SERMONS PREACHED UPON Several Occasions,

BY LANCELOT DAWES, D. D. Now Minister of Barton in Westmorland, and sometimes
fellow of Queens College in Oxford.

MATH. 23. 37, 38. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered,
etc.

LONDON. Printed for Humphrey Robinson, at the three Pigeons in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCLIII.

The Contents.
First Sermon. Gods Mercies and Jeusalems miseries. Jeremy 5. 1. Run to and
fro by the streets of Jerusalem, and behold now, and know and inquire to the
open places thereof: If ye find a man, or if there be any that executes
Judgment, and seeks the truth, and I will spare it. page 1. Second Sermon.
Matthew. 26. 15. What will ye give me and I will deliver him unto you? page 53.
Third Sermon. Matthew. 27. 3, 4. Then Judas which betrayed him saw that he was
condemned, repented himself, and brought again the thirty pieces of silver to
the Chief Prie^ts and Elders, saying, I have sinned, betraying the Innocent
blood: but they said, what is that to us (see thou to that) and when he had
cast down the silver pieces in the Temple, etc. page 89. Fourth Sermon. Psalm.
82. 6, 7. I have said ye are gods, but you shall dye like men. page 105. Fifth
Sermon. Galat. 3. 10. As many as are of the works of the law, are under the
curse: for it is written cursed is every man that continues not in all things
which are written in the book of the law to do them. page 139. Sixth Sermon
preached at the funeral of Dr. Senhouse, Bishop of Carlisle. Job. 14. 14. If a
man die, shall he live again? all the days of my appointed time will I wait
till my changing come. page 159.
The second part.
Four Sermons on this Text. Luke 12. 32. Fear not little flock, for it is your
fathers pleasure to give you the kingdom. page 1. The second Sermon upon the
same, page 30. The third Sermon upon the same, page ^5. The fourth Sermon upon
the same, page ^^. Fifth Sermon. Matthew. 7. 22, 23. Many will say unto me that
day. Lord, Lord, have not we by thy name prophesied, and then I will profess
to them, I never knew you. page 93. Sixth Sermon. Jer. 22. 3. Thus says the
Lord, Execute ye Judgment and Righteousness. page 129.
GODS MERCIES AND IERVSALEMS MISERIES.
JEREMIE 5. 1. Run to and fro by the streets of Jerusalem, and behold now,
and know and inquire to the open places thereof: if ye can find a man, or if
there be any that executes Judgment and seeks the Truth, and I will spare
it.
MAny means did the Lord use to reclaim Jerusalem from her rebellion against
him, by sundry commemorations of his benefits he wooed her, by the sweet
promises of the Gospel he incited her, by the captivity of her sister Samaria,
he forewarned her, but yet she continued like her forefathers Psalm. 78.
a faithless and stubborn generation, a generation that set not her heart
aright, she runs still on a wrong Bias, in stead of being a faithful Spouse,
she becomes a filthy harlot, and Jere. 3. 6.
plays the Whore upon every hie mountain, and under every green tree, her
Isa. 1. 22.
wine is mixed with water, her silver is become dross, her Princes rebels and
companions of thieves, and as she grows in years, so she increases in all
impieties, she which at the first did only pull little sins with the small
Isa. 5. 18.
cords of vanity, does now draw greater transgressions with the huge cartropes
of iniquity; so that now Isa. 1. 6.
from the sole of her foot to the crown of her head, there is nothing sound in
her but wounds and swellings, and sores full of corruption. In this case God,
Psalm. 5. 4.
which cannot abide wickedness, neither can any evil dwell with him, as the
Psalmist speaks, begins to loath her, and to give her up into the hands of
her most savage and cruel enemies, (the Chaldeans) who shall Psalm. 79. 1.
defile the holy Temple, and make Jerusalem a heap of stones. Oh, but shall the
husband be so unkind to his Spouse Jer. 2* 2.
whom he has married unto himself? shall a Father be so severe to his child?
shall the God of mercy be so unmerciful unto his chosen? Genesis 18. 25.
Shall not the judge of the world do right? far be it from God, that he
should slay the righteous with the wicked. God answers, that there is no
reason, why she should repine against him, or accuse him of cruelty: her
Apostasy is so general, her disease (like a Gangraena) is spread through
every member of the body, her malice is so incurable, that he cannot without
impeachment of his justice, spare her any longer. Run to and fro by the
streets of Jerusalem, etc. as if he had said, O ye men of Judah and
inhabitants of Jerusalem, do not say that your teeth are set on edge, because
Ezech. 18.
your fathers have eaten sour grapes: do not object, that my ways are not
equal: it is your ways that are unequal: it is your sins that brings this
heavy doom upon your heads: whether this be so or not, you your selves be
Judges: for I beseech you seek up and down, not in the Country towns only,
and villages of Judah, but in the Metropolis of the whole Kingdom, in the
Matthew. 4.
holy City, Isa. 52. 1.
run through every corner of it, search and enquire in the houses and allies
and back-lanes, and high streets thereof, mark their conditions, observe their
practices, consider their behavior, take a full view of their whole carriage,
if after such enquiry, there be found but one man amongst the whole multitude
that fears me, or makes any conscience of his ways, and I will spare the
whole City for that one man's sake: but if after you have sought man by man,
there be not one godly man found amongst them all, think it not cruelty, if now
at length I inflict (in justice) my judgments upon her: the sum is contained
in this short proposition: I will spare Jerusalem if there can one righteous
man be found in her.

Wherein we may observe these two principal points: Gods mercy, in that he
would have spared Jerusalem for one man's sake; Jerusalems misery, in that not
one righteous man can be found in her; the former I deliver in this
proposition; Gods mercy in sparing does exceed his justice in punishing, and
with this we will begin.

But alas, Doctrine.
who am I dust and ashes that I should entreat of this Subject? it is a
bottomless depth, who can dive into it? it is an unaccessible light, Tull.
de. natu. deorum.
who can behold it? if the Heathen Simonides after three days study how to
describe God, was further from any resolution in the latter end, then when he
first began: nay, if Exodus 33.
Moses (a man more familiar with God then any that ever lived upon the face of
the earth) when he was put in a clift of a rock, and covered with Gods hands,
could not behold the glory of his face; then may it not seem strange, if the
tongues of men and Angels fail in describing the very back parts of this one
attribute, being more proper and essential unto God then any whatsoever.
Justin. l. 18.
That Tyrian proved the wisest in the end, who having concluded in the Evening
with his fellows, that he which could first in the next morning behold the Sun
(which they worshipped as a God) should be King; looked not toward the East
where he rises, but toward the western mountains where his rays did first
appear. We will follow his Example, and seeing we cannot seek into the fountain
at which the Cherubs did cover their faces: let us behold it in the mountains,
that is, the Prophets and Apostles, Hieron. lib. 11. Comment in Ezech.
as Jerome expounds the word, or the mountains, that is the creatures and works
of God, in all which it does most clearly shine: there is no work of God in
which there do not appear such manifest Characters of his mercy, that he which
runs may read them. Those benefits intended toward his children; as namely
Election before all time, creation in the beginning of time, Vocation,
Redemption, Justification in the fullness of time, Glorification after all
time, etc. To prove them to be so many rivers of the bottomless Ocean of Gods
never dying mercy; it were but to busy my self about a principle, which I hope
none of you will call into question: Gods almighty power is manifested unto us,
in that he has created the world of nothing, Psalm. 33. 6.
and made all the host of heaven by the breath of his mouth: and it is a
property, in describing of which, Gods Secretaries do strive to be eloquent.
Job to show it faith, that Job. 9.
he spreads out the heavens like a Canopie, and walks upon the height of
the Sea, that he makes the stars, Arcturu; and Orion, and Pleiades, and the
climates of the South. Elihu sets it forth under Behemoth, whose tail is like
a Cedar, and his bones like staves of brass, Job. 40.
yet the Lord leads him whither soever he will; and under Leviathan, which
makes the depth to boil like a pot, and the sea like a pot of ointment, and
yet the Lord can put a ho^k in his nose, and pierce his jaws with an Angle.
David to show it, faith, Psalm. 114.
that he makes the mountains to skippe like Rams, and the little hills like
young sheep: Esaias, to express it says, that Isa. 40.
all nations before him are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as the
dust of the balance, that he takes away the Isles as a little dust, that he
has measured the waters in his fist, and counted heaven with a span, and
comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains in a
weight, and the hills in a balance, and yet his mercy goes beyond his power,
in that his omnipotency has made nothing but what his mercy moved him to
create, and it comes after too, in preserving, and guiding, and protecting by
his heavenly providence (a branch of his mercy) whatsoever his powerful hand
has made, if he should but once stop the influence of his mercy, all the works
of his hands should presently be annihilated. Psalm. 33. 5.
The earth is full of the mercies of the Lord (says the Psalmist) he says
not the heavens says Austen, Quia non indigent misericordia ubi est nulla
miseria: they needed no mercy where there is no misery; Augustine in illum locum.
and yet in another place he adds the heavens too: thy truth (an other of
his attributes) goes unto the clouds, there it stays, but thy mercy goes
further: it reaches unto the heavens, in fewer words: It is over all his
works. Psalm. 14. 5. 9.


But my text leads me to entreat of his mercy, as it has reference unto his
justice; where you shall find that of two infinites one does infinitely
surpass an other, to be called a merciful God, and the father of mercy is a
title wherein God especially delights, but he is almost never called the God
of judgment: here how he proclaims himself: The Lord, the Lord, strong*
there is one Epithete of his power; merciful, gracious, slow to anger, abundant
in goodness, and truth, reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and
transgression and sin: there are six of his mercy. Then comes his justice in
punishing of offenses: not making the wicked innocent, visiting the iniquity of
the Fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation: there he
confines his justice, he says unto it as he does unto the seas in Job: Job.
38. 11.
Hither shall thou go, and thou shall go no further, here shall thou stay thy
raging waves, it shall not pass the fourth generation, and that is more then
Ordinary, if it come so far, it is but as a high spring, Exo. 20. 5, 6.
upon such as hate him: but his mercy flows like a boundless Ocean, upon
thousands of those that love him. Nay the Prophet tells us, that to punish, is
with God a rare and extraordinary work. Esa. 28. 11.
The Lord (says he) shall stand as in mount Perazim, he shall be angry as in
the valley of Gibeon, that he may do his work, his strange act. This is an act
of judgment, where you see that to punish, with him is an uncouth and strange
work, an act indeed, unto which without compulsion of justice, he could not be
drawn; he is more loath to put out his hand for to inflict a judgment, Sueton.
then ever was Octavius to subscribe his name to the execution of any public
offender, whose usual speech was this, Vtinam nescirem literas, I would to God
I could not write. How often does miserable man offend against his maker? surely
if the just man fall seven times, then the wicked falls seventy times seven
times, and yet he makes his Sun to shine upon them both, he makes his rain
to fall upon them both, still almost he contains the sword of his justice
within the sheath of his mercy: If in case he be enforced to draw it, he is as
it were touched with a feeling of that which the wicked suffer; hear himself
speak, Therefore thus says the Lord of hoasts, the holy one of Israel, ah, I
will ease me of mine adversaries, Isa. 1. 24.
and avenge me of mine enemies: it is a kind of ease to be avenged of thine
enemy, and therefore God when the Jews continue still to provoke him to his
face, will ease himself by inflicting his judgments upon them, I will ease me
of mine enemies: but it comes with an ( ah) or ( alas) it is pain and grief to
him, he is wounded to the very heart, his bowels are rolled and turned within
him; a few tears might have made him sheath his sword, and defer his
punishments; the history of Ahab will prove as much, who was one that had sold
himself to work wickedness, that provoked the Lord more then all the Kings of
Israel that were before him, 1 King. 16. 30
then Baasha, then Omri, then Jeroboam the son of Nebat that made Israel to
sin, therefore the Lords sends unto him the Prophet Eliah telling him, that in
the field where the dogs licked up the blood of Naboth they should lick his
blood also, 1 King. 21. 19 21.
and that he would wipe away his posterity as one wipeth a dish, when it is
wiped and turned upside down. Ahab has no sooner rented his clothes at the
Prophets words, then God repents him of what he had threatened: See thou how
Ahab is humbled before me? Verse 29.
a simple humiliation God wot, only in outward show, and yet shall suffice to
revoke part of Gods judgments against him, because he submits himself
before me, I will not bring that evil in his days upon his house. Nineve had
multiplied her transgressions as the sand upon the sea shore; she had by her
sins blown upon the coals of Gods anger against her; but yet he will not come
upon her as a thief in the night to destroy her, she shall have forty days
warning, and if in the mean time she will turn her playing into praying, and
her feasting into fasting, and by covering her self with sack cloth, hide from
his eyes her broad sails of pride, he will make it known unto her, that he was
not so ready before to lend a left ear of justice to her crying sins, as he is
now to afford a right ear of mercy to the cry of her sinners: he will repent
of the evil that he had denounced against her, Jonah 3. 10.
and will not do it. The old world had so defiled the earth with her cruelties,
and the smoke of her sins did so fume up to Heaven into the Nostrils of God,
that he was sorry in his heart that ever he had made man: Genesis 6. 6.
yet he will not presently destroy this wicked generation, there shall be an
hundred and twenty years for repentance, Verse 3.
before he will purge this Augaeum stabulum, with a deluge of waters.

Nay, such is the never drying stream of his mercies, that for the righteous
sake, the wicked though they do not repent, shall fare the better. Ruffin.
Hist. Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 18.
God is not like to the Emperor Theodosius, who for the offense of a few, put
all the Thessalonians to the sword: but rather (if without offense the Potter
may be compared to the clay) like to that Persian General, who spared Delos
because that Apollo was born there; Herod. Lib. Plut. in Caesar.
or Caesar who made the Cnidians free men for Theopompus his sake: it was an
opinion of the Heathen, that for one evil man's sake, many good men were put to
the worse, -- Pallas exurere Gentem
Argivum atque ipsos voluit submergere ponto: Virgil. 1. Lib. Aeneid.

Pallas overthrew the whole navy of the Argives:
Vnius ob noxam and furias Ajacis Oilei,
for the sin of one man by name, Ajax the son of Oileus, and (...), God
punishes a whole City for one man's sin, Hesiod. op. and dies.
and sends upon it (...), famine and plague for the sin of some particular, it
is not so: God never punishes one man for another offenses: if thou object
unto me, that the Israelites were plagued for David's trespass, I answer,
David's sin did occasion that punishment which the Israelites did justly deserve
for their own iniquities: for howsoever David in respect of himself (who
deserved more) called them sheep, yet indeed they were Wolves in sheepskins:
and verily in this particular, we have an evident demonstration of his mercies:
for first, of three several punishments, he gives him leave to choose which of
them he would: When David had chosen the Pestilence for three days, indeed he
sent his destroying Angel; but before his sword was half drawn, he puts it up
again, and repents him of the evil, and abridgeth the time: Now we know that
every substraction from his judgments is a multiplication of his mercies, and
how far he is from punishing the righteous with the wicked, let Sodom witness,
a sink of the filthiest sins, a cage of the uncleanest birds, a den of the
wickedest thieves that ever the earth bred: yet he will not rashly come upon
her, Genesis 18. (...).
but first he will go down and see whether they have done altogether according
unto that cry which was come unto him, and if there can but fifty righteous men
be found in five Cities, which was but for every City ten, nay, if but forty,
nay, if but thirty, nay, if but twenty, nay, if but ten can be found amongst
them all, which was but for every City two, he will not destroy the City for
those men's sake: when none can be found save just Lot, he will not subvert
Sodom before he be brought out of the City, nay, he will spare the whole City
of Zoar for Lots sake: Acts 27.
if good Paul be in the ship, all that are with him, even the barbarous
Soldiers shall for his sake come safe to land. But of all others (that I may
end this point where I began it) Jerusalem in my Text is most famous: whom the
Lord does so tenderly compassionate, that if within her spacious walls, amongst
so many millions of souls, one righteous man could have been found, either
among the Nobles or Magistrates, or Priests, or people, he would have spared
Jerusalem for that man's sake.

And is this true? Use. 1.
be not then dismayed thou fainting and drooping soul, whom the burden of thy
sins has pressed down to the brink of hell: is there such a thunder-threatning
Cloud of Gods justice set before thine eyes, that thou think it impossible
that the Sun of his favor should pierce through it into thine heart? Romans 5.
20.
deceive not thy self, where sin abounds, there grace super-aboundeth; thou
a^t a fit Subject for God to work upon: where should the Physician show his
skill* but where the greatest maladies do reign: and where can God better show
his mercy, then where is the greatest abundance of man's misery? the
desperatest diseases that can befall the soul of man, dead Apoplexies, unclean
Leprosies, dangerous Lethargies, remediless Consumptions, whatsoever they be,
God can as easily cure them, as the smallest infection: and as he is able, so
is he most willing to do it, because his mercy (as I have already proved) is
his chiefest attribute, and every attribute of God is the Essence of God, so
that he can no more cease from his works of mercy, then the eye being well
disposed from seeing, or the fire from heating, or the Heaven from moving, or
the Sun from shining: he that denies this is a Traitor to the King of Heaven,
because he gain-sayeth that style wherein God especially delights. There is
no sin of it self (...), but God can wipe it away: he will forgive (...) as
wel^ as righteous Abraham, ten thousand talents a^ one penny.

Suppose that all the sins that ever were committed, from the murder of Cain
to the treason of Judas, laid upon thy shoulders, there is no more proportion
between them and Gods mercy, Cicero de finibus.
then between stillam muriae and mare Aegaeum, betwixt a drop of brine and the
Aegean, nay the great Ocean, the snuff of the Candle, and the light of the day,
or a mote in the Sun, and the Globe of the high Heaven. Fly unto the throne of
grace, and though thy sins were bloody like Scarlet, he will make them as Wool;
and though thou be as Purple which is twice dyed, to wit, in the Wool and in
the Cloth: Though thou be dyed in the Wool (the first lineaments of nature)
with original d^pravation, and in the Cloth (after thy natural perfection) with
actual transgression, yet he will make thee as white as the snow in Salmon:
Esaias 1.
he will bind all thy sins in a bundle, and cast them into the bottom of the
Sea, he will nail them unto his Sons Cross, he will remove them as far from
thee as the East is from the West, or the North distant from the South. No man
ever begged an alms at Gods hand in faith, and returned empty. Heaven gates are
never shut when penitent sinners knock, there is a Master of requests in that
Court, which is more ready to prefer thy Petition unto God, then thou can be
to request his help, and will he which for ten men's sake would have spared
Sodom, and for one man's sake have passed by the crimson sins of Jerusalem, who
was moved with compassion at the hypocritical repentance of wicked Ahab, and
revoked his Sentence at the counterfeit humiliation of proud Niniveh, stop his
ears at the petition of any penitent sinner? doubt not but he will hear thy
petition and give his royal assent to that thou desire, though thou can but
with David roar and not speak, or with the poor Publican utter a short and
abrupt speech, O Lord be merciful unto me a sinner, etc. or with Hezekiah
chatter like a crane, Esaias 38. 14.
and mourn like a Dove. Oh then flee unto him as a Dove unto the Windows, Cant.
2.
hide thy self in the holes of the true Rock, put thy finger in Christ's side,
there thou shall find both Oil to soften and Wine to cure thy festered soul,
cry mightily to God with Niniveh, 2 Samuel 12. 13.
say with David, I have sinned, mourn with Hezekiah, weep bitterly with Peter,
fall down at Jesus his feet with Mary Magdalen, Matthew. 26.
say with blind Bartimaeus in the Gospel, John 11.
O Son of David have mercy upon me. Mark 10. 47.
And doubt not but God will be merciful unto thy sins, and make his
favorable countenance shine upon thee.

Again, Use 2.
is Gods mercy such that he will spare the wicked for the righteous sake? Here
then ye sons of Belial, may learn this lesson to spare the righteous for
the wickeds sake. I mean to cherish and to make much of all those that fear the
Lord, if for no other reason, yet even for this, because such men are often
times a means to keep away Gods judgments from the evil doers, the chafe
shall not be burned as long as it is mingled with the wheat. Plut^rch says,
that in the sacking of Cities such houses as were erected near unto a Temple,
of any of the heathen Gods, were untouched, when the rest were overthrown by
the enemy: as long as a sinner stands near unto a Temple of the living God,
he needs not fear an overthrow. God could do no hurt unto the Sodomites as
long as just Lot was in their company, Genesis 19.
as he blessed the house of Obed Edom, 2 Samuel 6. 12.
and all that he had because of the Ark that was with him, so the blessings
that fall upon the wicked man's head, are because of the godly with whom he
dwells; Plutar: in Caesare.
it was the encouragement that Casan gave unto the Boatman, when his Boat was
almost overwhelmed by the violence of the waves, in the river Anius, that he
should not fear because Caesar was in his company. And the best encouragement
that can be given to the wicked, in the time of danger, is that some good man
is in their company, then they may say as Michah said, when he had hired a
Levite to be his Priest, now I know that the Lord will be good unto me, Jud.
17. 13.
seeing a Levite (a man that fears the Lord) is with me, and therefore at the
least in this one point, let them resemble the just man, which makes much of
them that fear the Lord, Psalm. 15. because they are as it were Bucklers to keep
away the force of the blow, and with faithful Moses they stand in the gappe to
turn away his wrathful indignation, Psa. 106. 23.
lest it should destroy them. But if they seek (as the custom of so many is)
by all means possible to destroy them, to trample them in the dust, and (as
much as in them lies) to root them out of the land of the living, that they
may have none to control them for their unlawful deeds, then they do their
best to cut asunder the thread that keeps up the sword of vengeance, or
Sampson like to pull down the pillars upon which their house stands, and so
to bring all down upon their heads.

Again, Use 3.
is God so slow to anger, so unwilling to revenge? had he rather save one
righteous man then punish a whole City, of such as sin against him? Where be
the gallants of our days, who will not brook the least offense offered against
them? Nothing shall wash it away but the peccants Blood, it is a disgrace unto
me, an ignominy unto my whole kindred, is that a disgrace in thee which is an
honor in God? For thy kindred I little account of it. If thou can draw it
from the loins of Adam, thou gettest nothing there but shame, Luke 3. 38.
unless thou can step a foot higher (as Luke does in the Genealogy of
Joseph) and say that Alam was the Son of God, if thou would be counted the
Son of God, tread in his steps, walk as thou have him for an example. Be thou
merciful as thy Father which is in Heaven is merciful. For so doing thou
show thy self to be a sparkle derived from that infinite flame, a drop
taken from that bottomless Ocean, it is remarkable (which one observes) that
God has given unto Beasts both weapons of defense and offense, the Lion has
his Paws, the Ox Horns, the Boar Tusks, the Serpent his Sting, the Birds
Claws, the Fishes Scales, the very Hedgehog is not without his Pricks: But
man the excellency of his dignity, and the excellency of his power (as Jacob
speaks of Reuben) he brings into the world smooth and naked, Genesis 49. 3.
in token that he should be like unto him, Genesis 25. 25.
soft to anger, slow to revenge. Esau, that was borne red, and rough God
disinherited as a Monster, and no true Child of his, but smooth Jacob he
acknowledged to be his Son. The child of wrath is no Son unto the God of
mercy. How often do thou sin against thy God? By thy blasphemous oaths
thou tearest him, by thy hypocritical holiness thou mockest him, by thy
uncleanness thou pollutest him, by thy arrogant pride thou disdainest him, and
spittest in his face. The least trespass that thou committest against him, is
no less then treason against his royal person, and does God for every offense
un-sh^ath his sword against thee? Si quoties peccant homines sua fulmina mittat
Jupiter, etc. If God should in judgment punish every sin upon the offender,
where should wretched man be? now when God writes thy sins in dust, will thou write thy Brothers in Marble? When he forgiveth thee ten thousand talents,
wilt not thou forgive thy Brother an hundredth pence? If thou will be indeed his
Son, be like unto him, be pitiful, tenderhearted, full of mercy and
compassion, Ephesians. 4. 26.
if thou be angry beware that thou sin not, by speedy revenge, if thy wrath be
conceived in the morning, and perchance increase his heat with the Sun till
midday, yet let it settle with the Sun at afternoon, and set with it at
night, 1 Kings 3.
Let not the Sun go down upon thy wrath, if its conception be in the night,
use it as the harlot used her child, smother it in thy bed, Psalm.
and make it like the untimely fruit of a woman which perishes before i^ see
the Sun, to this purpose remember that the Citizens of this Jerusalem are at
unity amongst themselves, the stones of this temple are fast coupled and linked
together, the members of this Body as they are united in one head with the
nerves of a justifying faith: So are they knit in one heart with the Arteries
of love: The branches of this Vine as they are united with the boale (from
whence they receive nutriment) so have they certain tend^els whereby they are
fastened, and linked one to another. Now if without compassion thou seek thy
brothers hurt, thou do as it were divide Christ, thou pullest a stone out of
this Temple, thou breakest a branch from this Vine, nay (more then so) thou
cuttest the Vine it self. Aeneid. 3.
Virgil tells us that when Aeneas was pulling a bough from a mi^tle tree to
shadow his sacrifice, there issued drops of blood from the boale trickling down
unto the ground: at length he heard a voice crying unto him thus, Quid miserum
Aenea laceras? jam parce sepulto, parce pias scelerare manus; the Poet tells us
that it was the blood of Polydorus Priamus his son which cried for vengeance
against Polymnester the Thracian King which had slain him, in like manner
whenever thou seek the overthrow of thy Christian Brother, and have a
desire to revenge thy self of him (as he had to pull a bough from the Tree)
think that it is not the branches but the Vine thou seek to cut down. Think
that Christ will count this indignity done to his members as it were done to
himself. Think that thou hear him cry unto thee after this manner, jam
parce sepulto, parce tuas scelerare manus, imbrue not thy hands in my blood,
hand cruor hic de stipite manat, it is not the branches thou fightest against,
Nam Polydorus ego, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest. Acts 9. 5.
I am now come near to a point, which I have pressed heretofore in the other
public place of this city, At the Spittle.
therefore I proceed no further, but turn aside to my second general point
observed in this verse, which was Jerusalems misery.

The Tree is very fruitful, and I am but a passenger, and therefore must be
contented to pull two or three clusters which I conceived to be the ripest, and
the readiest to part with the boughs, which when I have commended to your
several tastes, I will commit you to God.

First, the Paucity of true Professors ( if ye can find a man, or if there be
any). Secondly, the place where, ( In Jerusalem.) Thirdly, that God will bring
his judgments upon her, because of her wickedness; not expressed but
necessarily understood.

From these three I collect three Propositions; from the first, Gods flock
militant may consist of a small number: from the second, There is no particular
place so privileged, but that it may revolt and fall from God: from the third,
No place is so strong, nor city so fenced, but the sins of the people will
bring it to ruin. Of these three in order, Gods holy Spirit directing me, and
first of the first.

God made all the world, Proposition.
and therefore it is great reason that he should have it all to himself: yea,
and he challenges it as his own right: Hag. 2. 8.
The gold is his, and the silver is his, and all the beasts of the field (...)
his, and so are the cattle upon a thousand hills: and the Heavens are his, for
they are his Throne, and the earth is his, Psalm. 110.
for it is his footstool, and the reprobate are his, for Nebuchadnezzar is his
servant, Acts 7. 49.
and as Judah is his, Jerem. 25.
so is Moab likewise: but in another kind of service: Psalm. 24.
in a word, The earth is the Lords and all that therein is, the compass of the
world, and all that dwell therein, but not in that property, which is now
meant, for that belongs only unto men, and yet not unto all, but to a few,
which are appointed to be heirs of salvation. Heb. 1. 14.


God made all men, so that they are all his sons by creation, but he ordained
not all to life, so that there is but a remnant which are his sons by adoption:
our first Father did eat such a sour grape as did set all his childrens teeth
on edge: by transgressing Gods commandment he lost his birthright, and was
shut out of Paradise, by committing treason against his Lord and King, Genesis 3*
his blood was stained, and all his children were made incapable of their
fathers inheritance, but God (who is rightly termed the Father of all mercy and
God of all consolation) as he purposed to show his justice in punishing the
greater part of such, 2 Cor. 1. 3.
as so grievously incurred his displeasure: so on the contrary side, it was his
good pleasure to show his mercy in saving of some, though they deserved as
great a degree of punishment as the other; and therefore in a Parliment holden
before all times, it was enacted, that the natural son of God, the second
person in the Trinity, should in the fullness of time take upon him man's flesh,
and suffer for our transgressions, and gather a certain number out of that
Mass of corruption, Augustine.
wherein all mankind lay: these be they which shall follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goes; these be his people, and the sheep of his pasture,
these be they which have this prerogative to be called the Sons of God, Psalm.
100.
and the heirs of God annexed with Christ: Gal. 4. 1.
and these are they which I affirm to be often contained in a very narrow room
in respect of the wicked. Romans 8. 17.


There is much chafe and little wheat, it is the wheat that God keeps for his
garner: there are many stones, but few pearls: it is the pearl which Christ
has bought with his blood. 2 Cor. 4.
Many fowls but only the Eagles be good birds. Satan has a Kingdom, and
Christ but a little flock, it is like to Bethleem in the land of Judah, but a
little one amongst the Princes of Judah, it is like to Noah's flood, Luke 12. 32.
going and returning, like the (...) flowing and ebbing, Mich. 5. 2.
or like to the Moon filling and waining, Genesis 8. 3.
and sometimes so eclipsed and darked with the earth, that thou can not
perceive, that Christ the son of righteousness does shine upon it.

The story of times will make this plain, innumerous were the men of the old
world, yet Gods flock was only contained in the family of Sheth, they only were
called the Sons of God, afterward this flock was compassed in a very narrow
fold, Genesis 6. 2.
in Noah's family, Not lupus inter oves. Ovid. Metam. lib. 1.
it was enclosed in one Ark, and yet there was one wolf amongst these few
sheep. Thus it continued in a very narrow compass till Abraham's time, and so
downward, till it began to multiply in the land of Egypt, and afterward in the
promised Canaan, as yet it was still tied to one place, there was but one
pasture for Gods sheep, the rest of the world played the Harlot with other
Lovers, and went a whoring after their own inventions, and in this one pasture
there were more goats then sheep, for though the number of the children of
Israel were as the sand upon the sea shore, Romans 4. 27.
yet only a remnant was to be saved. When the fullness of time was come that
God had sent his Son made of a woman, this Moon did suffer such an eclipse, as
that the quickest eye could hardly perceive her: then she began to recover her
light, for God broke down the partition wall, and rent the veil of the Temple,
and made no difference betwixt the Jew and the Gentile, Tros Tyriusque mihi
nullo discrimine agetur.

Then Gods sheep brought forth thousands and ten thousands in the streets, then
the Vine stretches forth her boughs unto the river, and her branches unto the
lands end, then God gave unto his Son the Heathen for his inheritance, and the
utmost part of the earth for his possession. Yet then and ever since, the
gleanings of Satan have been more then the Vintage of Christ. Yet take a survey
of the world, as it is at this day; divide it into three parts with Ptolome, or
into four with some later Writers, nay into six or seven with our last
Geographers, Maginus.
and you shall not find much above one of these seven which profess Christ.
Amongst these separate the orthodox from the heterodox, and you shall find
that Christ is now almost banished out of the world, so that if the Son of Man
should now come, Luke 18. 8.
he should scarce find faith in the Earth, the true profession of the Gospel,
is confined in a little corner of the North-west, and in this corner remove the
Atheists, and Heretics, and Worldlings, and Neuters, and Hypocrites, how
little will the remainder be after so many substractions? And no marvel, for
many are called, but few are chosen, and broad is the way that leads to
destruction. Gods sheep have a little narrow path, Use 1.
but the Goats have a beaten Cartway.

This being so, it is strange what Bellarmine meant to make amplitude, and
multitude, to be a note of the true Church; especially when he proposes to
speak of such notes, by which it may be most easily known, and distinguished
from the false Religion of the Jews, and Heretics, and Pagans, and Infidels
whatsoever: and therefore such as are both Notae debent esse propriae non
communes. l. 4. cap. 2. and postea in eodem cap. Notae verae sunt inseparabiles
a vera Ecclesia.
proper and inseparable, in respect of the Church; and again such as Non quidem
efficient evidenter verum ipsam esse veram Dei Ecclesiam, sed tamen efficient
evidenter credibile. De Ecclesia lib. 4. cap. 3.
though they make it not evidently true, yet they make it evidently credible,
not only probable (for Lutheranorum notae non sunt ullo modo sufficientes, nam
non declarant quae sit vera Ecclesia, secundum haeretic. nisi probabiliter lib.
eod. cap. 2.
that is the imperfection of our notes, if you will believe him) nay, amongst
those which admit of the Scriptures and ecclesiastical Histories and writings
of the ancient Fathers, faciunt etiam evidentiam veritatis. Lord, how plausible
a doctrine would this have been unto Ahab, how would it have fitted his turn
to plead for Baal? what meanest thou Eliah thus to trouble Israel? As though we
were all Idolaters, and thou only a true worshipper of God? Consider the matter
aright, and thou shall find what a weak Ground thou stand upon, those are
the true worshippers of God, who are the most in number, now thou art but one,
and the Prophets of Baal are four hundred and fifty: how pleasantly would it
have sounded in the ears of the Jews? when Jeremiah thus prophesied? Behold
(might they say) all the inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem are against thee,
and is the Spirit of God departed from us all to possess thee? Thus
Constantius disputed with Liberinorum Bishop of Rome against Athanasius, Hoc
orbis terrarum comprobat: quota tu pars es orbis terrarum qui solus facis cum
homine scelelerato and pacem orbis dissolvis. Theod. lib. 2. cap. 16. Athan.
Epist. ad solitariam vitamagentes. Bellar. lib. 3. de Eccles. milit. cap. 16.
Idem lib. 4. cap. 5. Alii flammis exusti, alii ferro perempti, alii flagris
verberati, alii cruciati patibulo, etc.
The whole world is of this opinion, and what art thou that thou should take
part with a naughty fellow, and dissolve the peace of the world. If this
objection had been urged against Luther, when he first began to bait the Popes
Bull, he might easily have answered in Athanasius his words: What Church is
there now that does openly adore Christ, if it be godly it is Subject to
danger, for if there be any that fear God (as indeed there are many every
where) they have hid themselves with Elias in Dens and Caves of the earth. But
the example of the Jews will not much move our adversary, quia non est eadem
ratio populi Judaeorum and populi Christianorum, and might the Church of
Christians be still known, by the multitude of professors, so that a man not
yet resolved in the Truth, might be guided by this mark to find her out, as
the wise men by the star were directed unto Christ! Surely no, for scimus
initio fuisse multo pauciores Christianos, quam essent Judaei, what better was
she in the time of those ten bloody persecutions which endured for the space of
three hundred years? when a man could no sooner make profession of his faith,
but he was either killed with the sword or burnt with fire, or drowned in the
Sea, or stoned to death, or stean quick, or famished with hunger, or thrust
through with bodkins, or thrown to wild Beasts, or pulled in pieces with Trees
or wild horses, or boiled in lead, or made away with more exquisite, and more
Tragical torments. (If that be possible) then the Perilli of our time have
invented to gratify the Romish Phalaris. Come a little lower and compare the
Church not with the number of the Gentiles, (which no Papist in the world can
for shame deny to have ever exceeded the number of Christians) but with
Heretics, I mean not all sorts joined together (for they will subscribe to
Haeretici sunt per tam faciem terrae; alii hic alii ibi alia secta in Africa,
alia haeresis in orient August de de past. Cap. 8.
Austin, the Church is every where, and Heresy every where, but the Church is
the same evey where, Heresy is not the same but most different) but only the
Arians, which sometimes have so overspread the whole Christian world, as that
if any had said Lo here is Christ or there is Christ, thou would not have
believed him. The Church was like a Sparrow that sits alone upon the house
top, or like a Pelican in the Wilderness, and an Owl in the desait: they
counted themselves the only Catholics, but the true Christian; they termed
Scismatikes, call^ng them Joannites, and Ambrosians, and Athanasians, and
Homousians: Even as the Papists at this day challenge the name of Catholics,
to themselves, and call us Lutherans, and Zuinglians, and Calvinists.

They did not only possess the Church of Jerusalem, and Alexandria, and
Antiochia, and Constantinople, and the rest in the Eastern Empire, Hieron. in
dialog. contr. Luciferianos.
but passing thence into the North, and from thence with the Goths, and
Vandals into Germany and France, and Spain, and Italy, (yea into Africa too)
had infected all Churches in the West. Which makes Hierome say, that the whole
world groaned and marvelled, to see her self become an Arrian, an Arrian sat
in Peter's chair, the head of the Church Durand lib. 2
that great Melchisedeck whose Priesthood is not to be compared to any other,
their Dominus deus noster Papa Ex tran. I^h. 22. ut citat. Juel.
God and their Lord, the Pope himself, rather then he would die in the defense
of the Gospel, subscribed to Arianisme; surely the whole Body must needs go
wrong, Liberius test. A^han. Epist. ad Solitariam vit^m agentes ^dem patet ex
^^eambulo. Council. Nicen.
when the head did thus miscarry.

This plague endured not for some small moment (like the Macedonian Empire
which was but a Flash and gone) but for the space of three hundred years and
upward. Where was now the true Church amongst the Arrians, Bodin.
which oppugned the Doctrine of the Nicene Synod in sundry councels, and
expelled the Orthodox Bishops and enjoyed their rooms, and instead of the true
Christ worshipped an Idol of their own inventions? or rather in a few miserable
and forlorn wretches, which remained in prisons and wildernesses, and
Mountains, and dens, and Caves of the Earth, as was the case of the Church at
that time, so was it in the time of Wicliffe and Husse, (...)
for then the Devil had for a long time been loosed, and Antichrist was in the
height of his pride, and the light of the Gospel was raked for up in the Ashes
of Popery, in so much that that which Nazianzen spoke in the oration against
the Arrians, (...)
might fitly have been applied against the Papists. Where be those that object
poverty unto us, and boast of their prosperous Estate? this is another mark of
the Popish Church.

Where be those that define the Church to be a multitude, Nazianz. in oratione
contra Arrianos.
and set at naught a little Flock? and yet if multitude should bear the bell
away, the Papists should not have any such cause of triumph, as they wll bear
the world in hand that they have. There are at this day four Religions in the
world (if the name of Re^igion may be given to them all) Judaisme, Paganism,
Mahumetanisme, and Christianisme: of all these Iudaisme is the least, but
Paganism exceeds all the rest. Mahumetanisme (which is a mixture craftily
composed of the other three) both in largeness of Countries and multitude of
people, goes beyond all Christendom: for it has not only seated it self in
the whole Turkish Empire, and the large kingdoms of the great Sophi, but
spreads abroad in many places of the vast dominions of Tartarie, Cathaia, and
China almost unto the Eastern Ocean, and what it has of latter years gained
in the West, we feel partly in the miserable distres^e of Hungary and
Transylvania, and have just occasion ^f greater fear, if the Lord out of
compassion to his poor Church, shall not overthrow the plots of that proud
Senacherib, 2 Kin. 19. 28.
and put a ^ook in his nose, and a bridle in his lips, and carry him back again
the same way that he came. N^w for Christianisme, amongst those that p^ofesse
the name of Christ, there are not above a third part that are Papists: for the
Russians together with the Relics of the Greek Church, the Armenians and the
Christians that are under the Emperor of the Abassens, do exceed the number
of all those, which hold the Principles of the Romish Church. The Protestants
come not much behind them: for howsoever within these hundred years, the Moon
did suffer such an universal Eclipse, that a man would have judged she had
lost her light, and the Lords flock was but like a few grapes after the Vintage
is ended, here a grape and there a grape on the outmost boughs. Brevi
occupapavit doctrina Lutheri, non solum multa regna in partibus
septentrionalibus sed etiam usque ad Indos excurrere ausa est. Bell. lib. 3. de
Pont. To ca. 23


Yet since it pleased God to sti^re up the heart of Martin Luther to stand at
open defiance with the Italian Goliath which reviled the Israel of God: she
has every day recovered her light, the Gospel that was then hid under a
bushel, is become like to David's Sun, which comes forth as a Bridegroom out
of his chamber, and rejoices as a Giant to run his course: the professors of
the Gospel have wonderfully increased so that now their sound is gone through
the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world. There is no place in the
Globe of the earth, where Christ is professed, Psalm. 19. 4.
which has not some Protestants. Italy the very Center and sink of Popery,
and the seat of the great Whore, when Iezabel has done what she can, in
murdering the Lords Prophets, will afford seven thousand men which have never
bowed the knees of their hearts unto Baal. Vid. Bell. de Pontif. Romans lib 3.
cap. 21. Nostris temporibus Romana seeds magnam Germaniae partem amisit,
Suetiam, Gothiam, Norvegiam, Daniam, etc.
In France we have a far greater number, in Germany the major part, almost
all Polonie, all Denmark, Swethen, Norway, Britain, and all the Islands in the
Northern seas, which have taken the military Oath to fight under Christ's
standard. If these be not equal to them, yet consider on either side such as
know the Principles of Christian Religion, and can give an account of their
faith, and we have a far greater number, for the common people amongst them
are stupid and blind, and do no more understand the mysteries of their
salvation then Pagans and infidels, or those in the Acts, who being demanded of
Paul, Act. 19. ^.
whether they had received the holy Ghost, made answer that they never heard
whether there was an holy Ghost or no. And little marvel; for many of their
Priests do no more understand their Masses, which they mumble daily in their
Churches, then Balaams Ass understood his own voice. It is enough for them to
believe as the Church believes, though they know no more what that is, then
did Bellarmines Collier, who being demanded what he believed, (quoth he) that
which the Church believes, being again demanded what that was, answered, the
same which I believe: Herein we will not think much that the Papists exceed us:
Bellarmine may give good measure if he draw the dregs and all: August. in
Psalm. 39.
but Austen will teach him another lesson, Noli numerare turbas hominum
incedentes latas vias, implentes crastinum circum, civitatis natalem clamando
celebrantes, civitatem ipsam male vivendo turbantes, noli illas attendere,
multi sunt, and quis numerat, sed pauci per viam augustam incedunt. Chrysostom
will teach him that not in numeri magnitudine, Chrysostom. hom. 40. ad populum
Antiochen.
sed in virtutis probitate consistit multitudo. It was a pretty stratageme of
the Roman Captain, when his Soldiers were few in number, to make every man
draw a bough in the dry dust, that so the Samnites (with which he was to
encounter) beholding them a far off might believe that his Army was greater
then indeed it was: we are no such dastards as to be afraid of every withered
branch that can raise up dust into the air: Livius decad. 1 lib. 9.
if the Papists purpose to match us with multitude, let them bring such as have
some skill to handle their spiritual weapons.

I end, seeing the Church is like unto the Moon, sometimes in a glorious
splendor, sometimes clouded with Schism, and sometime so darkened with the
shadow of heresy and superstition* and persecution, that the eyes of Linceus
can scarce behold her.

Seeing that the Papists at this day, cannot compare neither with the number of
Christians (taking the name generally for all such as profess the name of
Jesus) nor with the Protestant Churches, if we take an account only of such as
understand the Principles of their Religion: Hic non tenetur nota marginalis
quae nonnunquam occurrit in li. Sent. P. Lombardi.
I see no reason why Bellarmine should make multitude a Note of the true
Church; or if it were, why the Papists should challenge it themsemselves: and
therefore he may be well censured with a hic magister non tenetur, or not a
quod haec nota nihil notat, it was only to make up the number of notes, that
he may number one note, Nam cum non prosunt singula, multa juvant; Vive de
Causis Corrupt. Art.
though they be of little force being severally considered, yet if they be all
jointly taken, they will prove like Seleucus his rods, or like a threefold
cord which is not easily broken. Plut. Apoth.
Indeed he had need to be stronger then Hercules, that could cut often all the
heads of Hydra at one blow: but a simple warricu^ taking one by one may make an
end of them, before he be wearied; for they are like to the tail of Sertorius
his horse, which a valiant Soldier taking it altogether, Plut. in vita
Sertorii.
could not pull off, but a poor Skull pulling one hair after an other had
quickly made it bare.

Secondly, does Gods flock sometimes consist of a very small number? Use 2.
then it behooves thee (beloved Christian) with greater diligence to try and
examine thy self, whether thou be comprehended in this number: for as in that
universal deluge of waters, all were drowned that were not in Noah's Arc: so
in the great flood of fire, which shall be at the end of the world, all shall
be swept away with a river of brimstone, which are not of this flock: it is a
common saying, he shall never have God for his father which has not the Church
for his mother, and he shall never be a member of the Church triumphant, which
is not first of the Church Militant: first, then thou art to enquire whether
thou be of the true visible Church; and this thou shall know, by two marks; by
the true preaching of the word, by the right use of the Sacraments, for where
these two are performed according to the prescript of Gods word, there must
needs be a true church; this is somewhat, but it is not all: for what did it
avail Judas to be numbered amongst the twelve? he was in hell before any of the
rest came at heaven: all that are in the Church be not of the Church: there are
both good and bad fish in this net; there is wheat and tares in this field,
Sheep and Goats in this fold, thou must go further and examine, whether thou
be one of that Company, which God from eternity elected unto life, and in time
effectually calls by his holy Spirit, and makes true Members of his Son
Jesus Christ, which is the head of this body, whether thou be of that flock,
which Christ calls his garden, Can^.
his sister, his spouse, his love, his dove, his undefiled, which the pillar
and ground of truth, 1. Tim. 3. 13. the body of Christ, Ephesians. 1. 23. the temple
of the Lord, Ephesians. 2. 21, which the gates of hell shall never prevail against,
Matthew. 16. 18. Here thou must exercise thy wits, this must be thy care to find
thy self in this little number, but how may this be known? by the cause? that
is the will and good pleasure of Gods which dwells in light that none can
approach unto. This is a bottomless depth, who can sound it? Never man looked
into this Arc and lived: busy thy brains about it, and when thou have done
all thou can, thou art but like a fly about a Candle, which plays so long
with the flame, Lipsius lib. 2. de Con.
that at length she burns her wings and falls down: and good reason it should
be so: for it is enough for wretched man to be of Gods Count, and it is too
much to be of his Privy Council: Plut. in These.
Thou must therefore do as Theseus die with the Labyrinth, thou must catch
hold of the threeds end that hangs without the door, and so by winding steps
come at length to the first cause. Seeing thou can not know it a ^riori by
the cause; thou must know it a posteriori, by the effect* one effect of Gods
immutable decree and an undoubted mark (to let all others pass) of Gods child
is Sanctification: for as on the one side it is certainly true that without
holiness of life, no man shall see God: Heb. 12. 14. So it is as true on the
other side, that he which walks not after the flesh, Romans 8. 1.
but after the Spirit, is ingrafted into Christ, and shall never be condemned.
So then holiness of life is the true touchstone, to try whether thou be of this
number: but here deceive not thy self, for there is a verbal holiness, and a
Pharisaical holiness, and a Herod's holiness, and a Popish holiness, Ioh. 29. 13.
and an Anabaptisticall holiness. The verbal holiness is of such as draw near
unto God with their lips, but with their hearts are far from him as the
Prophet speaks: the Pharisaical holiness, is of those which devour widows
houses under color of long prayers; and such as will not leave a mote on the
outside of their cup, but never care how fil^hy it be within. The Herod's
holiness is of them which will quench the fire on the harth, and leave it
burning in the top of the Chimney, will mend their least faults, and let their
worst be marring. The Popish holiness is in observing humane traditions, and
treading under foot the law of God. The Anabaptisticall holiness, is of such
as are well persuaded of themselves (though without all reason, but can never
have a charitable opinion of any others: they are troubled with a Noli me
tangere, Isa. 65. 5.
touch me not, come not near me, for I am holier then thou: Matthew. 5. 20.
but I say unto thee, except thy righteous exceed the righteousness of all these
men, thou shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: it is another kind of
holiness which thou must have, if thou will assure thy soul that thou art one
of Christ's flock: it is indeed in the tongue, but it proceeds from another
fountain, (the heart) and makes a man say with David, Psalm. 119.
thy words have I hid within my heart, that I might not sin against thee. It
makes a man have a care to approve by outward actions unto men, but much more
to approve the cogitations of his heart unto God: it strives not to break off
some branches of sin (such as may be best forgon) reserving the rest, but it is
most severe against those sins which are the sweetest to man, because such
sins as are most pleasant unto man, are most unpleasant in the sight of God.
It will not stick charitably to censure others: but it makes a man most sharp
in censuring and condemning his own sins, Phil. 3. 13.
it rests not contented with any one degree of perfection, but forgets
that which is behind, endeavors to obtain that which is before, and
follows hard toward the mark for the price of the calling of God in Christ
Jesus.

Beloved in our best beloved Jesus Christ, do you all desire to be fully
assu^ed that you are of that little number, whose names are written in the
book of life: I know you desire it, for (alas) what comfort can a man have in
this life, though he should be Monarch of the whole World, and to have Kings to
lay their crowns before his footstool, if he doubt what shall become of his
own soul? Verba morientis Hadrians.
that of the heathen Emperor, animula vagula blandula quae nunc abibis in
locis, etc. Though it be allowed by popish Divinity, 'twill be but a cold
comfort to a Christian on his death bed: he shall never come in Heaven that is
not perfect of the way, before he go hence. This is the best mark whereby you
may assure your selves, that ye are already in the high way even your
sanctification. Oh then be not (as too many are, like painted tombs, gilded
without, rotten within; tippe not your tongues with godliness, when your
souls are full of gall and bitterness. Bear not Bibles in your hands, and
Mammon in your hearts. Let the remembrance of this, that holiness of life is
the cognizance of every true member of Christ's Church, be as it were a knife to
cut asunder the cords of vanity wherewith Satan strives to strangle you, or to
draw you headlong into hell and d^struction. Let it be as a spur to prick you
forward in the course of idleness, assuredly howsoever my words may now pass
away as a wind, Ovid Meta* lib. ^5.
and not sink into the hearts of many that shall hear them: yet Cum volat
ille dies, etc. When those muddie walls are ready to fall (and fall they must
for all your daubing) there cannot a greater terror befall you consciences (to
make you fear that you are but rotten members at the best of Christ's Church)
then the remembrance of an evil life: nor on the other side can there a
greater comfort betide you, when your pitchers are ready to be broken at the
cistern, Eccl. 12. 8.
then to assure your selves by your lives past (abounding with good works
which are the fruits of a justifying faith) that you are amongst those that God
has adopted to be his children. For then you may go with greater desire^ to
your graves then a weary pilgrim unto his bed, assuring your souls, that your
souls should be transported into Abraham's bosom, there to reign with the
holy Angels into eternal happiness, for ever more.

The second proposition follows, 2. Proposition.
no particular place is so privileged, but that it may revolt and fall from
God. If eve^ City that was seated under the cope of Heaven, had a Pattent from
the God of Heaven, for her perseverance in religion, it was Jerusalem: for as
of all the countries in the world, Josh. 18. 1.
he chose Judea, so of all the Cities of Judea, he preferred Jerusalem.
Sometimes his tabernacle was placed in Shilo, but this he disliked, and
remooved unto Jerusalem, as the only place which he had picked and culled out
of all others to set his name there; according to that of the Prophet. He
refused the Tabernacle of Joseph, and chose not the Tribe of Ephraim: but he
chose the Tribe of Judah, even the hill of Sion, which he loved, and there he
builded his Sanctuary as an high palace like the earth, which he stablished
for ever. Psalm. 78. 67, 68, 69. This he made a seat for himself, an holy
place, for the Tabernacle of the most highest. Here was a Temple for the Lord,
an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob, those that shall but slightly
peruse the grants and privileges which God had promised this one City, will
think that it had been as impossible for her to fall away, as for the Sun to
be darkened in the midst of heaven. The hill of Sion is a fair place, even the
joy of the whole earth, upon the North side lies the city of the great King,
God is well known in her palaces, as a sure refuge. Jerusalem have I chosen
out of the tribes of Israel, to put my name in it for ever. 2 King. 21. 7.
Psalm. 132. 14. 15.


The Lord has chosen Sion to be an habitation for himself, he has longed
for her, saying, this shall be my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have
a delight therein. Psalm. 132. 5.
Here was the seat of judgment even the seat of the house of David. To whom
the Lord had sworn by his holiness, that his seed should endure forever, and
his seat should be as the sun before him: that he should stand fast for
evermore, as the Moon, and the faithful witness in heaven. Psalm. 89. When
the Israelites were yet in the Wilderness, God told them by his Servant Moses,
that he had appointed them a place in the in the Land of Canaan, where they
should all meet out of their several tribes, and towns to offer their first
fruits, and to sacrifice unto the Lord: You shall seek the place which the
Lord your God shall choose out of all your tribes, to put his name there, and
thither you shall come, and bring your burnt offerings, and your sacrifices, and
yous tithes, and the offerings of your hands, and your vows, etc. And there ye
shall offer before the Lord. Deuteronomy. 12. This was Jerusalem, for thither the
tribes came up even the tribes of the Lord, to testify unto Israel, and to
give thanks unto the name of the Lord. Psalm. 122. Moreover he was there (...)
their chief Council, Sigon. de rep. Heb. lib. 6. cap. 7.
or high Commission, (consisting of the King and Princes of the people, to wit,
the chief of every tribe, and of seventie Elders, and of the high Priest, with
the Doctors of Law) in which all matters of greater moment were concluded, and
unto which (as unto the Oracles of God) in difficult points, which could not be
decided by Judges of particular Towns and Cities, they were to have recourse
for the full determination thereof, according to that of the Prophet: If there
rise a matter too hard for thee to judge between blood and blood, between
plea and plea, between plague and plague, in the matters of controversy,
within thy gates, then shall thou arise, and go up unto the place which the
the Lord thy God shall choose, and thou shall come unto the Priests of the
Levites, and unto the Judge that shall be in those days, and ask, and they
shall show thee the sentence of judgment, and thou shall do according to that
thing which they of that place (which the Lord has chosen) shall show thee,
and thou shall observe to do according to all that they inform thee, Deuteronomy.
17. Beside this, the law was there more diligently then in other places
expounded; the Prophets did reveal Gods secrets unto the people, and by
thundering out the Canons of the law did strive to weane them from their evil
ways, and by the promises of the Gospel, t^ woo them unto God, the Iebusites
which before time God had permitted to dwell amongst them, that they might be
thorns in their eyes, and prickles in their sides, were now extirpated, so
tha^ they could not choke the word of God which was sown amongst them,
Sig^^ius de ep. Heb. lib. 1.
and make it unfruitful. Was there ever City upon the face of the earth,
which had such a Charter as this? the City where God had promised to be
resident, where was the Arc of the Covenant, and the glorious Temple which
Solomon had built at Gods appointment, where the Kings of Judah had their
abode, where the Law and the Prophets were diligently read and expounded unto
the People, where all points of difficulty were handled, where was the Priests
Palace, whither the whole land had recourse out of their several Tribes, ^oh.
4.
as unto the place where men ought to worship: it was a heaven upon the earth,
and a type of that glorious City which is above: and is Jerusalem so fallen
from God, can there not one righteous man be found within her walls? is the
holy city become so wicked? is the faithful Spouse become a harlot? are her
Princes become rebels? her Judges murderers? her gold dross her charity
oppression, her ripenes, rottennes? her almesdeeds, al-mis-deeds? Has the
leprosy of sin so infected every part of her body, Isa. 1.
that from the sole of the foot to the crown of the head, there is nothing whole
therein, but wounds and swellings, and soresful of corruption? what need we go
further for proving our conclusion, for as he speaks in Tully, Cicero lib. 1.
de orat.
Either this is enough, or I know not what will suffice: If you would have
topical arguments after such a demonstration as this I could lead you through
many places of invention, which would manifestly confirm my assertion. I could
show you the Churches of Galatia, and Philippi, and Corinthus, which Paul had
plant^d, Apollos and other Disciples had watered, and God had wonderfully
increased; I could instance in Smyrna and Pergamus and Laodicea, etc. In which
the Evangelist John had so painfully labored in Constantinople, and Ephesus,
and Nice, and Chalcedon, famous for the general Councels, in Carthage, and
Hippo, and other Churches of Afric in Anticohia, the first God-mother of
Christians, and in a word, in all the Eastern and African Churches, in which
so many Worthies have flourished. What is the case of these particulars at this
day? Isa. 40.
behold they are fallen, as though they had not been planted, as though the
seed of the word had not been sown amongst them, as though that stock had taken
no root in the earth, the Lord has blown upon them; and they are withered,
and the whirl wind has taken them away like stubble: the abomination of
desolation (let him that hears it, consider it) sits in their holy places,
Philip. Lonicerus de rebus Turcicis.
which are now nothing else but as it were an habitation for Dragons and Courts
for Ostriches, instead of the Sacred Bible, they have entertained the
blasphemous Alchoran, their Moph^i Mezin and Antippi, and such Idolatrous
Mahometans have gotten the rooms of the ancient Fathers.

What? and are these also fallen? then let her that thinks she stands take
heed lest she fall. Use.
I mean that strumpet which advances her self above the stars of God: which
says, I am, and none else, and sings with Niobe in the Poet, Sum foelix, I am
in a happy estate, and there shall no harm happen unto me; which with Laodicea
thinks that she is rich and increased with goods, and needs nothing, Rev. 3.
where as indeed, (as anon you shall hear) she is wretched and miserable, and
poor, and blind and naked. Nineve had such a conceit of her self, and did so
far presume upon her strength, that she thought it had been impossible for
all the powers of the world to bring her under the hatches. And therefore the
Lord bids her look upon the state of Alexandria, a stronger City then Nineve,
and yet she was destroyed. Art thou better (says he) then No, which was full
of people? that lay in the rivers, Nahum. 3. 8.
and had the waters round about it, whose ditch was the sea, and her wall was
from the sea, Ethiopia and Egypt were her strength: and there was no end: Put
and Lubin were her helpers, yet was she carried away, and went into captivity.
The same may be said of Rome, (suppose that none of these cities which I have
last mentioned may parallel with her) is she better then Jerusalem, which was
seated upon such strong bulwarks, as already has been mentioned? yet she fell
from God, and moved the holy one of Israel to anger against her: grant unto her
all that she can claim (and she will be sure to lack nothing for want of
challenging, for she is not unlike to him who could not epsy a ship floating
upon the seas, Thrasilaus apud Athen. Dipnos. 12.
but presently said it was his) and more then all the Papists in the world can
prove to be her due; yet she has no more to brag of, then had Jerusalem; is
she the mother-Citie of all other, and the Metropolis of all Christendom? So
was Jerusalem, in respect of the Inhabitants of Jury. Which at that time were
the only people which God had chosen. Are all others to appeal unto her, as
unto their supreme Judge in matters of difficulty; so were Jews unto the high
court of Jerusalem; did Peter the Prince of the Apostles, the porter of heaven
gates, remove his chair from Antiochia and placed it at Rome? so did the Lord
his tabernacle from Shiloh to Jerusalem, has Rome the head, or chief Bishop
of all christendom? Jerusalem had the like, is she the keeper and dispenser of
the Lords treasury? So was Jerusalem: does she challenge a freedom for
persevering in the truth? Jerusalem had better grounds to do the like: and
verily, as Rome does at this day flatter her self with a false application of
universal promises, So did Jerusalem. Abraham is our father, John 8. 33. 36.
Psalm.
we are the Children of Abraham, this is my rest forever the scepter shall not
depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from under his feet: Genesis 49. 10.
the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, this is the Temple of the
Lord. Ier. 7. 4.
All her titles that she can any way lay claim unto* will not make her better
then Jerusalem, which became such an Apostate, that not one godly man could be
found in her. So that she cannot challenge any privilege to her self from
falling to the like wickedness, that which happens to the one, may befall the
other, U^lesse she can deal with the truth, as the old Romans handl^d d^d the
goddess (...): who after they had w^ne the field, used to ^ippe her wings that
she might not fly away.

But what need we stand of the possibility, when the Act proves it. A certain
man, walking on his way, while he looked not so well to his feet, as he should
have done fell into a pit, when diverse of his acquaintance came by, and saw his
mischance, they began to enquire one after another, how he fell thither: What a
question is that said he, you see that I am fallen, think rather of some means
how to help me up again. We never need make question, whither and how Rome
could revolt, and fall from Christ; certain it is she is fallen; and well it
were for her, if she could be help up. When Philip told Nathaniel, that he had
found the Messiah, of whom it was written in the Law, and in the Prophets, and
told him who it was, viz. Jesus of Nazareth: Nathaniel wondered at it, Ioh. 1.
47.
and said; Can any good thing come out of Nazareth? If any shall wonder that
there should be any defect in Rome, which so many ages has been counted the
mother and nurse of true religion: I answer him as Philip answered, Nathaniel,
Come and see. When thou art an eyewitness of all her abominations, thou will
subscribe to his testimony, who at his coming away, bade her thus adieu.

Roma vale, vidi, satis est vidisse revertar,
Cum leno meretrix scurra cinoedus ero.
I must confess, that when first I made choice of this portion of Scripture, I
did not intend to have played upon this string with my least finger. But now
that I have met Rome in my high way, I cannot choose, but (by your patience)
speak a word unto her before we part, especially, when I consider how ready
she is to disgrace all such as will not drink of her Cyrcean cups. How she
sends her panders amongst us to get her more customers, and her pedlers to
sell her deceitful wares. How busy she is in hanging up her spider-webs to
catch our English butterflies which have neither wit to avoid them, nor
strength to break them; and what pains she takes in decking herself, and in
painting her ugly wrinkled face, Prove. 7. 7.
that she may allure Men destitute of understanding, to forsake their first
love, and commit folly with her. There was a time when Rome was a glorious
Church, Paul gives her this testimony, Romans 1. 8.
her faith was published throughout the whorle world. She was (as some say) the
chief seat for one of the four Patriarks. Praefat. in Conill Nicenum 1
seeds, Romae 2. Alexandriae. and Cant. 6 antiqua Consu^tudo, etc.
or rather of equal dignity with the others. Her approbation was desired in
sundry Councels, as one more incorrupt then the rest, by reason that she was
not shaken with Schisms and Heresies, as were the Eastern Churches she was an
Asylum for many which were persecuted for the testimony of Jesus Christ: Quid
urbis Romae paril. est mos.
this she was, and this is all that she can boast her self of at this day.
Which when she had done, she is no better then those degenerous spirits of
Nobility and Gentry, who when they have nothing in themselves worthy the
^least commendation, will digg up the col^ root whence they sprang.

Si vita labat, perit omnis in illa,
Gentis honos cujus, Ovid.
laus est in origin sola.
He leans upon a rotten staff, which has nothing to speak for him save his
dead Progenitors virtues. If any man think I do her wrong, may it please him to
compare her with the state of Jerusalem, in the time when Jeremie prophesied:
the sins of Jerusalem were either in doctrine and matters of Religion, or in
conversation and manner of living: for the former it is as much (if not more)
corrupted at this day in the Romish Church, Ier. 5. 31.
then it was then amongst the Jews. The Prophets there Prophesied lies: Chap.
23. 24.
God sent them not, and yet they ran, he spoke not unto them, and yet they
prophesied Chap. 14. 14.
even a false vision, and the dreams and devices of their own hearts: whether
the Romanists do this or no: those impious assertions which they maintain
against the reformed churches (for oppagning whereof, many holy Martyrs have
with their blood dyed the skirts of the purple whore) may sufficiently
witness. Vid. Lind. li. Cap. 100. and Petrum a Soto contra Brentium.
What I shall tell you of their prayers for the dead, their Sacrifice of the
Mass, their communicating under one kind, their vows, their forbidding of
ma^riages, their indulgences, their Purgatory, their works of Supererogation,
and a number more, by which like Act. 14. 25.
the Silver Smiths of Diana, they have gotten their goods? all which make a
goodly show of holiness, to such as are blinded with the mists of ignorance,
by reason that the candle of the word is covered under a Bushel and locked up
in the closet of an unknown tongue, but bring Psalm. 119.
David's Lanthorn to try them, and you shall find that when they are viewed in
the light* they will prove like gloe-wormes, and Toad-stools, more like to any
thing then that which they were taken for: or like Solinus.
the Apples of Sodom, which make a goodly show a far off, but if they be
once touched, they will presently fall into dust, or like those D. D. in his
preface upon Euclid.
Mathematical Shows, which in the twilight seem to be gold or precious stones,
yet where the light comes, prove nothing but lime and sand:: then their prayers
unto Saints will prove but much babbling: their Images teachers of lies, their
forbidding of marriages, doctrines of Devil: their Purgatory fire borrowed from
the Superstitious Ethnicks, to keep their Kitchins hot their Masses, massacres
of souls, their Holy Water, crucifixes, relics, and ^ags of Saints, etc.
beggarly rudiments, base Merchandise not worth the cheapning: this they
themselves know full well, Tertul. de resurrectione carnis. Per^^us. Eckius
Pighius contro. 3. de scriptura. Ludov. Canoninonicus Lateranenss orat hab. in
Council. Trid. vide Chem. in exam. Council. Trid. and Tuellum in defen. apol.
cap. 19. 20. Si quis habeat interpretationem Roma^nae Eccl. de aliquo loco
scripturae etiamsi nec sciat nec intelligat an aut quomod. eum cum scripturis
conveniat; habet tamen ipsissimum dei verbum, Hosius de expresso dei verbo.
and therefore if you ask these Lucifugae scripturarum what warrant they have
from the Oracles of God.

Romulidae Satyriquid dia Poemata narrant?
They will tell you they have it by tradition, or the Church has ordained it:
or it is not needful to bring Scripture for a ground of their positions, which
it pleases some of them to call a Lesbian rule, and a nose of wax, and a
black Gospel, and inkie Divinity, and a dumb Teacher, and a dead and killing
Letter. Indeed, if they can wrest any place of Scripture, though it be contrary
to the meaning of the holy Ghost, yet it must be taken for sound Divinity,
because as a great Cardinal speaks, if any man have the interpretation of the
Romish Church, of any place of Scripture, although he know not whether it agree
with the word of God or no: yet it is not to be doubted, but he has the very
Word of God.

Thus must these Expositions go for sound Divinity, mark them, and compare
them with the Jewish glosses: Drink ye all of this, that is not all, but some,
to wit, the Clergy, Marriage is honorable amongst all men, not all, but some,
the Laity: Cast not Pearls before Swine; that is, suffer not the people to
read the Scriptures in a knownetongue: Thou have put all things in subjection
under his feet, that is under the Popes feet: The fishes of the Sea, that is
the souls in Purgatory, The Beasts of the Land, that is, the men of this
world, The fowls of the heaven, that is the souls of the blessed which the
Pope has canonized. Psalm. 8.
Here are two swords; that is, the Pope has the managing of both swords Civil
and Ecclesiastical, Anton. in Sum. part. 3. tit. 2. cap. 5.
an Exposition not altogether so harsh, as that which In his advertisment to
Pope Paul the fifth touching the Venetians.
Baronius brought of late, to prove that the Pope had authority not only to
feed Christ's Sheep, but also to punish with death such as resist his Papal
dignity: because he which said, Ioh 21.
Peter feed my sheep, said also, Act. 10. 13.
Arise Peter and kill: if he had pressed the Text a little further, he might by
the same Argument have proved his Holy Father to be an Antropophagus or
Caniball because it is not simply said, Arise Peter and kill, but Arise Peter
kill and eat, Bellar. de Romans Pont. lib. 1. cap. 12.
unless he had Bellarmines wit, who proves the Popes Supremacy, not from the
first word kill, but from the second word eat.

But the main fault in Religion, which hastened Gods judgments upon Jerusalem,
was her idolatry: She changed her God: Jer. 2. 13.
She forsook the fountain of living waters, and dug unto her self even
broken pits which would hold no water: she played the harlot upon every high
mountain, Verse 17.
and under every green tree: She said unto a tree, thou art my father, and to a
stone, thou have begotten me. Whether Rome go not beyond her in this
particular, he that has but half an eye may plainly see, Cur natos toties
crudelis tu quoque falsis
Ludis imaginibus? Virgil, Aene. 1
--


We do not read of many Idols that were famous amongst the Jews, there was
Ashtoreth the God of the Sidonians, and Milcom the abomination of the
Moabites, and Chemosh the abomination of the children of Ammon, and Baal, and
a few more: but the Idols which Papists have invented are so many, that Rome
can scarce find room for placing them: She is more like to the old Gentiles,
who did acknowledge one chief Jupiter, (...),
And, Jupiter Omnipotens, Hominum rex atque deorum.
qui res hominumque Deumque
Aeternis regis imperiis:
But he had three hundred under him, Varro.
which they worshipped as gods: though the Papists acknowledge one supreme
power, yet are there three hundred to whom they perform that worship which is
due only unto God, and as they had twelve which they counted greater gods,
which Ennius contains in these old verses, Juno, Extant apud Apuleium, and
Natalem Comitem. Sen. na. quaest. lib. 2. cap. 41.
vesta, Minerva, Ceres, Diana, Venus, Mars.
Mercurius, Jovis, Neptunus, Vulcanus, Apollo.
Whom they hold to be of Gods Privy Council: but many lesser gods and goddesses
for particular purposes, as for their waters, Lympha, Varro. lib. 1. de re
Rustica.
for her Gardens, Pomona, for their grounds, Terminus, etc So the Papists have
the twelve Apostles, which (with the Platonists) they use as Mediators
between them and the high God, unto which they have added the Virgin Marie,
thinking especially by her intercession to have their desires; as the Trojans
in the Poet used the mediation of Venus to obtain favor of Jupiter. Now for
particular matters, there is scarce any thing but they have a God or Goddess
for it: When they are in fear of the plague they pray to Sebastian; against
the falling sickness to Valentine, Lutherus in Decalog.
against sudden death to Christopher, against the Ring-worm to Anthony. Now
then as Pythagoras from the print of Hercules his foot in the games of
Olympus, did collect the bigness of his whole body. So from these few things
which have been spoken, you may gather how far Rome has declined from her
former purity, and how well she may parallel with Jerusalem in my Text. I might
take occasion to speak of that pre-eminence, which the Pope challenges over
all Christian Kings (Gods immediate Deputies on earth) by reason of a supposed
Authority, given unto Peter, whose successor he pretends himself to be the
very same argument in substance, by which the Turk claims the Western
Empire, because he succeeds Constantine: or he that married Tullies wife,
laid claim to his learning, because he had married his executor: all Pinces
must hold their Scepters from him, all Nations must couch down before him and
all kingdoms must do him service: Here Jerusalem dare not stand out in
comparison with Rome: her high Priests were never come to that height of
impudency, as to set up their heads above the Lords anointed. When Tyberius
observed the base servitude which the Romans used toward him: Tacius Annal.
lib 3.
he could not choose but cry out, O homines natos ad servitutem, he that
considers how vilely and servilely: she which sometime was the Emperesse of
the World, does obey him which is styled a servant of servants, he may well use
Tyberius his words or those of the Poet.

Roma tibi quondam suberant domini dominorum,
Servorum servi nunc tibi sunt domini.
but this only by the way. From her religion, let us come to her conversation,
Jer. 7. 9.
and manner of living. Jerusalem was as corrupt in life, as she was in
religion. She did steal, murder and commit adultery, Cap. 6. 13.
and swear falsely. Her Inhabitants from the least to the the greatest, were
given to covetousness, and from the Prophet unto the Priest, Cap. 2. 34.
they all dealt falsely. In the wings was found the blood of souls of the poor
innocents: How far Rome goes beyond Jerusalem, even in this also we may
have a little taste in our holy English Catholics, the remainder of the Romish
Church, and the only true Professors (if ye will believe them) of the ancient
faith in this Kingdom but try them by the works of regeneration (the
principal body of true Christianity) and you shall find, that in
profanation of Gods Sabbath, in swearing and blaspheming, in lying and
cozening, in drunkenness and whoredom, in oppression, and all unconscionable
dealings, they are for the most part the very scumme and excrements of this
land. And why should they make conscience of these sins, Venalia Romae
templa, sacerdotes, altaria sacra, coronae, ignet, thura, preces, Coelurn est
venale deusque.
seeing their holy Mother is as it were a fair royal Exchange, where any
sin may be bought at a reasonable rate. Nothing more common, then what do you
lack, or what will you buy, etc. A pardon for your sins past, or for any
sin you shall hereafter commit? a toleration for common Stews, for, (but I
dare not name it) dispensation, for incestuous marriages, or any thing else,
you shall have it if you can agree for the price: shall I say all in a word?
She is a hell of impieties, a habitation of Devils, and the hold of foul
spirits, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird. And therefore I less
marvel why Friar Mantuan should be so bitter against her corruptions in his
time. Rev. 18. 2.


Sanctus ager scurris venerabilis ara cinaedis.
Servit, Mantuan.
honorandae divum Ganimedibus aedes.
And he says further, Nullae hic arcana revelo, It was no shriving secrets the
Friar did disclose, but such things as all the world could witness to be true.
Bernardus lib. 4. de consideratione ad Eugenium.
Bernard is more sharp against the abuses of his time (though the rotten
hmours were but then in gathering) when he complains, that the covetous,
luxurious, ambitious, incestuous; sacrilegious, and all such hellish Monsters
did flock to Rome, to get a warrant from the Apostolic Sea, for their
proceedings. And that they made no more conscience of sinning, then thieves
after they had robbed a man by the high way, are afraid to divide the spoil.
Curiae tua recipere honos magis, quam facere consuevit, (he speaks unto the
Pope) mali enim illic non proficiunt, sed boni deficiunt. I intend now to lay
open her monstrous cruelties and bloody massacres, of such as truly profess
the Gospel of Christ, in which point she does very well resemble (Shall I say)
Jerusalem, which killed the Prophets, and stoned them, that were sent to her?
Tacitus lib. 14. Annal quoties fugas and caedes jussit princeps, toties gratiae
diis actae quaeque rerum secundarum olim nunc publicae cladis insigniae fuere.
Nay, rather old Rome under Nero, as often as the Emperor gave commandment
that any should be slain or banished (says Tacitus) did they give thanks
unto God: and those things which in former time had been notes of some
prosperous success, were now the ensigns of public slaughter. Is not this her
custom at this day? are there any bloody butcherings of Christ's flock, any
cruel murdering of Christian Princes, by Romish Jebusites, but it shall be
received at Rome, with Bonefires and Hymns in most triumphant manner? all which
things when I consider, I am fully resolved that a learned Divine of later
years, does not speak of any malicious humor when he says that there be
three points of divinity, Calvinus lib. 5. Instit. ca. 7.
(he calls them Capita arcana Theologiae) which go current in Rome. The
first, that there is no God: the Second, that whatsoever is written of Christ
is lies and deceits. The third that the Doctrine of the resurrection and the
last judgment is merely fabulous; now then this being the case of that great
and glorious City, we may well collect, that her horrid desolation and
fearful downfall is at hand. For there is no state so strong, no City so
fenced, but the sins of the people will bring it unto destruction, which is
my third and last proposition out of the second general branch of my Text,
whereof I am now by your patience to entreat.

That Kingdoms and Commonwealths have their periods and downfalls, Proposition
3.
is a conclusion which the premises of all former ages do demonstrate; learned
Athens, stately Sparta, rich Babylon, victorious Carthage, ancient Troy, proud
Ninive, and a thousand more have numbered their years: and at this day have no
stronger fence then Paper walls, to keep their names from oblivion, the great
enemy of antiquity. Now for the true cause of their subversions, it is a
truth, which the greatest wizards of this world, after much study, and many
serious consultations with nature, could never find out. The Epicures
attribute it to Fortune, the Stoics to Destiny, the Pythagorians to numbers.
Which last opinion Plato made such reckoning of, that he will have numbers to
be the sole cause of the transmutations of Commonwealths. Whose words be so
Aenigmatical, that Tullie makes them a Proverb, Plato lib. 8. de rep. Cicer.
lib. 7
and Marcilius Ficinus invocateth not Oedipus but Apollo to unfold them.
Aristotle (who of all others comes nearest unto the truth) makes the cause to
be a disharmonie in the body politic, Epist. ad Atticum.
as too much wealth of some few, the great misery of many, Arist. 5. lib.
pollit. cap. 12.
injury: fear, etc. I little marvel that Heathen Philosophers should shoot so
wide, when Christians have so grossly mistaken their mark. Bodin. method.
hist. cap. 6.
Bodin how witty is he in pleading for numbers? what virtue does he attribute
to 7. or 9. or 12. and their squares and cubiques. How does he shift himself to
prove his opinion sound, by instances of the most Commonwealths that have been
hitherto in account, adding or detracting years at his pleasure, from the
Calculation of the best Chronologers, to make the number square, or cubick, or
spherical, or at the least, some way consisting of 7. or 9. or of their roots
or squares. Cardanus.
Cardanus hangs all upon the tail of the greater Bear. The common sort of
Astrologians, refer it to the Planets and Stars, making such a scheme at the
first foundation of any City, which made Varro (as Plutarch witnesses) so
earnest with Taruncius Firmanus, to enquire the opposition, and aspect of the
Planets, when Rome was first situated, thinking here by to conjecture how long
that Empire should endure. Copernicus.
Copernicus will have the conversion and motion of the center of his imaginary
excentricle circle (which circle according to him, is not caused by the Heavens
motion (for the Heavens in his opinion are unmovable) but by the earth, which
he will have to be continually wheeled about, to be the cause of these
alterations of Commonwealths. Thus while they groped in the dark, they missed
their mark, as the Sodomites did Lots door, Genesis 19.
and while they professed themselves wise, they became fools. Romans 1. 22.
And little marvel, for the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God: None
of all these have happened on the true cause, it is the sins of the people
which brings every Commonwealth to ruin. 1 Cor. 1.
And how can it be otherwise? for if thou lay more weight on the root, then the
pi^^ars can support, the house must needs fall. Now sin is of such an
intolerable weight, that no house, nor city, nor commonwealth can stand
under it, but it will press it down, it is a burden to the whole earth, and
makes it reel to and fro, Isaiah, 24. 20.
and stagger like a drunken man: it is a burden to all the creatures, Romans 8.
22.
and makes them groan, and travel in pain: it is a burden to God himself,
which makes him cry out in the Prophet against the Jews, Amos 2. 13.
that they had pressed him with their iniquites, even as a cart is pressed with
sheaves: it lay so heavy upon Christ's shoulders, Luke 22. 44.
that it made him sweat drops of blood. This burden of it self so heavy, like a
malefactor that is pressed to death, cries for more weight, to press the
sinner to the pit of Hell: Jerem. 23.
it calls to Heaven for the burden of the Lord, that is, for vengeance to be
inflicted upon the impenitent sinner. God in regard of his patience and long
suffering, is said to have leaden heels, he comes slowly, even against his
will to punish, but in respect of his justice he is said to have iron hands. He
strikes with a witness, when once he begins to smite in his proceedings
against the sins of men, he has a double method sometimes, (and this method is
most usual when he proceeds against the sins of his children) he comes to
them as he came to Elias. 1 Kings 10.
First he sends a mighty strong wind, to blow down the tall cedars, and cast
them to the ground, as Paul was, before he was converted. Then an Earthquake,
to shake the flinty rocks, Acts 24. 26.
I mean the stony hearts of men, and to make them tremble, as Felix did, when
Paul disputed of the judgment to come, then a fire to burn up the stubble, and
consume the briars, and then (when these forerunners, like John Baptist have
prepared away for the Lord) he comes himself in a soft voice, the gracious and
sweet promises of the Gospel, to seal a pardon to such, as by the former
Judgments are dejected and humbled. And this may be termed Gods Ordo
compositivus: Sometimes (and this is more usual, especially when he proceeds
against the wicked, he takes a contrary course: First, he comes in a soft and
still voice, to woo them to himself: But when they harden their hearts, and
will not be reclaimed from their evil ways, then at length he will send a
fire to devour them, and an Earthquak and mighty strong wind to scatter them
away like chaff from the face of the earth, Psalm. 1.
and to blow them down even into the bottom of Hell, and this I may fitly call
Gods ordo resolutivus; it is said of Alexander, Q. Curtius.
that when he besieged certain City, he held out a Lamp, proclaiming a pardon
to as many as would yield themselves before the Lamp was burned: so the Lord
first holds out the Lamp of his word, whereby he calls them to submit
themselves, and gives them a time to deliberate, if in the mean time they do
not yield, nothing remains but death and destruction: it is storied of
Tamberlain the Scythian, that whenever he besieged a City, first he
displayed a white flag in token of mercy, if they would yield themselves,
Stephani Apol. in Herod.
the second day a red flag threatening blood because they did not in time submit
themselves, if they continued until the third day, then came out his black
flagg, menacing utter ruin and desolations; this is Gods method. First he sets
out his white flagg of peace; if this be not regarded, then comes his red
flagge of correction, though not of destruction: if this will take no place
with them, then he sets out his black flagge, bella, horrida bella, nothing but
death and desolation. Down with it, down with it, even to the ground,
tribulation and anguish, fire and brimstone, Virgil lib. 4. Aeneid.
storm and tempest, this shall be their portion to drink. Its long before he be
moved to anger, but if the coals of his wrath be kindled; O Lord God how
terrible will this flame be! it will lick up the Sea like dust, and melt the
mountains like wax, and burn to the very bottom of Hell, so that nothing in
the world will quench it, but the blood of the Lamb, and the streaming tears
of unfeigned repentance: cast your eyes to the time of old, for we are but men
of yesterday, and our days on earth are like a shadow, Job. 8, 9.
as Bildad speaks in Job, and you shall find my conclusion proved by the
occurrents of all ages. Sodom that fruitful and plentiful City, which was
for beauty and pleasure like the garden of God, Genesis 19.
or as the valley of Egypt, as thou go unto Zoar, if the stink of her
sins ascend into heaven, Genesis 13. 10.
shall be converted into a stinking Fen, Deuteronomy. 3. 3.
for an everlasting remembrance of her iniquity. Jericho a goodly place, a City
of palm trees, a fenced City, whose walls reached up to Heaven: if she be
withal a sinful and Idolatrous City, she and all that is in her, both man and
woman, young and old, Ox and Ass, Joh. 1. 21
shall be utterly destroyed. Arist. Polit.
Babylon, which Aristotle for the greatness calls rather a region then a City,
the Empress of the earth, the Princess of Cities, the glory of Kingdoms, the
beauty and pride of the Caldeans, which said, I sit as Queen, I am no widow,
and shall see no mourning: If she continue in her sins, shall be as the
destruction of God in Sodom and Gomorrah, it shall not be inhabited for ever,
Isa. 13.
neither shall it be dwelled for ever from generation to generation, but Zim
shall dwell there, and their houses shall be full of Ochim, Ostriches shall
dwell there, and the Satyrs shall dance there, and Iim shall cry in their
Palaces, and Dragons in their pleasant places: so that a man shall be more
precious then gold, even a man above the wedge of the gold of Ophir: It is not
her powerful state, nor rich Citizens, nor strong walls, nor high Towers, nor
magnificent buildings, that shall free her from Gods punishing hand may,
Jerusalem in my ext, the Vine that Gods right hand had planted, the City of
the Great King, the holy place of the Tabernacle of the most high, the beauty
of Israel, the glory of Nations, and Princesses of Provinces, if she will not
be awaked from her sins, Lament. 1.
shall not be much better then the destruction of Sodom and the miserable
desolation of doleful Gomorrah, her was shall be turned into heaps of dust,
her houses consumed, her Temple burned, her treasury empty, her inhabitants
killed: Quis cladem illius urbis, quis funera fletu
Explicet.


What heart is so flinty which will not melt into tears, when it shall think
of the misery which did twice befall this one City. Use 1.


Now all 1 Cor. 10. 11.
these punishments came upon them for an ensample and and are written to
admonish you upon whom the ends of the world are come, that you should be armed
and warned, that you should see and foresee, Cicero Phil. 1.
before the time be past, ut quorum facta imitamini eorum exitum
perhorrescatis, that if you tread in their footsteps you should remember their
downfals, God is the same God still, he is as strong as ever he was, he is
as just to revenge as ever he was, his Arm is not shortened, his strength is
not abated, his wrath is not turned away from sin, but his hand is stretched
out still. Sin may bud in the spring but it withers before Harvest: it may
flourish for a time, but godliness endures unto the end. When the wicked
thinks himself the surest, when he says unto his soul, Peace, Peace, and
Soul, take thy rest. Even then there is but one step between him and
destruction: believe the kingly Prophet, he speaks it of his own experience,
Psalm. 37. 36. 37.
I my self have seen the ungodly in great prosperity, and flourishing like a
green bay tree; what follows, I went by, and lo, he was gone; I sought him,
and his place could no more be found. Behold his covntenance, he is but as the
grass upon the house top, which withers before it be plucked up, or as the
foame upon the water, or as a garment freted with mothes: Psalm. 73. 18.
O how suddenly does he fade, perish, and come to a fearful end: even as a
dream vanishes when as one awaketh. It is noted of Pyrrhus and Haniball, that
they could quickly conquer a City, Plut in vita Pyrrhi. idem in vita Hanib.
but they could never keep that which they had once subdued I little marvel,
that the wicked have great facility in heaping up of riches, but I should
think it strange if they could keep them till the third generation. Their
wealth is like a snow ball, gathered in the fall, not without labor and cold
fingers: and anon after it is melted with the Sun, or washedaway with the
rain. But alas, alas beloved, I may here take up the Prophets complaint. Isa.
53. 1.
Who will believe our report? my words seem unto many, as Lots Sermon did to
his sons in-law, when he foretold the destruction of Sodom, who seemed as
though he had mocked, Genesis 19. 14. Give me leave a little to speak plainly: I
came not to sing unto you a gloria patri without a sicut erat, to flatter you
with a smooth tale, as to lay pillowes under your elbowes, whereby you may
securely sleep in your sins, Multi sunt placentini, and laudenses pauci
Veronenses, many come hither from Placentia, and Lauda but few from Verona. I
doubt not but ye will all with your tongues confess my proposition to be true,
but the practice of the most denies it: it is the sins of the people that
brings every commonwealth to ruin. Every one will say as much, but yet in
our practice we hold an other strange Axiom that goes for current amongst us:
it is the sins of the people that upholdeth every Commonwealth: conscionable
and true, and faithful dealing, which my Prophet as I suppose means, by
executing of judgment, and seeking of the Truth, is like an Almanac out of
date, every man has found out a new way, both to maintain and better his
estate, this old way is too far about. The bloud-sucking Usurer, instead of
lending and expecting nothing again, a lesson which our Savior would have him
to take out, if he look for the true treasure, does eat and consume his needy
Brother, even as Pharaohs lean and il-favoured Kine devoured the other. This is
the way he takes to support his house, God loves not such an Arithmetician as
spends his whole study about Multiplication, Regula falsttatis.
and the Rule of falsehood, and can never learn, the practice of Division. The
Lawyer who should employ his best knowledge in untying the knots of the law,
and should be an Atropos to cut off the thread of controversies between man and
man: feeds his Client with golden hopes, and sugared words, and in the mean
time like Lachesis draws in length the thread of contention, using
unnecessary delays, and posting off the matters from Court to Court, Term to
Term, year to year, not unlike the cogging Surgeon, who in hope of greater
gain does poison the wound, that it may be longer in curing, or (if I may use a
homely comparison) like the waggish Boy in the streets, who when he sees two
dogs snarling and grinning one at another for a bone, is never at rest till
(for his own pleasure, but little for their profit) he has brought them a
rictu ad morsum, to try their right by their teeth, till at length the weaker
be enforced to resign up his right to the stronger: this is a principal plot
to maintain his estate.

The Citizen that lives on his trade, is like to the idolatrous Jews in the
Psalmist, which worship the Images of Canaan; Canaan signifies a Merchant, and
what is the Merchants Image (says Luther) but Denarius the Cross. This he
makes such reckoning of, as that he cares not for making shipwreck, not of a
crased, wooden vessel, but of a good conscience, so that he may obtain it: he
sells days and months, and years at a higher rate then his best stuffes; if
his wares be too light, false balances must make up the weight, if too bad,
too dear, a false oath must mkae amends for both. The country Landlord (for
though I speak in Jerusalem, yet I do not doubt but some of every quarter of
Judah does hear me, whom the Lord has endowed with ample possessions, that
he should be as it were Pater Patriae, an upholder of his Country, a
maintainer of justice, a scourge of vice, a protector of Religion, Xenocrates
apud Aelianum. var. hist. lib. 13. cap. 31.
a shelter for the distressed to defend them from the rage of oppressors, as
the Philosopher did the Sparrow that fled into his bosom from the talons of
the Hawke. What does he* he raises his rents, wringeth his Tenants like
spunges, shakes by some new devise the ancient custom; if this will not serve
his turn, he farmeth out his livings (especially in such a year as this, when
he should break his bread to the poor at his own doors) and takes a room in
this City, or some other, where he may live with much ease, little charges, and
small credit, this he counceth an especial means to hold up his estate.

If I have been in the bosoms of many of you, blame your selves, for mine own
part I may truly say to every particular that thinks himself touched, as our
Savior said to the woman that was taken in Adultery; Joh. 8. 11.
Has no man condemned thee? neither do I. Marry, 1 John 3. 20.
withal I add that of John, If thine own conscience condemn not thee, God is
greater then thy conscience, and knows all things; and therefore I dismiss
thee with that speech of our Savior spoken to the Criple, that was newly
restored to his feet; Go thy way and sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto
thee. What shall I say more? Joh. 5. 14.
Run through each particular Estate and calling, and you shall find by the
practice, though not of all, God forbid that I should think so, I know there
are in every profession which make a conscience of their ways, and in all
their actions set God before their eyes, yet of the most part, that fraudulent
and deceitful dealing, or some other unlawful means, is thought the most
expedite and beaten way for supporting them. Few will let this conceit sink
into their heads, that sin is the means that brings every Estate to ruin,
the Preacher may tell them as much, but they will believe him at their leisure;
in the mean time, they will still run on their old Bias; the husbandman may
labor in weeding those grounds, but still they bring forth briars to entangle,
and nettles to sting others: the Gardner may busy himself in pruning those
vines, but still they bring forth sour grapes, such as will set the teeth of
Gods children on edge. Gods shepherds may watch continually about their
flocks; Jer. 2.
yet like swift Dromedaries they run by their ways, and like the wild Ass
used to the wilderness, which snuffeth the wind by occasion at her pleasure,
as the Prophet speaks; they cannot be kept from going astray. Every one can be
angry if his worldly purpose be crossed never so little, but few or none will
say with David; it grieveth me when I see the transgressors, because they keep
not thy law: Many can weep and command plenty of tears, when any worldly
calamit, does befall them, but few or none can shed one tear, Misere terendo
oculos (as he speaks in the Comedy) for their sins, much less weep bitterly
as Peter did, Math. 26.
or have their eyes gush out with water, Psalm. 119.
because other men keep not Gods Laws: with David many will sing to the Vi^l,
and invent to themselves instruments of music like David as the Israelites
did; Amos 6. 5.
But few will say with him, Psalm. 119. 143.
All my delight is in thy commandments; Many will say, with those good
fellows, Come and bring wine, and we will fill our selves with strong drink,
and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant. Isa. 56. 12.
But few or none will say with those good professors. Come and let us go up to
the mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob, Isa. 2. 3.
and he will teach us his laws, and we will walk in his paths.

I think I cannot truly say with Hosea, that the Lord has a controversy with
the inhabitants of this land, because there is no knowledge of God in the land.
Isa. 1. 5.
For our heads are not so sick, as our hearts are heavy: I mean our heads are
not so void of knowledge, as our hearts are of obedience, but I dare boldly
say, that which follows: By swearing and lying, and killing, and stealing,
and w^o^ing, Hos. 4. 2.
they break forth, and blood touches blood. Will you hear the judgments
annexed in the subsequent words? Therefore shall the land mourn, and every one
that dwells therein, shall be cut off. This is a terrible curse and he that
dwells in heaven, still avert it from u, but yet it is a conclusion which the
Lord uses to infer upon such premises.

Give me leave to repeat a pa^able unto you, Isa. 5. 1, 2, 3, etc.
My beloved had a vineyard in a very fruitful hill, and he hedged it, and
gathered the stones out of it, and he planted it with the best plants; and he
built a Tower in the midst, and made a winepresse therein. The Prophet in that
place applies it to the land of Judah, Surely the vineyard of the Lord of
hosts, is the land of Israel, and the men of Judah, are his pleasant plants: me
thinks I may not unfitly apply it unto this Island. Surely the vineyard of the
Lord of hosts is the land of Britain, and the men of this land are his
pleasant plants, Now therefore, O ye inhabitants of this land, judge I pray
you, between him and his vineyard, what could he have done unto it, that he
has not done? He has planted it with his own right hand, he has so hedged it
about with his heavenly providence, that the wild boar out of the woods
cannot root it up, nor they that go by, pull off his grapes. He has watered it
most abundantly with the dew of heaven: he has gathered the stones of Popery
and superstition out of it; he has set the winepresse of his word therein:
he has given it a Tower, even a king as a strong tower against his enemies,
whose reign the Lord continue over us, if it be his pleasure, as long as the
moon knows her course, and the sun his going down and let all that love the
peace of Britain say Amen. Now he has long expected that it should bring
forth grapes, but behold it brings forth wild grapes. He looked for
judgment, but behold oppression, for righteousness, but lo^ a crying.

These were the sins of Jerusalem, and you know her judgments, he that was
Jerusalems God, is Britains God too, and therefore if she parallel Jerusalem
in her iniquities, let her take heed she taste not of her plagues; God though
he has not yet begun to punish her in his fury yet has he sundry times shaked
his rod of correction over her, if this will not work amendment, her judgment
must be the greater.

Fearful was the case of Samaria, whom Gods punishments could not move to
repentance. I have given you cleanness of teeth in all your Cities, and
scarceness of Bread in all your places, yet have ye not returned unto me says
the Lord God. Amos. 4.
I have withholden the rain from you when there was yet three months to the
harvest, and I caused it to rain upon one City, and brought a drought upon
another, yet have ye not returned unto me says the Lord. Pestilence have I
sent amongst you after the manner of Egypt, and yet ye have not returned unto
me says the Lord. I have smitten you with blasting and mildew, etc. yet ye
have not returned unto me says the Lord God. The Lord has not hitherto dealt
with us after our sins, nor plagued us according to the multitude of our
iniquities, yet he has made it manifest that he is displeased with us: His
mercy has pulled back his hand from drawing his sword of vengeance against us,
yet he has left us sundry tokens that he is angered with our sins. Deuteronomy. 28.
23.
It is not long since that the heavens were made as brass, and the Earth as
iron, nay, the very waters became as iron or as brass, so that neither the
heavens from above, nor the earth, or water from below did afford comforts for
the service of man.

This extraordinary cold distemperature of the air might by an Antiperistasis
have kindled some heat of zeal and devotion in our breasts; Psalm. 105. 16.
when it had not the expected effect, then he Called for a dearth upon the
land, and destroyed our provision of bread: even such a famine, that if we were
not relieved from foreign countries, Ten women might bake their bread in one
Oven, as the Lord speaks, Levit. 26. 26.

But all this has not brought us upon our knees, nor humbled our souls before
our God, therefore once again, he has put life in his messenger of death,
and set him on foot, which hertofore of late years has raged in this city,
like a man of war, and like a giant refreshed with wine, and bestirred
himself (though not with the like violence) almost in every part of this
kingdom: I mean the pestilence that walks in the darkness, Psalm. 91. 6.
and the sickness that has killed many thousands at noon day: all these are
infallible tokens that he is offended with our sins: Howbeit he is so
merciful that he will not suffer his whole displeasure as yet to arise, --
Horum si singula duras
Flectere non possunt, poterint tamen omnia, mentes:
If each of these by themselves cannot prevail with us* yet if they be all put
together, they may serve (as a threefold cord) to draw us unto repentance. If
these be not of force but still we continue to blow up the coals of his anger,
then let us know for a certainty, that they are the forewarners of a greater
evil* as the cracking of the house is a forewarning of his fall: these be but
the flashing lightnings, the thunder bolt will come after.

The cloud that is long in gathering, will make the greater storm: he is all
this while in setting his stroke, that he may give the sorer blow; Eurum ad se
Zephirumque vocat; he is in bringing the winds out of his treasures, that he
may rain upon our heads a shower of vengeance which shall be the portion of all
the ungodly to drink.

I began like a Barnabas, I will not end like Boanerges: my song had an
Exordium of mercy, I am loath to bring for an Epilogue a thunderclap of
judgment. Wherefore (my beloved Brethren) now that you see the true causes of
the ruins of every commonwealth and the judgment that hangs over your
heads (like Damocles his sword) for our iniquities; flatter your selves no
longer in your own sins, but turn unto him by speedy and unfeigned repentance,
that he may repent him of the evil, and turn away his plagues from you: let
the wanton leave his dallying, and the drunkard his carrowsing, and the Usurer
his biting, and the swearer his blaspheming, and the oppressor his grinding,
and every one amend one in time, before the Lords wrath be further kindled:
then will the Lord be merciful unto this land: he will quickly turn the sour
looks of an angry and sinne-revenging Judge, into the smiling countenance of a
mild and gentle Father. He will take the rod which he has prepared for
you, and burn it in the fire. These plagues which do hang over you for your
iniquities, he will blow away with the breath of his nostrils, as he did the
Egyptian Grasshoppers into the red sea: he will command his destroying Angel to
put up his sword into the sheath, he will open the windows of heaven, and
power down a blessing upon you without measure.

Then shall you be blessed in the City and blessed in the field, blessed at
your going out, and blessed at your coming in, and whatsoever you put your
hands unto shall be blessed; your sons shall grow up as Olive branches, Psalm.
129. 4.
and your daughters shall be as the polished corners of the Temple. Your
grounds shall so abound with grane that the tillers shall laugh and sing; Psalm.
144.
your garners shall be full and plenteous with all manner of store, Joel. 2. 24.
your presses shall abound with Oil and wine, your sheep shall bring forth
thousands, and ten thousands in your fields; Every thing shall prosper,
nothing shall stop the current of Gods blessings, there shall be no decay, nor
leading into captivity, and no complaining in your streets; and which is better
then all these, he will give you faithful and painful Pastors to feed you,
his spirit to comfort you, his word to instruct you, his wisdom to direct you,
his Angels to watch over you, Esther. 6. 9.
his grace to assist you, and in a word, He will be your God, and you shall be
his people: thus shall it be done unto all those whom the King of heaven shall
honor: so that all the world shall wonder at your felicity, and say, Blessed
be the Lord which takes pleasure in the prosperity of his servants, and happy
are the people that be in such a case, yea blessed are all they which have the
Lord for their God; thus will he be with you, and direct you in the desert of
this world, till he bring you into a fair and goodly place, the promised land,
a land that flows with better things then abundance of Milk and Honey, the
celestial Paradise, the heavenly Canaan, the kingdom of glory prepared for you
from the beginning of the world, even that kingdom where the King is verity,
the Laws charity, the Angels your company, the Peace felicity, the life
eternity. To this kingdom, the God of all mercy bring us for his sake that
bought us with his own blood, to whom with the Father and the holy Spirit,
three persons in trinity, and one God in unity, be ascribed all honor and
glory, power and Majesty, both now and for evermore, Amen.

TO THE Right reverend father in God, the Lord Bishop of CARLISLE,
RIGHT REVEREND,
WHen I preached at Carlisle at the last Assizes, I made no other account,
Arist. de hist. animal. lib. 5. cap. 10.
but that my sermon should (like Aristotle's Ephemeron) have died the same day
that it took breath. Since which time I have been entreated by diverse to make
it common: to whom I would not yield the least assent, as doubting that their
desires proceeded rather from affection toward the speaker, then from a sound
judgment of the things spoken. But when I perceived how distasteful it was to
some, that bear Romish hearts in English breasts; I resolved, as David did
when Michal mocked him for dancing before the Arc, to be yet more vile, by
publishing that unto their eyes, which before was delivered to their ears;
hoping that the more it displeases them, the better acceptance it shall find
with the true Israelite. Which now at length I have effected. So as that before
they heard it (or at least heard of it) so now they may read it. And if I have
evil spoken, let them bear witness of the evil, but if I have said well,
why do they smite me? It seems to them a mere calumniation to say that there
is no probability that a Papist shall live peaceably with us, and perform true
and sincere obedience toward our Prince. To whom I might return the short
answer of the Lacones to their adversary, Si: if it were so, my speech was not
to no purpose, because not only rebels to the King, but, much more to God and
his true worship and service, are to be rooted out of a Christian commonwealth.
And if those be worthy a sharp censure which agreeing with us in the
fundamental points of Divinity, cannot away with the carved work of our
Temple, but cut it down as it were with Axes and Hammers, how much more those
Sanballats and Tobiahs, that strike at the foundation thereof, and say of it,
as did the children of Edom in the day of Jerusalem, down with it, down with
it, even to the ground.

But I rather say, O si, I wish it were so, and that there were no fear of
danger by their means and devises. But this I doubt cannot be effected,
unless there be, I will not say with the Orator, a wall, but a sea between
them and us. Till then there is as great probability of peace between us, as
there was of old time between the Catholics and the Donatists, the Orthodoxall
and the Arians, the Hebrews and the Egyptians, the Jews and the Samaritans:
Immortale odium, and nunquam sanabile vulnus.


And for true loyalty, and faithful obedience there is as great probability, as
that the two poles shall meet. The King and the Pope are two contrary masters,
none can truly serve them both; Either he must hate the one, and love the
other, or he must lean to the one and despise the other. The obedience which
either of them requires is so repugnant, that they cannot lodge within one
breast. This loyalty which our adversaries do outwardly pretend is but
equivocal, no more true loyalty, then a dead hand is a hand; it wants the very
form and soul (if I may so speak) of true dutifulness, which is to perform
obedience voluntarily, and with a free heart for Gods cause, as to Christ's
immediate Vicar over al persons within his dominions. It is with some secret
reservation, till their primus motor, the man of sin, upon whom their obedience
depends, shall sway them another way: rebus sic stantibus, the state standing as
it does, and donec publica bullae executio fieri possit, until they may have
power and strength to resist. So that I may use the same words unto them which
Austin does does to the Rogatists, Aug. ep. 48.
Saevire vos nolle dicitis, ego non posse arbitror; ita enim estis numero
exigui, ut movere nos contra adversarias vobis multitudines non audeatis, etsi
cupiatis. I speak chiefly of such as are grounded in the Principles of Popish
Divinity, and take for current what soever is stamped in Romes mint. As for
their ignorant followers, I only give them that censure, which S. Paul gives
the Jews; They have the zeal of God, but not according to knowledge, for they
being ignorant of the righteousness of God, and going about to stablish their
own righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of God.

I have adventured to join with this an other Sermon preached before upon a
like occasion (so far as I could gather it out of a few scattered Papers,
flying abroad like Sybilla's leaves.)

-- rapidis ludibria ventis.
Which I have the rather done, because my experience these few years in the
Country, has taught me how common those sins are which I have herein
endeavored to reprove, if these my labors shall not be distasteful, I shall
be willing to go forward in a greater subject. Howsoever they shall be taken,
I submit to the censure of your Lordship, and of every indifferent Reader (not
counting what carping Momus can say against them) in the words of judicious
Vives; Si quid dixi quod placeat, Lud. Vives in August. de Civit Dei lib. ult.
cap. ult.
habeat lector gratiam Deo propter me; si quid quod non placeat, ignoscat mihi
propter Deum and male dictis det veniam propter been dicta; and of holy Austin
in the conclusion of his long discourse de Trinitate Domine Deus unus and
Trinitas, uaecunque dixi de tuo agnoscant and tui, si qua de meo and tu
ignosand tui.

Your Lordships in Christ to be commanded, LANCELOT DAVVES.

MATH. 26. 15. What will ye give me, and I will deliver him unto you?
I Have elsewhere, in a great and populous auditory, discoursed of our Saviors
mildness, and humility, and of the deceit and hypocrisy of the Judasses of
these times, from these words of our Savior: Luke 22. 48.
Judas betrayest thou the son of man with a kiss? Being commanded to supply
this place, I thought it not unfit for this present occasion, to look back into
the story of our Saviors passion, and to seek out the cause of Judas his
cruel, and more then hellish fact, in betraying his Master, which I find
wrapped in the words already delivered unto you.

These two questions, what will ye give me? and what shall I give you? be two
evils at this day much reigning amongst men; which though they may stand
somewhat upon their antiquity, yet they have little reason to brag of their
pedigree. For the one may be fathered upon Simon Magus, Act. 8. 19.
who offered to buy the gifts of the holy Ghost for money: What shall I give
you, that upon whom soever I shall lay my hands, he may receive the holy Ghost?
the other upon Judas the traitor, who offered to sell the giver of the holy
Ghost for a small sum of money. What will ye give me, and I will deliver him
unto you? Both of them wicked, but the speech of Judas the more heinous. Who
not contented with that which he gat by stealth out of the bag which he bare,
and being disappointed of a profit which he expected, in regard that that box
of ointment which he purposed to have sold, (that he might have converted a
good part thereof to his own proper use,) was powered upon our Saviors head:
and perceiving our Savior to defend the fact of the woman, anon he goes out;
and because he was frustrated of his hope of gain by selling the ointment, he
offers for a small sum of money to sell the Anointed. What will ye give me,
and I will deliver him unto you? As if he should have said, I perceive that ye
are mavelous desirous to apprehend my master, but ye cannot easily effect
your purpose, by reason of the people, which make such account of him, that
perchance they would make an uproar, if any open violence should be offered
unto him: yet if ye will listen unto me, and follow my counsel, I will quickly
ease you of that care, upon this condition, that ye will afford me any
reasonable reward for my pains; tell me therefore before I go, what shall my
recompense be, and I will undertake without any tumult to deliver him into your
hands. In which words observe these two points, 1 Judas his question, what will
ye give me? 2 His promise to deliver his master, so that he may be rewarded:
and I will deliver him unto you.

In the question we see, that though Judas was an Apostata, fallen from God,
and led by Satan to betray his master, whom he little esteemed, as appears by
the price he sold him for; yea though he had a desire to make his master away,
lest he should afterward get knowledge of his theft, yet he will not betray him
unless he have something for his pains. And therefore before he make any
promise of delivering him, he covenanteth for a price: whence arises this
note, that even the wicked, and reprobate will abstain from horrible and
gross sins when there is no provocation offered, and when they see no end of
committing them. There are in every sin which is voluntarily committed two
causes; An inward impulsive moving them; and something which may have the name
of a final cause, or else an external object, alluring them. The impulsive
cause in Judas was covetousness. The final cause was to obtain some money.
The impulsive cause kept it self close, and like a thief, lurked in a corner,
till a fit opportunity was offered, and a reward was expected. As it was in
Judas, so was it in Achan; no doubt but Achan had given lodging to
covetousness before the overthrow of Jericho* but then he had the opportunity
offered him. Jos. 7. 21.
He saw amongst the spoil a goodly Babylonish garment, and two hundred shekles
of silver, and a wedge of gold, and because he coveted them he took them
(contrary to the Lords commandment) and hid them in the midst of his tent. As
it was in these two, so was it in Gehazi. I make no question but an inordinate
desire of having, had possessed his heart, before that Naaman the Syrian, came
to his master, to be healed of his leprosy. But never such an opportunity was
offered, as was then: for when he saw Naaman offer his master some rich
reward; for curing him, and his master absolutely refusing them, he thought
then was the golden occasion offered him to satiate his greedy desires, 2 Kin.
5. 20.
and therefore posts after Naaman to get something of him. Wicked Ahab who (as
the holy ghost speaks) sold himself to work wickedness, did not shed the
blood of Naboth the Israelite, but to this end, that he might obtain the
vineyard which lay near unto his house. Now as it is in covetousness, so with
other sins. And the reason is very plain: for though the understandings of
the wicked be so darkened, Isa. 5.
that they call good evil, and evil good, sour sweet, and sweet sour; though
their appetites and affections be so perverted, that they swallow up sin with
greediness, and drink iniquity like water: yet there is some relics of the
image of God in their understanding, whereby they have a glimpse of good and
evil, which though it cannot moderate the will, and affections from running
into sin, yet it does so far forth bridle them, as that they will not
commit any heinous impiety, but when some thing is offered which puts as it
were a vizard upon the object of the will, and makes it choose that which
otherwise it would refuse. For the will by nature is always carried unto his
proper object, which is good, and abhors that which is evil. So that when
it chooses evil, it is not as it is a will, but as it is depraved, and as the
understanding, which judges of the object, before the will choose or refuse
it, counts that good which indeed is evil.

3. Here two sorts of men are to be censured: Use. 1.
the first is such as think themselves sufficiently excused for committing any
sin, if they can bring any occasions or the allurements which have moved them
to commit it. The drunkard will say that company has drawn him to forget
himself, and therefore he must be pardoned. The adulterer will plead for
himself, that his own corrupt affection has moved him, and that the
circumstances of time and place have caused him, and therefore he must be
excused. But these excuses are such, as that, if they would serve the turn, the
wickedest reprobate upon the face of the earth might be found not guilty. For
might not Judas have pleaded for himself, that he would never have betrayed
Christ, but that he expected some reward from the high Priests? Might not Ahab
have sworn that he would never have sought Naboths blood, if it had not been
for his vineyard which was so commodious for his house? Might not Achan have
avouched that he would never have transgressed the Lords commandment by taking
of the excommunicate thing, but that it so offered it self that he thought he
might have taken it, and none been privy to it? Might not Cain have excused the
slaughter of his guiltless brother, that he would not have killed him, if the
Lord had not had a greater respect unto Abels sacrifice, then unto his? It is
true indeed, that such objects may occur, such inducements may happen, as
that the dearest of Gods children (which as long as they remain in these houses
of clay do taste too much of the old Adam) may thereby be led to commit gross
impieties. We know, that the fear of death moved Peter to deny his master: That
idleness, and the sight of Bathsheba, caused David to adultery: That Lots
daughters brought their father to commit incest: That Solomon by his wives was
drawn to Idolatry: That the fear of the Egyptians made faithful Abraham to
distrust Gods providence, and to say that his wife was his sister. But this
only shows their imperfections; it excuses not their facts, that they had
sundry provocations to these sins. If Peter had thought that the fear that
the Jews put him in, by reason of the great cruelty which they used against his
master, might have excused him for denying Christ, he might have spared his
tears. If occasion, Mat. 26.
and time, and place, might have purchased a pardon for David, Psalm. 51. 1.
he would never have been so vehement, and passionate, in confessing his fault,
and craving a pardon for the same. And indeed this is the only course to be
freed from Gods plagues, not to excuse our sins, and say that such and such
provocations brought us to them: (for so the wickedest reprobate might be
innocent) but to humble our selves before the Majesty of God, and to confess
our misery, that he may receive us to mercy.

4 There is another sort of men which if they commit not such iniquities as
others do, Use. 2.
(either because their natures are not so prone, and bent to those vices, of
because such objects and allurements are wanting, as others have had) will
boast (at least within themselves) that they have attained unto a far greater
measure of holiness, then others, which by their natural pronenesse, or some
external cause, are drawn to wickedness. But (alas) what credit is it for the
Scythians, that they were no drunkards, when they never got wine nor strong
drink? Tacitus.
What commendation for the old Germans, that they abstained from the unlawful
company of women, when by nature they were not addicted to wantonness? What
credit is it for a young child, or withered old man, to abstain from carnal
pleasure, when the heat of youth in the one is quelled, and the other never
knew what lust meant? What grace for a weak spirited man, who was never moved
with any excessive anger, not to be a murderer? This is rather commendation
worthy, if we shall abstain from those vices to which our corrupt nature does
most propend: If the Dutch can leave his drunkenness, the Italian his
lustfulness, the French his factiousness, the Spaniard his haughtiness, the
English his gluttony, and greediness* if the choleric can lay aside his anger,
and rashness; the phlegmatic his sloth, and idleness; the melancholic his
hatred, and enviousness; the sanguine his concupiscence, and wantonness; in a
word, if Herod can be contented to part with Herodias, and every man his
beloved sin, to which by nature he is most addicted.

When a certain Physiognomer looking upon Socrates, gathered by his complexion
that he was given to lust and wantonness, the people which knew the
continency, and virtuous life of Socrates, mocked him as unskilful of his art,
thinking that Socrates was not addicted to any such vice. But Socrates
acknowledged the judgment of the Physiognomer to be true, and confessed that
by natural disposition he was prone unto it; thinking it a greater virtue to
conquer, and keep under the corruptions of the flesh; then to keep himself
under, and within the bond of reason, when he had nothing to draw him away. And
yet this is little worth, unless it be at such time, when some external means,
and provocations do concur, for bringing that into act, which depraved nature
most affects. The drunkard will sometimes abstain from his beastliness: but
it is when he can get no wine. The oppressor from grinding, and grating the
faces of the poor; but it is when he lacks matter to work upon. The wanton
from his pleasures; but it is when he wants time, and place to effect his
desires. The glutton from his excessive eating: but it is in a dearth or
scarcity, when he knows not how to fill h^s paunch. It had been praiseworthy
in Judas, if having a covetous mind, the high Priest had come unto him, and
offered him a large sum of money, upon this condition, that he would have
betrayed his Master; and he should have replied, as Simon Peter did to Simon
Magus: your money perish with you, Act. 8. 20.
because ye think that the Son of God may be bought for money. It is a good
commendation which Tully gives to Muraena, that living among the effeminate and
luxurious Asians, he was not infected with their faults. Laus illi tribnenda
est, non quod Asiam viderat, In Orat. pro Muraena.
sed quod Asia continenter viverat. And Ulysses deserves the name of a soberand
temperate man, not because he was so amongst the Grecians, but because he kept
himself sober in Circe cellar; where all his fellows except Eurylochus were
drunk. On the contrary it argues weakness in Anacharsis the Scythian
Philosopher (who used to say in commendation of his Country, that there were no
Pipers in Scythia, Arist. Post Analyt. lib. 1.
because there were no Vines) that falling into the company of some
Cellar-knights which drank for a wager, he took their part, and was first
drunk under board himself. The Lord, says the Psalmist, tries the righteous.
He suffers such objects to be offered unto them, Psalm. 11. 5.
as may be allurements unto sin; that by refusing and forsaking thereof, they
may make it known to the world, to whom they belong. So was Lots
righteousness tried, not when he dwelled with Abraham, but when he was removed
to Sodom: which though it was for the pleasantnes of the soil like the garden
of Eden, yet for wickedness and unnatural uncleaness it surmounted Hell it
self. And yet for all this it could not infect righteous Let, who dwelling
amongst them, from day to day vexed his righteous soul by their unlawful
deeds. 2 Pet. 2. 8.
So was David's innocence tried, not when he fled from Saul, but when he found
him asleep, and might have killed him. So likewise thou declarest thy
righteousness, 1 Samuel 26.
not, when thou abstainest from such sins as thy nature is averse from, or
from such sins, as thy flesh is prone unto, at such times as fit means are
wanting to accomplish thy desire: but when thou abstainest from such as thy
flesh inwardly desires, and some external provocation urges and allureth
thee unto. Thou must, when the high Priest offers thee a rich reward, not be
bribed to sell thy Master. With Ulysses thou may live sober at Cyrces table,
with Lot thou may persist honest among the Sed mites: otherwise if thou
perswadest thy self, that thou do well, if thou can abstain from gross
sins, when there is no great inducement to persuade thee to act them; this is
but Judas his righteousness, who would not betray his master but in hope of
reward, what will ye give me, and I will deliver him unto you?

5. And so I come unto the second general part: wherein observe, 1. The person
delivering, I. 2. The Action, deliver. 3. The party delivered, him. 4. The
parties to whom, unto you.


Of which before I particularly entreat we may from the promise as it has
reference to the question, gather this conclusion. That a covetous mind,
setting all respects aside, will not be afraid to commit any sin, so that he
may be rewarded for his pains.

Luke and John tell us, Luke 22. 2.
that the Devil put it into the heart of Judas to betray his Master. Joh. 13.
3.
He put it not into the heart of Peter or John, or any other of the Disciples;
why? because this Phylarguria, had only taken root in Judas his heart: the rest
were not infected with this disease. They were indeed weak, and feeble in the
faith, and therefore Peter, though he followed him a far off, and came into the
high Priests hall, yet a poor damsel did so shake the rock of his faith that
presently he denied him, the rest immediately after he was taken forsook him,
and fled: but none of them did entertain any such suggestion as to betray him,
save Judas Iscariot, who before was entangled with the chains and fetters of
covetousness. So true is it which the Apostle says, those that will be rich
fall into snares and tentations of the Devil; for so the vulgar adds 1 Timothy
6. 4. Here then if ever, the Poets exclamation may have place.

-- Quid non mortalia pectora cogis, Aenid. lib. 3.

Auri sacra fames! --
What vice so scandalous; what thing so monstrous; what sin to God and nature
so odious, which the desire of money will not cause a man to commit? Ioh. 17. 12.
A man betrayeth a man, a servant his Master, Matthew. 16. 16.
a creature delivers his Creator, the son of perdition the son of God; 1 Timothy: 6. 10.
the Lord of life must be put to death for a little money. Well therefore does
the Apostle term covetousness the root of al evil. Gal. 5. 20. 21.
For as all the the lines of a circle do take their beginning from one middle
point or center; so all other evils do spring from this fountain. The works
of the flesh are manifest (says the Apostle) which are Idolatry, witchcraft,
hatred, debate, emulations, wrath, contentions, seditions, heresies, envy,
muther; I may add lying, swearing, stealing, oppressing, whence do they
proceed, but from a covetous and insatiable heart? This is the womb where they
ordinarily are bred. -- Lucri bonus est odor ex re
Qualibet --
says the Poet; Iuven.
alluding to the fact of Vespasian in Suetonius, who gathered a tax from some
homely matters, and told his son Titus, Sueton in Vespasiano.
that it smelled as well, as any other silver did. Be it gotten by theft,
lying, stealing, swearing, forswearing, usurie, oppression, what way soever it
be gotten, (faith the covetous in his heart) if it be gain, it is well gotten.
Tacitus tells us of a Roman knight, that killed his own Brother, Tacit hist.
lib. a.
in hope to be rewarded for his pains. Histories are full of the like, which I
will pass over with silence. I will only instance in one of our own country,
(which methinks in all points, save in the difference of the parties betrayed,
may be compared to this of Judas) I mean Humphery Banister, servant to the Duke
of Buckingham: whom the Duke had tenderly brought up, and above all loved and
trusted, in so much that being pursued by King Richard the third, he hid
himself in Banisters house, thinking it to be the only Sanctuary, where he
might safely repose himself. But when King Richard had promised 1000 pounds to
those that would find him out, the desire of gain so wrought with him, that
presently he betrayed his Lord and master into the kings hands. As the fact was
like to that of Judas, so the punishment has some resemblance with it. Judas
though he had no bond for payment, In the life of Richard the 3 written by Sir.
Th. More.
yet he got the money. The high Priests proved better of their promise then the
King. Judas did not enjoy the money, for he went out, and hanged himself.
Banister was not executed, but was shortly after for a murder condemned: his
son and heir became mad, and died in a hogstie, his daughter was infected
with a leprosy, his second son deformed of his limbs; his youngest son
drowned in a puddle.

6. By this which has been spoken, you see my conclusion plainly proved: that
a covetous man, setting all respects aside, will not be afraid to commit any
sin, so that he may be rewarded for his pains. And how can it be otherwise?
for he is like an hunger-starved man which will do any thing, so that he may
satiate his appetite. Covetousness like the pit of hell, is never satisfied,
and like the barren womb, it never says, I have enough.

Quo plus sunt potae, Ovid. Fast.
plus sitiuntur aquae, the more blood the two daughters of the horsleech shall
suck, Prove. 30. 15.
the more eagerly they cry out, give, give. This barren and d^y earth is never
satisfied with water: Hor.
nec sitim pellit, nisi causa morbi. Nothing will content this dropsy, but
that which more augmenteth the disease, as nothing will satisfy the fire, but
that which more augmenteth the flame. He is like unto him that has the Caninus
appetitus, the more he eats the more he hungreth. Some Physicians say that
gold is good for him that is in a consumption, but I never read that it is good
against a surfeit. But experience proves it true, that a gold-hungring man,
does not only long for this metal when he is in a consumption, but far
more when he has taken a surfeit through abundance.

-- congesto pauper in auro est.
The richer, the poorer: his mind hungereth as much for gold, as Dionysius his
belly hungered for flesh, who used to stand all the day in the shambles, Justin.
l. 21.
and quod emere non potuerat, oculis devorabat. That which he could not buy
with his penny, he devoured with his eyes. And here that comes in my mind which
Herodotus records of Alcmaeon the Athenian, who because he had kindly
entertained the messengers which Croesus sent to the oracle of Delphos: Herod.
lib. 6.
Croesus sent for him and offered him as much gold as at one time he could bear
out of his treasure house. Alcmaeon not a little glad of the offer, prepared a
large doublet with wide sleeves, a pair of breeches reaching down to his
heels, both of them fitter for Hercules then for himself. This done he went
to Croesus his coffers; and first filled his breeches as full as he could
stuff them, then his sleeves, and bosom, then glued as much as he could to
the hairs of his head, and beard, and then lastly stuffed his mouth with as
much as he could thrust in it, and so with much ado, crept out of the treasure
house.

This sin, Application to magistrates.
as of all men it is to be avoided, so especially of magistrates which sit at
the stern to direct our ship in this glassie sea: and which are the pillars of
justice to support her battered fabric. Ye must not give it the least welcome
in your hearts: but (like the wise traveller) stop your ears at the songs of
this Siren, and not give it the least attention though it charm never so
cunningly. You should have eyes like unto Lynceus, to dive into the bottom of
the most deep and abstruse controversies. Now hope of reward blinds the eyes
of the wise: so that as a blind man which has a pearl upon his eyes, cannot
see his way, but stumbleth at every block, and falls headlong into every pit;
right so if you shall have this rich pearl (this pearl of riches) before your
eyes, you can never tread right in the way of truth. The eye, or any faculty of
the sensual, or intellectual part, if it be busied about any one object
neglects the rest: and if your eyes be exercised about this object, it will
make you negligent in public affairs. Artist. de anima lib. 3.
Intus apparens prohibet alienum: if the species of gold possess your hearts,
there will be no room for justice to lodge in them. For these two be (...), non
been convenient nec in una sede morantur. They can no more lodge within the
same breast then light with darkness, the arc with Dagon, God with Mammon.
Cic. lib. 3. Offic.
It was Caesar's saying, borrowed from Euripides in his Phoenissa: If justice
must be broken, it must be for reigning. But he might more truly have said, for
gaining* For gold could never away with justice, and therefore the Poets feign,
that when gold first began to be dug out of the earth, justice durst tarry
no longer, but presently fled into heaven. Therefore jethro describing the
quality of a good judge, Exodus 18. 21.
says that he must deal justly or truly, and then he adds, as it were by way
of explication for the better understanding of the former word, that he must
hate covetousness: as if he had said, if he be a covetous, and goldthirsting
man he cannot be a true and just dealer. And to this purpose David prays,
Psalm. 119. that the Lord would incline his heart to his testimonies, and not to
covetousness.

7. Now as this insatiable desire of gain, 2 To Lawyers.
is not to sit on the bench with the judge, so is it not to plead at the bar
with the counselor, which with the key of knowledge is to unlock the secrets
of the law, and with as skilful, and expert hand, to untie the knots of hard
and difficult questions. It will make him Pharisee-like to strain a Gnat, and
to swallow a Camel; to tith the mint, and cummin and to let pass judgment and
fidelity, it will make his tongue play fast and loose with justice at its
pleasure. A golden key commonly opens a wrong lock. Auro loquente, nihil pollet
quaevis oration. When Pluto speaks Plato may hold his hand on his mouth like
Harpocrates the Egyptian God, and say nothing. It is a great commendation which
Tullie gives unto a Lawyer: De orat. l. 1.
The mouth of a Lawyer is an oracle for the whole city. But if this mouth be
once corrupted with gold, it will prove like the oracle of Delphos of which
Demosthenes complained in his time, that it did (...), Tull. de divinat. lib. 2.
speak nothing but what Philip, which gave it a fee, would have it to say. And
such an oracle Demosthenes himself sometime proved: Aul. Gel. l. 11. cap. 9.
who being feed to plead a cause, and immedatly after receiving a large sum
of money of the other party for holding his peace, the next day comes into the
court in a rugge-gowne, having his neck, and jaws all muffled with furs, and
warm clothes, and told the Judges he was troubled with a squinancie that he
could not speak. Whereupon one that perceived his disease, said that it was not
a cold, but gold that hindered his speech (...), an Ox, I warrant you, was in
his tongue. The Athenian coin which was stamped with the form of an Ox had
bunged up his mouth, no marvel if he was speechless.

8. But especially this sin is to be avoided of you that are witnesses, 3. To
witnesses and Jurors.
and jurors, which are the one by testifying, the other by examining the truth
to make a final decision of controversies. If you shall entertain any such
thought as to say with Judas, What will ye give me? ye shall be sure to find
some Simon Magus ready to say, What shall I give you? Falsity and lying have
ever been the handmaids to covetousness. And therefore when the Prophet Jeremy
complains, that from the least to the greatest they were all given to
covetousness, Jer. 6. 13.
it must needs be true which he adds in the next words, that from the Prophet
even unto the Priest they all dealt falsely. As Judas was hereby moved to betray
his master, so were the soldiers persuaded to lie, and falsely to forswear
themselves, that his disciples stole him away when they were asleep; and that
most palpably too. For if they were asleep how knew they that it was his
disciples, and if they knew that it was his disciples, how were they asleep?

9. Follow not then the ways of Balaam the son of Bosor which loved the
wages of unrighteousness. 2 Pet. 2. 15.
Only herein ye must keep his resolution, Number. 24. 13.
not for an housefull of silver and gold to go beyond the word of truth to say
less or more. Equivocations and mental reservations which the Papists make
such reckoning of, are the ready way to renew that old tohu, and bohu, to make
a chaos and confusion of all things, Genesis 1.
to mix light and darkness, truth and falsehood, heaven and hell together.
Whosoever shall for filthy lucre sake, either wittingly conceal part of the
truth, or add any thing thereto, and thereby turn the truth into a lie, I say
unto you that an untimely birth is better then he; Eccl. 6. 3.
and better it were for him, unless he repent, that a millstone were put about
his neck, Matthew. 18. 6.
and that he were drowned in the deep of the sea.

10. To end this point, 4 To all.
let me speak unto you all in the words of our Savior, Luke 12. 13.
beware of covetousness, and with the Apostle, let it not be once named
amongst you. Ephesians. 5. 3.
But if ye will needs be covetous, 1 Cor. 14. 1.
covet spiritual things: set not your hearts on the things that are below, but
on the things that are above, Covet that which will satiate your hearts, and
that is nothing in this world. For the heart is triangular, and the world is
round, and a round body cannot fill a triangle, but there will remain some
empty corners: no more can the whole world fill the three corners of an heart,
nor any thing save he which is three, and one, God blessed for evermore.
Inquietum est cor nostrum O Deus, postquam recessimus a te, donec revertamur ad
te, says Austin, O God our heart is never contented when we turn from thee,
till we return to thee. Oh then as your hearts are, so let your hearts desire
be; that is, the Basis or broader part upward toward heaven, and heavenly
things, and the conus or narrow point toward earth and earthly things. Use not
your riches as Anacharsis said the Athenians did their money: Plut. de profect.
virt. sent.
Nummis ad numerandum, only to count it over, and then to coffer it up. Enjoy
them, but joy not immoderatly in them, knowing this that ye are not owners,
but only users of the things that ye possess. Alas why should a man, which is
a little world of himself, a man whose conversation should be in heaven, be
wedded to these base, and vile excrements of the earth? they deserve no better
name. For what I pray you is the best gold, but a congealed vapor? and the
greatest possessions but so much earth? and the finest silk, but excrements of
silly worms, which live but two or three months? 1 Kin. 10. 17.
Solomon had as much experience in them as any man that ever lived. For he gave
in Jerusalem silver as stones, and Cedar trees, as the wild fig trees that
grow abundantly in the plains, yet in his old age, when he became a preacher,
and repented him of his former life, he took such small comfort in this
transitory trash, that in the beginning of Ecclesiastes, he took this for his
text, Eccles. 1.
Vanity of vanities, and all is but vanity: and if they be weighed in the
balance of the sanctuary, they will want of weight. They are altogether vanity,
nay they are lighter then vanity't self. Let us then so love them, as that we
care not to leave them: and in all things, let us learn both to be hungry, and
to be full, Philip. 4. 12.
and to abound, and to have want; accounting all things, but loss, and dross,
and dung, that we may win Christ. Which Judas for the desire of a little
money promises to deliver unto the high Priest: I will deliver him unto you.
And so I come to the particulars of the second general branch of my text.

11. And first we are to begin with the Person delivering, and that is Judas,
no Saducee, nor Pharisee which oppugned his doctrine, no professed enemy which
openly sought his destruction, but an Apostle, one of the twelve which he had
chosen unto himself, and sent abroad to preach the Gospel, and to cast out
Devils, and to heal the sick. Hence I infer this conclusion: that no calling is
so holy but that it has some wicked impes, and dissembling hypocrites (which
though for a space they may deceave the world with a visard of holiness, yet
time will unmaske and show them in their own colors) intermixed with true
professors. A conclusion which if the instances of our time could not make
good, the premises of all former ages do abundantly demonstrate it. When as
yet our first Parents had no more Children then Cain and Abel, the elder of
these two, Genesis 4.
the first that ever was borne of a woman, the heir apparent of the whole
world, was an Apostate: his hypocricie was disclosed in killing his brother.
When the whole Church was compinged within the sides of one Arc, all were not
sheep that were in this little fold, for -- Not Lupus inter Oves,
there swam one wolf among these sheep As there was a Sem which was elected, so
was there a Cham which was rejected: his apostacy declared in mocking his
father. Genesis 7.
Of the same father (even of him, who was the father of the faithful) there
came an Ishmael, as well as an Isaac of the same mother (even at one and the
self same birth) came an Esau as well as a Jacob. Genesis 16.
The same kingdom had as well a Saul, Romans 4. 16.
as a David: Genesis 25. 24.
the same place a Barrabas, and a Barnabas, the same profession a Cephas, and a
Caiphas, a Jude and a Judas, and as it was, so it shall ever be till the son of
man come in the glory of his kingdom, as long as the nett swims in the salt sea
of this world, till it be brought to land, it shall contain both good and bad
fishes. Till the reapers come, there must grow wheat and tears together in
this field: till the shepherd come there must be sheep and goats in this
fold. This great house till it be builded a new, must contain vessels of
honor, and vessels of dishonor: the gold must be mixed with the dross, 2 Timothy 2. 20.
till the great and terrible fire come to separate them. In this floor the
wheat shall be mingled with the chafe, till the Lord come with his fan in his
hand to winnow it, and shall blow the chafe, and scatter it away from the face
of the earth. Psalm. 1.


The reasons hereof first respect the wicked, and that is to make them more
inexcusable, Reasons.
in that conversing with the godly, they do not learn godliness: but as those
which walk in the sun, though they change their outward color, yet they
still retain their inward nature, so these though they receive an outward
tincture of godliness, yet they still keep their inward corruption. Hereupon
it is that Corazin and Bethsaida are more inexcusable, then Tyrus, and Sidon:
Mat. 11. 21.
that the men of Nineve, and the Queen of the South shall rise against the
Jews, Mat. 12. 41.
and shall condemn them: Mat. 11. 23.
that it shall be better for them of Sodom in the day of judgment then for
Capernaum.

2. The Lord by this means effects the conversion of some, which are not yet
called. For as the Aramits, by walking with the Prophet, 2 King. 6.
were at unawares brought unto Samaria: so many who are not as yet called by
walking with the righteous, are catched at unawares, and brought to Christ's
sheepfold.

3. The Lord does hereby exercise his children and keeps them still fighting,
whereas otherwise they would be ready to fall asleep in the cradle of carnal
security. The coldness of devotion, that is in the worldlings, does by an
Antiperistasis oftentimes stir up the heat of zeal in Gods Children. While
the winds strives to blow out the fire, it increases the flame, and while the
wicked do endeavor to consume the heat of zeal in Gods Children, and to
make them as cold as they themselves are, they often blow it up, and make it
far greater then it was before.

I told you before what Tully says of Muraena, that his chastity was more
seen in living among the effeminate Asians, then ever it was at Rome. And I am
sure Lots continency did far more appear when he lived amongst the
Sodomites, then when he was in the mountain with his two daughters. If Gods
Children should have none but such as Moses, Genesis 19.
and Elias to converse with them, they would say as Peter did unto Christ, when
he was transfigured upon the mountain, Mark. 9. 5.
Master it is good for us to be here: let us here (upon this mountain) build us
Tabernacles. Psalm. 15. 1.
They would never say with the Psalmist: Lord who shall dwell in thy tabernacle
and who shall rest upon thy mountain? Whereas now being vexed with these
Cananites that dwell amongst them and are thorns in their sides, Number. 33. 55.
and pricks in their eyes: they are weary of the earthly Canaan, and long for
another, which flows with better things then milk and honey. Genesis 25. 22.
They cry out as Rebeccae when she felt the two twins struggling in her womb:
if it be so, why are we thus?

12. To leave then the conclusion, 1. Use.
and to come to some application thereof. Are the wicked intermixed with true
and zealous professors? What shall we then say to the old Donatists, and the
Brownists, and Anabaptists, which separate themselves from the true Church, and
say with those in the Prophet. Come not near us for we are holier then ye?
Socrat. hist. Eccless. lib. 1. cap. 7.
Methinks I may say unto them as Constantine said to Acesius a Novation Bishop:
Let them make a Ladder for themselves to ascend into heaven, here is no place
for them on earth, as long as this world shall last, the Lords wheat shall grow
up with the tares Christ has spoken it, and Christ is truth, if there be in
them any charity, Mat. 13. 29.
they will assent to this verity, yea but light has no communion with
darkness nor bitterness with honey, Sit in illis charitas and congaudeant
veritate. Aug*
nor life with death, nor the unbeleever with the infidel. It is the objection
of Petilian the Donatist against Austin. But his answer is, that when they
eschew the darkness, they forsake the light: Cor. 2. 6.
when they flee from death they flee from life also Attendis Zizania per
mundum, and triticum non attendis, cum per totum utraque sint jussa crescere?
Attendis semen maligni, quod ad finem messis separabitur; and non attendis
semen Abrahae, in quo benedicentur omnes gentes? Do thou mark the darnell,
and do thou not remember the wheat? Do thou think upon the seed of the
Serpent, whose head shall be crushed; and do thou not think upon the the
seed of Abraham, in whom all the Nations of the earth shall be blessd? when
thou fleest from the chafe thou forsakest the good wheat, which is mingled
with it. When thou separatest thy self from the seed of the wicked, thou
separatest thy self from the seed of Abraham. When thou thus dividest thy
self from the Hypocrites, that are in the true Church, thou cuttest thy self
from the Church, and a member taken from the whole must needs perish. If thou will think upon this with that heedfulnesse that thou should, thou will not
forsake the green pastures of the Lord, that are besides the waters of
comfort, because of the goats, nor leave Gods house because of the vessels of
dishonor; Psalm. 33. 2.
nor run out of the Lords floor because of the chafe; nor separate thy
self from the wheat, because of the tares, which shall at length be bound in a
bundle and cast into the fire; nor burst the unity of the Lords net, because
of the bad fish, Aug. lib. 3. contra lit. Petil. cap. 3.
which swim in it, (which when the net is brought to land shall be cast
away:) but as a father speaks tolerare potius propter bonos commixtionem
malorum, quam violare propter malos charitatem bonorum; rather for the good to
tolerate the bad, then for the bad to forsake the good.

But before I leave this point, 1 Use.
I must give thee this lesson) and I beseech thee mark it well) though of
necessity thou must live amongst the ungodly, Psalm. 1. 1.
yet thou must not walk in the counsel of the ungodly, much less standing
stand in the way of sinners, and least of all, sit down in the seat of the
scornful. Though thou dwell among Wolves, 1 Co. 5. 10.
thou must not ululare cum lupis, howl with the wolves, though thou accompany
with the fornicators of this world, and with the coveteous, and with
extortioners, and with idolaters, (for else thou must go out of this world,
yet be not partaker with them in their sins, 2 Timothy 2. 19.
least thou be partaker with them in their punishments. Though a corporal
separation cannot be had, yet in spirit thou must separate thy self: for let
every one that calls on the name of the Lord, separate himself from
iniquity. Thou see what is thy lot, if not with Lot, to dwell with Sodomites;
or with Naaman, Psalm. 120. 5.
to be amongst the Aramites: or with Joseph to live among the Egyptians; if
thou can not say with David, Woe is me that I am constrained to dwell in
Meshech, and to have my abode in the Tents of Kedar: Isa. 6. 5.
Yet may thou say with Esaias, Woe is me for I dwell in the midst of a people
of polluted lips. With Christ and his Apostles, thou must converse with a
Judas: with the Hebrews thou must live with the Cananites: with the Spouse in
the Canticles, thou must be as an apple tree amongst the wild trees of the
forest, Cant. 2. 2, 3.
or as a lilie amongst the thorns. Let not these wild trees, which are moved
with every blast of wind, by the shaking of their boughs beat down thy
fruit, and though the thorns prick thee, yet keep still a lilies beauty.
Thou must touch pitch, but beware of being defiled with it. Thou must walk upon
coals, beware of burning thy feet: though thou lie among the pots, among the
washpots of the Lord (as Moab is called) among the vessels of dishonor that
are kept for the day of wrath, Psalm. 108. 9.
yet must thou be as the wingr of a dove, Psalm. 67. 13.
that is covered with silver wings, and her feathers like gold. Be not like the
Apothecarie, that carries the smell of his shop about him, Plin. not. hist. l.
5. c. 15.
nor like the River Jordan, which loses his sweet waters in the lake
Asphalites. But like the fish in the salt sea, which still retain their
freshness; pass through the brinish Ocean of this world, as Arethusa does
under the Sicilian sea.

Doris amara su^^^ non intermiseat undam. Virg. Eclog. 10

In a word, though thou can not wholly separate thy self from the workers of
darkness, yet have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but
even reprove them rather. Nay from such works, Ephesians. 5. 11.
as much as thou may lawfully separate thy self: for thou will in time joy
in the latter, if thou long enjoy the former, it is a matter of some difficulty
to be continually handling pitch, and birdlime, and to have none cleave to thy
hands. Arist. Met. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Aristotle notes it of his master Plato, that conversing long with the
Pythagorians, he learned from them many erroneous opinions, which afterward he
stiffly maintained. Q. Curtius
Alexander by conversing with the effeminate Persians, and Live. dec. 3. lib. 3.
Annibal by living in Capua, did abate so much of their former valor, that it
was doubted whether they were the same men they had been before. Sozom. l. 5.
cap. 2.
Julian, in profession sometimes a Christian, by conversing with Libanius, and
Maximus, became an Apostata. To go no further with the examples of heathen men,
you know that Joseph living in Pharaohs Court, began to swear Genesis 42. 16.
by the life of Pharaoh. And the Hebrews dwelling among the Idolatrous
Egyptians (which Herod. l. 2.
worshipped an ox) did meetly well imitate them, for they Exodus 32.
worshipped a calfe. And pitching for a time in the plain of Moab, they
sacrificed to Baal Peor, and ate the offerings of the dead. Numb. 25.
An infected sheep will sooner spoil a whole flock, Psalm. 106. 20.
then a whole flock will cure an infected sheep. It is no hard matter to change
wine into vinegar, but to turn vinegar, or to change water into wine.

Hoc opus, hic labor est.
This is such a miracle as will never be wrought, unless Jesus be at the
feast. It is an easy matter to be infected with the plague of sin, If thou
remove out of the fresh air into the company of contagious persons. And though
thou be regenerate, and the old man has got his deadly wound, yet is there a
sympathy between thee, and the wicked. Thy affections are like tinder, ready to
kindle with every sparkle, that the wicked shall strike in them. And sin once
kindled is like wilde-fire, it will not be quenched with every kind of water.
This poison perhaps will not be perceived at the first, yet, like the biting of
a mad dog, it will never cease infecting thy blood till it come at thy
heart. Beware then of dogs. Philip. 3. 2.
Avoid (as much as is possible) such contagious places, as are dangerous to
infect, and keep thy self in the fresh air, where the spirit, that quickneth,
does blow. But whereas thou can not wholly avoid the company of sinners (for
as before was said, the good and bad fish swim together in Gods net) avoid
their sins. Prove. 1. 10, 15.
hearken unto Solomon, My son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not. My
son, walk not thou in the way with them, refrain thy foot from their path;
but contrariwise when they entice thee to evil, persuade them unto that which
is good. Be to them, as Noah was to the old world, a preacher of
righteousness; 2 Pet. 2. 5. Verse. 8.
as Lot was to the Sodomites, who dwelling amongst them vexed his soul with
their unlawful deeds; as Christ was to the woman of Samaria, who by desiring of
the water of Jacobs well to quench his thirst, Joh. 4.
brought her to desire the water of life, whereof whosoever drinks shall
never more thirst; and as he was with Publicans and sinners, who refused not to
go to their corporal banquets, that he might feed them with spiritual food;
as John was with the Pharisees and Saducees, Mat. 3.
who preached unto them faith and repentance; and as Paul was amongst the
Idolatrous Athenians, who went with them, through their idolatrous temples, and
read the titles and inscriptions written upon their altars, Act. 17. 23.
but to this end, to take a text, and argument thence, to persuade them to the
worship of the true God.

So much of the person delivering. The action follows, ( deliver.)

13. Treason is a sin so odious, Deliver.
that even the heathen which were guided, but with a glimpse of natures light,
howsoever, sometimes for their own advantage, they approved the fact, yet they
could never away with the author of it. It was Augustus his saying of
Rimotalchus the King of Thrace, which vanted himself for the betraying of
Antonie: (...). I may love the treason but I hate the traitor. And it was the
saying of Antigonus: Proditores tantisper amo dum produnt, ast ubi prodiderint
odi. I love a traitor when he commits the treason, but when he has done it,
I detest him. These speeches, though plausible at the first, argue corruption
in the speakers. For if the traitor be evil, surely the treason cannot be
good. The old Romans could abide neither. For when Pyrrhus his physician,
seeking to gratify the Romans, promised to give his master poison, the
Romans made Pyrrhus acquainted with it, and willed him to look unto himself.
And when the schoolmaster of the Phalascides children offered to betray those
which were committed to him, Live. dec. 1. l. 5.
to Camillus his hand: Camillus sent them bak again, and made his own scholars
to beat him.

This fact, Him.
of it self so heinous, is further aggravated by the person betrayed. If Judas
had betrayed one of his fellows, the sin had been horrible: but he makes it
far worse, he betrayeth his master. He goes yet further, for (behold whither
man does fall, Unto you.
if the spirit of God do not direct his steps) he delivers him into the hands
of his hateful enemies, Luke 1. 71.
who came to deliver us from our enemies and from the hands of all that hate
us. He delivers him to death, who came to restore us, that were dead in our
sins, to life; who to satisfy for our hunting after vanities, was himself
hunted like a Pelican in the wilderness; to satisfy for our carnal, and
sensual pleasures, left the bosom of his father with whom is fullness of
delights, and at whose right hand is pleasure for evermore: to satisfy for our
pride, humbled himself and took upon him the form of a servant: Phil. 2. 7.
to answer for our gluttony, tasted gall, and vinegar; to answer for our
covetousness, paid not gold, nor silver, but the ransom of his own blood.
These things I do but point at, having discoursed of them elsewhere, when I
handled our Saviors mild speech unto Judas, when he went to betray him.
Therefore I pass them over, and come to apply this fact unto these present
times.

14. Judas is dead, and all men cry, fi^ upon him, and say that if they had
been in Judas his days, they would not have been partners with him in the
blood of our Savior. And so said the old Pharisees, if they had been in the
days of their fathers, they would not have been partners with them in the
blood of the Prophets. Mat. 23. 30.
And yet they fulfilled, nay they exceeded the measure of their fathers
wickedness. And now a days howsoever many will build the tombs of the
Prophets, and garnish the sepulchers of the righteous, yet we have Judasses,
which will betray Christ unto the high Priests. I cannot reckon them all, but
there are 3 transgressors, nay 4 which I cannot pass over. 1. The sacrilegious
Church-robber, 2. The grinding oppressor, 3. The close briber, 4. The deceitful
lawyer. All these do their best (nay their worst) to betray Christ, if not in
his person, yet in his members, into the hands of the hellish Caiphas, And me
thinks they do somewhat resemble those 4. great plagues mentioned in the first
of Joel: which were the Caterpiller, the Locust, the Cankerworme and the
grasshopper. The Caterpiller eats the first fruits when they are in setting. To
him I compare the Church-robber, which lives of the first fruits and tithes,
which by the law are due to God. The Locust (as Naturalists describe him) is a
great fly, which lives upon the less, and with no difficulty can burst a
spiders web, wherein the smaller flies are quickly catched. To him I compare
the oppressor, which devours his inferiors, and will with no less difficulty
pass through those good statutes that are made against him, then a great
Locust will burst through a spiders web. The Canker-worme does secretly shave
off the tender barks of herbs and trees before he can be perceived. To him may
be likened the briber, which does so closely carry himself, that none can
perceive him, but the plant which he feeds upon. The Grasshopper has a chirping
voice to allure a man after him, but yet so nimble is his motion, that he which
follows him shall scarcely find him. Like to it, is the deceitful lawyer,
which with fair promises, and sugered hopes, draws his clients after him; but
so nimbly he hops up and down, for his own advantage, that ye shall perhaps not
find him twice in one tune, insomuch that ye shall be worse resolved in the
end, then ye were in the beginning. These four lie as heavy upon our land, as
those four plagues did upon Judah: so that we may say, that which is left by
the Locust, the grasshopper has eaten, and the residue of the grasshopper, has
the cankerworme eaten, and the residue of the cankerworme has the caterpiller
eaten. Before I begin to speak of these in particular, let me use the Apostles
protestation. Romans 9. 1.
I say the truth in Christ Jesus, I lie not, my conscience bearing me witness
in the holy ghost. I do not seek the disgrace of any particular, it is the
truths cause, and Gods cause that moves me to speak and let my tongue cleave
to the roof of my mouth when I shall be afraid to discharge a good conscience
in Gods behalf.) If then my music seem harsh, and unpleasant in the ears of
any that hear me, I would have them to know thus much, that the strings upon
which I am to play are far out of tune. If any man shall find himself
wounded with my speech, I say unto him as our Savior did to the adulteress,
Has no man condemned thee? neither do I condemn thee; yet I add with John,
Joh. 8. 10. 11.
if thine own heart do condemn thee, 1 John 3. 20.
God is greater then thy heart and knows all things, and therefore I dismiss
thee with that speech of Christ to the impotent man: go thy way, Joh. 5. 14.
and sin no more, lest a worse thing happen unto thee. Now to the particulars.

15. In the first place come the Simoniacal Patrons, the heirs and eldest sons
of Judas, the caterpillars of our Church, and the notablest thieves in all our
land. Which will not part with that portion which is due unto the sons of Levi,
and which is committed unto them, as the golden apple was unto Paris, with this
motto engraven upon it, detur digniori, let the most worthy have it, unless
with Judas they covenant for a price before hand. Let a man's gifts of mind be
never so good, yet if he bring no gifts in hand; let his care, and industry,
and learning be never so rare, and extraordinary, yet if he do not speak with
the tongue of men, and angels, yea archangels, he shall have little hope to
prevail in his suit. He that will insinuate himself into their favors, must
come, as Jupiter came into Danaes lap, per impluvium, secretly in at the
chimney top, (not in at the door) and he must come as Jupiter then came, in a
shower of gold. This is the way, this is the best means to effect his desire;
for he that is as blockish and stupid, Plut. Apoth.
as Philips Ass in Plutarch, if he be laden with gold (with that ass) oh he
is a man of excellent gifts, of rare endowments, no exception must keep him
back; that which he wants in learning, he has it in simplicity: as if it were
simplicitas Asi^ina, and not simplicitas columbina, Mat. 10. 16.
which the Lord would have in his ministers. And what if he lack Latin? he
has gold enough, and that is a far more precious metal. But if this way will
not hold, then they will take another course, they will act the parts of
Ananias and Sapphira, and keep back part of that possession, which they should
voluntarily lay down at the Apostles feet. Act. 4. 12.
There must be an exception in the general rule, a reservation of their own
tithes, a limitation of such a township, or such a field. Or they will say with
the harlot, 1 Kin. 3. Let it neither be thine nor mine, but let it be divided.
Here is treason in another kind; they do not sell the king of heaven, by
covenanting for a price before hand, as Judas did, but (which is all to one
effect) they clip his coin and make it so light, that it will not sustain the
sons of Levi. And this verily is a principal reason, that we have so many
mutes, and so few vowels in our crosserow: that many lapwings which hopped out
of their nests with their shells on their heads, before ever they get a feather
on their backs, have builded in those rocks where eagles should nestle; and
many which have never put down their buckets, into either of the two fountains
of this land (or if they have, it has been but tanquam canis ad Nilum, they
have only wet their lips, and taken a lap by the way) are advanced to
Ecclesiastical preferments, and made Pastors of flocks being not able to feed
themselves, and are become captains in the Lords field, being not able of
themselves to take one stone out of Gods brook to cast at the forehead of the
spiritual Goliath. I confess some of them will now and then be flinging in the
pulpit, but they be mentita tela, other men's weapons they fight with: they
have, indeed, as good a property in them, as they have in their benefices,
Carmina Paulus emit, jactat sua carmina Paulus: nam, quod emit, possit dicere
jure^ suum.
and as Paulus in Martial had in his verses, which he used to brag of. Such
wandering Levites as these, are the fittest merchants that sacrilegious Judasses
can meet withal: for they will be contented to dwell with every base filching
Michah: and will serve him for ten shekles of silver by the year, and a suit of
apparel, and meat, and drink, and withal their hearts, will be contented to
part with beautiful Rachel, Judge. 18.
(though they serve for her) so that they may be assured of blear-eyed Leah.
They will never say as much as Jacob did to Laban: Genesis 29.
Wherefore have thou done thus with me? did I not serve thee for Rachel?
wherefore then have thou beguiled me? Truth it is, that even these would gladly
mend their estates (and who can blame them?) but they are withholden with a
triple cord, which, as the wise man says, is not easily broken. 1. The Patrons
bounty, which though it be little, yet it is more perhaps then they deserve. 2.
Their own promise, or handwriting, which if it be not of sufficient validity,
then comes a third cord to make all sure, and that is want of ability. A
spiders web you know) is strong enough to hang a silly fly withal. God
forbid, that I should object this sacrilege, as a general fault of these
times, not admitting any limitation; or say that these devouring Caterpillars
have eaten up all the houses of God in the land, 1. Kin. 15.
I remember what the Lord answered Elias, when he complained against Israel,
that they killed his Prophets, and diged down his Altars, and that he was left
alone. I have (said the answer of God) reserved unto my self seven thousand
men, Romans 11. 3, 4.
which have not bowed their knees unto Baal. Even so at this present time, by
the grace of God, there is a Remnant (though I think far fewer then seven
thousand yet a remnant there is, which have never dug down the Altars of God
to build their own houses with the ruins thereof; which have not bowed unto
their angle, nor sacrificed unto their net, nor burnt incense unto their yarne,
nor monopolized that unto themselves, which of right belongs unto Gods
Ministers, So that in this case they may say with good Samuel, Whose Ox have I
taken, 1 Samuel 12. 3.
or whose Ass have I taken, or of whose hand have I received any bribe? They
bate such sins of unfaithfullnesse, and they will not suffer the least chip
of Gods bread to stick on their fingers. By the means of such faithful
Nehemiahs, thanks be to God, and remember them herein O God, and wipe not out
that unkindnes they have showed on thy house, Nehem. 13. 14.
and on the offices thereof) the glorious Gospel of Christ does give a goodly
luster in many places of this land. But the great number of the other (which I
purpose not to leave as yet, for I would gladly make a rod of such small cords
as I have, to whip these buyers and sellers out of the Temple) is such, that it
does almost overshadow these, that they seem but as it were a handful, Iud. 7.
and do bear (I take it) the like proportion, that Gideons army did to the huge
host of the Midianites.

16. The donation of ecclesiastical livings, Hospin. de orig. templor.
was at the first, for avoiding of faction and confusion, amongst the ignorant
and seditious multitude, which otherwise should have made choice of their
Pastors, commended to some particulars, which for their worth, and wisdom,
and uprightness were thought fittest, both to make choice of such, as could
sufficiently discharge the places, and to protect them, and their right against
such ravenous harpyes, and Eagle-clawed Nebuchadnezzars: as would scrape and
gather into their hands the vessels of the temple, and hereupon they were
ledled Patrons. But time is like a river, -- Nec enim consistere flumen,
Nec levis hora potest.


That is not my meaning, but as a river sins that which is heavy and
substantial, and carries down that which is light and naught, so has time
in this point. The uprightness and faithfulness, that is sunk long ago in a
great number: their carefulness in protecting the minsters right, that swims
not down so low as to our time: and yet as Tully said of a tyrant, that he
gives life to those that he does not kill; So we could willingly account them
worthy maintainers of the Levites portion, if they would take nothing from
them. But the name of patron, this is light, and the current of time has
conveyed it unto us. But (alas alas) it is but as he said.

-- Sine corpore nomen
It is secunda notio, a shadow of a name; and yet a name is no more then a
shadow of a thing. And verily it may be feared that the great house of the
thing will in future ages make the word to be of a contrary signification:
Isidor. orig. lib. 9. cap. 3.
as the name tyrannus, which at the first signified any Prince, which had a
care of his Subjects safety, and protected them against their foes; by the
cruelty of the governors (handling them as Samuel told the Jews their King
should use them; 1 Samuel 8.
or as the Storke in the fable dealt with the Frogs, when he was made their
King; or as Vespasian used his nobles squeezing them like a sponge, Sueton in
Vespas.
when they were full) is now degenerate from its ancient sense, and used for
the contrary. We have occasion of doubting the same in this point. For Judas
claims Christ's bag by prescription. Is not now the advouson of a benefice
accounted as a man's proper inheritance? Is it not offered to him that will bid
the most, as an Ox in the shambles, or an Ass in the Market? Is it not
accounted a good patrimony to many younger brothers, which scorn forso oath to
be Priests; and would God they would scorn the Priests portion too, then would
they abate a little from the height of their own conceits: and would at length
be enforced for their delicate fare, to eat husks, and to turn their Satin
Suits into Country russets. But they are of the same opinion as was William
Rufus sometimes King of this Realm, who kept diver Bishoprics in his own
hands as they fell, and would not restore them unto ecclesiastical persons.
Being demanded a reason hereof, he said that Gods bread was sweet, and good for
Kings. Or like our old Countryman Mat. Parisiensis in vita Guil. 2 Rex in
proprio tenebat, die qua obit) Archiepiscopatum Cant. Episcopatus Wint. and
Sarisb. cum 12 Abbatiis.
Brennus who (when he went about to rob the Temple at Delphos) said that God
was rich, and therefore should part with something to supply his wants: and
with Justin. Aelianus variae hist. lib. 1.
Dionysius, they count gold too cold to cloth Apollo with, a garment of worse
stuff is good enough. In Synodo Triburiensi An. Do. 895.
when the question was proposed whether golden chalices or wooden were to be
used in the administration of the sacrament: Boniface bishop and afterward
Martyr made Beat. Rhenanus lib. 2. rerum Germanicarum.
answer, that in former times they had golden ministers, and wooden chalices:
but in his time wooden Priests used golden chalices. I may say the contrary, in
the times of our forefathers, were blockish and wooden Priests, and then they
had golden cups. Then the people would even have pulled out their own eyes to
have given to those blind guides; and were so ready to offer their free gifts
to the building of the Tabernacle, that Moses was constrained to say, the
people bring too much, Exodus 36. 5, 6.
and more then is enough: nay moreover to make a proclamation, and enact a
statute, which yet is in force, but needless) that neither man, or woman should
prepare any more for the oblation of the sanctuary. But now (thanks be to God)
we have golden pastors, and wooden* dishes are thought good enough for them.

Dicite pontifices in templo quid facit aurum? Per^rus.

What should the Church do with gold? Act. 3. 6.
Peter said unto the lame man, Psalm. 45. 14.
gold and siver have I none. The Kings danghter is al glorious within (they
forget what follows, her clothing is of wrought gold) the Ministers Kingdom
is not of this world, a competent living is sufficient, that is 40. or 50. l.
tush, he must not be troubled with the thorny cares of this world, Number. 16.
you take too much upon you ye sons of Levi: thus would these wild asses and
fat bulls of Bashan beat out of the manger, the Oxen that tread out the corn,
that they may have the best themselves, and leave only the orts for them, which
should have all. Alas beloved, that Gods Legates, which should be harbarous and
beneficial unto the poor, and provide for their Family, should thus be st^nted
by such, whose hearts are never satisfied with earth, till their mouths be
filled with gravel. But let them not think that the ministers living is ever
competent, where any part of his right is detained. And therefore let them
beware how they play the Judas instealing out of the bag, which is committed
unto them, part of that relief, which should sustain Christ and his Apostles:
or betray him in his maintenance, and by a consequence in his Members, the
flock by withdrawing their food. For if Succus pecori, then it must needs
follow that lac subducitur agnis: if the pasture be without the fleece, the
flock shall want their fodder. It is an objection which some would fasten as a
scandal upon our Universities, that many of our preachers drone-like lurk in
their own hives, and flee not abroad; that they bury their talent at home in
their own studies as in the ground; whereas, by settling themselves in some
Country charge, they might put it out to their Masters best advantage. But (I
shall tell you?) the case is with them as it was with the sick impotent man by
the poole Bethesda in the 5. of John, gladly would they be in the poole, but
there is none to put them in: an angel troubles the water, and presently, while
they are coming, another steps down before them. The fountains are stoped; no
stream can flow abroad unless Tagus-like it have golden sands, or like unto
Eurotas, and Alpheus, it pass under the earth as it were by some slight and
secret conveyance, and so burst up on the sudden in some place where it
cannot be prevented: or like unto Tygris, that fierce and swift running river,
which perforce will burst down such dammes, and banks as would hinder his
course: or last of all like unto Meander that insinuating, and parasitica^l
river (as I may call it) which winds and turns it self into every pleasant
valley, that it may, as it were, get the good will, and favor of the places
where it comes. These 4. rivers find the easiest passage rich Tagus, fierce
Tigris, subtle Eurotas, and winding Maeaender. The rest, Genesis 8. 10.
for the most, (for I speak not of all) though the waters be as pleasant as the
4. rivers of Eden, Ios. 3.
yet shall they stand on a heap like the waves of Jordan when the Israelites
passed over; or as a pool, or the dead sea without any vent: whereas if there
might, at the vacancy of livings, an offer be made unto one of the
Universities, and a choice made thence, no doubt but the gospel of Christ would
flourish in every quarter of this realm from Dan to Beersheba, from the river
of Twede unto the lands end. And God would for this cause even open the windows
of heaven unto the inhabitants thereof, and power down upon them a blessing
without measure, and rebuke the devourer for their sakes, that he should not
destroy the fruits of their ground, neither should their vine be barren in the
field, Mal. 3. 10, 11.
as the Lord speaks by the Prophet Malachie.

17. I have dwelt too long upon this point. Only to end, I would these men
would remember Judas his end. Demirorte Antoni quorum facta imitaris eorum
exitum non perhorrescere* it is the saying of Tully to Antony. I wonder Antony
that thou art not afraid of those men's deaths, Philippic. 2.
whose lives thou imitatest. And it is strange that these men will be like unto
Judas in the premises, and never think of the conclusion that was inferred
thereupon. I am not a Prophet, Amos 7. 14.
nor am I the son of a Prophet, that I should foretell the manner of their
particular ruins. Thus much upon good grounds I will say, that these goods
will in time profit them no more, then the price of him, that was valued,
availed Judas: they will be like Eagles feathers; Plin. l. 10. c. 3.
they will eat, and consume the rest of their substance: or like equus Sejanus
and aurum Tolossanum in Gellius, AGell. l. 30. c. 9.
which were still unfortunate to those that had them. And those goodly
buildings, which they make for themselves with the ruins of Gods house (I will
speak in the words of Isaiah against the enemies of the Church) the Pelican
and the Hedgehogge shall possess them, Isa. 34. 11. 13. etc.
the great Raven, and the Owl shall dwell in them, and he shall stretch out
upon them the line of vanity, and the stones of emptiness: they shall bring
forth thorns in the palaces thereof, nettles and thistles in the strong holds
thereof, and they shall be habitations for dragons, and courts for Ostriches:
there shall meet Zim, and Jim, and the Fairies shall dance there, and the
Skrichowle shall rest there, and shall find for her self a quiet dwelling:
there shall the Owl make her nest, and lay, and hatch, and gather them under
her shadow; there shall the vultures also be gathered, every one with her mate.
Seek in the book of God and read: none of these shall fail. For more
confirmation hereof, consider the subversion of Abbeys: they were founded by
religious men in their generations, to a good purpose: their situation was as
the garden of the Lord, Genesis 13. 10.
like the land of Egypt as thou go unto Zoar; as Moses speaks of the plain
of Jordan before the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah; they stretched their
towers up to the heavens, like the Pyramides of Egypt; but, behold, the Lord
has wiped them as a man wipeth a dish, which he wipeth, and turns up side
down. They are now the fittest places for the raven to build in, habitations
for Dragons, and courts for Ostriches, they stand, Phys. 6.
(but as Aristotle says, quod stat movetur, they stand so as they are moving
to a fall) in the plasantest valleys of the land, as the relics of Babel in
the vallie of Sinar: Isa. 7. 8.
or like a cottage in a vineyard, like a lodge in a garden of cucumbers, and
like a besieged and defaced city, dropping down by joints, as a thief rotteth
from the gibbet. What were their sins which brought so heavy a judgment upon
them? suppose they were (as they were indeed) the sins of Sodom, Ezech. 16.
49.
pride, fullness of bread, mercilesnesse toward the poor, and abundance of
idleness. Now if these sins of some few, or suppose the greater part (certain
it is that all were not such, some were industrious, some humble, some merciful
toward the needy, some of a moderate and spare diet,) if these sins, I say,
brought so heavy a judgment upon those houses, that they are, in comparison of
that they were before, 1 Samuel 5. 4.
like the stump of Dagon, when his head, and the two palms of his hands were
cut off upon the threshold in Ashdod; or the remainders of Jezabel, when the
hungry dogs had eaten her up, 2 Kin. 9. 35, 37.
so that there was no more found of her, then the skull, and the feet, and the
palms of her hands; insomuch, that none can say this is Jezabel; these be the
houses they were before: shall we think that their houses shall continue for
ever, which turn Bethel into Bethaven; the house of God, into a house of
vanity; which take the childrens bread and cast it unto dogs? which, with the
consecrated things of the altar, maintain their own pomp, feed their Hawks,
their Horses, keep --? but I stay my self.

18. After the Church-robber comes the grinding oppressor, another great
plague, which sits sore upon the skirts of our land. He says unto his gold,
Job. 31. 24.
thou art my God, and to the wedge of gold, thou art my confidence. And instead
of counting godliness great gain, 1 Timothy 6. 5, 6.
he accounts gain great godliness: he adds house to house, and land to
land, as if the way to the spiritual Canaan laid all by land, and not through a
red sea of death. He brayeth the people as in a mortar, and grindeth the faces
of the poor. He sells the poor for silver, Amos 8. 6.
and the needy for a pair of shoes: he eats up the poor as if they were
bread.

-- Vtpisces saepe minutos
Magnu' come, ut aves enecat accipiter.
As a Pike devoureth the little fishes, and as a goshauk kills the smaller
birds: he gathers the livings of the poorer sort into his own hands, as the
great Ocean drinks the rivers: he enhaunceth his rents, and pilleth his poor
tenants, and doubleth, yea, treableth their fines, 1 Kin. 12. 10.
telling them, with young Rhehoboam, that his little finger shall be heavier
then his fathers loins. Not contented with this cruelty, he thrusts them out
of their houses, and depopulateth whole towns, and villages, making those
streets which used to be sown with the seed of men, Isa. 7. 25.
Pastures for the sending out of bullocks, and for the treading of sheep. Apud
Cand. in descript. Northampt.
One justly complains of our English sheep: that whereas in former times,
they were the meekest beasts of the field, and contented themselves with a
little, are now become so fierce, and greedy, that they devour men, and
town-fields, and houses, and villages, and lay all waste; insomuch that that
which the Psalmist speaks of Israel, spoiled by his enemies, may be verified
of our Jacob also: They have devoured Jacob, Hab. 2. 11, 12.
and laid waste his dwelling places. Surely, the very stone out of the wall
does cry against these men, and the beam out of the timber does answer it: woe
unto him that builds his house with blood, and erecteth his walls by iniquity.

While the spleen swells, the body languisheth: and it may justly be feared,
that if our good Physician do not in time purge these tumorous, and swelling
members, they will cause a lienterie in the body politic. God forbid that this
flourishing kingdom, which sometime has deserved that title which Cyneus,
Justin.
Ambassador unto Pyrrhus, gave unto Rome when he called it a City of Kings,
Aven^im.
should ever deserve that title, which one gives unto France, when he calls it a
kingdom of asses, by reason of the burdens, that are laid upon the baser sort
by their superiors.

19 Therefore it behooves you, and as many as sit at the stern of justice, not
to sleep with Jonas, while the ship is tossed with these mighty winds: nor to
be careless in a matter so nearly concerning the good of this Commonwealth.
Gird you with your swords upon your thighs, Psalm. 45. 4, 5.
O ye men of might, according to your worship, and renown, ride on because of
the word of truth, and righteousness, and let your right hand teach you
terrible things. But if you shall be negligent herein, surely, as Mordecai said
to Hester, help, and deliverance shall come from another place. Est. 4. 14.
For doubtless the cry of the afflicted, is already ascended, into the ears
of the Lord of hosts, and he will take the matter into his own hand. Believe
it, it is his own promise: Now for the comfortless troubles sake of the needy,
Psalm. 12. 5, 6.
and because of the deep sighing of the poor, I will up, says God, and will
deliver him from such as vex him, and will restore him to rest. I will
prosecute this point no further: only let me tell these locusts, that their
goods whereunto they trust are but a broken staff of reed, 2 Kin. 28. 21.
whereunto if a man lean it will pierce into his hand: that their pleasures
are but as Dalilab was to Samson even gyevs and fetters of Satan, Jud. 16.
to entangle them: that their gold will be as a millstone about their necks, to
carry them down headlong into the pit: that their hands and goods are as a
bunch upon a Camels back, which will not suffer them to enter in at the needles
eye, the narrow way that leads to heaven: Mat. 19. 24.
that those goods, which by grinding, and oppressing they have scraped
together, the Lord will fan them away with the fan of (...), Dan. 4. 24.
unless (as Daniel said to Nabuchadnezzar) they break off their sins by
righteousness, and their iniquity by mercy toward the poor; and that which
they have by unlawful means gotten (with Zachaeus) they restore it again
fourfold. Luke 19. 8.


20. From the Locust, we come to the Cankar-worme; from oppressing Ahab, to
bribing Gehazi: of whom I may truly affirm that which Tacitus speaks of the
Astrologians in Rome, Hist. lib. 1.
it is genus hominum pestilens, and fallax, quod in hac republic a semper
prohibetur, and semper retinetur; a pestilent, and froward kind of people,
which has been still gainsaid, and yet never more common, and frequent then
now; an offspring, not so degenerate from the loins of Judas, as is the
oppressor. Because the oppressor like the fat Bulls of Basan, closes the poor
on every side, and gapes upon him with his mouth, as it were a ramping, and a
roaring lion; whereas the briber lies closely in the thievish corners of the
streets, that he may ravish such as he shall get into his net. Psalm. 10. 8, 10.
The oppressor takes it perforce, the briber gets all by secret compact: What
will ye give me? Est. 4. 11.
None might come to the inner court of king Ahashuerosh, save he, to whom the
king held out his golden scepter. But none may come to the bribers inner court,
save he, that shall hold out a golden scepter unto him. Be thy cause never so
light in the balance of equity, it is not material, if thou can make it up in
gold, it shall be current through his liberties. Right and wrong, truth, and
falsehood are only distinguished by their attendants. If injustice get the
overthrow, it is because she is not guarded with such companies, as are
expected. But I have not Elisha's eyes, to point out Gehazi, and to observe
what he has done in secret, and therefore I will pass him over: only thus
much I would have him to know, that Judas cannot so secretly compact with the
Priests, but Christ knows it. That speech of our blessed Savior (which that
worthy Martyr Hugh Latimer used for his posie) is an undoubted truth: There is
nothing so secret, but it shall be revealed. Thou may well flatter thy self
with an outward show of justice, Hor. epist. l. 1. ep. 16.
like that monster in the Poet: -- Pulchra Laverna
Da mihi fallere, da sanctum justumque videri:
Noctem peccatis, and frandibus objice nubem.
O beautiful Laverna, grant that I may deceive the world with a counterfeit
show of holiness: cover my sins with a cloud of obscurity, that they may be
hid. Deceive the world thou may, but thou can not deceive God.

Soloculis hominem, quibus aspicit omnia cernit: Ovid. Met:

God, whose eyes are ten thousand times brighter then the sun, can pierce
through this cloud, if it were darker then hell, and behold thy doing. It is no
heathenish counsel, which a heathen man gives, neither does it smell of
Epicurisme, though it was his dictate, who was the father of that Swinish Sect,
that whatsoever thou art about to do, Epicurus apud Senec.
though never so secret, thou should still imagine, that some does behold
thee, and observe thy actions. Vt sic tanquam illo spectante vivas, and omnia
tanquam illo vidente facias, says Seneca. And therefore whatsoever thou art
about to do, says the same writer, imagine that Cato, a severe reprehender of
the least vices, or (if this be too much) suppose that Laelius, a man of a
quiet disposition, but such as cannot brook any notable offense, does behold
thee. This is good counsel of a heathen man, which knew not God aright; But
thou which do profess Christianity, should go a step further, and fully
assure thy self, that not a sinful man, but that a sinne-revenging God does
watch thee. Prope a te Deus est, intus est. And Sacer in te spiritus sedet,
bonorum malorumque observat, and custos, as the heathen Stoic divinely
speaks: there is a holy spirit within thee, which sees whatsoever thou
do, good or bad. Do not then deceive thy self like that Sophister in
Aristotle, Post. Aanl. lib. 1. cap. 1.
who thought it impossible to know by demonstration, the affections of a number
or triangle because he kept some number or triangle in his fist, which others
did not know of. Be it Nummus or Numerus, triangle or cross, or whatsoever it
be, thou can not keep it so closely in thy hand, but God looks into it,
and will one day call thee to an account for it.

12. In the last place comes the Grasshopper, the cozening Lawyer, who feeds his
Client with sugered words, and golden hopes, but all proves in the end for a
quid mihi dabitis? Here as Tully said unto the Romans touching the
Catilinarians; Cupio me patres Conscripti esse clementem, cupio non dissolutum
videri; I would gladly hold my peace, and not be judged by any to exceed the
limits of modesty. But voces reipublicae imo totius regni me nequitiae
inertiaeque condemnarent, the voice of the whole kingdom, exclaiming against
the great abuses of these times, would condemn me of negligence. The time is
protracted, unnecessarie delays are used, new doubts are daily invented,
insomuch that the causes are oftentimes more uncertain in the latter end then
they were at the first beginning. What postings off from Court to Court! what
delays and procrastinations from term, to term, from year to year to
year! insomuch, that a man may sooner travel about the whole globe of the
earth, then pass through an English court. The Laws are made like a game at
the cards, wherein all the players are loosers, and all the gain comes to the
butler, which found them cards to play on. And the Lawyers prove such
Arbitrators, as was Quintus Fabius in Tullie; who being appointed a daiesman
between the Nolanes, and the Neopolitanes, touching the borders of their
grounds, took a great part of their right from both: or rather like to Philip
of Macedon; who being chosen a judge between two Brethren, touching their
fathers kingdom, took it from them both, and reserved it to himself. They
take from both the Parties, though not the same numero, which they contend for,
yet the same specie, (I mean the value of the same) and gain it to
themselves. The filly sheep in a tempest runs to a briar bush for a shelter:
when the storm is overblown, he is so clapsed in the briars, that before he
get out, he is enforced to leave some good part of his fleece behind him, so
that he is made unable to endure the next storm. And yet better it is that he
should endure with patience, then, by having recourse to such an Harbor, have
his skin riped by the bramble. I will not apply, I reverence the profession. It
is good and necessary for the commonwealth, and a calling warrantable by Gods
Word. And I make no qustion but there are many of this profession, which do
study to approve their doings in the sight of God and man. And so I am
persuaded of you all, though I thus speak: but as the Apostle says of
himself: I know nothing of my self, yet am I not justified, so say I, though
I know nothing by any of you, yet I am not justified. 1 Cor. 4. 4.
I do not discharge a good conscience, unless I should admonish you of these
things; that if any be guilty of that which I have spoken, he may learn to
amend it, if not he may do his endeavor to avoid it.

22. If I should speak unto you, ( R. H.) and offer to instruct you in the
particular duties of a Judge, I might perchance be judged by many, Aslian. Var.
hist. lib. 2 cap. 2.
with Megabizus to discourse of the Art of painting, before the scholars of
Zeuxis. To say nothing that my Text gives me no fit occasion to discourse of
this subject, notwithstanding I beseech you, in one word give me leave to move
you to that which ye both know, and are ready I am sure to put in practice.
You know the saying of the Poet, Qui rogat ut facias, quod jam facis, ipse
rogando.
Laudat, and hortatu comprobat acta suo.


The object of your office is either life or living. About both these, it is
requisite you have three properties; An Eagles eye, a Ladies hand, and a Lions
hsart An eagles eye, to dive into the bottom of such matters as shall come
before you: for the wound is never soundly cured, unless the bottom be first
searched, A ladies hand, to deal softly, and gently with your Patients. A
lions heart, Aug. in Ma. Ser. 15.
to be courageous and resolute, when there is no place for lenity. Herein ye
must imitate a good Chyrurgion, who cuts the wound though his patient weep
never so sore. Ploratsecandus and secatur, plorat urendus and uritur. The sick
weeps, and yet the Chyrurgion cuts, the sick laments, and yet the Chyrurgion
seareth. Is this cruelty in the Chyrurgion? none at all. For, savit in vulnus
ut homo sanetur; quia si vulnus palpetur, homo perditur. Where there is hope of
cure without searing, or cutting, use there a Ladies hand; in this case a
plaster is better then a knife. But where the Member is incurable, and
incorrigible, and like to endanger the whole, cut it off. Melius est ut pereat
unus, quam unitas. And.

-- immedicabile vulnus,
Ense recidendum, ne pars sincera trahatur.
But yet, Cuncta prius tentanda; fire must be the last medicine. All gentle
means must be first tried: and even in this act of justice, Plutarc. de
audiendis poetis.
ye must not altogether exclude mercy. When many of the Lacedaemonians were
drunk with wine, Lycurgus gave charge that the Vines should be cut down; but
Plato's counsel was better, who willed, that the fountains should be caused
to run among the Vines, and that the rage of Bacchus should be tempered with
the soberness of Neptune, that is, that the water should be mingled with the
wine. Though the extremity of juice make some desperate, (as did Draco's laws,
which for their severity are said to be written in blood) yet must it not
therefore be taken away, but rather the rigor of justice must be mixed with
clemency, as his counsel was, that the rage of wine should be assuaged with
the coolness of the water. For justice, with out mercy is bloody cruelty,
mercy without justice is foolish pity; but justice with mercy is perfect
Christianity. Oh then those which God would have joined together, do not you
put asunder. But let them both be so linked together, that ye may verify that
of the Psalmist, Mercy and truth are met together, righteousness, and peace
have kissed each other. Psalm. 85. 10.
To this purpose, in all your consultations and actions set God before your
eyes, let him be on your right hands, and so ye shall not greatly fall, A Poet
when he is to bring a person upon the Stage, will have this care, that the
action and speech be agreeable to the person.

Inter erit multum, Davusne loquatur an Heroes. Hor. de art. Poet. Cicero.

Id histrio videbit Scena, quod non saepiens in vita? shall a stage player
observe that decorum on the theater, which a wise man will not look to in his
life? The world is stage, and every man acts his part upon this stage. You (
R. H.) do act the part of God himself. The more wary ought ye to be in your
actions. Ever waiting, whether God, if he were in your places, would do thus,
or thus. Remember likewise, that, though ye be Gods, yet ye must die as a man.
The greatest Judge of the earth, must one day hold up his hand at the bar,
and answer for himself, when the Judge of the world shall sit on the bench.
This do, and when it shall please God to call you hence, ye shall be advanced
to a higher Court, the Court of Heaven; where for your scarlet garments, ye
shall be invested in long white robes, Rev. 7. 13.
your bench shall be the Throne, your attendants the Angels, the parties ye
shall judge the world, 1 Cor. 6. 2.
your sentence an Hallelujah: Amen, praise, and glory, and wisdom and thanks,
and honor, and power, and might be unto our God for evermore Amen.

MAT. 27. 3. 4. Then Judas which betrayed him saw that he was condemned,
repented himself, and brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the chief
Priests and Elders, saying, I have sinned, betraying the innocent blood. But
they said, what is that to us? (see thou to that) and when he had cast down the
silver pieces in the Temple, etc.
THese words contain in them part of an history of some things which happened
unto Judas after he had betrayed his master, together with the answer of the
High Priests and Elders at such time when he being sorrowful for the fact,
confessed his fault and restored the money. They prettily excuse themselves
what is that to us: O Hypocrites, what is that to us? did not you hire Judas to
betray him? did not you incense Pilate to condemn him? did you not all cry
with one voice crucify him, and what is that to us? O generation of vipers,
how can ye escape the damnation of hell? but my speech at this time, shall be
about the history of Judas, wherein observe three things. 1. His condemnation,
by the virdict of his own guilty conscience, (then Judas when he saw that he
was condemned) 2. His mortification or imperfect repentance, he repented, etc.
3. His desperation, he departed and went, etc. let us begin with the first,
(then Judas when he saw that he was condemned) they may be understood two
ways; either thus when he saw that his master was condemned; for though Christ
in this chapter comes after, yet that is not material. For the Evangelists do
not observe a strict order of time in setting down the story; but sometimes by
way of Anticipation set them down before, and sometimes by way of
recapitulation bring them after; or thus, when he saw that himself was
condemned: take them whether way you will and they afford us this doctrine,
there is no man so wicked but his conscience will at one time or other, upon
one occasion or other, convict and condemn him for his sins. He that shall a
little look upon Judas before this time, would think that all the threatenings
of the law would not mollify his stony heart. When the High Priests and Elders
send Officers to apprehend Christ, Judas goes with them as their captain, and
brings them to the place where Jesus was, and though the barbarous Soldiers
and pitiless Officers and cruel servants were so appaled and daunted with his
speech, that when he told them, that he was the man whom they sought, they were
so far from apprehending him, that presently they started back; veluti qui
sentibus anguem pressit humi nitens, as a man does when he treads upon a snake,
and were beaten down with the breath of his mouth. For the text says, they
went backward and fell to the ground, John 18. 6. and moreover were struck into
such amazement and astonishment of heart, that when Peter drew his sword, and
smote off one of their ears, they scarce (or as it is probable) not at all
observed it; For when they were come into the High Priests hall, and Peter
amongst them, though they could say this is one of them, and says his speech
betrayeth him; yet none could say this is he, that cut off Malchus his ear;
yet all this wind shakes not Judas.

Is seu dura silex stat vel Marpesia cautes.
all the thunderbolts of the law, will not make a breach in his flinty heart,
whereby repentance might enter in. For all this when he hears that Christ is
condemned then he begins to repent. The conscience is of mavelous great force
says the heathen Orator, and that two ways; for those that have done well
are not afraid, and poenam ante oculos semper versari putant qui peccaverunt,
and those which have done amiss think that God is always shaking his rod over
them. The righteous is bold as a Lion, his conscience has passed upon him, and
found him not guilty: but the wicked flies when none pursues, his own guilty
conscience has condemned him. He may perhaps be hid from the eyes of men, but
he can never assure himself that he cannot be catched, as Epicurus in Seneca
speaks. Suppose his sin be hid from the eyes of men, let him think that the
Angels that are about him do not take the least notice of it; let him imagine
that he has drawn a curtain before the eyes of God, so that he cannot behold
it; let him say with those Epicures in the Psalmist, tush, God does not regard
it, there is no knowledge in the most highest. He hides away his face, and he
will never see it; yet there is one within him that notes it in the table of
his heart, as it were with a pen of iron, and with the point of a diamond: it
is a witness to accuse him, a bayliffe to arrest him, a prison to contain him,
a jury to convince him, a judge to condemn him, an hangman to kill and torment
him. The Poets fable of Prometheus, that he was tied to the mountain Caucasus,
and had an Eagle still gnawing upon his heart for offending Jupiter; me thinks
it is a fit emblem of a sinner, who for offending his God is as it were tied
to a stake, and has the worm of conscience as a hungry eagle still gnawing
upon his heart. Plutarch compares it to a boil or impostume in the flesh. For
as a boil pricketh and eats the flesh, so does a sinners conscience his
mind. Now as those that have cold or hot agues within them, are more troubled
then when they are made cold without by the frost, or heated by the beams of
the sun. So those grievances which happen by some external cause, are far
easier then this inward sting of conscience, and therefore (says he) a mind
void of sin, were more to be wished for, then houses, then lands, then
dignities, then riches, then any thing which this greedy world does so much
gape after. The saying of Diogenes is notable for this purpose, who seeing his
host in Sparta making great provision for a feast; what needs all this (said
he) for an honest man has a feast every day, meaning that an honest man has a
good conscience, and a good conscience is a continual feast, Prove. 15. 13.

Those that were to be crucified amongst the old Romans, did bear the Cross
upon which they were to suffer: So the wicked do carry with them the cross of
a guilty conscience, which though for a little they may lay it down, yet can
they never cast it from them, till they come to the place of execution; indeed
they willmake a goodly show outwardly, as though nothing did trouble them
within, they laugh, they jest, they quaffe, they play, but all this is but from
the teeth outward, they are like thieves (says one) in aprison, which are
condemned to death, who will sometimes play at dice or cards, to put out of
their minds the cogitation of their future execution, but all in vain, for
haeret lateri laethalis arundo. It is so rooted in their hearts, that no sponge
of oblivion can wipe it out, they are in Damocles his case, they see Gods sword
of vengeance still hanging over their heads, ready to fall upon them, and to
hew them in pieces, that deep wise man (says Tacitus) said not without cause,
that if Tyrants hearts (and what he spoke of Tyrants is true of all such as
sin with a high hand) were laid open a man should see them torn and rent
asunder, for as the body is torn with stripes, so their minds are rent with
the sting of conscience,, for their cruelties, their lasciviousness, their
oppression, and such other sins as they have committed, for the (...) the
conscience of a sinner does whip and scourge his soul, therefore says the
Poet, Turpe quid ausurus, te sine test time.


When thou art about to do any unlawful act, fear thy self, though thou
want a witness, for thou art not alone.

Nocte dieque tuum gestas in pectore testem.
Thou carriest a witness withthee, thy bosom, and that is thy conscience
which is as good as a thousand witnesses, wretched and desperate is thy case,
if thou make not account of this witness.

3. Examples will make this point plain, begin with the first man that ever
sinned, and the first sin that ever he committed. Our great Grandfather Adam,
had no sooner transgressed Gods commandment by eating of the forbidden tree,
but presently his conscience accused him, and made him ashamed: for when he
heard the voice of God walking in the garden, in the cool of the day, he hid
himself from the presence of the Lord, among the the trees of the garden. Why
was Adam so afraid of Gods presence? had he not been with him before? He had
made him, he had made a helper for him, he had made him Lord over the whole
world, and put all things in subjection under his feet, all Sheep and Oxen, yea
and all the Beasts of the field, the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the
seas, and therefore a man would think, that he should rather have run unto
God, to have given him thanks for all his benefits, but it may be God came in
a more terrible manner then he was wont, not so the text says, the voice of
the Lord came, he did but send his voice, not his fearful and terrible, which
shakes the Wilderness, but his mild and gentle voice, it came walking it came
not running to take vengeance, and therefore it must needs be that his guilty
conscience made him afraid. Cain after he had murdered his innocent brother,
howsoever he could prettily excuse the matter unto God, telling him that he was
not his Brothers keeper, yet had he an inward accuser, which laid the murder
so hard unto his charge, that he was enforced to confess the fact, and
desperately to cry out, my sins are greater then can be pardoned.

Jacobs sons, when they sold their Brother Joseph, were never troubled in
conscience for it, but many years after, upon their trouble in Egypt, their
consciences were awaked, Genesis 42. 21. They said one unto another, we have
verily sinned against our Brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul,
when besought us; and we would not hear him, therefore is this trouble come
upon us.

Ahab was one that sold himself to work wickedness, that provoked the God of
Heaven to anger, more then all the Kings, that were before him, then Baasha,
then Omri, then Jeroboam the son of Nebat, that made Israel to sin, this
wicked King hearing from the mouth of a poor Prophet, who a little before fled
out of the Country, for saving his life, those fearful judgments that God
would bring upon his house, was smitten in conscience; and rent his clothes,
and put sackcloath upon him, and fasted and lay in sackcloth and went bare
footed 1 King. 21. 2. (the Scribes and Pharisees brought a woman (that was taken
in adultery) to Christ, desirous to know his opinion, but to no other end,
save only to tempt him our Savior, made no particular enumeration of their
sins; but only wrote with his finger upon the ground, adding these words, He
that is without sin amongst you, let him cast the first stone at her. What
followed? when they heard it; being accused by their own consciences, they
went out one by one. beginning at the eldest even to the least, there was never
a greater contemner of God, then was Caligula, never man burst out into more
outrageous sins then he; he was one of those fools that say in their heart,
their is no God, yet none so fearful as he, when he saw any signs of Gods
judgments, insomuch that when it thundered, he was wont to hide himself under
his bed, his guilty conscience made him fear that God, whom of purpose he
studied to contemn.

4. I do not speak this as though I were of opinion, that all men were alike
touched with a feeling of their sins. I know there is great difference
between the sons of God, and the sons of Belial, when they have sinned between
such as sin of infirmity, and such as by long practice have gotten an habit.
Sin is to the Children of God, asit it were a thorn in their sides, and a
prick in their eyes, they feel it at the very first* yea, and that most
grievously too, but thewicked which sin with a high hand, have so overcharged
their conscciences, that they are benumbed and past feeling, as the Apostle
speaks Ephesians. 4. 19. such have their consciences burned as it were with a hot
Iron, as he elsewhere says, meaning that they are so dulled and hardened by
custom, that they can hardly be brought to any feeling of their sins, and no
marvel* for, Consuetudo peccandi tollit sensum peccati, custom of sinning
takes away the feeling of sin. I may compare the conscience of Gods Child to
the eye of a needle which streitneth the smallest thread, but such as have
gotten a custom of sin, their consciences are like to great broad gates, at
which a laden Camel may find easy entrance, or it may be likned unto a
green path, in soft and marish ground, which in the beginning is so soft, that
a man cannot set his foot upon it, but will leave an impression in the ground,
but in process of time by continual passage, it is worn unto the gravel and
then a laden Cart will scarce leave any print behind it: so like wise the
conscience at the first is so soft, that the least sin leaves a wound and
print in it, but continuance in sin wears it to the gravel, and makes it
so hard, that the greatest iniquity can scarcely be felt. Now the Children of
God commonly sinning upon infirmity, seldom upon presumption, never upon habit,
after they be effectually called, but the wicked adding drunkenness to thirst,
that is, heaping one sin in the neck of another, without entering into a due
consideration of their wicked estate, it falls out that the ungodly for the most
part are not so soon touched with a feeling of their sins, as are Gods
children when they have transgressed. Holy David after he had committed
adultery with Bathsheba slept diverse months in his sin, (a thing not so
ordinarily befalling the Children of God) but he was no sooner rouzed out of
this Lethargy, by the Prophet Nathan, then the prick of sin did sting him to
the heart, and made him cry as in Psalm. 51. Have mercy upon me O Lord,
according to thy great mercies, and according to the multitude of thy
compassions do away mine offenses. One deep calls upon another, the
deepnesse of his sins, calls for the depth of Gods mercies, but Herod had
so long enjoyed Herodias his Brothers wife, that the preaching of John Baptist,
a greater man then the Prophet Nathan, a Prophet yea and more then a Prophet,
could not move him from that particular, though he dissuaded him from other
sins, to which he was not so much inured. The same Prophet David, when he had
numbered the people (a thing of it self indifferent, if he had taken no pride
in the multitude of his Host) was smitten at the heart, and said unto the
Lord, I have sinned exceedingly, in that I have done. If his Predecessor Saul
had done the like, it may be supposed he would have defended the lawfulness of
the fact, who was so ready to excuse himself for keeping the fat Oxen of the
Amalekites contrary to Gods commandment. Godly Austin in his old age was moved
in conscience for the least faults he had committed when he was a Child, for
playing at the Ball when his Parents had forbidden him, for stealing a few wild
Pears out of his Neighbors Orchard; sins which few will remember, or if
they do, it is only to brag of them: so then it is without question, that
such as are not inured to any sin, will be sooner moved, then those which by
long custom have made it natural unto them; but yet none are so wicked,
though with Ahab they sell themselves to work wickedness, but their
consciences will now and then check them, will accuse them will condemn them,
yea, when the world does take little notice of it: that which made Caligula to
hide himself under his bed, made Faelix to tremble, and Nero to cry, Ego nec
amicum habeo, nec inimicum, I have so wickedly misdemeaned my self, that I
have neither friend to save me, nor for to rid me out of my misery. And
Pharaoh whose heart was harder then brass, or the nether millstone, to say: I
have sinned, God is righteous, but I and my people are wicked. The story of
Theodoricus King of the Goths is notable for this purpose: When the Romans
(being backed by Symmachus and Boatrius, two worthy men) would not give leave
to the Arrians to erect any churches where they might promulgat their
blasphemous heresy against the son of God. Theodorick sent for those two to
Ticinum, and there after he had for a time kept them in close prison, and
confiscated their goods, commanded that they should both be executed.
Theodoricus was a man of that power, that few could, none would revenge the
blood of these two famous men, neither did God presently inflict any outward
punishment upon him, yet his guilty conscience would not suffer his sin to
sleep, for a little while after, when the head of a fish was set before him on
the Table, he calling to mind how he had beheaded those two men, thought that
he saw the head of Symmachus, with horrible jaws, and fiery eyes, threatening
death and destruction unto him, at the fight whereof being suddenly astonished,
and cast down, he willed his Servants to carry him to his bed, where lying
some short space, after much sorrow of his offense, he gave up the ghost. And
here another story comes in my mind, which I find recorded by Plutarch, of one
Bessus, who had killed his father, but so secretly, that none knew of it; as
this Bessus was going to supper with some of his acquaintance: finding a
swallows nest in the way, he thrust it down with his spear, and killed the
young swallows, when the rest reproved him for it, telling him it argued a
cruel mind, to kill the innocent birds, especially seeing they were not good
for meat: why should I not kill them said Bessus, seeing they objected unto me
that I had killed my Father; hereupon he was examined before the Magistrate,
where he confessed the Fact, and suffered condign punishment. The young Birds
could not speak, and yet his guilty conscience made him think that they cried
to Heaven for vengeance: here then we may note another difference between the
consciences of the godly and the wicked; the wicked though their consciences be
not so soon touched as the consciences of the godly: yet when they once begin
to feel their sins, then they feel as it were daggers stabbing their hearts,
which seldom leave them before they be overwhelmed in the pit of desperation.
The children of God are said to have hearts of flesh, and the wicked to have
hearts of stone: now the flesh will be easikly wounded, and oftentimes quickly
cured; so Gods children are easily wounded with the feeling of their sins:
but as Pliny faith of the Hearts, that when they have eaten any poysonful herb,
then they run unto the herb Cinara, and by eating thereof are cured; and
when they are wounded with an arrow, they have recourse unto the herb
Dictamnum, by which they are healed. So these, when they feel the poison of
sin working in their bowels, then they run unto the good Physician of their
souls, which gives them a potion of his blood to cure them; when Satan that
hunter of men has wounded them with his poysonful arrows, they have recourse
unto Christ, who with a plaster of his merits heals them. A stone will hardly
receive any characters, but when they are once graven in, then they stick fast,
and cannot easily be rased out, nor will the characters of sin be quickly
graven in the sinners conscience, but when they are once stamped in, they
remain for ever, so that they may be read in this book, in the day of
judgment. Thus have I proved, that sin is a burden unto the sinners
conscience, a doctrine (if ever) in these days most needful to be urged, where
in the practice of the greater part does seem to cross the truth of that which
has been delivered. It was an old complaint of one, that there was in his
days, multum scientiae, but parum conscientiae, much science, but little
conscience; another of later years does aggravate the complaint: and says,
that in his time, the two first syllables con and sci, were taken away, and
nothing remained but the latter end of the word entia: pure beings without
knowledge or honesty; the complaint is too true at this time; conscience
seems to be banished from most men, and knowledge from may; so that nothing
is left but the metaphysical notion entia: mere beings, pure naturalists. They
lade themselves with sin, as a cart is laden with sheaves; and yet they feel
no weight. It is storied of Milo of Croton, that accustoming himself every day
to carry a calfe into the fields, he was able to hear it when it became an ox:
and these have so accustomed themselves to lesser sins, that great and
terrible sin, seem not a whit burdensome unto their consciences. There is a
story of Mithridates King of Pontus, that he had so used himself to take
poison, that in fine his stomach would digest it, as well as wholesome meat: and
these men have so inured themselves to feed upon sin as the monkie does upon
the spider, that they make as good, nay, more reckoning of it then the best
meats, wherewith their souls should be fed unto eternal life: wretched and
unhappy men, which have their consciences so feared, that they cannot feel
their sins. Verily, Pharaoh, and Cain, and Judas, and Caligula shall arise
against these at the day of Judgment and shall condemn them. Those sins
which they drink with greediness, even as the beast drinks water, will one
day prove like Ratsbane to poison them; they will prove like John's book, which
was sweet as honey in the mouth, but bitter in his belly: or like the head of
Polypus which is sweet in eating, but afterward it causes fearful dreams: they
will in the end sting like a Serpent, and bitelike a Cockatrice; let them not
say to their souls, peace, peace, when there is no peace; for there is no
peace says my God unto the wicked. When they promise unto themselves most
security, when they shall say with the fool in the Pa^able, eat and take thy
pastime, even then shall sorrow come upon them, as travail upon a woman with
child: when they shall carouze in their golden cups, and enjoy their greatest
pleasure; then shall their sins like that palm of an hand, Dan. 5. Write such
a lesson in their consciences, that it will make their countenance changed, and
their thoughts troubled, and the joints of their loins loosed, and their knees
to smite one against another. But to leave these, and to make an end of this
point. Seeing that sin is such a burden unto our consciences, let us take
head, that we do not load them too much; if we were fully persuaded that such
and such meats would cause an ague, we would willingly abstain from them. Now
sin causes a greater sickness unto our souls, then is an ague unto our
bodies ( viz* a troubled conscience (and a wounded spirit who can bear) how
then dare we* commit it? when Rebecca felt the struggling of Esau and Jacob in
her womb, she wished she had been barren, and said if it be so, why am I thus?
Sin may be pleasant in getting, but it is bitter in bearing; better we were
barren, then feel the pains and throws, before we be delivered of it. And if
it be so, why are we thus?

Turpius ejicitur quam non admittitur alter.
Better to give this guest no entertainment at all, then discredit our selves
with God for harboring it. Therefore before thou do any thing consider with
thy self whether it be a sin or no; examine it by the law of God, if it be a
sin, see thou do it not, lest afterward thou feel the pain when it shall come
into thy bowels like water, and like oil into thy bones. When the remembrance
of it shall burn within thee like fire, and gnaw like a worm upon thy heart,
perchance thy conscience is so heardned that thou can not feel, nor call to
remembrance thy sins; (which if it be so, miserable and wretched art thou,
for without a feeling of sin, and repentance for the same, there is no
remission to be expectedyet there will a day come (when God knows, but
certainly it will come) when thou shall find them to be heavier then lead upon
thine heart. When thy master shall call thee to a reckoning, and the day of thy
departing comes: then will the book of thy conscience be laid open and thou
shall read such a Catalogue of thy sins therein, that even then thou shall
plainiy perceive the never dying worm to gnaw upon thy soul; and the
unquenchable fire to begin to burn within thee, unless the Lord in merey
shall give thee grace to repent, that so thou may be saved: therefore strive
always to have a good conscience, and if thou will be careful, that thine eye
because it is the most tender, and precious part of thy body, be not troubled
with the least mote: Be much more careful of thy conscience (the eye of thy
soul) that it be not troubled with beams of great and horrible sins. Will thou never be sad? live well; this is the best means, to gain the joy and peace
of conscience. Happy is that man, who when his fatal hour approaches can say
with Paul, I have in all good conscience served God, until this day. Verily
this will more avail him, then if he should conquer the whole world, and have
all the Monarchs of the earth, to cast down their scepters before his
footstool.

Thus much of the first point, his condemnation; I proceed to the second, his
mortification or imperfect repentance.

He repented himself, etc.
THis repentance was an extreme grief of heart, arising from the curses of the
law, and apprehension of Gods wrath: which as it was in Judas, so was it in
Pharaoh, and Ahab, and the Ninevites, and many of the heathen. Orestes and
Nero, when they had killed their Mothers, were exceedingly troubled, and wished
to be cleansed; and Hercules in the Tragedy, when he had killed his wife and
children, runs up and down like a madman, and cries out, that if the whole
sea should run through his hands, it would not wash him from that bloody
fact. So that this is no part of true mortification, yet it is a preparative
thereunto: The wheat must be threshed with the flayle, before it be fanned from
the chafe with the wind, and a natural man must be as it were threshed with
the terrors of the law, before he be fanned from his corruptions with the wind
of the Spirit. In natural mutations, before a substantial form be corrupted,
andan other educed e potentia materiae, certain alterations or previal
dispositions are required as necessary for hastening of this change. So in a
Supernatural mutation when a son of wrath is to be made a son of God, the
terrors of the law are required as necessary precedents for hastening this
change. Aug. 1.
The law like the shoomakers elson pricks the heart, legal sorrows and fears
like the bristle come after, and true mortification like the thread comes in
the last place. Take the elson and the bristle from the shoemaker, and he
cannot use his thread take legal sorrow and compunction of heart from a natural
man, and he cannot be brought to true repentance. So that Judas goes well thus
far, he goes yet further: he makes confession of his fault, first in general,
I have sinned; then in particular, I have been a traitor, I have betrayed, and
which is worst of all, I have betrayed the innocent blood.

If Judas this repentance notwithstanding be damned to hell; merciful God what
shall become of thousands amongst us, which go under the name of Christians,
and come short of Judas in repentance. They are seldom touched with any sorrow
for their sins, but say they be, surely not half of that sorrow that Judas
was in; admit they be, come they to the next step: do they make confession?
admit this too, come they to a third; do they make satisfaction? does the
sacrilegious Church-robber bring back again that which he has wrongfully taken
from the sons of Levi, and say, I have sinned? does the bloud-sucking Usurer
restore that which he has wrongfully taken from the poor, by sundry practices
of covetousness, and say, I have sinned? is there any, who after that he has
done wrong, is sorry for it, and confesses his fault, and is ready to make
amends, and say, thus and thus have I done, thus and thus have I sinned? all
these are necessary to salvation, but these are not all that are necessary to
salvation. We must go thus far with Judas, but we must not here stay with
Judas. Judas by stepping a foot short, got a break-neck fall, and is tumbled
into the pit of hell. We must go a step further, and fasten our feet upon the
corner stone by a true and saving faith, and then our sins be they never so
many, never so grievous, shall not bring us to condemnation, but though they be
as Crimson, they shall be made white as snow; Isa. 1. 18.
though they be red like scarlet, they shall be as wool. We read in the Gospel
of 3 whom our Savior rased from death to life; Mat. 9.
the first was Iairus his daughter: she was dead in the house, and Christ
raised her in the house. The second was the widows son of Naein, Luke 7.
he was dead in the way, (they were carrying him to the place of burial) and
Christ raised him in the way. The third was Lazarus, and he was dead, stinking
in his grave, and Christ raised him there. Saint Austin does thus moralize the
stories: ista tria genera mortuorum sunt tria genera peccatorum, etc. These
three kinds of dead men are three kinds of sinners, whom our Savior does daily
raise from death unto life. These are those that be dead in the house; these be
they that have conceived sin in their hearts, but have not actually committed
the same; he fear dead in the house, for there is no sin (no not the least
exorbitant thought) of its own nature venial: but he that raised Iairus
daughter, will upon their repentance raise these* the second sort are those
that are dead in the way, these are they that have conceived sins in their
souls, and actually committed the same, these are in the way, to be buried in
Hell, but he that said to the widows son of Naim young man arise, is able
and willing upon their repentance to raise these. The third are those that with
Lazarus lie stinking in the grave, these are they that have not only conveyed
sin in their hearts, and actually committed the same, but by long continuance
have got an habit of sinning and continued, custom like a great stone is laid
upon their graves; the case of these men is fearful, but he that said Lazarus
come forth, is able and ready, if they lay as deep as Hell, upon their serious
repentance to raise these.

Non haec dico fratres (says he) ut qui vivunt, vivant, sed ut qui mortui sunt
revivificant. I speak not these things (Brethren) that those that live in sin
may be encouraged to continue therein, but that those who are dead in sin,
may be revived, well then let us be sorry with Judas, let us make confess^ion
with Judas, let us make fatisfaction with Judas, but let us never despair with
Judas, be our sins never so heinous, for there is no more proportion between
our sins and Christ's merits apprehended by faith, then there is (to use Tullies
phrase inter Sillam muriae, and mare Aegeum, between a drop of brine and the
Aegean, nay the whole Ocean Sea.

For as Rahab the Harlot was saved by reason of a red thread which was tied to
her window when Jericho was destroyed: so (be thou ten thousand times worse
then ever Rahab was, if the red thread of Christ's bloody passion be tied to the
window of thy heart by faith, doubt not but thou shall be saved, though not
Jericho, but the whole world should be destroyed.

But without this faith, our legal sorrow will avail nothing, our confession
nothing, our satisfaction will profit nothing, for as a plaster be it never so
excellent, if as soon as it is laid upon a sore, it be wiped off, will not
heal the sore: and as a potion be it never so precious, if as soon as it be
drunk, it be vomited up again, will not (...) he inward maladies that are in a
man's body: So the precious plaster of Christ's merits will not heal the wounds
of our souls, if it be wiped off by unbelief, nor will the Sovereign potion
of his merits cure our inward maladies, if they be vomited up by incredulity.

I have read somewhere of a Lacedemonian, who riding on his way, happened to
find a dead man, and not knowing perfectly that he was dead, he alighted from
his horse to try whether he could make him stand, when he could not, but the
dead fell sometime this way, and sometime that, he said to himself, de^st
profecto aliquid intus, there is something wanting within that should keep him
up, he said truly, for his soul was wanting a man without faith, be he never so
sorrowful for his sins, make he never so ample a confession of them, be he
pressed even to the mouth of hell with a doleful remembrance of his iniquities,
yea though he could say the whole Bible on his fingers ends, he is never able
to stand in judgment, nor to make answer before the Lord in the congregation
of the righteous, and no marvel for by faith we stand, 2 Cor. 1. 24. and
therefore it stands us all upon for the best of as all has but fidem
implicitam, I mean a weak and imperfect faith, to pray with the Apostles, O
Lord increase our faith, and with the father of the possessed child, Lord I
believe, help my unbelief.

PSALM. 82. 6, 7. I have said, ye are Gods; but ye shall die like men.
THere are three sorts of men, who, if they be faithful in their places, and
follow the direction of their books, are the chief pillars, to support a
Christian commonwealth: the Physician, the Divine, and the Magistrate. These
three are in the body politic, as the three principal parts, the liver, the
heart, and the brain, are in the body of man. The Physician is the liver, the
Divine is the heart, and the Magistrate is the brain of the commonwealth. The
liver is called the beginning of the natural faculty; it segregateth the
humors, it ingendreth alimental blood, and by veins sends it into each part of
the body, whereby the whole is nourished, and preserved. Like unto it is the
Physician, who purges the body of man, from such noxious humors, as whereby
it may be endangered, and prescribes such a diet, as whereby it may be best
nourished, and kept in health. The heart is called the beginning of the vital
faculty, it ingendreth the vital spirits, and by arteries sends them into
every particular member. To which I compare the Divine. For as the heart is the
fountain of the vital spirits, and the beginning of the vital faculty: so is
the Divine the fountain and beginning, though not (...) of generation, nor
(...) of radication, yet (...) (to use the Physicians terms) of the
dispensation of the true vital spirit. He is the means to make thee, of a
natural man (such as the Physician leaves thee) a spiritual substance. The
brain, which is called the beginning of the animal faculty, is the chief
commander of the whole: it sits in the highest room, as in a stately palace,
being compassed about with the pericranium, the cranium and the two meninges,
as so many strong castles, and countermures, against all foreign invasion. It
has the five external senses as intelligencers, to give notice, what is done
abroad, the common sense, the fantasy, and the understanding as privy
counselors, the memory as a book of records. But yet it is not idle, but is
continually busied in tempering the spirits received from the heart: which it
sends by the nerves, through the whole body, thereby giving sense, and motion
to every part. A fit emblem of a good Magistrate, who as he has his forts,
and guard, and counselors, and records, etc. so must he remember that he has
not these for his own proper use, but for the whole, and therefore should
bestir himself, for benefitting the whole, especially in tempering the spirits
received from the heart; I mean in using those spiritual admonitions, and
instructions, which he shall receive from the minister of the Gospel, for the
good, and benefit of all those that are under him. As the body is in best
estate, when all these are well disposed, so it is most miserable, when there
is a dyscrasie, and distemperature in any of them. So in the state likewise: Woe
unto that Commonwealth where the Physician for wholesome physic ministers
hemlock: and the Divine, for sound doctrine, broacheth heresy, and the
Magistrate turns justice into wormwood. Of all these three, the brain is
subject to most diseases: and of all these three, the Magistrate is most
obnoxious to falls; both because he has many ineitements unto sin, which others
want; and because he is deprived of a benefit, which others have, that is, he
is not so freely reproved for his offenses, as commonly others are; And lastly
because of those Cubiculares consiliarij, (as Lipsius calls them) tinea and
sorices Palatij, Polit. l. 3. c 9.
(as Constantine termed them) the very mothes and rats of a court, which live
by other men's harms; a quibus bonus, Vopis^. in Aureliano.
prudens, cautus venditur imperator, (as Dioclesian an ill Emperor said well)
which sell the magistrates favors, as if one would sell smoke, Lamprid. Ant.
Heliog.
(as did Zoticus the fair promises of Heliogabalus) and are always ready, for
their own advantage, to give an applause unto his worst actions. By these he is
led whithersoever they will have him, Ducitur ut nervis alienis mobile
lignum, Hor.

Even as an arrow is led by the bow-string. Therefore David in this Psalm
makes a sharp sermon against the corruption of Magistrates, out of which I
have made choice of this one branch. I have said, ye are Gods; but ye shall
die like men. As if he had said: truth it is, your authority is great, your
power extraordinary, Psalm. 75. 6.
( ye are Gods) yet set not up your horns on high, and speak not with a stiff
neck, ye are no transcendents, ye have no more reason to boast of your
superiority, then the moon has to brag of the light, which she borrows
from the sun, or the wall of the beam, which it receives in at the window; ye
have it only from me ( I have said:) and though ye be Gods, yet ye are but
earthly Gods, ye are Gods in office, not Gods in essence, ye are made of the
same metal that others are, and your end shall be like other men's ( you shall
die like men.) In which words, not to stand upon the diverse acceptions of any
of them, may it please you to observe these three points. 1. The party from
whom Magistrates receive their authority, it is from God, ( I have said) and
Gods saying is his doing. 2. Their pre-eminence above others, in that they are
called Gods ( ye are Gods) 3. The limitation of their dignity, ye shall die as
men. Out of which I collect these three propositions. 1. Magistrates and Judges
of the earth do receive their authority from God. 2. They are Gods deputies to
minister justice, and to judge between party and party. 3. Though they be
extolled above their brethren according to their office, yet they must die as
other men: where is implied this general conclusion, that it is the lot of all
men, once to die. These are the pillars of my intended discourse: of which
while I shall plainly entreat, in the same order, that I have now proposed
them, I beseech you all to afford me your Christian attention.

2. Of all the corporeal creatures that God made, 1 Part.
none is more exorbitant then man. The highest moveable is constant in his
motion. He does not hasten, nor neglect his course. The Sun is precise in his
course under the Ecliptic line, and turns not an hair breadth, Psalm. 19. 5.
unto the right hand or unto the left, but comes forth as a bridegroom out of
his chamber, and rejoices as a giant to run his race. The rest of the Planets,
though they turn to both sides of the Zodiac, and are (the most of them)
sometimes direct, and sometimes stationarie, and sometimes retrograde (as
Astronomers speak) by reason of their motion in their imaginary Epicicles, yet
they have their constancy in this inconstancy. Thou (O God) have given them a
law that shall not be broken. The elements keep themselves within their bounds.
The beasts of the forest, in their kind, have their policy, and society. The
raging sea goes not beyond his limits: Job. 38.
God has bound it (to use Jobs words) as a child in swaddling bands: he has
given it doors, and bars, and said unto it, hither shall thou go, and thou
shall go no further, here shall thou stay thy proud waves. But man is more
exorbitant then all these: no bounds can keep him in. Therefore God has
written in the heart, and conscience of every man, that comes into the world, a
law, which we call the law of nature: as that God is to be worshipped, good is
to be embraced, evil is to be avoided. That which thou would not another man
should do unto thee, thou must not do to another man. And according to these
general notions, he would have every person to direct his actions. But this
law (like an old inscription upon a stone) is written in the stony heart of man
in such blind characters, that he is put to his shifts before he can spell it.
And howsoever he understand it, in Thesi, yet in Hypothesi, in the particular,
he makes many soloecismes, and oftentimes calls good evil, and evil good.
Therefore God has written with his own finger a paraphrase upon it, which we
call the moral law, and added a large commentary of judicial laws, by the hand
of Moses. Which benefit (though not the same numero) he has not only granted
unto Christian Commonwealths: but even to the heathen also, amongst whom, in
all ages, he has stirred up men of excellent spirit to make laws, for the
better government of their several states. The best of which did acknowledge
that they had them from God. Howbeit after the custom of nations, which held a
plurality of Gods, they did not all agree in one name; Diodorus Siculus.
Lycurgs affirming that he received his laws from Apollo, Minos from Jupiter,
Solon, and Draco from Minerva, Numa from the Nymph Egeria, Anacharsis from
Zamolxis the Scythian God.

3. But all this will not confine man within his bounds, for it is true of him,
which was spoken of the Athenians, that they knew what was to be done, and yet
did it not. And, which was objected by the Cynick, against the old Philosophers
of Greece, that they gave good rules, but put none in practice. -- video
meliora proboque Ovid. Met.

Deteriora sequor, --
said Medea, when she was overcome with passion. It is true of most men, though
they know the law, how that they which commit sin, are worthy of death, Romans
1. 31.
yet they do not only the same themselves, but also favor them that do it. The
law of it self is but a dead letter. It is like a sword in the wars without a
soldier to draw it. Many make no more account of transgressing it, then Remus
did of going over the furrow, Live. l. 1. dec. 1.
which Romulus had caused to be drawn. Or the frogs in the fable of skipping
over the Lion, when he was fast a sleep. Therefore God has added the
Magistate, as the life, and soul of the law, as a Captain to manage this
sword. Him he has made (if I may so speak) the summum genus of the
commonwealth, by two generical differences of poena, and praemium, to coarct,
and keep his inferiors in their several ranks: that as Jehu, and Jehonadab,
went hand in hand together, for the rooting out of Ahabs posterity, and
destruction of Baals Priests; Ethicorum, lib. 5. cap. 4.
so the Magistrate being (as Aristotle calls him) a living law, and the law,
being a mute, and dead Magistrate, should join hand in hand, and proceed
valorously, to the rooting out of sin, the suppression of Idolatry, the
protection of justice, and maintenance of true religion.

4. Now that they have this authority only from God, it is a point, which I
hope in this place, Jam. 1. 17.
I shall not need long to insist upon. For if every good and perfect gift be
from above, even from the father of lights, much more this excellent, and
supereminent gift of governing Gods people, must proceed from this fountain.
And to think otherwise is but with the Epicures, to be of opinion, that though
God made the world, yet the government thereof, he leaves to fortunes
discretion to be directed by her. One of the styles wherewith God is invested,
is this, that he is the author of order, 1 Cor. 14.
and not of confusion: if of order then of Civil government, seeing that an
Anarchie is the cause of all disorder, and confusion in the state. Insomuch
that the reason of all the sins that were committed in Israel, is often in
the book of Judges ascribed unto this, that they wanted a Magistrate: There was
at that time no king in Israel, Judge. 17. 6. 18. 1. 19. 1. 21. 25.

It is a miserable life, to live under a tyrant where nothing is lawful; but
far worse, to live in an Anarchie where nothing is unlawful. But I shall not
need to trouble my self, or to tire out your attention, by heaping up
multitudes of reasons for proving of this point, seeing it is a conclusion so
plainly averred by the holy Ghost: Prove. 8. 15, 16.
by me kings reign (sath the wisdom of God by the mouth of Solomon) and
Princes decree justice; by me Princes rule, and the nobles, and all judges of
the earth. As if he had said: it is not by the wit, and policy of man, that
the governments of states is committed unto kings, and other inferior
Magistrates: it is effected by the wisdom, and providence of God. With which
the Apostle agrees, Romans 13. 1.
when he tells us, that there is no power but of God, and the powers that be,
are ordained of God. It was sometime said of Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 5. 19.
that great king of Babylon, that whom he would, he pulled down, and whom he
would, he set up. But it is always true of the king of heaven, who is -- (...)
the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; he pulls down one, and sets up an
other, he disposes of their rooms, at his pleasure. Prove. 21. 1.
For if the hearts of kings, much more their kingdoms, are at his disposition.
This is a truth to which the very heathen themselves have subscribed. 2 Chr. 9.
8.
It was God alone that did exalt Solomon unto the throne of his father David,
so the Queen of the South affirmed; that did exalt Cyrus to the kingdoms of
the earth, so he himself confessed. 2 Chr. 36. 23.
Agreeing with that of the prophet David, Promotion comes not from the East,
Psalm. 71. 7, 8.
nor from the West, no nor yet from the South. And why? God is the judge, he
puts down one, and sets up another.

5. And is this true? 1 Use.
Here then first the Anabaptists come to be censured, which withdraw their
necks from the yoke of civil government, and condemn it, as not beseeming the
liberty of a Christian man. A lesson which they never learned from the prophet
Esaias, who foretold, that in the time of the gospel (an assertion which they
cannot away with; for though they grant, that the Jews, at Gods appointment,
had their Magistrates, yet they think it not fit for a Christian to be subject
to such slavery) in the time I say of the Gospel he will appoint kings to be
patrons, and propugnators of his Church. Isa. 49. 23.
Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and Queens shall be thy nurses. Nor from
our Savior Christ, who though he told his disciples, Luke 22. 25.
when they strove for superiority amongst themselves, that one of them should
not domineer over another, as did the kings of the nations; yet it was never
his meaning to withdraw them from obedience to superior governors, but that
Caesar should have that which did belong to Caesar. Mat. 22. 21.
Nor from Peter, 1 Pet. 2. 17.
who commands us to honor the King. Nor from Paul, who commands us to pray for
Kings, 1 Timothy 2.
and all that are in authority, and that to this end, that we may lead a quiet,
and peaceable life in all godliness, and honesty. God knows better what is
meet for Christians then the Anabaptists do. He knows that we are strangers
on earth, and not angels in heaven. 1 Pet. 2. 11.
And being strangers and pilgrims, stand in as great need of these helps, as of
fire, of water, of air, of apparel, of any thing, which is necessary for the
sustentation of our lives; seeing that they are not only the means that we are
partakers of all these while they effect, that we may live together in civil
society, but also the promoters of true religion, the advancers of virtue, the
rewarders of piety, the punishers of sin, the destroyers of Idolatry,
superstition, and all misdemeanors amongst Christians. So that as God said
unto Samuel concerning the Jews, when they disl^ked their present government,
1 Samuel 8. 7.
they have not cast thee away, but they have cast me away, that I should not
reign over them: so I may say of these fanatical spirits, it is not the
Magistrate, but God himself, whom they have rejected, that he should not reign
over them.

6. There is an other sort of men, 2 Use.
who, though not directly with the* Anabaptists yet indirectly, and by a
consequent, cross my proposition. I mean the Papists. These do not altogether
take away the civil Magistrate, but they tie his thums and abridge his
authority. It must be only in temporalibus: for spiritual matters, he must have
no more d^alings with them, 2 Samuel 6.
then Vzza had to touch the ark of God. This they willingly grant, that the
Magistartes are Gods, 1 Kin. 20. 28.
but as the Aramits said of the Israelites, that their Gods were Gods of the
mountains, and not Gods of the valleys: so say they, the civil Magistrates, are
Gods of the montains, and not Gods of the valleys; they are Gods of the Laity,
but not of the Clergy.

This is naught in respect of that which follows. For whereas God challenges
this as a prerogative unto himself, to bestow kingdoms on whomsoever he will,
and places the Princes of the earth in authority next unto himself, this they
have perforce taken from God, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
and bestowed it upon him, that sits in the temple of God, and advances
himself, above all that are called Gods. It is he to whom (if ye will believe
him, and his parasites) all power is committed, both in heaven and in earth. He
is that King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, by whom Princes rule, and on whom the
right of Kings depends: all nations must fall down before him, and all
kingdoms must do him homage. The greatest Monarch of the earth must prostrat
himself before him, and kiss his holy feet. The Emperor, if he be present
when he takes horse, must hold the bridle, when he lights, he must hold the
right stirrup, when he walks, he must bear up his train, when he washes, he
must hold the basin, when he would be born, he must be one of the four that
must carry him upon their shoulders in a golden chair.

7. And as he takes upon him to give kingdoms to whomsoever he will (like the
Devil, who told our Savior Christ that all the kingdoms of the world were
his, Luke 4. 6.
and he gave them to whomsoever he would (whereupon says an ancient father,
Irenaeus.
mentitur diabolus, quia cujus jussu homines creantur, hujus jussu reges
constituuntur, the devil is a liar, for by whose authority men were created, by
his are kings appointed) as he takes upon him, I say, to give kingdoms at his
pleasure, so will he take them away when he lists. So far is he from that
obedience, and reverence, which every soul should give to the higher power. Who
knows not that Leo Isaurus for putting in execution, Chron. Charion. lib. 3. ^
a decree of a Council held at Constantinople in his time, touching the taking
away of Images, was first excommunicated, and then deprived of all his revenues
in Italy? That Pope Zachary deposed Childerick, the French king, that he might
gratify Carolus Mertellus, and his son Pipin? Bonfin. rerum ^ng. d^c. 4. l. 1.
That the proud Venetian peddler, Paul the second, by a public edict deprived
of crown and kingdom, George the king of Bohemia, because he was an H^ssite,
and stirred up Mathias the king of Hungary, (his son in law) to war against
him? What shall I tell you of the indignities, offered in our own land, against
Henry the second, and John, king of England? or of the bulls of Pius Quintus,
sent against Queen Elizabeth of never dying memory, whereby he has
excommunicated her, absolved her subjects, from their oaths of allegiance,
stirred up rebellions in these middle parts of Britain, and taken upon him, to
bestow the regal diadem upon strangers. Psalm. 2. 4.
God be thanked he that dwells in heaven (and, of right, challenges the
authority of disposing the kingdoms of this world to himself) laughed all
their devises to scorn. So that his Canons, though they made a terrible noise,
yet no bullet was felt. And his Bulls which sometimes had such a terrible
aspect, that a whole provincial Synod durst scarce venture to bait them, proved
such cowardly dastards, that every single adversary has been ready to tugge
them. Much resembling the counterfeit shows of Semiramis, when she warred
against the king of India, which, a far off, seemed to be Elephants, and
Dromedaries, but when they were thoroughly tried, proved nothing but Oxen hides
stuffed with straw. Apoc. 16. 7.
Even so Lord God Almighty true and righteous are thy judgments.

That I may cut off this first branch of my Text, 3. Use.
my third and last inference shall concern you ( R. H.) whom the Lord has
placed at the seat of judgment. Have Magistrates their authothority from God?
this concerns you in your places, as well as the greatest potentate of the
earth. And therefore as on the one side it should be encouragement unto you, to
hold on in all godly courses ye have begun; so on the other side, it should
work in you, an humble, and thankful acknowledgment of so rare a benefit. Say
not then within your selves, that it was not your own deserts, the excellency
of your wits, the ripeness of your judgments of so rare a benefit. Say not
then within your selves, that it was your own deserts, the excellency of your
wits, the ripeness of your judgments, the deepnesse of your knowledge in the
laws, the integrity of your persons, that did advance you, unto those rooms:
If these were means of your preferment, yet have ye nothing whereof ye can
justly boast, because ye have all from him. For Dei dona sunt, quaecunque bona
sunt. Use then your places as received from him, acknowledge God to be author
of your advancement, and say with Mary in her Song: Luke 1.
he that is mighty has done great things for us, and holy is his name. And so
much of the first proposition.

The second follows,

Magistrates are Gods Deputies. 2. Propos.


8 God as he is jealous of his honor, so is he of his name too. He will not
give it unto any other, but only so far, as has he some resemblance with him.
I find only three in Gods book, (to say nothing of that eternal essence, to
which it principally agrees) which have this name given them. The first is
Satan, who, by reason of his great and almost unlimited power, which he has
for a time, here on earth, by ruling and reigning in the hearts of the children
of disobedience, is called a God. The God of this world, 2 Cor. 2. 4. The
second are the blessed Angels, those yeomen of the guard in the Court of
Heaven, which wait about the throne of God. These by reason of their
supereminent offices, are called Gods. Thou have made him a little inferior to
the Gods, Psalm. 8. 5. which the Apostle, following the Septuagint, trans^^teth
Angels, Heb. 2. 7 The third, is the Magistrate, who, both in this Psalm, and
sundry other places of Scripture, is called a God, His master shall bring him
to the Gods, Exodus 21. 6. Thou shall not rail upon the Gods, Exodus 22. 28.
that is, the Judges: implying thus much, that as they have a commandment, and
authority from God; so they have, in some sense, the authority of God, and do
supply his room. Therefore, said Moses unto the Judges which he appointed in
every city, Deuteronomy. 1. 16.
ye shall not fear the face of man, for the judgment is Gods. 2 Chr. 19. 6.
And Jehosaphat to those Judges, which which he had set in the strong cities of
Judah: take heed what you do, 1. Use.
for ye execute not the judgment of man, but of the Lord.

9. Now then, if Magistrates be Gods deputies, what reverence, it behooves each
private person, to exhibit unto them, I appeal to the conscience of every
particular. There be many at this day, who howsoever in common civility, they
will seem to give an outward reverence unto the Magistrate, yet in heart they
scorn and contemn sundry of them: as perchance not being able to equalize them
in wealth, peradventure not descending of so ancient a house as they.

Tune Syri, Horat.
Damae, aut Dionysi filius audes
Dejicere e saxo cives, and tradere Cadmo?
It was an old objection in the Satyrist: what? dare thou, being thus, and
thus descended, presume to give judgment upon a man that is better born then
thy self? yes, why not? he is now in Gods place. He that lifts the poor out
of the mire, and raises the beggar out of the dunghill, that he may set him
with the Princes of his people, has styled him, with his name, and set him in
his room. Herod. l. 2.
I remember a story in Herodotus, of Amasis an Egyptian king, who, in the
beginning of his reign, Arist. polit. l. 3
was scorned of his subjects, by reason of the baseness of his parentage:
which when the king observed, he took a golden basen, wherein his guests were
wont to wash their feet, and use to some homely purposes, and thereof made an
image of one of their Gods, and set it in an eminent place of the city; which
when the Egyptians saw (as they were mavelous superstitious) they came
flocking on heaps unto it, and worshipped it. Hereupon Amasis, calling the
people together, told them, that he was like unto that basen, which before was
vile and abject, yet now was worshipped, because of the form it bare: so he,
though before he was mean, and base, yet now was to be honored, because he was
the king, for the persons sake whom he did represent. It skilleth not, what the
Magistrate has been, or what hereafter he may be. For the present, be thy
reputation never so great, thou art to honor and reverence him, if not for the
man's sake, yet for Gods sake, whose person he bears. Live. dec. 3. l. 4.
The story of Quintus Fabius is very worthy the noting. Quintus Fabius was sent
by the Senate of Rome to his son, Plut. in vit.
who was Consul, Fabii.
and resided at that time in Apulia. The old man, either by reason of his age,
or to try his sons courage, went riding to his son: which when his son
observed, he sent a Sergeant, and commanded him to light, and come on foot, if
he would speak with the Consul. The bystanders thought it great arrogance in
the young man to be so bold with his aged father. But old Fabius, who had
experience, what it was to be Consul, knew well, that he did no more then did
beseem him: experiri volui fili (said he) satin' scires Consulem te esse. It is
not for a Magistrate to debase himself: neither is it for others, of what
reputation soever, to equalize themselves with the Judge whom God has placed
over them: Prove. 24. 21.
whom Solomon would have to be feared; 1 Pet. 2. 14.
whom Peter would have to be honored; Romans 13. 5.
whom Paul would have to be obeyed, not for wrath only, but even for conscience
sake.

10. And this is not only meant of godly and religious Magistrates, Deuteronomy. 17.
such as are described by Moses, which make Gods law of their privy Counsel,
and turn not aside to the right hand, or to the left: but of wicked and ungodly
governors too; such as are described by Samuel, 1 Samuel 8.
which take men's sons, and appoint them to his charets, and to be his horsemen,
and to run before his charets, and take their fields, and give them to his
servants, and their vineyards, and give them to his Eunuchs. The reason, is,
because as well the bad, as the good are of God. The one he gives in his love,
the other in his anger. He that gave the regiment of a Commonwealth to Caius
Caesar, a mild, and gentle Prince, gave it also unto Marius, a bloody Consul.
He that gave it unto Augustus, a myrrour of humanity, gave it unto Nero, a
monster of crudelity. He that gave it unto Vespasian, gave it unto Domitian. He
that gave it unto Constantine, a religious defender of Christianity, gave it
unto Julian, August. de Civ. Dei l. 5. c. 21.
an author of apostasy, says Austine. And be they good or bad, we have no
commandment from him, but parendi and patiendi: of obeying them, when their
precepts are not repugnant to Gods statutes, and of suffering with patience
whatsoever they shall lay upon us. It was a worthy saying of the mother of the
two Garaes, Bonfin. rerum Ung. dec. 3. lib. 2.
when they kept Sigismond in prison, that a crowned king, if he were worse then
a beast, could not be hurt without great injury done to God himself. A lesson
which she learned from David, 1 Samuel 24.
whose heart smote him, when he had cut the the lap of Saul's garment, because
he was the anointed of the Lord: although he himself was before that time
anointed to be king over Israel, 1 Samuel 13. 14.
and was without cause, hunted by Saul like a Pelican in the wilderness, and
an Owl in the desert.

11. Then to draw thy sword* and to seek perforce to depose such as God has
placed over thee, either because they are not suitable to thy affections, or not
faithful in their places, what is it but with the old giants, (...), to fight
with God: with the curre dog, to bite at the stone, and not regard who casts
it: or, with the rebellious child, to snatch at the rod, and never remember who
smites with it. The weapons of a Christian, in this case (when such a case
does happen) must be preces and lacrymae, prayers, that either God would turn
the heart of an evil Magistrate, or set in his room a man David-like after his
own heart: 1 Samuel 13. 14.
and tears, for his sins, which as they are the cause of war, famine,
pestilence, and all other calamities, so are they also of wicked and ungodly
Magistrates. Otherwise they have reason to fear, that, Val. Max. l. 6. c. 2.
if God should displace an evil Magistrate, he would set a worse in his room.
According to that of the old wife of Syracuse, who when others prayed for the
death of Dionysius the Tyrant, she prayed for his long life, being sent for by
Dionysius, and demanded wherein she was beholden unto him, that she so devoutly
prayed for him: in nothing, said she, am I beholden to thee and yet I have
great reason to pray for thee? For I remember when I was a young wench, there
was a cruel tyrant, that reigned over us; and all of us prayed for his death, I
as fast as any: shortly after he was slain, and then came a worse in his room.
Then we prayed for his death, at length he was dispatched. Now after both these
art thou come, and thou art a thousand times worse then all thy predecessors.
And wl o knows but when thou art gone, God may (if it be possible) send a
worse in thy room? This they may justly expect, which continue in their sins,
and think by their private endeavors to cross Gods ordinance. Thus much of
those duties, which are required at the hand of every private man toward the
Magistrate.

12. My second inference shall touch those duties that are required at the
hands of Magistrates, 2. Use.
in that God has made them his deputies. As God has done great things for
them, so he requires much at their hands. But (alas) it often falls out that
those which owe God the most, pay him the least: and those, who of all others
should be most careful of their places, of all others make the least conscience
of their ways. Annal. l. 6.
Tacitus reports of Claudius that he was a good subject, but an ill Emperor:
of Titus, that he was an ill subject, Hist. l. 2.
but a good Emperor. Where one proves like Titus, two prove like Claudius.
Honors change manners. And those goodly blossoms, which did appear in many
when they were private men, when they come in Gods-place, like frost-eaten
buds, wither away, and prove like thunder-blasted fruit, not worth the
touching, much less the tasting. It is noted of Aeneas Sylvius, Buchelc. Ind.
Chron.
that when once he became Pope, and got his name changed into Pius secundus, he
condemned diverse of those things which he had written, when he was a private
man. Whereupon upon one came over him with this quippe, quod Aeneas probavit,
Pius damnavit: that which Aeneas commended, Pius condemned. A fault to which
men of eminent place are too much subject, to condemn and dislike those good
things when they are in authority, which they approved when they were private
men. Quod Aeneas probavit, Pius damnabit. Thus* those whom God calls Elohim,
change their natures, and prove Elilim idols, and vanities. Abbas Ursp.
The heathen persecuters (as some writers have recorded) in the place where
Christ was crucified had placed the image of Venus, a heathen idol, that if any
should worship Christ, he might seem to adore Venus. This is the devils
practice, to set an idol in Gods room; sometimes a Venus, or a Cupid, that use
their authority for the enjoying of their own carnal pleasures; sometimes a
Mars, using his power to blood and revenge; fomet^mes a ^aturn, that eats up
his children (that is, his inferiors, which he should affect as a father does
his own children) as if they we^e bread; sometimes a Mercury, who is eloquent
in speaking, but withal nimble in fingring, having a smooth tongue lie Jacob,
but rough hands like Esau, nay Eagle claws like Nabuchadnezzar, to scrape, and
scratch together whatsoever comes in his way, using his place only for his own
advantage. Here is the undoing of all: for, besides that Gods place is
polluted, and the people wronged, there is an evil president given to private
men, to follow the wicked example of their Governors. For as the lower
spheres, follow the motion of the higher: so in the commonwealth, those that
are of an inferior rank are ready to follow the practice of those that are
set over them. When a shrub, or bramble falls, they hurt none but themselves;
but when a Cedar of Lebanon, or an oak of Basan falls, down goes all the
underwood that grows about them. It is the nature of the plague to infect
upwards, from a lower, to a higher room: but the plague of sin is more
forcible in effecting downwards, from an higher, to a lower room. It descends
from the top to the toe, and from the head to the skirts of the clothing. Mat.
2. 3.
If Herod be troubled about the birth of Christ, all Jerusalem will be in an
uproar with him. 1 Kin. 12.
And if Jeroboam be an idolater, -- componitur orbis
Regis ad exemplum: Claud.

all Israel will go a whoring after him. And hereupon it is, that ye shall
seldom meet with his name in the book of kings, but you shall find him branded
in the forehead with this mark, that he made Israel to sin.

13. God be thanked, we have no great occasion of complaint at this day;
especially in our chief Magistrates (and I wish, I might without check of
conscience say as much of those, that are of an inferior rank) The Lord has
set over us his name for ever be blessed for it) a most godly and religious
King, Rara temporum felicitate, ubi sentire quae velis and quae sentis dicere
licet. Hist. lib. 1.
of whom (as Tacitus says of Trajane, and Cocceius Nerva*) a man may think
what he will* and speak what he thinks, God has given him (as he did unto ( a)
Solomon) a large heart as the sand that is upon the sea shore to judge his
people according to right, and to ( b) discern beween good and bad. 1 Kin. 4.
29.
Whose princely care is to observe the practice of the old Romans, 1 Kin. 3. 9.
( c) to set Honors temple close on the backside of Virtues temple, August de
Civ. Dei l. 5. cap. 12.
and not wittingly to suffer any to come into the Temple of Honor, which have
not first done their devotion in the Temple of Virtue: not to make his Judges,
and chief Magistrates) like Jeroboams Priests) of the basest, 1 Kin. 12. 31.
and lowest of the people; Exodus 18. 21.
but such as Moses, at Jethro's persuasion, made Judges over Israel, men of
courage, fearing God, men dealing truly, and hating covetousness.

14. And such ( R. H.) you have by good demonstrations evidently proved your
selves to be. So that to make any large discourse before you, of your
particular duties, may peradventure seem unto some, as needless a piece of
work, as it was for Phormio, Tull. de orat. lib. 1.
to make a military discourse before Annibal; or for Plotin to read a lecture
in Philosophy in the presence of Origin. Yet because it comes within the
limits of my text, I beseech you that you, will with patience hear me, while I
shall say somewhat of that duty which God requires at your hands, in that he
has seated you in those high rooms. Many will tell you of the greatness of
your places; but not so many will truly acquaint you with that which God
requires for the discharging of those places. For my part me thinks I may say
unto you, Live. dec. 1. lib. 10.
as Lucius Posthumous sometimes said unto the Senators of Rome: No^ sum
Patres-conscripti adeo vestrae dignitatis memor, ut obliviscar me esse
Consulem. I am not so mindful of the greatness of your places, that I should
in the mean time forget mine own, how that God has made me his Ambassador,
and commanded me to acquaint you with some part of his will.

15. It is our parts, and duties, to give you that reverence, and honor, which
is due unto men of your place. But yet as the people said unto the Ass that
carried the image of Isis, when the beast seemed to be proud, because the
people bowed as it went along the streets, as if the honor had been given unto
it, and not unto the image: religioni non tibi, said they, it is not thee, but
the goddess, whom we worship. So it is not to you as ye are men, but as you
are in Gods place, and do bear, and resemble his person, that we exhibit this
reverence. You are Gods, but ye are Gods on earth, and Gods of earth, as we
shall hear anon. Mathematitians tell us, that the whole earth is but a point in
respect of the highest moveable: it is no more in respect of that heaven, which
is Gods throne, Aelian. Var. hist. l. 3.
then Alcibiades his lands were in that map of Greece that Socrates showed
unto him. The greatest Judge in the world, if his circuit should extend over
the whole globe of the earth is but a God of Gods footstool. Your circuit is
far less: you are but Gods of an out-corner, nay, a little portion of an
out-corner of Gods footstool. Let me then speak unto you in the words of the
Tragoedian, Vos, quibus rector maris, atque terrae.
Jus dedit magnum necis, Seneca in Thyeste.
atque vitae,
Ponite inflatos tumidosque vultus.
you whom the God of heaven, and earth has so highly extolled, as to make
Judges of life and death, be not proud of your authorities, but think with your
selves, that, Quicquid a vobis minor extimescit,
Major hoc vobis Dominus minatur.
What hurt soever your inferiors shall sustain by your means, there is a
greater God, that threatens the same (nay a worse) unto you. Psalm. 2.
Be wise now therefore O ye Gods: be learned ye that are Judges of the earth:
serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice before him with trembling: kiss the
son, lest he be angry. Let his word be a law to direct your sentences, his
will the line to measure your actions. With what conscience can those hands
subscribe to an untruth, which should be Gods instrument to confirm a right?
with what faces can those mouths pronounce an unjust sentence, which should be
the organes of God to confirm a right? When you do amiss, you are not only
injurious unto man whom ye wrong, but contumelious unto God, whose sacred
judgments ye pollute. Give me leave then to say unto you with good king
Jehosaphat: 2 Chr. 19. 6, 7, 10.
take heed what ye do, for ye execute not the judgments of man, but of the
Lord, and he will be with you in the cause, and judgment. Wherefore now let
the fear of God be upon you; take heed and do it: for there is no iniquity in
the Lord our God, neither respect of persons, nor receiving of reward.
Therefore in every cause that shall come unto you, between blood and blood,
between law and precept, statute and judgment, ye shall judge the people
according unto right, and admonish them that they trespass not against the
Lord. Let me say with Moses, Deuteronomy. 1. 16, 17.
Judge righteously between every man, and his brother, and the stranger that is
with him: ye shall have no respect of persons in judgment, but shall hear the
small, as well as the great. Jer. 22. 3.
With Jeremiah unto the king of Judah: Execute judgment and righteousness,
deliver the oppressed from the hands of the oppressor, vex not the stranger,
the fatherless, nor the widow, do no violence, nor shed innocent blood in this
place. And finally with my Prophet in this Psalm: Defend the poor and
fatherless, see that such as be in need, and necessity have right, deliver the
outcast, and poor, save them from the hands of the ungodly.

16. I speak not this, as if I would have you to exceed the limits of justice,
for commiserating the cause of the poor. I know the poor may offend as well as
the rich: and as the poor is to be pitied, so the rich is not to be wronged.
And he that has given this law unto the Magistrate, that he should not respect
the person of the mighty, Lev. 19. 15.
has given this also, that he should not favor the person of the poor. It is
not the misery of the one, nor the felicity of the other, that the Judge is to
respect. For the matters in question, sound them to the bottom, anatomize them
to the least particle, and sift them to the branne: but for the parties whom
they do concern farther then this, that ye are to judge between a man and a
man, (...) of (...).
ye ought not to enquire. The law in the Greek tongue comes from a verb that
signifies to divide, because it divides to every man, that which is his own.
You then which are dispensers of the law should give to every one, poor or
rich, Arist. Eth. l. 5. ^4.
that which is his right. Hereupon it is that Aristotle calls the Judge in
commutative justice (...), or as some copies have it (...) medianus, or
medijurus, a mean between two; because he should not propend to the one party,
more then the other, but only so far as the weight of the cause carries him,
and should give to every man that which is his right, and that not according to
geometrical, but according to arithmetical proportion: that is, not with
Xenophons young Cyrus give the greater coat unto the greater man, and the
lesser coat unto the lesser man, but to give the greater coat (if it be his
due) unto the lesser man, and let the greater man (if he have right to no more)
be contented with the lesser coat.

17. But the principal thing, which it beseems me to put you in mind of, and
which is chiefly required at your hands, as ye are factors for the God of
heaven, is the care of religion, and the true worship of God. Nothing is so
dear unto God, as his own worship. He that touches it, wounds him to the
heart, and pierces the apple of his eye. It is an injury which he will not
put up at the hands of any man, but will come against him, as the fire that
burns up the stubble, and as the hammer that breaks a stone. Therefore it
most nearly concerns you, who are his deputies, to maintain his service, and
to put what strength you can unto the hammer of justice, that ye may (as far
as the laws will give you leave) burst into pieces, whatsoever shall advance
it self against his worship.

18. The sicknesses in religion, that are amongst us, are not Novatianisme,
Brownisme, Catharisme. No, no: these hot phrenzies are scarce heard of in this
cold climat wherein we live. They are cold Epilepsies and dead Apoplexies, and
sleepy Lethargies, and dangerous Consumptions, that vex us. The main root,
whence they all spring, is a disease, with which this land is sick. And that is
the bold profession of Popery: for hereby the true Christian are mightily
discouraged, those that are infected with Romish superstition take occasion, by
little and little, to fall away from us; The ignorant are doubtful, and know
not what to do, but are ready to embrace any religion, or no religion, as time
and occasion shall require; The Atheist (a vermin wherewith this whole country
swarms, though they cannot be well discovered, by reason that they wear
vizards upon their faces) is hardened and heartned in his impiety.

For us, we do what we can to cut in sunder this bitter root. Gladly would we
heal them of Babylon, but they will not be healed. For our private conferences
with any of them, if they want wit to answer our reasons, they have will to let
them alone. For our public work of the ministry, lest we should catch some of
them they will not come within the compass of our nets. The last weapon of the
Church is fulmen excommunicationis, to drive them out of our Synagogues. And
what care they for this, who will not come in them, no, when we do entreat
them? they count it but brutum fulmen, a thunderclap, without a bolt, a
canon-shot without a bullet: it hurts them no more then the dart which old
Priamus in the Poet shot at Pyrrhus:

-- Quod protinus aere repulsum, Virg. Aenl. l. 2.

In summo clypei, nequidquam umbone pependit.
Further then this we cannot go: the weapons of our warfare are spiritual.
Coactive jurisdiction is beyond our sphere. What is now behind? Vbi desinit
Philosophus, incipiat medicus; where the word leaves them, let the sword find
them. Brachium seculare, was the help, and assistance that the holy fathers of
the Council of Constance implored against the poor Hussites. And brachium
seculare is the help and assistance, that we implore against these Canaanites,
that are amongst us. Which (howsoever unto the halting Mephibosheths, and
lukewarm Laodiceans of our time, which can blow both cold and hot out of the
same mouth: and wear linen and woollen in the same garment, and yoke an ox,
and an ass in the same plowe, and care not if their fields be sown with
mingled seeds, they be never a whit noisome: yet unto the true Israelite, they
are thorns in his sides, Number. 33. 55.
and pricks in his eyes; and gives him just occasion to exhibit that bill of
complaint against them which the Jews framed most falsely against the Apostle,
Act. 21. 28.
ye men of Israel (nay ye Gods of Israel) help, these are the men that teach
all men every where, against the people, and the law, and this place. Moreover
they have brought (not Grecians, as it is in the text, but a more pestilent
sect) Romans into the land, and have polluted this holy place.

19. I speak not only of those children of Babylon, those sons of Belial, the
followers of the beast, the viperous brood of Rome, the Seminary Priests and
Jesuits, that crawle in every quarter of this land, Exodus 8.
like the frogs of Egypt; and travel sea and land, to make one of their own
profession, Mat. 23. 15.
that he may be twofold more the child of the devil, then they themselves are:
but also of these limbs of Antichrist, these factors, and panders for the
great whore, that are at home, and sit under their own fig trees, and drink the
water of their own cisterns. Cic. 2. Cat.
Quos video volitare in foro, quos stare ad curiam. quos etiam venire in
senatum, as the Orator speaks. These, these are nostri fundicalamitas, the very
moths of our region, Ps. 45. 4.
and the cankarworms of our religion. Wherefore gird you with your swords, Jud.
8. 20.
upon your thighs, and be not faint hearted (like Jether the first born of
Gideon) but let your right hand teach you terrible things. No doubt but they
will complain of cruelty, and persecution (they do that already, when they have
no cause) but let not that discourage you, but rather let it be a means that
they may have the same law, Tull. Pro. Roscio.
which the old Capitolian dogs had: when they barked without a cause, their
legs were to be broken. If the difference between them and us, be de lana
caprina, about toys and trifles, let them be ashamed of their bloody cruelty,
that have butchered, and massacred so many thousands of our brethren, for toys
and trifles. Yea, and let us be ashamed likewise, that have continued so long
in schism; and division from the Roman Church for matters of so small moment.
If they be (as I take them to be) fundamental points of Christianity, (alas)
what worldly respect shall be sufficient to cool the heat of our zeal in Gods
cause? If our religion be a new religion, and theirs the old, and Catholic,
let us forsake our new-fangles, and join with them. The old, is the true
religion. If ours be the old, and Catholic religion, which the Apostles have
taught us, the martyrs have confirmed unto us, and the faithful till this day
have maintained and taught: and theirs a new and an upstart religion, an
hotch-potch and Pandora, composed of all the religions in the world, scarce
heard of (for any material point of difference between them and us) in the
Church of God, for six hundred years after Christ: let them pare away these
rotten rags, these filthy and menstrous clouts, Is. 64. 6.
and beggarly rudiments, and let them join with us. Gal. 4. 9.
E^ther let us all swear by God, Zeph. 1. 5.
or all by Malcham. Either let us all serve God, or all Baal; if God be God,
let us all follow him, if Baal be God, let us all go after him.

20. I know what some will be ready to answer me, though in matters of religion
they be different from us, yet for civil duties they will be subjects good
enough. You say true, sir, and so the kite will be a dove good enough: Isto
pacto and milvvs quando pullos rapere territus non potuerit columbum se
nominat. Aug. contra lit. Petil. lib. 2. c. 83.
but wot ye when* marry when he cannot seize upon a chicken, and make her his
prey, as Augustins speaks. Is it likely that he will be true to an earthly
king, that in matters of religion is his opposite, who is false to the King of
Heaven? Philosophers, though they hold that it is not the same virtue that
makes bonum virum, and bonum civem, yet the best of them agree in this
principle, that he cannot be bonus civis, good in the duties of civil policy,
which is not first bonus vir, perfect in the general duties of morality:
neither can he be true in practicing the virtues of the second table, which is
false in the first. Do thou think, that the oath of Allegiance is a band of
sufficient force to tie a Papist in true allegiance unto his Prince?

Quo teneas vultum mutantem Protea nodo? Horat.

Can thou bind Proteus, that turns himself into every shape? Or can thou
make a coat for the moon, that is never at a stay? Was there ever oath so
wisely contrived, so religiously taken, but the slippery snakes, and stretching
horse-leaches of Rome, could find some chink to creep out at? or their Holy
Father, out of his Papal, and transcendent power can dispense with it, or cut
it, as Alexander did Gordians knot, Justin. l. 11.
or break it, Jud. 16. 12.
as Sampson did the new ropes, where with the Philistines had bound him, which
he brake from his arms, as a thread?

21. Verily I think there is no probability, to be a true Papist, and a true
subject. A few simple seduced creatures amongst us, that understand not the
mysteries of popery, but only in a generality, I speak not of them: (and yet I
know how easily the young cubs may be taught to learn the tricks of the old
Foxes) but for the rest, the time past will help us to discover them in the
time to come. To say nothing of their damnable, and treacherous practices
abroad against foreign princes, and here at home against Queen Elizabeth of
never dying memory, and the breath of our nostrils King James; that one
gunpowder-plot, a devise set from the bottom of hell, may be an everlasting
memento of their disloyalty.

Accipe nunc Danaum insidias, and crimine ab uno
Disce omnes --
By this one fact we may judge of all the rest, as an ass may be known by his
long ears, and as the bigness of Hercules might be gathered by the print of
his foot. And though some of them, to make it less heinous, P. R.
call it a particular fact of a few, and that temerarious too, as though,
forsooth, it had been far from their hearts to have attempted any such
cruelty against the Lords anointed: yet it may be truly said of them all, as
Tullie said of the Catilinarians, aliis facultas defuit, aliis occasio,
voluntas profecto nemini. And he, that in outward show seems most against it,
would have lent both heart, and hand, and put to the very match, so that he
might have effected that matchless treason. And why should it be otherwise?
For what, I pray you, is any* Prince in the world, if he do not adhere to the
Apostatical Sea of Rome? shall I define him unto you out of their Logic books:
A woolf devouring the sheep? Bell. Sand.
an Ahab or Jezabel, destroying the Lords Prophets; Creswell.
an Holofernes, Bancherius Rainolds.
a professed enemy to the true Israelite; a Goliath, reviling the host of the
living God; a seducer, and deceiver of the people, as our Savior was called by
their old grandfathers. And must not such a one be made away by one means or
other, by open hostility, or secret conspiracy, it makes no matter?

-- dolus an virtus quis in host requirit?
Shall not the shepherd do well to kill a wolf? Jud. 13. 8.
shall not Judeth be highly extolled if she can kill Holofernes though sleeping
in his bed? 1 Samuel 18. 7.
And if David kill Goliath, deserves he not to be met with the two women of
Israel with timbrels, and instruments of joy, singing thus, Saul has killed
his thousand, but David his ten thousand? In a word, is it not their assertion
that Princes must not be suffered to reign, when they draw the people into
heresy, but must be made away yea by all means possible. And therefore I less
marvel, why that reviling Rabshakeh, that brasen-faced fugitive Parsons, who
blushed not to say any thing in his younger years, in his old age took upon him
a kind of modesty, and durst promise no more for his fellows then this; that
there was no impossibility for Papists to live in subjection, and dutiful
obedience unto the king of great Britain. For possibility it is not the
question, but for probability it is no more, then that the wind, and the sea,
light, and darkness, the Arc and Dagon, God and Mammon, the unbeliever and
the infidel shall be together. For what I pray you is it, which knits men, as
it were with chains of adamant, in love amongst themselves, and in loyalty and
obedience unto their Prince? Is it fear of punishment? Oh no, for malus est
custos diuturnitatis metus. He never reigns long, whom every man fears;
Caveat multos, quem timent singuli, let him beware of a multitude whom every
particular dreadeth. Is it hope of reward? not that neither. For that is often
frustrated, and then follows an alteration in the affections. It is neither
of these. It is religion and the true fear of God. This, this is it which knits
the heterogeneal parts, of the same kingdom unto the Prince, as the several
parts of man's body are by arteries knit, and united unto the heart, and as the
lines of a circle, though they be far distant about the circumference, yet
concur in one middle point: so must it be with them. Though they be different
about the circumference of worldly affairs, yet must they concur in one
common center of religion. A good Christian commonwealth is like unto Peter's
sheet, Act. 10.
wherein were all manner of four footed beasts, and creeping things, and fowls
of the heaven. There are in it all sorts of men. There are nobles flying aloft,
like the fowls of the heaven; there are of the baser sort, creeping as it were
below; and there are of a middle sort, men of all conditions, and callings. But
this sheet is knit together (as that was) a the four corners (the most distant
and remote parts thereof) with the unity of religion.

22. This is so plain, Arist. Pol. l. 5. c. 11.
that Aristotle gives it as an especial rule for a Tyrant, if he mean to
continue his government, to make an outward show of Religion. For such kings
(says he) as seem to be religious, are in least danger of treacherous
practices by such as are under them. Now where this unity of religion is
wanting, (as wanting it is, seeing we differ from the Papists, not in a few
circumstances, but in sundry fundamental points of Divinity) how can this knot
be made fast? Nay, seeing they are so far from counting any Protestant Prince
religious, that they count him an heretic; and the more diligent he is in
cleansing and refining his kingdom from the dregs of Romish superstition (as
our Savior Christ was in purging the law from the absurd glosses of the
Scribes and Pharisees) the greater persecutor he is holden with them to be of
the Catholic faith. Verily I see no probability, I had almost said, no
possibility, that they will hereafter prove true and dutiful subjects to the
King of Great Britain. They may well make protestations, and outward shows of
love, and duty, and obedience toward the Prince: but Lupus pilum, non ingenium
mutat, a wolf is a wolf though he be clothed in a sheep-skin; well may he
cast his old hair, but still he keeps his own nature. Shall their fair speeches
make us believe them?

Sic notus Ulysses?
Is the craft of the Romish foxes no better known unto us?

Timeo Danaos and dona ferentes.
I fear their fawning far more, then their frowning, it was but a frivolous
tale, which the people of Alexandria told Timothy, etsi non communicamus tecum,
tamen a^mamus te, although we do not communicate with thee, yet we love thee.
For how can a man love him in his heart, with whom he cannot find in his heart
to communicate?

I am in a field, in which I might course at large, but I am mindful of the
time, and will not presume too long upon your patience. Some of our worthies do
stoutly with their pens oppose themselves against these men, and I pray God
every Magistrate in his place would be as careful in unsheathing the sword of
justice against them. Habemus in eos Senatusconsultum satis (...) and grave;
Catilin. 1.
we have an act and statute strong enough (...), but daily increasing, makes me
almost say, as it follows in the Orator, habemus inclusum in tabulis, 1 Samuel
21.
tanquam gladium in vagina reconditum. It is closed in the book as a sword in
the scabbart, or (as Goliaths sword was) wrapped in a cloth behind the Ephod.
The best that I can say in this case is to use the Prophecy of the Crow in
Suetonius, (...), Suet. in Domitiano.
all will be well: Est been non potuit dicere, dixit erit.


Pliny writes that the tricks of an ape will so vex and move a Lion, Plin.
not. hist. lib. 8. cap. 16.
that he will disgorge, and cast up, whatsoever lies on his stomach. I doubt
not but their apish tricks will in time move the heart, and stomach of our
gracious, and merciful Coeur de Lion, and other Magistrates in their places, to
cast up, and show such tokens of their inward grief, as they shall have just
occasion to conceive against them; and to purge the body politic from these
noxious humors wherewith it is endangered. And without this there is no
assurance of peace. For as Jehu said unto Jehoram, when he went against the
house of Ahab: 2 King 9. 22.
is it peace Jehu? said Jehoram. What peace said the other, while the whoredoms
of thy mother Jezabel, and her witchcrafts are in great number? So say I, what
peace can be expected, as long the whoredoms of the Romish Iezabel, and her
witchcrafts, and enchanting cups, wherewith she withdraws the people from
their obedience to their Sovereign, 2 Samuel 15. 6.
and steals their hearts from him (as did Absolon the hearts of the
Israelites from David his father, are in great number. As long as the Pope can
set any foot-hold in Britain, he will bestir himself to molest the peace of our
Sion.

Et si non aliqua nocuisset, mortuus esset.
But enough (if not too much) of this subject. It is a point which I vowed to
handle; not out of any spleen to any particular person whosoever (he that sees
the thoughts of my heart, knows that I lie not) but for the love of the truth,
the zeal of Gods glory, the integrity of my conscience, and the discharge of my
duty. And herein liberavi animam meam: look ye unto it. The third proposition
follows.

23 Ye shall die.) What metal other creatures were made of, whether
immediately of nothing, or of some preexistent matter, I find no express
mention in Gods book. This I find, that man was made of a matter, and that not
gold, nor silver, pearl or precious stones, but of earth, the basest and vilest
of all the elements, yea, of the dust of the earth, even of dry dust, which is
good for nothing: that if he shall with proud Phaeton in the Poet, boast that
Apollo, God is his father, he might presently call to mind that poor Clymene,
the earth is his mother; that he was made of dust, Genesis 2. 7.
that he is but dust, and that he shall return to dust. Psalm. 103. 14.
And yet I know not how it comes to pass, but I am sure it is true, Genesis 3. 19.
that many in authority resemble the dust in no property better then one, that
as the dry dust in the streets, is with every blast of wind blown aloft into
the air: so are their hearts blown aloft, and swelled up with a windy tympanie
of their own greatness. But let them climb as high as they can, God will one
day send a shower, and lay this dust. They are but natural men; and the thread
of nature (as a Poet feigneth) is tied unto the foot of Jupiters chair: he can
loose it, when it shall please him. Though Adams wit was such, that he could
give names unto every creature, according to their natures, yet he forgot his
own name. He did not remember that he was called Adam, homo ab humo, by reason
of that affinity that was between him and the earth. These sons of Adam are
very like their old grandfather, they are witty in seeking out the names, and
properties of other creatures, but they forget their own names, and their
natures too. And this is the cause why they be so holden with pride, and
overwhelmed with cruelties. They will with Nebuchadnezzar, Isaiah 14. 13.
strive to advance themselves above the stars of God; and to match their old
grandfather, the first Adam, who though he was made of earth, yet with the
wings of pride and arrogancy would needs soar up into heaven, and care little
for resembling their elder brother, the second Adam, who took upon him our
weakness, that we might be strengthened: our poverty, that we might be
enriched; our nakedness that we might be clothed; our baseness that we might
be exalted; our mortality that we might be invested in the robe of immortality;
and was contented to descend from heaven: to earth, that he might make a way
for us, to ascend from earth to heaven. But let them secure themselves as much
as they will; their hour-glasse is continually running; Ezekiel. 18.
the tide of death will tarry no man. Our father has eaten a sour grape, and
his childrens teeth are set on edge. Our grandfather for eating of the
forbidden tree, had this sentence denounced against him; that he should return
to dust. And his children are liable unto it, till heaven and earth be renewed,
and there be no more death.

Those great and mighty Gods of the earth, Luke 16. 19.
which clothe themselves in purple and fine linen, Isaiah 5. 8.
and dwell in houses of Cedar, and add house to house, and land to land, as if
the way to heaven laid all by land, have a time appointed them, when their
insatiable desires shall be contented with a Golgotha, a place of dead men's
skulls, a little portion of the great potters field, as much as will serve to
hide, and cover a dead carcass in it. You which sit on the seat of judgment,
whom the Lord has so highly extolled, as to be called Gods, you have your
days numbered, your months determined, your bounds appointed which ye cannot
pass. It is not the ripeness of your wits, nor the dignity of your places,
nor the excellency of your learning, nor the largeness of your commission,
that can add one inch unto the thread of your days.

Pallida mors aequo pulsat pede pauperum tabernas, Hor. car. lib. 1. Od. 4.

Regumque turres --
Deaths arrow will as quickly pierce through the strong castle of a King as the
muddie wall of a country swain. Were ye wiser then Solomon, stronger then
Samson, richer then Job, mightier then the greatest Monarch of the earth,
faithfuller in your places then Samuel, that faithful Judge of Israel,

Ire tamen restat Numa quo devenit and Ancus.
This must be the conclusion; Ye must die as men, and yield your bodies to
deaths Sergeant, to be kept prisoners in the dungeon of the earth, till the
great and general assizes that shall be holden by our Savior Christ, in the
clouds of the sky, at the last day. The conclusion is most certain, howsoever
the premises be fallible, and doubtful. Seneca.
Alexander, when by his followers he was called a God, forgot that he was to
die as a man, till by a poisoned arrow he was put in mind of his mortality,
and then he confessed the truth: Vos me Deum esse dixistis, sed jam me hominem
esse sentio. You said that I was a God, but now I perceive I am but a man. And
shortly after he perceived it with a witness, when he was poisoned by
Antipater, and then enclosed in a small parcel of ground, whose aspiring mind
the whole world could not fill.

Cui satis ad votum non essent omnia terrae
Climata, Epitaph.
terra modo sufficit octo pedum. Hen. 2 Regis Angl.

He, whom the whole earth could not content, was at length contented with a
parcel of ground of eight, yea, of six foot long. Herod when upon a day he was
arrayed in royal apparel, Act. 12.
and sat on the bench, and gave such an excellent charge, that the people
cried.

-- non vox hominem sonat --
It is the voice of God, and not of man, immediately after proved neither God
nor man. For he was eaten up of worms, and gave up the Ghost. Rare examples
for the Gods of the earth, to look down into their own bosoms, and to remember
that they must die as men. It is a good custom of the Emperor of the
Abyssenes (Prester John) to have every meal, for the first dish, that comes on
his table, a dead man's skull, to put him in mind of his mortality. So was that
which was used by Philip: namely, to have a boy every day to put him in mind,
that he was to die as a man. Munst. Cosmogr.
Not much unlike was the old practice of the Egyptians, who when their Princes
went to banquet, used to bear before them the picture of a dead man, to put
them in mind of their mortality.

24. Seeing then that ye must die, study to have your accounts in readiness,
that whenever the Lord shall call you hence, he may find you provided. Be
faithful in those high rooms wherein God has placed you. 2. Chr. 19. 6.
Ye execute not the judgments of man, but of the Lord. Ask counsel therefore
of God, and weigh your proceedings in the balance of the sanctuary. Do nothing
but what God commands you, and the testimony of a good conscience will warrant
to be lawful, remembering that ye must one day (God knows how soon that day
will come) be summoned to appear before the common Judge of all flesh; who is a
burning, and consuming fire, Hab. 12. 29.
who is not blinded with secret closeness, nor corrupted with bribes* nor
moved with friends, nor allured by flatterers, nor persuaded by the importunity
of intreaters, to depart an^ hairs breadth from the course of justice: no
though these three men Noah, Daniel, and Job, should stand before him, and make
intercession in your behalf. These things remember, and do, and ye shall have
comfort in your lives, comfort at your deaths. And when your souls shall be
removed from those earthly cottages wherein they now dwell, Ezech. 14. 14.
they shall be translated into everlasting habitations, and received with this
joyful, and comfortable welcome: Mat. 25. 21.
it is well done good servants and faithful: ye have been faithful in a little,
I will make you rulers over much; enter into your masters joy.

25. Like men] It is implied in the conclusion of my text, that it is the lot
and condition of all men to die. And therefore as it concerns magistrates, so
it concerns all others to provide themselves for their end, Eccl. 11. 3.
because as the tree falls, so it lies: that is, as the day of death shall leave
them, so the day of judgment shall find them.

Remember this ye that are to be witnesses, Application. 1. to witnesses, etc.
for giving testimony unto the truth, and jurers for giving a verdict according
to the truth. And as you love and reverence the truth it self, as ye desire
the benefit of your Christian brethren, which ye should love as your selves, as
ye wish the glory of God, which ye should tender more then your selves; let it
be a forcible motive unto you to deal uprightly in every cause with every man,
without declining to the right hand, or to the left, then shall ye sanctify
the name of God, by whom ye do swear to speak truly, to deal truly: ye shall
give occasion to good men to praise God for you, and ye shall not need to be
ashamed to meet God in the face, when he shall call you to a reckoning for your
doings. But on the other side, if rewards shall blind you, or fear enforce you,
or pity move you, or partiality sway you, or any respect whatsoever draw you
to smother the truth, and favor an evil cause: ye pearce your selves through
with many darts. For first you are false witnesses against your neighbor:
secondly, ye are thieves, ye rob him of his right: thirdly, ye are murderers,
ye kill him in his body, or in his name, or in his maintenance: fourthly, and
which is worst of all, ye take the name of your God in vain, yea, as much as in
you lies, ye take his godhead from him, and make him who is the truth from
everlasting, to be all one with the devil, who is a liar from the beginning. If
ye must be countable unto God, when he shall call you hence, for every idle
word that goes out of your mouths; and if the least ungodly thought of your
hearts, in the rigor of Gods justice, deserve eternal death, how shall ye be
able to stand in judgment under this ponderous Chaos of so many crying sins. I
cannot prosecute this point, only for conclusion I say with Moses, behold this
day have I set before you life and death, blessing and cursing, Deuteronomy. 30. 19.
20.
choose life, and ye shall live. If not, I pronounce unto you this day, ye
shall surely perish. The mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

26. You, To Lawyers Atturnies, etc.
whose profession is to open the causes in controversy, and by your knowledge
in the laws to distinguish between right and wrong, truth and falsehood,
remember that ye must die. And therefore I beseech you in the fear of God, to
study to make the cause of your clients sure, as that ye do not in the mean
time forget S. Peter's counsel, 2 Pet. 1. 10.
to make your own election sure.

I urge this the rather, because ( -- absit reverentia vero) I will speak the
truth in despite of all scoffs, and I hope such as are ingenious will bear
with my plainness, Plut. Apot.
if as Philip said of the Macedonians, I call a boat a boat, and a spade a
spade; because it seems to be much neglected by many of your profession, who
with Martha trouble themselves about many businesses, but anum necessari^m, to
meet Christ, and talk with him, they scarce remember it. I remember the saying
of Demades touching the Athenians, when they refused to make Alexander one of
their Gods, and Cassander (who was his successor) threatened that unless they
would do it, he would presently overthrow their city: the Athenians (said
Demades) have reason to look to themselves, lest, while they are too curious
about heaven, they lose the earth. But these men have need to look to
themselves, lest while they trouble themselves too much about the earth they
lose heaven: by whose means especially it is effected, that our courts, do too
much resemble the Lions den, which howsoever other beasts in simplicity went
flocking on heaps unto, yet the fox, that found by experience how others sped,
durst not come near it.

-- Quia me vestigia terrent ( said she)
Omnia te adversum spectantia nulla retrorsum.
All comes to them, little from them: they have as attractive a force for
silver, Hom. Iliad. l. 6.
as the loadstone has for iron. Glaucus made no good market with Diomedes,
when he changed his golden armor, for armor of brass: but many clients
complain that they meet with worser merchants, who for a pu^se full of angels
give them nothing but a black box full of papers. Procrastinations, and
unnecessary delays, for filling of the lawyers coffers, and pilling of the
poor clients, is a fault which I have glanced at heretofore, and might a
thousand times hereafter ere ever it be reformed. For never was it more spoken
against then now, and never was it so much practiced as now. Well fare the old
Athenian laws, which (as Anacharsis once said) were like unto Spider-webs,
that catched the little Flies, and let the Waspe, and the Be, and the Beetle
burst though them: in respect of them that hold Waspe, and Be, and Beetle and
all, and scarce any can burst through them. But what do I now? Condemn I the
law? I do wrong. Is the law sin? says Paul (he speaks of the moral law) Nay
the law is holy, Romans 7. 6, 7, 12, 14.
and just, and good, but I am carnal, sold under sin. So say I, is our law
sin? Nay our law is just, and good. Here is the breakneck of all: too many of
our Solliciters, Atturnies, and learned Scribes, are merely carnal and sold
under sin, using it not to that end for which it is ordained, the glory of
God, and the peace of the commonwealth. But as the fowler does his net, for
catching of plovers to enrich themselves withal: making that which should be
for the common good, a Monopoly for themselves, a profession of mockery, and
a mere shop of most horrible, and detestable covetousness.

But it is the worst thriving in the world to rise with an other man's fall. It
was a short, but a sharp quip, which a captive gave unto Pompey the great,
Nostra misiriaes Magnus, It is our misery that gave thee thy surname. It is so
in this case, Nostra miseria es Magnus, may the client say to his counselor.
As the swelling of the spleen argues the consumption of other parts: so the
enriching of the lawyer, the impoverishing of the client. If then his cause be
good (alas) why is it never ended? If it be naught, why is it still defended?
If the cause be naught, the defense is worse then naught. Understand me
rightly: it may be a Counselors hap to be a speaker in an ill cause, and yet
he not worthy any blame. The party may misinform him in the truth of the cause.
Judgments in the like case may be different, or some other circumstance may
deceive him. But where it plainly appears to be naught indeed, by nimblenesse
of wit, and volubility of tongue, to smooth it over with colorable
probabilities, thereby (as far as thou can) to give the truth an overthow,
this is but to guild over a rotten post, to call good evil, and evil good, to
let loose Barabbas, and destroy Jesus, to make the devil, who is a fiend of
darkness, to appear in the likeness of an angel of light, and therefore worse
then naught. Better with Papinian to have thy head parted from thy shoulders,
then to be a common Advocate in such causes.

There is a kind of men in the world, who though they know before they begin
their suits, or at least before they have waded far in them, as well as they
know their own names, and the number of their fingers, that the matter which
they prosecute, by extremity of law, is manifest wrong: yet either out of a
malicious humor, to give their adversaries an overthrow, or because their
ability is such, that it will hold them out, or because others do join with
them, and make it a common quarrel, or because they love ( Salamander-like) to
be broyling in the fire of contention, can by no means be dissuaded from their
wicked enterprise. This matter so wickedly, and mischievously begun, one
counselor or other, (that loves (with the Eele-catchers in the old comedy)
to be fishing in muddy waters, and desires alife to bathe himself in any pool
that an Angel shall trouble) must manage. He must find some probable title in
the law for it: he must as long as the law will afford him any kind of weft,
weave it out in length, and when it fails, he must Spider-like spinne it out of
his own bowels. He must prolong judgment, and defer the matter from one day
to another, from one term to another, from one year to another, from one court
to another; till at length he who has both God, and the law, and a good
conscience on his side, for very weariness, be enforced to give it over, or be
brought to extreme beggary, that he can follow his suit no longer, or till
Atropos have cut in sunder the thread of his days, and so made an end of the
quarrel. Well were it for the Commonwealth, if such seditious quarrellers, and
make-bates were by some severe punishment, taught not to delude justice, and
oppress the truth, that others by their example might be terrified from such
wicked attempts, and that honest and godly men might live in more peace, and
tranquillity. If my words do sound harsh to some of my hearers, I must say of
them as Hierom says of some in his epistle to Rusticus, dum mihi irascuntur,
suam indicant conscientiam, Hieron.
multoque pejus de se, quam de me judicant. If they be offended with me, they
bewray their own guilty consciences, and have a far worse opinion of
themselves, then they have of me. I name none, I know none, I speak in general
against sin, 1 John. 3. 20.
and if any man's conscience condemn him, 1 John. 5. 14.
God is greater then his conscience, and knows all things, and therefore let
him go his way, and sin no more lest a worse thing happen unto him. My hope
is, that all you are of a better disposition. But I kow ye are all men, and
therefore subject to the like passions and infirmities that others are. Let me
therefore once again (to return to that from which I have a little digressed)
beseech you in all your pleadings and legal proceedings to remember that
account that ye must make unto God, when ye shall be called hence. Remember
that there is woe denounced against them that call good evil, Isa. 5. 20.
and evil good. Remember the end of your profession: it is not to sow
dissension, to fill your own coffers, to make a mart to utter your own wares,
to show your ready wits, and voluble tongues, in speaking probably of every
subject good or bad: but to help every man to his right, to cut away strife and
contention, and to restore peace and unity in the commonwealth, that all the
Members of the body politic may be of one heart, Ephesians. 4. 4, 5, 6.
and one soul. Even as there is one hope of our vocation, one Lord, one faith,
one baptism, one God, one father of all, which is above all, and through all,
and in us all. Remember that our God is called the God of peace, 2 Cor. 13. 11.
his Gospel the Gospel of peace, Ephesians. 6. 15.
his ministers the Ambassadors of peace; Isa. 52. 7.
his natural Son the Author of peace, Coloss. 1.
his adopted sons, the children of peace: if then ye will be the sons of the
most highest, Ephesians. 4. 3.
your endeavor must be this, to preserve the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace. 2 Timothy 2. 7.
Consider what I say, and the Lord give you wisdom, and understanding in all
things.

Finally to speak unto all (and so to make an end of all) seeing that we are
all Tenants at will, 3. To all.
and must be thrust out of the doors, of these earthly Tabernacles, whenever
it shall please our great landlord to call us hence, let us have our loins
girt, and our lamps continually burning, that whenever the Lord shall call us
hence, in the evening or in the morning, at noonday, or at midnight, he may
find us ready, Happy is the man whom his Master when he comes shall find
watching. Let us every day sum up our accounts with God. Ita aedificemus quasi
semper victuri, ita vivamus quasi cras morituri: Hierom.
let us build as if we would ever live, but let us live as if we were ever
ready to dye. Then may every one of us in the integrity of heart, and syncerity
of conscience, when the time of his departing is at hand, say with the blessed
Apostle, If have fought a good fight and have finished my course. 2 Timothy 4. 7,
8.
I have kept the faith, from hence forth is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness, which God the righteous Judge shall give me at that day: Unto
this God, one eternal, omnipotent, and unchangeable Jehovah in essence, three
persons in manner of subsistence, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, be
ascribed all honor, and glory, power, might, and majesty, both now and
forever more. Amen.

Galathians 3. 10. As many as are of the works of the Law, are under the
Cuurse, for it is written, cursed is every man that continues not in all
things which are written in the book of the law to do them.
IN which words observe two things.

1. A Doctrine. 2. A Reason of the doctrine in the former part, the reason in
the latter.
I have spoken of the doctrine: I purpose now to speak only of the reason, for
it is written, etc. wherein observe three things, 1. It is to no purpose to
begin a good course of life, unless thou hold it out, and continue till the
end. 2. Its not enough for a Christian to perform obedience to some of Gods
precepts, and to bear with himself wilfully in the breach of others. Cursed is
he that continues not in all. 3. That the rule of our obedience, is no
unwritten tradition, but the written Word of God, that are written in the book
of the Law.


But before I speak of these, I gather from the connection this conclusion,

That no man can in this life perfectly fulfill the Will of God: it follows
thus, because as it is written, Cursed, etc. So it is written, Romans 7.
This do and thou shall live, Romans 8* 7.
and the man that does these things shall live in them: So that the Apostle
takes this for granted or else his argument is of no force: this is evidently
confirmed by many places of Scripture, 1 Kings 8. 49. Eccles. 7. 22. Psalm. 143.
2. Isa. 64. 6. Acts. 15. 10. Acts. 13. 39. 1 Ioh. 1. 8.

2. It is confirmed by reason: the first is drawn from the corruption of nature
which is in the best Christians; from which we may thus argue, he that
consists of flesh as well as of Spirit cannon fulfill the Law, no not in his
best actions, but the best Christian that ever lived, consists of flesh as
well as of Spirit, therefore he cannot fulfill the law. The minor has been
formerly proved. The Major is plain, for as he is carnal, he is sold under
sin. The wisdom thereof is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the
Law of God, neither indeed can be: Thus it is proved from the the death of
Christ; for if righteousness be by the works of the Law, then Christ dyed
without a cause, Gal. 3. 21. and if they which are of the law be heirs, then
says is made void, and the promise is made of no effect, Romans 4. 14. for he
came to fulfill the law, Matthew. 5. 17. which was impossible to be fulfilled of
us, in as much as it was weak because of the flesh: Therefore God sent his
son in the similitude of sinful flesh, Romans 8. 3. But the Romish Sophisters
answer, that this makes against the Pelagians, which were of opinion, that a
man might by the strength of nature fulfill the law; not against them which
hold that this ability comes from grace, and that the good works of a
Christian proceed from Christ, as the juice in the branches proceeds from the
Vine.

To this I answer*

1. That neither the Pelagians, nor these against whom the Apostle disputes,
did altogether exclude grace, and therefore if it be strong against them, it
will be of force against the Papists too. 2. Their answer is grounded upon a
false supposition as that the works of a Christian do proceed wholly from
Christ; for, they they do in part proceed from the flesh, and therefore though
as they are the works of the holy Ghost (who applies unto the faithful the
force and efficacy of Christ's resurrection, they be perfect, yet in respect of
the flesh they be stained and polluted. 3. Christ died for us, not by any
inherent, but by his imputed righteousness (which righteousness is applied and
appropriated unto us principally by the holy Ghost, instrumentally by faith,
whereby we are, incorporate into Christ, and so partakers of his
righteousness we might be justified.
I think Abraham was as holy a man as Ignatius the father of Jesuits, or
Dominicus and Franciscus, the founders of Friars, in whom says Bellarmine,
their very adversaries can find nothing that deserves reprehension, praeter
nimiam sanctitatem, save their too much holiness; and yet it was not his good
works, but his faith for which he was counted righteous. I know that this
imputative righteousness, is counted with them a putative and imaginary
righteousness, but herein the injury is not done unto us, but unto him who
says, to him that works not, but believes, in him that justifies the
ungodly, his faith is imputed for righteousness. Even as David declares the
blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputes righteousness without works,
saying, Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes no sin, we say that
faith was imputed to Abraham for righteousness: now it is not written for him
only, that it was imputed unto him for righteousness, but also for us to whom
it shall be imputed for righteousness, etc.

A third reason, to prove that no man can fulfill the Law, is because all have
need to say, forgive us our debts: who more excellent amongst the old people
(says Austin) then the holy Priests, and yet the Lord commanded them that they
should offer sacrifice for their sins: who amongst the new people holier then
the Apostles? and yet the Lord commanded them to say in their prayers forgive
us our debts. To this Bellarmine answers, that we may say forgive us our
debts for venial sins, which in this life we seldom or never want.

But I object. Either these sins which they call venial are against the law
of God or not: if the former, then the faithful do not fulfill the Law; if
the the latter, then they are not debita, and therefore we need not say in
respect of them, forgive us our debts.

This assertion is further confirmed by the testimonies of Hierom and Austin.
Hierom against the Pelagians lib. 2. I confess that there are just men, but
that there are any without sin, this I deny; again, behold the Apostles, and
all the faithful cannot do that which they would. Austin de spiritu and
litera cap. ultimo, Siquanto major notitia, tanto major dilectio, profecto
quantum nunc deest dilectioni tantum perficiendiae justitiae deesse credendum
est: and de perfecta iustitia, tunc erit plena iustitia, quando plena sanitas,
tunc plena sanitas, quando plena charitas, tunc plena charitas, quando
videbimus eum sicuti est: neque enim erit quod addetur ad dilectionem; cum
sides, pervenerit ad visionem. And in the same book, as long as there remains
any carnal concupiscence, we cannot love God with all our heart. Now what
these Fathers maintained, was the opinion of the Church at that time. Bernard
came long after them, when the Church had gathered much corruption, and was
become like Glaucus the Sea God, who having sundry parts of his body worn and
consumed by beating upon the rocks, and the shelves, has the same parts
repaired with shells, and wreck: yet what was his opinion in this point, we may
gather out of his fiftieth Sermon upon the Canticles: Si placet tibi de
effectuali charitate datum fuisse mandatum, non inde contendo, dummodo and
acquiescas tu mihi, quod minime in ista vita ab aliquo homine possit, vel
potuerit impleri.

Thus we have proved our assertion by reason, by Scripture, and by testimony
of the ancient Church. Contra rationem nemo fobrius, contra Scripturas nemo
Christianus, contra Ecclesiam nemo pacificus senserit. Against reason no sober
man, against the Scriptures no Christian man, against the Church no peaceable
man will judge.

Thus much concerning the connection: Now I proceed to the first proposition.

It is to no purpose to begin a good course of life, unless thou hold it out,
and continue till the end.

For to forsake sin for a time, and to return again unto it, is as ill as
not to forsake it at all. If the righteous turn away from his righteousness,
and commit iniquity, and do according to all the abominations that the wicked
man does, all the righteousness that he has done shall not be metioned, but
in his transgressions that he has committed, and in his sin that he has
sinned, in them he shall die, Ezech. 14. 24. nay, it is far worse, for if
after they have escaped the filthiness of the world, they be yet entangled
again therein, their latter end is worse then their beginning, for it had been
better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, then after they
have known it, to tu^ne aside from the commandments given unto them, 2 Pet.
2. 20, 21. And if we sin willingly after we have received the knowledge of
the truth, there remains no sacrifice for sin, but a fearful looking for
of judgment, and of violent fire, which shall devour the adversaries, Heb.
10. 26. And the Apostle elsewhere says, that it is impossible for such to
repent. Judas run well, but Satan hindered him, he cast before him a golden
Apple, which brought him out of his way; it had been better for Judas to have
been a stranger unto Christ as Pilate was, then to have forsaken him after he
was chosen, for though both of them did most grievously transgress in that
they put to death the Lord of life, yet. Judas that delivered him had the
greater sin, John 19. 11. as it is in bodily diseases; so it is in the
sickness of the soul: if the sick person be well guided, oftentimes there is
hope of recoverie; but if while he is in recovering, he by negligence fall into
a relapse, his disease is more dangerous then it was before, and for the most
part proves incureable. Even so in spiritual sicknesses, those that sleep in
their sins may be awaked, those that are sick with sin may be cured, yea,
those that are dead in their sins may be raised, but if after they be awaked
they begin to snort again, if after they be cured, they fall sick again, if
after they be raised they die again (this is a spiritual relapse) their case
is dangerous, if not altogether desperate. The reasons hereof are diverse.

1. Because such men refuse the means of salvation, when they, have been
offered unto them, and therefore their sin is greater then if they had been
hood-winked with a vizard of ignorance, which though it does not altogether
excuse, yet does it extenuate the offense. This made the Jews more
inexcusable, in that when Christ offered himself unto them, they rejected him.
This is the condemnation (says our Savior) that light is come into the:
world, and men love darkness rather then light. Again, if you were blind you
should not have sin, but now ye say we see; therefore your sin remains.

2. Such men commonly sin upon presumption, neglecting the commandments,
contemning the threatenings, abusing the patience and long-suffering of Almighty
God; now these sins of all others (that great sin against the holy Ghost
excepted) are most pernicious, and therefore David prays God that he will
keep him from presumptious sins.

3. Such men do crucify unto themselves the Son of God, and make a mock of
him, they tread under foot the blood of the Covenant as an unholie thing, they
make Christ like Sisiphus in the Fable, to begin his work of redemption anew,
after that he has once finished it, as if the sick person, after that his
Physician has recovered his health, should of purpose eat such meats as would
renew his disease, and that to this end, that he may put his Physician to a new
labor, and try his skillin recovering him again, or as if a banckrupt after
that his friend out of his love has discharged all his debts, and undertaken
to be his surety, he should of purpose run upon a new score, in hope that
his friend will pay it again; and therefore (this may be the fourth reason)
the Lord gives them over unto reprobate minds, and vile affections, to do
those things that are not convenient, and to commit iniquity even with
greediness. Now as when the Pillar upon which the house stands is taken away,
the house must needs fall, and when the Pilot is removed from the Ship, the
Ship will be dashed upon rocks and shelves, and at length sink: even so when
the Lord substracteth his graces from them, they presently fall and plunge
themselves headlong into the gulf of perdition. Hitherto may be added, that
those who have once been dispossessed of Satan, and have begun to embrace the
truth, shall of all others be most assaulted by Satan, and to be inflamed with
his fiery darts, then he enters in, and keeps possession more strongly then
he did before. When the unclean spirit is gone from a man (says our Savior
Christ) he walks through dry places, seeking rest, and when he finds none,
then he says, I willreturne into my house from whence I came, which if he find
empty, swept and garnished (ready to receive him) then goes he and takes
seven other spirits worse then himself, and they enter in and dwell there, and
the latter end of that man is worse then the beginning.

Think upon this whosoever thou art, which have begun to leave the world, and
profess thy self a scholar in Christ's school, beware of backsliding, all
downfals are dangerous, be not weary of well-doing, but (with the blessed
Apostle) forget that which is behind, and strive to obtain that which is
before, remember Lots wife when she turned her eyes back toward Sodom, she
became a Pillar of salt, this came upon her for an ensample, and is written to
admonish thee, that when thou art fled out of the Sodom of sin, which is
ready every moment, to call for fire and brimstone from heaven, thou should
not with her look back but (with Lot) hasten unto the hills. The Poet fableth
of Orpheus, that with his melodious harmony, he brought his wife out of hell,
but when by the way he looked back toward the place whence she was brought, he
lost her. In vain does Orpheus (I mean the Minister of Gods word by warbling
upon the ten stringed harp of the law, bring thee home from hell, if in the
midst of the way thou turn back again; it is to no purpose for Moses to lead
thee through the Wilderness toward the promised Land, if thou long after the
flesh pots of Goshen, and account more of the stinking garlic and onions of
Egypt, then of the milk and honey of Canaan; it is a trick of the most
unclean beasts to return to their filthiness, the dog takes up his vomit
after he has once cast it up, the Sow returns to the mierie puddle, after
she has been once washed. The Spouse in the Canticles is of another humor, I
have washed my feet, how shall I defile them, I have put off my coat, how shall
I put it on? she is married unto Christ, how shall she play the whore with
others, and so forsake her first love? It is not for a Christian to imitate
Demas, first to make profession of Christ's Gospel, and afterward to revolt
from it, and embrace the present world; or with the Galathians, to begin with
the Spirit, and end in the flesh; or to be like King Joash, who did uprightly
in the sight of the Lord all the days of Iehoida the Priest, and repaired the
house of the Lord, but afterward becam an Idolatour, and slew the Prophet
Zacharias, Iehoida's son, or to be like Hercules in the Poet, who when he was a
young child overcame a Serpent which set upon him in his cradle, when he was
come to man's estate, he overcame a Lion, and sundry other Monsters, but in his
old age, he became slave unto Iole a drab, who had him at her command;
whereupon his wife does thus complain, Coepisti melius quam desinis, ultima
primis cedunt, dissimile hic vir, and llle puer; we must not in our young
years be able to kill a Serpent (that wily Serpent, who deceived our old
Grandmother) and afterward a Lion (that roaring Lion, who goes about seeking
whom he may devour) and in the end fall in love with a Iole, the world,
Satan's Concubine, whereby he seeks to entangle us, as the Philistines by
Dalilah, beguiled Sampson. Nebuchadnezzars image is no good picture of a true
Christian, to have a head of gold, and feet of clay, a good beginning and a bad
ending: such sacrifices offered unto Juno are little accepted with Jehovah; the
first year he offered a golden sheep, the next year he sacrificed one of
silver, and the third year one of brass: Such Mandrabuli there are too too
many now a days, of whom the old proverb may be verified; young Saints and old
Devils; like those, 2 Timothy 3. 13. which wax worse and worse, deceiving and
being deceived, first professors and then persecutors: first Apostles, and then
Apostates. Try and examine thine own soul in this point, and be not partial in
this examination: have thou sometime loathed the world, and the vanities
thereof, and counted them but loss, and dross, and dung, that thou may win
Christ? have thou once abhorred such sins, as thy corrupt nature is most
inclined unto, and can thou find in thine heart to fall in love with them
again? To instance in some particulars; do thou delight in swearing and
blaspheming the name of God, a sin which thou have sometime detested? have
thou sometime had a longing and hungring desire after the word of God? and do
thou now not greatly thirst after it, nor esteem more of his Ministers, then
of other men? do thou now take pleasure in dallying and wantonness, in
gluttony and drunkenness, in envy and maliciousness, in oppression and
covetousness, or in any other vice which thou have once forsaken? Thy case is
dangerous, this is a spiritual relapse, it had been as good, nay, better for
thee, never to have trodden in the path that leads to heaven, then thus to
turn out of the way: the more heedfull must thou be in looking to thy steps,
and in persevering in that godly course, which thou once have begun, and not
with the Israelites to start aside like a broken bow in the time of temptation,
nor to be like the children of Ephraim, which being harnished and carrying
bows, turned themselves back in the day of battle.

Every block that satan can cast in the way of Hypocrites, will make them run
out of the way as did Balaams ass, when the Angel stood before him with a
drawn sword in his hand. Is the Gospel of Christ ready to be persecuted? then
there is a Lion in the way, they will walk no further; is not the profession of
the Gospel like a ladder, whereby they may climb unto some preferment? then
they will bid it adieu, Discede pietas, religion be gone, haec non successit,
alia tentanda est via, this way proved not so well as was hoped, another course
must be taken in hand, worldly pleasures on the right hand and on the left, are
sufficient motives to draw them aside, they must needs divert out of their
course to gather a poesy of these flowers, though by that means they lose the
goal of everlasting felicity; but a true Christian must be constant in his
course, he must resemble the sun which comes forth as a Bridegroom out of
his chamber, and rejoices as a Giant, to run his course; and yet in one
thing, he must be unlike the sun, he ascends above the horizon in the morning
and travaileth to the meridian, where he shows himself in his best strength
at noonday, but from that hour he declineth, and casts his beams more and
more obliquelie, waxing faint by degrees, till at length he hide himself under
the western horizon: a Christian must not be like the afternoon sun, he must
still strive toward the top of Heaven, he must never decline: let all the
powers of Hell stand in his way, they shall never make him run away, perhaps
they will beat him down on his knees, but then he falls to prayer; if they
bring him to the ground, then he is humbled, and so Antaeus like stronger then
he was before; perhaps they may violenly drive him backwards; but yet he will
strive against them, and pass through the midst of them, as our Savior passed
amongst the Jews, when they would have stoned him, dangers before him, honors
and worldly preferments behind him, riches on the right hand, pleasures on the
left hand, all these shall not make him discontinue his course, but with
greater speed to fly toward Heaven, as a Dove into the window, he must keep a
straight course like the two kine that carried the Arc from Ekron to
Bethshemesh, and turned neither to the right hand nor to the left.

Thus have we seen what a danger it is for a man to fall into such sins as he
has once left, to drink the deadly poison of iniquity after he has once
been recovered, to run into the danger of his spiritual enemies, after he
has been once cured of his wounds that were inflicted upon him, it may here be
demanded, whether a man relapsing into sin, may repent, and so be again
received into Gods favor. Montanus the Heretic denied all hope of salvation
after a relapse. This Heresy was by the Novatians, who for their uprightness
did proudly term themselves Cathari, Puritans: The Donatists who were the
right Cathari, because they deemed their Church love without spot or wrinkle,
refused to communicate, with such as they suspected to be polluted with any
sin. Tertullian who was much addicted to the heresies of the Montanists,
insomuch that in his old age he became a Montanist, grants, that a man may
once repent after a relapse, but no more then once. And of this opinion says
B. Rhenanus were many old writers, and amongst others, St. Austin; but Austin
means only that public repentance, which he calls humilima poenitentia,
and Lombard and the schoolmen term poenitentia solennis, which was imposed
only for such grievous offenses, as whereby a City or Commonwealth was
greatly scandalized.

And the reason why it was but once granted by the Church, was, lest the
medicine being made too common should less profit the sick, as Austin speaks
in an Epistle written to Macedonius, in which Epistle he plainly averreth, that
a sinner relapsing after this solemn repentance, and afterward repenting of
his fall, may obtain a pardon at the hands of God. But we have a better
witness of this point, then Austin, even God that cannot lie, who by the mouth
of his Prophet has promised, that Whenever the wicked turns from his
wickedness that he has done, and shall do that which is lawful and right,
he shall save his soul and live. And therefore be not dismayed, thou faint and
drooping soul, which have fallen into such sins, as were sometimes hateful in
thine eyes. It may be that Satan will object the place of the Apostle before
cited, if we sin willingly, etc. for answer whereof thou must know that the
Apostle speaks not of every kind of backsliding; But

First, Of that which is committed with a full consent of the Will ( if we
sin willingly) and this the child of God after his conversion can never
commit, because he is partly flesh, and partly Spirit: so that though the
carnal part be still ready to draw him unto most heinous and gross sins,
yet the Spirit is at his elbow, ready to pull him back again; it is unto him
as the Angel was to John when he was ready to worship him, see thou do it not
said the Angel, see thou do it not said the Spirit; or as Abigail was to
David, who met him in the way as he was going to kill Naball, and dissuaded him
from that bloody fact: and though it do not still prevail, by reason that
the flesh is like an headstrong horse, that can hardly be curbed, yet it
prevails thus far, that the Will gives not his absolute consent to the
committing of such sins; and again the Apostle means, not every sin
wherein the Will yeildeth his full assent (for without doubt the elect before
their conversion fall into such sins) but of a general, malicious, and
purposed revolting from the known truth, and a proud and scornsul rejecting of
the blood of Christ, once offered for sin, such as was in Julian, who first
professed Christianity, but afterward became a most bloody Persecutor of
Christians, even till his last gasp: so that when he was deadly wounded with
an Arrow, and ready to yield up the Ghost, he thrust his hand into the wound,
and threw his blood into the air, crying blasphemously against the Son of
God, Vicisti Galilee, O Galilean thou have overcome. So that this place is
understood of sin against the holy Ghost, which shall not be forgiven in this
world, nor in the world to come, of which also the Apostle speaks, Heb. 6. 4
5. 6. it is impossible that they which were once lightened, and have tasted of
the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the holy Ghost, if they fall away
shall be renewed by repentance. In which places, if every relapse, were
understood; then who should be saved, for the dearest of Gods Children have
sliden backwards, after their conversion. Lot into incest, Noah into
drunkenness, David to murder, and adultery, Solomon to Idolatry, Peter to
forswearing his Lord and Master.

2. The consideration whereof made Constantine bid Acesius a Novatian Bishop
(who refused to communicate with such as had fallen after baptism) set a
ladder for himself to climb into Heaven, noting his intolerable pride, as if
he and his followers had guided their feet so well, that they had never slid
after baptism.

It is very dangerous to commit such sins as have been once left and forsaken
(as has been already proved) but yet Gods Children have no particular
privilege. For First, their inbre^d corruption; though it be quelled yet it is
not killed. And therefore it is still ready to give them the foil, and carry
them captives to the Law of sin; again, the causes remain, which may move God
to give over his Children a little unto themselves, and to permit them to fall,
as namely to humble them, to make them more earnestly implore his help to show
unto them their own misery in relapsing, and to make known his own mercy in
forgiving, but still he is ready to receive them again, if they return unto
him by repentance. For if he would have us to forgive our Brethren their
trespasses (when they turn unto us and ask forgiveness) not seven times, but
seventy times seven times, that is, as often as they offend us: much more will
the Lord, out of the bottomless depth of his mercy, pardon his children when
they fall, if afterward they return unto him by earnest and unfeigned
repentance. And thus much in effect, the Novatians did at length confess,
holding that such as sinned after baptism, were not to be admitted into the
congregation; but yet they should be exhorted to repentance, that so they might
obtain remission of sin of God, who alone can forgive sins, meaning that if
after their relapse they should repent, the Lord would have mercy upon them:
and this is the difference betwixt Gods children and revolting hypocrites;
these when they fall, they fall away, but Gods Elect though they fall seven
times, yet they rise as often.

The fall of the wicked is like the fall of Eli from his chair, or of Iesabel
from the window, it is a breakneck fall, but the fall of the godly is like unto
the fall of Eutychus, though they fall from the third loft, yet they are taken
up (though dead) and some good Paul by embracing them with the sweet promises
of his Gospel does revive them: the wicked are like to the Raven which (as the
vulgar corruptly reads it) went out of the Arc and returned not, they go out
of the Arc (the Church) and return not, but feed upon the carrion of this
world; but the godly are like the Dove, they fly sometimes out of the Arc (the
church of God) yet when they find no rest for the soles their feet, they
return again with an olive branch in their mouths, like the Dove, I mean with
an humble confession of their offenses, and earnest and hearty prayers unto
Almighty God; which when they do, then Noah, the true Preacher of
righteousness, will put forth his hand, and again receive them into the arc.
And therefore let not the weak Christian be discouraged with the remembrance
of such sins as he has fallen into after his justification, as if now there
were no hope of pardon, but let him prostrate himself before the throne of
God, and with many bitter groans cry after this or the like manner. Father I
have sinned against Heaven and against thee, I dare not lift up my impure eyes
unto the heavens, the seat of thy majesty. I am one whom thou have vouchsafed
to adopt to be thy son, and yet I have never reverenced thee, as a loving
Father, but like a stranger have transgressed thy precepts, and neglected thy
statutes, so that I am most unworthy to be called thy son. I am one for whom
thou have given thine own, and only son, Christ Jesus, God and man, the very
brightness of thy glory, the engraven form of thy person, the essential word
by which thou made all things, and yet I have been unmindfull of so great a
benefit, I have rejected the sweet promises of thy sons Gospel, I have denied
the faith. I have sinned, Father, I have sinned against Heaven and against
thee, I am no more worthy to be called thy son. I am one whom thou out of the
bottomless depth of thy mercy (many others of better desert being still
leftin darkness) have illuminated with the light of thy word, have called unto
faith and repentance, have ingrafted into the true Vine; when I was a wild
branch, thou have made me partaker of thy holy sacraments, and yet these
inestimable Jewels, these heavenly treasures, these rich indowments I have set
at naught, and trodden under foot: I have sinned Father, I have sinned against
Heaven and against thee, I am no more worthy to be called thy son. I am one
whom thou have washed with the blood of thy dear son, whom thou have
restored to newness of life, and yet I have returned like a dog to my vomit,
and with the Sow to the wallowing in the mire: to thee therefore, to thee
belongs righteousness, but unto me belongs nothing but shame, and confusion
of face* yet O my God, the greater my offenses are, the more earnestly I
implore thy help and the more shall thy mercy appear, if thou pardon and
forgive them: I have polluted and defiled all my ways, thou O Lord Jesus which
art purity it self, which came into this world to save sinners (whereof I
am chief) wash my filthiness, revive my deadness, quicken my dullness, awake my
drousiness, kindle my zeal, increase my faith; Lord Jesus I fly unto thee, my
soul gaspeth after thee as a thirsty land. Peter denied thee, and thou did
receive him again, the Apostles forsook thee, and yet thou forgavst them; Paul
persecuted thee, and yet thou did receive him to mercy: David did
grievously trespass, and yet thou O God had pity and compassion upon him,
the Israelites oftentimes provoked thee, and yet thou did in thy mercy
forgive them, thy love is not abated, thy bowels of compassion are not
lessened, the bottomlesse-Ocean of thy mercy is not dried; thou have
protested, and made it to be proclaimed by thy Herald the Prophet, that thou will not the death of a sinner, but that he turn unto thee and live. Lord, I
turn unto thee, receive me to mercy, let thy favorable countenance once
again shine upon me. And when his heavenly Father shall hear these, and
perceive that they proceed from an humble and contrite heart, presently he will
have compassion upon such a prodigal Child, and fall on his neck and kiss
him, and bring forth his best Robe, even the Robe of Christ's righteousness,
and put it upon him, and put a Ring on his finger, and shoes on his feet.

Thus far of the first Proposition; the second follows, It is not enough for
a Christian to perform obedience to some of Gods precepts, and to bear with
himself wilfully in the breach of others: Cursed is he that continues not in
all.

There were some of opinion (as says Lombard) that a man might truly repent
of one sin, and obtain pardon for the same, and yet continue in another; but
these did never rightly understand the nature of mortification, which requires
a detestation and forsaking of all sin, and not a paring away of some, which
may best be spared: as we cannot at the same time look with one eye into
Heaven, and another unto the earth, so may we not in somethings serve God, and
in other things be servants of sin: when a man sees his house on fire, he
will not quench some part of the flame, and let the rest be burning, but he
will use all possible means to extinguish all the fire, lest peradventure if
one spark be left, it spread abroad, and consume the whole building. Sin is
as dangerous to a man's soul as fire in the chimny top is dangerous to the
house: he that would avoid the danger, must not cast water in some corner, not
meddling with the rest but he must do his best to quench it all, and not
willingly leave one spark remaining, lest it spread abroad, and he at the
length be burned with unquenchable fire. Christ never healed any man, but he
healed him all. Mary Magdalen was possessed with seven Devils, Christ did not
cast out six, leaving the seventh, but he cast them out all. And when a Legion
of Devils did possess one man, he did not deliver him that was possessed from
some of them, but from them all; to teach us (as the Author of the book of
true and false repentance, which goes under Austins name, does moralize the
story) that he would not have us to forsake some of our sins, but leave them
all, Whosoever shall keep the whole Law (says James) and yet fails in one
point, he is guilty of all: which place Austin understands of love, which is
the fulfilling of the law: this Exposition is good; for he that coveteth or
steals, or commits adultery, loves not his Neighbor as himself, and he
that loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has
not seen. Now of these two hang the whole law and the Prophets. But I suppose
that the meaning of James is rather this, that God would have us to keep the
whole Law, and to leave no commandment great or small unobserved. This
exposition James seems to approve in the next words, for he that said, Thou
shall not commit adultery, said also, Thou shall not kill, now though thou
do not commit adultery, yet if thou killest, thou art a transgressor of the
Law, he then that offends in one is guilty of all, because he offends
against him, who is the lawgiver of them all, and who would have us without
respect, to observe them all, and like wise because he is liable to that curse
(though not according to the same degree) which shall come upon such as shall
break them all. For Cursed is every man that continues not in all things,
that are written in the book of the Law to do them. God is not like the false
mother, which would have had the child to be divided, he will either have all
or none, he uses not to hire by halfes, he will either have all our service,
or else he will have none at all, we cannot serve him and Mammon too, he likes
no Mermaids, which are half fish, and half flesh, no Ambidexters shall dwell in
his house, no such Satyrs as can blow both cold and hot out of the same mouth,
no such Monsters as the Roman Legate saw at Alexandria, which was half white,
and half black, no such worshippers as those Assyrians, which served God and
their Idols, no such Jews as swear by God and by Malcolme, no sacrificers
like to him in the Poet, which offered one sacrifice to summer and another to
winter, one to God and another to the Devil. (But alas) how far are the most
from the practice of this duty. Some (nay the greater part) make no more
conscience of sinning, then an hungry man of eating his dinner, as if they had
no God but the Devil to serve. Others are like those Eastern people called
Coords, which worship both God and the Devil: God because say they he is good,
the Devil lest he should do them harm; these will with Herod fear John
Baptist (the Preacher of the word) and reverence him, and hear him gladly, and
do many things which he exhorts them to do, but they had rather see his head
off then part with their beloved sins. Saul was contented at Gods
commandment to kill the lean kine of the Amalekites, but the fat and well
liking Beasts he kept. So these at the commandment of the Lord by the mouth of
his Preachers can be contented to kill their lean sins, their little sins,
but they have some fat sins they must needs enjoy, these must of necessity be
spared. Naaman the Syrian was contented to worship no other God save the God of
Israel, but yet he must needs go with his Maaster into the house of Rimmon,
the Lord must be merciful to him in this point; so it is with very many which
would be counted good Professors, they can forgo most of their sins, yet
some beloved sin they must needs enjoy, the Lord must be merciful unto them
in this point, the Covetous man can abstain from excess in eating and
drinking, but usurie and oppression, this is a fat sin, he will not kill it,
the Lord must be merciful unto him in this point: the Drunkard can be
contented to hate usurie and oppression, but he must needs drink till the wine
do inflame him, oh this is a merry sin, the Lord must be merciful unto him
in this point: the wanton perchance can be contented to bid them both adieu,
but his carnal appetite he must needs obey, this is a pleasant sin, the Lord
must be merciful unto him in this point; these men are like unto those double
pictures, which if they be viewed one way, have the fices of men, look upon
them another way and they have the shape of Foxes or Goats, or some deformed
Creatures, behold them directly, and you shall see no perfect picture, but a
mixture of diverse. So look upon these in some of their actions, and you will
take them for good Christians, behold them in other things, and ye will think
them wicked Miscreants, take a view of all at once, and you shall find a
mixture and confusion of both, but God loves no such confusion, the livery of
his Children is white, not party-colored. Some there be that have stepped a foot
further in Christianity, and will be loath to commit any of these gross sins,
but yet they have some little sin which they must needs enjoy, the Lord must
be merciful unto them in this point. Oh said Lot (when he came out of Sodom)
Let me flee into this little City (Zoar) behold it is a little one, and my
soul shall live, so it is with these; when with Lot they are fled out of
Sodom, they must needs go with him to Zoar, when they have left their great
and gross sins, they have some little one as they call it, oh let them enjoy
this and their soul shall live, but (Beloved Christian) thou must remember what
I told thee before, that no sin of it self is venial, for the wages of the
least sin is death; and therefore thou must beware, of these little ones as
well as the other: what helps it a man to escape the edge of the sword, if he
stab himself with a penknife? to escape drowning in the great Ocean, if he
drown himself in a little brook? and what will it profit thee to cast away the
great Cart-ropes of iniquity, if thou strangle thy sefe with the small cords of
vanity? Thou must therefore be contented to forgo those little ones, a great
beam will put out a man's eye, so may a mote too; a great flame may burn a
house, so may a small sparkle, a cart-rope may strangle a man, so may a small
cord: a sword will take away the life of the strongest man, and so may a little
penknife, nay the point of a needle: a Canon shot may murder a man, so may
the shot of a pocket dagg; the deep Ocean may drown a man, and so may a small
River. It is even so with sin, the Egyptians were as surely drowned that laid
dead on the shore, as those that were overwhelmed in the deep, so the least
sin without repentance, drowns a man in the gulf of perdition, as well as
the greatest; and let me add this which is a most certain truth (though at the
first it may seem a paradox) that more are damned to Hell for little sinnnes
then for great. Why? Because as it is not the falling into the fire that burns
a man to death, but continuing in it, nor the falling into the water that
drownes a man, but lying in it: so it is not the falling into sin that damns a
man (for then all should be damned, seeing all fall into sin (but cotinuance in
sin and impenitencie. A great sin may prove venial, and a little sin the
same kind^n mortal. exempli gratia, oppression may be venial, and the least
desire of another man's goods mortal; actual adultery, venial, and adultery
of the heart (unlawful desire, mortal, shedding of innocent blood venial,
and unadvised anger mortal, one of these we find pardoned in David another in
Zacheus, the third in Manasses, and pardoned they shall be to all such as truly
repent, and believe the Gospel: but these being breaches of Gods law, are in
their own nature mortal, and unless repentance follow them, they are sure to
bring death with them; not that these are more grievous in their own nature
then those, or did more provoke Gods wrath, the contrary is true in both, but
because they often find mercy when the other do not, because they are often
accompanied with repentance, when the other are not, and it is not the
greatness or littleness of the sin, that makes it mortal or venial; but
the continuance in it or forsaking of it, he that continues in his sin (though
never so small) shall not prosper, but he that forsakes them (though never so
great) shall find mercy. Now many that have been overtaken with grievous and
crying sins, having had the looking glass of the Law laid before them, have
been humbled, and upon their humiliation pardoned, and so their mortal sins
made venial, whereas these less sins, wherein men walk securely, and never
are truly humbled for them, but bless themselves with the fancy, that they
are free of many heinous crimes, wherewith many others in the world are
stained: these, these I say bring many milions to hell: experience shows that
many dangerous wounds being timely looked unto are cured whereas the least, as
a stab with an Aule, or prickle of a black or prickle of a black thorn
neglected, may endanger a member if not life; So the greatest sin, soundly
and timely repented obtains pardon, whereas the least neglected as if there
were no danger, because of it self not so dangerous, brings death on the back
of it. Let then the men of this world (who make a sport of sin) mince, and
qualify, and extenuate their greatest offenses, let them think themselves
happy, because they are not the greatest transgressors; let them never have
any Scriptures but such as sound Gods mercies in their mouths, but for thee
(Beloved Christian) if thou look to find favor at the hands of the Almighty,
though after thy falls and slips, thou art to meditate upon Gods mercies, lest
thou be swallowed up with over much heaviness, yet before, to keep thee from
falling, mediate upon his judgments and fierce wrath against the least
transgressions, lay them open before God, that he may cover them, condemn them,
that he may forgive them, confess them to be by nature mortal, that by grace
he may make them venial.

Thus much concerning the second proposition; the last proposition is against
the Romish doctrine of traditions; we receive traditions (say the Fathers of
the Council of Trent) pertaining to faith and manners, with like devotion and
reverence, that we do the books of the Old and New Testament, they mean
divine and Apostolical traditions, these we reverence and receive as well as
they ( viz.) if they be expressly delivered in the Scripture, or may by
necessary consequence be thence proved: this is not their meaning, but such as
are not written, but only said to be delivered by Christ and his Apostles: very
well but seeing the ancient received some for divine and Apostolical, which are
not rejected even by the Church of Rome, as abstaining from blood and that
which is strangled, praying toward the East, etc. How shall I know what
traditions are divine and Apostolical, Bellarmine gives me a good rule, that
is, without doubt an Apostolical tradition (says he) that is taken for
Apostolical in those Churches where is a continued succession of Bishops from
the Apostles, where is that, marry, only in the Church of Rome. Et ideo ex
testimonio hujus solius Ecclesiae sumi potest certum and indubitatum
argumentum, ad probandas Ecclesiasticas traditiones, and therefore from the
testimony of that Church only may be taken a certain and infallible argument
for proving of Apostolical traditions.

This is the strongest stake that stands in the Popes hedge, allow him this
principle, and he will be sure to win the field.

The Protestants have challenged the Romanists at three several kind of
weapons; Reason, Antiquity, and Scripture. The first they put off with their
nice and aeriall distinctions: the second (when all other shifts have failed
them) they wipe often with the wards of their expurgatorie indices. wherein they
deal with the ancient Fathers (and some of their own side also) as Terence in
the Poet did with Progn^, that is, cut out their tongues, that in future times
they shall never be able to cry down Popery, when they are assaulted with the
third, which is the fittest that can be used to maintain Gods quarrel against
his enemies, being taken out of David's Tower, where hang a thousand shields,
and all the weapons of the strong men; they put off this blow by their
tradition, yea, but traditions are against the Word of God, Ye shall add
nothing unto that which I command you, Deuteronomy. 4. Yea but traditions are the word
of God, though not written, how prove you this? because our Church holds them
to be such. Et quod nos volumus sanctum est, as Tichonius the Donatist was wont
to say, Woe unto you ye Hypocrites, for ye bind heavy burdens, and lay them
upon men's shoulders, ye make the Law of God of no effect by your traditions.
So ye show your selves to be Children of the old Pharisees, hold on in your
courses, and fulfill the measure of their wickedness.

A Sermon preached at the funeral of Dr. Senhouse Bishop of CARLISLE.
Job 14. 14. If a man die, shall he live again? all the days of my appointed
time will I wait, till my changing come.
IF for this life's sake only, the faithful had hope in Christ, they were of
all men the most miserable says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 19. For, though they
be not in distress, yet are they afflicted on every side; though not overcome
of poverty, yet in poverty; though they perish not, yet they are cast down;
though they be not forsaken, yet for his sake they are persecuted all the day
long, and are accounted as sheep appointed to be slain: but they know that he
that raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise up them by Jesus, and therefore they
faint not, knowing that their light affliction which is but for a moment,
causes unto them a far more excellent and eternal weight of glory, and that
when this earthly house of this Tabernacle is destroyed, they have a building
given of God, that is an house not made with hands, but eternal in the
heavens, 2 Cor. 5. 1. If any man be not fully persuaded hereof, John 1.
I may say to him as Philip did to Nathaniel, Come and see: Come and behold a
lively picture, a notable experiment hereof in the speaker of these words, who
not long before (if any men in the world) might have taken up Niobe's boast in
the Fable.

Sum foelix, Ovid. Metam. lib. 6.
quis enim negat hoc, foelixque manebo,
Hoc quoque quis dubitat, etc.
His Garners had been full and plenteous with all manner of store, his sheep
brought forth thousands and ten thousands, in his field, his Oxen were strong
to labor, no leading into captivity, and no complaining in his streets, his
wife was as a fruitful Vine upon the walls of his house, his sons grew up as
the young plants, and his daughters were as the polished corners of the Temple;
besides this he was so hedged about by Gods providence, Mag. Com. in lib. 1,
etc.
that the son of wickedness could not hurt him: And was he not happy that was
in such a case? But, maxima pars est foelicitatis fuisse foelicem, the
remembrance of a man's felicity past, adds to his present misery; For now his
Children which were unto him as the Arrows in the hand of a Giant, are taken
away by deaths arrow, Psalm. 127.
they cannot assist him, his goods and cattels, the external complements of
his former felicity, are violently taken away by the Sabeans, his enemies they
cannot love him, his friends (miserable comforters God wot) instead of sweet
consolations to his distressed soul, thunder out such sharp threatenings that
they do increase his calamity, and more to grieve him, the wife of his own
bosom, appointed by God as a help for man, is now become as Dalilah was to
Sampson, a snare to him, his own flesh (like a tinder-box, kindling with every
sparkle that Satan does strike unto it) lusts and fights against him, yea, and
God himself has drawn a curtain before his eyes, has his face as though he
had quite forsaken him, behold now and see if there be any sorrow like his
sorrow, his Children have left him, his goods taken from him, his friends
revile him, his wife entangles him, his flesh buffets him, God seems to
forsake him, tell me if his hope were only in this life, if he were not of all
the men in the world the most miserable, nothing is left to solace him in this
great calamity, but that which the Poet fableth left within the vessels mouth.

-- (...)
(...) --
Some hope remains in the crooked and broken vessel, Hesiod. op. and dies.
which as a helmet keeps him from blows, 1 These. 5.
as an anchor holds the ship both sure and steadfast, Heb. 6. 19.
that it be not dashed by the winds upon some shelves or rocks, as a cork holds
up above the waters, that he sink not, and in a word makes him resolve with
himself, not to be quite dismayed, Romans 8.
nor utterly discouraged at these calamities which are befallen him, being such
as are not worthy of the glory, which shall be revealed, but with patience to
wait when his landlord will come, 2 Co. 5. 2.
and put him out of this earthly house, and cloth him with that house which is
from Heaven, All the days of my appointed time will I wait til my changing
shall come: As though he had said, the Arrows of the Almighty are in me, an the
venom thereof does drink up my spirit, Job. 6. 4.
and the terours of God fight against me, which makes me I confess to send
forth some unsavourie speeches, yet they shall never quite discourage me, nor
deprive me of my hope, which shall be accomplished after this fleshly
Tabernacle shall be destroyed; for I am sure that my Redeemer lives, Job. 14,
and that I shall see him even with these eyes, and no other for me, and in
this hope and confidence I will patiently wait and expect, not for a short
time, but even all the time that my soul shall continue in this Tabernacle
(which cannot be long) for that hour when this body shall be dissolved, and
the Spirit shall return unto God that gave it, All the days, etc.

In which words we may observe and learn these Lessons, 1. That every man
has an appointed time by God, which he cannot pass, mine appointed time. 2.
That a man's life is not long before he come to his full period days 3. Seeing
the time of man's life is limited, we ought always to wait, and provide our
selves for death, I will wait. 4. We are not to wait some part, but all our
life long, All the days. 5. That death to the godly and regenerate, is but a
change or a passage to a better life, my changing.


These shall be handled in their several order, but first I will speak a
little of the connection of this latter part, with the precedent part of this
verse. In the former he proposed this question, If a man dye shall he live
again? not as one denying the resurrection of the body, but (as I take it) as a
fleshly man not fully persuaded, but somewhat doubting of the truth hereof, as
in the tenth verse of this chapter, man is sick, and dies, and man perishes,
and where is he? As if he should have said, is it impossible that a man shall
dye, and be turned to dust, and eaten up of worms, and turned to grass, and
go as it were a progress through a beasts body. shall be revived and live
again, if a man die shall he live again? The spiritual man which prevails
against the flesh, makes this reply, that though he do not see any natural
reason for it, yet he will believe it, and he will defend the conclusion,
maugre all the premises that can be brought against it, All the days of mine
appointed time will I wait till my changeing shall come.

Whence this note does naturally arise;

That in this life, in the regenerate man, there is a combat and conflict
betwixt the flesh and the spirit.

A natural man of himself is like a heavy body, which in a well disposed
medium, moves downwards of it self without resistance, he goes downwards
without violence, nay, praecipitat non descendit, he throws himself down as
Satan would have persuaded Christ to cast himself down from the Pinnacle of
the Temple, and does not descend down by stairs; but a regenerate and
spiritual man, as he cannot easily fall down, being holden up with the two
wings of says and hope, so can he not easily ascend, being pressed down by a
weighty burden too heavy for him to bear, he is like to the Giant under
Sicily:

Nititur ille quidem pugnatque resurgere saepe, Ovid. Metam. lib. 5.

Dextrae sed Ausonio manus est subjectae Peloro,
Laeva Pachine tibi, Lylibaeo crura premuntur
Aetna caput --
Upon his right hand lie presumptuous sins, upon his left, honor and fear,
upon his feet and thighs the lusts and affections of the flesh, upon his head
blindness and ignorance, doubting and unbelief, so that oftentimes the good
which he would, that he cannot do, but the evil which he would not, that he
does: or he may be compared to a man that swims against the stream, with much
ado he gets upward, but if he miss the stroke, the stream carries him back
again, or to one which ascends up to the top of a Hill, with a but then on
his back, much panting and sweating has he before he can get up, and if his
foot chance to slip, so heavy is the load on his back, that he will hardly
recover himself without a fall: the spirit strives against the stream, to swim
up to the fountain of goodness, and the flesh strives to beat him back, and
as it were with an easy tide to carry him down into the Ocean of sin and
iniquity: the spirit strives to creep up the hill, upon hand and foot, 1 Samuel
14.
as Jonathan and his armor bearer did between the two rocks, Bozez and Seneh
when they went against the Philistims, but the flesh striveth to beat him
backward, and to tumble him down like Nebuchadnezzars stone from the top of the
mountain; Dan. 2. 45.
so that it fares with a regenerate man, as it did with Rebecca, when she was
with Child, the flesh and the spirit fight and strugle one with another, Genesis
25. 22.
as the Children did in her womb, so says the Apostle Gal. 5. 17. The flesh
lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and these are
contrary one to another: so that we cannot do the thing which we would, which
is not so to be understood, as though the body fought against the soul, or
that these two the flesh and the spirit were locally separated, for as the
flesh is partly spiritual, so the spirit is partly carnal, these two are
mingled and joined in both body and soul, and in every part and faculty
thereof; In the understanding, there is knowledge mixed with ignorance and
blindness, there is spirit mixed with flesh: in the Will there is a willing and
a nilling: in the affections there is a desiring and forsaking of that which is
good, as Medea in the Poet had between natural reason, and carnal appetite.

-- Video meliora proboque
Deteriora sequor;
The reason is manifest: For as a Child becomes not a perfect man in an
instant, but grows by little and little; So after our regeneration, when we
are new born of water and the spirit, we become not presently strong men in
Christ Jesus, but we grow daily in perfection, we ascend as it were up Jacobs
ladder, we climb from one degree or staire of perfection to another, till all
imperfections be removed from us. For howsoever justification be actus
individum and simul totus, ^eckerm. Syst.
as judicious writer truly aver-Justification is an individual act, and admits
of no degrees, yet sanctification comes by parts and degrees, for it fares
with him as it does with cold water when it is made hot by fire, as the cold is
by degrees expelled, so is the heat brought in by degrees, omnis remissio est
per admissionem contrarii: In like manner, as the old man, which like the earth
is cold, perishes, so the new man, heated by the fire of the spirit, quickneth
and reviveth; and again, as there is a struggling and mutual conflict, and
encountering betwixt the the contrary qualities, Frigida cum calidis pugnant,
humentia siccis,


One endeavoring to captivate and destroy the other so it is betwixt these
two, the spirit indeavoureth to conquer the flesh, but like a natural agent
agendo repatitur, it suffers blows of the flesh which rebelleth against it,
and leads it captive to the law of sin, only here is the difference, that
two contrary qualities may be so tempered, as that a mean consisting of both,
and not specifically distinguished from both, may be produced of them, but the
flesh and the spirit will never make one, and therefore the spirit says to the
flesh, as Alexander did to Darius, who offered him half of his kingdom, so
that he might quietly enjoy the other half, but as one world cannot have two
suns, so one kingdom must not have two kings, and therefore 'twil endeavor
utterly to dispossess the flesh, and depose it from its estate which it
holds in man, as Alexander did to depose Darius from his kingdom; it can no
more live in agreement with the flesh, then Sarah could with Hagar and her
son, and therefore it says as she did to Abraham, Genesis 21. 10.
Cast out this bondwoman, and her son, for the son of the bondwoman may
not be heir with my son Isaac: Of heat and cold may be made one individual
quality which we call lukewarm, but the flesh and the spirit cannot be mixed
no Christian may be lukewarm, Apoc. 3.
for such will Christ spue out of his mouth. Thus you see that so long as a
Christian remains in this world, so long there is a contention betwixt the
regenerate and carnal part, the flesh which like a Zopyrus keeps within the
walls of the City, Herodot.
is ever ready to betray him unto his enemies hands, it is to him as the
Canaanites were to the Israelites, thorns in their eyes and pricks in their
sides, so that a Christian may say of it as David did of Absalom Even my son
which comes out of my bowels seeks my life: or take up that complaint which the
Prophet does elsewhere; it is not my open enemy that does me this dishonor,
for then peradventure I could have borne it, neither was it mine adversary
that did magnify himself against me, for then peradventure I could have hid
my self from him, but it is thou my guide and mine own familiar friend (my
flesh) which eatest my bread, that liftest up thy heel against me; on the
other side the spirit seeks to root out the earthy affections and lusts of the
flesh, as the Hebrews by little and little rooted out the Cananites, it seeks
to repress this rebellion, as David did the plots of his son Absalom.
Experience we have in the main pillars of the spiritual Temple; David a man
after Gods own heart, so moved at the prosperity of the wicked that he begins
to say, Psalm. 73. 13.
that certainly he has cleansed his heart in vain, and washed his hands in
innocence, there is a carnal David, which make his feet almost to go, and
his steps well-nigh to slip, but when he goes in the Sanctuary of God, then
he understands the end of these men; there is spiritual David, which makes
him condemn his former thoughts and speeches; so foolish was I and ignorant,
even as it were of a Beast before thee. Peter who sometime was so confident as
to continue true unto his Master, that he made protestation, that if all should
deny him, yet he would never do it, presently after he begins to follow afar
off, and anon after the rock of Peter's faith, is so shaken with the voice of a
damosel, that he begins to curse and swear, Mat. 26.
that he never knew him; but presently again at the crowing of a Cock, the
spirit is awakened, and goes about to take some avengement of the flesh, 2 Cor.
2.
he went out and wept bitterly; who more strong in the spirit then Paul was, in
zeal fervent, in labors abundant, in nothing inferior to the chief Apostles,
and yet he has given him a prick in the flesh, the Messenger of Satan to
buffet him, which makes him say when he would do good, Romans 4. 23.
evil is present with him, and that he finds a Law in his Members, rebelling
against the law of the mind, and carrying him captive to the law of sin; and
good reason it should be so, for if the spirit should so domineer over the
flesh, then there were no resistance and reluctation, then would we not have an
earnest and longing desire, to be out of this world, we would not with the
faithfully say, Revel. 22. 22.
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, we would not desire to be clothed with our
house which is from Heaven, but would say as Peter did, Master, it is good for
us to be here. Mark. 9. 5.
To end then; that we should long after our future perfection, when corruption
shall put on incorruption, and mortallity shall be swallowed up of
immortallity, we find this conflict in our own bowels, that we may be weary of
this present state, and say as Rebecca did, when Esau and Jacob strugled in her
womb, if it be so, why am I thus? Only here is our comfort, that though the
flesh be still lusting against the spirit, and we have more flesh then spirit,
for flesh is like to Goliath, and the spirit is like to little David; yet the
spirit shall be in the end sure to prevail, as David prevailed against
Goliath, for though it be little in quantity, yet it is fuller of activity, as
a little fire has more action (though less resistance) then much earth: for
it fares with these two, as with the house of Saul and David, the spirit like
the house of David, waxes stronger and stronger, but the flesh like the house
of Saul, 2 Samuel 3. 1.
waxes weaker and weaker, it is with them as it was with John Baptist and
Christ, I must decrease (says John) but he must increase, the flesh which like
John is before, it must decrease, but the spirit which like Christ comes after,
whose shoe latchet the flesh is not worthy to loose, it must grow and increase,
and this is plain, and of this place; for whereas the flesh objecteth, that man
is sick and perishes, and where is he? and again, If a man dye shall he live
again? the Spirit replyeth, and puts the flesh to silence, All the days of my
appointed time will I wait till my changing shall come.

Is it true beloved Christians, Use 1.
That the Children of God, yea even in such as have obtained the greatest
perfection that a mere man has obtained in this life, there is reluctation
between the flesh and the spirit: Oh then let as many of us as long after life,
and desire to see good days, even life everlasting, and days which never
shall have an end: Let us, I say, labor to subdue this Rebel, and bring it
into subjection to the Spirit; for it is the Spirit that quickens, the flesh
will profit nothing: The flesh is like Caligula, (who as Tacitus says of him)
was a good servant, but an ill master: It will be a good servant if we keep it
in subjection to the spirit, Tacit. Annal.
but it will be an exceeding bad master if it once get the upper hand; and it
will use the spirit as the Scythians servants dealt with their masters, who
when their masters had for many years warred in the Southern parts of Europe
and Asia, Just. l. 2.
in the mean time married their wives, and got possession of whatsoever they
had; and therefore we must use it as these Scythians used their servants, who
when they could not prevail against them with open war, at length handled them
like servants and slaves, took rods and beat them, and so recovered their
ancient possessions. We must not proceed against the flesh as against an equal
enemy; but we must use rods and scourges, we must chasten and correct it, and
so bring it again in subjection to its lawful commander: It is like the dumb
devil, which could not be cast out but by prayer and fasting: we must implore
the assistance of Gods spirit (being of our selves unable) that we may be
strengthened and enabled to overcome it; Mat. 17.
we must by fasting withdraw its food wherewith it is nourished; I do not mean
only our meat and drink, but all worldly delight, and enticing allurements to
sin: wanton and idle spectacles they be food of our carnal eyes, Job. 31.
these we must withdraw away, and with Job, Make a covenant with our eyes that
we will not look upon wantonness; foolish and undecent speeches be the delight
of the tongue; those we must remove away, and pray with David, Set a watch, O
Lord, before our mouths, and keep the door of our lips: In a word, whatsoever
will be an incitement to sin, and is like to strike fire in the tinder of our
corrupt affections, that must be debarred, and kept from them. Let us then use
the flesh as the enemy uses a besieged City, observe and watch the by-ways,
that there be no intercourse, or secret compact between it and Satan, that
there be no provision carried by Satan and his vassals into it, that so it may
be enforced to yield it self, or as the Hunters use Mole and Foxes in the
earth, stop the passages that through hunger it may be at last enforced to come
out, and leave its habitation; otherwise, if by excessive eating and drinking
we nourish it, if by gorgeous and costly attire we deck it, if by epicureous
and voluptuous delights we pamper it, what do we but arm our enemies against
us, and Goliath like, give him a sword for the cutting of our own throats.

Again, 2. Use.
Is it so, that in the regenerate* so long as he remains in this earthly
Tabernacle, there remain not some few relics, but many fragments of the
natural man, so that there is a combat between the flesh and the spirit? where
then be the Papists which maintain justification by works? Can a clean thing
come out of that which is unclean, Job. 14. 4.
says Job? and can our minds wills and affections wherein the flesh and the
spirit are mixed together, produce any effect which is not impure and
imperfect? and therefore far short of that perfection and righteousness
which is required by the Law, I do not say that they are sins (that is but a
slander of the Papists) but they have some degrees of sins and imperfections
joined with them, the best come that grows in our fields, has some grains
blasted, the best fruits that we can bring forth, are in some part rotten, the
best gold that we can show, is much mixed with dross, and cannot abide the
touchstone, it is an easy matter I confess, for a sinful and unregenerate
cloysterer to say somewhat for the dignity of works in justifying a man, but
when we enter into an examination of our own consciences, and find so many sins
and imperfections lurking in every corner of our hearts, it will make us cry
out with Bernard, meritum meum miseratio domini, Ber. sup. Cant. sect. 6.
my merit is the Lords mercy; and again, sufficit ad meritum, scire quod non
est meritum. Nay if we look up unto God, and consider him not as a man's brain
considers him, but as his word describes him unto us, with whose brightness
the stars are darkened, Job. 9. 2.
with whose anger the earth is shaken, with whose strength the mountains melt,
with whose wisdom the crafty are taken in their own nets, at whose pureness,
all seem impure, in whose sight the heavens, nay the very Angels are unclean;
we must needs confess with Job, that if we should dispute with God, we could
not answer him one for a thousand, and confess that he found no stedfastness
in his Saints, yea and when the heaven is impure in his sight, much more is man
abominable and filthy which drinks iniquity like water, Job 15. 15, 16.
and therefore pray unto him with David, Psalm. 143. 2.
that he will not enter into judgment with us, because in his sight shall no
man living be justified; but I must leave this point, and come unto the second,
All the days of my appointed time, etc.

Every man has an appointed time by God which he cannot pass: 2 Doct.
Though Adams wisdom was such, that he could give names to every creature,
according to their nature, yet he forgate his own name; because of his
affinity between him and the earth, the sons of Adam are like their father,
they are witty enough about the creatures, but they quite forget their own
names and their natures too, and this is the cause why they be so holden with
pride, and overwhelmed with cruelty, they will contend with Nebuchadnezzar in
Isa. to advance themselves even above the stars of God, and to match their
Grandfather the first Adam, who though he was made of the earth, would with
the wings of pride soar into heaven, and care little for being like their
elder brother, the second Adam, which from Heaven came unto earth, and took
upon him our infirmities and miseries, but let them secure themselves never so
much, the tide will tarry for no man, for their Father eat sour grapes, and
his childrens teeth are set on edge, their Father for eating a grape of the
forbidden Vine, had this sentence pronounced against him, Unto dust thou shall
return, Genesis 3.
and his children shall be liable to it, till heaven and earth be removed,
Revel. 21.
and there be no more death. The tender and dainty women, which never adventure
to set the sole of their feet upon the ground for their sofness and tenderness
(as Moses speaks) have a day appointed when their mouths shall be filled with
mould, Deuteronomy. 28.
and their faces which they will not suffer the sun of the Firmament to shine
upon, lest it should stain their beauty, shall be slimed with that earth
which they scorned to touch with the soles of their feet; those rotten posts,
which spend themselves in whiting and painting, as though they would with Medea
recall their years, or with the Eagle by casting their old bill, renew their
youth, have a day set them, in which deaths finger shall but touch them, and
they shall fall in pieces and return to their dust; those which cloth
themselves with linen, and build them houses of Cedar, and add house to house,
and and to land, as though they should continue for ever, or at the least as if
their journey to the heavenly Canaan, lay all by land and nothing by Sea, have a
determinate time, when their unsatiable desires shall be content with a
Golgotha, a place of dead men's souls, a little part of a potters field, as much
as will serve to hide and cover their earthen vessel: Cui satis ad votum non
essent omnia terrae
Climata, terra modo sufficit octo pedum.


Are not his days determined (says Job) the number of his months are with
thee, Job. 14. 5.
thou have appointed his bounds which he cannot pass; it is not nobility of
Parents, nor wisdom, nor comeliness of person, nor strength of body, nor
largeness of dominions, that can lengthen the thread of a man's days.

Pallida mors aequo pulsat pede pauporum tabernas regumque turres.
Deaths Arrow will as soon pierce the strong Castle of a King, Hor.
as the poor cottage of a Country Swain be thou more zealou then Moses, or
stronger then Sampson, or beautifuller then Absalom, or wiser then Solomon, or
richer then Job, or faithfuller then Samuel.

Ire tamen restat Numa quo devenit and Ancus.
This is the conclusion of all flesh, at the time appointed thou must dye, and
yield thy body to deaths Sergeant to be kept Prisoner in the Dungeon of the
earth, till the great Assizes which shall be holden in the clouds at the last
day; the conclusion is most certain, howevsr the premises be most fallible and
doubtful, I say not, that the time of our lives are equally lengthened; or
that the days our life consist of like hours, some see but a winter day, and
their breath is gone, some an ^quinoctial day, and they live till their middle
age, some a long Summers day, and live till old age, all of them with the Beast
called (...) shall be sure to dye at night; the course of man's life is like the
journey of the Israelites, from Egypt to Canaan, Cicer. lib. 10.
some dye as soon as they are gone out of Egypt, Tusc. Quast.
some in the middle way, some with Moses come to the edge and borders of Canaan,
some indeed with Caleb and Joshua, enter the promised Land alive, such as shall
be living at the last day, but this is without the ordinary course, and beyond
the extent of the statute enacted after man's transgression: to say nothing that
their change shall be equivalent with death, that it may be as great a question
whether their bodies be the same which they were before, as it was amongst the
Athenian Philosophers, Plut. in These.
whether the Ship wherein Theseus sailed to Crete to kill the Minotaure was the
same when the decayed parts of the ship were repaired with new planks, till at
length none of that wood was left, that furrowed the Sea between Athens and
Creet; the rest which are without this compass, have an hour assigned them,
when they must leave their bodies in the Wilderness, but then be careful of
their health, use recreation, observe diet, seek to the Physician, all these as
they will not add one cubit to their stature, so can they not add one minut to
their appointed time. Indeed Hezekiah had fifteen years added to his days, but
this was not by the help of man, but by his immediate power which turns man
to destruction, Psalm. 90.
and again he says, Come again ye sons of Adam: and again it was not added to
his appointed time, (for as God is not as man that he should lie, so is he not
as the son of man that he should repent) but it was added to that time wherein
by the course of nature the thread of his life should have been broken, Cicer.
de senect.
the thread of nature is tied to the foot of Jupiters chair; for as it is with
the fruits, those which are not pulled off the trees when they are ripe will
fall themselves, so it is in men, those that are not by force taken away, by
the course of nature drop down themselves: that axiom in natural Philosopie is
true, that every thing is resolved into that whereof it is composed, which made
Anaxagoras to say, when he heard his son was dead, I knew still that I had
begotten a mortal man; and Epictetus when walking one day into the fields, he
saw a woman break an earthen pot at the Well, and going abroad the next day, he
heard some Children weep for their Father that was dead; when he came home, his
speech was this, heri vidi fragilem frangi, body vidi mortalem mori; it is no
greater matter that a mortal man should dye, then that an earthen vessel shall
be broken; if any man should doubt of the certainty hereof, I would say unto
him as Bildad said to Job, Inquire I pray thee of the former age, Job. 8. 8.
and prepare thy self to search of their Fathers (for we are men of yesterday,
and are ignorant, so our days on earth are but as a shadow) will not they
teach and tell thee, that all flesh is grass? How many millions have lived
before thee, and where are they? Omnis haec magnis vaga turbaterris, Ivi^ ad
manes; so that I may say with I^. know ye nothing? have ye not heard it? has
it not been told you from the beginning? Isa. 40. 21.
have ye not understood it by the foundations of the earth? he sits on the
circle of the earth, and the Inhabitants thereof are as grashopers, he brings
the Princes to nothing, and makes the Judges of the earth as vanity, as though
they were not planted, as though they were not sown, as though their stock took
no root in the earth, so he blows upon them and they wither, and the
whirlwind shall blow them away in stubble, Isa. 40. Out of which place its
plain, that as God has set every man his limits and bounds, which he cannot
pass, which was my first collection out of the second part of my division (
mine appointed time) so it is evident likewise, that this time is but short
which is my second observation ( days).

To this purpose it is that Moses says, 2 Doct.
teach me O lord to number my days, if he had said months, they had been but
the passing of the sun through a sign, or years, they had been but a few
revolutions of the swift running Giant, through the Zodiac quickly gone; Psalm.
19. 6.
but yet to show unto us the momentarie shortness of our lives, he expresses
them by days, which if they be natural, they contain but so many turns of
the heavens upon the axeltree of the world, or artificial, they contain but the
remaining of the sun in our Horizon, which seems to be David's meaning, when
he says, that God has made his days as it were a span long, a short winter
day, he makes but a little fragment of a circle, and then presently the sun of
his life is down; as the Lord lives (said he unto Jonathan) and as thy soul
lives, there is but a step between me and death; he meant in that place that
he was daily in danger of his life, by reason of Saul, which never ceased from
persecuting him: though there were no persecuting Saul's in the world (as there
are too many) yet with David as many as are sprung from the loins of Adam, have
but one step between them and death, it is nearer unto them then their clothes
on their backs, they carry it about with them in their own bosoms, and though
it presently get not the masterie, yet Serpent like, it is still nibling at
their heels, and will never leave tripping them till it has brought them to
the ground, Prima quae vitam dedit, hora carpsi^. The first hour that they
began to breath, Sen. (...).
but an inch from the thread of their life: if a man's body were made of Adamant
or steel or brass the wicked Ethnic needed not to have exclaimed against God,
that the Raven and the Heart, and the Phoenix should live so many ages, whereas
the life of a man like a Weavers shuttle, or swift post is presently gone, for
though they should come at length to a full point (as the flint will at length
be broken, and brass and steel cankered and consumed) yet they should first
pass so many ages, that they could not say with Jacob, few and evil have our
days been? but alas they are but of a glassie metal, the least fall will
crack them, they are of potters clay, the seast knock will break them, so that
we may say to death with him in the Tragedy.

Parce venturis, Loc. Cit.
tibi mors paramur
Sis licet segnis properamus ipsi.
Hence it is that man's life is counted as as a buble of the water, a vapor, a
smoke, a dream, a spa^n, a tale that is told.

And are these things so? 1 Use
hence then we might first learn not to put our trust and confidence in man, as
though he were able to prolong our days,, for let him be as tall as the sons
of Anak, or mightier then Og king of Basan, whose bed was of Iron, or more
terrible then Goliath, which so affrayed the Israelites, that they durst not
come near unto him; yet he cannot deliver his own, much less thy body from
the grave, or make an agreement unto God for it, he is but a man whose breath
is in his nostrils, and shall be sure though he be the mightiest potentate in
the world, to hear Nebuchadnezzars sentence against him; O man to thee be it
spoken, not thy kingdom only, Dan. 4.
but even thy life is departed from thee: but to trust in him with whom the
Inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing, and who according to his will
works in the inhabitants of the earth, and the Army of Heaven, and none can
stay his hand, or say unto him, why do thou so, it is he that has limited
our lives, and set bounds to our days, which we cannot pass.

Again, 2. Use.
has God limited our lives, and given Bars to our days, as unto the Seas,
saying, hitherto shall ye go, and ye shall go no further, then I might put you
in mind, to beware of two dangerous rocks, upon which many unheedfull Sailors
have split their Ships: the first lies on the left hand, that we rely not too
much on the outward means, for that were to trust in man and contemn God: the
second on the right hand, that because our years are determined we neglect not
the ordinary means, for that were to tempt God, we must not think that we
can keep our selves in prison, when we are called to the Bar, nor yet must we
break the Prison, before the Goal deliverie. Asa sought to Physicians and
dyed; Hezekiah sought not, and had fifteen years added to his days; the one
sought to the Physician, and not to God, the other to God, not to the
Physician: we must join them both together, or else we shall make a fallacy or
paralogisme in Christianity, which Logicians call, a been divisis ad male
conjuncta; for we may with Asa use the Physicians, but far more with Hezekiah
seek unto the Lord.

But the third and last use is this, that seeing man's death is appointed, 3.
Use.
yea, and that it must be shortly, we make use of this short time, and not
wastfully mispend this golden opportunity; it was Apelles his custom not to
let any day slip, without drawing of some lines with his pensil; and it was
Pythagoras his rule to his scholars, that they should never suffer their eyes
to sleep at night, till they had taken a diligent survey of all their days
labor, no more should we let one day pass without using of that talent which
God has given us, nor suffer our eyes to sleep, nor our eyelids to slumber,
nor the temples of our head to take any rest, before we have taken a strict
account with our selves, how we have bestowed the day past, always waiting and
expecting that day, when we shall pay our Grandmother her due, which is the
third note I observed, Scilicet, -- Vltima semper
Expectanda dies homini est --


We should ever expect our last hour, when we must make our account to God,
that whether he call us to a reckoning at evening or at morning, or at
midnight, we may have our accounts ready: when we see a vapor drawn up by the
heat of the sun, when we see the smoke ascend up the Chimney, when we see the
Post coursing on the way, when we see a glass broken, when we hear a blast of
wind, when we put off our clothes, when we lie down to sleep, when we dream a
dream; we should still remember the shortness and uncertaintie of our lives;
that they are like vapors quickly consumed, like smoke presently vanished,
like a Post in a moment passed, like a wind shortly ceased, like a glass
presently cracked, like our clothes quickly sullied, like a dream in an instant
perished, so that it is as strange that we should not remember it, as that we
should not remember the number of our fingers, or with Corvinus forget our own
names; but alas we see this, and yet we will not see it, we know it well, and
yet we will not consider it, we are sure that death will shortly knock at our
doors, and yet we will say unto our selves, as Peter did unto Christ, pity
thy self, this thing shall not happen unto thee: we will persuade our selves
of our lives, a^ the false Prophet persuaded the Jews of the safety of their
City, when the enemy was ready to surprise it. This City shall not be
delivered into the hands of the King of Babel, we can build our houses, plant
our trees, sow our fields, gather our fruits into our Barns, for those things
we can observe a fit season; but yet the ordering of our lives, the salvation
of our souls, as though they were trifles not worthy the looking into, we post
them often to our better leisure. Surely the Stork in the air knows her
appointed times, and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow observe the
time of their coming, Jer. 8. 7.
and yet man will not remember the time, when he must come to his particular
judgment, when he must leave these toys which he makes his chiefest delight,
and say I have no pleasure in them. Eccl.
When we see a man dye, we remember our mortality, but we have no sooner pu
him in the grave; then we have buried in the earth of oblivion the remembrance
of our own death, we are no sooner in our own houses, then we return to our old
sins, the swearer to his blasphemy, the wanton to his pleasures, the Usurer to
his unlawful gaining, the Drunkard to his vomit, every one to his old ways,
not one will think with himself that he may be the next which shall be turned
out of the doors. We count that rich cormorant in the Parable a right fool
(and so he was indeed) who when his field brought forth abundance of fruit,
determined to pull down his barns, and make them greater, and then to say to
his soul, take thy rest, not remembering that even that night his soul might be
taken from him, ^. Philip.
demiror te Antoni (said Tullie to Anthony) quorum facta imitaris eorum exitus
non perhorrescere; and is it not as strange, that we should imitate this
Cormorant in his life, and not think upon his end, we sleep and secure our
selves with the old world, and never remember a flood which is ready to sweep
us all away; we remember well the former part of the Epicures sentence, let us
eat and drink and be merry, but we forget the latter end, to morrow we shall
dye; we do not remember that every one has a Sergeant at his elbow ready to
arrest him, and to say, Lusisti satis, edisti satis, atque bibisti,
Tempus abire tibi est. Hor.



Thou have eaten and drunken thy pleasure thou must now be gone. Beloved
Christians, do ye desire the salvation of your own souls? I know ye desire it,
oh then bestow not this short time, which the Lord has lent you here in the
Land of the living in chambering and wantonness, in luxury and riotousnesse,
in strife and envy, in oppression and covetousness, but use it to the glory
of God, that when ye shall go hence, and be no more seen, ye may be received
into everlasting habitations. The Lord could take your souls from you before ye
depart this place, if ye depart in safety, before ye come into your houses, or
before you go to bed or before you rise in the morning, but if you enjoy to
day, and to morrow, and the next day, despise not the riches of his
bountifulness and patience, and long suffering, knowing that his bountifulness
leads you to repentance. Be not like to the wicked Job 21. which take the
Tabret and Harp, and rejoice at the sound of the Organs, and spend their days
in wea'th, Romans 2.
and then suddenly go down into the Grave. Nor like those in Eccles. 9. 12.
which do not know their time, Job. 21.
but like fishes which are taken in an evil net, and like birds that are
caught in a snare, so they are snared in the evil time, which falls upon
them suddenly; nor like the evil servant in the Gospel, Eccles. 9. 12.
which says in his heart, my Master does defer his coming, and begins to
smite his Fellow Servants, and to eat and to drink with the drunken, lest death
come upon you in a day when ye look not for it, and in an hour that you are
not aware of, Mat. 24.
and cut you off, and ye receive your portion with Hypocrites in the Lake that
burns with fire and brimstone, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
Blessed is that man, whom the Lord when he calls him from hence, shall find
waking, but woe, yea thrice woe be to that man, whom the Lord when he comes,
shall find sleeping; verily I say unto you, it had been good for that man, if
he had never been borne, wherefore once again I say, use this golden
opportunity to the honor of your God, redeem the time because the days are
few, not for a day, but even all your days, which is the fourth note, 4. Note
and which I can but touch, let it be your care, not how you may be rich in
this world, but how you may be rich unto God, not rich in goods but in
goodness, let your chief study in this life be how he may be saved in the life
to come. Alas it was but a cold comfort to Adrian the Emperor when he was
ready to dye, to jest with his soul doubting what should become of it.

Animula, Charionis Chron.
vagula, blandula, hospes comesque corporis, quae nunc abibis in loca?
Pallidula, rigida, nidula, nec ut soles dabis jocos.

What speeches but this, or worse then this can any expect will proceed from
you in your sickness, when you are ready to leave the world, if in your health
you have not studied to make your election sure; if in your life ye offer to
God nothing but dregs, there is little hope you will set forth good wine at the
hour of your death, late repentance is oftentimes counterfeit, never so
accepted with God, we must blossom in the spring, if we will bring forth fruit
in harvest, it is no commendation to offer to the world and Satan the flower of
our youth, and sacrifice to God the withered stubble of old age, to turn to God
when we can scarce turn our selves in our beds, and to leave this world, when
it is ready to take a farewell of us, wherefore have your loins still girded
about, and your lights still burning, and you your selves waiting and
expecting, nay desiring not only for that time, when your souls and bodies
shall be separated, but much more for that great day, when they shall again be
united and conjoined; let these and the like be each of your meditations and
prayers: How long Lord, how long holy and true; as the heart desires the water
brook, so longs my soul after thee O God, my soul is a thirst for God even
for the living God; when shall I come to appear before the presence of God,
into thy hands I commend my spirit, for thou have redeemed me O Lord God of
truth, yea thou art my helper and my redeemer, O my God make no long tarrying,
but come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

The 5th and last thing, 5 Obs.
which was observed out of these words was this, That death to the Children of
God is but a change to a better and more blessed state: for so with Mercer and
other learned Divines, I take the meaning of the words to be, when it is said
my changing, and not to be meant of the resurrection as some would have it.
Death is the wages of sin. (says the Apostle) Romans 6. 23. not only a
temporary death which is a separation of the body from the soul, but an
eternal death which is a separation both of body and soul from God; for so
it was told our Grandfather, before he tasted the fruit of the forbidden tree,
whenever thou shall eat thereof, thou shall dye the death, seconded after
the fact with this judicial sentence, dust thou art, and unto dust thou shall
return, Gen 3. and so by the transgression of one, death reigned over all unto
condemnation, Romans 6. 14. But behold the abundant Ocean of the riches of the
mercy, and bountifullness of our God, who by the balm of Christ's blood has
so tempered this popson (that like Treacle which is made of venomous worms) it
becomes a preservative against poison, and has broken the teeth of this Lion,
that we may say with the Prophet, the Lion and the Lamb may dwell together,
has taken the sting from this Scorpion, that we may even now in some sense
say, O death where is thy sting? thus by the grace of God, Aug. de civit. dei
lib. 5. c. 4.
the punishment of sin is to us turned, to a freedom from sin; it was said to
our first Parents (says Austin) thou shall dye if thou sin, now it is said
to a Martyr, dye lest thou sin; then it was said, if thou transgress the
commandment thou shall dye the death; now it is said, if ye refuse to dye, ye
transgress the commandment; that which then was to be feared, that they
should not sin, is now to be undergon lest they sin, then death was gotten by
sinning, now justice is fulfilled by dying.

Behold the great difference of death in the godly, Use.
and the wicked, to the wicked it has the same force which before it had, to
the godly it is like a sleep which resteththeir bodies, and makes them more
lively then before, to the ungodly it brings a tail or sting with it, and that
is condemnation, to the godly it is as it were a Be without a sting, to the
godly it is terminus a quo of misery and vexation, to the wicked it is the
beginning of sorrow and damnation, to the ungodly it is Satan's Cart to carry
them to Hell, to the righteous it is like Elisha's fiery Chariot to mount them
to Heaven, to the wicked it is Satan's Sergeant to carry them to Tophet, which
is prepared for them, to the godly it is the Lords Messenger to remove them to
their expected home; let then the ungodly fear and tremble when they hear of
death, and let them use the means they can to put this evil day from them, as
being the beginning of their eternal woe and sorrow; but let the children of
God be no more afraid to dye, then they fear a Be without a sting, then they
fear a sleep when their eyes are heavy, or they fear to be comforted when
they are in misery, or to be at home when they are abroad in a strange Country

FINIS.
TO THE READER.
Reader,
IF the reverend Author of those Sermons had not been one of those, Qui male
merentur de viribus suis (for so I shall take leave to expostulate with his
modesty) his more then vulgar Abilities might have added much to the luster of
his Name, with which he has hitherto dealt so unkindly as to detain it
(though not in the shade, yet) at too great a distance from the Sun. Whilst he
lived in the University, he was a singular Ornament to the College where
Providence had bestowed him; and being thence called forth to a Pastoral
charge (over the Barton in Westmerland.
place which first welcomed him into the World) he was quickly taken notice of,
as worthy of a more eminent Station in the Church, to which he was accordingly
preferred, with the general acclamations of all the knowing and pious Divines
in the Diocese, with whom (to say nothing of others, though of greatest note
in that Precinct) for a comprehensive and orthodox Judgment, adorned with all
variety of learning, he has ever been held in greatest Estimation. As for
these Sermons (some of which saw the light, and all have been delivered many
years ago) they are able to speak for themselves. Their maine design is to
heal the plague of the Heart, not the Itch of the Ear: Animis composuit, non
auribus, Here is good wholesome ^iands (...) before you, and if your Palate be
not over (...), you will have no cause to quarrel with the Sance. What help
soever the Book shall afford you in your spiritual negotiations, give God the
glory, and the Author (I doubt not) has his End.

T. Tully

LUKE 12. 32: Fear not little Flock, for it is your Fathers pleasure to give
you the Kingdom.
CHRIST the Great Shepherd of our souls, being shortly to finish that for
which he came into the World, the work of our Redemption, and to lay down his
life for his Sheep, and according to his corporal presence to have them, in
the wilderness of this World, where they should find Amalekites to encounter
them, the Sons of Anack to impugn them, fierce Serpents to sting them, Lions
and Bears, and Foxes, and Wolves, to devour them, and the very Wilderness it
self by its natural barrenness, ready to starve them; does in the precedents
of this Chapter, warn and arm them against all humane and mundane fears.
Humane, from Verse 4. till the tenth. Mundane, from the tenth till this thirty
second: both which if I be not mistaken, are by way of recapitulation wrapped
up in the beginning of this Verse, Fear not, etc. And in the later part
confirmed by an Argument, a majori, For it is your Fathers pleasure, etc. As if
he should have said, My friends which have forsaken all and (...)
followed me in the regeneration, though ye be as a flock of Sheep subject to
wandering, unfit to provide fot\r your selves things necessary, unable to resist
the Wolves amidst whom ye are, though ye be little in the opinion and
estimation of the World (being reputed the scum of the earth, the filth of the
world, 1 Cor. 4.
the outcast of the people, and of-scouring of all things) less in comparison
with the world (being in respect of them, as the first fruits in respect of the
Harvest, as the gleanings in comparison of the Vintage) yet be not dismayed nor
discouraged for any thing that the world will or can inflict upon you* for lo,
he that was your enemy is now become your friend, he that had a Sword of
vengeance drawn against you, will now fight for you, he that was a just and
severe Judge, is now become your Father, because you are in me, and howsoever
of your selves you have deserved no better then others, whom he has left in
that mass of corruption wherein all Adams Children lay drowned: yet his good
will and pleasure is such, that he will at length freely bestow upon you an
inaccessible Inheritance in his Kingdom of glory; much more will he watch over
you by his heavenly protection, provision, and direction in this Kingdom of
Grace: Fear not, etc.

A Doctrine proposed by way of exhortation.

Which words divide themselves into two branches.

1. Fear not little Flock. 2. A reason or argument to confirm this, For it is
your Fathers pleasure, etc. In the first of these observe, 1. The object,
Flock: 2. The quantity of it, Little flock: 3. An encouragement against fear.
In the second note these particulars: 1. The Grantor, Your Father: 2. The cause
impulsive that makes him respect us, and that is his good pleasure, (...), Our
Father is pleased: 3. The manner of conveyance, by Franck Almaigne, to give: 4.
The quality and quantity of the gift; a Kingdom.
Of each of which particulars, because I cannot now particularly discourse,
Ezekiel. 47.
for as much as they seem unto me like Elishaes Cloud, still bigger and bigger,
or like the waters of the Sanctuary, deeper and deeper: I will by your
patience, make the object of our serious speech, the subject of my speech at
this time ( Flock.)

The party to whom this speech is directed, are his Disciples, Verse 1. and
Verse 22. those which he had picked and culled from amongst all the Sons of
Adam, and effectually called to his grace, the Church without that was actually
existent at that present; so that what is here spoken to them, is spoken to the
whole Church of God: They then were, she still is, a Flock of Sheep, for that
is meant as may appear by conference with like places, John 10. 11. 16. 27.
John. 21. 15. Matthew. 25. 33. Psalm. 100. 3. Whence observe two things, 1. The
quality of the members, in that they are resembled unto sheep: 2. The unity of
the whole body, in that it makes but one Flock of Sheep.

Concerning the first, The Church of God is called a Flock of Sheep, not a Herd
of Swine, nor a Kennell of Dog^, nor a Stable of Horses, nor a Fold of Goats,
nor a Mew of Hawks, nor a Capine of Foxes, nor a Den of Wolves, nor a Puddle
full of Toades; because she must not wallow in the filthy mire of sin like
Swine, nor bite one another like Dogs, nor be proud and stomackfull like
Horses, nor stink in her corruption like Goats, nor be ravenous like Hawks,
nor fraudulent like Foxes, nor cruel like Wovles, nor poysonfull like Toades,
but in patience and sincerity, in meekness and simplicity in innocensie and
humility, she must resemble a Flock of Sheep.

So then the ungodly miscreant that drinks iniquity like water, and is frozen
in his own Dregs, and presses the Lord with his sins, as a Cart is pressed
with Sheaves, is a filthy Swine and none of CHRIST'S Flock. The backsliding
Hypocrite, that like Nebuchadnezzars Image, has ^ head of Gold and feet of
Cl^y, a good beginning and a bad ending; that with M^^diabilis, first offers a
golden, then a silver, then a leaden Sacrifice; and with the Gallathians begins
in the spirit and ends in the flesh, is an unclean Dog licking up his own
Vomit, and none of Christ's Flock, the oppressing Landlord, that wringeth, and
squeezes his Tenant like a sponge, and eats up their guts, and pulls the skin
from the flesh, and the flesh from the bones, as the Prophet speaks, Mich. 3.
2. 3.
is a ravenous Wolf, and none of Christ's Flock. The unjust Magistrate that
sits to judge according to the law, and commands to smite contrary to the
Law, and makes his place a Monopoly for himself, Acts 23.
is a wily Fox and none of Christ's Flock: The deceitful Lawyer that hides the
weakness of his Clyents Cause, as the Panther does the deformity of his head,
Plin. lib. 8. cap. 18.
when he would allure other Beasts to follow him, is a deceitful Leopard and
none of Christ's Flock: The Priest and Jesuit, that barbours in every quarter
of our Land, like the Egyptian Frogs and goes about to poison the hearts of
Christ's Sheep, with the enchanted cups of the Italian Circe, is a venamous
Toade and none of Christ's Flock: All those we wish to be removed and separated
from this little Flock, into their own proper Elements: The Sow to the M^re,
the Dog to his Kennell, the Wolf to his Den, the Fox to his Earth, the Leopard
to the Wilderness, the Toade to the stinking Italian Fennes where they be
bred: And I pray God that you R. H. and others like unto you (I mean zealous,
godly, and watchful Shepherds (...) might deal with as many of these as are
incurable and incorrigible, as our Savior dealt with the Gaderens Swine,
Matthew. 8.
when they were possessed with Devils, Drive them into the Sea that they might
be choked in the waters: or as the Legend fables Saint Patrick dealt with the
Irish Toades, or as the Welchmen used the English Wolves, root them out, that
there might not one be left alive to worry the tender Lambs of this little
Flock.

Give me leave in handling the first Point, to touch two or three propertyes of
a Sheep, wherein every man must study to resemble her that will acknowledge
Christ for his Shepherd.

1. She is Sincerum simplex and Sine fraud pecus. Simple without all guile and
dissimulation. 2. Meek without all harm or offense. 3. Patient, without all
desire of revenge.
Concerning the first* We must have this Sheep-like simplicity, and that in
heart, in word, in deed, we must be plain and simple of heart, so we must be
wise as Serpents but simple as Doves* Matthew 10. 16. Plain and simple in speech,
for we must cast off lying, and speak every man the truth unto his Neighbor,
Ephe. 4. 25. Plain and simple indeed: for he that does uprightly, and works
righteousness, shall dwell in Gods Tabernacle. Psalm. 15. 1, 2.

But alas where is that Sheep-like simplicity, Use.
that should be amongst us, where is that true Nathaniell, that true Israelite
in whom is no guile: So far has deceitful hypocrisy prevailed in men's hearts,
that amongst all vocation, ^ in Court and in Country, in Church and in
Commonwealth, dssimulation is now counted a great part of policy, and it is
grown a common Proverb in our mouths, but much more in our practice, Qui
nescit dissimulare nescit vivere. And this sheep-like simplicity is contemned
and condemned for mere folly, and brutish stupidity, in so much that a sheep, a
simple man, and a fool, are become Symonyma, all one in signification, to cog,
to cloak, to fawn, to flatter, to speak what thou never think, and think
what thou never speak. Oh these are high points of wisdom: And as under the
fairest flowers, and greenest grass lie the most poysonful serpents, so
oftentimes under the fairest and sweetest tongues, the most poysonful and
deceitful hearts. Briefly, men so live, as if our Savior had not given this
Commandment, Be wise as Serpents, and simple as Doves: but, Be wise as Doves,
and simple as Serpents. They resemble the Dove and the Serpent too, but in
contrary qualities, the Dove in knowledge, the Serpent in simplicity; for
knowledge (I mean saving knowledge) it is as far from them, as the Dove is from
being a great Statesman, or wise Politician: and for plain and honest
simplicity, it is as proper unto them, as it is to the wily and winding
Serpent: so that it is plain there is no truth in their hearts and ^eynes.

Now if the fountain be polluted, is it likely that the stream will be
clean? If the root be bitter, will the fruit be sweet? If the house be full of
smoke, will the chimney be fair without? I the Clock be out of tune below,
will the Bell strike right above? If the heart be full of deceit and
hypocrisy, will there be truth in our words? Surely no, For of the abundance
of the heart the mouth speaks: And no marvail therefore, seeing we dissemble
with our double hearts, if that be true also which immediately goes before,
They speak deceitfully every one to his neighbor.

And as simplicity is banished from our hearts and tongues* so from our
actions, as we have double hearts, and double tongues, so we have double hands,
and love double dealing. So that we may cry with David, Help Lord, for there is
not a godly man left, the faithful are minished from amongst the children of
men. They speak deceitfully every one to his neighbor, they do but flatter
with their lips, and dissemble with their double heart, Psalm. 12. 1, 2.

And here I could be well contented to break off this point, and pass to
another, without discending to any particulars, but that I see two sorts of men
so directly in my way, that I must needs salute them before I go; both which,
although they converse and live amongst the Lords sheep, yet in nothing, save
in the outward appearance they resemble sheep: Matthew. 7.
Beware of them, for they come to you in sheeps Clothing, but inwardly they be
ravening wolves. Or if they will needs be called sheep, I will be so bold as
call them as they deserve, Rotten sheep. Introrsum turpes speciosus pelle
decora, their hearts are rotten, they are wholly corrupted, they have nothing
but a fair sheeps-skin to cover and conceal their inward deformities from the
eyes of the world.

The first is he that wears a vizard of Religion; the other, that under a cloak
of Law, and consequently of Justice, wor^eth his own private intendments with
the loss and hinderance of other men. The first shrouds himself under God, the
second under the King, both damnable hypocrites: and seeing the Scripture will
warrant us to call every hypocrite a Fool, we may call the first of these Gods
fool, and the second the Kings. To speak a little of either of these by
themselves: the first is our Statute-Prote^tant, our indifferent Apelles, our
hollow-hearted Interimist, our lukewarm Laodicean; which howsoever he make an
outward show and profession of Religion, yet he counts no more of it, then the
Gaderens did of Christ, Matthew. 8.
who made more reckoning of their swine then they did of him: And this man
rather then for Christ's cause he should lose a swine, he can be contented that
Christ should part out of his Coasts. He will make an outward show to the world
as if he did love and reverence the truth: he will perform the outward works
thereof as far as the law of man binds him, but all without a simple and
sincere heart, only upon some sinister respects, and indifferent
considerations. As 1. because he will not be singular, but desires to live at
unity with the people with whom he converseth. 2. For fear of humane Laws. 3.
Religion is to him as a fair Cloak to a beggarly Swaggerer, it hides his
rotten rags, and keeps him from wind and weather. 4. Peradventure it serves him
as a ladder to advance him unto some preserment, and as soon as he has
attained the top of his hopes, he cares not though he push it down with his
heels.

Now because he makes no account of Religion, but only as an instrument to
effect his own private purposes, hereupon it falls out, that he is ready to
embrace any Religion, or no religion, as the circumstance of persons, time and
place shall require. For as they fable of the Sea-god called Proteus, that he
does always resemble the color of the Rock upon which he lies, or as Glass
reflects the visage of him that shall look upon it, or as water forms it self
according to the fashion of the vessel into which it is powered: so he is always
ready to join in profession with them with whom he lives and converseth; the
reason in all is the same, the Proteus and the Glass have no perfect color
nor visage of their own, and therefore they reflect the color and visage of
others that are next unto them. The water has no figure of his own (for
humidum suis terminis non est terminabile) and therefore it applies it self to
the vessel that contains it: And this man has no Religion of his own, it is
enough for him if he have some species and reflection thereof from others. By
this unstablenesse and mutability of profession, may this hypocrite be
discerned, and distinguished from a true Professor. For as wild Apes are
catched while they imitate the motions and dancing of men: so may this same Ape
be catched and disclosed by framing his Religion to the disposition and
affection of others: For though he has no man save himself in his Pater
Noster, yet he has every man in his Creed, because every man's Creed for the
time is his.

This Country is full of this kind of Vermin, I have found it too often
amongst the meaner sort, and I pray God that all of you that are Gentlemen, and
of place and authority in the country, could wash your hands from this sin.
I charge no particular, 1 Cor. 2. 11.
I cannot, For no man knows the things of man, save the spirit of man which is
in him.

Only let me crave leave to propose a few queries, and let every man upon the
examination of his own heart, at his best leisure return an answer. Is there
any among you, any Pharisee, that under a color of long prayers devours widows
houses? Any Absalom, that under pretense of performing a vow, practices
rebellion against his father? Any Jezabel, that under a color of executing
Judgment, sucketh the blood from guiltless Naboth? If there be, (as I hope
there will) a non est inventus returned upon all these. Let me go a little
further: Is there any Ambidexter, that can play with both hands? Any Satyr,
that can blow both cold and hot out of the same mouth? Any Jew that can swear
by God, and by Malchom? Any Assyrian that can serve God and his Idols? Is there
any that can be contented to hear a Sermon in the Church, and to see a Mass at
home? That yoaketh an Ox and an Ass in the same Plow, and wears Linen and
Woollen in the same Garment, and sows his field with mingled seeds? To speak
plain English, that has not Joshuah's resolution; I and my house will serve
the Lord, but comes himself to Church, leaves his wife to say over her Beads
at home, and permits to his children and family, greater liberty in their
Religion, then in their Garments, to shape what fashion they like best? I pray
God there be no such, if there be, I pray God turn their hearts, that there may
be no such: but those that will, maugre what can be said or done unto them,
continue such, and hang like a Thief upon a Gibbet between Heaven and Hell,
God and the Devil, the Pope and the King. It were to be wished they were
handled by the Magistrate as Tullus Fostilius dealt with Motius Suffetius, when
he stood indifferently affected between the Romans and the Fidenates, or used
as Birds use the flying fish, because it is a master in the Sea, the Dolphin
persecutes it there: and because it is a master in the Air, the Fowls set upon
it there: So because they are (...) neither Protestants nor Papists it matters
not if they were expelled out of both their Elements: If not, yet let them fear
and hear Laodiceas censure, Rev. 3. 16. I speak not these things out of any
spleen to any particular persons what soever (he that knows the thoughts of my
heart, knows that I lie not) my worst wish to any of you is the salvation of
his own soul in the day of Jesus Christ. I am persuaded far better things of
many of you, and for others, as far as charity binds me, I judge the best; and
therefore if any be offended at my speech, it is scandalum acceptum non datum,
not I, but his own guilty conscience that deserves the blame. If I should in
this place seek to please man, I were no fit Ambassador of Christ: As long as
the Chyrurgeon works according to the rules of his Profession, let his Patient
weep, and cry, and complain of cruelty, yea and scratch him on the face, he
needs not care for it: And he that rides in the street armed on every side,
from top to toe, what counts he if all the dogs of the Town bark at him? As
long as a man is faithful in his Vocation, and without fear or favor of man,
does those things that are proper to his place, Hic murus aheneus esto, He is
armed on every side with Gods protection, and therefore may say with David, The
Lord is on my Side, I will not fear, what man can do unto me.

But let us come to the other Hypocrite, which I called the Kings Fool, this is
he of whom I may complain, as Nazianzen did of some, Pugnant pro Christo,
contra Christum, says he, and Pugnant pro lege contra legem, say I, they fight
for the Law against the Law, and Legis nomine armantur, and contra legem
dimicant, They arm themselves with the Law to fight against the Law, Leo.
Epist. 83:
as Leo speaks, Ad Palaestinos. Thus the Covetous and the unconscionable
dealer makes the Law his Patron, the oppressing Landlord makes her his
Sanctuary, the deceitful bargainer, makes her his stalking horse, the bloody
Revenger makes her his sword and buckler, to offend his Enemies and defend
himself, and thus she that is ordained for a public good, proves the hurt of
many, she that is the Mistress of Justice proves the Minister of injustice, she
that is a Preserver of Peace, proves a Trumpet and an occasion of War, not that
of her self she is any such cause, no no, but as the middle region, which of
all the three is the coldest, by antiperistasis produces the hottest effect,
Thunder and Lightening, as water which naturally does quench, being poured upon
lime, causes it to burn, as the moral Law, the Law of all righteousness, is
the cause of sin, Romans 7. 8, 10, 11. as the Gospel of Peace is an occasion of
War, Matthew. 10. 34, 35. So our Law, which of it self is holy and Just and
good, by accident turns to be a cause and occasion of Evil.

All the blame hereof rests upon the heads of two men, the wrangling Client,
the unconscionable advocate; the 1. is that Ahab that troubles all Israel, who
is, as Jeremia speaks of himself upon another occasion, a contentious man, and
a man that strives with the whole world, that rough Ismael, that has his hand
against every man, and every man's hand against him, that Salamander that loves
to be bryling and broyling in the fire of contention, Et lachrymas mittit cum
nil lachrymabile cernit, he is never well but when he is doing or plodding some
ill, he goes to Law, not out of a desire of public peace, (for what has he to
do with peace, he may say, as Nero did when he set Rome on fire, (...), etc. So
that it go well with him, he cares not if the whole world be set on fire, not
out of an honest defense of his own Right (for his own conscience tells him he
has none) but either of a desire of revenge, or because he knows himself to
be more skillful in packing and shuffling of Cards, then the party with whom he
is to play, or presuming upon his own purse, or upon the simplicity of his
Adversary, or out of an hope by spinning In infinitum the thread of contention,
and bringing his opposite into an inextricable maze of troubles, to enforce
him, either wholly to depart from his own right, or to say of it, as the Whore
did of the child, Let it neither be mine nor thine, but let it be divided, or
at least (which is the ordinary work that such Archers aim at) to draw him to
a Composition. This is sometimes sacrilege, when it is for depriving the
Church of her right, sometimes these, when it is for stripping men of their
lawful Rights, sometimes murder, when it is out of a desire of Revenge,
sometimes other sins, when other ends are proposed, shrouded and sheltered
under a cloak of Law.

Well, the cause cannot be so bad, so repugnant to common Equity, to Law, to
Honesty, to Conscience, but some will be found to solicit it, and not only
privately to countenance and support it, but publicly, if need so require, to
plead and report it; this is done by such as makes his vocation a Monopoly for
himself, and levels all his pains, not at the public good, but at his
private gain, and in his heart applauds that saying of Vespasian to his son
Titus, Juven. Sueton. in Vesp.
when he gathered a tax from some homly matters, lucri bonus est odor ex re
qualibet, It is no matter how bad the cause be, so the fee be good. Weight it
never so light in the balance of Justice, Gold is a heavy metal, and will
soon make it weight. Of both these I may well use the words of the Heathen
Orator, Tull. off. lib. 1.
Totius injustitiae nulla capitalior est pestis, quam eorum, qui tum, cum
maxim fallunt, id tamen agunt, ut boni viri esse videantur, Of all kinds of
injustice, none is so capital a crime, as of those who when they hurt worst,
yet do they it under a pretense and color of right.

In the time of King Edward the third, Fox. Acts ult.
there was a Phamphlet set out in Latin verse, bearing the style of
Paenitentarius asini, The Asses confessor. The Argument is this, The Wolf, the
Fox, and the Ass go to Shrift, and do penance: First, the Wolf confesses
himself to the Fox, who does both absolve him, and extenuate his faults; then
the Fox makes confession to the Wolf, who obtaines like favor; at last comes
the Ass, and makes his confession, who as his fault was less, so the more he
expected absolution. And what was his fault? marry this: Being very hungry, he
had pulled a Straw out of the Sheafe of a Pilgrim that was traveling toward
Rome; this is no sooner confessed, but it is made a capital crime: Immensum
scelus est injuria quod peregrino
Fecisti Stramen subripiendo sibi.


Such, as for which he must have the rigor of the Law, and that is to be
slain and devoured. The Author of that Book did, no doubt, obliquely gird the
Pope, whom he meant by the Wolf, and his Prelates, whom he understood by the
Fox. I think we may not unfitly apply it to the persons whom we have in hand:
The wrangling Client is the Wolf, the unconscionable Advocate is the Fox, the
plain dealing man is, I would say the Sheep, but the Fable calls him an Ass,
and indeed he is made the Ass, and enforced to bear the burden away: The Fox
and the Wolf shrive themselves one to the other, and all their sins are minced
and qualified, mountains with them are but Mole-hills, blocks in their ways
are but straws, beams in their eyes are but motes, great sins are little sins,
and little sins are no sins: Let the poor silly Ass when he comes to shrife,
the least wrong that can be pretended, especially if it be against one of them,
though it be but the turning of a straw, Immensum scelus est, etc. It is an
action of Trespass, and unless he will compound for the wrong that he has
done, he must undergo the rigor of the Law.

Let not our learned and worthy Lawyers mistake me, as if I sought to disgrace
and defame their profession, I respect, I reverence, I honor it; and I make no
doubt but there are very many of this Profession, as learned and skillful in
the Law, so also honest, conscionable, religious: And (to use Jethros words
concerning Magistrates) men of courage, fearing God, men dealing holily, and
hating covetousness; and such I hope all are that be here present. Now that
which I have spoken concerning them that are deceitful and unconscionable, is
no more a disgrace unto these and their Calling, then it was to Christ's
Apostles, that one of them was a Judas, or to the Leviticall Priests, that one
of them was a Caiphas, or to the Sons of God, the good Angels, Job^ that the
Prince of darkness the Devil was one of their company. Only this one thing let
me beseech them to take notice of, the better that any thing is, the more
dangerous it is, when it is abused. Can there be any thing more necessary then
Fire and Water, when they keep their proper places? displace them, remove the
fire from the hearth into the housetop, and astus, incendia volvunt, it
indangereth the whole Town: remove the River out of its Channel into the mowne
Meadows, and new grown Corn, and, Sternit agros, sternit sata laeta, boumque
labores.


It sweepes away the C^r^, and makes havoc of all. Was there ever Creature
that God made more excellent then the Angels? and yet those Angels that fell,
and kept not their first Estate, no Creature under Heaven so hurtful and
dangerous, as they* Come to man; is there any calling, if ye respect public
peace, so necessary as the Magistrate, whom God has set in his own room, and
styled with his own name: If ye respect the Soul of man, so worthy as the
Minister, if ye respect the health of Body, so necessary as the Physician, if
ye respect the outward and temporal Estate, so requisite as the Lawyer? But
if these abuse their places; if the Magistrate, under a color of executing of
Justice, practice Tyranny, if the Minister for sound Doctrine, preach Heresy,
if the Physician, instead of wholesome Physic, minister poison to his
Patients, who so pernicious? So likewise the Lawyer, if in stead of opening and
explaining the Laws, and defending the right, and standing in the gap, that
falsehood and wrong may not enter, he labor to smother the Law, and outface the
truth, and patronize falsehood, who more hurtful then he? The more you are to
be exhorted, (for you are all but men and no man, walk he never so uprightly,
but he is subject to fall) to walk worthy of that excellent vocation whereunto
you are called; love your Friends, honor the Mighty, regard your Clients,
respect your Fees; The labourer is worthy of his hyre: But prefer truth, and a
good conscience before them all, and let neither might, nor fear, nor Client,
nor Friend, nor Fee, nor any thing in the World, cause you to make shipwreck of
a good conscience, or to give leave to your tongues, which as the Heathen man
said should be Oracles of the truth, to be Bauds and Brokers for an ill cause;
remembering that that description, which old Cato and Quintilian gave of an
Orator, as it agrees to us that are Ministers, so to you also that are
Lawyers, Viz. that he is Vir bonus, dicendi peritus; and therefore as he must
be Dicendi peritus, a good Speaker, to must he also be Vir bonus, a good liver.
Enough of this.

To conclude this first general Point, 2. use.
and so to descend unto the second, (for I will not now trouble you with the
other two properties of a Sheep) seeing the Dove-like, or sheep-like simplicity
is a virtue, wherewith every Member of Christ's Flock must be qualified, we are
all to be exhorted, and let me say unto you with Saint Austine, August. de
verit. cap. 55.
Hortor vos omnes charissimi, meque hortor vobiscum, I beseech you, yea and my
self with you to avoid hypocrosie, and that the rather, because it is a sin
unto which all Adams Posterity are, yea though they be regenerate by the spirit
of God, in a greater or lesser degree subject. To this purpose we are to labor
for single hearts, because these are the soul of our actions, without which,
well they may have a being, yet have they neither life nor moving. For as the
Body, when the Soul is separated from it, how comely soever it be in outward
form, will presently stink and become noisome; so all our words and actions,
whether they concern Piety, or honesty, God or our Neighbor, if the heart be
not joined with them, are but stinking Carrion, and filthy Abominations in the
Nostrils of Almighty God.

The second general Point is the unity of Christ's Church, she is but as one
Flock, as the Sheep under one Shepherd, though never so many, do all concur to
the making of one and the same numericall Flock: So all Christians, though
never so dispersed over the Globe of the Earth, being fed in the green Pastures
of the Lord, which are beside the waters of comfort, do make but one and the
same individual Church. And this the very word it self does imply, if we look
into his Parentage in the Greek tongue, viz. a Congregation, or collection of
many particulars, into one society and city of God, for which cause she is
called one undefiled Love Cant. 6. 8. one Body. Ephe. 4. 4. within which
nothing is dead, without which nothing is alive, as Hugo speaks: one Sheepfold,
John 16 Figured by one fleece of Gideon, which was wet with the Dew of Heaven,
when all the ground beside was dry, shadowed by the Arc of Noah, wherein eight
Persons were saved, when all the rest or the World was drowned, the Boards of
which Arc were conglutinated and pitched together within and without: within,
that she should not loose her own, and without, August. de un. Eccles. Ca. p 5.
Ne admitteret alienam. that she should not leake in foreign waters: as a
Donatist did not unfitly expound it, or rather as Austine moralizeth it, Vt in
compagine unitatis significetur tolerantia charitatis, ne scandalis ecclesiam
tentantibus, sive ab^ijs quritus, abijs sive quae foris sunt cedat fraterna
junctura and solvatur vinculum pacis. August, contra Faustum lib. 12. Chap. 14
reason. 1. In respect of Christ, the Shepherd is one, therefore the Flock but
one, the Bridegroom one, therefore the Spouse but one, the Head one, therefore
the Body but one* In this respect Cyprian holds the whole Church one
Bishopric, not that his meaning is, that any one man should be ministerial
head of the whole church in Christ's corporal absence, and that the Bishop of
Rome, for that were to marry the chaste Spouse to two Husbands, and instead of a
faithful Spouse, to make her a filthy Harlot: Cyprian de Praelat.
Cyprians words will admit no such Interpretation: unus est episcopatus, etc.
And what account he made of the Bishop of Rome, which then was a man of better
worth then al those Magogs, who have possessed that Chair for a thousand
years last past, it may appear by this, that he contemned his Authority,
vilipended his Letters, opposed his Council to his, his Chair to his, called
him a proud man, an ignorant man, a blind man, and little better then a
Schismatic. It is then one Bishopric in respect of Christ, the Bishop of our
Souls, 1 Pet. 2. 25. The sole oecumenicall and universal President of the
whole Church. So then, as there are many Beams proceeding from the same Sun,
yet one Sun, in which they are United, many branches growing from one Tree, yet
one root wherein they are conjoined, many Rivers, yet one Sea wherein they all
meet, many lines in a circle, but one Center wherein they all concur: So the
Members of Christ's Church, though in respect of themselves they be diverse, yet
they have all but one beginning, one Spring, one root, one Head, one Center,
and in this respect all but one; as one in respect of the Head, so in respect
of the Spirit, which animateth every Member thereof. This is the soul that
informs the whole Church, it is that Intellectus agens, of which Philosophers
have so much dreamed, which is Vnas numero, in every Member of Christ's
mystical Body: So that as the integrall Members of man's Body, though of
themselves they be specifically distinct, flesh, bones, nerves, muscles,
veins, arteries, etc. Every one of them having a peculiar, essential, and
specificall form, yet being informed with one humane Soul, they are but
integrall parts of the same man: So all Christians in the World, though in sex,
and state, and degree, and calling, and Nation, and language they be different,
yet being regenerated and animated with the same spirit, they are but integrall
Members of one and the self same Church. 3. One in respect of Faith and
Religion, and profession contained in the sacred volume of the Bible, the two
Breasts of the Church, out of which Christ's Lambs do suck the sincere Milk of
the word, that they may grow thereby: The two Cherubims, that with mutual
counterview do face the mercy Seat, that is Christ, the two great lights that
inlighten the World, the old, like the Moon, to rule the night, the new, like
the Sun, to rule the: day that for the Patriarks, this for us, the two Pillars
to lead us from Egypt to Canaan, the old of a Cloud, dark and obscure in
figures and shadows, the other of fire, bright and clear, both of them making
one, and absolute rule of our faith and profession: she is then one, because
one spirit quickens her, one, because one rule directs her; that is, the
essential form, this is the proper passion flowing from this form, by which
the Church a Posteriori may be demonstrated, For they are my Sheep says Christ
which hear my voice. John 10. 27. thus then briefly, one Spouse, one love, one
Dove, one Body, one Fleece, one Arc, on Spirit, one Faith, one Religion, one
Head, one Shepherd, one Flock.

Here (to come to so me application) give me leave to use the Apostles
protestation. Romans 9. 1, 2.
I say the truth in Christ Jesus, Ilye not* my conscience bearing me witness
in the Holy Ghost, that I have great heaviness and continual sorrow in my
heart, and with the Prophet Jeremy could wish that my head were full of water,
Jer. 9. R. 1
and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the
Schisms and divisions that are at this day in the Christian world. There was a
time (there was, Woe worth that unhappy Tense, there was; but, Est been non
possum dicere, dico fuit, I cannot say there is, I must needs speak as it is)
There was a time when the whole Church of God, in all places of the world, was
of one heart, and one mind, of one accord, and of one judgment. And howsoever
there was, and ever will be some difference about some circumstances of no
great weight, yet was there not the least discrepance amongst them, in any one
essential point of our faith. Vna agebat in omnibus membris divini spiritus
virtus, and erat omnibus anima una, and fidei propositum idem, and divinitatis
celebratio omnibus una, Eusebius. lib. 10. hist. Eccl. Chap. 3. in so much that as
when any member of the body is ill affected, all the rest do conspire to cure
it: or when a house is set on fire, the whole town will run to quench it: So if
any heresy happened to spring in any part of the World, their common desire
was to crush the serpents head, to make it like Jonas his gourd, of short
continuance, and to smother it in the birth, and make it like the untimely
fruit of a Woman, which perishes before it see the Sun: they did conspire to
heal the affected member, and did concu to stay the flame from further
combustion.

Thus did they from the most parts of the world concur at Nice against Arius,
at Constantinople against Macedonius, at Ephesus against Nestorius, at
Chalcedon against Entiches. Thus was the head of Britains snake (as Prosper
Aquitanus tells) Pelagius crushed by provincial Synods, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 25.
in most places of Christendom. And long before these times, when as yet there
was not a Christian Emperor, thus they dealt with Montanus in many of their
Synods. And at Antioch against Paulus Samosatenus, they met from all Churches
under Heaven, as it were against a common theife that stole the Sheep out of
Christ's flock.

But now (O times) the one, and undivided spouse of Christ is like a Traitor
drawn and quattered, the North and the South, the Orient, Romans 1.
and the Occident, each differ from other in sundry material, and essential
points of Faith. And here in the West, that Church whose faith was once famous
through the whole world, which was as a Beacon upon an hill, a guide for all
the Churches round about her, a Sanctuary for orthodoxall exiles, one of the
four Patriarchicall Seas, and that in respect of place and order, the first;
the Empress of the World, the Glory of Kingdoms, the pride and beauty of
Nations, the faithful City, is so estranged from the Bridegroomes Voice, and
has so depraved the purity of Christian religion, both by loosing of her own,
and the taking in of Foreign water, that as one said of Athens, we may say of
Rome, thou may seek Rome in Rome, and can not find it, being become like
unto one of the old Egyptian Temples, beautiful without, and Cats, and Ratts,
and Crocodiles adored within. And whereas she has no more reason to be called
Catholic, then the old Mahometans to call themselves Saracens, then the Jews
had to call Herod that was ready to be eaten with worms a God, then the
Persians that were shortly afterslaine by the Romans, to be called (...) then
Manes had to style himself an Apostle of Jesus Christ, then Celsus the Heathen
Philosopher to entitle his Books written against Christian Religion, Origin
Contra cells. lib. 1.
the word of truth; or Drunkards to be termed good fellows, or light
housewives honest women: (having made the rule of her faith like* Glaucus the
Sea, which loosing some part of his Body by beating upon Rocks and shelves,
has the same repaired by rocks and sand that cleave to him: yet must she be
called the only Catholic Church of Christ, and all others that dissent from
her, although they do consent with Christ, shall be counted and called
Heretics and Scismaticks, and Calvinists, and Lutherans, and Zwinglians, and I
wot not what; even as in former ages, the Arians called themselves
Orthodoxalls, and branded the Catholics with the name of Heretics, and
Homousians, and Johanites, and Ambrosians, and Athanasians: and as he that is
troubled with the vertigo or swimming in the head thinks that the earth turns,
when he stands still, whereas the earth stands still, and his giddy brains
turn, as those that sail from the shore into the maine Sea, think that the Land
goes back from them, when they go back from the Land: So they charge us to
have turned from the truth; when it is not we, but their giddy brains that have
turned, and to have gone back from the ancient, Catholic, and Apostolic
Church, when it is not we, but they that have run backwards, and made an
apostasy.

Hear yet more cause of grief in this little Flock in these North-west parts
of the world, Revel. 18.
which at the commandment of Christ is come out of Babylon. Alas, what a rent
have two or three points of difference made; and those not of such moment, but
that a reconciliation might have been made, if a charitable construction had
been admitted on both sides. It Is worthy the observation which the holy Ghost
sets down, Genesis 13. 7. when there was debare between the Herdsmen of Abraham's,
and the Herdsmen of Lots Cattle, The Canaanites and the Peresites dwelled at
that time in the land; whereupon Abraham was more desirous to make a
pacification: Let there be no strife between thee and me, nor between thy
herdsmen, and my herdsmen, for we are brethren. So say I, let there be no
strife between Abraham and Lot, between Luther and Calvin, nor between the
Herdsmen of either side (especially seeing it is with us as it was with them,
the Canaanite and the Peresite dwells amongst us) for we are brethren: The
matters of difference are not such, but that they may, and I hope will in time
be determined in a lawful Assembly: Till then* oh let no heat of passion melt
the pitch of Noah's Arc, no violence of perturbation burst in sunder the
thread, and knots of Gods net, but both endeavor to preserve the communion of
Saints, and so continue the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. Worthy is
that admonition which Saint Austin gives to certain brethren that did not
fully agree in the doctrine of predestination, I wish these men would hearken
unto it: Itaque dilectiss: ne vos perturbet hujus quaestionis obscuritas. Moneo
vos primum ut de his quae intelligitis agatis deo gratias. Quicquid est autem
quo pervenire nondum potest vestrae mentis intentio, pacem inter vo and
charitatem servantes, a domino ut intelligatis, orate; and donec res ipsa
perducat ad ea quae nondum intelligitis, ibi ambulate quo pervenire potustis:
St. Paul shall english it, Let us as many as are perfect be thus minded: and if
any be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even the same unto you.
Nevertheless in that whereunto we are come, let us proceed by one rule, that
we may mind one thing, Phil. 3. 15. 16.

To come yet nearer home; although peradventure it may befall me, as it does
him, who stepping in hastily to part a fray, gets a broken head for his pains,
and receives blows from both parties: Tamen subibo discrimen, I will hazard my
self, and pro virili aquam infundam in sacrum hunc ignem: I will do the best
I can to power out my Bucket, to quench if I may this holy Fire; I mean the
fire that is burning in our English Church, those hot and fiery flames of
contention about Circumstances and Ceremonies, Figures and Colors (shall I say
more?) toys and trifles, if not in themselves, at least in regard of many
things that are neglected, even by those who most oppugn them, which might be
badges and tokens of unity and consent in our Church; yet prove they (I know
not how) like the waters of Massah and Meribah, causes of strife and
contention, and serve to make a rent in the veil of our Temple, even from the
top to the bottom, and to tear in sunder the seamlesse Coat of Christ Jesus.
Mark those unchristian speeches cast to and fro, and those Books which are by
sundry divulged on both sides, I except neither (and yet I must needs say there
is a difference, the one maintaining the decency and order of our Church, the
other striving to beat down all the carved work thereof, Deuteronomy. 32. 33.
as it were, with axes and hammers) and compare them with the most tart
polemicall books that have been written against, or for the Papists, and you
shall find some of them in bitterness and sharpness of style far exceeding
them, as if their pens were dipped in vinegar and wormwood, or their ink were
made of the blood of Dragons, and the cruel gall of Aspes. Yet Michael the
Archangle, when he strove against the devil; and disputed about the body of
Moses, Lucan pugna Pharsal. lib. 1.
durst not blame him with cursed speaking, but said, The Lord rebuke thee Jude
9* May we not justly exclaim, as the Poet did concerning the civil Wars
between Caesar and Pompey, Quis furor Ocives? what madness is this! quae tanta
licentia linguae, what mean these unbridled terms?

Cumque superba foret Babylon spolianda trophaeis,
Bella geri placuit nullos habitura triumphos.
When we should march with joint Forces against the whore of Babylon, shall we
every man slay his brother, and sheath his sword in his companions bowels? Oh
that they would remember that general name, which as many have taken, as have
taken the Military oath, to fight under Christ's Standard, I mean the name of
Christian. It was thought a good motive to Julius Caesar (in the first of
Tacitus his Annals) to unite the minds of his dissenting Soldiers, to call
them Quirites. Divus Julius seditionem exercitus compescuit uno verbo, Quirites
vocando: And should not the name of Christians be as great a motive to compose
those jarrs, as Quirites was to the barbarous Soldiers? Oh that they would
remember that they are brethren, Genesis 49. 5.
not like Simeon and Levi* brethren in evil; nor like those bred of the
Serpents teeth, which slew one another, as the Poet says,

Mart cadunt subito per mutua vulnera fratres. But brethren bred in one womb,
the Church, fed with one milk, the Word, animated with the same spirit,
governed by the same Lord, justified by the same faith, watchmen over the same
Flock, fighting under the same Banner. Sen. in Thyeste.
Nefas nocere vel malo fratri puta, said he in the Tragedy: and Moses thought
it a good argument to compose the two Israelites which were at odds between
themselves: Sirs, ye are brethren, why do ye wrong one to another? If this be
not of force, oh that they would consider how they weary, and wear, and wast
themselves, while they thus rubb one upon another. It was a pretty invention
of the States of the low Countries, upon some fear of discord between them and
England, when they painted two earthen pots floating upon the Seas, Meteran.
lib. 15
with this motto, Si collidimur frangimur; the like might they justly fear. Si
collidimur frangimur: If we thus be knocked together, we shall both be broken
in pieces: If we thus bite and devour one another, we shall be bitten and
consumed one of another.

And last of all, which is not the least of all, oh that they would consider,
that the Politician at home, and the Papist abroad, looks upon them: and
howsoever they may seem in outward show to incline to the one or the other
party, yet indeed they laugh in their sleeve, and in their hearts say, There,
there, so would we have it: Virgil Aen. l. 2.
Hoc Ithacus velit, and magno mercentur Atridae. It is noted that when the
Grecians strove amongst themselves, Philip got them all into his hands: and
certainly there is not a fitten opportunity then this for the dissembling
Atheist, and the neutralizing Worldling, and the statizing Politician; for the
Foxes, these little Foxes that dwell amongst us, and have already destroyed our
Vines, Tacitus in vit^ Agricol.
and left us nothing upon them save a few small grapes, to obtain their much
desired prey: For these are like the Eele-catchers in the old Poet, it is best
fishing for them in troubled and muddy waters. Tacitus notes of the ancient
inhabitants of this Land, Joh. 11.
that by their continual factions and dissentions, they made an easy way for
the Roman conquest. Britanni factionibus, and studiis trahuntur, nec aliud
adversus validissimas gentesnobis utilius quam quod in communi non consulunt,
sed dum singuli pugnant universi vincuntur. While the present Inhabitants of
this Land tread in the footsteps of those ancient Britannes, behold Hell has
enlarged it self, the Antichristian Synagogue of Rome has hereout sucked no
small advantage, and the Romans do their worst to come and take away (which God
forbid) both our place and our Nation. 3 Use.
True it is (say they) which thou have said; the Church is one Flock, one
Body, one Spouse, one Sheepfold; all the members thereof have one belief, one
heart, one soul. This very point does manifestly demonstrate the Protestants
to be not so much as members of the Catholic Church, because they be at
continual jarrs and wars amongst themselves; To whom I may return this
Proverb, Physician heal thy self: Or I may say as one said unto Philip, when
he began to reprove two forreiners for dissentions between themselves; quoth
one unto him, look first to your own house, and make peace there, and then
reprove your neighbor. Quis tulerit Gracchos de seditione querentes? Our
dissentions we see, we lament and bewail, yet are they neither in number so
many, springing all from one or two roots, or in quality so flagitious, being
matters of question, not of faith, about the hemme and fringe, not about the
garment it self; about the husk, not about the kernel; about ceremonies and
circumstances, not about the essentials and fundamentals of faith, or that they
exclude us not from the society of the faithful, unless Austin, and Jerome,
and Ruffinus, and Epiphanius, and Chrysostom, Cyrill and Theodoret, Ireneus
and Victor, Paul and Barnabas be excluded together with us; who although as was
before said, they consented in all the fundamentals of Religion, yet in some
points of circumstance and ceremony they varied.

But what do all the builders of Babell speak the same language? do all the
Romans agree amongst themselves? indeed as well as Dogs in a Kitchen, or Cocks
in a pit; or as did the Midianites host, and Cadmus his Soldiers, they consent
together as did Herod and Pilate, both at odds amongst themselves, yet both
against Christ. Or as Sampsons foxes, their heads look every one several
ways; marry their tails are tied together with firebrarnds in them for
annoying their enemies; or as the Beasts which Cacus, an old Italian Giant (who
dwelt where the Pope now dwells) was wont to steal from others, which lest by
their footsteps they should be discovered, he was wont to draw into his den
by their tails, their faces looking another way; all the unity that they can
boast of is in the tail, whereby they are drawn to yield and submit themselves
and their works to the censure of the Romish Church, their heads looking
another way. I will not now speak of their actual and moral dissentions,
neither of the many schisms and divisions, which have been in the Romish
Church, when sometimes there were two, sometimes three Popes at once, and for
the space of two years together none at all. Neither will I mention the
difference of their Religious orders, whereof there are, or have been at the
least 100. in many things differing one from another; their intellectual and
dogmaticall differences are such, and so many, as that if I should repeat them
unto you, I should both weary my self, and much abuse your Christian
attention. Our learned Solomon in his Apology for the oath of Allegiance, has
gathered 11. gross contradictions out of Bellarmine: Pappus has observed 237.
different opinions cited in Bellarmine: Crastovius has observed 205.
contradictions amongst the Jesuits: Willet has cited 57. points wherein
Bellarmine contradicts himself, 39. points wherein Popery crosses it self,
100. opposite constitutions in their Canon law, Fox. acts and monuments.
and 70. contradictions between the old and the new Papists: Bishop Ridely has
quoted 17. manifest contradictions out of Steph. Gardener in one question, viz.
touching the Sacrament of the Altar, as they call it: And a worthy Prelate of
our Land in his Catholic Apology has confirmed almost all those positions
which we maintain against the Church of Rome, by evident testimonies out of
their own Writers. What shall I say more? Let the Papists, if they can, name
any maine controversy between them and us, wherein they do agree amonst
themselves. For my part, I think it requires more pains and judgment to set
down the doctrines and positions of the Church of Rome, then demonstratively to
confute and overthrow the same. If I allege Bellarmine, Suarez, or the
greatest Jesuits, Pighius, Catharinus, or who wear the name, one or other
peradventure will reply that it is but a particular opinion, and not the
doctrine of their Church: Whither then shall I go? to the Pope himself? then
say I the Papists must condemn their Communion under one kind; for so did
Gelasius: nay they concur with the Montanists, for so did Zepherinus; with the
Arrians, for so did Liberius; with the Nestorians; for so did Anastasius 2.
with the Monothelites; for so did Honorius; with other Heretics in other
points, for so other Popes have done; (...) thus see you Pythagarus determine.
Here I am put off with the words of their nice and quirling distinctions: The
Pope as a private Doctor may err, Rhenanus in marg. Tertul. adver. Prop.
but as he is Pope, his judgment is infallible: If he be sitting in his Chair
in the Consistory, if he back the whole Church, then he is like Apollo in
tripode, he can speak nothing but Gospel. Marry if he be walking, or riding, or
sitting at Table, he will talk as madly as any of his Cardinals. Now because I
know not what the Popes were doing, how their behavior was when they did thus
and thus determine, Hieron. in Chronic. Athan. Epist. ad solitar. vitam agentes.
whether they were sitting in their Chaires, as Plato was wont when he did
dictate; or walking with the Peripateticks; or which is most likely, lying,
with the Epicures; the Popes authority is not sufficient of it self to prove
this or that to be the doctrine of the Romish Church. Gratian. distinct. 19.
Can. Apost^
Whither must I now go? to their Councils confirmed by the Pope? Indeed these
be the Church representative, or branch of the unwritten word, which is to be
received with no less reverence and authority then the books of the Old and
New Testament. Vid. Bell. de Romans pont. lib. 4. cap. 3.
Well then, I will go no higher then the Council of Trent, it was called by a
Pope, continued by a Pope, confirmed by a Pope: and shall I take this for an
undoubted truth, that whatsoever is there decreed is universally received
amongst Papists? Oh but the very Council it self, though it has been sundry
times attempted, yet could it not be received into the Kingdom of France, nor
is as I suppose to this day. Yea, and in Italy and Spain too, both private
Doctors, yea and Popes too have crossed the determinations of that Conventicle.
I will instance in one particular; the Council of Trent commands that the old
and vulgar edition shall be received for authentical, and that no man under
any pretense whatsoever, shall once dare or presume to reject it. And yet
Bellarmine, a great Champion of that Synagogue, holds that in four cases it is
lawful to appeal from it to the Original Languages: and Azorius, Vega, Sixtus
Sinansis, Canus, Lindanus, and diverse others since that Council do aver, that
in that edition there are many gross errors, and ridiculous Soloecismes, not
only by the negligence of Writers and Printers (which the Lovanianists, and
Colonianists have noted in the Margent) but by the negligence and ignorance of
the Interpreter himself: yea and Popes themselves contrary to the Precept and
Decree of that Synod, have revised and corrected the same. For about 43. years
after the first publication of this Decree, Dr. James.
Sixtus 5. did review and correct the whole Bible; and publishing it in the
last year of his Popedom, did command that that of his should for evermore
stand in force, upon pain of the great Curse: and yet within three years after
this comes Clement 8. with a new Edition in many hundred of places, different
from that of Sixtus, the diversities whereof being gathered together by a
painful Antiquary into a Book, which he intituleth Bellum Papale, do make a
pretty volume; and this latter must (I trow) upon no less penalty be received
for authentical. These be they that boast of unity, and make Consent a mark of
the Church.

But let us grant that unto the Papists which they are never able to make good,
that Rome is at Peace with her self, will it hence presently follow, that that
Church is this little Flock? Thieves and Robbers are at peace amongst
themselves, and true men may go to Law one with another. The Scribes and
Pharisees, yea Herod and Pilate agreed in crucifying Christ: The the Kings of
the earth stood up, and the Rulers took counsel together against the Lord, and
against his Christ. Psalm. 2. 2. They have cast their heads together with one
consent, and are confederate against thee O God, the Tabernacles of the
Edomites, and Ismaelites, the Moabites and Hagarens, Geball and Ammon, and
Amaleck, the Philistims, with them that dwell at Tire, Ashur is also joined
unto them, Psalm. 83. The Nobles and Princes and Dukes and Judges, and all
agreed in the dedication of the Image which Nebuchadnezzar bad set up; they
must either be at peace with God, or their braggs are wind: There is no true
peace amongst men when they war with God; there is no truth in unity when
there is no unity in truth. Now how they agree with the Spirit of God speaking
unto us in the holy Scriptures, he that will hear them (...) speak shall
quickly discern. God forbids that any Image be made to any religious use, or
being made, to be worshipped, the Church of Rome commands both; God commands
that the Sacrament shall be ministered in both kinds, the Church of Rome
commands that the greatest part of Christians have it but under one kind: God
teaches us, that howsoever before men we are justified by works, yet before
him we are justified by Faith without the works of the Law; the Church of Rome
teaches that we are not justified before God by faith without the works of the
Law. God tells us that we must pray with the understanding, the Church of Rome
maintains praying in a strange tongue; God says that Marriage is honorable
amongst all men, the Church of Rome denies it: God calls the prohibition of
marriage a Doctrine of Devils, the Church of Rome makes the prohibition of
marriage equal to Canonical Scripture: God has taken away all legal
distinction of meats, and tells us that every creature of God is good, 1 Timothy 4.
etc. they, the Church of Rome, puts more religion in abstinence from meats,
then in the observation of Gods precepts: Briefly, whereas the sum of the
whole Bible is comprehended in the Decalogue and Creed, and both these included
in the Lords prayer; there is not a Commandment in the Decalogue, scarce an
Article in the Creed, or petition in the Lords prayer, against which, if not
directly, yet indirectly and by consequence, they do not offend; they ascribe
an inward religious worship to Saints, against the first Commandment, they
adore Images against the second, they maintain swearing by the creatures,
invocation of Saints, they dispense with Oaths against the third, with greater
strictness they observe their own holidayes and fasting days then the Lords
day, against the fourth; they extol the Pope above all Emperors and secular
Princes, they admit Children into religious Orders without consent of Parents,
against the fifth; they teach and practice rebellions, murders, and massacres
of such as be opposite unto them in matters of Religion, against the sixth;
they prohibit marriage and allow the Stews, against the seventh; they hold
that in extreme necessity it is lawful to take another man's goods, against
the eighth; they maintain equivocation and mental reservation, against the
ninth; they hold that concupiscence, unto which the will does not yield consent,
is not properly a sin, and so overthrow the tenth; that concupiscence unto
which the will yields her consent, being forbidden in the former precepts.

Not to trouble you further, the sum of all is this, Such is the unity of the
Romish Church, as neither old Papists agree with new, nor old with old, nor new
with new, nor new with old, nor School Doctor with School Doctor, nor Friar
with Friar, nor Priest with Priest, nor Jesuit with Jesuit, nor Pope with
Council, nor Pope with Pope, nor one with another, nor any with God: And
therefore as he in Plutarch, who when he cast a stone at a Dog, happened to
light upon his Stepmother, said, That though it was besides his purpose, yet
it was not greatly amiss: The Printer of Doctor Reynolds his Theses.
Or as the Printer of a learned Treatise, when in stead of Cardinales he
Printed Carnales; although it was besides the intent of the Author, yet was it
neither incongruous Latin, nor false English. So if Bellarmine in setting
down the works and rules of the Catholic Romish Church, when he made Vnitas
for One, if in writing of Vnitas he had overreached a little with his Pen, and
added one Vowell more and made it Vanitas, though it had been beside his own
intendment, yet had it neither been beside, nor against the truth: this being a
proper passion immediately flowing from the principles of that Church, and
consequently an inseparable mark whereby to discern her.

But to leave the Papists, Last use, exhortation to all.
and with an exhortation to all, to make an end of all, Is the whole Church of
Christ but one flock? then let us all which profess our selves to be members
of this Church, of what calling and condition soever we be, bend all our
endeavors, nor for our own particulars, but for the peace and good, and
preservation of the whole; even as the members of a man's body (which is a fit
emblem of Gods Church) do not so much tender their own good, as the safety
and preservation of the whole; and because the bond of this Unity is Peace, let
it be the care of you that are Magistrates to maintain peace, and of us that
are Ministers to Preach peace, and of you that are Lawyers to procure peace,
and of you that are Jurors to conclude peace, and let us all with joint
consents pray for the peace of this Jerusalem, that plenteousnesse may be
within her Palaces, and peace within her Walls, peace in matters of opinion,
and peace in matters of action, peace in matters of piety, and peace in matters
of equity, peace with God and peace with our selves, and peace with all men,
remembering that God himself is called the God of peace, and his Gospel the
Gospel of peace, and his natural Son the author of peace, and his adopted
Sons the children of peace.

But especially let me entreat, yea and as an Ambassador of Jesus Christ,
charge you that are Magistrates of our Country, Justices of the peace, to make
your practice agree with your names: I use this exhortation the rather because
I may use the same words to you which the Apostle did to the Corinthians, It
has been certainly declared unto me that there are contentions among you: and
one says I am Paul's, another, I am Apollos: Who is Paul, or who is Apollos,
but the servants of Christ, and members with you of the same body; let no man
so respect one particular member, as that he neglect the whole, the whole
Church militant, and so every particular Church is like unto that Ship wherein
Paul sailed under the Roman Centurion from Sidon toward Rome: Act. 27.
Caelum undique and undique pontus. She is amidst a glassie Sea, every where
beset with dangers: Vna Eurusque Notusque ruunt -- The air thunders, the winds
blow, the rain falls, the Sea rages, the waves rise and beat upon the Ship:
Exoritur clamorque virum stridorque rudentum, the ropes crack, Virg. A^n. lib.
1.
the men cry, they are carried up to the Heaven, and down again into the
deep, so that their souls even melt within them: What must be done in this
case? Every man must shift for himself and his friend, and leave the Shipp to
the merciless Seas; or as Parnus his Mariners did, fall together by the ears
about a rotten Shippboard, and hurt, and wound, and disgrace, and displace one
another? No no, but the Centurion must command, the Pilot must guide the
Compass, Paul must preach, the Mariners must row, every man in his place, all
private respects set aside, must labor to bring the Ship to Land.

Let me then with the blessed Apostle beseech you, that all injuries forgotten,
all wrongs forgiven, all factions abandoned, all contentions and discords
buried, ye walk as the Elect of God, holy and beloved, put on tender mercy,
kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long suffering, forbearing one
another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel to another, even
as God for Christ's sake forgave you; and above all things put on Love, which is
the bond of perfection, and let the peace of God rule in you, and the God of
peace shall be with you. Colos. 3.


Once again for conclusion of all, let me with the same Apostle exhort you, if
there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship
of the spirit, if any compassion and mercy, fulfill my joy (my joy, nay your
own joy, and the joy of all Gods Elect children) that ye be like minded,
having the same love, that nothing be done through contention and vain glory,
but that in meekness of mind every man esteem better of another then of
himself, supporting one another through love, endeavoring to keep the unity
of the spirit in the bond of peace, being of one heart and one soul, of one
accord and one judgment, even as the Church whereof we profess our selves to
be members is but one Flock, and the Governor of this Flock but one Shepherd,
and the milk of this Flock one Word, and the soul of this Flock one Spirit,
and the inheritance of this Flock one Kingdom; and that I may neither add to,
nor detract from the Apostles words, As there is one hope of our Vocation, one
Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, which is above all,
and through all, and in us all; consider what I say, and the God of Gods give
you wisdom to know, and a conscionable endeavor to put in practice that
which has been said.

The second Sermon.
LVKE 12. 32. Fear not little Flock, for it is your Fathers good pleasure,
etc.
CYRUS, Herod. lib. 1.
when he went against Babylon, falling in his way upon Gyndes a Navigable
River, for his more speedy dispatch he caused it to be cut into many streams,
and the event was answerable to his expectation, for by that means he found a
safe and ready passage for his Army and Carriages. When I first looked upon
this River of God, in hope of the like event, I did the like, but the success
has proved different, for whereas I might in an hours space have swimmed it
over (going in one Channel) having cut it into two streams, and divided
either into sundry smaller Rivers, it has proved like Elishaes Cloud, ever
bigger and bigger, or like the waters that flowed out of the Temple in Ezekiels
vision, ever broader and deeper, Caelum undique and undique pontus: So that it
has cost me one days travel already, and is like to put me yet to more
before I shall be able to waft it over.

The last time I spoke in this place upon this occasion, this Scripture was
divided into two streams.

First, An encouragement against all humane and mundane fears.

Secondly, A reason, For it is your Fathers, etc.

In the first of these, 1. A dehortation, 2. The object of it, Flock: 3. The
quantity, Little.

In the second: First a gift, a Kingdom: 2. The Donor or Grantor, your Father:
3. The Grantees, not to all, but to his children, You: 4. The manner of
conveyance in Franck Alms, He gives it: 5. The cause impulsive, or the
consideration, not Faith, nor foreseen works, nor any thing in man, but that
love wherewith from everlasting he loved them, (...), It is your Fathers good
pleasure: Or, Your Father is well pleased. I began with the object, and made it
the subject of my speech at that time, and therein observed, first the unity of
Christ's Church, it is but one Flock: Secondly, the quality of the members, a
Flock of Sheep, not a heard of Swine, etc. So far already.

We are now to come to the second branch, the quantity of Christ's Church, A
few, Matthew. 7. A remnant, Romans 9. 27. A little Sister, Cant. 8. 8. A little
City whose inhabitants are few, beleaguered by a mighty King ( Satan) and
preserved by the wisdom of a poor man ( Christ.) So Olympiodorus expounds
that of Eccles. 9. 13. A little Flock here in my Text: Little in two respects:
First, little in the esteem of the World: Secondly, little in comparison with
the World: From which two respects we may gather these two propositions.

1. Those that are in the sight of God the dearest, are commonly in the eyes of
men of meanest and basest esteem. 2. The number of true Believers is little,
being compared with the World.
The former of these (for I must handle them severally) although to a natural
man it may at the first blush rather seem a Philosophical Paradox then a
Theological conclusion, especially seeing man naturally desires that which is
good, and what he desires he loves, and the better any thing is, the more he
loves it, and the more he loves it the more he esteems it: Yet he that is
acquainted with the Oracles of God, and the writings of the Ancient, and the
practice of present times, and finds what befell the Patriarcks and Prophets,
and Apostles, and Evangelists, and Martyrs, and Confessors, and Christ
himself, and the best in all Ages since the Serpent began to bite the heel of
the Woman's Seed, and sees what miseries they endured, what indignities they
suffered, in what account and estimation they were had in the World, will
rather take it for an undoubted principle then a disputable Problem. That
which David spoke of himself, or of Christ, whereof he was a figure, was true
of all Prophets and Patriarchs, before, and in his time. I am a worm and not a
man, a shame of men, and the contempt of the people; all that see me have me in
derision, Psalm. 22. 6, 7. We are a reproach to our neighbors, a scorn and
derision to them that are round about us, Psalm. 79. 4. Paul speaks or himself
and the rest of the faithful in his time, We are made a gazing stock to the
World, and to Angels and to men: We are fools, we are despised, we are made
the filth of the World and of-scouring of all things, 1 Cor. 4. And that which
the Pagans spoke of one, they meant of all that were of his profession: Bonus
vir Caius Sejus, sed mutus tantum quod Christianus: Nomen non crimen in nobis
damnatur; and ignotam sectam vox sola praedamnat quia nominatur, non quia
revincitur, says Tertullian: And yet to say the truth, Tertul. Apol.
they spared no lies to excuse themselves, and make Christians more odious to
others. Pliny calls Christianity, Plin. Epist. Aunal. lib. 15.
a wicked and excessive superstition: Christiani per flagitia invisi, says
Tacitus: And again, Exitialis superstitio Christianorum, the deadly
superstition of Christians. Christiani genus hominum novae ac maleficae
superstitionis, says Suetonius: In Nero.
These were but small crimes; they were Idolaters, troublers of States,
overthrowers of Empires: Atheists with Diagoras, Worshippers of the Sun with
the Persians, incestuous like Oedipus; Man-eaters like Thyestes, and what not?
And what marvel that these should find such entertainment with strangers,
when their Master found no better entertainment with his own, but was
accounted as Isaiah long before had foretold, a man forsaken and contemned of
men, Isa. 53. A deceiver, a Samaritane, a Wine-bibber; a friend of Publicans
and Sinners; nay, a Witch, a Sorcerer, whom none of the Rulers or of the
Pharisees, but a few ignorant and cursed people which knew not the Law, made
any reckoning of* John 7. 48. I dare not spinn along this thread to our times,
neither is it needful I should, seeing these present days do sufficiently
demonstrate my proposition to be true; I speak not of the Beast, and those that
have its mark in their foreheads and right hands, between whom and such as are
sealed with the Seal of the living God, there must needs be immortale odium
and nunquam sanabile vulnus, a wonderful great antipathy as between the
Serpents and the Woman's Seed. I count little, how little these account of us,
it is indeed a singular honor to be dishonored by them: I speak not I say of
these, though these do sufficiently confirm the truth of my proposed Doctrine.
It is well known (would God I might be found a liar) that even in our English
Church which is fled out of Babylon, and professes her self to be a follower
of the Lamb whethersoever he goes: such as yet carry the most evident and
apparent mark of Gods Sheep in their foreheads, are not by professed Enemies,
but by many thousands which in outward profession join with them, counted the
excrements of Christians, and outcast of all things, and branded with the
odious names of Precisians, Catharists, Puritanes, and I wot not what: odio est
in hominibus innocuis nomen innocuum, as Tertullian spoke of Christians in his
time.

Mistake me not, I desire to be counted a Son of our English Church, and am not
come to make an Apology for our Donatists, that have burst the unity of Gods
Net, because of the bad Fish that are within it, and have leapt out of Gods
Fold because of the Goats, and have forsaken his Field because of the Tares,
and his floor, because of the Chaff which they find mingled with the Wheat:
those that will live in no Church on Earth, but such as is without spot or
wrinkle, must (as Constantine said to Acesius a Novatian Bishop) make Ladders
for themselves to climb into Heaven, here is no place for them under the Sun.
Neither go I about to patronise such as agree with us in the Fundamentals, but
differ in the Ceremonies and circumstances of Religion, that hold with us the
substance, but as David did to Saul, would pull a lap of our Garment, and hew
down the carved work of our Temple, as it were with Axes and Hammers. I never
thought it a sound Argument that Ceremonies must be abolished, because they
have been abused: for if the abuse should make the thing unlawful, there is
nothing in the world which a tender conscience might not make scruple of: the
Sun, the Moon, and all the Host of Heaven, the Earth which we tread upon, the
Air which we breath, our Meat and Drink which nourish us, our Apparel which
cover us, the Bells, the Pulpit, the Font, the Church, and what cannot have
been wickedly abused? We abridge the liberty of the Church too much, if we
think that it may not use any thing which the Pope or others misused, says
Peter Martyr in an Epistle written to Hooper Bishop of Gloce ^er, there being
some cavelling at that time between him and Ridly then Bishop of London, about
some Ceremonies of the English Church: the one seeking to abolish them, the
other to maintain the lawful use of them, yet were they both so far from
Popery, that he that stood so stiff for those Ceremonies, was as ready as the
other in Queen Mary's days to spend his best blood in defense of the Gospel.
Our Elders, if not before the Egg was laid, yet before the cockatrice of
Popery was hatched, were of another opinion, when they converted the Temples
that were erected to heathenish Gods, and the reverence which were due to the
Vestall Virgins, and Idolatrous Priests to the service of the true God. And
this is the meetest sense that can be taken in the Judgment of any that is not
wedded to his own conceit, to take away the abuse and keep the thing: we have
no commandment to deal with false Religion, as Saul was commanded to do unto
Amelek, to root out good and all that belonged unto it: but rather as Joshuah
was instructed to deal with Jericho, to destroy the execrable things, to
reserve the Silver and Gold, and Vessels of Brass and Iron, for the Treasury
of the Lord. It is a pretty saying of Austine, Lib. de ser. Domini in mon. lib.
2.
non debet ovis pellem deponere quod lupi aliquando eam j^duunt, the Sheep must
not therefore put off his Skin because Wolves are sometimes clothed in
Sheeep-skins.

Let no man then take me to be a Pleader for such, although I must confess
that I have partly learned Judes Rule, to have compassion of some in putting
difference, such as not out of a spirit of contradiction, but out of a
tenderness of conscience, choose rather to forgo all worldly preferment, then
to have the Eye of their Souls (their Consciences) troubled with the least
mote: I cannot choose but lament their cases, as he did the seduced Prophet,
Alas my Brother, 1 King. 13. 30. and be^one the Churches loss, as the
Israelites did theirs of the Benjamites because a Tribe was perished out of
Israel, Judge. 21. 6.

But now to return to that from whence for mine own excuse I have somewhat
digrest: that such as neither make any Donatisticall Separation from our
Church, neither any Rent in our Church, but allow and approve as well the
Ceremonies, as the fundamental points of our Religion, if they strive to sail
against Wind and Weather, and to swim against the Stream, and (as much as
humane practice will permit) to keep themselves unspotted in the World: Should
in Streets, in Markets, in Tavernes, on Stages, yea in Pulpits, and Books too
be branded for Puritans, because by their Lives and Conversations, they give
Evident Demonstration that they are of this Flock (for other Reason I cannot
give) Quis talia fando temperet a lacrimis? This shows, that all they are not
Israel which are of Israel, but woe unto them that call Good evil. If thou
abhor that beastly and swinish sin of Drunkenness, and either envy against,
or refuse to be an ordinary Companion to such: Thou art a Puritan, if thou
can not endure that blasphemous, horrible, hellish swearing, which is so
common almost in all Professions, that we may justly renew St. Austins
Complaint, Et cum creduntur jurant, and cum non creduntur jurant, and
horrentibus hominibus jurant, and plura sunt plerumque juramenta quam verba:
Thou art but a Puritan, if thou exclaim against the Chemarims and Baalites of
Rome, thou art with Elias, a Troubler of Israel, inclining to Puritanisme: if
thou make a Conscience of keeping the Sabbath, and call it a Delight to
consecrate it as glorious to the Lord, as thou art commanded, Isa. 58. 13. Hic
nigrae succus loliginis, haec est aerugo mera, it is a strong strain of a
Puritan. Hereupon it falls out, that as of old Arius, for avoiding of
Sabellianisme, fell into a more dangerous Heresy, and Eutiches for fear of
Nestorianisme defended a contrary, but worse Error: And Pelagius, out of
dislike of Manichisme founded a proper heresy of his own: So many amongst us,
(verifying Horace his Verse In vitium ducit culpae fuga si caret art; like
unskilful husbandmen, who going about to make strait a crooked piece of wood
bend it so far the other way, that instead of striaightning of it they break
it) for avoiding of Puritanisme, fall into more pernicious Erours, then either
the old or new Catharists ever maintained, to wit Papisme, Neutralisme, and
Libertinisme, and Epicurisme, and Arminianisme, and Atheism: They care not
what they be, so they be not counted Puritans. Hos populus ridet, multumque
torosa juventus: The name is so generally derided, they cannot endure it. Thus
then it has been, thus it is at this day, and thus no doubt it will be in
times to come; they that are in the sight of God the dearest, shall commonly in
the eyes of men be of little and base account.

The Reason of this Proposition are chiefly two.

The first arises from the difference of Judgment between the World and the
Sons of God.

The second from the enmity and Antipathie of the Serpents Seed against the
Woman's.

For the first, Gods Ways are not as Man's Ways, nor his Thoughts as man's
Thoughts. The Wisdom of the World is foolishness with God; and the Wisdom
of God to a natural man seems foolishness. The reason is, because a natural
man cannot perceive the things of the Spirit of God, such knowledge is too
wonderful and excellent for him, he cannot attain unto it, he wants a
Spiritual Eye to discern Spiritual things.

The Milesians objected to Thales, that the Study of Astronomy and other
liberal arts, was idle and fruitless, because it commonly fell out, that
those that study them the most, were the poorest: and when the same of
Aristotle his learning was spread abroad through all the Regions of Greece,
many desirous to be acquainted with that which they heard by Report from
others, flocked to Athens to hear him read a Philosophy Lecture: when they
were come into his School, and heard him make a large discourse about the
Subject of the Metaphysics, Ens, and Vnum, and speak never a word, how a man
might augment his Goods, and enlarge his Possessions; they altered their
Judgments, and (for all his wisdom) counted him but a fool, to leave that by
which a man may become great in the World, and discourse about such abstruse
and abstract notions as they could not understand.

This is the Worlds judgment still, to count light of all that savours not of
some present profit, or pleasure; he declines his felicity no further then the
present Tens a Lease for life in this World is of more worth with him, then the
Reversion of a Kingdom in another; and therefore the Child of God that looks
not on the things that are seen, but on the things that are not seen; and first
seeks, and then sets his affections on the things that are above, and makes
more reckoning of a peaceable conscience, then a worldly Kingdom, is by him
contemned, and reputed a fool by troubling himself with such metaphysicall
notions as he (the worldling) cannot understand. A Jueller makes reckoning of a
Pearl, but Aesops Cock, that knows not the use of it, counts it but a Babble.
When Protogenes the Painter did earnestly eye a Picture made by Apelles,
admiring the curiousness of the workmanship; an ignorant man comes to him and
tells him, that he wonders why a Painter should admire that Picture, for I have
seen (said he) a hundred better: Oh said Protogenes, if thou had mine eyes
thou would never ask me that question, but would judge as I judge. The
child of God looking upon heavenly things with a spiritual eye, prizeth them
at a dearer rate then ten thousand Worlds all of Gold and Pearl: But an unwise
man that does not consider these things, and a fool that does not understand
them (because he wants a spiritual eye) does far undervalue them; as he that
measuring the Sun by his eye, conjectures it to be but a foot and a half broad
(as Tully notes) which Mathematicians know to be far bigger then the whole
Globe of the Earth and Water.

When the Romans for the good service performed by the Cappadocian Slaves,
offered them liberty (which all creatures naturally desire) they not knowing
the benefit thereof, because they had ever lived in bondage, refused it. The
worldling scorns and contemnes that liberty which the Sons of God have in
Christ, because having ever been bound with the evil Angels in chains of
darkness, he knows not what that means, If the Son make you free you shall be
free indeed. This is the first cause of contempt of Gods Children with the
worldling, he understands not the things of the Spirit of God; he counts them
foolishness, and him that studieth them no better then a fool in respect of
himself.

The second is the antipathy between the Woman's Seed and the Serpents: I will
put enmity between thee and the Woman, and between thy Seed and her Seed, said
God to the Serpent, Genesis 3. 15. Hic incipit liber bellorum Domini, says
Rupertus: true; for the whole Scripture is a Book describing the Wars between
the Serpents Seed and the Woman's; which shall be continued until the
consummation of the World. Basil writes of the Panther, that he has such a
mortal hatred against man, that he cannot endure his picture, insomuch that if
he see it but drawn in Paper he will presently pull it in pieces: The Serpent,
that Hellish Panther, bears such an inveterate hatred against God, that he
cannot endure his Picture; and therefore when he saw Gods Image drawn in a
piece of earth, I mean in Adam at the creation, he was never at rest till he
had pulled it in pieces: and in whomsoever he shall find it drawn anew (as it
is in all believers, though not so perfectly as was the first draught) against
them he and his Imps bear an implacable hatred, and labors with tooth and
nail to tear in pieces this Image, if they cannot this, then at least to keep
them under that wear it; or as the Garderens dealt with Christ, to keep such
out of their coasts: By a Law of Ostracisme they will banish such out of their
company, Plut. Herod. Tullie, Tuscul. quaest. lib. 5.
as the Athenians did themselves, and the Spartans Demaritus, and as the
Ephesians used Hermodorus, who cast him out of the City because he was a trusty
and an honest man, adding this sentence, Let none of us be over good for ought,
if he be let him seek another place, and get him other companions.

Here then (beloved Christian) learn not to be discouraged for this that thou
art not respected, Use.
nor had in account with many worldlings as thou deservest; the more the men of
this World shall hate, the more strive thou to be unlike them, that they may
hate thee; the more Invidia rumpantur ut ilia Codri: They contemn thee because
they do not know thee; thou art not of the World, what marvel if the World
hate thee, thou art a stranger, care not if the Dogs bark at thee: The
Philosopher in Laertius said of a Dancer, Apud Diogen. Laertium.
Quo melius feceris eo deterius facias, and Quo deterius eo melius, The better
thou dancest the worse thou art, and the worse the better: So the better thou
art in the Worlds judgment, the worse thou art; and the less thou art in the
Worlds account, the greater art thou in Gods: As Tacitus speaks of the Images
of Brutus and Cassius, which were not showed amongst the rest in Tiberius his
time, Eo honoratiores quod non ostendebantur: So the more thou art despised the
more honorable art thou, if thou can enjoy riches and honors and favor
with the men of this World, as Joseph under Pharaoh, and Obediah under Ahab
thou may, so that it be without the loss of Gods favor: if thou can not,
count not of the loss. The woman clothed with the Sun, treads the Moon under
her feet, Revel. 12. If thou be clothed with the wedding Garment of the Sun of
righteousness, and the bright beams of the Gospel inlighten thy dark and
cloudy heart, all worldly honors, riches, pleasures (which are as mutable as
the Moon, tread them under foot, and set them at naught: requite the worldlings
with a like kindness, have the most precious things on earth in as base
esteem as they have thee. This is a lesson (I confess) hard to be learned, and
practiced by very few: No marvel Christ's Flock as it is little in estimation
and account of the World, so is it also little in comparison with the World,
which is the second proposition observed from the quantity.

It is true which the essential truth has told us, That many are called, yet
not so many as the upholders of universal Grace would have us to believe; for
he that showed his Laws unto Jacob, his Statutes and Ordinances unto Israel,
and dealt not so with any Nation, nor gave the Heathen knowledge of his Laws:
he that prohibits to cast Pearls before Swine, and to give that which is holy
to Dogs, he that brings a drought upon one City when he makes it rain upon
another: he that commands Paul to Preach in Macedonia, and forbids him to
Preach in Asia, shows plainly that he is not tied in any obligation to offer
so much as the internal means of Salvation to all, but of those many that are
called few are chosen, Matthew. 20. Will ye have a type of it, six hundred
thousand are called out of Egypt, but only two of them enter into the
promised Land: Three and twenty thousand are called to fight against Midian,
but only three hundred are chosen, Jud. 7. Gideons Fleece is wet when the
whole Earth is dry. Eight persons are saved in the Ark, when the whole World,
that would not hearken unto the Preacher of righteousness, is drowned: five
Cities are burned, only three Souls that believed God and fled unto the Hills
were preserved. The Seed falls four ways out of the Sowers hand; some amongst
Thorns and that is choked: some amongst stones, and that is withered; some by
the way side, and that is devoured, scarce the fourth part falling into good
ground is preserved: Christ has a little Flock, but the Devil has a
Kingdom, nay a world of Kingdoms: All these are mine: He lied, but in some
sort his speech was true; he is the Prince of this World, he drives the whole
World in a drift before him, as a Butcher does his Flock to the Shambles:
Christ catches here a Sheep and there another out of Satan's Drove, to make up
to himself a little Flock; he has the Vintage, Christ has the Gleanings, as
the scattered Grapes when the Vintage is ended, and as the after shaking of an
Olive Tree, here a Berry and there a Berry on the outmost boughs, Isa. 24. 13.
For this cause, as if it were too much that Christ's Church should be called a
Flock, it is elsewhere called a Household, Ephesians. 2. Gal. 6. This is too large a
name, and therefore is it limited: in a House there be Vessels of honor and
Vessels of dishonor, the former only are Christ's, the other he leaves to
Satan: there be Sons in an house, and there be Servants, Christ makes challenge
to none but Sons and Daughters, the reason is plain; the way to Hell is a
broad way, they may go by thousands to it, there is room for Foot and Horse,
and Cart and Coach and all; it is plain and pleasant, no hedges to keep
passengers in, no mire to withhold them, no blocks to stop and hinder their
passage: But the way to Heaven (like that described by Livie to Tempe in
Thessalie) is but one single narrow craggy path, all that go that way, Dec. 4.
must (as near as may be) tread in the footsteps of him that is gone before,
Viz. Christ: There is the sharp thorny hedge of the Law to pale them in, and
the fiery Cherubs to affray them, and the blade of a Sword shaken to discourage
them, and the mire and clay of tribulation to keep their legs, as it were, in
the stocks, and many blocks and stops does Satan cast before them to bring them
to the ground; and when thou art come to the gate, it is but like a needles
eye: If thou be puffed up with luxury and drunkenness, thou must empty thy
self: If thou be swelled with pride and ambition, thou must humble thy self:
If thou be laden with the dross and trash of this world, thou must disburthen
thy self, thou must pull down thy topmast, and strike sail, and become
slender and little, and nothing in thine own eyes, or thou shall never find
entrance.

This being thus, I much wonder why either Bellarmine, or the most impudent and
brazen-faced Divine that ever the Roman Church bred, should not blush to place
multitude, and a glorious visibility of Professors amongst the infallible marks
of the true Church; which if they prove, I will not say to be proper and
inseparable marks (the mark which Bellarmine aims at) but to carry so much as
a show of probability, I dare boldly infer that neither Abraham, nor any of
the Patriarchs; nor Elias, nor any of the Prophets; nor Athanasius, nor any of
the Orthodoxall Bishops of that time; nor Christ, nor any of his Apostles were
of the true Church: all of which had multitude, and glorious visibility of
Professors as strongly against them, as the Romanists can prove it to be on
their side. Where was this multitude and visibility, when Abraham and his Wife
were Pilgrims in Egypt, and Canaan, and had not so much as a child to leave
behind them? where, when Elias complained that he was left alone, that small
remnant which God had reserved to himself being so hid, that they were unknown
to Elias himself, though a principal member of the Church? Where, when the
Prophet complained, that not a righteous man could be found in Jerusalem? Jer.
5. 1. Where, when Christ first began to preach, and made choice of 12. Apostles
for this purpose, one of which proved a thief. Where in the time of the Arian
persecution, when to use Hieroms words, the whole world groaned and wondered to
see her self become an Arian? When this plague spread over the whole Christian
world, and infected two Bishops of Rome, and was strengthened by ten several
Councels, in which the decrees of the Nicene Synod were repealed. When whole
burden of the Church (in respect of men) lay upon the shoulders of Athanasius,
and a few other forlorn Bishops, which endured either imprisonment or
banishment, or otherwise hid themselves, and durst not show their faces: By
this which has been spoken, as it is evident that this note of multitude notes
nothing; or if any thing, the contrary to Bellarmines note: So is it also as
clear, that that glorious show of visibility (of which these Thrasoes make
such great boast) neither makes their cause good, nor hurts ours. Where was the
Protestants Church for diverse hundreds of years before Martin Luthers days?
many there were not of that Church; true, there needed not. Christ's flock is
little, gloriously conspicuous it was not; true, for neither was that needful.
Where was this great multitude of Believers, and glorious splendour of
Professors, when the Prophet complained that he was left alone? When Esaias
exclaimed, That from the sole of the foot to the crown of the head there was
nothing but bruises and putrified sores, Isa. 1. When all Jerusalem was
troubled about the birth of Christ, when the Christians groaned under the ten
bloody persecutions inflicted by the Pagans, and under the eleventh caused by
the Arians? As in those times, so in the times before Martin Luther, the
western Church was at a low ebb, and the Moon did suffer almost a total
Eclipse: No marvail, seeing it was foretold that there should be an apostasy, 2
These. 2. And that the second Beast should cause all, both great and small, rich
and poor, free and bond to receive a mark in their right hands, and in their
foreheads, Apoc. 13. 16. And that all Nations should be drunk with the wine of
the fornication of the whore of Babylon, Apoc. 18. 3. Yet even then I make no
doubt but God had his true Church, because the gates of Hell shall never
prevail against it. Although I could neither neither name the persons who, nor
the places where (which notwithstanding I can do both) as I doubt not but we
had all Ancestors living 120. years ago, and yet none of us can name either
person or place, or profession of any of them: and I doubt not but there is a
moon immediately after the change, although I cannot point out the place with
my finger, and say here it is.

Now as this doctrine proves amplitude and multitude of Believers to be no true
and infallible (...) of Gods Church: Use 2.
So it takes away an excuse which is common in the world to do as the most do:
wherein we may justly renew Seneca's complaint, Inter causas malorum nostrorum
est quod vivimus ad exempla, nec ratione componimur, sed multitudine abducimur.
Quod si pauci facerent, nollemus imitari: cum plures facere caeperunt, quasi
honestius sit quo frequentius, and sequimur, and recti apud nos locum tenet
error ubi publicus est factus. Epist. 123.
Here comes into my mind a story recorded by Munster in his description of
Frisland: Carolus Mertellus Duke of Brabant, coming into Frisland, persuades
Rapotus Duke thereof to embrace Christian Religion, and to this purpose sent
Wolfrancus a certain Bishop to instruct him in the grounds of Christian Faith;
After a time Rapotus yields, and going into the water with the Bishop to
receive the Sacrament of Bapt. having one foot in the River where he was to
have been baptized, he demands of the Bishop whether more of his Progenitors
were in Hell, or in Paradise, the Bishop replying in Hell, presently the Duke
steps back, and refusing baptism, said, I had rather be in Hell with the most,
then in Paradise with the fewest. Many deride the folly of this man, who follow
his example; rebuke the Adulterer for his dallying, or the Drunkard for his
carousing, or the Swearer for his blaspheming, or the Usurer for his grinding,
or the Sabboth-breaker for his profaning: What but universality of sin must
procure him a pardon; in Ruffin. in Joh. Ser. 49.
but multitud^ peccantium non parit erroris patrocinium says Hierome, and he
that excuses his fault by alleging of multitude (says St. Austin) seeks not
a patron for his cause, but a fellow for his punishment, and God has commanded
us not to follow a multitude to do evil: and we have now learned that Christ's
Church is not a great, but a little flock. It is a true saying of Livie; major
pars plerumque vineit meliorem. In doing of good it is good to have company:
but where they leave the way of God, we must leave their ways. It is the worst
kind of good fellowship to go to Hell for company, Bonum quo communius e^
melius: but malum quo communius eo pejus, It Is more dangerous when a whole
house is sick of the Plague, then when only one of the family is infected,
worse when it is in a whole Town, but worst of all when it is spread through
the whole Kingdom. The universality of sin is an argument that Gods plague is
waiting at the doors of that house or City, or Kingdom, to fall upon it, and
to destroy it. Poets fable that a little before the Trojane war, the Earth
made complaint to Jupiter that she was laden with the sins of wicked men, and
could no longer bear them, the offenders were ^o many. Whereupon Jupiter
stirred up the Trojan wars, to ease of the earth of the multitude of offenders:
and indeed Wars are commonly Gods new brooms (which sweep clean) whereby he
purges this Augaeum stabulum, and sweepeth away the common heaps of sins.
And in them it falls out according to the proverb, Vt victor fleat, and victus
intereat, That both parties sustain loss as then it fell out. But we have
better examples then Poetical fictions for illustration of this point.

What was the cause of the drowning of the old World? See Genesis 6. 12.
Universality of sin: All flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth. What was
the cause why Sodom was burned? See Genesis 18. Community of sin: not ten
righteous men could be found in five Cities. For shame then plead not
universality for sin, lest if thou be partaker with the multitude in their
sins, thou suffer with them in their punishments. If Noah had been like unto
them of the old world, he had been drowned with them: And if Lot had been like
his neighbors of Sodom, he had been burned with them. If thou will enter into
life, be singular, go not with the most, but with the best. Abraham must come
out of Chaldaea, though none but his Wife accompany him: and Lot must leave
Sodom, though all his neighbors forsake him. He that will follow the stream
and current of Rivers, shall at length come to the deep Sea: and he that will
follow the stream and current of times, shall at length come to the deep of
Hell. So much of the second, the third follows.

Fear not.

Of that fear whereby a man is moved either to obey God, Third part.
or depart from his precepts, Peter Lombard sets down 4. kinds. Servile, which
has poenam for its object; it arises from the apprehension of Gods wrath, and
curses of the Law. He that is the subject of this fear, will abstain from
sin, and do that which is good, Non virtutis amore, sed formidine paenae, as
Horace speaks. Non timore amittendi aeternum bonum quod non amat, sed timore
patiendi malum quod formidat, In Psalm. 127. ver. 1.
as Austin notes. This is a preparation, or previall disposition to the next
kind of fear, which is called chaste and filial: It is the beginning of
wisdom, as Solomon calls it, and it is to filial fear, as the needle is to
the thread so Austin illustrates it) the needle makes way for the thread, and
draws it after it, yet so as that the thread, not the needle remains in the
cloth, and ties the parts together. Filial fear, the second kind, is joined
with faith, and love of God, and has Culpam for its object: this is a special
part of Gods worship: Thou shall fear the Lord thy God and serve him, Deuteronomy. 6.
13. The third is Initialis, which does not specifically, but modally and
gradually differ from filial: And indeed in the best of Gods children, as all
other virtues, so also filial fear is but Initiall. Cunctorum in terris
gementium imperfect a perfectio est, says Hierome, they are pilgrims, and a
pilgrims motion is (as all mutations are) actus entis in potentia, as the
Philosopher defines motus. The fourth is mundane and humane, unto which we may
refer that which some Schoolmen make a fifth kind of fear, which they call
natural, which is not evil if it be kept within its bounds. For to be touched
somewhat with those things which be by nature terribilia, and may do evil, as
Death, Famine, want of necessaries for this life, is not evil. Aristotle notes
it as a kind of brutishness in the Celtae that they feared not Lightnings, nor
Inundations, nor Earthquakes. But now to exceed in this kind, and for
avoiding of mundane evils to incur the displeasure of God: with Elisha's
servant, to see thine Enemies, but not thy Friends: with Saul, to be greatly
afraid of Goliath, and not to see the power of God in little David: It proceeds
from an evil root, an immoderate love of this world, and is joined with a
distrust to his providence, who has said, I will not leave thee nor forsake
thee, and is here forbidden by our Savior, Fear not.

Janus-like it looks both back-ward and forward. Backwards to the precedents of
this Chapter, and so it contains the use which we are to make of that which
hitherto has been delivered concerning Gods providence. Forward to the latter
part of the verse, and so it is a conclusion of an argument a majori, thus:
Gods elect are Kings sons, States of Paradise, and heirs apparent to the
crown of Heaven; Ergo, they need not fear, but he will watch over them, with
his fatherly provision, protection, and direction in his kingdom of grace.
Take it whether way ye will, and it will afford us this proposition; Such is
Gods fatherly care and providence over his children, that they need not be
discouraged by humane nor mundane fears.

As the night Crow sees in the night, but is blind in the day: So a natural
man is quick-sighted in temporal things, Aquinas 1. 2. quaest. 102. art. 6.
but blind in spiritual; For as the Sun lighteneth the Earth, but darkeneth
the Heaven: So his understanding gives him direction about earthly things, but
for heavenly and spiritual, them it darkneth and obscureth. This as by many
other things it is evident, so especially by the worlds rash judgment touching
Gods providence over his children while they remain in these houses of clay;
for they seeing that the godly are oftentimes hunted as a Partridge upon the
mountains, or as a Pelican in the Wilderness, and an Owl in the Desert:
whereas the ungodly (as Job speaks) have their houses peaceable, and without
fear, and the rod of God is not upon them, they rejoice in the sound of the
Organs, and spend their days in wealth: They I say, seeing these things, not
being able to give the true reason of them, (because God made them neither of
his Court nor Privy Counsel) and yet storning to be ignorant in any thing
(though they knew nothing as they ought to have known) began to lie and libell
against that eternal power in which they live, and move, and have their being.
Some of them, because they would not seem to impute any injustice unto God,
thought that such as they saw groaning under the heavy burden of affliction,
howsoever unto the worlds eye they might seem devout and righteous, yet in very
deed, and before God, which sees not as man sees (for man looks on the
outward appearance, but God beholds the heart) they were dissemblers and
hypocrites. Thus Paul when he had gathered a few sticks for the fire, Acts 28.
and a Viper came out of the heat, and leapt on his hand, was by the Barbarians
counted a murderer. Job 11. 6.
Job, when the heavy hand of God was upon him, was by Zophar thought to be a
man forgotten of God for his iniquity. Nay Christ our Savior, that immaculate
Lamb, who had done no wickedness, neither was there any guile found in his
mouth, was judged by the Jews as a man plagued and smitten of God for his
sins, Lib. 4.
Isa. 53. 5. Others, not much unlike the old Thracians, who (as Herodotus
writes) when it thundered, used to shoot up their arrows toward Heaven, and to
tell God that he cared for none but himself) affirmed, that though God had
made the world, yet the government thereof he committed to Fortunes wisdom and
direction. Others, that he ruled Caelestiall bodies, and those that are above
the Moon: but for these base creatures that are below, it is against his
divine Majesty to respect: Scilicet is Superis labor est, etc. Others, that
he was tied to second causes, and could work no otherwise then he found them
disposed. Hereupon came the fable of the three Fates sitting by Jupiter, the
one holding a D^staff, the second spinning, the third cutting the thread, whose
decrees Jupiter cannot alter nor resist: and Homer brings in Jupiter with a
chain in his hand, to which the whole world is tied in certain links of
Causes: Jupiter has in his own power the moving of the first link; but after
the first like is moved, then he meddles with no more, but one link draws on
another. The same Poet brings in Jupiter complaining upon the Fates, by whose
immutable decree he is hindered that he cannot deliver Sarpedon from death:
And Neptune desiring to hinder Ulysses from coming into his Country, for the
hurt done to his son Polyphemus, but cannot, because the Fates are against
him. So Juno in Virgil complains that she is resisted by the Fates, from
hindering Aeneas to come into Italy. -- Mean incoeptodesistere victam, Nec
posse Italia Teucrorum avertere regem!
Quippe vetor fatis.


Nay some upon this occasion stickt not to come to that height of impiety, that
they adventured to deny that which with a pen of iron, and with the point of a
diamond is written in the tables of their hearts, that there is a God.

Marmoreo Licinus tegitur tumulo, Cato parvo,
Pompei^snullo. --
And hereupon to make up the verse came that blasphemous speech -- Quis putat
esse deum? Yes blasphemous mouth, there is a God, and this God is not God of
the mountains only, but he is God of the valleys too; he looks not only to the
things which are in Heaven (his Throne) but also unto the things that are on
Earth (his footstool) the young Ravens are fed by him; one Sparrow cannot fall
unto the ground without him; he numbers the hairs of our heads, and puts our
tears into a bottle, and marks our treadings, and reckons our steps. He
cares for his chosen as a Shepherd does for his Flock, nay as a Master does
for his household; nay as a Father for his own Children. As a father pittieth
his own children, so is the Lord merciful to them that fear him: Nay as a
mother loves the son of her womb, which is greater then the fathers love,
Lib. 8. Ethic. cap. 12.
as Aristotle well notes. Can a woman forget the child of her womb? Isa. 49
Emphatically spoken, a woman? Women where they love, love earnestly. David to
show the ardency of Jonathans love toward him, hyperbolically extolls it above
the love of a woman. Can a woman forget her child? Her love to children is
great, not only by reason that the sex does daily converse with children, which
is a means of increasing love, but also by a natural sympathy between them.
Can a woman forget the child of her own womb? She loves others, but much more
that which is nearest of her blood, a part of her self, whom she loved before
she either knew either name or sex. Can a woman forget the child of her womb?
Its almost impossible: but because such Monsters have been heard of in the
world; Saevus amor docuit natorum sanguine matrem
Commaculare manus.


Therefore he adds; Though she should, yet I will never forget thee. His love
to his is more then a woman's to her own child. He respects us as a member of
his body, to speak after the manner of men: Isa. 49.
Nay as his dearest member, as his eye, nay as the chief part of his eye, As
the apple of his eye, Zach. 2. 8. And though Baal (as Elias mocked) may perhaps
be weary, or be in pursuit of his Enemies, or asleep, and would be awaked; Yet
he that keeps Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep. Witness the wonderful
preservation of his Church against the persecutions and cruelties of Pharaoh,
Haman, Antiochus, Sennacherib, Decius, Dioclesian, and other Pagans, Vale^s and
other Heretics of old, and many other, both of former and last times, whose
names I will not now repeat, because I may not load your ears with such harsh
stuff. If I might presume upon your attention in this kind, I had rather
instance in this little Israel of ours, since she fled out of the dark Egypt
of Popery, through the red Sea of Queen Mary's Reign. What curses has the
Romish Babylon intended? Nay what has he not intended against her? He has
sent his fierce Bulls to push her down, and to trample her honor in the dust.
He has thundered out his Canons charged with bullets of Anathemaes against her:
He has set open Hell gates (for to this three-crowned Cerberus is given the key
of the bottomless pit) and sent out locusts to annoy her. He has used base
flattery, open hostility, cunning practices, secret conspiracies, dangerous
treasons, hellish deviles, to overthrow her. But behold the watchful eye of
God our heavenly Father over his Children: His Bulls which in former times have
seemed so wild, that scarce some hundreds met together in a Provincial Synod
du^st bait them, have proved such cowardly Dastards, that every single Curre
has been able to lugge them, proving much like to the counterfeit shows of
Semiramis, when she was to fight with the Indian King, which afar off seemed to
be Dromedaries and Elephants; but when they came to trial, proved nothing but
Oxen hides, stuffed and bumbasted with straw. His Canons troll like Domitians
thunder, a noise heard, but no bullet felt. His locusts hurt none, but such as
had not the Seal of God in their foreheads. His plots and devises against
Queen Elizabeth, and King James, so defeated and brought to naught, that maugre
the beards of all Romish Traitors, and in despite of all the Devils of Hell;
they were both brought unto their graves in peace. Give me leave (before I make
use and application of this proposition) to put you in mind of two
deliverances, which as they are never to be forgotten, but to be written with
pens of iron, and the point of a Diamond in the tables of our hearts; So do
they give evident testimony of the care which our heavenly Father bears over
his Chosen. The one was in 88. when our Enemies were purposed to swallow us up
quick, they were so wrathfully displeased with us: Then the Kings of the earth
stood up, and the Rulers* (M^^rulers) Ba^lac and Balaam; the Spaniard^ and the
Pope took counsel together against the Lord, and against his Anointed;
saying, Come and let us root them out, that they be no more a people, and that
the name of England may be no more in remembrance. But what followed? He that
dwells in Heaven laughed them to scorn, the Lord had them in derision. He
spoke unto them in his wrath, and did vex them in his sore displeasure. He put
a book in their noses, and a bridle in their lips, and carried them back
again, not the same way they came (as he did Sennacherib) but a strange and
unknown way (to the Spaniard for all his sailing) through the cold Northern
Seas, and the boisterous Western Ocean; Whence after Leviathan had taken his
full of them, and the Sea which then faught for England was glutted with the
multitude of dead corpse, a few weather-beaten Soldiers returned home in torn
and tattered Ships, to carry their Master word, that it was hard for him to
prevail where God was his enemy. Pretty were those verses of Claudian spoken
to Theodosius the first, when he prevailed against his Enemies by help of the
wind which blew dust in their faces, applied to Queen Elizabeth.

O nimium dilecte deo cui militat ether,
Et conjur ati veniunt in praelia venti.
Turned thus to Queen Elizabeth.

O nimium dilecta deo cui militat aequor,
Et conjur ati veniunt in classica venti.
Neither is the Zelanders invention to be forgotten, who upon this occasion in
a new coin of silver stamped a Ship sinking, with this motto, Venit, ivit,
fuit: and in a coin of Gold, Hom^ propouit, Deus disponit, 1588.

This, though of it self great, may find examples parallel to it; but the
other which happened, November. 5. 1605. which is such that a man would scarcely
believe that the Devil himself, though he be a subtle Serpent, could invent so
wicked a plot: or he and all his Angels, though they be murderers from the
beginning, would not tremble to put in execution so cruel a device; if we
shall turn over all Histories of ancient and later times, we shall not find
one to match it. What shall I say unto you by way of Preface, but as Isaiah
begins his Prophecy, Hear heavens, and hearken O earth: Or with Joel, Hear ye
this O ye Elders, and hearken all ye Inhabitants of this land, whether ever
such a thing has been in your days, or in the days of your fathers, or in the
days of your forefathers: Tell ye your children of it, and let your children
tell their children, and their children tell another generation: When Balaams
servants did not only wish as once that Barbarian did,

(...): Suet. in Ner.

Nor as Nero added, when he set Rome on fire, (...) when I am living let the
whole World burn with fire; but had almost put in execution their cruel
intendments. Nor as Tarquin in Livie, and Periander in Herodotus, to cut off
the chief heads, that there might be a paritie (Cousin german to confusion)
amongst the rest, but to cut off head and tail, branch and rush in one day: To
make the body of this Kingdom like dead Priamus in the Poet, -- Avulsum
humeris caput, and fine nomine corpus: When that place which was ordained for
the establishing of wholesome Laws, for the safety and peace of this Kingdom
should have been made like to that old Tophet, where is burning and much wood
kindled, as it were, with a river of Brimstome: Or as Aetna did of old.
Flammarum globos liquefactaque volvere saxa, belching out flames of fire, and
heaps of stones, not much unlike to the destructions of Sodom, and the
miserable desolations of doleful Gomorrah. When those true Professors, which
should have remained after such an overthrow, should have been like a few
scattered grapes after the vintage is ended, and like Pellicans in the
Wilderness, and could have expected for nothing but what was written in
Ezechiels scrowle, Ezech. 2.
Lamentations, and Mourning, and Woes: O daughter of Babylon, worthy to be
wasted with misery, happy shall he be that rewards thee as thou have deserved
of us: Yea, blessed shall he be that takes thy children and dasheth them
against the stones. Now did not he who has said, Fear not little flock, who
keeps us from the snare of the hunter, keep us from those snares which they
had laid privily for us, and from the traps of those wicked doers? Did not he
which takes the wily in their own craftiness, and saves the poor from the
hand of the violent man, as Eliphaz speaks in Job; Let these fall into their
own nets, and let us ever escape them. Yes doubtless it was the Lords doing,
and it is mavelous in our eyes. By this which has been said, the Doctrine is
clear, let us now come to the Use.

Is Gods care and providence over his children such, Use.
that they need not be discouraged by humane or mundane terrors and fears? Oh
then comfort thy self thou child of God, whosoever thou art, which art tossed
with contrary winds in the tempestuous Sea, and begin to say unto thy weary and
distressed soul with the Kingly Prophet. Why art thou so sad O my soul, and
why art thou so disquieted within my breast? Does he, Who lays the beams of
his chambers in the water, and makes the clouds his chariots, and walks upon
the wings of the wind, care for Agar and her brat, and will he neglect Sarah
and her son? Does he make his Rain to fall, his Sun to shine upon the
unjust, and will he suffer to famish the soul of the righteous? Is he a
Savior of all men, and will he forsake them that believe? Does he nonrish the
roaring Lion, feed the young Raven, give the little Wren her dinner, provide
for the poor Sparrows, whereof two are sold for a farthing, Mat. 10. that is
too dear, five for two farthings in this Chapter: In a word, does he give food
to all flesh, and will he oversee his own? Does his providence extend to
senseless creatures, to the grass and Lilie of the Field? What will he not do
for them, for whose sakes these and all other creatures in the world were made?
He that has given us his Son, what will he deny us? He that has provided for
us, and promised us the Kingdom of Heaven, will he deny us the Earth so far as
it is expedient for us to have it? Heaven and all creatures under it shall
change their natures, rather then this little Flock shall be left desolate. The
hungry Lion shall not touch the Lords Prophet; The devouring Fire shall stay
its burning; The Whale shall preserve Jonas; The Earth without labor shall
yield her increase; The Sun and Moon shall stand still; The barren
Wilderness shall afford bread; The raging Sea shall become dry ground, and the
flinty Rock shall be turned into a springing Well, before the least Lamb of
Christ's little Flock shall be left destitute. Go too then, let Hell rage, let
fury swell, let the men of this world threaten to swallow thee up quick, when
they are so wrathfully displeased with thee; yet put thou thy trust and
confidence in him, who has said, Fear not little flock; and say, In the Lord
put I my trust, how say ye then unto my soul, that she shall flee like a bird
into the hills? The Lord is my strong rock and my defense, whom then shall I
fear; the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall I then be afraid?
What if the greatest Potentates of the world shall join their Forces against
thee, he who has said, Fear not little flock, and I will not leave thee nor
forsake thee, is able, though they had sinews of iron, and necks of brass, to
break them with a rod of iron, and to crush them in pieces like a Potters
vessel^: so that thou may boldly say, Hebr. 13.
I will not fear what man can do unto me. What if the boisterous sea carry
thee up to to the heaven, and down again into the deep? What if the waters do
compass thy soul, Jon. 3.
and the weeds be wrapped about thy head (as Jonah speaks of himself) Fear
not any of these things that shall come upon thee; for though the waves of this
troublesome Sea be mighty, and rage horribly, yet the Lord that dwells on high
is mightier: So that they shall not be able to drown thee; but as Noah's flood
carried the Ark above the waters, so they shall carry thy head above the water
floods, till they bring thee to the Rock that is higher then thee. Come rock,
come tope, come evil, come Devil, come what can come, nothing can come
amiss; For he that has given the bars, and has said unto it, Hither shall
thou go, Job 38.
and thou shall go no further; here shall thou stay thy raging waves. He that
can put a hook in the lips of Leviathan, and pierce his jaws with an Angle:
though he make the depth to boil like a pot, Job 41.
and the Sea like a pot of ointment (as Job speaks) has bound Leviathan that
piercing Serpent (as Esaias calls him) and all the powers of Hell in chains of
darkness, so that they shall not move one foot to hurt thee, but as he permits
them, and loses out their chains. The spiritual Pharaoh may be a terror to
thee, as he of Egypt was to the Israelites, but he shall not hurt her: For
though he be not cast into the bottom of the Sea, lest thou should be
secure, yet he is dead on the shore, lest thou should despair. The world may
be to thee as the Canaanites were to the Israelites, thorns in thy sides, and
pricks in thine eyes, but it shall not overcome thee. Thy wife may be as
Sampsons was to him, fetters and snares of Satan to entangle thee, but they
shall not prevail against thee. Thy children may be as Absalom was to David, a
wicked and a rebellious offspring, but they shall not overthrow thee. Fear
not; for as the Angel said to Gideon, The Lord is with thee thou valiant man;
Thou art a branch of that Vine, whereof the least sprig shall never be cut off:
Thou art a member of that body, whereof the least part shall never be
corrupted: Thou art a Sheep of that little flock, whereof not one shall ever
perish: Thou art a Soldier in that Camp, whereof the weakest in the end shall
be a Conqueror. Fear not, the Lord is with thee thou valiant man; Neither
tribulation, nor anguish, nor nakedness, nor sword, nor death, nor life, nor
Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come,
nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us
from the love of God in Christ Jesus. He whose name is Amen, Revel. 3.
the faithful and true Witness (and therefore cannot go back with his word)
has promised to his whole Flock his divine protection and assistance in his
Kingdom of grace, and will at length bring us to everlasting happiness in his
Kingdom of glory. Fear not little Flock, for it is your Fathers pleasure to
give you the Kingdom.

The Third Sermon.
LVKE 12. 32. For it is your Fathers good pleasure, etc.
HAving finished the former branch (the Doctrine) we are now to come to the
second part (the Reason) and herein observe, 1. The granter (your Father.) 2.
The thing granted (a Kingdom.) 3. The grantees: Not all Adams sons, but the
Sheep of this little Flock (you.) 4. The consideration, or cause impulsive, and
that is nothing in Man, but the love and good pleasure of Almighty God (your
Father is well pleased.) At this time only of the first, the Grantor, your
Father.


He who has one only natural son, God begotten from everlasting, of the
same substance with himself, and in all things equal to himself, and one
only begotten son by grace of Conception, Man, made of the seed and substance
of a Woman (both which concur to the making of one and the same individual
person of Immanuel, the Messiah) is (if you take the word not personally, but
essentially) 1. A Father of all his Creatures, Similitudine vestigij, because
there is not the meanest creature in the world, wherein he has not imprinted
some characters and footsteps of himself, in which respect Job calls the Worm
his sister and mother, Job 17. 14.

2. A Father of the Angels, Similitudine gloriae: So they are called The sons
of God, John 1. 6.

3. A Father of all Mankind, Similitudine imaginis, wherein man was created,
Genesis 1. 27.

4. Not of all mankind, but only of a certain number, whom he, before the
foundation of the world was laid (not for any goodness either of faith or
works which he did foresee; for what did he foresee, but what he decreed to
bestow upon them, of his free grace and love picked and culled out of that
mass of corruption, into which by Adams sin they were to come: and in the
fullness of time effectually calls, that is, separateth from the world,
Ephesians. 2.
and admits into his household and family, and makes them ( Who by nature were
dead in sins and trespasses) living members of Christ's mystical body: Thus
he is a Father of all believers. I will be a father unto you, and ye shall be
my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty, 2 Cor. 6. 18. The spirit of
adoption bears witness that we are his children, and bids us cry Abba
Father, Romans 8. 16. In this sense our Savior bids us Call no man father on
earth, because we have but one Father, which is God, Matthew. 23. 9, and sends us
in our prayers to our Father which is in Heaven, Matthew, 6. 9. Thus is he a
Father of his little flock.

And well may he be called Father; for what does a natural parent to his child,
which the Father of Spirits does not in an infinite, larger, and better measure
to his?

1. An earthly father begets his child, and is the cause of his natural being.
2. He gives him a name. 3. He feeds him. 4. He cloatheth him. 5. He protects
him from wrongs. 6. He corrects him for his faults. 7. According to his means
he provides an inheritance, or a portion for him. God does all these to his
sons, the Sheep of this little flock.
1. He begets us, Jam. 1. 18. For which cause he is styled the father of
spirits, Heb. 12. 9. This is a mere work of God, to which the power of
free will does no more concur then a child is a Coadjutor to his father at
his natural generation. I grant that as in substantial mutations, before a
form be corrupted, and another educed, e potentia materia, there are certain
alterations, or previal dispositions for making way to this change: So in this
supernatural mutation, when a son of Adam is to be made a son of God, God
ordinarily uses certain previal dispositions. The Law and the Gospel are
preached; the heart of man is shaken with the terrors of the law, and cast down
to the ground as Paul was at his conversion, and touched with fear of
punishment, sorrow for sin, desire and hope of pardon, etc. But as those
previal alterations are no essential parts of natural generation, (though
preparatives thereunto.) Nor is there in the Matter any more then a mere
passive power for receiving the substantial form: so neither are these previal
dispositions any essential part of our supernatural regeneration: Nor is there
in the will any active, but a mere passive power, for receiving this
supernatural being, which is only wrought by the finger of God.

The Apostles evidences are strong for this point; let us hear them: Ephesians. 2.
10.
we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus: meaning that there is no more
power in a natural man for begetting himself a new, then there was in that
dry dust whereof Adam was made, Ephesians. 2. 1.
for assisting God in the creation of man. A natural man is dead in sin:
Colos. 2. 13.
Can a dead man revive himself? Could Lazarus, when he had been three days
stinking in the grave, move hand or foot, till Christ had put his soul into
him? No more can a natural man so much as move himself to a supernatural and
spiritual work, till God regenerate him, and as it were create him anew, and
infuse into the powers and faculties of his soul a quickening spirit. Ezech.
11. 19.
He has a heart of stone; ( I will take the stony heart out of their bodies)
a heart of stone, not a heart of iron; for though iron be hard, yet the heat
of the fire will mollify it, and the stroke of the hammer will turn it into a
new form: but no heat will mollify a stone, no hammer can beat it out, or
bring it into a new shape, but by breaking it: So our hearts are by nature
such, that they cannot be softened or turned to that which is right, till they
be broken in pieces, and cast in a new mould. And again, as no water can be
drawn out of a stone, so no goodness can be educed out of a natural man's
heart. We are by nature evil trees, and an evil tree cannot bring forth good
fruit. Matthew. 7. 18.
The Apostle tells us, That of our selves we cannot so much as think a good
thought: That it is God that gives both the will and the deed. And our great
Master (whom we are commanded from heaven to hear) says, That without him we
can do nothing: That those to whom Power is given to be the sons of God, are
not borne of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but
of God.

1. They are not borne of blood; that is, they come not by natural
propagation, for by this nativity we are children of wrath.

2. They are not of the will of the flesh. This may be referred to them which
are borne of faithful Parents, yet begotten carnally. For as the wheat is sown
without chafe; but when it grows, the chafe comes up with it. Or as the
Hebrew Males which were circumcised, begat children which were uncircumcised,
so the most holy and spiritual man begets a carnal son; Aug. de peccatorum
merit, and remiss. lib. 7. cap. 9.
the reason is, Quia ex hoc gignit quod adhuc vetustum tenet, inter filios
seculi, non ex hoc quod in novitatem promovit inter filios dei, as Austin: He
begets according to that corruption which he retains amongst the sons of
men, not according to that perfection which he has attained unto amongst the
sons of God.

3. They are not borne of the will of man: That is, the will of man does not
co-work with God at his regeneration, to receive grace, and convert himself.
Let the Papists, and Pelagians, and Semi-pelagians busy their brains, and
confederate themselves, and join their forces against Christ and his Apostles,
maugre their beards it shall stand, which is confessed by an honest Friar, that
there is not in the whole world of natural men, John Ferus in Joh. 1.
vel mica virium, so much as a dram or crum of power, whereby he may convert
himself, and become a son of God. Thus then first he is our Father, not only
by grace of adoption, but by grace of regeneration; he regenerates and begets
us a new, by the washing of the new birth, Tit. 2. 5.
and the renewing of the holy Ghost.

2. To his children thus begotten and born anew, he gives new names. Thou shall
be called by a new name, Isa. 62. 2. To him that overcomes I will give a white
stone, and in the stone a new name, Rev. 2. 13. I will write in it my new name.
Rev. 3. 12. Old things, when they are renewed, have new names given them: So
old Byzantiu^, renewed by Constantine, was called after his name. So a son of
the old Adam, who of himself Is a child of wrath, a firebrand of hell, Gods
enemy, and an alien from the commonwealth of Israel, being renewed and
regenerate, and having given his name to Christ, is called a Christian. This is
a new name received from him, who after he had spoiled Principalities and
Powers, and like a triumphant Conqueror, showed them openly in his Chariot of
triumph (so Origin calls it) the Cross, has received a name above all names
that are named, not in this world only, but also in that which is to come. The
name also we receive in our Baptism when we are admitted into Christ's Church,
is a new name, and may put us in mind of our new and spiritual estate (as the
other which we receive from our Parents and Ancestors is a mark of our natural
state we received from them:) So that whenever we think of our names given us
in our baptism, we should think of our new birth, and be more and more
renewed, according to that of the Apostle, Old things are past, behold all
things are become new. Therefore as many as are in Christ, let them be new
creatures. New names and old natures are like new wine in old vessels, or like
new cloth in an old garment.

3. He feeds us, 1. with corporal food for the sustenance of our bodies: The
greatest Prince of the world has not so much de proprio, as a morsel of bread
to put in his mouth, but what he receives from him who has Heaven for his
throne, and Earth for his footstool; Isa. 61. 1.
who opens his hand, and gives to all creatures that wait upon him their meat
in due season; For which cause Christ sends us to heaven gates to beg our
daily bread, Ezekiel. 4. 16.
viz. not only the substance of bread, but baculum panis, Dan. 26. 26.
(as the Scripture calls it) the power and strength to nourish us, without
whose benediction, be our tables furnished with never such variety of dishes,
we shall be but like Caligula's guests, at his golden banquet, we may well
feed our eyes, but not our stomachs: Or like to him that eats in a dream, and
when he awakes, behold his soul is empty.

2. He feeds us with spiritual food; that which was figured by the tree of
life, and the waters that flowed out of the stony rock (as some of the Fathers
expound it) the body and blood of Christ unto eternal life.

3. He cloatheth us, Psalm 45.
as the Kings daughter, with a vesture of gold, the robe of Christ's
righteousness, which we must put on as a wedding garment, that our filthy
nakedness may not appear in his sight: Revel. 3. 18.
and withal by degrees makes us glorious within, with the habit of
sanctification and inherent righteousness.

5. He protects us against all dangers, as has been already showed.

6. He corrects us for our offenses, Hebr. 12.
as a father does his child in whom his soul delights.

7. He provides for us an Inheritance immortal, and undefiled in the heavens.
1 Pet. 1. 4.
For it is your fathers good pleasure to give you a kingdom: The next thing
that comes to be handled. But let us first by way of use and inference reflect
upon the point we have in hand.

Is God Almighty a Father of his little flock, 1 Use.
and such a father as does not only regenerate, but feeds and cloatheth, and
protecteth, and directs, and has in a readiness a Kingdom for the meanest
of them that be his? Here then let us take notice of the dignity, and worth,
and happiness of the meanest Christian, above all the sons of Adam, be they
never so great, swell they never so high with a conceit of their own worth.
The greatest of heathen Philosophers tells us, that felicity consists in a
cumulation of moral virtues: Others place it in worldly pleasures: The common
sort of men in worldly honors and preferments: and the higher a man is
advanced, the more worthy, the more happy they repute him. But (alas) what
great felicity is it for a base fellow to act a Kings part upon the Stage, and
when the Play is ended, to be contented with a ragged coat? far less to be a
King in this world, and then to be cast into Hell fire. Here is the state and
condition of the greatest Potentates on Earth, that have not Christ for their
Brother, and God for their Father; when they have acted their parts upon the
stage of this world, down they must go into the infernal lake. The Spider
thinks her self no base creature, when she has got her self into the roof
of a Princely palace, and there woven her web, and rests there secure (as
she thinks) from all danger; but anon, when she least fears, up goes the
broom, down goes the Spider and web and all, and are trodden in the dust, and
there is an end of her pride. So it is with the greatest of them that are
without Christ, when they have seated themselves in the highest rooms the
world can afford, anon when they least think upon it, God sends his broom of
death, and sweeps them down into the pit of hell and destruction.

What was that Lucifer, the son of the morning ( Nebuchadnezzar) which did
advance himself above the stars of God, and other Potentates of the world,
Egyptians, Assyrians, Chaldeans; but (as it is said of them of the old world
that occasioned the flood) great Giants: Genes. 6.
or (as Nimrod is called) mighty hunters before the Lord: Genesis 10. 9.
or as the Scripture phraseth them, Swords, Syths, Flayls, Axes, Hammers, Rods,
wherewith God whipped his children for their disobedience, and then cast them
into the fire.

Attila that great scourge of Europe in his time, who was wont to boast that
the stars did fall from Heaven at his presence, and that he made the Earth to
tremble wheresoever he came: Or Tamberlane, the terror of Asia, who led a
million of Soldiers against his Enemies, what were they, but as they styled
themselves, the one Flagellum Dei, Gods whip, the other Ira Dei, Gods wrath?
Neither of the two was Filius Dei, a son of God. Or to speak of present
times, what is the great Mogor of the Indians, or the Cham of the Tartars, or
Sophi of the Persians, or grand Signior of the Turks, but Gods hang-men, and
bondslaves, not worthy to lick the dust of the feet of the poorest Christian,
that endures bondage and miserable captivity under them.

Its a world to see how many will stand upon their Gentry, and busy their
brains in deriving themselves from some ancient stock. How does Bonfinius
bestir himself in deriving Matthias King of Hungary (a man of mean descent,
if you except his father John Hunniades) from the Corvini amongst the old
Romans, leaning altogether upon improbable conjectures? And how do many, of no
great rank, busy their wits in deriving their discents from the Normans, as
did Ajax from Jupiter, the old Italians from the Aborigines, the Egyptians
from the Earth, the Arcadians from the Moon? How far they can climb this
ladder, I cannot precisely define; Certain it is, that the ancientest surname
we have is but of yesterdayes bre^d in respect of true antiquity: and he that
is proudest of his Parentage, and stands most of the antiquity of his house, if
he will take pains to climb the line of his descent, he may within a few
hundreds of years run his name out of breath. But say that every ordinary
Gentleman could derive his Pedigree from the first of his Nation: the English
from the Saxons, or Normans, the Spaniard from the Goths or Vandals; the French
from the Franci or Burgundians, etc. What were these at their first coming, and
others which like a general deluge, after the removing of the Emperors seat
into the East, overflowed these Western parts of the World, but godless,
graceless, cruel Pagans, that usurped other men's rights, and reaped where they
had not sown.

Imagine (and its but an imagination) thou could without interruption derive
the line of thy pedigree from Adam, what can thou find there but shame,
unless thou should climb a degree further, as Luke does in the genealogy
of Christ, The son of Adam, the son of God? What is the ancientest in any
Pedigree, to him that is called The ancient of days, Dan. 17. 13? And what is
a dead stock unto the living God? This, this is the specifical Form which gives
nomen and esse to a right Gentleman, to have God for his Father, to have the
Almighty, the Summum genus and top of his Kin: And without this all Gentry,
how ancient soever, is but loss, and dross, and dung, and gilded vanity, and
golden damnation; or to give it a milder name, it is but a grace of flesh; or
(as we commonly call it) its but blood: And what is the best blood of it
self, if flesh, and bones, and nerves, and spirits, and a soul be not added,
to make it a perfect man? No more is parentage, if virtue, and grace, and
religion, and other habiliments of body and mind be wanting. But now as a
sanguine complexion is the fairest and best of all, when all the parts and
members are correspondent: so Gentry, when it is adorned and beautified with
Religion and other graces from above, gives the greatest luster. I may speak of
it, as Solomon speaks of old age (when it is found in the way of godliness)
It Is a Crown, It Is like apples of gold in pictures of silver.

Quale manus addunt ebori decus, aut ubi flavo
Argentum pariusve lapis circumdatur auro.
Like a picture of Ivory curiously set forth by the hand of a skillful
Artificer, or like a ring of pure gold beset with a precious Diamond; Or like
the Kings daughter, which was not only outwardly adorned with a vesture of
gold, but (which is better) All glorious within.

Virtue in a mean person is like a Candle under a bushel, it gives light to
him that has it, but brings little help to others; but in a Gentleman, it is
like a Taper set up in the midst of a room, or like a Beacon upon a hill, Plut.
it gives direction to all that come near. Happy are those Kingdoms ( Et
multos habet Sparta tales) Gods name for ever be blessed for it, this Kingdom
has many such, in whom goodness equalizeth greatness: and like stars of the
first and second magnitude, as they exceed others in bulk and substance, so do
they also in light and influence. Cato said that the people of Rome were like a
flock of sheep, let the Shepherd single out one, and he will hardly drive it;
but put them together, the greatest will lead the way, and the rest will
follow. Christ's Church is a flock of sheep; had this poor Country many such
Bel-weathers to lead the way, it would prove no small case to the Lords
Shepherds for driving of the rest into the green pastures of the Lord, Psalm
23.
that are beside the waters of comfort.

But if Religion and grace be wanting, a man, be his parentage never so
ancient, his Lands and Lord-ships, his Honors and Preferments never so great,
is but like matter without form, like Apuleius his golden Animal, or like
Polyphemus without an eye.

And here I cannot choose but censure those for degenerous spirits, and
unworthy the name they bear, who think themselves in all points complete
Gentlemen: Si venaticam noverint, si in alea fuerint damnabilius instituti, si
corporis vires ingentibus poculis commonstrent, etc. If they can discourse
about Horses, Hawks, and Hounds; If they can hunt skilfully, and dice damnably,
and drink profoundly, and sweat profanely, and spend riotously, and make
their recreation their vocation (without doing any service to God, or their
King, or their Country) as if they were borne to live on the Land, as
Leviathan in the Sea, whom God has made to take his pastime therein; and (that
I may come to a second use) superciliously scorn and contemn such as in means
or lineage come short of them, as if they were not in the same Predicament, nor
originally hewn out of the same Rock, nor regenerate by the same Father.

Who art thou that contemnest a state of Paradise? 2 Use.
one of the blood royal of heaven? whom God has adopted for his Son? over whom
he has appointed the Angels to be his Protectors and Governors? Psalm. 91. 10.
Whose enemies he has threatened to curse, Genesis 12. Whose prayers he has
promised to hear, Psalm. 50. For whose sake he reproves Kings, Psalm. 104. Whom
he tendereth as the apple of his eye, Zach. 2. The hairs of whose head he
numbers, the tears of whose eyes he bottles.

If a Kings son should come to us in Beggars attire, like Codrus, or lame and
impotent of his feet like Mephibosheth, Justin.
or with any other imperfections of body or mind, we would not scorn him
because of his imperfections, but yield him all honor due to a Kings son. Have
thou the like respect to Christ's little ones; let their outward condition be
never so mean, and subject to contempt, let them be poor, ignorant, of base
parentage, friendlesse, servants, bondslaves; let them be all these, or
whatever else may cause contempt in the eyes of man, if they believe in Christ
(for of these I speak) they are sons to the King of Kings, and consequently
more noble then the Turk, or Persian, or the greatest Monarch of the world,
that is without Christ. It Is not nobleness of Parents, nor Lands and
Possessions, nor riches, nor humane wisdom, nor worldly dignities, that makes
a man truly honorable, and worthy of respect; nor is it the want of these that
makes a man contemptible, but the want of Gods favor and adoption in Christ.
Stemmate si Thusco ramum Millessime ducis: If thou could number thy
Progenitors for a thousand generations; if God be not in thy pedigree (as I
said) thou art a bastard and no son. Had thou all humane knowledge in the
world, and do not know Christ crucified, thou art but a fool. Had thou all
the riches in the world, and want the great riches which the Apostle calls
godliness, 1 Timothy 6.
thou art but a beggar. Had thou all dignities and honors in the world, and
be not one of Gods household servants, thou art base, and of no respect in
comparison of Christ's little ones. I do not derogate from such as are well
descended, nor from such as are rich, nor from such as excel in humane Acts
and Sciences, nor from such as are set over others in honors and worldly
preferments (God forbid I should) I allow them that which of right pertains to
them, a civil honor, because of some divine representations that are in them;
as of his eternity in such as can show the antiquity of their stock; of his
dominion, in such as are rich; of his Sovereignty, in such as are in authority,
etc. But such must remember that it is no more then a civil honor that is due
unto them for these. And howsoever for these considerations they ought to have
their due respects according to their places in the civil Regiment, and to be
honored above others: Yet in the spiritual Regiment, the poorest Christian
that believes with his heart, and confesses with his mouth that Christ died
for his sins, is their equal. There is no difference, says the Apostle, in
the Kingdom of Heaven; Saturns ^easts are continually kept, Master and Servant
are both alike: There is neither Jew nor Grecian, there is neither bond nor
free, there is neither male nor female, etc. Gal. 3. He that is called, being a
servant, is the Lords freeman; 1 Cor. 7.
and he that is called, being free, is Christ's servant. All then, of what state
soever they be in the political Regiment, must think of the poorest Christians
as of their brethren, and remember that rule given by God even unto Kings, to
read the book of the Law, Deuteronomy. 17. 20.
that their hearts be not lifted up above their brethren, and imitate the
example of holy Job, who did not contemn the judgment of his servant, Job 31.
13.
nor of his handmaid, when they contended with him.

My third inference shall contain a double duty; 3 Use.
one we owe unto God, as our Father, the other to our Neighbors, as sons of
the same Father, and consequently brethren one to another. It Is the sum of
John's first Epistle, and Synopsis of the whole Law, and comprehended in one
verse, 1 John 3. 10. In this are the children of God known, and the children of
the Devil; be that does not righteousness is not of God, neither he that
loves not his brother; these are children of the Devil. Gods are known by the
practice of two affirmatives, 1. Doing of righteousness. 2. Loving of the
Brethren.


Touching the first: They that call God their Father, must carry themselves as
children of such a Father, and without limitation obey him in whatsoever he
commands.

A son honors his father: Mat. 1.
If I be your Father, where is mine honor, says the Lord of Hosts to the
rebellious Jews, who called God their Father, and neglected his precepts. Many
such Jews are amongst us; common Drunkards, abominable Idolaters,
blood-sucking Usurers, profane Atheists, blasphemous Swearers, filthy
Whore-mongers, and that hellish and damned crew of impenitent sinners, that
live within the bosom of the Church (though they be no integrall parts of it,
no more then hairs and other excrements are parts of a man's body, or dogs and
swine, essential parts of a family) will call God their Father. If God be your
Father, where is his honor? where is that filial obedience you should perform
to his commandments? when the Jews told Christ that Abraham was their Father,
he tells them no, Because it Abraham were your father, ye would do the works
of Abraham. And when they said that God was their Father, he proves it false:
Joh. 8. 42.
If God were your father ye would love me: Ye are of your father the Devil,
and the lusts of your father ye will do: So say I to these miscreants, If God
were your father, ye would do the works of God: If God were your father, ye
would love him, and keep his commandments. Because ye walk in darkness, ye
are of your father the Devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. And if
ye would speak aright, ye should not say as Christ bids his brethren say when
they pray, Our Father which art in heaven: Latimer in Orat. Dominic.
But rather as Latimer speaks of such (truly, though somewhat plainly) Our
father which art in hell. Beloved in Christ, Behold what love the father has
showed us, that we should be called the sons of God: 1 John 3. 1.
Let us be followers of God as dear children: and in all things study to
resemble him, Who has called us out of darkness into his mavelous light.
Aristotle notes of the Eagle (whether truly or no, I will not dispute) that
when her Birds are pen-feathered, in a hot sun-shining day she holds their
eyes directly toward the beams of the Sun: those that cannot endure that
intensive light, she casts out of her nest as degenerous; such as directly eye
the Sun, she loves and feeds as her own Hereby it will appear, whether we be
Jovis aquila, Gods birds or no; if we look upward upon the Son of
righteousness, and have our eyes (the eyes of our souls) fixed on Heaven and
heavenly things, then are we of this Feather; if downwards, and have our
cogitations Swine-like, rooting in the earth, and wallowing in the filthy
puddle of worldly vanities, then are we a degenerous offspring, not worthy to
be called Sons of such a Father.

What an absurd and indecent thing were it, if a Gallyslave, or a Kitchin-boy,
should have that honor as to be made the adopted Son and Heir of some great
Prince, and he (not considering his high advancement) should continue in his
former sordidnesse and baseness of condition? Much more undecent it is, that a
man when he is advanced from a child of wrath, and a bondslave of the Devil,
to that transcendency of honor, as to be made a Son of the King of Kings,
should continue as before, in his blindness of heart, crookedness of will,
uncleanness of affection, and perverseness of action. Shall such a man as I
flee? Neh. 6. 11.
said Nehemiah to Shemaiah, and shall such a man: as has God for his Father
debase himself like the Cat in the Fable, who being turned into a Gentlewoman,
kept her old nature, and leapt at a Mouse? Or like the Popes Ass, who adorned
with golden Furniture, as soon as he came to a Carriars Inn, began to smell at
a Pack-saddle? Cyrus, when of a Shepherds Son (for so he was then supposed to
be) he was made a King in a Play, began to show himself like a King; and Saul,
when he was anointed by Samuel to be King, had his heart changed, He had
another heart, 1 Samuel 10. 9. Honors change manners; if then we be advanced to
this high dignity, let us be ashamed of our natural baseness, let us have our
hearts changed, and walk worthy so high a calling, not doing our own will,
but his, who when we were of no strength, Romans 5. nay when we were worse then
nothing, sent his own natural Son to dye for us, that we might be his Sons
by grace of adoption.

I urge this point the rather, because it is not only a necessary duty which
God requires at our hands, but also the most certain and infallible (...) of
Gods child, and consequently a matter of the greatest moment in the World, upon
which depends the everlasting salvation or damnation of our souls.

If at these Ass^ses a man shall in a case criminal be convict of Felony,
perhaps his Book may save him; suppose not, he at the worst but looses his life
for it, his soul, if he repent, is in no danger. If in a civil controversy a
Verdict shall go against him, he loses but the thing in question; but he that
has not God for his Father (and none have him but such as work righteousness,
and in holiness of life endeavor to resemble him) loses all his title and
claim to the Kingdom of Heaven, and is for evermore in body and soul a Bond
slave to the worst Master that ever man shall ^erve, unless God in mercy shall
effectually call him, and ingraft him into the body of his only. Son by faith.
And it is lamentable to see so many Marthaes and so few Mary's in the World, so
many that drown themselves in worldly employments, and doubt where there is
cause, and use means to clear their doubts, and neglect this Vnum necessarium,
as if it were a matter not worthy the regarding. If a man's body be ill
affected, he will send to the Physician; if he doubt of the weight of his Gold,
he will seek to the Balance; if of the goodness of the metal, he will try
it by the Touchstone; if the title of his Lands be questionable, he will have
the opinion of a Lawyer; but whether he be a Son of God, and consequently
whether he shall be saved or no, he never doubts, but whatsoever he do or
thinks, or speaks, he takes it as granted:

The most wicked and hellish liver, who serves no Master but the Devil, will
(as I have ^ayd) direct his prayers to God as to his Father; others we have
who^e practice is far better, (being kept from gross sins by Gods restraining
grace) our careless and carnal Go^pellers, our sleepy and drow^e Protestants,
who content themselves with the shadow, and let fall the substance of Religion;
these, if they be Baptized, and can say that in their Baptism they were made
children of God, if they come once or twice in a week to hear Prayers or
Sermons, if at usual times they receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, if
they give their assent to the Law and the Gospel that they are both true, and
with a general faith believe all the Articles of the Creed, and withal have a
care to lead a civil life amongst men, then they persuade themselves their
case is good, they are sound Christians, children of God, and sheep of that
little flock to whom our heavenly Father will of his good pleasure give a
Kingdom. But alas, a man may do all these, and more then these, and be a
son of the Devil. He may do all these, 1. He may be baptized, so was Simon
Magus. 2. He may hear the word pre^ched, so did Pharaoh: 3. He may receive the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, so did Judas. 4. He may believe the Law and the
Gospel, and all the Articles of the Creed to be true, so does the Devil. 5. He
may lead an honest and civil life amongst men, so Socrates, and diverse Pagans,
if ye look to the matter of good works, have out-stripped many Christians in
the practice of sundry moral duties.


He may do more then all this, and be a reprobate and child of the Devil.

1. He may be sorry for his sins, and make satisfaction, both these we see in
Judas. 2. He may confess them even in particular, and desire good men to pray
for him, both these we see in Pharaoh: He may have a delight in the Word, and
love the Preacher, both these did Herod. He may for a time be zealous of Gods
glory, so was Jehu. He may be humbled for his sins; and declare his
humiliation by fasting and weeping, so did Ahab and the Ninivites. He may have
a certain taste of faith, which much resembles a justifying faith, so had
Simon Magus. He may in many things reform his life, so did Herod and
Maxentius. He may tremble at the threatenings of Gods judgment, so did Falix,
and so does the Devil.
Now then how can such drowsy Protestants, such carnal Gospellers, prove
themselves to be sons of God, when they are matched and out-stripped by the
sons of Satan: when they are matched with Simon Magus in their baptism, and
with Judas in receiving the Lords Supper, and Pharaoh in hearing the word
preached, and with the Devil in believing, and with Pagans and Infidels in the
practice of civil and moral duties? Nay when Judas goes beyond them in
repentance, and Ahab in sorrow and humiliation, and Herod in delight in the
Word, and reverence of the Preacher, and amendment of life; and Jehu in zeal
of Gods glory, and Pharaoh in desiring the prayers of the godly, and Foelix and
the Devil in trembling at Gods judgments: Oh pitiful!

If you should live (I speak to them that are such, and I doubt there are too
many in this place, the hearts of most are like this Country climate where they
live, cold, and their brains more subject to Lethargies then Phrenfies) If you
should live amongst the Turks or Tartars, where the sound of the Gospel is
scarce heard; if you had lived and dyed in those days when God gave his laws
to Jacob, his statutes and Ordinances unto Israel, and dealt not so with any
Nation: Or if you should live in Spain or Italy, where the heavenly treasure
is locked up from ignorant men in the closet of an unknown tongue, and where no
more is required of a son of the Church (for that is a term they are better
acquainted with then a son of God) then to be baptized, to say his prayers in
Latin, to hear and see a Mass, to keep fasting days, and to believe, as the
Collier told the Devil, as the Church believes; you might have some excuse
for your selves. But now that you live where the judgments of the Law are
denounced, and the sweet promises of the Gospel proposed; now that the Sun does
shine, and no better blossoms of righteousness appear in you, how can you
escape the hatchet of Gods wrath? How can you call God your Father, or Christ
your Brother? Shall Judas be sorrowful, and make confession of his sins, and
will not you? Shall Ahab and the Ninivites be humbled, and manifest their
humiliation by fasting, and sacke-cloath, and tears, and will not you be
humbled for your sins? Shall Herod amend many faults at the preaching of John
Baptist, and will not you reform your lives? Shall the Devil believe and
tremble, and will not you believe with him? Or if you believe with him, will ye
no^ tremble with him? Shall all these I have named be damned to hell, and look
you for the reward promised to Gods children, the Kingdom of Heaven? No
assuredly, no. I deliver unto you that which I have received from the Lord:
Except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of all these, you
cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven. The spirit of adoption is not severed
from the spirit of sanctification, it is one and the same individual spirit.
Holiness becomes Gods house for ever. It Is written over Heaven gates (as it
was over Plato's School door) Let no man that is not a Geometrician enter this
room: Let no man that has not measured his life by the line of the Law, that
has not this Motto written on the Table of his heart, Holiness to the Lord,
presume to come into Gods Tabernacle, or rest upon his holy Hill. That for the
first duty we owe unto God as he is our Father, and we his children.

The second is to our Neighbor; Jude 3.
For if God be our Father, then all we which make profession of that faith
which was once given to the Saints are brethren, and should live as brethren,
and love as brethren. And how brethren should be affected one to another, we
see in the members of our bodies: our two feet are as it were two brethren, one
to support another; two arms, two eyes, two ears, one to help another; the
utmost part of the hand divided into five fingers, one for assisting and
strengthening another. No otherwise, even by the judgment of natural men,
should one brother be affectioned to another. Hence in Poets came the fable of
Briareus, with one body and 100. hands, and of Geryon, with one body and
three heads; by the first was meant fifty, by the second, three brethren so
linked together in the bands of brotherly love, as if they had all been members
of one and the fame individual body. And he that for his own particular
benefit seeks the loss and hurt of a brother, does as if one foot should
supplant and trip up another; or as if the fingers of the hand should fall out,
and one wrest another out of joint. Nay further, a brother that forsakes his
brother, and joins himself into society with a stranger (says Plutarch)
does, as if a man should cut off one of his own legs, and take a wooden leg in
the room of it. As their love is the greatest, so their hatred (if they fall
out) is noted to be the greatest, so that of all others they are hardest to be
reconciled. For as those things that are glued together, if they go asunder,
may easily be reunited; but a body that is all of one piece, if it be broken,
cannot be so fastened again, but you may discern where the breach was. When
friends, who by affections are joined together, if they dissent, may easily be
reconciled: but brethren, who are as it were one by nature, can hardly be so
united, but there will remain some scarre behind, for which cause it concerns
them to avoid the least occasions of disagreement.

Now (that I may bring that which I have spoken home to my purpose, grace is a
stronger bond then nature: If then natural brethren should be thus affected
one to another, how much more brethren in Christ, begotten by one father, God,
bred in one womb, the Church, fed with one milk, the Word animated by the same
spirit, justified by the same faith.

And this love must show it self chiefly in two things.

1. In pardoning wrongs without private revenge. If the injury be little,
forget it; if great, yet must thou not be Judge in thine own cause, but as
children say when they are wronged, I will tell my Father, so do thou. All
malice and private revenge lay aside, out of a zeal of justice make thy
complaint to those who are the Ministers of God to take vengeance on them that
do evil.

2. In supporting and relieving such as stand in need of thy help: As the great
stones that are laid in the bottom of a building, bear the weight of the
less that are laid above them; or as a bundle of rods bound together (to use
Seleucus his comparison) do one strengthen another: Or as when a faggot of
grove sticks is laid on the fire, and warms and kindles another) and that which
he has be ready to communicate to such as want: those that are learned, to
instruct others that are ignorant: those that be strong, to support them that
are weak: they that are rich, to relieve such as be poor: that there be no
schism in the body of Christ, but the members may have the same care one of
another, and every man please his brother in that which is good to edification
and comfort.

Here me thinks I discover in my way troops, troops (to follow the Hebrew
phrase) great multitudes, and whole legions of persons, who though they
profess that God is their Father, yet are they so far from the practice of
the duties of brotherly love, that if God should ask them what is become of
their brethren, they might well reply with Cain, What is that to them, are they
their brothers keepers? They live as if only born for themselves, swine-like,
hurtful to all, good to few or none, as long as they are alive, as if the
stomach should not only deny to communicate the meat which it receives from
the mouth to other parts of the body according to each particulars necessity,
but should suck and exhaust the nourishment from other parts to it self.

When Richard the first in his Wars against certain Rebels in Normandy, had
taken in the Field a French Bishop armed like a son of Mars, he caused him
(and good reason) to be committed to Prison: The Pope being acquainted with it,
requires the deliverance of his dear son, so he called the Bishop: whereupon
the King sends his Ambassador to the Pope, and the Armor wherein his
Catholic son was attired, with the Message which Jacob's sons sent to their
Father when they had sold Joseph: This we have found, see now holy Father
whether it be thy sons Coat or no. All of them count themselves amongst the
sons of God, and call him Father: But look to their practice, see their works,
and tell me whether these be the Coat of the sons of God or no. Amongst many
I will name three, (and I can but name them) they are all in an high degree
sinners against the 8. Commandment, and therefore I will be bold to give them
their right names (Thieves*) 1. The needy Thief. 2. The greedy Thief. 3. The
wrangling Thief.


By the first, I mean such as first steal from themselves, and then from
others, those idle and inordinate persons, who carry Cains curse upon them and
his mark about them, Vagabonds and Runagates in the Earth, which work not at
all, nor eat their own bread, but live on other men's labors like Mice and
Rats; which though they neither plow, nor sow, nor reap, nor carry into the
Barn, yet will be as bold with the poor man's Corn, as he that took the pains
to bring it thither. And as they live like Mice and Rats on other men's labors,
so like them they multiply, and breed a numerous offspring, which they bring
up at their own Trade, without any lawful vocation, without any knowledge or
fear of God, any feeling of Religion, any respect or awe of the Laws and
Magistrates, only like their Parents, eating up the Corn which the Husbandman
has provided by his own pains and industry, so that they may well apply to
themselves the Epicures verse in Horace, Nos numerus sumus, and fruges
consumere nati.


This Country, this part of Cumberland swarms more with this kind of Vermin
then any part of England beside* The Judges do almost every year call for
houses of correction, and a reformation of these things, and how little is
done, we all see and know.

The number of these is much increased by the greedy Thief, who lives amongst
men, as the Pike amongst the little fishes, or as the Hawk amongst the little
birds; he makes a prey of those he should commiserate, and robs such as he is
bound to relieve; and, like a wild Cannibal, loves no meat so well as men's
guts, and drinks their blood, and eats up the people as if they were bread,
Mich. 3.
and plucks off their skins, and their flesh from their bones, and chops them
in pieces as flesh appointed for the Cauldron.

I speak of blood-sucking Usurers, grinding Oppressors, grating Extortioners,
close Bribers, griping and merciless Landlords, ravenous Wolves, and such
Worshipful and right Worshipful Thieves, as make havoc of all, til there be
no place for the poor, that they may be placed by themselves in the midst of
the Earth, Isa. 5. 8. Be these practice the liveries of Gods sons? See now o
God of Jacob, Psalm. 38.
whether these be thy sons coats. Break their teeth O God in their mouths,
smite the jaw-bones of the young Lions O Lord, let them be like water that
runs apace, and when they shoot their arrows let them be broken.

The third is the wrangling Thief (and as the second) a Murderer as well as a
Thief, though he will plead not guilty to both; using the Law like a stalking
horse to hide his theft, as the Panther has a bush in a readiness to hide the
deformity of his head. This is that rough Israel, that has his hands against
every man, that Salamander that is never well but when he is in the fire of
contention, who will neither do right, nor take wrong: If he have hurt his
brother, let him right himself as he can, he shall buy it at a dear rate: If
another have done him the least appearance of wrong, if he have trodden upon his
grass if his beast have looked, over a wall, if he have taken a rotten stick
out of a hedge, if he have given him a harsh word, etc. any of these is enough
to break in sunder the knots of Gods net, the bonds of brotherly love: A writ
shall be procured, a suite commenced, no tolerable condition will give
contentment, no private arbitrament will satisfy, no submission will be
accepted; but either he will be his own carver, and take what he will,
peradventure ten times more then the loss sustained, or he will try it to the
utmost extremity, to the impoverishing perhaps, and undoing of the other party.

Whereupon such as are sons of peace, are willing to buy their peace upon
unreasonable conditions (as a Traveller for saving his life will part with his
purse to a Robber) rather then they will spend their times, and wast their
moneys, and neglect the works of their callings, and hazard their estates upon
the event, and wait the final determination of the Law, which too often (not
through fault of the reverend Judges (as I conceive) but of others, who flee as
rank about Courts of Justice, as the Ravens did about Abraham's sacrifice, and
grow happy by other men's misery) a Sea of that deepnesse, that he must be both
a strong and skillful swimmer that can dive into the bottom of it, and a way
of that length, that it will almost make an Hercules weary, and cause him to
set a Nihil ultra before he come to his journeys end.

I am no Anabaptist, I speak not against going to Law, where the matter is of
moment, the cause just, and cannot otherwise be peaceably and friendly
determined. To whom may a child when he is wronged make complaint, rather then
to his Father? and to whom shall a man have recourse for redress of injuries
done to him, but to them who are Gods Deputies, Fathers of their Countries, and
living Laws to give every man his own? And if every wrong should be put up
with patience, it would imbolden such as we speak of to multiply their abuses,
and with greater impudency to go on in their lewd courses. Veterem ferendo
injuriam, invitas novam: whereupon the Ephori amongst the Lacedaemonians did
punish a man that had put up many injuries, and never made complaint. Nam si
primum vel alterum accusasset, vel jure vindicasset, cateri abstinissent.

But yet it is not fit that Fathers of great Families (such as our reverend
Judges) should be molested with the petty complaints of every peevish Boy that
is in the house. In this case there is utterly a weakness of mind amongst men,
especially in these parts so remote from the chief Coures of Justice, that they
go to Law one with another. As for the Wrangler, of whom I was last speaking,
(who makes the Law sometimes a Sword to revenge himself of his Brother,
sometimes a Coak to cover his theft) Surely if that law of Pittacus was good,
that he who committed a fault when he was drunk, should suffer a double
punishment, one for the offense, the other for being drunk; then this deserves
a double one, one for abusing the Law, the other for wronging his Neighbor, to
whom he should perform all duties of brotherly love.

But I leave him, and will end this branch with a general exhortation: As we
all profess our selves to be children of one father, so let us be affectioned
to love one another with brotherly love, Romans 12. 10. Now then as the elect of
God, children of one father, holy and beloved, put on the bowels of mercy,
kindness, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one
another, if any man have a quarrel against another, even as God for Christ's
sake forgave you. Colos. 3. 12, 13. 15.
And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, and the God of peace shall be
with you. O holy Father sanctify them whom thou have given unto thy Christ,
the sheep of thy little flock; keep them in thy name, pour into their hearts
the spirit of peace and unity, That they may be all one, as thou and thy son
are one. John 17. 11.


Last of all, Use. 4.
Is Almighty God the great Judge of the World? Is he a Father to his little
flock? Here then Judges and Magistrates, and the great ones of this World, and
all those whom the great God of Heaven and Earth has set over others, and
styled with his own name, are to be exhorted to imitate him whose person they
bear, in this relation of Paternity, remembering bring that as they are called
Gods, so are they also named Fathers: so Job a Judge, or as some think a King,
is styled, Job 29. 16. And David speaks to his Subjects as unto children, Psalm.
34. Come ye children. Naamans servants call their Master father, 2 King. 5. 13.
And Joseph when he was made ruler over Egypt, was called Abroch, that is,
tender Father; and the Philistims called their Kings Abimilech, as who should
say, the King my Father. So amongst the old Romans, the worthiest of their
Senators were called Fathers, as Juvenall speaks of Tullie, Roma patrem patriae
Ciceronem libera dixit.

They must then, Jer. 22.
as Jer. exhorts, not only abstain from violence and shedding of innocent
blood, but after Gods example, deliver the oppressed from the hands of the
Oppressor; and as much as in them lies, show themselves fathers and protectors
of the righteous. This God requires at their hands; and those that purposely
neglect it, shall one day hold up their hands, and answer for it, when the
Judge of the world shall sit on the Bench. And this they are the rather to look
too, because the more eminent their places are, the more conspicuous will their
faults be, if they neglect their duties. As a blaine on the eye beseems worse
then a wart on the face, and a wart on the face worse then a wenne on the back,
or other part that is not seen: That which others may do, great men, and those
that are in authority may not. ( Quibus omnia licent propter hoc ipsum multa
non licent, says Seneca,) Sen. de Clem. cap. 8.
other men may look out at a window, and observe passengers in the streets.
Tull. Offic. lio. 1.
Sophocles when he is on the bench may not; Praetorem decet non manus solum,
sed and oculos habere abstinentes, Plut. in. Themist.
another man may stoop and take up something that lies in his way, Themistocles
may not. Others may wear Sycionian Pantophles, Tull. de Orat. lib. 1.
but they become not Socrates, though fit for his feet. Magistrates play Gods
part, and a Fathers on the stage, and therefore have need to remember
Jehosaphats rule, Take heed what ye do. They walk upon the top of a steep
Rock, they have need to tread warily: And if their places and their names put
them in mind of their duties, especially of protecting the innocent after Gods
example, a shame befall those Courts, and Magistrates, and Advocates too, who
by the greatness of their places think to manage and inlaw the foulest
enormities. Vbi is qui sedet crimina vindicaturus, Cypr. ad Donat.
admittit, as Cyprian complains: Or (as Aeneas Sylvjus once said of the Court
of Rome) where Justice is made the lure, Suitors the fowls, Attorneyes and
Solliciters the drivers, Pleaders the fowlers, the Law the net, and he that
should sit in the gate to protect the cause of the Innocent, sits lurking in
the theivish corners of the streets, that he may ravish the poor, and such as
he gets into his net.

It was a bold, but a true Speech of Diomedes a Pirate, to Alexander the Great,
when he was convented before him for Piracy: I who robb with one poor Pinace am
called a Pirate, and thou that do it with an invincible Navy art called a
Monarch; I, because I robb one private man am called a Theife, and thou because
thou robbest and wastest whole Kingdoms, to which thou have no right, art
called an Emperor; I by the misery of a few have purchased a name of disgrace,
and thou by the misery of a great part of the World, have got the Surname of
Magnus. If I had thy Navy by Sea, and thy Forces by Land to command, I should
be saluted Emperor; if thou were alone, and a poor prisoner as I am, the whole
World would condemn thee for a notable Theife. For in the cause we differ
nothing, save that he is the worse, who does more manifestly forsake Justice,
and more notoriously impugn the Laws; those whom I flee, thou persecutest,
whom I after a sort reverence, thou scornest; it was the iniquity of Fortune,
and want of necessaries that made me; it is intolerable pride and insatiable
avarice that made thee a Theife: had I more, I would be better; thou the more
thou have, the worse thou art. Thus, thus (alas) it too often falls out; Sen.
in Thyest.
Diomedes is a Pirate, but Alexander a Monarch, Magnum and prosperum scelus
virtus vovatur: Landlords, and such as do eminently bear the image of Gods,
in respect of his power (and consequently should show themselves Fathers to
those that are under them) if they prove unto their Tenants like Briars and
Thorny hedges, and squeaze and waste whole Towns and Villages, and turn those
Streets which used to be sown with the seed of men, Isa. 7. 25.
to the sending out of Bullocks, and the treading of Sheep; they take but their
own, the Law must be their discharge: The poor hunger-starved Caitiff, if in
extreme necessity he take a Sheep from a Pasture, or a Sheet from a Pale, must
(and deservedly) hold up his hand at the Bar for it. If a Cutpurse take a few
pence out of a man's pocket, its felony; a Magistrate, or an Advocate, if for
expedition, or procrastination, or managing of an unjust cause, or otherwise
unjustly or deceitfully he shall exhaust the Purses and Coffers of many, its
Honorarium; the former by his practice becomes odious, and disgraceful; the
latter, by his, great and worshipful: Ille crucem paenam scelenis fert, hic
diadema. Verily for the matter I see no difference, Juv. Sat. 13.
but that the latter is in a greater degree an oppugner of Justice, not only
in respect of the sin it self, which is far fouler (as Alexanders sin was
worse then that of Diomedes) and of the cause impulsive (want and necessity
being the one, pride and avarice the other) but chiefly in respect of the
persons, who act a part directly contradictory to their profession. If upon the
Stage a father, sitting to examine and correct the faults of his family, shall
cheat some of them; or if a Magistrate sitting on the Bench, when a Suppliant
shall come to him with a Petition, shall put his hand into the Suppliants
pocket, and ^eale away his Purse, Attollent omnes equites, peditesque cachinnum:


All the spectators would deride the folly of the Poet; Quintil. lib. 1.
as when an in^ulse Actor cried O Jupiter, and held his hand downward, and
after cried O terra, and looked up to Heaven: Polemo, who was Master of the
company, rann off the Stage and cried out, Manu hic soloecismum fecit, ^aliud
voce, aliud gestibus designans. Cicero Off. l. 1.
No more but this, Id histrio videbit in Scaena quod non sapiens in vita. The
two lowest Elements are not heavy, but when they are out of their proper
places; no more is sin any where so heavy as when it is displaced. Meretrix
male facit quod est meretrix, sed non male facit accipere quatenus meretrix,
says Bodin. So it may be said of a Thief, and consequently of all Offenders.
A thief does ill that he is a thief, but he does not ill to steal, quatenus
a thief: This is after a sort his profession, he is in his own element. But a
Magistrate, and such as should be a Father to those that are under his
jurisdiction, for him to play the Thief, is to imitate Horace his Painter,
Delphinum sylvis appingit, fluctibus aprum. It Is to displace the Elements, and
to put the water in place of the fire, with Cleanthes to put vice in Virtues
chair; with Antiochus, to set up the image of Jupiter in Solomon's Temple, and
the abomination of desolation in the holy place. For a filcher and
hedg-creeper to pill a sheep, it is no great matter, it is ordinarily done: but
for a Shepherd to do it were a foul blemish.

If a man be cosened at Cards with a common Cheater, I Will never pity him, he
might have looked better to himself; but to be cosened by a common Lawyer, to
whom he shows his cards, hoping by his direction to win the game, here is an
element displaced, it is heavy and grievous to be borne, and I am sorry that it
should be applied to any of that worthy profession, which was spoken of
Usurers, Alienas negotiantur miserias, and lucrum suum aliorum adversitatem
faciunt: They make it their vocation to make men miserable, and to make
themselves great by other men's falls, and hurts, to hurt them whom they pretend
to help. But enough of this subject.

I know well that it befalls a Minister in touching the faults of great men,
and such as are heads of the people, as it does a Butcher in fleaing a Beast,
he goes smoothly away with the skinn that covers the Carkas but when he comes
to the head it sticks, so that unless he work very warily, he shall be
reprehended for mis-guiding his hand. If he hold his knife high, he shall
leave part of the skin behind; if low, he takes part of the flesh with him. So
it is with a Minister in preaching to men of place, if he (as is commonly done)
preach nothing but Placentia, and sing a Gloria patri, without a Sicut erat,
and Gentleman-like shoot fair, and far off, and for fear of hurting hold
his knife too high, he shall leave sin top whole; if he go deep, he shall be
censured for cutting the quick flesh: a mean were to be wished; but it is of so
little latitude, that it is hard to be hit upon; of the extremes, I hold the
latter the better. I had rather be reproved for saying too much against sin,
then for speaking too little. I had rather be counted an enemy, then a
flatterer in Gods business. Aug. de temp. Ser. 6.
Plus timeo illum qui jubet, quam illum qui detrahit, I am more afraid of him
who says, Cry aloud and spare not, then of any that can censure me for want of
discretion. Christ's Church in my Text is a little Flock: And he said truly, if
he be rightly understood: Multi sunt Placentini and Landenses, pauci
Veronenses. Lauden and Placentia are populous Towns, and their Citizens swarm
every where, but Verona is a poor ruinated Village, and has few Inhabitants.

Tacitus writes, that Caepio Crispinus (a man well acquainted with the vicious
life of Tiberius) accused Marcellus, an honest Citizen of Rome, for certain bad
speeches touching the Emperor. The Emperor knowing the things to be true,
that Marcellus was accused to have spoken, was easily persuaded that he had
spoken them: Nam quia vera erant, ideo dicta credebantur. None I hope will
(Sure I am none justly can) censure me for aiming at any particular, save he
whose conscience with Tiberius accuses him to be guilty of the same sins I
have reproved: and Si vera sint, ideo in eum dicta credantur; If he find those
things in himself, let him think that he is the man, or rather his sins the
mark that I have aimed at; And let him go his way and sin no more, lest a
worse thing befall him.

I am persuaded we have at this day as many worthy and religious Gentlemen, as
many learned and religious Lawyers, as many reverend, learned, and religious
Judges and Magistrates, as ever England had: and for you (my Lords) although
the one of you is known to me but Ex auditu, but being such as John gives of
Demetrius, 3 John 12.
I may speak to you both, as I concluded my speech to you the last year, that
you may say with that worthy Judge of Israel, Whose ox have we taken, and to
whom have we wittingly done any wrong, or at whose hands have we received any
bribe to blind our eyes therewith?

Now as Plutarch writes of Garlic and Rue, that being planted besides
Rose-trees, they make the Roses smell the sweeter: So the corruptions of evil
men set by the virtues of the good, make them more pleasant in the nostrills of
all good men. The condemnation of evil is a secret commendation of them. The
threatening of judgment to the evil, implies a promise of reward to them that
are good. Go on in the name of God, and the Spirit of the Lord, even the
Spirit of wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of Counsel and fortitude, the
Spirit of Knowledge, and the fear of the Lord rest upon you, and guide you in
all your Consultations, Proceedings, and Judgments; that Justice and Equity
may be advanced, Vice suppressed, Religion and Piety established, Gods name
glorified, Peace maintained, your Duties discharged, and your Souls saved
through Christ Jesus, etc.

The fourth Sermon.
LVKE 12. 32. For it is your Fathers good pleasure, etc.
We have in it observed four things.

1. The Granter, your Father. 2. The thing granted, a Kingdom. 3. The
grantees, not all Adams sons, but the Sheep of this little flock. 4. The
consideration, or cause impulsive, and that is nothing in man, but the love and
will, and good pleasure of Almighty God (your father is well pleased)*
The last time I supplied this place, I spoke of the first, I will now follow
the words as they lie in order, and leaving that which I noted in the second
place to the last, as it lies in my Text, I will conclude the other two in this
one Proposition: Our heavenly father bestows upon the members of his little
flock, eternal life in his Kingdom of glory, not for any merit either of
Faith or of Works, but merely of his good will and pleasure. We do not now
dispute, whether any, being come to years of discretion, can be saved without
faith and new obedience; (I grant none can) these and others be media ad
salutem, and fruits and effects of predestination to life; but the question is,
which is the Sola causa (...) which internally moves God to do this. Here we
exclude both faith and works, yea predestination in Christ, yea and Christ
himself, in whom, as in the head this little flock was elected to a Kingdom,
and ascribe all those to the good pleasure of his will. This is the little
inward wheel which sets all the rest on work: it is the Primus motor, which
carries all the inferior orbs (Election to Salvation, the death and merits of
Christ, Vocation, and the rest, with and under it. Election to glory is the
first link in this golden chain, it is the Primum mobile that carries all the
rest with it: and for this, and so consequently for all the rest, we find no
praevision either of faith or works, or of any other thing (for what could he
foresee to see in man that is good, but what from eternity he decreed to bestow
upon him; for his prescience in order of nature follows his decree, that is, he
did not decree, because he did foresee; but he foresaw, because he decreed
things to be thus or thus) but only (...), the good pleasure and will of God.
And surely this we may see as in a pure glass (as Austin well notes) in the
very head of the Church. Mortal man is conceived of the seed of David; by what
works, by what virtue did this mortal flesh merit, that it should be united
unto the Divinity, that in the very Virgins womb he should be made the head of
Angels, the glory of the Father, the only begotten son of God, the
righteousness, light, and salvation of the world? Surely he was not made the
Son of God by living righteously, but it was the Fathers good pleasure that he
should be dignified with this honor, that he might make his little flock
partakers of his gifts. But because we are now about divine mysteries, in which
we can know no more then the Lord has revealed in his word, let us follow this
word, as the Israelites followed the cloud, which indeed shows the way to the
promised Land; and as the Wise men followed the Star which led them to Christ,
and it will bring us into the Kings chamber, as a Father speaks, Where are hid
all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. God has chosen us in Christ,
before the foundations of the world were laid, that we should be holy, etc. And
all this according to the good pleasure of his will, Ephesians. 1. 4, 5. here almost
every word is an argument.

1. He has chosen us: From whence did he choose us? Out of that mass of
corruption in which all mankind was drowned, and was become sons of wrath,
and bondslaves to Satan. Well then, as there could be no merits in them which
he past by (for if they had merited, they had been elected:) so neither did we
merit why we should be elected, but from his good will and pleasure have we
obtained this grace.

2. Before the foundation of the world; Ergo, from eternity; Ergo, not for
works.

3. That we should be holy; Ergo, not because we were holy; and so the Apostle
speaks of faith, God had mercy on me: Vt fidelis essem, not because I was
faithful.

4. According to the good pleasure of his will. There is the ground and cause
of all: Our fathers good pleasure; Even so O father, because thy good will and
pleasure was such. Add unto this that of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 1. He has called
us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his
purpose and grace: Where to our works he opposes Gods purpose and grace. And
not to trouble you with other places, that in Romans 9. where speaking of Gods
free election of some, and rejection, or (if you like the word better)
praeterition of others, he sends us to the prine cause of all, the pleasure and
will of God.

1. He instanceth in Ishmael and Isaac, both begotten by faithful Abraham, yet
one is elected, the other left out; but because the Jews might object that
there was not the same reason of Ishmael and Isaac, the one being begotten of a
bondwoman, the other of a lawful wife, Sarah, to whom he was promised before
he was conceived: Therefore he brings another instance in Esau and Jacob, who
though they were both children of Isaac, and descended from faithful Abraham,
to whom the promise was made: In thy seed, etc. and were Twins of one Birth*
and in all things like, save that Esau was the Elder, yet is Esau left, and the
birthright given to Jacob, and that before they were borne, when the children
were yet unborn, when they had neither done good nor evil, that the purpose of
God might remain according to election, not by works, but by him that calls,
it was said, The elder shall serve the younger, as it is written, I have loved
Jacob, etc. What will the enemies of Gods grace and good pleasure answer to
this? Forsooth God in Jacob demonstrates that he makes choice of those whom he
foresees worthy of his grace; in Esau, that he rejects those whom he sees
unworthy. But why does he say the children were unborne? why adds he that they
had neither done good nor evil? why is it said that the purpose of God might
remain according to election, not by works. What will thou say to that which
follows? What then shall we say? (says the Apostle) Is there injustice with
God? God forbid: As if he had said, although God to those that are equal give
things unequal; although he deprives Esau of his Birthright, and gives it to
Jacob, yet God forbid that we should accuse him of injustice, seeing his will
is the rule of all justice, which in the words following he proves to be the
prime cause of election and praeterition; therefore (says he) It is not in him
that wills, nor in him that runs, etc. Again, He has mercy on whom he
will, etc. And, O man who art thou that disputest with God? Has not the potter
power of the clay? etc. All that the Potter can do with the clay, is to bring
an accidental form into it; the clay he cannot make: but God is Author, not
only of the accidents, but of substances too, and therefore has greater power
over his creatures, then the Potter over his clay.

Well then, if you ask why God conferres a Kingdom upon his Flock of Sheep,
and not on Goats, why he loves Jacob and hates Esau, why he pardons Peter and
not Judas, we all deserving death, being plunged over head and ears in the
water of corruption? thou have the answer (...), etc. Its our fathers pleasure,
he will have it so. And why will he have it so? I answer with Austin, Tu
homoes, and expectas responsum a me qui sum homo; itaque ambo audiamus
dicentem: O homo, etc. Melior est fidelis ignorantia, quam temeraria scientia.
Occulta Jehovae, etc. Revealed things belong to us and our Children, but secret
things to God: None has ever pryed into his Ark and lived, Oculos amittunt qui
eos acrius in solemn figunt: sic and nos omne amittemus mentis lumen si eam
intendamus in hoc lumen. Gods will is the supreme cause; to ask further is to
seek a cause of that which has none. Now then, Compescat se humana temeritas
and id quod non est non quaerat, ne id quod est non inveniat: Now humane
Scrupulosity must be silent, and not search for that that is not, least it
find not that that is.

Let us leave Pelagins and his Bratt Arminius a little, and speak closely to
the Papist, concerning merit of works.

First, Nothing can properly merit the Kingdom of Heaven, but that which is
absolutely perfect, both in respect of parts and degrees; if you look for
Heaven by merit of works, you must with the Sun in the Zodiac, keep a precise
course under the Ecliptic Line of Gods Law, and not divert an hairs breadth
to the right hand or to the left; if thou fail but in the least Iota, hear
thy doom, Cursed is he that continues not etc. He that offends in one is
guilty of all, Jam. 2. Let the Papist, with his Forefathers, the proud
Pharisees, boast that he has been so good a proficient in Gods School, tha^
he has fulfilled all Gods precepts from his youth, an easy matter so to do,
he can go further, and become a transcendent; and with the Icarian wings of
Supererogatory works soar above the predicaments of the Law, and merit the
Kingdom of Heaven, not for himself only, but for others too. But for thee
(beloved Christian) if thou be wise, confess with the faithful in the
Prophet, Isa. 64. That all thy righteousness is as filthy clouts: with Peter,
That the Law is a yoke, which neither thou nor thy Fathers were ever able to
bear, Acts 10. With Paul, That it is impossible, in as much as it is made weak
because of the flesh, Romans 8. Say with John, If we have no sin, etc. 1 John 1.
And with an ancient Father, Multum in hac vita ille profecit qui quam long sit
a perfectione justitiae proficiendo cognovit.

Its an easy matter I confess for an idle Friar, who with the Spider spins
his Web out of his own bowels, and spends his whole time in making of
Sophismes against the truth, as Chrysippus did in making of Fallacies, and
measures God by himself; as Praxiteles painted Venus like his own Wise, to say
somewhat for salvation by works: but he that will look upward to Heaven, and
consider the Almighty as he is described in his word, at whose brightness the
Stars of Heaven are darkened, by whose power the earth is shaken, at whose
anger the mountains are melted, at the presence of whose purity all things
seem impure, who makes not the wicked innocent, who is a burning and a
consuming fire; let him sit on the bench of judgment, and sift and boult our
works in the Sieve of his justice, let him try them who looks not on the
outward appearance of man, but enters into his heart, and searches every
corner thereof, and like a curious Critic spells every syllable of our
thoughts long before they be conceived, and who can abide his judgment. Who
then dare to boast of his own righteousness, or challenge the Kingdom of
Heaven by his good deeds? Behold (says Job) he found no steadfastness in his
Saints, and laid folly upon his Angels; how much more on them which dwell in
houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust, Job 4. 18. And again, Behold
he found no steadfastness in his Saints, and the Heavens are impure in his
sight: How much more is man abominable and filthy, which drinks iniquity like
water, Job 15. 15, 16. Hither, hither let us lift up our eyes, and all boasting
of our own righteousness will vanish away, as the morning dew at the heat of
the Sun; it will make us say with Austin, God brings us to eternal life, not
for our own merits, but for his mercy: With Bernard, Meritum nostrum miseratio
Domini: With Job, We are not able to answer him one for a thousand: And with
David, Enter not into Judgment with thy servant, O Lord, for in thy sight
shall no man living be justified.

Secondly, But Dato, and non concesso, suppose that which shall never be
granted, that thou could say truly with Saul, and the Pharisee, I have
fulfilled the Commandments of God; yet want thou one thing; for that work
which must merit, must be Opus indebitum. Now obedience to every branch of Gods
law, is a debt which we are owing to God by the law of creation, and God may
say to every one of us, as Paul said to Philemon, Thou owe to me even thine
own self. Does a Master thank that servant which did that which he was
commanded to do? I trow not: so likewise, When ye have done all things which
were commanded you, say, we are unprofitable servants, we have but done that
which was our duty to do. Inutilis servus vocatur (says Austin) qui omnia
fecit, quia nihil fecit ultra id quod debuit: And Theophylact upon that place;
The servant if he work not, is worthy of many stripes: and when he has wrought,
let him be contented with this, that he has escaped stripes.

3. That work by which thou must merit, must be thine own, but thy good works,
if thou look to the first cause, are not so: Quid habes, quod non accipisti, 1
Cor. 4. Its God that works both the will and the deed, Phil. 2. 13. Not I,
but the grace of God in me, 1 Cor. 13. So then, put case thou could fulfill
the law, and it were not a payment of debt, yet is no merit due to thee, but to
him whose they are. Dei dona sunt, quaecunque bona sunt, Every good and perfect
gift comes from above, even from the father of lights. And Deus sua dona, non
nostra merita coronat.

4. Admit it were in thy power to fulfill the law, that it were no debt, that
thy works were wholly thine, and God had no part in them; this is not enough,
there must be some proportion between the work and the reward, or no proper
merit. Now between thy best works, and the Kingdom of heaven promised to
Christ's little flock, there is not that proportion, that is Inter stillam
muriae and mare Aegeum, as Tullie speaks, between the light of a candle, and
the light of the Sun, between the least grane of sand that lies on the
Seashore, and the highest heaven, as shall presently appear.

5. Last of all, that thy work may merit at Gods hands, some profit or honor
must thereby accrue to him: But my goodness, says David, O Lord, reaches not
unto thee, but to the saints that are on the earth. If thou be righteous (
says Elihu) what give thou to God, or what receives he at thine hand? Job
35. Who has given unto him first? Romans 11. 35.

All these five things are requisite for the merit of works, but not only
some, but all of them are wanting to our best works: and therefore we must,
with the Scriptures, ascribe our whole salvation to the grace of God, and
acknowledge nothing inherent in us to be the prime cause of all his graces, but
his own good will and pleasure. I count the afflictions of this world not
worthy the glory that shall be revealed, Romans 8. And in another place he tells
us, That we deserve hell for our evil works. The wages of sin is death,
but not heaven for our good deeds and sufferings, but of Gods bounty and
mercy. Eternal life is the gift of God, Romans 6. Not by the works of
righteousness which we had done, but according to his mercy he saved us,
Tit. 3. And ye are saved by grace through faith, not of your selves, it is the
gift of God, Ephesians. 2. And how does he prove that Abraham was justified by faith,
and not by works? because Ei qui operatur merces non imputatur secundu^
gratiam, sed secundum debitum. And if Abraham had been justified by works, he
had wherein to rejoice, but not with God, Romans 3. These are places of
Scripture, and let me build upon this occasion, to produce an assertion which
once I brought upon another point, which some that I see here present were
pleased to except against, as savouring of blasphemy; though the words excepted
against were none of mine, but of Justin Martyr, who lived above 1400. years
ago, and confidently brought by him in his discourse with Tryphon a Jew; if
any, I will not say Pelagian, or Arminian, or Papist; but if all the Fathers of
the Primitive Church, if all the ancient Councels, if Moses and all the
Prophets, if Paul and all the Apostles; if an Angel from heaven; nay if God
himself (these are the words of Justin the Martyr) should deliver any doctrine
repugnant to that which is contained in this book, I would not believe him.
Agreeable unto these places of Scripture was the doctrine of the ancient
Church; Gratia evacuatur, si non gratis donatur, sed meritis redditur. Aug.
Epist. 105. Non dei gratia erit ullo modo, nisi gratuita fuerit omni modo. And
in a third place, Non pro merito quidem accipimus vitam aeternam, sed tantum
pro gratia, Tract. 3. in Ioh. And thus have I confirmed my proposition by
reason, by Scriptures, and by the testimony of the Church: and Contra rationem
nemo sobrius, contra ecclesiam nemo pacificus, contra scripturas nemo
Christianus senserit, as a Father says.

Unto all these might be added (if it were needful) the confession of the
learned of our Adversaries (let our Enemies be Judges, who cry down this
blasphemous doctrine of Merit. God (says one of them) does punish Citra
condignum, but rewards Vltra condignum: and Scotus (as Bellar* confesses)
holds that Bona opera ex gratia procedentia non sunt meritoria ex condigno, sed
tantum ratione pacti, and acceptationis divinae. And of the same opinion (says
he) were other of the old Schoolmen, and of the new Writers Andreas Vega.
Ferus, as in many other points between us and the Pontificians, so in this he
is as sound a Catholic, and as good a Protestant as Calvin himself, or any
that has written on this subject, in Math. cap. 20. verse. 8. Gratis promisit,
gratis reddit: si dei gratiam and favore^ conservare vis, nulla meritorum
tnorum mentionem facito: And in Acts 15. Qui docet in operibus confidere, is
negat Christi meritum sufficere. Both which places, and many others of the same
Author, their Index Expurgatorius has wiped out, using him and the ancient
fathers, as Tereus dealt with Progne, who cut out her tongue lest she should tell
the truth. Yea, and Bellarmine himself, after he has spent seventeen leaves
in defense of merit of works, and scrapt and caught and drawn in by the
shoulders whatsoever he could, out of the Scriptures or ancine Fathers for
coloring that Tenent, at length brings this Orthodoxall conclusion (with which
I will conclude this point) Very Orthodoxall indeed, if two letters be
transposed, Propter incertitudinem propriae justitiae, let it be, Propter
certitudinem propriae injustitiae) and propter periculum inanis gloriae,
tutissimum est fiduciam totam in sola Dei misericordia and benignitate reponere.

A Kingdom:

Of this (as Salust once said of old Carthage) its better to say nothing then
to say but a little, and yet if I should say more then I am able to express,
it were nothing to that which might be said, Non mihi si linguae centum sint
oraque centum, ferreae vox: Had I a thousand mouths and a thousand voices, had
I a tongue of steel, or spoke with the tongues of those thousands of thousands
that wait about the Throne of God, I were not able to set forth so much as the
shadow or back parts, nay the shadow of the back parts of those joys which God
has prepared for them that love him. Nature fails me, reason fails you, the
whole Bible fails me in this point. Paul was taken up into the third Heaven
(the Kingdom here meant) and what saw he? The glory was such that it did not
only dazzle his eyes, but struck him blind that he could see nothing at all,
Acts 9* 8. Well, but what heard he? Things that cannot be conceived, neither is
it possible for man to be uttered, 2 Cor. 12.

Saint Austin when he was young did thus de cant upon it, Ibi erit summa and
certa securitas, secura tranquillitas, tranquilla jucunditas, jucunda
faelicitas, faelix aeternitas, etc. There shall be certain security, secure
safety, safe delightsome happiness* happy eternity, etc. O gaudium supra
gandium, O gaudium vincens omne gaudium; extrae quod non est gaudium: quando
intrabo in te, ut videam Deum meum qui habitat in te? ubi inventus nunquam
senescit, ubi vita terminu^ nescit ubi dolor nunquam pallescit, ubi amor
nunquam tepescit, ubi sanitas, nunquam marcescit ubi gaudium nunquam decrescit,
ubi dolor nunquam sentitur, ubi gemitus nunquam audit ur; ubi triste nihil
videtur, ubi laetitia semper habetur, etc. Aust. Soliloqui. O joy beyond all
joy, O joy without which there is no joy, when shall I enter into thee, that I
may behold God which is in thee, where youth never grows old? De verbis Domini
in Joh. Sermon. 64. where love never grows cold, etc. After, when he was grown
somewhat old, he takes a pause and demands this of himself, after a long
discourse: What shall I say? Surely I cannot tell, but I know that God has
such things to bestow: And facilius invenire possumus quid ibi non sit, quam
quid sit: We may easilier find what is not there, then what is there: Non ibi
erit lassari and dormire, non ibi esurire and sitire, non ibi erit crescere and
senescere. Behold what I have spoken, and yet I have not spoken what is there:
Eccejam vita, jam incolumitas est, jam nulla fames, nulla paena, nulla si is,
nullus defectus, and tamen nondum dixi, and yet I have not told you what is
there; that which eye has not seen, how can I discern? that which ear has
not heard, how can I speak? that which never came into the heart of man, how
can it come into my heart to declare? and indeed to make a long discourse about
this subject, were but with the blind man to discourse about colors. He may
talk long about them but with eyes he cannot know them; and we may talk much
of Heavens joys, but till we come there and see God we cannot see them: Our
knowledge is no more able to reach to the excellency of them, then a newborn
child is to make a demonstration in the Mathematics, or he that is blind to
name every color that is laid before him. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard,
says the Apostle: Quicquid recipitur, recipitur in modum recipientis: A Quart
will not contain a Gallon, nor a Gallon an Hogshead; nothing can receive more
then its able to contain. Our understandings are like Vessels of small
capacity, and therefore our heavenly Father, who in the Scriptures is often
pleased, Balbutire cum pueris, to condescend to the meannesse of his Childrens
capacity, expresses these joys by such things as their understandings are
capable of.

The Jews report of Manna, that it gave a taste to every man according to
their several appetites and desires: For the truth of this, Credat Judaeus
apella, non ego: The Scripture tells us that the taste thereof was like Wafers
made with Honey, ^um. 16. 31. But it may be truly said of this Kingdom, that
in the Scriptures its expressed by such names as may give satisfaction to every
man's appetite. Some are delighted with fair houses, it is therefore called an
house, 2 Cor. 5. and Solomon's house, 1 King. 7. was a type of it, but far short
of the antitype. Yea, and the house of the Sun too. Sublimibus alta columnis,
clara micante auro, flammasque imitante pyropo: It Is the house that wisdom
has built, Prove. 9. a stately house with a witness, for her stones are
Carbun^les, her foundation Saphirs, its windows of Emeralds, and all its gates
of shining stones, Isa. 54. In a word, Its a house made without hands,
eternal, and that in the heavens, 2 Cor. 5. Some it contents not to dwell in a
fair house, unless it be seated in a goodly City: It Is therefore likened unto
a City, a City having a foundation that is a sure foundation; all earthly
Cities are founded in quag-mires, they want a foundation, they are like the
house builded upon the sand, which cannot endure the weather, but down it
goes, as Athens, Lacedem^n, Niniveh, Babylon, and others have done: a City of
the best structure. Whose builder and maker is God, Heb. 11. 10. A City having
the glory of God, a City of pure gold like unto clear glass, Revel. 21. Oh
how excellent things are spoken of thee thou City of God. But neither fair
Houses, nor goodly Cities will give contentment to some, unless they may have
wealth at will, in which many place their chief felicity. It Is therefore
likened unto a pearl, for which the wise Lapidari^ sells all that he has to
buy it, A treasure which neither rust nor moth can corrupt, nor thief steal.
All these will not satisfy the minds of some, unless beside them they may
have honors and dignities heaped upon them. Here is that that may give these
contentment too, it is a Kingdom, A kingdom that cannot be shaken, Hebr. 12.
(and the greatest Kingdoms of the world have been often shaken and shivered in
pieces.) A kingdom that shall have no end, Luke 1. Or as was foretold by the
Prophet, A kingdom that shall never be destroyed, Dan. 7. 14.

Pyrrgus said of Rome (when as yet it was not Mistress of all Italic) That it
was a City of Kings, marry one thing was wanting to that Kingly City, which
Hormisda, Legate to Constantine, did well observe, when he saw the Emperor
ravished with the beauty of it, as if with Paul he had been wrapped up into the
third heaven; and it was this, that men died in that City of Kings, as well as
in other places. But it may be truly said of this, that it is not Vrbs regum,
but regnum regum, a Kingdom of Kings; not the meanest doore-keeper there, but
wears a Crown beset with more precious jewels then the Jasp^r and the Onix
stone: And here is that which makes up their felicity, that the Crown shall
never ^ade (as appears by that which has been spoken) their joy shall never
fail, their Sun shall never set, their life shall never end. Is not here
honor enough? Indeed neither houses, nor Cities, nor wealth, nor honors will
satisfy some, unless they may fare well, and have store of dainties:
therefore its elsewhere likened to a wedding feast of a Kings son, where
nothing is wanting which may delight the heart of man.

1. Costly apparel. 2. Curious and exquisite music. 3. Great provision of all
kinds of dishes, etc.
All these which I have named are but spoken, (...) whereby the holy Ghost would
have us gather the unspeakable joys of this Kingdom, as Pythagoras from the
print of Hercules his foot in the games of Olympus did gather the bigness of
his whole body. This is not all, fair houses, goodly Cities, wealth and
riches, honors and Kingdoms: so rich apparel, delicate fare, etc. join them
all together, and without good neighborhood they are like Jericho, 2 Kin. 2.
whose situation was pleasant, but the waters naught. When Themistocles was
about to sell an house in Athens, he made the Crier proclaim, that he that would
buy that house, should have a good neighbor with it. He that gets this House,
this City, this Kingdom we have spoken of, shall be sure of a good
neighbor, he shall have the society of innumerable Angels, and the spirits of
just and perfect men, and of God the Judge of all, and Jesus the Mediator of
the New Testament; who can wish better company?

An unwise man does not consider these things, Use 1.
and a fool cannot understand them: The reason is, he wants a spiritual eye*
and spiritual things must be spiritually discerned; and thinks himself never
rich enough; another thinks he has never preferment enough; another is so
addicted to the pleasures of this world, that he never thinks he has enough;
every one is desirous to have his abode here. It was Peter's error, Bonum est
esse hic, Let us here build us tabernacles: Here will I dwell, for I have a
delight herein. And the holy Ghost says of Peter, That he wist not what he
said, Mar. 9. 6. It Is true of us too, we wot not what we say; we make not that
comparison we should between this present and future life; we think of the
moment any pleasures of the one, which notwithstanding is mingled with much
bitterness; we think not upon, peradventure we believe not the eternity of the
other. Like bruit Beasts, the most are carried with carnal sensuality, and
regard the present, they consider not that which is to come. If a Beast could
speak, he would say that he is in a more happy estate then men; the reason is,
because he feels his own pleasures, but he has not the wit to consider the
felicity of man: Man can speak, and he says at least in his heart, he thinks
that he is in a more happy estate then the Angels in heaven; he feels his own
felicity (which indeed is a misery and no felicity) he wants a spiritual
understanding to judge of theirs. I remember what Aelian reports of Nicostratus,
an excellent Painter; this Nicostratus seeing the picture of Helena which was
painted by Zeuxis, did very earnestly look upon it, being much amazed at the
curiousness of the work-manship: An ignorant man that had no skill in
painting, and therefore thought that he had seen many pictures as good as that,
came unto him and asked him the reason why he did so much admire that image;
Oh, quoth Nicostratus, if thou had mine eyes thou would never ask me that
question, but be as much astonished with it as I am. The faithful Christian
looking with the eyes of faith upon this Kingdom mentioned in my Text;
Explorimentem nequit, ardescitque tuendo, and prizeth it above 1000. worlds all
of gold and pearl; the carnal man seeing him, laughs at him, and calls him a
Gods fool; he sees no reason why he should be so astonished at the contemplation
of that which is so high above his reach, and so far beyond his horizon, as he
by his natural understanding cannot attain unto.

I am better persuaded of you that hear me this day, though I speak these
things only for conclusion, let me exhort you, nay with Austin, hortor vos
omnes clarissimi, ^eque ipsum; that seeing the riches of this Kingdom is such
as cannot be valued, the excellency such as cannot be expressed, the joys such
as cannot be conceived, the durance such as cannot be ended, let us not with
Aesops Cock prefer a barly-corne, the transitory trash of this world before
this precious pearl, for which the wise Lapidary will part with all he has
that he may purchase it. Let us not with Esau prefer a mess of Pottage
before our Birthright; nay with the Israelites, account more of the stinking
Garlic and Onions of Egypt, then of the Milk and Honey of this spiritual
Canaan: but as the Spies which were sent from the Danites to view Laish, Judge.
18. said to their brethren at their return, We have seen the land, and surely
it is very good, arise and let us not be sloathfull to go and enter to
possess it. And if the old Gauls adventured their lives over the rocky Alps,
and encountered all their cruel Enemies the Italians, that they might have
their fill of the Hetrurian Wine and Figs of Tuscanie: And if the Queen of the
South adventured her self from Sheba, or Meroe in Aethiopia through the vast
Wildernesses in Africa, and the sandy Deserts of Arabia to Jerusalem, to see
Solomon, and to confer with him; shall not we with patience swallow up all
those calamities, which may befall us in the wilderness of this world?

And in despite of all opposition by evil or Devil, let us boldly hold on
our journey to the new and holy Jerusalem which is above, where we shall see
and confer with the true Solomon, Jesus Christ the righteous, the mighty God,
the everlasting father, the King of peace, Isa. 9. of whom we may more truly
say then she did of that Solomon; It was a true word that I heard in mine own
land of thy sayings, and of thy wisdom, but lo^ the one half was not told
me. Happy are the men, happy are thy servants which stand ever before thee,
and hear thy wisdom.

For the better performance of our duties in this journey, let us remember that
every one has a double calling, one general, another particular; in both these
let us do our utmost endeavor to spend that little time which God affords us in
this land of the living in a conscionable walking with God, after the example
of Enoch and Noah. To omit the general; as every man has a particular
calling, so let him make conscience to use as to Gods glory, so to the good and
benefit of his Country; the Minister in a faithful dispensation of the Word of
God to them that are committed to his charge; the Magistrate in using the sword
of Justice put into his hands for the punishment of evil doers, and for the
praise of him that does well. He is Vir gregis, the Belweather in Christ's
little Flock, and as he goes the rest will follow, if by honest, and upright
and conscionable dealings he shall lead them the right way, the lesser and
weaker Sheep will be ready to follow him into the green Pastures of the Lord
that are beside the waters of comfort. To this purpose let him remember that
God has set him in his own room, and styled him with his own name: The study
of a Poet, that every speech and action and gesture be suitable to the person
he brings upon the Stage.

Sit Medea Ferox, etc.
The fifth Sermon.
MATTHEW. 7. 22, 23. Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have not we by
thy name prophesied? -- And then I will profess to them, I never knew you.
THAT which our Savior delivered in the former part of the Precedent verse,
That not all that profess Christ to be their Lord shall be saved, is in these
two verses confirmed; for a man may have most excellent gifts, and in respect
of his Calling come near unto Christ, be his Vicegerent, and supply his room,
and for all that miss heaven. Many will say unto me, etc. In which words note;
1. The plea of certain persons. 2. Christ's answer; Then will I profess, etc.


In the Plea, note, 1. The persons described by their Offices; they are
Prophets, and they have taken pains in their calling: Have not we prophesied?
2. Their number ( Many.) 3. The time when this plea shall be made ( At that
day.) 4. The Judge before whom ( Unto me.)


The first will be as much as I shall be able to run through at this time,
which I purpose not to handle, ut thema simplex, but as it has relation to
Christ's answer.

Have not we in thy name; That is, by thy authority and appointment, as being
called by thee to that office, Prophesied; that is, either foretold things to
come (that is the proper signification of the word) or else explained and
expounded the word. The Prophets in the time of the Law did both, and in the
New Testament it is used both ways. In those days there came certain Prophets
from Jerusalem to Antiochia, Act. 11. 27. That is, such as by revelation of the
Spirit did foretell things to come, such was Agabus, and the daughters of
Philip, Acts 21. There you have it in the former signification, Despise not
prophecy, 1 These. 5. 20. Covet spiritual gifts, but rather that ye may
prophecy, 1 Cor. 14. 1. And in the next verse Prophecy is defined, A speaking
unto men to edification, and to exhortation, and to comfort: there you have it
in the letter; here it is taken generally, as enfolding both these particulars:
So that from hence may be gathered these two propositions, which shall be the
subject of my speech at this time.

1. A man may be a Prophet (that is, a foreteller of things to come) and be a
reprobate.

2. A man may be a learned Preacher, and a means of saving others, and for all
that be damned himself.

To foretell future contingents (as they are considered in themselves,
Propositions.
and not in their causes (for so they are in some sort present) its proper to
him from whose all-seeing eyes nothing is hid, Romans 4. 17.
Who calls things that are not as though they were, and understands the
thoughts of our hearts (things of all other most purely contingent) long
before; and therefore the Lord brings this as an argument against the Idols of
the Heathen, to prove that they were no gods, because they could not foretell
things to come, 1 King. 13.
Isa. 41. 23. It Is he (and none but he) that could name Josias long before he
came into the world, Isa. 44. 28.
and call Cyrus his Shepherd above 100. years before he was borne, Genesis 25.
11, 12
and number the years of the Jews captivity before they were carried to
Babylon, Dan. 7.
and foresee the four great Monarchies of the world before they were:
notwithstanding as the true Prophets have foretold these, and other future
events, not by help of Melancholy, Bodin Meth. hist.
which made them more addicted to contemplation (as Bodin fondly dreameth) but
merely by divine illumination: so has the Lord revealed some of the like
nature unto such as were not of the household of faith; Joh. 11.
which as it is plain by my Text, so also by the example of Caiphas, an enemy
to Christ, and Balaam, Numb. 23.
A stranger from the commonwealth of Israel: and Saul, a reprobate: and the
Devil himself, who could never certainly have foretold Saul's death, 1 Samuel 9.
unless the Lord had revealed it unto him: 1 Samuel 28.
which places are so plain, that Bellarmine, De gratia and libero arbitrio,
Bellarmine.
lib. 1. cap. 10. confesses as much in substance as now I labor to prove.

If it please you to leave the Scriptures a little, and to pass to heathen
men, you shall find that they were not without their Prophesies. Hierome.
Hierom upon his Epistle to Titus, says, that Epimenides (whom Paul calls a
Prophet of Crete) wrote a book of Predictions, out of which the Apostle
borrowed that heroical verse which is cited in the first Chapter of that
Epistle.

(...).
Concerning their Oracles, although they were oftentimes given in
amphibologicall terms, when the event could not be known, such as was that to
Pyrrhus (if such was given) which Tully doubts) Aio te Aeacida Romanos vincere
posse.


And that given to Croesus, Croesus Halyn penetrans pervertet plurima regna.


Croesus passing Halys, shall great Kingdoms overthrow, viz. either of his
own or others: Live. de c. 1. lib. 8.
and such as was given to Alexander King of Epirus, that he should beware of
the City Pandosia and the river Acheron, those two being in Epirus, and others
of that name in Italy, where he was slain; and sometimes were of things
already begun to be done, the news whereof was carried by Spirits in a moment
of time unto places far distant, such as that was in the first book of
Herodotus, where the Oracle tells Croesus his messengers what he was doing at
that time in his own house: and sometimes were of such things as had natural
causes, unknown to men, yet known to Devils, by reason of their greater
subtilty and quick apprehension; yet were they not all of these kinds, some
being of such nature as could never be known without divine revelation. To
tell Alexander the time, and place, and manner of his death, as the Indian
Oracle did (if that Epistle be not counterfeit, Q. Curtius. Ad. Arist. Justin.
Herod.
which in the end of Q. Curtius goes under Alexanders name) to tell the
Athenians that they should overcome their Enemies (the Dorenses) and the
Lacedaemonians, that they should prevail against the Persians, if their King
should be slain in the field: Livius.
and Brutus, that he should have the government of Rome, who should first kiss
his old Mother the Earth; they be things purely contingent, and such as the
Devil by his own knowledge could never reach unto.

What shall we say of the Sybills and their Prophesies? peradventure some of
them are spurious, and illegitimate: such as that of Sybilla Erithraea in
Eusebius and Augustine, where the first letter of every verse being put
together make up these words, (...). Munst. de Italia.
And that of the same Sibyll which Munster has borrowed, I know not out of
what Author: In ultima aetate humiliabitur deus, humanabitur proles divina,
unietur humanitati divinitas, jacebit in faeno agnus, and puellari educabitur
officio: and that of I know not which Sibylla, cited by Lactantius and Austin:
In manus iniquas infidelium veniet, and dabunt deo alapas manibus incestis, and
impurato ore expuent venenatos sputus, etc. He shall come into the hands of the
wicked, and they shall buffet him with their fists, and with impure mouths
shall spit upon him, etc. All which, and many such like were, I am persuaded,
forged by Christians (to make the Gospel more passable amongst the Gentiles)
especially seeing amongst none of Gods Prophets, Hierom. praef. in Isaiam.
no not in Isaiah himself, whom Hierom calls not only a Prophet, but an
Apostle and Evangelist) are extant such clear testimonies touching Christ.

Yet surely that in Virgils Eglogs was never as yet questioned by any, which
the Poet finding in the books of Sibylla Cumaea, and gathering by the first
letter of every verse (as Ludovicus Vives thinks) that the time was at hand
when that Prophecy should take place, Aug. de civ. lib. 18. cap. 23.
applied that to Saloninus, the son of Asinius Pollio, which can be fitted to
none, save Christ the redeemer of the world.

Vltima Cumaei venit jam carminis aetas*
What Verses be these? Let us hear them, at least let us have the sense of
them.

A strange exchange in course of things,
This present time unto us brings:
The Maid is come'd, the Iron age is spent,
A newborn Babe, Gods dearest Son,
From highest Heaven is sent.
Magnus ab integro seclorum nascitur ordo: Virg. Ecloga 4:

Jam redit and virgo, redeunt Saturnia regna;
Jam nova progenies caelo dimittitur al^^,
Chara dei soboles. --
And what benefit shall he bring to mankind? He shall save his people from
their sins.

Hoc duce, si qua manent sceleris vestigia nostri,
Jrrita perpetua solvent formidine terras.
And as it follows a little after, The Serpent shall be killed, and the of
poison dead,
Our Ladies Rose, from Sy^ian land, through all the World shall spread.


Occidet and Serpens, and fallax herba veneni
Occidet, Assyrium vulgo nascetur amomum.
What is this Serpent but that wily Serpent that deceived our first Parents?
What Is this Fallax herba veneni, but sin? And what is this Assyrium amomum,
but the Balm of Gilead, or to give it its English name, our Ladies Rose, or
the Herb of Jerusalem, Luke 24. 47.
the Gospel of Christ, begun to be Preached at Jerusalem a City in Assyria (for
Palaestina was then vulgarly accounted part of Assyria) according to Christ's
direction, and thence dispersed into every corner of the World: See
Constantines Oration, Ad Caelum sanctorum fidelium, cap. 20. in Eusebio.

These things are so plain that a learned Rabbin amongst our Adversaries, Tho.
Aquin. 2a. 2ae. q. 172. art. 6.
unto whom we appeal in this point ( Let our enemies be Judges, Deuteronomy. 32.) is
not ashamed to confess, that, Prophetae demonum non semper loquuntur, ex
demonum revelatione sed interdum ex inspiratione divina. And another, that God
sometimes permitted amongst the Gentiles some Prophets to foretell future
things: Greg. Toless. de rep. lib. 13. cap. 33.
And a third in his Commentary upon this Text, that false Prophets have truly
Prophesied.

The truth of this Proposition being confirmed unto us by such a cloud of
witnesses, Mald. in Mar. 7.
I wonder what came in Bellarmines head, Use.
to make Lumen Propheticum a mark of the true Church, especially where he
proposes to speak of such notes, by which it may most easily be distinguished
from all false Religion, Lib. 4. de notis ecclae. Cap. 3.
of Jews, Heretics, and Pagans; and such as are proper; and again, such as
though they make it not evidently true which is the true Church, yet they make
it evidently credible (not probable only, for that is the weakness of our
Notes, as he says) nay amongst those which admit the Scriptures, and
Histories, and Writings of the ancient Fathers (and all these we admit) Faciunt
etiam evidentiam veritatis. Shall we count him a Master in Israel that speaks
thus? Does that make it evidently appear which is the true Church, does that
difference true Religion from all false Religion of Jews, Heretics, and
Pagans, or is that proper Quarto modo to the Church, which all Sectaries,
Apostates, Heretics, Jews, Gentiles, Devils, may challenge? But let us follow
Bellarmine a little further (and leave these slippery Snakes no think to creep
out at) I demand, had the Gentiles no true Prophesies amongst them: Imo multa
falsa, says he; but because they had many false, had they therefore none true?
Speak plainly, were there no true predictions of future things amongst the
Pagans? No forsooth, Nisi forsa^ fierent in testimoniu^ nostrae fidei, ut
fuerunt vaticinia Sibyllarum, and Baalami: Very well: And if these were true,
how is lumen prophetitum proper to the true Church. But we will not stand upon
this advantage, let us grant that there were no true Predictions amongst the
Ethnicks, save only such as were for the confirmation of the Catholic faith;
and that all others were of such things as had natural causes (though unknown
to men) known to Spirits by reason of their subtle nature and quick
apprehension. Verily seeing neither the reasons thereof were known, nor the
Spirit from which this knowledge proceeded could be discerned, they might, and
may as truly be termed Prophesies, as any of those which the Papists brag of:
and if they were not Prophesies indeed, yet were they so in the opinion of men:
Saltem ipsorum opinione, is a strong argument with Bellarmine, to infringe the
Notes which our Divines have set down: Let some of his side answer it.

Thales, Arist. Polit. lib. 1.
for seeing by Astronomicall Observation, the abundance of Olives which would
be the next year, might by the Chians and Milesians, which knew not the reason
of it, be counted a Prophet.

Columbus was for a less prediction little less respected by the barbarous
Indians, Benzo.
then Paul and Barnabas was by them of Lystra, Acts 14. 12.
when they called Barnabas Jupiter, and Paul Merourie. This man being in great
distress in an Island, the Inhabitants denying him all kind of releife, he
understanding that shortly after there would be a great Eclipse of the Moon,
signified unto them by a Messenger that he was a Prophet sent unto them from
the great God of Heaven and Earth, and that if they would not furnish him and
his company with such things as they wanted, God, whose Prophet he was, would
utterly destroy them: In token whereof, quoth he, the next night at such an
hour, the Moon shall loose her light: they for all this continued in their
obstinacy, and scorned his threatenings. At the hour named the Moon by degrees
entering into the shadow of the earth, was at length in those parts for a space
quite darkened; which when the Barbarians saw, presently they ran unto
Columbus, they fell down at his feet, they honored him as a man, they
worshipped him as a God, they offered themselves, and whatsoever was theirs, to
be wholly at his service. Verily the Papists do Columbus great wrong, who for
this witty shift, deserves rather the name of a Prophet amongst them, then that
great Elias of the new. World, Francis Xaverius, for his juggling Tricks in
those Parts, deserves the name of a waker of Miracles.

To end this Point: Seeing it is a matter of such difficulty to distinguish a
true Prophet from that which is false, both because they are of things to come,
the truth whereof cannot be sifted out before the time be expired; and though
they have natural causes, yet be they such as cannot be known unto men, and if
they could, yet seeing (as already has been proved) the Infidels and Pagans
have had their prophesies; let the Papists prove the gift of Prophesy to be
perpetual in their Church (which they can never do) and let them bring us as
great Catalogues of their Prophesies, as they do of their Miracles, and lying
Wonders (a thing not impossible to men of such rare invention) but let none
from these slender Premises infer this conclusion, that there is the true
Church of God, but rather let him undoubtedly believe that the words of my Text
are verified of these men. Many shall say unto me at that day, Lord, Lord, have
not we by thy name prophesied? etc. Let us not think that the Precept of the
Law was given in vain. If there arise a Prophet or a Dreamer of Dreams, and
give thee a Sign and a Wonder, and the Sign and Wonder which he has told
thee shall come to pass, saying, Let us follow strange Gods (as these men do)
thou shall not hearken unto the words of that Prophet, for the Lord your God
proves you, to know whether you love the Lord your God with all your Heart,
and with all your Soul, Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3. Thus much of the first, the second
follows.

A man may be a Preacher of the Gospel, 2 Proposition.
and a means of saving others, and be damned himself.

I have a long Journey to go, and the time allotted me but short, so that I
cannot stand upon the proof of this Proposition, neither is it needful I
should (having no Donatists, no Anabaptists to impugn) let it suffice to add
unto my Text the words of the Apostle, Phil. 1. 15. Some preach Christ through
envy and strife; truly, for all that not sincerely: else would not the Apostle
have added that which follows; I therein joy, yea and in that will joy. This
Sermon upon the Mount of which my Text is a Branch, was preached at the
Consecration of the twelve Apostles, of which number Judas was one, whom a
while after he sent abroad to preach the Gospel; then called he the twelve
Disciples, and sent them to preach the Kingdom of God, and to heal diseases,
and they went through every Town preaching the Gospel, and healing every
where, Luke 9. 2. 6. For all Judas his preaching and healing, he did not preach
unto, nor heal himself; it had been good for him that he had never been born,
Matthew. 26.

The first Use and Inference (of which let me ^rave your patience to spend some
time) shall concern the hearers of the word. 1 Use.
It may lesson them not to have the truth of the glorious God in respect of
persons, as James speaks: or that I may express my self in other words, that
they do not forsake or neglect a truth preached, because the life of the
Speaker is offensive and scandalous. Saul may prophecy, and Caiphas may
prophecy, and Judas may prophecy, And many shall say unto me at that day,
Lord, Lord, have not we by thy name prophesied? Shall not Saul be credited,
because he is rejected? why not? is not Saul also amongst the Prophets? 1 Samuel
19. Shall Caiphas his prophecy not be esteemed, because he took away the life
from the Lord of life? surely yes: for, this spoke he not of himself, but
being high Priest that year, he prophesied that Jesus should die for the
Nation, Ioh. 11. 51. Shall Judas his Sermons be set at naught, because he is a
damned Reprobate himself? surely no: For whosoever shall not receive you, nor
hear your words (it was spoken to the twelve, of which Judas was one) Truly I
say unto you, it shall be easier for them of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of
Judgment, then for that City,, Matthew. 10. 14. 15. Oh then shall any man be such
an Enemy to his own Salvation, as that if the life of his Teacher be misliked,
he will therefore set at naught the word of God, truly, though not sincerely
delivered? what were this but to reject God himself: as he says unto Samuel,
It is not thee, but me whom they have rejected, 1 Samuel 8. 7. The word of God is
a Touchstone, to try every man's Actions whether they be Gold or Dross; it is
a line and squa re to make us fit Stones for Gods Temple. Now shall I mislike
the Touchstone, because the Gold is counterfeit? shall I make fit the Rule for
the Stone, and so make it a Lesbian Rule, Aust. Ath. lib. 5.
especially if it be a rough and unhewed Stone, and as yet not fit for that
building, whereof Christ Jesus is the corner Stone? If I be sick unto death,
shall I refuse physic because I mislike the Physician, or because he will not
take the same physic himself?

An tibi cum fauces urit sitis, Hor.
aurea quaeris
Pocula? cum esurias fastidisomnia, praeter
Pavonem, rhombumque?
When thou art thirsty will thou refuse Drink, unless it be given thee in a
gilded Bowl? When thou art hungry, will no Meat content thee but Patridges
and Pheasants? Surely thou have too dainty a Stomach; it commonly falls out
otherwise: men that are hungry will not refuse wholesome meat, though they,
have no good opinion of the Party that reaches it; and when they are thirsty,
they will not refuse Drink, though it be given them in a wooden Dish. Shall a
man have a care of his Body, and none of his Soul? if my Soul be sick unto
death, shall I refuse physic because the Physician takes it not himself; or
shall I refuse the bread of life and water of life, because they are offered me
with polluted hands? The Scribes and Pharisees, says Christ, sit in Moses
Chair; all that they bid you observe and do (sitting in Moses Chair, that is
explaining the Doctrine of Moses) that observe, and do, but after their works
do not, because though they have V^im, they want Thummim, they say, and do not.
Lo the Scribes and Pharisees, those rotten Dunghils, and painted Sepulchers,
whom the filthy Sodomites and the proud Ninivites, and the profane wretches of
Tyrus and Sidon, shall condemn at the day of Judgment, must be heard as long
as they preach the Law, yea and we must do that wi^h they teach us, but after
their works we must not do, for they be workers of Iniquity. Hos. 4.
If Israel play the Harlot (says the Prophet) what shall Judah sin? If the
Ministers of God transgress the Covenant, what must the People sin? If the
false Disciples go away (which indeed were only blazing Stars, and not fixed
Lights of that caelestiall Globe, which shall shine for evermore; Stella cadens
non est, stella cometa fuit) If these go away (says our Savior Christ) will
ye also go away? Nay let us make answer with Peter in that place, quo ibimus
Domine, Master to whom shall we go, thou have the words of eternal life, Ioh.
6. 67.

It is not the gross and dark Cloud of man's Infirmity, but the Pillar of fire
of Gods word, which must direct our Steps; its not the oblique and crooked
square of humane example, but the straight line of Gods revealed will that must
guide our Actions.

If the King should send his Charter subscribed with his own hand, and sealed
with his own blood, to confirm a parcel of Ground, or some earthly
Inheritance, to certain of his Subjects; if they because they mislike the
Messenger that brings it, shall scorn his bountifulness, and tread under foot
the Charter; will the King like of this frowardness think you? I think not.
Well then, shall the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, send these Letters
Patents indicted with the holy Ghost, signed with a test me ipso, with the
finger of God, sealed with his Sons blood, by which is offered unto us, not an
earthly Inheritance, but a Heavenly Kingdom, and if we by reason of the
lewdness of any Ambassador that shall bring it, shall contemn his kindness,
and set at naught his promises; assuredly he will invite those that are by the
hedges and highways, that his Rooms may be full, but none of those which
were thus bidden (unless with the Son in the Parable, who first refused to go
into the Vineyard, but afterward went, they who by unfeigned repentance shall
turn unto him) shall ever taste of the Lambs Supper.

Let them look unto this, who are so far from applying unto themselves such
Lessions as are delivered by the Minister, that neglecting whatsoever is
spoken, as if it did nothing concern them, or forgetting it as soon as they
have turned their faces (as he that looks himself in a Glass, and going
away, presently forgets what manner of man he was) will only strive to
follow the Minister in his life, and yet not in every thing neither (for in
many things they have a warrant for so doing; be ye followers of me, says the
Apostle, but with this limitation, as I am of Christ) but with Furius in
Tullie, will only imitate him in his wants and imperfections. Like those base
flatterers of Alexander the Great, who imitated him in crooking the neck; or to
give a later example, like those Germans who took a more special care of being
like to Philip Melancton, in writing a scribbling and ragged hand, then to match
him in soundness of Religion, and multiplicity of Learning; imitatores stultum
pecus. But if they will not imitate him, they will be sure to blaze his Arms,
and (so quick-sighted are these la^iae, when they carry their eyes of censuring
abroad, though they coffer them up when they come at home) not the least hole
in his Coat shall escape their censure, and yet they cannot espy one virtue,
though peradventure in a far greater measure he shall abound therewith. A
black color may perfectly be viewed; but a bright and shining color, if we
sted fastly eye it, will dazzle our eyes that we cannot behold it. So it befalls
men's vices and virtues (especially of the Ministers) their vices many will take
a full view of them, and see them through false spectacles, which make one
seame many, or at least greater in show then in substance; but with their
virtues (as the eyes of an Owl is dazzled with the light of the Sun) their
sight is so dimmed, that they cannot behold them.

The Merchant, if he sell good Wares, and a penniworth for a penny, is sought
into, whatsoever his person be. A Tradesman, if his work be good, shall be sure
to vent it, his life is no further looked unto. But a Minister treads upon
needles, he walks upon ice, he danceth upon ropes (to use Nazianzens
comparison) if he tread never so little awry he is espied, and both himself
and doctrine rejected. And as a mote is seen in the Sun-beame, which is not
discerned in a dark corner, or a wart on the face is sooner seen then a wen on
the back: so the least blemish in a Minister is sooner taken notice of then the
greatest slips and falls of other men. The Sun when he shines the brightest is
not much looked upon; but when he is eclipsed, then one calls another out of
the doors to see him, and all gaze upon it, and the greater the Eclipse is, the
more talk they of it: So is it with them whom Christ styles Lights of the
world; their shining virtues, whether in preaching, or living, or both, few
take notice of; but for their faults, they can look fully upon them, and call
others to be Spectators.

Would God I might here stay my speech, and that there were no further cause of
complaint in this kind; but alas, it is so commonly known, that it is even told
at Gath, and published in the streets of Askelon, insomuch that the daughters
of Babylon rejoice, and the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph, that many
are not only ready with cursed Cham to discover their spiritual fathers
nakedness, but which is worse, Sincerum cupiunt va^ incrustare. And whereas it
is the Devils practice to hide in a bush the deformity of the Panthers head, to
mince and qualify the offenses of other men (as the old Romans were wont to
mince the natural imperfections of their children, by giving them a name of
some famous man that had the like; Strabouem appellat P^tum pater, hunc Varum
distortis cruribus, illum balbutit Scaurum.) by giving a name of a virtue to
that vice which outwardly it most resembles, as to call prodigality liberality,
etc. He and his instruments take a contrary course with a Minister, and style
h^s virtues by the name of a vice. Nos quia serica vest non utimur, monachi
judicamur, quia ebrij non sumus, nec cachinno ora dissolvimus, contumaces
vocamur and tristes, si tunica non candueri^, st^tim illud e trivio impostor
est and Graecus, says Hierom. Hierom. ad Marcellam.
If a Minister be liberal, he is called riotous, if frugall, covetous; if
merry, dissolute; if grave, austere; if silent, melancholy; if he stand upon
his reputation, proud and arrogant: Woe unto them that call good evil. In the
Primitive Church (when the comparison between Gentilisme and Christianity did
much resemble Cleanthes his picture in Tullie, Lib. 1. de finibus.
where Voluptuousness was painted in a chair of State, and Virtue kneeling at
her feet) there was not a more odious name, says Tertullian, then to be called
a Christian: Bonus vir Cujus Seius, sed malus tantum quod Christianus. So it is
with some, they were good men, but they are but Ministers, they are but
Priests. Hos populus ridet, multumque torosa juventus, the name is odious to
some, they cannot away with it. But if his person cannot be excepted against*
his doctrine for matter or manner shall. Hierom. ad ^^mmach.
Faelices essent arts, inquit Fabius (they be Hieroms words) Si de illis soli
artifices judicarent, poetam non potest nosse nisi qui versum potest stuere,
Philosophos non intelligit, nisi qui scit dog matum varietates, etc. Nostra
autem quam sit dura conditio hinc potes anima dvertere, quod vulgi sit standum
judicio. Happy were the Arts, says Quintilian, if only Artifice^s should judge
of them. None judges of a Poet but he that can make a Verse: None gives
censure of Philosophers, but he that is acquainted with their opinions. A
Shoo-maker meddles with a shoe, but not with the Stocking; a Tailor with a
garment, and goes no further; but for a Preacher, men of all Trades will
censure him, and none so much as they that understand least. If with Nathan he
tell David that he is the man; If with Elijah he tells Ahab, that it is he and
his fathers house that troubles Israel: If with John Baptist he tell Herod,
that it is not lawful for him to have his Brothers Wife; Hic nigrae succus
loliginis, haec est aerugo: Now these be hard sayings, who can hear them. And
if they cannot reprehend the matter of his speech, the manner thereof will
afford some matter enough to speak of. If Paul speak of his Mysteries and
Revelations before Festus, he is beside himself, much learning makes him mad:
And if this Doctor of the Gentiles, applying himself to the rude capacity of
the ignorant Corinthians (for he becomes all things to all men, that by all
means he might win ne some) use a more familiar phrase, and feed them with
milk, because they cannot digest strong meat, 2 Cor. 10. 10.
he is presently by some seducer in that Church censured to be a plain silly
fellow, his bodily presence is weak, and his speech is of no value.

Thus he is rewarded Evil for good, and hatred for his good will: and thus are
Gods builders in many places constrained to build with one hand, and to hold
their weapons against their enemies in the other, as did those builders of
Jerusalem against Sanballat and Tobiah, and other Enemies of Judah and
Benjamine, Neh. 4. 17. Dextra tenet pennam, strictum tenet altera ferrum. May
they not in this case take up David's complaint, I verily lie among the children
of men which are set on fire? They have venenum ptyados, the poison of a
spitting Aspe under their lips, their teeth are spears and arrows, and their
tongues a sharp sword.

But beloved I have persuaded my self better things of you, Heb. 9. 6.
and such as accompany salvation, though I thus speak. Only for conclusion of
this Use, let me entreat you, with the Author of the Epistle to the Hebr. Heb.
22. 25.
See that ye despise not him that speaks, I mean Ministerial speakers: If
ye do, ye despise him that speaks from heaven, Whose blood speaks better
things then that of Abel. But receive such (as the Galatians received Paul, who
received him as an Angel of God, and would have pulled out their own eyes to
have given unto him) and have them in a singular love even for their works
sake. But above all things tread not under foot the bread of life, because of
the unworthiness of any that reaches it. Refuse not the water of life,
because of the uncleanness of any Conduit-pipe that conveyeth it. Reject not
the promise of life, because of the lewdness of any Ambassador that brings
it. Forsake not the way of life, because of the blackishnesse of any that
shows it. Contemn not the word of life, because of the imperfections of any
that preaches it: For assuredly, as the rain comes down from Heaven, and
ascends not thither again, but accomplisheth that for which it is sent, so
shall the Word, of God be, (by whomsoever it shall be delivered) it will either
harden you if ye be as clay, or it will soften you if ye be as wax; it will
either work upwards or down-wards, it will either prove the savor of life unto
salvation, or of death unto damnation.

Oh then so provide your ears to hear, that ye may say with young Samuel,
Speak Lord, for thy servant hears; and hearing it, pray that your hearts may
be unlocked to receive it; and receiving it, believe it; and believing it,
practice it in your lives and conversations, Philip. 1. 11.
that ye may be filled with the fruits of righteousness which are by Jesus
Christ, unto the praise and glory of God.

Having now dispatched my message to Hearers, let me crave leave that I may
turn my speech to the Preachers of the Word.

May a man be a Prophet, Use. 2.
and deliver true and sound Doctrine for the benefit of others, and for all be
an unregenerate man, a damned Reprobate himself? Then let me exhort you all
(my dear Brethren) or rather with Austine, Hortor vos omnes charissimi, meque
ipsum hortor vobiscum, I exhort you, and my self together with you, as we
desire to escape everlasting damnation, and to have our part with Christ in his
glorious Kingdom; let us as the Apostle exhorts, take heed not only to
Doctrine, but to our selves first, not only to our preaching, that it be sound,
but to our lives also, that they be unblameable; let us not only be vigilant
that the Bell strike right above, but that the wheels of the Clock go right
below: let us not only so speak, but so do, as they that shall be judged by
the Law of liberty, least after we have preached to others, and been a means
of their Salvation, ipsi reprobi fiamus, we our selves be tumbled into Hell; as
the Builders of the Arc were means of saving Noah and his Family, and for all
that were drowned themselves: we may not expect (it is not expedient we should)
for any to gain a good report of all men: Dogs will be barking at the best:
was he a good man of whom none spoke ill, it was spoken of a Lacedemonian. Plut.
Woe to you when all men speak well of you, says Christ, Luke 6. 26. Elias
was called a troubler of Israel, Jeremiah a seditious person and a disheartner
of the people, Socrates.
Paul an Heritick, a mad man, Athanasius a Witch, a Murderer, an Adulterer,
yea Christ himself, that immaculate Lamb, who had done no wickedness, a
Glutton, a Wine-bibber, a Sorcerer, a boon Companion with Publicans and
Sinners. The Disciple is not above his Master: If they have called the Master
of the house Beelzebub, much more will they call them of the household. But --
hic murus abeneus esto,
Nil conscire sibi.


Let a man have the Testimony of God and a good conscience, and we may scorn
all Dogs, bark they never so loud.

I know well we are men while we are in this World, and not Angels in respect
of purity of nature, and therefore cannot promise unto our selves an immunity
from falling. Let the old Catharists, the Novatians, Donatists, and Pelagians,
and the new Puritanes of Rome, who hold an absolute perfection in this life,
make Ladders for themselves to climb into Heaven (as Constantine bad Acesius a
Novatian Bishop) here is no room for them in this World. For as in the most
beautiful face that ever was, there has been some blemish, ( Venus her self
was not without a Wart) which though every man do not note, yet by a skillful
Painter it may be observed (which made Zeuxis, Cicero de invent. lib. 2.
when at the request of the Crotonians, he was to draw the Picture of Helena,
Plin. lib. 33. cap. 5.
to be set in one of their Temples, to send for five of the most beautiful
Virgins that could be found, and from them all to frame a Picture, by reducing
the quintessence of all their beauties into one Model) So in the most
mortifyed man that ever lived, there are some dregs of sin; which though the
bleared eyes of man's understanding cannot see them, yet the al-seeing eyes of
God can easily discern them. But what then; because we cannot be perfect
Saints, must we therefore be right Devils? because the perfection of the Law is
so high above our reach, and so far beyond our Horizon, that we cannot choose
but say, its too wonderful and excellent for us, we cannot attain unto it:
shall we therefore neglect it, or not take it for a Lantern unto our Feet, and
a Light unto our Paths? Because we cannot be without sin, shall we therefore be
Servants and Bondslaves to sin, and serve it in our mortal Bodies, and obey
it in the lusts thereof, and (as I fear some do) as if outlawed by God and
man, say with them in the Psalmist, Come and let us break their Bonds in
sunder, and cast away their Cords from us, and give liberty to our selves to do
what we list, letting the Reins loose to all licentiousness?

Ut cum carceribus sese effudere quadrigae,
Fertur equis aurigae, neque audit currus habenas.
Its one thing with John to sin, and another to commit sin. Its one thing with
Paul to walk in the flesh, and another to walk after, and war after the
flesh. Its one thing to stumble, another thing to fall in the highway, another
to fall away, and walk or run in a bie way: we cannot promise to our selves a
privilege from sliding and stumbling, no nor from falling in the way; with
Eutychus we may get a dead fall, a fall from the third Loft; from desire to
consent, and then to act. Here are three Lofts, and the least, in the rigor of
Justice, is death; least it prove a breake-neck fall (in case we shall so fall)
with Eli and Jezabell, we are not to lie on the Ground, but arise betime and
redeem the fall by running the faster. Let us keep diligent watch over our
thoughts, words, and actions, that we do not only abstain from evil, but as
much as humane frailty will permit, from all appearance of evil; and even in
things lawful, oftentimes for avoiding of scandal, restrain our liberty
(after the example of the Apostle, in eating of flesh, and refusing wages for
preaching the Gospel) that we may take away occasion from them that desire
occasion, 2 Cor. 11. that we may stop the mouths of mad Dogs, and that they
which speak evil of us as of evil Doers, and blame our good Conversation in
Christ, may not only be ashamed, but by our good works which they shall see,
be occasioned to glorify God in the day of the visitation, 1 Pet. 2. 12. 1 Pet.
3. 16.

The better that any Profession is, the worse is the man that does abuse it.
There is no Profession but may give wall to the calling of a Minister (though
many in contempt of it, with those foolish Suitors in the Poet, Penelopen
relinquunt, and ad ancillas confugiunt) So then a lewd and unworthy Minister is
one of the worst Creatures under Heaven. I remember a Story in the golden
Legend in the life of Macarins: This Saint traveling in a desert found the
Skull of a man, and asked whose it was; the Skull made answer, that it was a
relic of a Pagan that was slain in that place: and where is thy Soul, said
Macarius? in Hell, said the Skull, but it suffers the least degree of Hels
punishments, for in Hell there be three Rooms; in the highest, where are the
least torments, are the Pagans that never heard of Christ; in the middle where
the pain is doubled, are the Jews who crucified Christ, and persecuted the
Preachers of the Gospel; in the bottom of Hell, where the Torments are
trebled, lies the false Christian, which outwardly makes a show of Religion,
and in his heart denies the power thereof. For the truth of this Story, credat
Judaeus apella, he that beleives that every word is Gospel, that comes out of a
Friars mouth, may give credit to it if it please him. But for that which the
Skull is feigned to report, I can easily assent unto it, because it is
agreeable to Divinity: The Servant that knows not his Masters will, and does
it not, shall be beaten with fewer stripes; but the Servant that knows his
Masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. If a false
Christian, then surely a wicked Minister, who by his profession should be a
Guide of the Blind, Romans 2.
a Light of them that sit in darkness, an Instructor of them which lack
discretion, a Teacher of the Unlearned, may deservedly have the lowest Room.
The Lord calls them stealers of his word, so Austine expounds the place, Jer.
23. 30. Eos dixit Deus furari verba sua, qui boni volunt videri loquendo quae
Dei sunt, cum mali sint faciendo quae sua sunt. Aug. de doct. Christ. lib. 4.
cap. 25. Our Savior compares him to unsavory Salt which is good for nothing,
not for seasoning of Meats, not for the Land, not (for that, for which the
Mire and the Clay in the Streets is good) the Dunghill. In Gods name why should
such a Dunghill (that's to fair a name) possess a Room and Sanctuary in the
House of God? Extat concilium apud Cyprian.
me thinks those words which Caecilius Bishop of Bilta delivered in the Council
of Carthage where Cyprian was President (though all of them erred in the maine
point that they handled) are very emphaticall, and may serve as Goades and
Nails, nay as Daggers to pierce into the hearts of such men. Fidem dat
infidelis, veniam delictorum tribuit sceleratus, and in nomine Christi tingit
Antichristus, benedicit a deo maledictus, vitam pollicetur mortuus, pacem dat
impacificus, deum invocat blasphemus, sacerdotium administrat profanus. An
Infidel preaches the faith, an ungodly Miscreant remits sins, Antichrist
baptizeth in the name of Christ, he that is cursed of God blesses, he that is
dead promises life, Gods Enemy preaches peace, a Blasphemer calls upon God, a
profane person ministers about holy things: all Asystataes. Unto the ungodly
said God, why preachest thou my Law, and take my Covenant in thy mouth,
whereas thou hate to be reformed? Psalm. 50. 16. 17. Dic quaeso, Propheta
tinctura coloratur? Propheta stibio pingitur? Propheta tabulis ac tesseris
ludit? Propheta foeneratur? Propheta munera accipit? Says Appollonius in
Eusebius of Montanus and his Disciples: Eccles. hist. lib 5. cap. 15.
are these indowments of a Prophet? Thou that teach another, teach not
thou thy self? thou that preachest a man should not steal, do thou steal?
Thou that say a man should not commit adultery, do thou commit adultery?
thou that abhorrest Idols, Romans 2.
committest thou sacrilege? Oh let us not hew Timber out of Gods Wood by our
Doctrine, and instead of bringing our Building to an excellent work, by a
profane life hew down all the carved work of the Temple, as it were with
Axes and Hammers. Let us with Aaron have on our Brest-plates, not only Vrim,
light of Doctrine, but also Thummim, perfection of life. Let us be with John
not only crying voices, Matthew. 3. but burning and shining Lamps, Joh. 5. Let us
not only be Salt to season others, Matthew. 5. but let us also have Salt in our
selves, Mark. 9. 50. we are called the Light of the World, let us imitate the
light of the World, the Sun as lumine, by inlightning them that sit in
darkness, and guiding their Feet in the way of peace, So motu too, by keeping a
straight course under the ecliptique line of the Law, without wilful diverting
to the right hand or to the left; not with the rest of the wandering Stars, be
sometimes stationary and sometimes retrograde, and (which is common to all the
Planets, sometimes in apogaeo, and then in perigaeo; or (if I may so speak) in
apogaeo about Heaven and heavenly things, by our Doctrine, and then in
perigaeo, Seneca de vita beata.
about Earth and earthly things, in the whole course of our Lives and
Conversations. Seneca notes of Plato, Epicurus, and Zeno, docebant non
quemadmodum ipsi viverent, sed quemadmodum vivendum esset, they taught how a
man should live, not as they lived themselves. But of all others Seneca
himself may bear the Bell away for a notable Hypocrite in this kind, who
speaks so divinely of a blessed life of Gods providence, of the contempt of
the World, that some would have him to be one of those Converts of Nero's
Family, of whom the Apostle speaks, Phil. 4. and in favor with this opinion,
some have counterfeited Epistles between him and Paul, yet was he one of the
most covetous earth-wormes that ever the World bred. His oppressive usury
spread over the whole Roman Empire, this Island felt the smart of it, insomuch
that besides his large Possessions in the Country, and stately Palaces, and
pleasant Gardens in Rome, he had gathered in four years space, three thousand
times three hundred thousand Sestercies, which makes of our Coin, almost three
Milions of pounds. Let us not be like these Heathen Philosophers, to teach one
thing and do another, Orat. panegy^ in laudem Origi.
as Boat-men look one way and row another; but rather as Gregory
Neocaesariensis speaks of Origin, when he taught Philosophy: ad officia nos
invitavit plus factis quam dictis. And as Iehu and Iehonadab went hand in hand
together for the rooting out of Baals Priests, and Ahabs posterity; so let our
profession and our practice go hand in hand together for the rooting out of the
sons of Anak (spiritual wickedness) amongst us. And if our profession outrun
our practice in the way to heaven, as John outrun Peter to Christ's Sepulcher
(which may easily fall out (our tongues are swifter then our feet) yet let not
our practice give over, but follow after, though non passibus aequis, 2 King. 3.
and say to it as Elisha said to Elijah, As the Lord lives I will not leave
thee, Ruth. 1.
I will follow after thee: Or as Ruth said to Naomi; Whither thou go I will
go, and where thou dwell, I will dwell: Vnum and commune periclum, una
salus ambobus erit: and let us always remember that that definition which old
Cato gave of an Orator, is very suitable to a Divine, Vir bonus dicendi peritus:
and therefore as we must be dicendi periti, good speakers, so should we also be
viri boni, good livers. By these two linked together, we teach our Flocks how
they should live; but by the former without the latter, we tell God how he
shall condemn us, as Chrysostom speaks: Been docendo, and been vivendo
populum instruis quomodo vivere debeat, been autem docendo and male vivendo
deum instruis quomodo condemnare te debeat. For drawing us to a cheerful
performance of this duty, beside the judgment denounced in the latter part of
my Text, I will produce a threefold Cord, which, as the Wise man speaks, is
not easily broken.

First it will keep our persons and callings from just contempt; 1. Motive.
every man is bound to maintain the credit of his Calling, but a Minister
most. See that no man despise thy youth, 1 Timothy 4. See that no man despise
thee, Tit. 2. How shall this be effected? by proud looks? by imperious words?
by a grave and majesticall countenance? by gorgeous and costly attire? these
may indeed dazzle the eyes of a few ignorants, which look only on the
appearance (as Magabizius with his majesticall looks, Aelian.
and silken suits at the first did to the Scholars of Zeuxis) and peradventure
they may procure a cap or a knee to our persons, but very little or no
reputation to our Calling. If we would keep it from just contempt, we must be
as John Baptist was, holy and just men: and then the proudest of them all, if
they have but Herod's honesty, Mar. 6.
will fear and reverence us. We must be unto them that believe an ensample,
in word, in conversation, in love, in spirit, in faith, and in pureness, 1 Timothy 4. 12. This will make men fall down on their faces, and worship God, and
say that God is in us indeed.

Secondly, 2. Motive.
holy Doctrine without life will not produce that effect which they would do,
if they went hand in hand together, but rather as if a man should blot with one
hand, that which he writes with another. Our lives will do as much harm, as
our Doctrine good. It Is a true speech of a reverend Divine, that the sins of
Teachers are teachers of sins; as in a Scriveners table, when any letter
wants its due proportion, the Scholar that takes the Copy for his guide, will
imitate that as well as those which are perfectly written. A bove majore discit
arare minor, not by doctrine, but by example* It Is to no purpose for the old
Crab in the fable to bid her young ones go forward, when she goes backward her
self. Hor. art. poetica.
Sivis me flere, dolendum est primum ipse tibi. Quod mihi praecipis, cur ipse
non facis? Aug. de doct. Christ. lib. 4. cap. 27. Gallo similis est
praedicator, says Gregory. Wherein does the comparison consist? Inter
tenebras praesentis vitae studet venturam, lucem praedicando, quasi cantando,
nunciare, dicit enim nox praecessit, etc. That is true, but not all; and
therefore others stretch the comparison further thus: As the Cock claps his
wings, and beats, and ronzeth up himself before he awake others: so we must
first give an example in our selves of that to which we exhort others;
otherwise they will say unto us this proverb, Physician heal thy self.

Quis coelum terra non misceat, and mare coelo,
Si fur displiceat Verri, homicida Miloni?
That then the seed of Gods Word which we shall sow may take deeper root, and
more abundantly bring forth fruit in our hearers, let us give example in our
selves.

-- Non sic inflectere sensus
Humanos edicta valent, ut vita docentis.
Let every of us say with our Savior, Learn of me, for I am meek: Learn of
me, for I am thus and thus: And as Gideon said to his Soldiers; Learn of me,
and do ye likewise, even as I have done so do ye.

But what is either the fruit of our Ministry, or the credit of our calling
in respect of Gods glory, which we should so tender, as that we should rather
wish our selves accursed, and razed out of Gods book, then that by our means
the least stain or spot of dishonor should be imputed unto him. Now as God is
honored by the holy life of a Preacher, so nothing brings more disgrace then
the wicked and scandalous conversation of him that carries the vessels of the
Lord.

If a stranger who belongs not unto me, mis-behave himself, and be a common
drunkard, a blasphemer, an unclean person, etc. that is no disgrace unto me;
but if one of my family, my son, my friend whom I trust as my right hand,
fall into any of these, the disgrace lights not only on him, but it reflects
upon me. So if a stranger from God, a Pagan, etc. shall fall into these or the
like, the matter is not great, it shows what man is without God. But if he who
in outward profession is one of the household of faith, a steward in Gods house,
appointed to give every one of his family their portion of meat in due
season, Christ's Ambassador and Vicegerent shall miscarry, and like Hophni and
Phineas, of sons of Eli, prove a son of Belial, Gods name is dishonored, and
his offering abhorred.

O heavenly Father, that thy Name may be hallowed, sanctify the Tribe of Levi,
whom thou have separated from the multitude of Israel, to take them near unto
thy self. Let thy Vrim and thy Thummim be with thy holy ones. Let thy Priests
be clothed with righteousness, that thy Saints may sing with joyfulnesse.

Shall many Preachers be damned, 3 Use.
as having not expressed that in their lives and conversations which they have
delivered to others? what then shall become of them that are called to this
honor, and preach not at all: that cannot say so much for themselves as Judas,
Lord have not I by thy name prophesied? shall they not be condemned at that day
upon a nihil dicit? Purgatory (as the authors of it confess) will then have an
end: Limbus Patrum is long since destroyed, the Earth at that day shall be
burnt up, and whether there will be any room in Heaven for them that neglect
the works of their particular calling, I have reason to doubt: Pietas,
honestas, probitas, privata bon a sunt, said he in the Tragoedy, nay pietas,
honestas, probitas, publica bona sunt, they be general duties which no
Christian (whatsoever his calling be) may want: He cannot be bonus civis which
is not bonus vir; and yet it is not sufficient for a man that would bear
Office in a Corporation, that he is bonus vir, unless he be also bonus civis,
qualified with such particular virtues, as are requisite to that Place. I
commend Gregory Nazianzens resolution, who when they would needs choose him
Bishop, fled into Pontus, and having afterward accepted the Dignity, and from
that translated to another, and then to one of the greatest Bishoprics in the
World (insomuch that some of his Successors contended with the Bishop of Rome
for primacy) did afterward voluntarily relinquish it. For indeed though he was
a fluent Orator and a great Divine (which got him the sur-name of Theologus)
and so acute a Disputant, that the Arians counted great Athanasius a Child in
respect of him; yet was he not fit (especially in those turbulent times) for
Church Government.

If I be desirous to be resolved in some doubtful points of Law, concerning
mine Inheritance, and a Friend advise me to go to such a man, telling me that
he is a very honest man, what better am I for that, unless he be skillful in
the Laws, and able and willing to resolve me in that where I am doubtful. If
I have a Garment to be made, I will not go to this or that man, whom I hear to
bear the name of an honest man. I will suppose every man to be such, unless I
know the contrary, but to him that is a professed Tailor, and able to do the
work. So for us (that I may bring that which has been spoken home to my
purpose) It is not sufficient for us that the World carries an opinion of us,
that we are good men in respect of general virtues, unless we be good
Ministers, and put in practice those Gifts which are proper to that state of
life, wherein our Master has set us. Now preaching is the best flower that
grows in our Garden, its the very grace and ornament, nay the very life and
esse, and specificall form of a Minister, being the only ordinary means, for
ought that I know, which God has appointed for saving of Souls. This was
meant as some moralize it) by the Bell and Pomegranet on Aarons Garment; The
Bell signified the preaching of the Gospel, and the Pomegranet, the merits of
Christ; implying thus much, that the merits of Christ are by no other means
ordinarily conveyed to the Sons of men, then by the preaching of the Gospel;
this is agreeable to the Apostles Doctrine: Seeing the World by wisdom knew
not God, in the wisdom of God, it pleased God by the foolishness of
Preaching, (So the World of Jews and Gentiles counted it) to save them that
believe, 1 Cor. 1. How shall they call on him of whom they have not heard, how
shall they hear without a Preacher, Romans 10. Where Salvation, Faith, Hearing,
Preaching are linked together. Christ sent me not to baptize but to preach the
Gospel, 1 Cor. 1. 7. his Commission was for both, Go and teach all Nations
baptizing them, Matthew. 28. His meaning then was this, that the latter was the
principal, the other but an appendix unto it. Like that Jer. 7. 22. I spoke
not unto your Fathers, when I brought them out of the Land of Egypt,
concerning Sacrifice, but this is the thing which I commanded them, to obey my
voice: and Hos. 6. 6. I will have mercy and not sacrifice: obedience and mercy
rather then sacrifice or burnt offering. So it may be said of us, we are by our
places to baptize, to administer the Sacraments, but our chief Office is to
preach: For a Minister then to have the name of an honest man, a learned man,
and seldom or never to come into the Pulpit (as some do) is as if I should
say, this man is an excellent Scrivener, but never puts Pen to paper; an
excellent Lawyer but never pleads nor gives counsel; an excellent Artificer,
but neglects his Trade, this (but) takes more from him then my commendation
gives him.

Here I cannot choose but censure two sorts of men.

Fist, they that cannot.

Secondly, those that can but will not preach. Of the first, we have not many
in these parts of this Diocese (in which Gods name be blessed) I dare boldly
speak it, we have at this present day more Baruabasses, Sons of consolation,
and Be^nerges, Sons of thunder, and Apollos, Eloquent men and mighty in the
Scriptures, then any one Century of years has seen, since the Gospel of Christ
was first preached in this Island) yet some few we have (the fewer the better,
Satis pauci, satis unus, satis nullus) in speaking to whom, let me take leave
as the Apostle speaks to the Gallatians, Gal. 4.
to change my voice as Nurses do when they speak to young Children; thou can
not preach. Yea but as I have heard a Judge speak to a convinced Malefactor,
whose life he was desirous to save; I cannot read, yea but I know thou can
and must read, or else I must pronounce Sentence against thee. Yea but thou
can preach, and preach thou must, or else I must say unto thee, friend how
came thou in hither? I add no more, thou want Logic and knowledge in the
Arts, which are handmaids to Divinity, and many other helps which are
requisite to a Preacher; yet may thou teach: As an overweening conceit of a
man's abilities, so too base an opinion of thy self, may be an hindrance to
virtue. Many had proved great men, if they had not thought themselves on the
Hils-top, before they were at the midst of the way: and some of our
notpreaching Ministers might prove better then they are, if the weakness of
their brains did not hinder them from climbing, because they despair of being
excellent Preachers, therefore they will do no good at all in their Profession,
they seldom look upon Book but when they are in the Church: possunt qui posse
videntur. A man's conceit that he can do, will make him somewhat adventure. When
John Bradford was unwilling to enter into the Ministry, alleging his weakness
and inabilities for preaching, if thou can not (quoth Martin Bncer) feed thy
Flock with fine Manchet, feed them with brown Bread. Non possumus omnes esse
Scipiones, aut Maximi, says the Orator, if thou can not do as thou would,
do as thou may; if thou want strong Meat, feed with Milk, catechize and
instruct thy hearers in the ground of Religion, pray, hear, read, study,
confer, meditate, stir up the Gift of God which is thee, kindle and blow up
this fire, desire the best Gifts, 1 Cor. 12. and in so doing, God giving a
blessing to thine endeavors, Si non evaseris in summum, at certe multos infra
te videbis: as Quintilian speaks, if thou prove not the best, thou shall not be
the worst of thy profession. If thy learning be so slender, that thou can not
well understand a Latin Author, be not discouraged for that. We have many
excellent Books of moral Divinity in our English Tongue, and of controversial
writers we have no want, furnish thy self not with all, but with the best.
Distrahit animum librorum multitudo (says Seneca) and qui ubique est nusquam
est. Read then rather multum then multos, much then many books, so shall thou
make it thine own which thou have read, and be able to make use of it for the
discharge of thy duty, and benefit of the Flock committed to thy charge. And if
thy learning and judgment be so weak, as that thou can not so skilfully
extract the quintessence out of the flower, with the Be, then rather give it
them in thy Authors words, then not at all.

I confess I could never approve of those lapwings, which having hopped out of
their nests, with their shells on their heads, before they got a feather on
their backs: Priusquam sacra volumina vel nomine noverint, priusquam veteris
and novi testamenti signa not asque cognoverint, as Nazianzen speaks, having
provided themselves of half a dozen Sermons, which they have as good right
too, as Paulus in Martial had to his Verses; Carmina Paulus emit, jactat sua
Carmina Paulus;
Nam quod emit poterit dicere jure suum.


Like jollie fellows, make a flourish up and down the Country with them, as if
they were men of worth. I have no more to say to them, but only send them that
salutation which Horace sent Celsus.

Quid mihi Celsus agit monitusque and saepe monendus,
Privatas ut quaerat opes, and spernere discat
Scripta, palatinus quaecunque retexit Apollo.
Otherwise (for all their shows) the riddle may well be applied to them, Nullus
malus magnus piscis.

But now for such as have Cures, where the Stipend is so small that it will not
maintain a tolerable Preacher (as in some of our large and spacious Parishes,
there is scarce so much left as the Pharisees petty tiths, tithe of Mint, and
Anise, and Cummin, little more then would give contentment to a Swine-he ard)
if these, not out of any vainglorious humor of being reputed that they are
not, but out of a desire to benefit their Flocks, besides the instructions
given them by way of catechizing, they shall commit to memory, and deliver other
men's labors; in St. Austines judgment they are not to be disallowed: Aug. de
doct. Christiana. lib. 4. cap. 29.
Nor will I; for beside that it will keep them from idleness, and peradventure
from worse exercise, they shall both benefit their hearers, and receive at
least some tincture of Divinity: as he that tarries long in an Apothecaries
shop will carry the smell of it about him, and he that walks in the Sun will
be colored by the heat of it.

The second sort is of such as will not: my censure must be sharper against
these then against the former. He that has his Garners full of grain, and
will not bring it out to the Market in such a year as this, but rather suffer
the people to starve, then sell a bushel, unless, he may have an excessive
price for it, is worse in the judgment of all men, then a poor man that does
not furnish the Market because he wants. The mother is worse, that has breasts
full of milk, and will not give suck (which the Dragons deny not the young
ones, Lam. 4. 3.) then she that has dry breasts and cannot: and is not he
worse that has a candle and hides it under a bushel, and will not give light,
then he that is dark and cannot? that has eyes, and winks, and will not see,
then he that is blind and cannot? that has a tongue, and will not speak, then
he that cannot because he is dumb? It Is true of a Lawyer, Scire tuum nihil, si
te scire hoc sciat alter: If every man knew as much in the Laws as the Lawyer
does, none would seek unto him for Counsel. But it befits a Minister better,
if a ni be put to it, as Persius has it, Scire tuum nihil est, nisi te scire
hoc sciat alter.


His knowledge must not be shut up in the Ventricles of his brain like Timons
money in his chest; but like that precious oil that was poured on Aarons head,
it must descend to the skirts of his clothing, the meanest of them that are
committed to his charge. It must fall from the brain to the tongue, and from
thence Drop as the rain, and still as the dew, as the shower upon the Herbs,
and as the great rain upon the grass, Deuteronomy. 32. 2. The Priests lips must
preserve knowledge, Mal. 2. 7. The Lord has given me the tongue of the
learned, to minister a word in season to him that is weary, Isa. 50. 4. And he
that makes no conscience of this is liable to a double curse.

1. A curse in his gifts, they will rust and canker away: The faithful servant
that employeth not his masters talent, shall have it taken from him, Matthew. 25.
This idol Shepherd that feeds not his flock, shall prove a right idol
indeed; for as he has a tongue and speaks not, so shall he have eyes and shall
not see. His arm shall be dried up, and his right eye shall be utterly
darkened, Zach. 11. ult.

2. A curse upon his soul, Matthew. 25. Cast him into utter darkness.

I am not credulous in believing ill reports of any man (especially of a
Minister) but if it be true which I have heard (and by reason of the late
Visitation, I have somewhat more then a bare report) it is to be lamented even
with tears of blood, that some of extraordinary gifts (as they would be
deemed; and the greater their gifts are, the greater shall their judgment be if
they be found negligent) do scarce once in 12. or 13. years visit a great part
of their Flock. Their little ones cry for bread, and there is none to give them
any. And in the place where they reside, like Atheists very often mew
themselves up in their private houses, when they should be in the house of God
feeding their Flocks: and when they go to the Church, ordinarily continue there
like images without a word speaking, and so frustrate their poor hunger-starved
sheep of their hopes. Like as when a barren cloud hangs in the air in time of
a drought, and yielding no drops to water the dry and gasping Earth, the
expectation of the Husbandman is made frustrate: If they afford them once in
the year, or at most once in the quarter a dish of Strawberries (as Latimer
spoke in the same case) it is a dainty, they must hold themselves contented. I
wish it were as good as a dish of Strawberries, and not rather like Caligula's
banquet, where all the banqueting stuff was made of gold, which did only feed
the eye, but not the belly; this banquet is not of gold, but for the most part
of a worse metal (Latin) which with a tinkling noise may tickle the ear, but
never fill the stomach. Pliny writes of some people of Mount Atlas that were
without names; it seems these men think their Parishioners to be without souls:
or else that the calling of a Minister is not Virtutis exemplum, sed vitae
adjumentum atque subsidium, non munus reddendae rationi obnoxium, sed imperium
liberum, and reddendarum rationum metu solutum, as Nazianzen speaks. In Apol.


Oh beloved brethren (that I may speak to all) let us beware of these things.
Let the doing of his will that has sent us be our meat and drink, our joy and
crown, and the gathering together of his dispersed Flock our game and
advantage: our names may put us in mind of our duties.

Convenient rebus nomina saepe suis.
We are called Shepherds. If we love the great Shepherd of our souls, let us
feed his sheep, feed his lambs. We are watchmen, let us stand upon our watch,
and give warning to the City of God of the approach of the Enemy. We are
lights of the world, let us consume our selves that we may inlighten others. We
are voices of cryers, or crying voices; for Sions sake let us not hold our
peace, and for Jerusalems sake let us not keep silence, but lift up our words
like Trumpets, And tell the house of Jacob their transgressions, and Israel
their sins. Let us be like that (...), Nec Dedonaei cessat tinnitus aheni: No
more should we, remembering that strict adjuration of the Apostle: I charge thee
before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead
at his appearing, and in his kingdom, preach the word, be instant in season
and out of season, 2. Tim. 4. 1. We are Captains of the Lord of Hosts, Let us
fight a good fight, and resist unto blood, striving against sin. Where should
a Captain dye but in the field? and where should a Preacher die (said learned
Jewel) but in the Pulpit?

Add for a second Motive that joy and comfort which will attend us, 2. Motiv.
when we shall leave these houses of clay, and these earthen pitchers shall be
ready to be broken at the Well, if our consciences can bear us witness that we
have continued faithful in our Masters service. No doubt it was no small
comfort to Cyrus, when Lysander admired the sweetness of his Gardens, and fit
ordering of trees in his Groves, that he was able to tell him they were his
own work, and that he had planted them with his own hands. No less comfort
will it be to us, when we can persuade our own souls that such trees we have
planted in the Lords garden, such sheep we have brought into Christ's sheepfold;
if every of us can say to the great Archbishop of our souls, when he shall
keep his visitation, Here am I, and the children thou have given me.

Add last of all, 3. Motive.
that Crown of righteousness wherewith our service shall be rewarded at the
last day. Those that have been his faithful witnesses here on earth, when the
earth shall be no more, shall be as the Moon, and as the faithful witness in
heaven. And whereas those which follow wisdom shall shine, ut expansum, as
that which is stretched out over our heads (the Firmament) those that turn
many unto righteousness (and let no painful Minister be discouraged) if the
fruit of his labors fall short of his expectation. We are but Gods
Instruments: Except the Lord keep the City, the watchman watches but in
vain. Except the Lord build the house, their labor is but lost that build it.
Paul may plant, and Apollos water, but to no purpose, unless God give an
increase. Jeremiah thundered out Gods judgments against the sins of Jerusalem
the space of 50. years, and she was more obstinate in the end then at the
beginning. Esaias preached 64. (some say 74.) years, and profited little for all
his pains. Noah preached 120. years to the old World, and we do not read of one
person he converted. Let it be our desire and study to turn many unto
righteousness, and our reward shall be with our God. He that accepts the
will for the deed, will as surely reward us as if we had done the deed. So then
(as I was about to say) whereas those that follow wisdom shall be as the
thinner parts of heaven, or as the Lacteus Circulus, which is caused of the
confluence of the beams of those heavenly torches; Those that turn many unto
righteousness shall be as the thicker parts of the celestial Orb, and shall
shine as the stars of heaven for evermore.

The sixth Sermon.
JER. 22. 3. Thus says the Lord, Execute ye Judgment and Righteousness.
THREE things there were amongst the Gentiles, to which they (dreaming they had
them from God) trusting too much, Lib. dec. 1. lib. 1.
disadvantaged themselves, and gave occasion of rejoicing to their Enemies.

First, their twelve Ancilia, or Targets, one of which they say fell from
Jupiter into the hands of Numa.

Secondly, their Palladium, which fell from Heaven into a certain Temple in
Phrygia, being then without Roof.

Thirdly, and the Image of Pessinuntia dea, or Idaea matter, the Mother of their
Gods, which the Romans with great cost and pains brought from Pesinuns, a Town
in Asia the less, to Rome, Lib. dec. 3, 4. lib. 9.
and placed in the Temple of their Goddess Victoria, as a means to perpetuate
and eternize the felicity of that State. The Jews likewise had three things,
which they said (and said truly) they had from God. The Temple, and the Ark,
and the Law; which because they looked no further into, then the outside and
external Superficies of them (as if a man should busy himself with picking
and licking the Shell of a Nut, and neglect the Kernel; or rest satisfied with
keeping a true measure and balance in his house, and never use them; or as if
a Scholar should content himself with looking on the Cover and Strings of his
Book, and never open it, nor learn the Contents thereof) brought many
Calamities upon them, and at length proved their destruction; as long as the
Temple was in the City, and the Ark in the Temple, and the Law in the Ark, they
thought all sure; they themselves were called, the people of God, their City,
the City of God; in it they had the Temple of God, and the Ark of God, and the
Law of God. What was wanting? verily as much as is wanting to a good Soldier,
when he has his Sword hanging by his side, and never offers to draw it, when
the Enemy assaults him; or to the Office of a Judge when he sits on the Bench,
having the Scales painted over his head, but speaks not a word. Against this
remissness (not to give it a worse name) the Prophet exclaimes the Law is
dissolved, then the Letters remain in the Book, the practice is perished,
Judgment never goes forth. Defluxit lex, Hab 14. its a metaphor borrowed from
the Pulse; a man's bodily constitution may be known by his Pulse, if it be
fallen down and give over beating, the man is in the pangs of Death, or dead
already; if vehement, he is in a hot Fever; if temperate, he is in good
health. The Law is the Pulse of the Commonwealth, if it move not, the Body
Politic is dead, if its motion be violent, its sick of a hot Ague, if moderate
and equal, its well affected. In the days of our Prophet, the Pulses of the
Law were quiet, no more motion in them, then in the dead Sea, which neither
ebbs nor flows. Judgment was fallen, and Justice could not enter, the
faithful City was become an Harlot, her Princes Rebels and Companions of
Thieves, every one loved Gifts and followed after Rewards, they judged not the
Fatherless, neither did the cause of the Widow come before them, Isa. 1. They
had altogether broken the Yoke, and burst the Bonds, Jer. 5. 5. Whereupon the
Lord sends his Prophet to the King of Judah, and his Servants, that is, his
chief Officers and Magistrates, with this Charge, that if they desired to
continue their Possessions in that good Land which he had given them, and to
escape a miserable slavery and captivity under cruel Tyrants, in a strange and
Idolatrous Country, into which for their sins he was ready to bring them,
they should put life into the Law, that the Pulses thereof might be perceived
to move. Execute Judgment: And because the corruption of man's nature commonly
runs from one extreme to another, in vitium ducit culpae fuga, here quires that
this Judgment be not too violent, but moderate and equitable. Execute Judgment
and righteousness, that is, righteous Judgment. For the Law, like a man's
shoe, Si pede major erit subvertit, si minor urit, if it be too wide it will
give Liberty to the Foot to tread awry, if too strait* it will pinch it. But
what has a private man to do in matters of State? what Commission has Jeremy
a Priest, to come to the Court of a mighty King, and to tell him and his Nobles
of their duties? Surely a very strange one: He who is King of Kings and Lord of
Lords had set him over Nations and over Kingdoms, to pluck up and to root out,
Jer. 1. sends him now as his Ambassador into the Kings house, and gives him
instruction what he shall speak; Thus says the Lord God, esteem not my Message
according to the quality of my person, for though I be mean in place and of
small reputation, yet my Errant is of another nature: I am vox clamantis, a
Crier or Summoner sent unto you from the great God of Heaven and Earth, who
with a mighty hand and outstretched Arm brought your Forefathers out of the
Land of Egypt, and gave them this fruitful Land which you now possess, who
being almighty is able to defend you if you shall cleave unto him, and to
punish you, if you shall neglect his word, whose name is JEHOVAH, I am
yesterday and to day, and the same for ever, which was, and which is, and which
is to come, without change or shadow of change, that which I have received from
him, I deliver unto you: Thus says the Lord, Execute Judgment and
Righteousness.

As then Judges in their Circuit, in the several Counties where they sit, to
hear and determine Causes, first cause their Commission to be read, then give
the charge to the Inquest; So our Prophet first shows his Commission, Thus
says the Lord, and then gives his Charge, Execute Judgment: And these be the
two Branches into which my Text divides it self.

In the Commission I note, that a Prophet, and consequently a Minister, who in
the new Testament is also called a Prophet, is an Ambassador sent from God
unto the Sons of men: So says the Apostle, We are Ambassadors from Christ,
as though God did beseech you through us, we pray you in Christ's stead, that
ye be reconciled unto God, 2 Cor. 5. 20. Let a man so think of us; as of the
Ministers of Christ, and disposes of the secrets of God, 1 Cor. 4. 1. This
shows the Dignity of this Calling, a Calling whether you respect the Author,
or the Subject, or the end, as far exceeding all others, as Saul in length of
body, did the rest of the Israelites: And surely if the Philosopher could call
the Stones happy of which the Altar was builded, because they were had in
honor when others were trodden under feet, then much more may they be termed
happy, Protarchus apud Arist. phys. lib. 2.
whom the Lord has separated from their Brethren, and taken near unto
himself, Nomb. 16.
to minister unto him, if they shall be found faithful and diligent in so high
a calling.

But here I may justly take up the Prophets Complaint; Who will believe our
report? If I should dilate on this Subject, my words would seem to many, as
Lots did to his Sons in Law, when he spoke of the destruction of Sodom, who
seemed to speak as if he had mocked. I appeal to your consciences, whether
the Vocation of a Priest (so the profane Gulls of this World call it in
disgrace) be not by many reputed the most base and contemptible Calling in the
Land; that which the Apostle speaks of our general calling to Christianity,
is at this day verified; of this particular Vocation; not many mighty, not many
noble are called, 1 Cor. 1. The poor, and the halt, and the lame, and such as
are good for nothing else, are thought sufficient for these things; though the
Apostle could ask (...)! who is sufficient? do not many with the foolish woers
in the Poet, Penelop^n relinquere, and ad ancillas confugere, leave the
Mistress and become Suitors to her Maids, and choose rather to be of any
calling, nay of no calling, to be idle Hunters, riotous Gamesters, loose
livers, to be any thing, rather then to be employed in this great and weighty
business, of being an Ambassador from God unto the Sons of men? But its no
matter, Philosophy suffers no great disgrace, because Agrippina will not have
her Son, young Nero, to study it; and a Pearl is not a straw the worse,
because Esops Cock cares not for it.

Rauca reful gentem contemnit noctua Phoebum;
Non crimen Phoebus, noctua crimen habet.
The Owl cannot abide the Sun; the fault is not in the Sun, but in the Owls
eyes that cannot behold it.

The very Heathen shall in the day of judgment arise against these men, and
condemn them, amongst whom this Calling has always been honored for the
best. Alexander, ab Alex.
Amongst the Phoenicians they wore a crown of gold: Amongst the Athenians none
were admitted King that had not been of this Order. It was not scorned by the
best Senator of Rome; insomuch that Gellius having set down four properties of
Crassus, which he calls Rerum humanarum maxima and praecipua, the greatest
things amongst the sons of men, Quod esset ditissimus, quod nobilissimus, quod
eloquentissimus, quod jurisconsultissimus; that he was the richest, and the
noblest, and the most eloquent, and the best Lawyer that Rome had: He adds in
the last place, as it were, a specificall form restraining all the rest: Quod
pontifex maximus, that he was the chief Bishop: and Virgil had no intendment
to disgrace Amus, when he called him a King and a Priest: Rex Amus, rex idem
hominum Phoebique sacerdos.


And the custom of the old Egyptians is well enough known unto Scholars; Qui
ex philosophis sacerdotes; and Ex sacerdotibus probatissimum in regem
elegerunt, who from Philosophers chose Priests, and from Priests Kings:
whereupon their Hermes had the name of Trismegistus, thrice greatest, the
greatest Philosopher, the greatest Priest, and the greatest King.

Such an one was Moses, the Prince and chief of all the Prophets, who did not
preach to Pharaoh, and the Israelites, till first instructed by the Lord what
he should say. Such were the Priests of the Law (or at least such they should
have been) and therefore the Lord says, That the Priests lips should preserve
knowledge; and, That they should seek the law at his mouth. The reason is
added, because he is the Angel, or Ambassador of the Lord of Hosts. Such was
Ezekiel, whom the Lord tells, that he had made a watchman over the house of
Israel, Ezekiel. 3. 17.
and that he should hear the word at his mouth, and give the people warning
from him. Jer. 1. 9.
Such was Jeremiah, who prophesied not to the Jews till the Lord had touched
his tongue, and put words into his mouth. Finally, such were all the Prophets
before the coming of the Messiah, who had this law given them, that they should
teach no more then he had given them in charge. Hence be these and the like
speeches: Thus says the Lord. The word of the Lord. The burden of the Lord.
The mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

Come to the New Testament, and look upon the Apostles and Evangelists, surely
very excellent things were spoken of them; they were called the salt of the
Earth, the light of the World, the friends of Christ; they had the keys of
Heaven gates given unto them, That whatsoever they bound on earth should be
bound in heaven; and whatsoever they loosed on earth, should be loosed in
heaven. They were sent to preach to all Nations, but not what they would, but
what they had in commission from Christ, Teach to observe all things which I
have commanded, Mat. 28. 20. Nay, Christ Jesus the Son of God, the Privy
Counselor of the Father, the only Master and Teacher of his Church, did impose
this law upon himself, telling the Pharisees, that his Doctrine was not his
own, but the Fathers that had sent him.

Now then if the Priests of the Law, if the Prophets, if the Apostles, if
Christ Jesus himself did not preach any Doctrine but what they received from
God, if they were tied to the word, and might not decline to the right hand,
nor to the left: Much more are the Lords Ministers at this day tied not to
deliver any Doctrine to their Hearers, but what is evidently grounded upon the
sacred Oracles of Truth. They are to build the Kingdom of Christ, to subvert
the kingdom of Antichrist; to feed the Lords Sheep, to drive away the Wolves;
to comfort the weak and feeble knees, to break the brazen and iron sinews of
impenitent sinners; to sing a song of mercy to penitent and humble souls,
Jerem. 1.
to thunder judgments to forlorn miscreants: To bind, and to loose, to pluck
up, and to root out; to destroy, and to cast down; to build and to plant, but
all by the word of God.

The writings of Heathen men contain in them many excellent precepts of
Morality, but they are mingled with a number of untruths and vanities. The
writings of the ancient Fathers are of especial use in the Church of God, but
they are not sufficient groun is for me to build my Faith upon them. I may no
more in all things follow their steps, then I may be drunk with Noah, or commit
incest with Lot, or be an Adulterer with David, or an Idolater with Solomon, or
with Peter deny and forswear Christ. I say of them all in respect of the
Scriptures, as Stankarus a Polonian Heretic spoke of our Protestant Writers,
in respect of Peter Lombard: Plus valet Petrus Lombardus quam Centum Lutheri,
etc. One Peter Lombard is of more worth then 100. Luthers, 200. Melanctons,
300. Bullingers, 400. Peter Martyrs, and 500. Calvin's. But one plain sentence
of Scripture is more worth then 100. Austins, 200. Cyprians, 300. Jeremies,
400. Ambroses, 500. Gregory's, where their Doctrines are not warrantable by the
word of God. I say of them as Aristotle did of Socrates and Plato; Socrates is
my Friend, and Plato my Friend, but Truth is my greatest Friend. And as Austin
said of his Countryman Cyprian: Cypriani literas non ut Canonicas lego, sed ex
Canonicis considero, and quod in ijs divinarum Scripturarum autoritati
convenit, cum laud ejus accipio, quod non convenit cum pace ejus respuo. I
read Cyprian, not as canonical Scripture, but I examine his Writings by the
canonical, and where I find them agreeing, with his due commendations I
receive them; when repugnant, with his good leave I will reject them. To the
Law, and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this Word, it is
because they have no light in them, Isa 8. 20.

Quest. Is it then unlawful for a Minister to use humanity, or secular
learning in his Sermon?

Ans. I have known many, who have said that a Sermon is too barren and dry, and
not so learned, nor so pleasant, nor so powerful, nor so profitable, if it
consist merely of testimonies from Scripture, without some inspersions at the
least of secular learning: as if that were dry which is like the Rain that
comes down from heaven, and waters the earth, that it may yield seed to him
that sows, and bread to him that eats; or any thing were more learned then
that which will make a man wise unto salvation; or any thing more pleasant then
that which is sweeter then honey, or the honie-comb; or any thing more
powerful then that which is lively, And mighty in operation, and sharper then
any two-edged sword, Heb. 4. 12.
and enters through, even to the dividing of the soul and the spirit, and of
the joints and the marrow: or any thing more profitable then that which is
given by inspiration from God, and is profitable to Teach, to reprove, to
correct, and to instruct in righteousness, 2 Timothy 3. 16. 17.
that the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect unto all good works.

Again on the other side, I know many, both Preachers and Hearers, who distaste
as much a sentence borrowed from a profane Writer, as the children of the
Prophets did of that branch of Coloquintida that was cast into the pot, mors in
olla. One sentence in their conceit spoils a whole Sermon, the thing otherwise
never so good.

These men are verily persuaded, that Hieroms dream was in good earnest, that
he was wrapped into the third Heaven, and miserably beaten before the Tribunal
seat of God for reading of Tullie; which although he (writing to a certain
Lady, who was too much addicted to reading of secular Authors) he relates as a
story: Yet when the same was objected against him by Ruffinus, and without
question Lactantius, and Tertullian, and Austin, and some others of the Fathers
deserved to lick of the whip for this as well as Hierome, who were so thoroughly
acquainted with all secular Writers, that (as he himself speaks of some of
them) a man cannot tell whether he shall more admire them for their secular
learning, or their knowledge in the Scriptures; insomuch that (as Julian
complained of some of them) De aquila pennas evellerent quibus aquilam
configerent: They pulled quills out of the Eagles wings (the Roman Ensign)
wherewith they wounded and killed the Eagle.

My resolution then is this: As I cannot approve of the former sort, so can I
not altogether of the latter; my reasons are these.

1. No Sermon is purum putum dei verbum, (...)
mere Logic, and Rhetoric, and humane invention are used in the best: and
therefore if I shall sometimes borrow a sentence from a secular Writer (be it
Goats-hair, or hay, or stubble, or call it what you will) peradventure it may
prove as good as any thing I can bring of mine own. 2. I take it to be a
property of a foolish Captain to scorn to use any stratagem which his Enemy
has used before. It Is lawful for the Hebrews to spoil the Egyptians, so
that it be not to make a golden Calfe of the spoil. 3. St. Paul himself
sometimes brings sentences out of secular Writers, as Tit. 1. 14. (...). an
heroical verse out of Epimenides. So Acts 17. We are his generation, part of
an heroical verse out of Aratus: and 1 Cor. 15. Evil words corrupt good
manners, a comicall verse out of Menander. 4. There is but one truth, and Omne
verum est a Spiritu Sancto, says Ambrose: so that if thou shall alleadg that
it is unlawful to use it; because it dropped from the tongue or penn of a Pagan,
I will reply, that if it be true, it is lawful, because it is originally from
God; but here these cautions are to be observed.
1. It must not be a Doctrine, but only an Illustration, or amplification of a
Doctrine. 2. It must be sparingly used in popular Congregations. 3. As an
Israelite, when he was to marry a captive woman taken in the Wars, was first
to shave her head, and pare her nayls: So a Minister, when he is in his Sermon,
to join a sentence of a secular Writer with the Scripture, he must shave and
pare off all superstition, profaneness, idolatry, and whatsoever may seem to
be repugnant to the doctrine of godliness. 4. He must so carry himself in this
business, that his Hearers may be benefited, his Duty discharged, and Gods Name
glorified.
2. Observe; That a Minister, being Gods Ambassador, must after the example of
my Prophet, deliver no private message of his own, but only that which he has
in commission from him that sent him: Duo sunt pontificis opera, says Origin,
Vt aut a deo discat, aut populum doceat, sed ea doceat quae ipse prius a deo
didicit: such a one was Moses, etc.

The charge contains two branches.

1. Judgment must be executed. 2. It must be executed without partiality, it
must be just judgment. I deliver them in these two Propositions:
1. It is the duty of a good Magistrate, to see that the good laws of his
Country be duly and speedily executed. 2. A Magistrate must with out
partiality, or respect of persons give just judgment.
Touching the first; It Is Gods commandemennt, and no sacrifice so acceptable as
obedience: Behold to obey it better then sacrifice. 1 Samuel 15.
It Is true in the general, especially in this particular: To do justice and
judgment is more acceptable to God then sacrifice, Prove. 21. 3. It is a proper
work of the Magistrates calling, and he is a sloathfull person that goes
carelessly and negligently about the works of his vocation, it is a work of
God. Ye judge not for men but for God, 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. And cursed is he that
does the work of the Lord negligently, Jer. 48. The Law of it self is a dead
letter, execution is the soul of it. As the body without the soul is dead, so
is it without execution of judgment. It Is not material how good a man's Will
be, if the executors who are put in trust do not perform it. The laws I may
call Gods Will, and the Will of the King: its no matter how good they be, if
those who are appointed Executors neglect to put them in execution. In this
case they are no better then Scar-crows, which being set up in the Fields by
Husbandmen to keep away Birds, at the first because they seem to be fenced
with bows, and Bills, and other weapons, are terrible to the Fowls; but at
length, seeing them still in the same place, and doing nothing, they make bold
with them, and sit on their heads, and worse too. Or like the Stock in the
Fable, which Jupiter cast into a poole amongst the Frogs, desiring a King: At
the first by it is fall it so troubled the water, that they were all afraid of
it, and hid themselves; but afterward observing it to be still, they came
croaking about it, and skipt over it, and counted it (as it was) a dead block.
So the Laws, though never so dreadful at the first; if they be not duly
executed by them that are in place, grow in contempt, and give occasion to the
bad, to go on with boldness in their lewd courses, as Solomon has well
observed, Eccles. 8. 11. Where sentence is not executed speedily against an
evil work, the hearts of the sons of men are fully set in them to do evil.

So they are now, Use.
and they are therefore so now, because Sentence is not executed speedily
against an evil work, the complaint is great (too true I doubt) that there is
too great remissness in executing Judgment, and that first in matters
criminal; Secondly, in civil controversies between party and party.

The first of these does not so much touch (or rather scarce at all) the
reverend Judges of this Circuit, as those that are of the Commission of Peace,
and other Officers in the County; whereof some because they would not be holden
busy bodies, others because they would not be counted rash and indiscreet
persons, others because they would be reputed gentle and quiet men, content
themselves with the honor of their Office, and neglect the duty and burden,
and suffer many good Laws to faint and languish for want of Execution. Like
Gallio Deputy of Achaia, who when an open Outrage was committed before his
face when he sat on the Bench, past it by, and took no notice of it; the
Graecians took Sosthenes and beat him before the Judgment Seat, but Gallio
cared nothing for these things, Act. 18. In some particulars conducing to the
public good we see some hope of Reformation, and if the old Proverb be true,
according to the sound of the Letters, Principium dimidium totius, and dimidium
plus toto, its done already, and many think that is all will be done. I am
better persuaded of you, I would be loath to place any of you amongst those
improvident Builders, who having not counted the loss before hand, after they
have said a good Foundation, give over, and are not able to bring it to
perfection. But there be many other things of a civil nature, the redress
whereof would prove much beneficial to the whole Public, which Gallio is
pleased to wink at; and those things which are of a spiritual nature, which
every Magistrate above all other things should take to heart, and so far as the
Sphere of his Authority will extend, procure Judgment to be executed upon the
Offenders; true Religion and the Service of God, Gallio cares for none of these
things: if popish Recusants grow more and more insolent, if their number
increase, if Priests and Jesuits run up and down the Country at their
pleasure, if Gods name be horribly blasphemed, if his Sabboths profaned,
Gallio cares for none of these things; are your minds set on Righteousness,
Psalm. 81. 1.
O ye Congregation, and do ye judge the things that are right, O ye Sons
of men?

Alas what skilleth it, how great, or how powerful, or how good a man be in
respect of general virtues, or how able and sufficient for his particular
place, if he shall be deficient in the practice of those duties, which are
proper to that State and Condition of life, wherein God has placed him? Now a
fearelesse and just, and impartial executing of Judgment upon Malefactors, is
the best flower that grows in a Magistrates Garden, its the grace and
ornament, nay the very life and esse and specificall form of a good Governor,
and the main end for which God Almighty puts the Sword into his hand; Romans 13.
and herein he shall not only clear, his own conscience, in discharging his
duty, and credit his calling, and do good Service to his Prince and Country,
and encourage the good, and dishearten the bad, but (which is more) he shall
make peace between God and his Country, and send a prohibition to the Court of
Heaven, and stop the mouth of the Judge of all the World, from giving Sentence,
or if Sentence be given, from executing of Judgment, or if Judgment be already
begun, from further proceeding. Take one or two examples, Psalm. 106. They
joined themselves to Baalpeor, and ate the Offerings of the dead, they provoked
him to anger with their own inventions, and the Plague brake in amongst them:
but when Phineas stood up and executed Judgment, the Plague was stayed, and the
Lord said unto Moses, Phineas the Son of Eliazer, the Son of Aaron the Priest,
has turned away mine anger, because he was jealous for his God, and has made
an Atonement for the Children of Israel, Numb. 25. For Achans sin, God
substracteth his helping hand from the Israelites, they flee at the sound of
Leaf shaken, and turn their backs upon their Enemies, the sinner is put to
death, and the Lord turns from his fierce wrath, See Jos. 7. for Saul's bloody
house and cruelty against the Gibeonites, God sends cleanness of teeth in all
the Cities, and scarcity of Bread in all the Villages of Israel; when Judgment
is executed God is appeased with the Land: See 2 Samuel 21. But till judgment be
executed upon Saul's bloody Family, let David do what he can, the Lord will not
be appeased toward the Land. Till Achan be stoned, let Joshuah and all the
Elders of Israel rent their Clothes, and put dust upon their heads, and fall
down and pray before the Ark, the Lord will not turn from his fierce wrath.
Till Phineas execute Judgment, thongh Moses and all the Congregation of Israel
weep before the Door of the Tabernacle, the Plague shall continue. If a Land be
defiled with blood, do what otherwise may be done, it will not be cleansed but
by the blood of him that shed it, Numb. 25. 23. Thus then when the Gods of the
Earth execute Judgment upon the transgressors of the Law, they give an
inhibition to the God of Heaven from further proceeding: Hence be these and the
like speeches so frequent in Charges given in the Law to Magistrates, for
punishing Offenders; so shall thou take evil away forth of the mids of thee,
Deuteronomy. 13. Deuteronomy 19. and in other places, what evil? not only malum culpae, but
that which is a consequent and fruit of it, malum paenae too, as is plain,
Deuteronomy. 13. 17. that the Lord may turn from his fierce wrath, and show compassion
upon thee.

On the other side, where they suffer the sword of Justice to rust and canker
in the Scabberd, and suffer their Inferiors, as if they lived in an Anarchie
to do what they lust, and let the Reins loose to all licentiousness, ut cum
carceribus sese effudere quadrigae, fertur equis auriga, as if there were no
providence in the Almighty. Then the Lord who is jealous of his honor, and
abhors all irregular motions, awakes as one out of sleep, and as a Giant
refreshed with wine, he unsheatheth his glittering Sword, and executes
vengeance both upon Prince and People, and (unless repentance follow) turns
them to a perpetual shame; whereof you have many examples in the Book of
Judges, to which David alludeth, Psalm. 106. The wrath of the Lord was kindled
against his people, insomuch that he abhorred his own Inheritance, and gave
them over into the hands of the Heathen, and they that hated them were Lords
over them. And what a fearful Judgment did Lot his neglect of executing
Judgment bring upon himself and Family, and upon all Israel? of Israel there
fell by the hands of the Philistims at two Battles 3400. Hophni and Phineas
were both slain with the Sword, old Eli at the news broke his neck, his
Daughter in Law, Phineas his Wife, at the hearing thereof was brought to Bed
before her time, and died, and which had never before happened, as she
complained at her Death, the glory departed from Israel, and the Ark of God was
taken. This heavy curse came upon Eli, and upon his house, and upon all Israel,
for not executing of Judgment upon such, as by their sins had kindled Gods
wrath; and through the whole Book of Judges, how many Plagues are executed upon
Israel for this sin; this is meant by that which is so often repeated in that
Book, In those days there was no King in Israel, Judge. 17. 6. 18. 1. 21. 25.
that is, no ordinary Magistrate to inflict condign punishment upon notorious
Offenders.

As there is a neglect in executing Judgment in matters criminal: So (I fear
in administration of Justice in matters civil. Where (if it be true which is
commonly spoken) too many frustratory and venatory delays, (as Bernard calls
them) are used; its a general complaint amongst those that have Law suits,
that expedition is a Court-Lady, so nice and dainty, that a common person shall
hardly be able to speak with her, yea that men of good rank must wait long, and
woe much, and make Friends and send love tokens, some peradventure as costly,
as she used to take, who gave occasion of the Proverb, Non cuivis homini
contingit adire Corinthum, before he can see her Face or enjoy her favor: thus
it is with him that begins a Suit in any Court of Justice, whether
ecclesiastical or civil (I call them both so, because they both should be so)
as with him that ventures upon the Ocean: Caelum undiqueet undique pontus, or
with one that enters into a maze, where he finds it an easy entry, Sed
revocare gradum, hoc opus, hic labor est. He that is to contend with a potent
and contentious adversary, must as he that undertakes voyage to the
East Indies, furnish himself before hand with 2. or 3. years provision at the
least, or he shall be ^nforced to put on shore for new supply, before he shall
be able to discover the Cape of good hope; the Medicine proves worse then the
Disease, insomuch that if a man shall in the end prevail against his
Adversary, he may peradventure give the same answer to his Neighbors that
rejoice for his success, that Pyrrhus gave his friends, who came to
congratulate with him, after a great Victory he had got over the Romans, but
with much bloodshed and loss of his best Soldiers and Captains: yea (quoth
he) but if I shall get such another Victory, I shall be for ever undone. This
makes some willing rather to part with their own Right, then to buy it at so
high a rate, in those places ubi major erit expensarum sumptus quam sententiae
fructus, as one complained of the Popes Court.

I do not, I cannot, I will not lay the blame upon the reverend Judges, who sit
to hear and determine Causes in their several Courts, the Causes that come
before them are many, and as in all other things, so especially in matters of
Judicature, its almost impossible in a short time to do much, and all well.

Veritas latet in abdito and profundo, Cicero.
as Democritus said; Truth lies hid in the bottom of a deep and dark pit, they
must delve, and dig, and seek till they find it. Some falsities at the first
seem no less probable then some truths; as the Croy-cole bears the color of
the best, and many base metals make as fair a show as the gold Ore, till the
Fire discover them. The false Mother cried as loud the child was hers, as the
true Mother did: and therefore as a good Physician does first view the Urine,
and feel the Pulses of his Patient, and enquire diligently into the cause and
manner of his disease before he prescribe physic: so the Magistrate (who is
the Physician of the body politic, as the other is of the natural body) lest
he err in prescribing medicines, must dive into the bottom of the cause,
hear witnesses, examine evidences, weigh all circumstances, and omit no means
that may conduce for boulting out the truth. It Is good counsel which was given
to the Israelites touching the abuse done to the Levites Wife by the
Benjamites: 1. Consider apart. 2. Consult amongst your selves. 3. Givesentence.


The two former be as the two propositions in a syllogism; and to proceed to
sentence before the other be thoroughly done, is to conclude without premises.
No sinner was by the law of God so severely punished as the Idolater, but not
upon a bare hear say. (For Si unusquisque erit accusator, quis erit innoeens?)
The Judge must seek and make search, and enquire diligently whether it be true,
and the thing certain, Deuteronomy. 13. 14. It Is the glory of God to conceal a thing
secret, but it is the Kings honor to search out a matter, Prove. 25. 1. So did
Job, a petty King as some suppose (a Judge at the least) When I knew not the the
cause, I sought it out diligently, Job 29. 16. But he that for expedition gives
sentence upon the first relation, may judge as untruly, as the accuser informs
falsely; as David did against Mephibosheth upon the report of a false servant.

The Magistrate then in using all the helps and advantages that may probably
conduce for the clearing of the truth, and informing his understanding in the
thing controverted, may not be justly censured for a delayer of judgment; marry
if after the cause be ripened, and all things fitted for Sentence, he shall
then either for his own benefit, or for friends or Favorites in the Court use
delays, let others plead for him that can, for my part I cannot excuse him
from being partaker at least in other men's sins.

But I blame most the wrangling Client, whom I define a Salamander, that loves
always to be broyling in the fire of contention, Qui lachrymas mittit, cum nil
lachrymabile cernit. He is never well but when he is working some ill; a right
eele-catcher, no fishing for him but when the waters of peace be troubled and
mudded. This is that Ahab, that troubles all Israel, who as Jeremie speaks of
himself, but in another sense a contentious man, and one that striveth with the
whole world. A rough Ismael, that has his hand against every man, he goes not
to law out of a desire o^ peace (for what has he to do with peace) nor out of
an honest desire of maintaining his own Right (his own conscience can tell him
he has none) but either out of a desire of revenge, or because he knows
himself more skillful in packing and shuffling the Cards, then the party with
whom he plays; or presuming upon his own purse, or the simplicity and
weakness of his Adversary, or out of hope by spinning in infinitum the thread
of contention, and bringing his Adversary into anin extricable many of
troubles, to enforce him at length either to part with his own Right, or to say
of it as the false Mother said of the true Mothers Child, let it be neither
thine nor mine, but let it be divided. This is much furthered by Birds of a
like feather, unconscionable Pleaders, Attorneys, Solliciters, Clarks, and such
like (mistake me not, I speak not to disgrace their Professions, they are all
necessary and warrantable Callings, and I doubt not, but there be many of their
Profession, not only skillful and learned, but which is better, honest,
conscionable, religious, and to use Jethroes words concerning Magistrates, men
of courage, fearing God, men dealing truly and hating covetousness: but
withal it cannot be denied (the more pity) that there be to many that use
their places as Monopolies for themselves, and level all their pains and
studies, not at the public good (which every private Tradesman in the works
of his calling should principally intend; much more such as have the least
employment in Courts of Justice) but at their private gain: they count not how
bad the Cause be* so the Fee be good: Gold is a heavy Metal, an I will soon
make it weight. When these shall meet with a tough and wrangling Client (as it
is not like but Birds of a feather will meet) they will invent for his and
their own advantage mill nocendi arts, a thousand delusory and venatory
delays, by demurrers and Writs of Error, and appeals, and I wot not what to
make the Suit endless. Soldiers live better by war then by peace, and these
gain as much by contention, as they would loose by quietness. Maggots and
flesh-flies feed on galled Horse-backs, and putrified soars, which if the skin
were whole and sound, would quickly perish for want of food. These Vermin know
no better means to preserve their own lives, then to keep the soar raw and
open: And many Empiricks that want means and have little practice, when they
meet with a Patient that is for their purpose, will impoyson the wound that it
may be long in healing, and spend as much time in curing a rue-rub, or a blind
blayne, then an honest and skillful Physician will do in healing a Gangraena,
or a fistula. I will not, I need not apply. When the Cause is ripened for
hearing, and like to go against them in the same Court, then if all other
tricks and advantages fail, an appeal must be made to another, and thence
perhaps after much time and money spent, dismissed and returned to the place
whence the appeal was made: as Christ was first brought before Pilate as a
computent Judge, before whom he was to be tried, thence upon better advise was
sent to Herod, where after he had been falsely accused, and shamefully abused,
a Consultation was had, and he returned to Herod. Give me leave to instance in
one particular: a Minister wronged by his Parishoners in payment of Tithes,
commenceth a Suit for his releife in an Ecclesiastical Court, as a place
proper for trial of such things: and when after much trouble and many journies
and long time spent, and (that which is not only of war (as Vespasian laid it
was) but of Lawsuits also, the string and strength) much money wasted, he is in
good hope of Sentence, in comes a Prohibition and blows all away, Velut ventus
folia, aut panniculum tectorium. Methinks those Verses which were made of
Caesar and Bibulus, when they were Consuls, the one being little better then a
Cipher to supply the room, the other ruling at his pleasure, may not unfitly be
applied to our Ecclesiastical and civil Courts.

Non Bibulo quidquid nuper, sed Caesare factum est,
Nam Bibulo fieri consule nil memini.
Both Caesar and Bibulus are Consuls, they have both the Sword of Authority put
into their hands; but non Bibulo quidquam sed Caesare factum est: Caesar does
all, Bibulus scarce any thing at all, except drinking up of Fees: and as Philip
(in Plutarch) said of two Brethren, whereof one was called alteruter, and the
other uterque; having heard them both speak, out of a dislike he had of the
one, and approbation of the other: alteruter (quoth he) shall be uterque, and
uterque shall be neuter. In our Forefathers days, the Ecclesiastical power
did not only stretch over Ecclesiastical persons, but like the Tree which
Cambyses saw in his Dream, it over shadowed and over topped the temporal power
too, and like Noah's Flood, it overflowed the highest Mountains as well as the
lowest Valleys. Then he might well have been termed (and so he was by some)
uterque, but now the case is altered, alteruter is become uterque, and uterque
is become a plain neuter; or rather as Ulysses termed himself to Polyphemus
(...), a no body. So that when on the one side I consider the Styles and Papal
Commands (for I think they had them from Rome) which our Ecclesiastical Judges
use in their Monitories and Citations; and on the other side, find how little
is effected, and how easy all their doings are dashed out of countenance at
the first sight of a Prohibition, it makes me call to mind the Story of a
Lacedemonian, who hearing a Nightingale singing in a Hedge, supposed she had
been some great Bird, but having afterward catched her, and found her almost
nothing but a few feathers, he said, vox es, praeterque nihil, and I cannot
better resemble them then unto the counterfeit shows of Semiramis, when she
fought against the King of India, which a far off seemed to be Elephants and
dromedaries, but when they were thoroughly tried, proved nothing but Oxen-Hides,
stuffed and bomebasted with straw. Or to those Enemies of Agesilaus which
seemed as they had been Giants, but one of them being gotten, it was found that
they had stuffed their Dabblets and Breeches only to this end, that they might
appear terrible to their Enemies.

I disallow not Prohibitions where the Law allows them; where there is (as
sometimes there may be) just cause for them: a River if it keep its self
within its bounds, is as good a Neighbor as a man can have; but when it swells
above its compass, and overflowes the Banks, Sternit agros, sternit sata laeta
boumque labores, it sweeps away and makes havoc of all things that comes in
its way. My wish is, that every river were confined within its own bank, that
for the more speedy dispatch of Lawsuits, every Court were bounded within its
own limits, that neither Ecclesiastical would incroach upon Civil, nor Civil
upon Ecclesiastical, that when Prohibitions are granted, and the suggestion
not sufficiently proved, the party wronged may be speedily dispatched by
consultation, or otherwise convenient expedition releived according to Justice
and Equity.

I am no Proctor for Ecclesiastical Courts, in which I hear there be as many
rubs, and lingering delays, as in any other. Its piety and commiseration of the
Clergy, that moves me thus to speak, who between these are tossed up and down
like Balls in a Tenes-Court, having no sooner ended in one, they must begin a
fresh in the other; So that in this case it falls out with a Minister, as with
a silly fly, which with much labor and trouble having got out of a Spiders
webb, presently falls into another that holds her fast, and the faster for
this, that having spent her strength in the former, she has no power to resist
in the latter. Or as it is with Sysiphus, whom Poets feign to be continually
rolling a stone to the top of an Hill, as soon as he has got it thither it
tumbles down again, so that he is put to a new labor: Aut petis, aut urges
rediturum Sysiphe saxum. Sysiphus, tumbling a stone may be a fit emblem of a
Minister suing for his Tithes, and the Motto agrees very well, aut petit aut
urget. Thus far of my former Proposition (its the duty of a Magistrate to see
that the good and wholesome Laws of his Country be duly and speedily executed)
together with a touch by way of use of some impediments, which stop the due
Execution of Judgment, both in matters criminal and civil; the latter
follows.

A Magistrate must without partiality or respect of persons give just Judgment:
2 Doctr.
a Lesson as commanded in my Text, so long before commended to Magistrates by
the first Lawgiver: Judge righteously between every man and his Brother, and
the stranger that is with him, ye shall have no respect of persons in
Judgment, Deuteronomy. 1. 16. 17. Ye shall not wrest the Law, Deuteronomy. 16. 19. and by
Jehosophat, in every cause that shall come before you, between blood and blood,
between Law and Precept, Statute and Judgment, ye shall judge the people
according to right, 2 Chronicles. 9. 10. he must not be so hard hearted, as not to
be pitiful and compassionate to the poor, nor so high minded, as not to give
to the mighty his due titles and honor, nor so opinative and selfe-conceited,
as never to be led by a multitude, nor so precise and scrupulous, as for fear
of temptation, to debar a rich man from his presence; but neither pity of the
poor, nor honor of the mighty, nor consent of the multitude, nor reward of the
rich, must draw him an hairs breadth from the Rule of Justice: this is the way,
in it he must walk: not pity of the poor, for thou shall not esteem a poor man
in his cause, Exodus 23. 3. relief of the poor is a proper work of Charity, not
of Justice; not honor of the great, for thou shall not honor the person of
the mighty, Lev. 19. 15. not consent of the multitude for thou shall not follow
a multitude to do evil; neither agree in a controversy to decline after many,
and overthrow a truth, Exodus 23. 2. not love of the rich, for thou shall take
no reward, because reward blinds the eyes of the wise, and perverteth the
words of the Just, Deuteronomy. 16. 19.

The Law must be the Copy he must write by, the rule he must build by, the
Cynosura he must sail by; and as Job says of the Seas, Hither he must go and
no further: hanc ultra citraque nequit consistere rectum; he must neither go
too short, nor too far, nor too much, nor too little, nor one way nor other
tread awry: but as the Sun keeps a straight course under the Ecliptic line,
without declining to either side of the Zodiac, so must he keep a strict
course under the line and rule of the law, and not decline to either party
further then equity and a good conscience will warrant him; he must not like
Mariners and Sailors, Obliquare Sinus, fetch a compass when the wind will not
serve his turn, but rather be like the two Kine which carried the Ark of the
Lord from Eckron to Bethshemesh, and turned neither to the right hand nor to
the left, unless (as in some case it may fall out) there be just cause of
mitigation.

In a word, he must lay judgment to the rule, and righteousness to the
balance: and as the balance puts no difference between gold and lead, not
giving a greater weight to gold because it is gold, nor a less to lead because
of the baseness of the metal, but gives an equal or unequal poyse to both
without respect of either: so should a Magistrate with an equal hand weigh
every man's cause alike, not respective to one more then another. This the
Egyptians figured by the hieroglyfical from of a man without eyes or hands,
intimating thereby that he should neither have hands to receive bribes, nor
eyes to behold and respect the persons of men. The same did the Greeks
signify, when they painted Justice between Leo and Libra, meaning that the
Judge should be courageous in executing, and equal and indifferent in
determining.

For the effecting whereof, three things are to be avoided as so many dangerous
rocks, any of which of it self is enough to cause him make shipwreck of
honesty and a good conscience.

The first is that which the Apostle calls the root of all evil, Covetousness,
it is the very cutthroat and cankerworm of all Justice; it and Justice be (...)
non been convenient, nec in una sede morantur; they cannot lodge within one
breast: Facite me Romanae urbis Episcopum, and ero pretinus Christianus, said
the wicked Pagan in Hierome: Hierom. ad Pamma^hium.
Give a covetous man such and such an Office, give him gold enough, or what
will ye give him, and you shall have him sure; he will be what ye will, he will
do what ye will; though as absurd and repugnant to justice and right reason,
as that Atheist thought it was to be a Christian. He will make the Laws as fit
for your purpose, as Procrustes fitted his guests for his Bed, if they were too
long, he cut them off by the knees; if too short, he stretched out their joints
till they were as long as the Bed. For avoiding of this, the Judge must remember
that it is a property of every good Officer and Magistrate to be an hater of
covetousness, as a thing e^diametro repugnant to his profession, Exodus 18. 21.
And that he cannot act such works of darkness though never so closely, neither
by himself, nor by such Brokers as he keeps about him for like purposes: But
God (who is like a wel-drawn picture, that eyeth every man in the room) does
behold it. Quaecunque capesses, testes factorum stare arbitrabere divos, says
the Poet. Quare si peccare vis, quaere ubi te non videat, and fac quod vis,
says Saint Austin.

The 2. Rock is fear or favor of great persons; but a Magistrate must be a man
of courage, and where does courage appear, but in resisting the mighty, in
using the severity of the Law against Great ones if they offend. He is (...),
as the Poet called a King, a Shepherd of his people, and should have that care
over those that are under his charge which a Shepherd has over his Flock; who
will not only destroy Maggots and flesh-flies, and such little Vermin as are
noisome to his Sheep, but much more Foxes, and such Beasts as make havoc of
them; because one Fox may do more hurt in one night, then 10000. Maggots can in
a whole year.

Now to make the Laws like Cobwebs, to hold Flesh flies, and such little
Vermin, and for fear of displeasure or hope of gain, to let great ones escape,
is as if a Shepherd should kill the Maggots in his Sheep, but withal give
liberty to Foxes to worry them at their pleasure: or with Domitian to have a
flap for every fly that comes, and neglect the weighty affayrs of the
Commonwealth. Has not God styled the Magistrate with his own name, Psalm. 82.
I have said ye are gods? Has he not made him a promise of his presence and
assistance? God stands in the congregation of gods, he is a Judge among Gods.
He will be with you in the cause and judgment, 2 Chr. 19. 6. And he that has
assurance of Gods presence, needs not fear any other, though (his Magistracy
set aside) far greater then himself, no more then David the Lion and the Bear
when they assaulted his Sheep.

The third and last Rock is Kindred and Friends: and surely if any thing may
give the Magistrate leave to set the Law upon Tenters, to rack and stretch it
beyond its compass, or to strain courtesy with it, or to muzzle and smother
it if it be against him, it must be Kindred.

Those whom Nature has made dear and near unto us, we cannot choose but love;
this is a lesson we learn, not by reading or hearing, but Ex natura arripuimus,
expressimus, hausimus, as the Orator speaks. This every man may see (if his
own affections will not tutor him in this point) in David's love to his son
Absolon, an incestuous person, a murderer, a Rebel against his own Father,
one that sought to kill him from whom he received life: all this could not make
David forget he was his son. What a mournful Elegy sings he upon news of his
death: O Absolon my son, O my son Absolon, would God I had died for thee, O
Absolon, my son, my son. This was it that made good K. Asa dispense with the
rigor of the law against Idolaters, when his Mother was found guilty, 1 King.
15. 13. And which made Seleucus, King of the Locrenses to be cruel unto
himself, that he might show some pity on his son, when he had made this law
against Adulterers, that both their eyes should be pulled out: his own son
being taken in the act, and brought before him, out of a fatherly pity he
divided the punishment between his son and himself, and caused one of his
sons, and one of his own eyes to be pulled out.

But this, how potent soever to flesh and blood, must not prevail with Gods
Deputy and Vicegerent, to cause him to make the least digression from the
course of Justice. Truth must be nearer to him then any of his Kindred: If thy
brother, the son of thy mother, or thine own son, or thy daughter, or the
wife that lies in thy bosom, or thy friend which is as thine own soul,
shall offend the law, thou shall deal with him according to law, Deuteronomy. 13. All
should be of like kinn to the Judge, he should be as it is said of Melchisedec,
without Father, without Mother, without Kindred; or as Moses says of Levi,
Deuteronomy. 33. Who said to his father and mother, I have not seen them, neither knew
he his brethren nor his own children. Father, and Mother, and Brother, and
Sister, and Wife, and Children, and Kindred, and Servants, and Favorites, if
they be as dear to thee as thine own eye, or right hand, erue, abscinde, cut
them off, cast them from thee, part with them rather then they shall part thee
and justice.

A worthy example we have in the Roman story: Junius Brutus, first Consul of
Rome, a Heathen man (yet indeed diverse of the Heathen have out-stripped
Christians in the practice of moral duties, though through want of faith their
best works were but splendida peccata) when sundry young Nobles had conspired
to reduce Tarquin after his banishment, he proceeded with to less severity
against his own, and Brothers son, being of the conspiracy, then against the
rest which were nothing allied unto him. The like authority did Titus Maulius
use against his son, when he had offended the Law. Live. de^. 1. lib. 8.
Histories are full of the like, one of our own shall suffice for all.

About the beginning of Edward the sixth his Reign, when in stead of Romish
Superstition and Idolatry, the Gospel of Christ began to be planted in England,
Clarles the Emperor made request to the King and his Council in behalf of the
Lady Marie the Kings sister, that she might have Mass in her house, without
prejudice of Law; the Council amongst other matters of policy, consulting
about this, sent unto the King Archbishop Cranmer, and Ridley then Bishop of
London, to entreat for the same, who coming before him alleged the best
reasons they could to accomplish it; which reasons he so pithily answered and
confuted out of Scripture, that they were forced to confess his Replication to
be true. Then they set on him another way, alleging Civil and Politic
reasons, her neerness unto him in blood, the dangers the denial thereof might
bring to the Realm, the breach of Amity on the Emperors part, the troubles and
rebellions the denial thereof might renew at home; to which he replied, that
all those reasons should never move him to yield to that he knew unlawful, and
that he was ready to part with Goods, and Kingdom, and life, and whatsoever he
had, rather then to yield to that which he knew certainly to be against the
Truth: When all this would not move him, but they set on him a fresh, and would
have no denial, he burst into sobs and tears, and desired to desist from
further molesting him in that matter; which made the Archbishop, when they
were gone, to say to the other Bishop, that the King had more Religion in his
little Finger, then they had in their whole Bodies. If this resolution was
seated in the hearts of all, to whom the Lord has committed the Sword of
Justice, then should we not have so many Jethroes, that dare not strike when
God bids them, so many Ananiasses, that give command to smite when God forbids
them; then should not the person of the mighty be so much honored, nor Kindred
so much respected, nor friends and followers so much favored; nor should the
Dorick Pipe seem so sweet Music in many of our Courts, nor should the Laws
cry out that they are sometime smothered in their Beds, like the Harlots
Child, and sometime stretched like a Traitor on the Rack: nor should truth
renew her old Complaint out of Tertullian, that she wanders up and down like a
stranger in the World, and cannot find Entertainment with some that profess
it: nor should Justice exclaim, that she is sometimes shouldered out of her
Predicament of Quality, and enforced to take a room in Relation, to become a
mere respective thing, which has no entity of it self, without relation to
some other thing.

I have persuaded my self far better things of you ( R. J.) who as you have a
long time already given sufficient demonstration of your learning and
abilities, for those high places wherein God has set you; so have you also of
your care and zeal, for executing of righteous Judgment. Now as Plutarch
writes of Rue and Garlic* that being planted beside Roses, they make them
smell the sweeter; So the corruption of evil Magistrates, set by the virtues
of the good, make them more pleasant in the nostrils of all good men. I doubt
not but you may say with Samuel, whose Ox have we taken, or to whom have we
willingly done wrong, or at whose hand have we received any Bribe, to blind
our Eyes therewith?

Only for conclusion, because you are men, and therefore cannot challenge unto
your selves any immunity or privilege from falling, let me beseech you, that
the Doctrines already proposed and proved, may serve as Rules to keep you in an
even course; let the fear of God be upon you, take heed and do it. To this
purpose, first remember, that God has set you in his own room, and styled you
with his own name: its the chief study of a Poet, that every speech, and
action, and gesture, be suitable to the person he brings upon the Stage.

Si^ Medea ferox, invictaque, flebilis Ino,
Perfidiu^^xion, Io^vaga, tristis Or^stes.
You are upon the Stage, and you act Gods part, with whom there is no iniquity,
nor respect of persons, nor receiving of reward, 2 Chronicles. 19. 2. think that God
is present with you. God stands in the Congregation of Gods, he is a Judge
among Gods; he notes your Actions, he hears your words, he pries into your
hearts, and spells every syllable of your conceits: the Almighty cannot be more
fully expressed to the eye then by that old Hieroglyphick of an eye upon the
top of a Staff, an eye upon the top of a Staff looks every way, a Staff is not
only a prop to support him that leanes upon it, but it is a weapon both of
defense and offense: God is an Eye, do what ye will, he sees you; he is a sure
staff, if ye lean unto him, he will support you; if ye do well he will defend
you, if amiss he will beat you. Wherefore now let the fear of God be upon
you, take heed what ye do, for ye execute not the judgments of man but of
the Lord; let not reward blind you, nor friends sway you, nor entreaty move
you, nor might terrify you, nor one thing nor other draw you aside from that
which is right; honor the mighty, pity the poor, respect friends and
favorites, love kindred, but still, Salva pietate and justitia prefer truth
and a good conscience before them all: These God and the King, and the Laws,
and the Country, and all good men, expect at your hands; and if ye do them,
the evil shall dread you, the good shall pray for you, the Heavens shall
applaud you, the Angels shall rejoice at you, God shall bless you with his
best blessings and ye shall not need to be ashamed, when you shall speak with
your enemies in the Gate.

For the better effecting of that which has been spoken concerning righteous
judgment, some things are required of others who come hither to act their parts
in such businesses as are to be handled at these Assizes: Judges, though they
be styled Gods, yet are they not omniscient, but must hear many things with
other men's ears, and see with other men's eyes; and as the Philosopher says,
that Quicquid est in intellectu, prius fuit in sensu: so whatsoever comes to
the Judge to be determined according to Law, must first pass through the hands
of witnesses and Jurors, and Pleaders, and others; these are to the Judge as
the external senses, and memory, and fantasy, are to the understanding, now
if these fail in performing their several duties, the best Judge may err in
Judgment, as does the understanding in apprehending of objects, when the
senses being ill affected, do not rightly inform. It is in matters of
Judicature as in a Clock, if all the Wheels and Wyers be in tune below, the
fault is in the Hammer or Bell, if it keep not time above; but the Bell may
miss the hour, and no fault in it, but in some Wheel or Pinn or Wire, that is
out of order; so if any inferior parts of this Engine be out of course; if the
witness come hither to sell or lend his friend a false oath, in hope of a like
courtesy from him at another time: if the Jury agree upon a Verdict contrary
to the evidence, or if the Lawyer respect his Clyent more then the truth, A
Gellius. lib. 7. cap. 3.
and study rather to show himself Dicendi peritum, then Virum bonum, as if he
were one of Protagoras his Scholars, whose profession (as Gellius tells us)
was to teach Quanam verborum industria causa infirmior fieret fortior, how to
make the worse Cause seem the better: How can the Judge, who (unless the
contrary be privately known unto him) is to proceed, Secundum allegata and
probata, but fail in executing of Judgment and righteousness?

To these I should now have directed my speech, but being prevented by the
time, I only beg at Gods hands, that he would work in the heart of every man
who is to be employed in any of these businesses, an holy desire and
conscionable endeavor to discharge his duty. Lord thou have commanded that
Judgment and Righteousness be executed: Da quod jubes, and jube quod vis: thou
O God of truth, let no man open his mouth against the truth; let Witnesses
swear truth, and Jurors verdict truth, and Pleaders lay open the truth, and
Judges give sentence and judgment according to truth; that equity and truth may
meet together, that righteousness and peace may kiss and embrace each other,
even for Jesus Christ his sake, who is the way and the life, and the truth; to
whom with thee and the holy Spirit, etc.

Errata.
Page 1. l. 6. for have r. leave. p. 6. l. 7. for speciosus r. speciosae. p.
133. l. 19, 20. for Amus r. Ancus.

FINIS.

