THE BLIND-BEGGAR OF BEDNAL-GREEN, WITH The merry humor of Tom Strowd the
Norfolk Yeoman, as it was diverse times publicly acted by the Princes Servants.

Written by JOHN DAY.

GRANTED:BY: H:R:M PROHIBITED:TO:BE:COVNTERFETED


LONDON, Printed for R. Pollard, and Tho. Dring, and are to be sold at the Ben
Iohnsons Head, behind the Exchange, and the George in Fleetstreet, near Saint
Dunstans Church, 1659.

Drammatis Personae.
KIng Henry the sixth. Duke of Gloucester, Protector. Momford the Blind-beggar.
Bedford, a Nobleman. Bewford, Lord Cardinal. Sir Robert Westford, Brother and
private enemy to Momford. Captain Westford, true Friend to Momford. Sir Walter
Playnsey, a Lover of Ell^nor. Young Playnsey, Troth-plight Husband of Bess
Momford. Old Strowd, a Norfolk Yeoman. Tom Strowd his Son. Swash his man, and
Clown. two Cheats.
Canbee Hadland.
Snip their Boy. Ellanor, old Playnsey's Ward. Bess the Blind-beggars Daughter.
Kate Sir Roberts Daughter. Switzer, Vitler, Landeress, Armorer, Carter,
Soldiers, Officers, and Attendants.
Scene Bednal Green.

The Blind-Beggar of Bednall-Green.
ACT I.
Enter Bedford, Sir Robert Westford, Captain Westford and Soldiers. Bed. YOu
Peers of England that with awful dread Drum.
Have paced on the green Garments of fair France,
Here cease a while, and give the Frenchmen rest,
That they may know whose Sovereignty is best,
Either the Dolphin^, or our Royal Lords.
But what avails our Conquests far from home,
When civil Discords stir uncivil arms
In the Kings Chamber, London, nay, his Court?
See Lords, read what is written there.
By blessed St. Peter, Gloucester is to blame,
And W^nchester has neither grace nor shame.

Sir Rob. Yes my Lord, he is Lord Cardinals grace.

Bed. Lord Cardinal! marry fie, he was proud before,
But now his Hat exalts his proud heart more:
But when I come among them, I Will make them know
The benefit of Peace; fall out for women,
Wrangle at a word? the one's Protector
Of a sacred Prince, the other made a Prince Drum afar off.
Amongst the Prelates; though Bewford basely born
I Will write to them: if with regardless eyes our lines they read,
We Will over and cut off their factious head

Sir Rob. About old Playnseys son what says your Excellency?

Bed. Sir Walters son, marry Sir Rob. Westford; March a far off.
This Drum I think marches from Amiens,
Is should be he, I sent him for the Prisoners.

Enter young Plainsey with Drum and Soldiers, and a Switzar. Y. Plain. Health
to your Excellence most gracious Regent,
Playnsey long Prisoner in Amiens,
Releast by Momfords bounty and your care,
Requests before these Prisoners be dismissed
This Switzar may be searched, for last night late
I heard a Gentleman tell him in Dutch,
If he would bear a Letter to a Lord,
With whom Veleires had intelligence,
He should receive in hand ten Crowns in gold,
And 30 more when 'twas delivered him.

Bed. Who was it promised you so large reward?

Switz. On frolic yonker,
Dat is de Scryven Ick Doeniit for-stow
De secretary to Van Here Velieres

Bed. He was the Secretary to the Governor?

Swiz. Yaw, yaw, mine Here.

Bed. Who were they sent unto?

Swiz. To van Heren Montford dat is de grave van Callis ant van Guynes,
Dar is deen script deen Letters watt you see then.

Bed. To Momford! what should Veleires write to Momford. Read.

Sr. Rob. Playnsey is this the plot for Momfords fall?

Y. Plain. It is, and be assured that down he shall.

Sr. Rob. Oh let me hugg thee! thou have won my heart!

Y. Plain. Forbear, lest the sharp eye of Jealousy,
See by this sudden Joy our Injury.

Sir Rob. When it breaks forth we will seem to weep for grief.

Bed. Lords take your places, and Mr. Playnsey take your seat,
For in this business your desert is great.
See here is a Letter sent from Amiens unto Momford.

Omnes. How, unto Momford!

Bed. Yes, and if this speak right,
Momford betrayed Guynes on Friday night,
And means to morrow ere the Sun be set
To yield up Callis to the enemy.

Cap. West. High Heaven for-send it, gracious General.
I think there breaths not a more noble Spirit
In any Soldiers breast, than noble Momfords.

Y. Plain. I Will gage my life Lord Momford will be loyal.

Bed. We would be loath to find him otherwise: Enter Momford.
But here he comes himself, his eyes bewray
Sorrow, as clouds fore-shew a stormy day.

Monf. Better success betide my Noble Lords,
Than has befaln the miserable Momford.

Bed. What has befaln thee?

Momf. Guynes, Guynes, is betrayed.

Bed. And when must Callis be surrendered?

Momf. Never while Momford has the charge of it.

Bed. Yes, if thou have the charge of it this night
It must be yielded unto false Veleires.
Here Is a large promise of ten thousand Marks,
Your praise for Fridays work in yielding Guynes.
Know you this hand? Oh that on silver hairs.
After much honor won in flowring Youth,
Should sit so huge a shame as on thine does.

Momf. My Lord! Lords all! this is conspiracy.

Bed. True, conspiracy in thee, for there he stands
That should have brought that Letter to thy hands.

Momf. This fellow fled from Hance Beamart the Traitor,
The Walloon Captain that betrayed the Lanthorn,
And so by consequence the Fort of Guynes.

Bed. Momford no more, his free confession
Has purchased his pardon, fellow stay
Amongst our English, and expect good pay.

Swiz. Thank had mine Here, lets Jacob gilt habben,
And Ick sall fight wid ten hunderd towsand Devils. Exit Switz.

Momf. Shall such a one touch Momfords reputation?

Bed. These Letters and the accidents succeeding
Condemn thee, and thou know by Law of Arms
Thou merit'st death with more than common torture:
But thy exceeding valor often tried,
Sets open Mercies gate, whose gentle hand
Leads thee from death, but leaves thee banished
From England, and the Realms and Provinces
Under protection of the English King,
Only thy Lands and Goods thou shall enjoy,
And wheresoere from them be still maintained.

Momf. My gracious Lord!

Bed. Thou find'st but too much grace.

Momf. Here me but speak.

Bed. No more; we must away,
To win by force the Town thou did betray. Exeunt.

Momf. Oh miserable! miserable man! Falls.

West. Why do you faint? why fall you on the ground?

Sir Rob. Cosen arise.
Manet Momford Sir Rob. Y. Playnsey, and Cap. Westford.

Y. Plain. Father, you are my Father!
The Lady Elizabeth your noble Daughter
Is my affied wife, for her sake rise,
And stop this tide of woe that drowns your eyes.

Momf. Oh miserable, miserable Man!
Dishonours-abject, base reproaches scorn,
Why was mine age to this disaster born?

Cap. West. Comfort your self, let not condemned despair
Add to your sorrow, more than common care.
If you be just, as I suppose you be,
Know Innocence ends not in misery;
Kings have had falls, great Soldiers overthrown,
No riches in this earth is a man's own,
He strives, he toyls, with many pains he takes it,
In an age gets it, in one hour forsakes it.

Enter Luce the Landeresse and 3 others. Vitler. He Is yonder yet, he is
digrac'd, and can do us no more good,
Therefore let every man ask his own. Follow me Sirs,
I Will speak to the purpose and stand to it.

Luce. Nay Sutler by your leave I Will stand to the best man in the Army,
And have my due before the proudest of ye, if I do not,
Say Luce the Landress is your Shee-asse to bear for others,
I Will venture upon him, let him take it as he will. Enter Soldier

All. Do Luce, we will be ruled by thee.

Luce. My Lord, my Noble Lord, I am sorry for your weak estate, I hope for all
this to see you up again, here is 4 poor Creatures of us; amongst the rest I am
Luce your poor Landress, that have washed you, and trimmed you, and starch't you,
and as I have done for you, I have done my part with all your company, here is my
Bill, I pray see me crossed.


Momf. What do I owe thee woman?

Luce. Nine pound, nine shillings, and nine pence my Lord.

Momf. There Is 10 pound for thee.

Luce, Oh good Noble man! that ever, that ever I should see thee thus down,
adown!


Vitler. Your poor Vitler Sir, where your Lordships men went of the ticket.


Armor. Your Armorer an't please your Honor.

Carter. Your Carter Sir for carriages.

Momf. What owe I thee?

Vitler. Some (7 marks) an't like ye.

Monf. What thee?

Armor. Twelve pound.

Momf. What thee?

Carter. About some 20 Nobles.

Momf. There Is 30 pound amongst ye, all Thave,
The Treasurer owes me some two thousand Marks.

All 4. God bless ye Sir, and send it ye.

Exeunt Luce and the rest. Momf. Wherefore stayest thou my Friend? Oh I know
thee now!
Thou art not impudent, thou can not beg,
Thou art a Soldier, and thy wound-plow'd face
Has every furrow filled with falling tears,
That arms and honor should be thus disdained.
I have no gold to give thee, but this chain,
I pray thee take it friend, thou griev'st at me,
And I am grieved thy want and wounds to see.

Sold. My silent prayer my hearts love shall express.
Heaven succor you, as you help my distress.

Momf. Brother Sir Robert, if you do not scorn
Momfords disgraced name, and Mr. Playnsey,
Son I should call ye if all vows be kept,
Will you vouchsafe to tarry here a while
Till I go down unto the Treasurers tent?
It may be he will pay me all my due.

Y. Plain. Father I Will wait for you, and weep for woe,
That I have lived to see your overthrow.

Sir Rob. Well, I Will stay too, or bear ye company,
For your distress does make my woes abound.

Momf. Come Cosen Captain Westford walk with me.

Cap. West. To do you good I Would go though it be to death.

Exeunt. Manet Sir Robert, and young Playnsey. Sir Rob. Ha, ha, ha, gill, gill,
gill, I have been teady to burst.
Son pray thee tell me how thou laid'st this plot?

Y. Plain. Marry Sir Robert thus, when I perceived
Your great desire for Momfords overthrow,
I got intelligence at Amiens,
How one Beaumart a Captain in Guynes Fort
Offered to sell it to the Governor,
Having this light, about a two months since,
I wilfully was taken Prisoner,
Born into Amiens, where I was confirmed
And knew the very time of taking Guynes,
On Thursday evening I attired my self
Like Veleires Secretary Lanclot,
Came to the Prison where the Switzer lay,
For I had liberty to walk the Town,
Had all my Ramsome ready sent by Momford,
And only tarryed for our English Drum,
That should exchange French Prisoners for the English,
The Switzar being one that stayed with us.

Sir Rob. So, I understand ye; but in the end
How dealt ye with the Switzar for the Letter?

Y. Plain. I brought it home in secret, gave him charge
To give it Momford with all able speed,
Promising 30 Crowns, besides those ten
I gave him first, of noble Momfords bounty:
He took me for Veleires Secretary;
But now you see the end, Momford's disgraced,
And I am unsuspected in this case.

Sir Rob. Excellent good! I hugg thee gentle Playnsey.

Y. Plain. But tell me pray, How goes all in England?

Sir Rob. Marry I Will tell thee Gill, thy Fathers Ward
The Lady Ellenor, shall be his Wife.

Y. Plain. The Duke of Gloucester will not suffer that.

Sir Rob. Tut, tut, it is all but talk, it is all but lies;
So does the Cardinal make show of Love,
But tittle tittle tattle, all is but talk,
He shall have Lady Ellenor no ^,
Say she die childless, there is land for you,
You marry with my daughter, she is my heir,
Still Mr. Playnsey there is land for you;
I Will turn out Momfords daughter forth of doors,
Seize all her goods and lands by a device;
Still Mr. Playnsey there is Land for you.

Y. Plain. But how I pray? What color have you for it?

Sir Rob. Marry Son thus, About a twelve month since
Momford in trust made me a Deed of Gift
Of all he had, excepting certain land
Morgag'd unto a Norfolk man, one Strowd of Harling,
Now Sir I am acquainted with an odd Consort,
One Ca^bee, that does serve the Cardinal.

Y. Plain. Oh he can cheat, take purses, forge men's hands.

Sir Rob. The same, the same, he rac'd out that Exception,
And put in other matter to my liking:
So I Will defeat old Strowd, turn out Besse Momford,
All shall be mine, and after mine all thine.

Y. Plain. No more, Momford returns.

Enter Momford, and Captain Westford. Momf. Captain, Ye see
That men dejected bust bear injury.
He knows I am exiled, and cannot stay,
And yet he drives me to a longer day.

Cap. Westford, There is a hundred pound, ye shall not choose.

Sir Rob. I faith my Noble Cozen, I and Playnsey
Are without money, but send into England,
Ye shall not want for 20 thousand pound.

Momf. Brother Sir Robert I put trust in you,
This Ring shall come within a day or two.

Sir Rob. I cannot speak for grief!

Momf. No more can I,
This wind ere the Sun set will let you see
London, that nere must be beheld of me.
Commend me to my Daughter, love her Playnsey;
Part silent, let your sighs serve for reply. They embrace. Exeunt, manet Momf.
Captain think on Strowds morgage, and farewell.
They shall see London, they shall see my Child,
But Momford must not, for he is exiled.
I am exiled, Yet I will England see,
And live in England 'spight of infamy.
In some disguise I Will live, perhaps I Will turn
A Beggar, for a Beggars life is best,
His Diet is in each man's Kitchen dressed,
But first I Will like an aged Soldier
Carry mine own Ring to Sir Robert Westford,
They say it is good to try Friends, him I Will try.
Though I believe he love me steadfastly. Ex. Momf.

Enter old Playnsey, and Lady Ellenor. Lady. Sir Walter Playnsey.

Old. Plain. Lady Ellenor,
You are too strong in this opinion,
I yield you are my wardship, and that desire
To your Revenews, more than true hearts love,
Enforced me beg your wardship of the King.

Lady. I do believe you Sir, for did you look
Into my State with an indifferent eye,
Or love me half so well as you make show,
You would --

Old Plain. Come, come, I know what you would say,
You think I am your Foe, because I keep you
From private conference with the Duke of Gloucester,
And his proud Uncle the Lord Cardinal,
That diverse times have practiced sundry plots
To steal you from my house.

Lady. Your love's but feigned,
Because you say you love me for my living.

Old Plain. I say my first love took first life from thence,
But since more dear familiarity
Has brought forth perfect and true shapen love.
I love you Lady, and you are mine own,
Mine in possession, and I do intend
To make you mine by lawful marriage,
Then blame me not if being all my joy,
And the high-prized Jewel of my heart,
I overlook you with a wary eye,
Lest Gloucester, or the Bastard Cardinal
Should with their swelling Protestations, Knock.
Cheat my fair meaning of thy hopeful love. Enter a Serve.

Serve. Sir here is a Servant from the Duke of Gloucester
Has brought you Letters.

Old Plain. How! Letters to me!
No thou mistak'st, they come to Ellenor,

Enter Gloucester disguised with a Letter. Glost. My Lord and Master greets Sir
Walter Playnsey,

Old Plain. I do accept his honorable love
With more than mean or ordinary care. Reads
He does entreat me to come and speak with him
About some certain Letters come from France,
Touching the present fortunes of my Son
Lately taken Prisoner by the bloody French.
He shall command far more than he entreats. Knocks.
How now? whose that which knocks? Enter Serve.

Serve. One of the Cardinals men.

Old Plain. Bid him to come in.

Enter the Cardinal disguised with Letters. Card. Sir Walter Playnsey,
From my Lord Cardinals grace of Winchester
I greet thee well, and charge thee without stay
To come, and answer such objections
As may by him be laid unto thy charge

Glost. Oh you should be his Sumner by your message.

Card. And if I do not take my marks amiss
Thou should be Glosters Skullion.

Glost. How ye Groom?
I am as good a man, and better born
Than up-start Bewford the base Cardinal.

Card. Sirrah! were not thou in presence of this Lady
Whose love my Lord does prize above his life,
I Would scorn to take these braves at Glosters hands,
Much less at thine. Madam know I am Bewford,
And for your love do undergo this scorn.

Lady. Then for my love let all these quarrels cease,
For fear Sir Walter do discover you.

Glost. Had thou been Servant to the meanest man
That breaths in England, being legitimate,
I would have born with thee: but thou to brave me,
Whose Master I esteem as basely on,
As on thy words, I cannot put it up,
For Madam know, that howsoere diguis'd
My name is Gloucester, who holds scorn --

Lady. No more,
If ever I had interest in your love,
Show it in silence, that's the Cardinal
Who comes diguis'd, armed with some base resolve
To get me hence by foreign violence.

Glost. Is It possible that this disguise should mere,
So just with mine?

Lady. It Is true, he told me all.

Glost. Would we were well rid of his company.

Lady. Do you but send away Sir Walter Playnsey,
Let me alone to pack the Cardinal.

Both. What do you say Sir Walter?

Old Plain. There is some hidden secret in this message
Which Playnsey sounds not, but I Will go to them both.

Glost. But Sir I hope you will go to Gloucester first.

Card. And why to Gloucester first?

Glost. 'Cause he is the betcer man.

Card. He lies that says it.

Glost. Were the Cardinal
Bewford himself apparelled in thy clothes, Draw.
I Would cross his pare for giving me the lie.

Old Plain. Keep the Kings peace Sir.

Glost. Sir Walter, so I will,
Yet the worst boy that feeds on Glosters beef,
Holds it high scorn to pocket up the lie
At ere a Sumners hand that follows Bewford.

Card. Thou durst not speak this in another place?

Glost. Yes here, or any where to Bewfords face,
Even to his teeth, and I would thou were he.

Card. Shall I be braved! oh I could tear my flesh,
And eat his heart for this disparagement,
I fear he knows me, and to work my shame
He braves me thus before my Mrs. face,
But Bewford with a shower of patience,
Lay the rough wind of thy distempered thoughts
For my vexed Soul has taken a solemn oath
Nere to kiss comfort till I be revenged.

Old Plain. Nay Gentlemen, howsoever private brawls
Have set your Lords and Masters at debate,
Let my entreats so much prevail with you,
As in my house to use no violence,
And so I pray rest pleased, for ere I sleep
I do intend to visit both my Lords.
Will It please you to walk along for company?

Card. I would, but I must stay an hour or two
About some other business in the Town.

Glost. About my Love you mean, but Cardinal
Here Is one will do that business to your hand.

Old Plain. Why then farewell to you both. Exit old Plain.

Both. A due Sir Walter Playnsey.

Lady. A word with you my good Lord Cardinal,
Your Brothers man seems very quarrelsome,
And should you both stay, there might grow some jars,
Which to prevent, I would entreat your grace
To walk before into the Spittle fields.
Whilst with good words I send away this Fellow,
Which done, I Will choose my opportunity,
And in the absence of Sir Walter Playnsey
Get out, and meet you at the Orchard-gate,
And there conclude about some stratage me
To make you Master of your own desires.

Card. Enough sweet Lady: Sirrah Horse-courser,
I Will course you one day for your Jadish tricks.

Glo. Jades a fit Title for an Ass like thee,
That can not kick, but bear all injury. Manet Glo. and Elle.
Come Madam now let us go, the Cardinals mad
To lose thee thus, then banish hence all fear,
Gloucester is on thy side. Exeunt.

Enter Canbee and Hadland, and Cardinal. Can. Sirrah Jack.


Had. What say thou Franck.


Can. How you base Rogue, nere an ( M.) under your Gidle, have I preferred thee
to my good Lord Cardinal here, and am I no better than your homesome Franck.


Had. Canbee, let me nere take purse again, and I think not, but thou and this
Tom Tawny coat here gull me, make me your cheat, your gull, your strowd, your
Norfolk Dumpling, whom when you cheated him of his sattin-suite, left naked bed
to the mercy of his hostess.


Can. And I damb thee not for thy unbelief. Call Canbee Coward think thou) I
would have lost this evenings work, but for my Noble, my Princely Lord Cardinal?
no.


Had. That Is some reason indeed, but Prince and Cardinal if thou be,
Iack-Hadland swears by the bawled Crown of King Carnifax the meeting thy
greatness this evening has dampnified our receipts at least six purses.


Card. Be what you will be both, only be resolute
In any quarrel against Glosters men,
And on mine honor I Will reward ye well.

Can. My Lord, and ye were able to give him as much Land as would lie between
Winchester and Walsingham, he would be your prigger, your prancer, your
high-lawyer, your --


Had. Your nipper, your foyst, your rogue, your cheat, your pander, your any
vild thing that may be, sblud the worst that any man can say of me is, that I
am a tall Thief, and the best that any man can say of thee is, that thou art a
base Rogue and a Cheater.


Can. I Will jerk ye for this ye slave.


Card. Nay Sirs be Friends, hold ye, here is gold,
Do but assist me against Glosters life
And I Will reward you better.

Had. Cardinal, were thou Cardinal King of the Infernals, were thou Prince of
Grim-tarter-tarmagant and Erebus, I would not shed one drop of the worst Dogs
blood my Duke of Gloucester keeps, for thy miter, thy million, thy metropolis,
shall I betray his life that saved me from the death of a Dog? no. Yet for my
honest friend Franck Canbees sake, I am content to stand by, and give aim at
this time.

Enter Gloucester and Ellenor. See where he comes two of ye are enough to deal
with one, I Will not meddle with him.


Card. Let Us set upon him all, and kill the slave.

Glost. Have thou betrayed me Coward? Bewford know
Though I am over-matcht I am not killed.

Enter old Playnsey, young Playnsey, Captain West. and Oficers. Old Plain. Keep
the Kings peace for shame my Lords.

Card. Come Canbee follow me, Playnsey be sure
I Will sit upon your skirts for parting us.

Glost. Bewford Thou may befriend him with thy power,
Had not he been, thou had not breathed this air.

Card. Gloucester thou wrongst me, with-hold'st St. Iohnses,
Look to it, for fear when I get enterie
I pull not down the Castle ore thine ears:

Glost. Cardinal to spite thee I Will keep Ellenor,
And wed her in St. Iohnses make her my Duchess.

Card. Thou will abuse her with lascivious lust,
As once thou did the Earl of Flanders wife,
And make her wretched, hoping in thy love.

Glost. Oh! your holiness would have her turn a Nun,
Your cloyster-lemmon but she minds thee not;
Fellow what ere thou art that take my part
There Is 20 Crowns, go prove an honest man

Card. There Is 40 for thee, Canbee, kill that slave
A^ ever thou intend'st my Love to have.

Can. I will take my time my Lord.

Had. Canbee come not near me, thou know my ancient order* They die that
dare me: but if thou dare meet me, hark in thine ear, disturb not these
honorable personages.


Can. Be brief, appoint the place of meeting, subito, subito.

Had. At our Old Hostises mad rogue to make merry, lay a fresh plot to meet the
Norfolk gull, and be blithe.


Can. Agreed, and I meet thee not, bafle my good name, and chronicle Canbee for
a Coward, my Lord I will have a limb of that Rogue.


Ca^. I shall be mindful of thee Canbee: if thou kill him
Base slave, had not he been Gloucester had dyed?

Glost. I am sorry Gentlemen for Momfords fall,
And for our Brother the Lord Regents anger,
Let him pull down the pride of Winchester,
And Gloucester easily will be appeased.

Card. Humphry nor Bedford, nor thy self has power
To make Lord Bewford stoop; do thou forget,
I am a Prince, and a Plantaginet?

Glost. Bastards were never Princes in their state.

Card. I am a Prince elected by the Pope.

Glost. I Will make ye gladly fly to your Elector.

Card. First will I see thy death Witless Protector. Draw again.

Old Plain. Keep the Kings peace my Lords.

Card. Look to it, I Will rowse you and your minions,
Out of St. Iohnses ere a week be spent.

Can. Sir we'll rowse ye, we -- Ex. Card. and Canbee.

Glost. Would never greater care came near my heart;
Could I have had my will in my Loves sight.
This evening had been Bewfords latest night.
But to the purpose, now Sir Walter Playnsey
Take no exceptions as you love our favor,
That Lady Ellenor's escaped away.

Old Plain. Is she escaped away my Lord?

Glost. She is, nay storm not,
For if you do your anger is in vain,
I Will answer any Duty for her wardship.
So rest your self content; if ye rest quiet
And will confirm your ward to be my wife,
I Will send ye within six days six thousand pound,
Being more than you can get by course of Law.

Old Plain. I but my Lord her sudden taking hence --

Glost. Nay, nay, stand not on terms, take this or choose*
Send word ye love us, or our Loves refuse.
Come Captain Westford bring us to St. Iohnses. Ex. Glost. and Cap. West.

Y. Plain. Here Is a good world when every Duke is King;
Thus I see power can master any thing.

Old Plain. I son, else durst not you and old Sir Robert
Being but new come from the dejected Father,
Offer such open wrong to Momfords Daughter.

Y. Plain. Father I Will answer that upon the way
Please ye to walk but to Sir Robert Westfords.

Enter Momford like a Soldier. Momf. Save ye Gentlemen, pray can ye tell me
Whether Sir Robert Westford ly in London.
Or at his Summer House?

Old Plain. He lies at Stepny fellow.
Follow us we'll bring thee thither presently. Ex. Playnseys.

Momf. That Is Playnsey and his son, I Will follow hem,
And try my Brother Westford ere I need,
Already have I took a little Cottage
On Bednall-Green, pretending my self blind,
Thither perhaps my gentle Child will come,
For she is full of charitable alms.
But howsoere now I shall surely see her
Bringing my own seal as a Messenger,
I Will follow after kind Sir Walter Playnsey,
And his Heroic son my Daughters Joy. Ex. Momf.

ACT II.
Enter Sir Robert, Kate his Daughter, Bess Momford, and Swash. Kate. FAther you
wrong me, and my Cosen Momford,
I marry Playnsey, troth plight unto her;
Oh it is an impious match! I Will rather have
Than such a mariage-bed, a dismal grave.

Sir Rob. Use no more words, no title tattle talk,
The Priest is sent for, Playnsey is a coming,
He shall have you, and you shall have his Land.

Kate. But for my Cosen Bess --

Sir Rob. Your Cosen-Beggar, Child unto a Traitor;
Go to no more, come hark a word with me.

Enter Old Strowd, and wash. Old Str. Ha this is excellent, stripped of his
clothes,
His shirt stolen from his back, why this exceeds,
This is a toy to mock an Ape withal.

Swash. Nay barlady Sir this toy has mocked as well-favour'd a Youth, as your
own Son.


Old Str. Hold ye, there is ten pound, go fetch him new clothes.


Swash. Nay Sir he wants no clothes, for he has a Cloak laid on with gold
lace, and an imbroidred Ierkin, and thus he is marching hither like the
foreman of a Morris.


Old Stro. Not for 20 l. gold lace embroiderd,
I Will see how he is suited by and by.

Swash. I Will tell him so, but pray Mr. let me be at the wedding feast.


Old Stro. And there you will be hoyting and kissing the Wenches you.


Swash. Not I indeed Master, I never use to kiss any, not I.


Old Stro. You know what complaints was made of you the last wedding you were
at.


Swash. I thank ye Master ye made me stand in a white sheet for ye-


Old Stro. How for me Knave? go to thou lie, thou shall not be there for that
lie.


Swash. Pray let me go, there will be all the Youth of our Parish there, good
Master?


Old Stro. Well Sir, go your way, but let me hear no ill of ye you were best.


Swash. I warrant ye Master, thank ye Sir, hey for our Town.
Green now in faith!

Old Stro. Go, get you gone, I fear we shall fall out,
I wonder what Sir Robert does intend? Exit.

Sir Rob. Look to it, pine, pule, weep, sob, it shall be so,
Thou shall be Playnseys wife who ere says no.

Old Stro. Sir Robert since your Cosen is refused
By Mr. Gilbert Playnsey, if she please, and you agree
Your Cosen Elizabeth shall have Tom Strowd;
You know he is my Heir, no Clown, no Swad,
But held in Norfolk for a Lusty Lad.

Sir Rob. Let her take whom she will, all is one to me.

Old Stro. How say you Lady?

Bess. For Playnsey's sake
The name of marriage I have sworn to hate.

Enter old Playnsey and his Son, Momford follows them. Sir Rob. Good morrow
good Sir Walter and Son Playnsey,
I trust Sir Walter gill has let you know
My purpose, for this marriage with my Daughter?

Old Plain. He tells me he is so resolved Sir Robert,
And in his own power now consists his choice,
But be assured, the searching eye of Heaven
Sees every thought of man, take heed you two
Answer not for each ill deed, and wrong ye do.

Sir Rob. Tut tut Sir Walter, God and we for that;
Speak Mr. Playnsey, let Bess Momford hear
How you resolve unto my Daughter Katherine.

Y. Plain. I come to mary her.

Kate. Think upon your Vow,
See this sad Lady, when you went to France,
You swore at your return to mary her.

Y. Plain. Fair be content, my mind therein is changed,
Her Father is disgraced and exiled
And therefore Playnseys Son does scorn his Child,

Bess. Do scorn me, leave me, every way abuse me,
Death will receive me, though you all refuse me.

Sir Rob. Nay good Sir Walter be not discontent,
Son Playnsey, Daughter Katherine, let us confer.

Old Stro. How say you Madam, will Sir Robert Westford
Defeat me of the Land I have at morgage,
Take away all your Jewels, and your plate?

Bess. He says he will.

Old Stro Well let him and he dare.
And if he wrong you Lady come to me.
Momf. Wondrous amazement! what does Momford see?
Where he most trusted, most impiety.

Sir Rob. The Chaplain stays in Heavens name let us in,
They shall be married in Bess Momfords sight.

Kate Father your malice to my Cosen Momford,
This deed of Playnsey whom you call my Husband,
Whom I shall never love, never abide,
Makes me to Death and Shame become a Bride:
But Shame will quickly from my red cheeks fly,
And Death will paint them with his ashy dye.

Sir Rob. Come, come, leave prattling, Playnsey comfort Kate.

Y. Plain. Fair Love be frolic talk no more of death and care
We'll sport, for I am young, and thou artfair.
Farewell forsaken Turtle, take thy flight
To some more abject mate whilst Kate and I, joys adore.

Kate. High Heaven forgive me, Father have remorce,
Let me not thus be haled to death perforce. Ex. both.

Old Plain. Sir Robert Westford I mislike this match.

Old Stro. It Is more than Injury, but Lady grieve not you.

Be^s. No Sir I am patient.

Sir Rob. I pray you go in Sir Walter.

Old Plain. Yes I Will go in,
But Heaven can tell, I hate this forced sin. Ex. old Plain.

Sir Rob. What will you do Mr. Strowd?

Old S^ro. I scarcely know
Your moods, and these affairs do ^^ll out so.

Sir Rob. Well at your pleasure, go Huswife get you in.

Bess. I will do what you will, yet ere I go
Somewhat on this old man I will bestow,
Thou seem a maimed Soldier, woe is me!
I have a little Gold, good Father take it,
And here is a Diamond do not forsake it;
My Father was a Soldier maym'd like thee,
Thou in thy limbs, he by vil'd infamy.

Old Stro. Bith mass I like her, she is a Momford right
Of noble blood and the true Norfolk breed;
Hold the good fellow there is one 40 pence
From a poor Yeomans purse, old Strowd of Harling.

Momf. I thank you Sir, I have more than I deserve.

Sir Rob. I Sir, and more than you shall bear from hence
Come Minx what Jewel did you give this Rogue.

Momf. I am a Soldier Sir, the name of Rogue
Ill fits a man of your respect to give
To a poor Gentleman, though in distress.

Sir Rob. A Gentleman! and why a Gentleman
Because a Soldier? Come you desper-view.
Deliver me the Jewel or I Will hang thee,
To morrow is the Sessions, I Will make short,
And shave your Gentry shorter by the neck,
A Gentleman! come, come, give me the Jewel,
What makes your Gentry sneaking at my Gate?

Momf. I came from Momford banished in Britany,
He prays ye by this token you would send
A thousand Marks to help him in his need.

Sir Rob. Where do you lie Sir?

Momf. I lay last night with a Blind-Beggar
That has a little House on Bednall-Green.

Sir Rob. He came but yesterday, I heard of him
Beggars keep lodging, well I Will hamper him,
I know this token, and will keep the same:
But have no 1000 Marks to maintain Rebels.

Momf. Base upstart Knight deliver Momfords Seal, Draw.
Or by the honor of a Soldiers name
I Will slice thy heart out.

Sir Rob. Help me Mr. Strowd.

Old Stro. What help ye to do wrong?
Nay by the rood, though Momford was exiled,
'Twas told me he should have his Lands and Goods.

Sir Rob. There, take them, but do you hear me Sirrah
Take heed I catch you not at the Blind-Beggars.

Momf. If I should lie there, though you be a Justice,
I trust to find Friends in my just defense.

Old Stro. Hold thee good fellow, there is the the other noble,
Bith mass I like thee, thou art a tough old Lad

Momf. I thank you Sir, Lady I Will take my leave.

Bess. Commend me to my Father good old man.

Momf. I will, and tell him of Sir Roberts wrong.

Sir Rob. Do fellow, say, I scorn his treachery,
And hope his end will be in misery.

Momf. I Will tell him what you say. Exit Momf.

Bess. Father farewell.

Sir Rob. Nay 'twere best ye packt,
Beggar with Beggar, for ye shall away:
Ha Huswife! are you giving Diamonds,
Do you forget your Jewels are all mine,
Did not old Westford pay for this attire?
But off with it, go in, or either drudge
Amongst my Servants to maintain your State,
Or pack, stay not an hour.

Bess. You shall not need
To bid me pack, for I Will begone indeed. Exit Bess.

Sir Rob. To steal and hang, or starve and beg, choose which

Old Stro. Sir Robert by the -- you do her wrong.

Sir Rob. What Is that to you look to your own affairs,
Strowd, Strowd, you think to have the Land at Farnam,
I and shall, and shall --

Old Stro. And will, do you your worst.

Sir Rob. You Are too saucy Strowd.

Old Stro. Too saucy moody Knight,
Thou durst not thus in scorn to old Strowd prate,
But cock on thine own hill, thus near thy Gate.

Sir Rob. I Will meet thee where thou dare, and when thou dare*

Old Stro. I Will say thou art a tall man and thou do.

Sir Rob. Appoint the place.

Old Stro. Theee is a new mown field
Lying by Eastward of a little shed
That stands on Bednall-Green.

Sir Rob. I know it, that is the shed the Soldier lay in,
The Close is compas'd with a quick-set, is it not?

Old Stro. The same.

Sir Rob. I like it, what is the hour?

Old Stro. 'Twixt one and two*

Sir Rob. Hold the Strowd, there is my hand
I Will meet thee, and I Will make thee know me too.

Old Stro. No more, I Will meet thee, else call me Jew. Exeunt.

Enter Tom Strowd and Swash his man, Gallant Y. Stro. London lick penny can ye
it, -- t'as licked me with a witness, I was set ore for a reckoning of 40
shillings, and as fair a Satin suite the other night, as a man shall lightly see
in a Summers day; but if ere it be my fortune to meet with that ill faced
Gypsy that stole it, I Will teach him his teripoop for stealing, whilst he has
a day to live again, so woll I: Nay nothing grieved me Swash, but that the
slave persuaded me to lie naked for fear of the Fleas; which when I had done he
stole me away as fair a shirt of my Mothers own spinning, as a man shall need
to pull over his ears: and Sirrah in the morning when mine Hostis came up to
call me, I was as naked as your Norfolk-Dumplin, as I am a christen man I
blushed out of all --


Swash. Nay Master I told you at first you should find a sower fellow of that
Gypsy, I liked him not he had such a crabtree-fac'd countenance of his own:
but come my old Master sent me for you, you must along to the wedding to --


Y. Stro. Why so I say now, -- it would make a Horse break his Bridle to see
the humors of these fellows, I know no more how to please him than I know how
to build up Pauls-steeple, so do not I, but come Swash follow me, I Will to him,
the --


Enter Canby, Hadland and Snip. Can. Tush man it is be, I know him as well as
the Beggar knows his dish, it is he that I fetched over for the satin suite,
and left him in pawn for the reckoning, he has a fair Cloak on's back, and we
could get that we were made men.


Had. Be ruled by me it is our own, do thou take the wall of him, if he take
exceptions I Will draw; if he draws his Cloak falls down.


Snip. And all fallings are mine Sir, let me alone, I know my cue Strowd, thou
had as good have met the Hangman; for thy upper Garment's mine.


Canby takes the Wall, and jussels Strowd. Y. Stro. -- What is the matter with
you? so feather-ey'd ye cannot let us pass in the Kings high way?


Can. You must learn to know your Duty, and give your betters the wall.


Y. Stro. My Betters the wall, on what acquaintance? ye shall be set up and ye
say the word, I Will wash mine hands and wait on you.


Had. What do you prate, nay then have at you Sir.


Y. Stro. -- And have at you too then e'faith. They fight.


Can. Hold, as you are a Gentleman hold.


Y. Stro. Hold me no holds, I Will have another bout with ye, or I Will make your
sconce and the post ring noon together, and sirrah Gypsy you shall fare the
worse for one of your Coats sake, that robbed me of a satin suite the other night,
-- and well remembered where is my Cloak Swash?


Swash. Your Cloaks a good Cloak, take the wall of my Master ye slave you.


Y. Stro I think the fellow be mad, -- where is my Cloak man.


Swash. Your Cloak's good Cloak and a fair Cloak, quarrel with my Mr. ye scabs
you.


Y. Stro. I think the fellow's frompall, I ask thee where my Cloak is.


Can. Let not a man pass unsearch'd, the Gentleman shall not lose the worth of
a mite in my company.


Had. I hope Sir you will not suspect my Boy nor me?


Y. Stro. Suspect me no suspects, I am sure my Cloak cannot go without hands,
and I Will have it again, or I Will bang it out of the coxcombs of some of them.


Can. -- Sir you mishape lies as near my heart as it had been mine own, and
cause I see'you a resolute tall Gentleman, and in respect that I was the
occasion of this falling out, my Cloak (simpl though it be) cost me 40 French
Crowns, take it, it is at your service.


Y. Stro. Forty French Crowns, forty French Pins, what do thou tell me of thy
Cloak? I scorn to wear ere a man's Cloak under the Element but mine own: but
I Will tell thee what, and it were not for thy sake, whom I think an honest kind
fellow and so forth, I Would bang this Bacon fan'd slave orethwart his shaoks, he
should remember stealing a Cloak to Dooms day, so should he.


Had. Why Sir I hope you know no harm by me were it in place, where I Would say,
he lied in his Throat that but touched the very hem of my reputation with
reproach.


Y. Stro. Wol't say I lie? thou had as good eat a load of logs were thou, I
^ay no harm by thee, and yet I say I have seen an honester face than thine
hanged, what say thou to it now? and thou be agrieved mend thy self how
thou can, or how thou dare, dost't see now. Nay Swah yonder is my father,
say nothing of my Cloak Swash.


Enter old Strowd. Old Stro. Well, if I live I Will meet Sir Robert Westford,
But first I Will see if I can find my Son,
And here he is, is it possible my Lands A Ierkin or Iacket for Strowd.
Should maintain this Attire, you Podigal
Where have you got this trash, unto whose Books
Are you indebted for it, pardon me Gentlemen
For being so sawey in your company;
It Is not for a poor Country Yeomans son
To flant it out thus.

Can. Sir you may say your pleasure, is your Son, but thus much I Will assure
you, though if he be your on the chiefest Gallants in the Land are enamored
with his good parts and valor.


Old Strew. Nay Gentlemen thus much I Will say for him,
He Is a right Norfolk-man mettle, all steel:
But I Will not have him use his bravery.
The time has been when as a Norfolk yeoman
That might dispend 500 marks a year
Would* wear such cloth as this sheeps russets gray,
And for my Son shall be no President
To break those orders, come off with this trash
Your bought Gentility, that sits on thee
Like Peacock's feathers cock't upon a Raven.
Let true born Gentlemen were Gentries robes,
And Yeoman Country seeming Liveries.

Y. Stro. -- You Would have the Calf with the white face I think, I am sure yonder is
old Simsons son of Showdam Thorp, that wears his great gall gaskins of the
Swash-fashion, with 8 or 10 gold laces of a side, and yet, without boast be it
spoken, you are more in the Kings Books than he. and pay more scot and lot a
fair deal, so ye do.


Old Stro. He is a desperate Castaway like thee,
And wrongs his fathers credit and his own;
The Sons discent's no better than her fathers.
Why should their clothes be richer? I am as proud,
And think my self as gallant in this gray,
Having my Table furnished with good Beef.
Norfolk temes-bread, and Country homebred drink,
As he that goes in rattling Taffity.
Let Gentlemen go gallant what care I,
I was a Yeoman born, and so I Will dye;
Then if thou be my Son be of my mind,
Wast less in rags and spend more in thine House,
Or if thou have no House to spend it in

Swash. Go to a Bawdy House Mr.

Old Stro. How Knave to a Bawdy House, no sirrah no
give it maimed Soldiers, and poor helpless Widows.
Off with this trash, on with this seemly weed,
Be not Strowds shadow but be Strowd indeed.

Y. Stro. Come hither Swash there is no remedy, I must give the old man good
words and speak him fair, for and if he should die to morrow next (as God
forbid but he should) he might defeat me of all his Land.


Swash. You say true Master, come on with this Jerkin, so now young Master you
look like your self, and like my Masters son.


Old Stro Son what are these that keep you company?


Y. Stro. A couple of honest proper Gentlemen they seem to be, but alls one to
you, I must keep company with none but a sort of Momes and Hoydons that know
not chalk from cheese, and can talk of nothing but how they sell a score of
Cow-hides at Lynmarte, and what price Pease and Barley bears at Thetford market.


Old Stro. Then still consort thee with these Gentlemen, I like the carriage of
them passing well.


Y. Stro. I a murren on em they they have carried away my Cloak amongst 'em.


Old Stro. But let that pass.


Swash. I Sir it is past and gone too.


Old Stro. And come along with me to Mile end to my Lodging.
I must talk a couple of cold words with Sir Robert Westford.
Go Swash before, and saddle my bay Nag,
Perhaps I Will ride a mile or two to night:
Kind Gentlemen, I am somewhat troublesome
To press thus rudely into your company;
Come Gentlemen, I Will gratulate your Loves
And your kind favors used unto my Son. Ex. Strowds.

Can. And we live we will make him spend your living, come Jack lets go, where is
Snip.

Had. Oh Sir at my sweet Boss the Broakers, near fear it there is a sure
Dandeno, she cuts it out in Hose and Jerkins, she is an honest dealer, your
privy taker, and your sure concealer.


Can. Let Us to it and turn again to meet this Gull,
We Will fleece him and his Bags we they nere so full. Exeunt.

Enter Bess Momford. Bess. Oh hapless, hapless, miserable wretch!
To loose my wealth and all my fathers Lands
Did never move me; but to see my Uncle
Cheat me of all my Jewels, and in spite
Even to my face mary my troth-plight Husband
To his own Daughter, and to see young Playnsey
Embrace another in my promised bed,
And I thrust out upon the wedding day;
Oh this is it that drives me full of woe
Into this sad and sollitary Green!
Here to do violence unto my self.

Momf. My Daughter in despair, then play thy part,
Prevent her ills that did procure her smart,
Alas where am I? how shall I return
Unto my homely Cabin? where is my boy?
I prithee do not leave me gentle wag,
Take pity of my miserable state.

Bess. Who talks of pity? now alas good man,
What are you blind?

Momf. Yes blind, and like to die,
Not for my own, but for thy misery.

Bess. Father be comforted, I am but poor,
Yet time has been -- sigh.

Momf. Oh do not sigh Girl,
Grief has so tyrannized upon my heart
That if you mourn my tears will bear a part.

Bess. You are the man I look for.

Momf. I am indeed,
And yet thou know me not, alas the while
That blind deceit, should clear eyed love beguile,
Whence spring thy sorrows from some private wrong.

Bess. Am I asleep, or do I know his tongue,
Art thou blind say thou, let me see thy face,
Oh let me kiss it too, and with my tears
Wash off these blemishes which cruel time
Have surrow'd in thy cheeks! Oh could thou see,
I Would show thine eyes whom thou do represent.
I called thee father, I thou shall be my father,
Nor scorn my proffer, were my father here,
He Would tell thee that his Daughter held him dear:
But in his absence Father, thou art he,
Shed but one tear for him, and I for thee
will weep, till from the moyster of mine eyes
A little font of crystal tears, shall rise
To bath thine eye lids in, yet do not weep;
Lay all thy griefs on me, for I am young,
And I have tears enough to weep much wrong.

Momf. Will thou remain with me; I dare not speak
For fear my tongue should my heart's counsel break.

Bess. I Will dwell, I Will tend thee, I Will do any thing
To do thee good, because within thy looks
I see the presence of my reverend Father.

Momf. Hast'^ lost thy Father then?

Bess. Father! I have,
List to my words and I will tell thee how.

Momf. First lead me to my Cottage, there relate
From the beginning all thy down-cast state. Exeunt:

Enter Sir Robert Westford, and Captain Westford. Sir Rob. I tell thee Captain
Westford I have done
No more than I can answer, I and will.

Cap. West. Nay Cosen Westford mis-conceit me not,
Or if thou do all is one, I say again,
You showed a cruel part, and wod the Maid
Be rus'd by me your Betters should decide it.

Sir Rob. Decide a pins end, do you take her part,
Each one you saw did seek to get their own,
Why should not I then? shall I undergo
Public displeasure for a pawltry Girl;
She comes not in mine ears.

Cap. West. The more unkind
And cruel you, but wherefore should you mary
Young Playnsey to your Child, considering
He was the troth-plight Husband to your Kins-woman,
The much wronged Daughter of the down-trod Momford.

Sir Rob. Alas for her, does she complain to you,
Why and she want a Husband you are a Batcheler,
You may do well to take her.

Cap. West. You had done better,
Had not your avarice broke the contract,
Twixt her and Playnsey.

Sir Rob. Well Sir, I will answer what I have done,

Cap. West. Not one word more Sir.

Enter old Strowd, young Strowd, and Swash. Old Stro. I marry Sir, why this is
somewhat like,
Now art thou like thy self, but stand aside,
Whose that, Sir Robert? he is as good's his word,
The Captain with him, ah he promis't me
To meet me single

Sir Rob. Pacify your self,
What I have done I Will stand to, pray forbear,
I Will talk a word or two with Master Strowd,
What Is here his son, how and his man too? ha
That Is more than promise.

Old Stro. Now Sir Robert Westford you are an early riser,

Sir Rob. My last nights promise wakened me before my hour,
Send hence your Son.

Old Stro. It Is good, I like you well, send hence your Kinsman,
Yet it is no matter, I have a devise
Shall rid them all, God save you Captain Westford,
Thanks for your friendly company last night.

Cap. West. I take your greetings kindly Mr. Strowd,
And with the tongue of love return it back
With double intrest, pray is not this your Son.

Old Stro. I cannot tell, his Mother tells me so.

Cap. West. I shall desire your more acquaintance Sir.

Y. Stro. I thank you Sir, I am easier to be acquainted with all, than to
borrow money on, I thank my father, but and it please you to drink a Cup of beer
or ale, and you will but walk 'ore the Green to the red lattice yonder, I Will
bestow it on you.


Cap West. Thanks Mr. Strowd, pray walk to my Chamber,
I am desirons to impart my love
Unto your kind acceptance.

Old Stro. Sir I thank you for him.
Please you to walk to Mile end with my Son
And this good fellow, I Will but talk a word
In secret here with Sir Robert Westford,
About Lord Momfords Lands, and follow ye.

Capt. West. At your good pleasure wilt please you walk Mr. Strowd?

Y. Stro. Pray lead the way, I Will follow you come hither Swash* and it had
pleased my Father, I might a had as gallant apparel as he, or another man, but
all is one, a dog has his day, and I shall have mine too, one day when the old
man's dead; -- I Will make all fly then e'faith. Exeunt.


Old Stro. So they are gone, and now Sir Robert Westford.
Think of your last nights quarrel.

Sir Rob. Tut, tut, never prate,

Old Stro. Thus I revenge my wrong, Thus I defend
The truth, and reputation of my cause.

Sir Rob. O I am slain. They fight, and Sir Rob. falls.

Old Stro. Then Heaven receive thy Soul,
And pardon me, thy Conscience can tell
I never wished unto thy Soul but well. Ex. Strowd.

Enter Momford. Momf. What pitious groan calls Momford from his Cell,
Whose this my Brother Westford? what and slain!
Heaven thou art just; he that last day for Gold
Did sell my Daughter, is himself now sold
Into the hands of death. Momford dissemble,
Daughter come forth, and look about this Close,
I heard one groan. Enter Bess:

Bess. And here is a bloody Coarse.

Momf. Look if thou know it.

Bess. Oh it is my Uncle Westford,
He that last day with his commanding breath
Chid me out of his doors, now breathless lies
Entreating me, to give his mingled body
A homely entertainment in our Cell.
Heaven thou art just, and dreadful is thy judgment.

Momf. Glory not in his Fall, but rather grieve
That in his end thou can him not relieve:
Let Us bear him in, and if we can by Art
Upon thy Foe, we'll work a friendly part:
For have he but the smallest sign of breath,
We'll recall life, and rescue him from Death.
But howsoever the Body stays with me, Exeunt with the body.
Till Justice points him out that murdered thee.

Enter old Strowd, young Strowd, and Swash. Old Stro. Saddle my horse, there
Swash run
Where Is my Son?

Y. Stro. At hand quoth Pick-purse, -- what is the matter with you trow?

Old Stro Good Son leave prating, Swash where is my horse?
I am undone, go post to Chenford, run to Mr. Glasscock,
Give him my Seal-ring, desire him send me.
Where Is my horse I say, the 100 pound he owes me, where is Captain Westford,
take heed he hear me not, Lord how my heart pants in my bosom, I have slain a
man.

Swash. Slain a man! oh oh oh oh.

Y. Stro. Peace Swash do not cry so.

Swash. No, I do not cry, I do but rore.

Old Stro. I had not the power to keep it longer,
Nor to take my horse till I confessed it.

Enter Captain Westford, and Officers. Capt. West. Lay hold on him, and Mr.
Strowd once more,
Confess thy guilt.

Old Stro. Why Sir? I not deny
Sir Robert Westford doing me much wrong,
Is by me slain.

Cap. West. And you for this offense,
Shall be conducted safely unto Prison,
Till matters may be better thought upon,
Mean time your own confession is my warrant.

Y. Stro. My Father kill a man, -- here is a jest to mock an Ape withal, what
shall become of me now: Swash hie thee to Chenford for the 100 pound, and soon
toward Evening I Will meet thee at Ilford for fear of base Knaves; -- I know not
whom a man may trust when ones own Father does deceive 'em thus. Ex. Swash.


Old Stro. Well Gentlemen I do obey the Law,
And yield my body Prisoner to the King,
Soon work what means ye can for my repreeve
Till we may sue for pardon. So adue my Son,
Heaven give thee grace such desperate bralls to shun. Exeunt.

Y. Stro. Get a reprieval call you it, -- I know no more how to go about it,
than I know how to build Pauls-steeple so I do not: but I Will go seek out a
Gentleman, one Franck Canby that served the Cardinal, and try what he can do
in it; it is an old saying in our Country, it is better to have a friend at Court
than a penny in the purse, it shall go hard but I Will save my father from hanging
that's certain. Ex. Music.


ACT III.
Enter Momford, with Sir Rob. and Bess. Sir Rob. GOod Father! gentle Maiden set
me down,
My wound I fear will freshly bleed again,
I prithee let thy Daughter make a bed,
I fear my Deathbed, good now send her in.

Momf. Daughter I pray go in and make the bed,
If we need help I Will call you, pray you begone.

Bess. It does torment him to behold my sight,
Well Heaven forgive him and restore his health,
He did me more than wrong, and if I see
He be at point of death, I Will let him know,
That I am Momford's Child he wronged so. Exit Bess.

Sir Rob. Father lend me thy hand now in Heaven's eye
Swear to be secret till thou see me dead,
Or of this wound by the recovered;
Know first I am a Knight, my Name is Westford,
My Wife was Sister to the Baron Momford, Ready for a Hangman's will.
That Momford left his Daughter to my trust,
Which Daughter I have this day turned forth
To seek her living, and from her have kept
Above ten thousand Marks, besides the Lands
Morgag'd unto one Strowd a Norfolk Yeoman,
That Strowd on my abuse done to the Lady
Challenged the field, we fought, and here I fell,
He escaped I hope, Heaven grant he may do well.

Momf. It Is well Sir that you are so penitent.

Sir Rob. Oh Father I had need to rend my heart
In sunder, with true sorrows hourly sighs,
For I have done a deed more impious
Than ever entered in the heart of man,
If ever thou did hear of Momfords name,
His honor, bounty, and magnificence,
If ever thou did hear his late defame,
His accusation, exile, indigence,
Then know that I am he, Momford loved well,
Yet I am he by whom old Momford fell.

Momf. Alas Sir! how?

Sir Rob. I coveted his Land,
And practiced with Sir Walter Playnsey's Son,
An irreligious careless Gentleman;
Yet one that will make show, swear and protest,
His course of life is equal with the best.
O there are many such old man there be,
Too many in this Land like him and me;
We laid this plot, he should go into France,
He did, and served on horse at Amiens,
Where he was wilfully ta'n Prisoner,
And by his Keepers Daughter understood,
The French should by a treacherous plot win Guynes,
Wherein Lord Momford held a Garrison.

Momf. Who were consenting with the French in this?

Sir Rob. A Wallown-Captain called Haute Bewmart.

Momf. Did Momford know of it?

Sir Rob. No (old man) never-
But Playnsey counterfeited certain Letters.
Subscribing them with Lord Villiers his name,
In gratulation for betraying Guynes,
These Letters were delivered to a Post,
The Post surpised, examined where he had them,
He answered from Villiers his Secretary:
For in his habit Playnsey was disguised*

Momf. Oh Heaven!

Sir Rob. Good father wherefore do thou sigh?

Momf. For grief men's hearts should harbor such deceits.

Sir Rob. I faint good father, if thou can relieve me,
Call for thy Daughter, stretch me on a bed:
Bear witness I repent now, help and ease me,
And till I dye conceal my treachery.

Momf. Be sure I will, and yet I hope you will live,
And reconcile the banished Lord your self,
For 'twas an unjust fact, indeed it was.
Come Daughter help to lead in this Gentleman,
We Will show him all the favor that we can. Enter Bess.

Bess. Father he fownes.

Momf. Come quickly help him in,
I hope he will recover, but if not,
Heaven grant his sins may wholly be forgot. Exeunt.

Enter Canbee disguised. Can. This damb'd perpetual Rogue Swash, has kept me
here in little ease of the bare ground, hungry, cold, and comfortless, ever
since two hours before day. I am hungry for the hundred pound he brings, cold at
my heart for fear he come without it, and comfortless least if he have it, he
comes with company, but lupus in fabula here he comes, what and alone!
excellent the 100 l. mine own then. Enter Swash.


Swa^h. I discover none, the danger is past, I think I may with safety put up
an honest weapon, thou terror to all Thieves, sleep there; my young Master
promised to meet me, he stays somewhat long, but he knows Swash is able to
stand under the strokes of a dozen false slaves, oh that I could meet with a
Thief now to try my valor.


Can. Stand sirrah and deliver.


Swash. Oh Lord, Thieves, thieves, oh, oh.


Can. Peace Villain, or I Will cut out thy Tongue, and make a rasher of the coals
on it, deliver the money.


Swash. Yes good Mr. Thief with all my heart, there it is I am glad I had it for
you.


Can. So am I too Sir, come hold up I must now bind you hand and foot for
running after me.


Swash. I pray you do bind me hard, do good Mr. Thief, harder yet Sir.


Can. So now farewell, your money goes with me Sir.


Swash. Farewell kind Mr. Thief. O pox choke him for a slave, Thieves, thieves,
thieves, help, help, help.


Enter Hadland and Snip with Strowd's sword. Had.. Sirrah Snip be sure you run
away with Strowd's sword


Snip. I warrant you Sir let me alone for running.


Swash. Thieves, thieves, help, help.


Snip. How thieves, I Will go, and raise the town Sir, thieves, thieves.


Ex. Snip. Enter Tom Strowd. Y. Stro. How Thieves, -- where is Snip run with my
sword? who is that cries Thieves Swash, how now man come stand to it.


Swash. Yes Sir, I am bound to it.


Y. Stro. Why what is the matter Swash, how came thou thus, ha.


Swash. I am robbed Master.


Y. Stro How robbed, I hope not so man!


Swash. Yes faith there was six Thieves set upon me, I very manfully killed
seven of the six, and the rest carried away the money, but I shall have it again
that is the best on it.


Y. Stro. How do thou know thou shall have it again Swash?


Swash. Why he has left me his bond here to bring it again.


Y. Stro. There Is a bond with a Halters name, -- Swash is all the money gone?


Swash. Every penny Master.


Y. Stro. What ill fortune is that Swash, what shall we do now trow.


Enter Snip and Canby. Snip. Thieves, thieves, come good Mr. Canby make have,
this way, this way.


Can. Thieves, where Boy? I am almost out of breath with runring, what Mr.
Strowd and Swash how comes this.


Y. Stro. Why Swash is robbed man!


Can. How robbed?


Y. Stro. Yes faith, but I may thank Snip there that run away with my sword.


Snip. Alas Sir I was so amazed I knew not what I did,
Nor whither I ran, till I met Mr. Canbee here!

Can. Robbed, I wod I had been with thee Swash.


Swash. I honest Mr. Canbee, and you had been with me I had escaped well enough
then.


Can. Well Mr. Strowd, as I was passing through Allgate this morning I saw the
Shreeves and Constables set toward to Newgate to fetch your father, the
Carpenter in a Cart carried the Jebbet to Bednall-Green, only love to meet you
made me neglect the principal business, here is the Protectors Reprieve, I have
done the part of a Gentleman, here is Humphry Gloucester good Noble man, he loved
your Father well, let not your delay dash all, I was two hours by the clock of
my bare Knees to the Protector, prayed the equity of the quarrel, and could
Westfords body a been found, the Pardon had been sealed: but haste away with
the Repreeve, take horse at Langton, and make speed, or your father will be
hanged.


Y. Stro. How take horse quoth ye, yes, the Cat would lick her ears and she had
'em, why, I was robbed too last night my self at Langton.


Can. Were you robbed Mr. Strowd?


Y. Stro. Yes faith, they make a matter of nothing to rob Swash and I now
adays, I have not a horse to cast at a dog man not I.


Can. Apox of all ill fortunes, hold Sir, there is five shillings left take it,
and go take my horse at the Bell at Stratford, and make have for fear you come
too late.


Y. Stro. Troth Mr. Canbee, and ye gave me all that ere ye had, I can but thank
you, and your horse were a horse of gold, he shall be forth-comming again. Come
Swash let us go. Exit Tom Stro:


Swash. Mr. Canbee no more but so for this kindness, farewell Mr. Hadland,
farewell Snip, pray let us see ye all at the Gallows, till when I bequeath this
halter amongst ye, in token of my love, and so adue.


Snip. Farewell Swash and be hanged.


Had. -- Canbee, art thou mad to give him thy horse, and five shillings to save
his father from hanging.


Can. No you Friday-fac't-frying pan it was to save us all from whipping, or a
worse shame; for let your Rogueship understand, that this reprieve is
counterfeit and made by me, your ordinary pasport maker, that should have lost
an ear at Salisbury, and another at Northampton; the truth is we must leave
London, for if the Protector get us under his protection, we shall all go
Westward for this warrant.


Had. -- Let Us turn Gypsies again then, and go about a fortune-telling, it is in
good request again now.


Can. That Is the smooth foot path up Holborn, no lack there is an odd fellow
snuffels in the nose, that shows a motion about Bishopsgate, we will wheel about
by Ratliff and get to his lodging, see shows for a fortnight, till Strowd's
nine days wonder of hanging be past, to let us use his motion, which done the
boy shall turn girl, thou as I have done already, wash off that Gypsie-colour,
and be doorkeeper with the boy, my self with a half vizzard will describe, and
thus we will live like young Emperors.


Had. ^anbee I Will chronicle thee for this conceit. Snip thou shall have good
purchase of the Wenches in the throng.


Snip. And if I snip not off their Purses then call me crack. Ex.


Enter Gloucester, Sir Walter Playnsey and his Son, Captain Westford. Enter Old
Strowd to the Gallows, with the Hangman, and Officers. Glost. Strowd I am sorry
for this heavy sight.
And by the dread command of my liege Lord,
I come to witness 'twixt the world and you
What state you dye in, how you will dispose
Your lands, your goods and debts now forfeited,
These he restores thee, yet whilst thou has life
To give unto your son, your friends, or wife.

Old Stro. I humbly thank his royal Majesty,
VVishing long happiness to him and you:
But with your favor my good Lord Protector
I still deny I am a Murderer,
I killed Sir Robert Westford in fair fight;
Our quarrel rising from open wrong,
He offered to his niece the Lady Momford.

Glost. All that was certified his Majesty,
But prithee hear me Strowd, Death's fleshless hand
Clapsing the wretched palms of endless woe,
Has made a circle, and thy soul's the Center,
From which by neither power, prayers, or tears,
If thou dye desperate she can be freed.

Old Stro. My Lord I do beseech ye pardon me,
The worl'd believes that I have murdered Westford,
Or since abused his body being dead,
And shaming at my savage guiltiness,
Have hurled it in some well not to be found;
Is this the matter that I should confess?

Glost. It is good Strowd in that make clear thy Soul.

Old Stro. He whose pure blood turns scarlet sins to snow.
Forgive me all my faults and Westford's death:
But if I ever wronged him being dead,
Or moved him from the place whereon he fell,
Not far off from this place where I must fall.
I ask Heavens anger on me, for his grace,
And I can say no more concerning that.

Glost. Enough what says thou about Momford's lands.

Old. Stro. I say, seeing the King of his good grace
Has given me all my lands, my debts, and goods,
I give too marks, and all the deeds,
Unto the Lady Elizabeth his Daughter,
And Captain Westford, in whom I put all trust,
Be careful that the Lady be not wronged.

Cap. West. I warrant you Mr. Strowd.

Glost. How mean thou to di^pose of all thine own?

Old Stro. I have a will drawn at my house in Harling,
And I confirm that for my Testament.

Glost. Are you pleased that will shall be performed,

Old Stro. Heaven's will be done.
But I would fain have seen mine unkind Son.

Glost. Tarry a little Executioner.

Enter Tom Strowd, and Swash. Y. Stro. Hold, hold, hold, let him alone you
cross legg'd-hartichoak, touch him and thou dare.


Swash. Hold Hangman and thou be'st a man, hold for the Kings advantage.


Glost. What are these trow?


Y. Stro. Two sir that come not without their cards I hope, Father you have a
simple fellow to your Son you see, come who is the shreeve here haw.


Old Plain. I do supply his place.


Y. Stro. Do ye so, then here is a Mittimus to repreeve my father back again to
the Gaol, or a repreeval what do you call it, it is my Lord Cardinal's, and my
Lord Protectors own hands, and seals; I assure you Sir.


Glost. Proud Winchesters and mine, that is strange, let us see it.


Swash. It is not so strange as true Sir, there it is.


Glost. Is this your Son Strowd?


Old Stro I my gracious Lord.


Y. Stro. It Is the more shame for my Mother else.


Glost. Where had you this repreeve?


Y. Stro. Of an honest Gentleman Sir, one that can do any reasonable matter
with my Lord Protector.


Swash. I truly Sir he is one, as honest a Gentleman as Canbee.


Glost. It may be so, for I know one Franck Canbee,
He served sometimes Bewford the Cardinal,
The commonst cosening Knave in all this Land.

Swash. I, I that is he Sir, that is he.


Y. Stro. As God mend me it is the very same man, but all is one for that, he has
played the kind Gentleman with me, and as God save me, and Swash had not been
robbed this morning of 100 pound, I had paid him well for his pains too Sir.


Glost. Strowd turn your self to Heaven these hopes are vain,
And young Strowd as you hope to have our favor
After your Father's death, I charge you seek
That Canbee forth that forged you this repreeve.

Y. Stro. How after my father's death, -- I hope it is not come to that now?
after all this charge.


Old Stro. Sirrah you, ever choose you such sure Mates,
My Lord Protector pray be good to him.

Y. Stro. Nay pray you my Lord be good to my father, and turn him 'ore the
Ladder.


Swash. -- is this my Lord Erector?


Y. Stro. How Is that my Lord Protector, and you be my Lord Protector, I pray do
but set your hand to this Bill, and as God save me, and ere ye come into
Norfolk, I Will do you twenty times as good a turn as the hanging of my father
comes to, pray you my Lord.


Swash. Do my good Lord Erector, and Swash and his Buckler shall be at your
service.


Old Stro. Peace, peace, your idle prate, Heaven's peace
Must be my comfort in adversity.

Y. Stro. Swash what shall become of me now, I nere dare go down into Norfolk
again, every clown will brave me, and bid me go to London, and be hanged as my
father was.


Swash. I, and they will bid Swash swing in an Halter as his old Master did.


Enter old Momford lead in by Bess Momford. Momf. Some good man bring me to an
Officer.
It may be a blind wretch may save a subject.

Swash. Master, here is a blind man come to see your father hanged.


Y. Stro. How a blind man see him hanged? that were strange indeed Swash.


Old Plain. What would that aged man, and that fair Maid?


Swash. I hope she comes to beg my old Master from the Gallows.


Y. Stro. No Swash She should have come in her Smock* and then


Swash. It may be it is not clean Master.


Momf. I heard the people murmur near my house,
A little Cottage yonder on the Green,
That there was come an ancient man to die,
For killing of a Knight last afternoon,
If it be so, the Knight lives, and no doubt
Will be recovered of his dangerous wounds.

Glost. Where is he father?


Momf. Yonder in my Cottage.


Swash. O brave, Master he says the Knight's in his God-piece.


Y. Stro. No in his Cottage man, thou mistakest.


Momf. He named himself but now, and sent us forth,
To know the truth, and he comes after us,
As well as his green wounds will give him leave.

Y. Stro. I marry Swash, here is a good old man, and a goodly Mother, brings
news for the nonce, -- I would not for all the Bullocks in Norfolk, they had fallen
out, that my father had fallen off.


Glost. Let Strowd come down, I hope Sir Robert lives,
And if he do, believe me I Will reprove
This over rash proceedings for Strowd's death.

Old Plain. May it please your grace, 'twas Sessions the last day,
Strowd granted he had killed him, Judgment past,
And my Sons wife the Daughter to Sir Robert,
Hastened (with tears) the execution.

Enter Sir Robert Westford. Swash. Yonder he comes Master, come you had like to
made a fine piece of work here, are you a Knight and can fight no better.


Sir Rob. Health to my gracious Lord the Duke of Gloucester.


Glost. I am glad Sir Robert Westford of your health,
How do you feel your wounds?

Sir Rob. May it please your grace, I hope they will do well,
This good old man, and this fair-comming Maid,
Next under Heaven preserved me from death.

Glost. Be thankful to them then, and hear ye young Strowd,
Consider this poor man, and that fair Maid.

Y. Stro. Consider her, -- I consider well enough, sirrah Swash methinks it is
the prettiest Mother that ere man's eyes looked on.


Glost. Sir Walter Playnsey take Strowd to your house,
His pardon shall be sent you ere you dine,
So upon Sureties let him be discharged,
But hear you young Strowd, see you find out Canbee,
Or at my hands never expect a favor.

Y. Stro. Yes my Lord I Will find him or it shall go hard, vesdiness Swash I am
mightily smitten in love with yonder Mother, and I ha not a swelling burning
feavour, in every member would I might nere stir, -- yonder is Mr. Playnsey has
all the talk with her, and yet he is no Batchelar.


Swash. Cannot you go and take her away from him, I co'd do it my self Master.


Y. Stro. I Will go to 'em, I Will try,
Goddeen to your Sir.

Swash. Pish you are no body Master, let me alone I have a device to get him
away, and then do you sease upon the Wench: follow me Master.


Y. Stro. Oh brave Swash e'faith.


Enter a Messenger. Glost. Now Sir your news?

Mess. The haughty Cardinal
Taking advantage of your being from home,
Has with a crew of his Confederates,
Beset St. Iohnses, and with all his force
Assayls to wrong the Lady Ellenor,
And steal her forth the Castle.

Glost. Is It possible, that this proud Priest dares offer violence
Unto my Troth-plight Ellenor?

Mess. It Is too true my Lord.

Glost. Where is he now?

Mess. Rid to the Court my Lord.

Glost. And thither Gloucester does intend to fly,
As swift as quickest speed will give him leave. Ex. Glost.

Old Stro. Come Sir you will seek those Cozeners*
No doubt those copes-mates had my 100 pound,
And do you hear, take your companion with you,
Go and seek them, or for your own part never see my face:
But as for you that trust to every slave,
Wasting my goods, nay jesting out my life.
By false repreeves, and such base practices,
Walk, pack, sink, swim, pine, perish, look not on me,
Till you have found those that have Cony-catch't you.

Y. Stro. Hark hither Swash, and it had not been for a blemish to the name of
the Strowds, would we had made an end of this brawling at the Gallows, and then
thou should a seen whether I would a kept such a coyl for a little pawltry
loss or no, I warrant thee he ha not the honesty, to cast thee a Noble toward
the healing of thy cracked Crown, yet every one says he gave that ill-fac't
knave the Hangman five, or six pound.


Swash. I that was to buy him a better face Mr. But give him good words, you
know the old man is kind enough.


Y. Stro. I as any Corssen creature, he is won with a Apple, and lost again
with a nut, but come Swash we'll go seek out those Cony-catchers, and ere I
catch them, -- I Will make them pay soundly all for their roguery.


Exeunt young Strowd and Swash. Old Plain. Sir Robert will you shake hands with
Mr. Strowd.

Sir Rob. Well he may have my hand but not my heart,
Srowd thou did wound me, yet thou did it well,
No more, I Will think on it till my dying day,
I Will sit upon your skirts before, I will.

Capt. West. Oh Uncle have patience.

Sir Rob. You are an Agent for the Child of Momford,
I pray you Sir Walter Playnsey make good Bonds,
That Strowd abuse me not, look to it I pray.

Old Plain. I warrant you Sir Robert I Will be sure
Of such security as you shall like.

Old Stro. Come Captain Westford, you shall have the Deeds
Concerning Momford's lands past unto you.

Cap. West. I had rather Sir you kept them in your hand.

Old Stro. Well as you please, yet walk with us I pray,
You brought me to the Gallows, bring me back:
Father farewell, farewell good gentle maid,
I Will rest your Debtor till some other time;
But 'twas Sir Robert's kindness to reveal his name,
Else Hangman you had had this homespun suit,
But Heaven be thank't I keep it for my Son,
I hope to drive him from his silken humor.

Cap. West. Come good Mr. Strowd will you go?

Old Stro. Gallows farewell, Strowd's heart is blithe and bold,
Having escaped thy danger being thus old.

Exeunt old Strowd, Cap. Westford, and old Playnsey. Sir Rob. A plague of this
blind slave, and that base drab,
Else had thou hanged ere I had been discovered,
And on my tongue a mischief, that revealed
Our purpose in the plot of Momfords fall,
But I have it now, I am resolved, hear you Son Playnsey,
I pray you give that Maid a mark in gold,
And Father I must crave a word with thee.

Y. Plain. Fair Maid besides his offer take this Gold,

Bess. I pray you pardon me, for all the world
I would not do my soul that injury.

Y. Plain. Divine immortal, all my Souls delight.

Bess. Salute me not with such vain Epithet.
I am wretched, mortal, miserable, poor,
But howsoever base, I Will be no whore.

Y. Plain. Will thou be then my wife, for she is dead.

Bess. It Is much unlike,
A Gentleman of your worth will vouchsafe,
A B^ggars Daughter to your Bridal bed.

Y. Plain. By Heaven I will if thou w^lt grant me love.
I Will answer you another time kind Sir.
My father has no Nurse, no Wife, no child,
No servant but my self, and he is blind.

Y. Plain. Hark in thine ear one word.

Sir Rob. I, I, I, I do remember such a tale I told thee,
Come hither good son Playnsey thou shall hear it.
Last night at my first dressing I was Lunatic,
Mad that I was hurt, more than of the hurt,
And in my ravening fit told this old fool,
That thou and I did practice Momford's fall,
Now this old Asse-believing I said true,
Comes with my Conscience, bids me advise,
And goes about to make a matter on it,
Ha, ha, old fool go, go, go to thy prayers,
Thou had need of eyes to keep thy Daughter honest.
I guess thy cottage be a brothell house,
Talk thou of Momfords fall and of my madness

Momf. I do beseech ye hear me for Heaven's sake.

Sir Rob. Tu^, tut, do not tell me of Heaven, or Hell,
Prate not, I Will send the now and then a penny,
But if thou tittle tattle tales of me,
I Will clap thee by the heels, and whip thy Daughter,
Turn thee to the wide world, and let thee starve.
Come come son Plainsey let the Knave alone,
Keep's tongue, and keep his friend, else he gets none.

Bess. My Father Sir had pity of your wounds.

Sir Rob. Peace Huswife. I have paid him for his pains.
Come son away, and old man hold your tongue,
Remember this old saw, As men are friended, Ex. Sir Rob. and Y. Plain.
So either right or wrong their suits are ended.

Momf. Oh miserable age!

Bess. Oh wretched youth!

Momf. Oh times corrupt by men for want of truth!

Bess. What ailes my father?

Momf. Why exclaims my Daughter?

Bess. Playnsey the perjured, he that did deride me,
He that did marry Westford's only Daughter,
Courts me again to be his Concubine.

Momf. Does he then know thee?

Bess. He makes show he does not.

Momf. Oh do not trust him Girl, Westford and he
Are all composed of guile and subtilty.
Alas that this fair world, by sin deformed,
Should bear upon her bosom such a shape
As Westford is; last night expecting death,
Terror dwelt on his heart, which forced him tell
With tears and lamentations his foul facts,
No sooner had he any hope of health,
But he conspired the faultless death of Strowd,
And would not have come forth, had not we been,
But till the man had died kept close within.
Now he denies a deed as clear as day,
Threatens poor want, and low-trod poverty
Must not resist men in authority;
Come lead me in, I would my days were done,
Since vice lays baits which virtue cannot shun. Exeunt.

ACT IV.
Enter Tom Strowd and Swash. Y. Stro. How Is this, shall I see all Norwitch in
the corner of a little Chamber? I had as lieve thou had told me Charing cross
stood in Cheapside, and all one.


Swash. And you will not believe me you shall see it your self, it is in this
house, it is called a motion: there is first the Master of the motion, then the
Master's Mate, the Mate's Consort, the Consort's Cabin-fellow, the
Cabin-fellows Hangby, the Hangby's Man, the Man's Boy, the Boy's Page, the
Page's Wench, and all these live upon the motion.


Y. Stro. This is old excellent in faith; come, and I had but one cross in the
world to bless me with I Would see it; go you before Swash and show me thither.


Enter Snip like a Wench dressed up. Swash. Do you see you Wench Master? she is
Doorkeeper, I have given her earnest to enter her soberly, and pass through
her quarters at my pleasure.


Y. Stro. Is this she? how now pretty Mother? what Gamballs have ta? can thou
describe them? sen ye?


Snip. Not I Sir, the Master of the Motion can Sir.


Y. Stro. Go call him out then, -- What Is he? is he ashamed to show his face
trow? or is it the fashion trow ye? what Gamballs have ye here now? ha?


Enter Canbee and Hadland disguised. Can. Why This is Strowd that I fetc'd over
with the counterfeit Repreeve, but it is no matter, we will outface him.
Gentlemen the first conceit you are to see is Tumbling.


Y. Stro. Stumbling, What stumbling? I think the fellow be straught.


Had. Sir he means Tumbling, and feats of Activity.


Y. Stro. Why man that is as stale as Bancks curtal, there were a sort of
Tumblers at Windham fair last week, and they have made that so stale in Norfolk
and Suffolk, that every wench is turned Tumbler, and ye ha no better matters ye
lose my custom I can tell ye Sirs.


Can. You shall likewise see the famous City of Norwitch, and the stabbing of
Julius Caesar in the French Capitol by a sort of Dutch Mesapotamians.


Y. Stro. How the French Capitol! nay I remember Tully's Offices says the
Capitol that Caesar was stabbed in was at Rome.


Can. Impute the gross mistake to the fault of the Author; you shall likewise
see the amorous conceits and Love songs betwixt Captain Pod of Py-corner, and
Mrs. Rump of Ram-alley, never described before.


Swash. Good Master let us see Mrs. Rump of Ram-alley.


Y. Stro. How? Captain Pod and Mrs. Rump? -- I think this snufling slave flouts
us; then in faith let us see the sawing of the Devil with a wooden saw.


Can. Or if it please you shall see a stately combat betwixt Tamberlayn the
Great, and the Duke of Guyso the less, performed on the Olympic Hills in
France.


Y. Stro. France? -- Thou speak all French to me; but off with this
snuffling French Mask, and speak in your English voice, or as God sa me I Will
beat thy nostrils as flat as a pancake, or a barley froyes.


Had. Alas Sir, the Gentleman has got a mischance lately, and broke his Brow,
that makes him wear a Visard.


Y. Stro. Do tell me on his Brow? what cared I and he had broke his Neck,
I Will have it off; what are you the Master of the Motion? -- I am glad I know
it; Swash look thee here is Canby that cosen'd me with the false Repreeve.


Swash. And here is the slave Snip that ran away with your Sword in a Wenches
Petticoat; we'll spoil your motion now we have ye.


Had. I beseech you good Master Swash.


Swash. What Gypsy? are you turned Jugler? I Will tickle you.


Can. Hark ye Mr. Strowd.


Had. Mr. Swash as you ever came of a woman --


Swash. Let me never come off a woman while I live again if I do not terrify
you, I Will motion you, I Will murder your Tamberlayn and his Coatch-horses, I Will
stab your Caesar, I Will ravish your Rump, I Will peper your Pod, I Will powder your
Motion, your Norwitch shall down, I am fire, and I Will consume your Motion in a
twinkling. Exit with Snip.


Y. Stro. Do Swash, and let me alone with these till thou come again.


Had. Mr. Stro. For mine own part I protest unto you I love you as dear as the
heart in my bosom, and protest unto you it went to the very soul of me to hear
how that slave Canbee, like a Gypsy, cosen'd you of a satin suit.


Y. Stro. How? how is this, was he the Gypsy that cosen'd me of my suit?


Can. Jack you are a Gypsy; believe him not Mr. Strowd he has been proved
perjured, the slave will fight with his own Father for a Jack of Beer, and kill
a sucking Infant for a pint of Wine, and where he says I cosen'd you of your
suit, 'twas his damned counsel that Swash was robbed yesterday of the 100 l.


Had. Mr. Strowd, by this hollow tooth that shall tear that slaves Nose like a
piece of Swines flesh, 'twas he that robbed him, and counterfeited the Repreeve;
indeed I must confess I had my share; some I have spent, the rest is here, take
it Mr. Strowd, and think of honest Jack Hadland as he deserves.


Can. I must give him some to; Mr. Strowd there is 20 l. toward your losses,
because I would not have my reputation come in question before the Protector,
nor seem to stain my Lord Cardinal's cloth; there should be an old Harry Angel
amongst it, lend it me to swear by a little.


Y. Stro. Not one of them and there were a hundred of 'em.


Can. Let me be torn into mammocks with wild Bears if I make not a gallemaufry
of thy heart, and keep thy Skull for my quaffing bowl you base cheating Slave.


Y. Stro. -- Here Is the old Proverb right, When false Thieves fall out, true
men come to their own; but say I should take this 40 l. in part of payment,
what security shall I have to get the rest? for my Father has vowed nere to
take me for his Son, till I get his money again, or see you at the Gallows.


Can. Are you fallen out with your father? fall in with us helter shelter, you
shall fare no worse than we do.


Y. Stro. -- Man, what would thou have me to turn Conycatcher?


Can. Oh Sir, your only bravest life that can be.


Y. Stro. -- I think it were not amiss, for I ha seen Wheat and Barley grow
amongst cockell and darnell, and many an honest man keep Knaves company; How
now Swash, what have thou done?


Enter Swash and Snip. Swash. I have confounded their Motion, beleaguered their
Castle, battered down the Walls, and taken Tamberlayn the blood* Prisoner in a
pursuit, to the utter undoing of all Motion-Monger and Puppit-players.


Y. Stro. It Is well done Swash, but wotts thou what man? I am turned
Cony-catcher since thou wentst.


Swash. Cony-catcher? the Devil you are?


Y. Stro. Yes in faith Swash, and if thou wou't do one thing for me now, I Will
teach thee to conycatch too when I come into Norfolk.


Swash. On that condition Master I Will do it what ere it be.


Y. Stro. Do but go thy ways to Mile-end-Green to my fathers lodging at the 3
Colts, and do but tell him I cannot find these fellows yet, but as soon as I do
meet with them, tell him he shall hear from me.


Swash. Yes Sir, I Will go tell him you are with 'em, but you bid me say you
could not find 'em.


Y. Stro. -- By no means Swash, then thou marr'st all, tell him I cannot find
'em, make a lie for me now, I Will make two for thee another time.


Swash. Well on this condition you will teach me to cony, I am content to lie for
you. Ex. Swash.


Y. Stro. Do so; Now Sirs, what course will you take, that I may come by the
rest of my money?


Can. Tush we have 100 l. tricks when we want cash one amongst us undertakes
the name and habit of some swashing Italian or French Nobleman at least, the
rest in Liveries attending, then we come and sojourn at some honest Gentleman's
house, till we have eat him out of house and home in diet, and wore his credit
out at elbows with taking up commodities at his Merchants, in hope to have all
his money at a day, before which day we give him the slip, and to escape pursuit
attire our selves like Gypsies, Pedlars, Tinkers, or such like disguise; how
like you this?


Y. Stro. This is old excellent in faith; well I see I might a kept company with
honest men all the days a my life ere I should a learned half this Knavery:
but hark my Masters, yonder is the Blind-Beggar of Bednall-Green has the
prettiest Mother to his Daughter as a man need to lay his leg over, now if all
the wit in your heads can but get her to be my wife, I should think my money
every penny better bestowed than other.


Can. You shall have Sir her.


Y. Stro. Shall, why well said; come then my mad Viragoes I have spent many a
gray groat of honest swaggerers, and tear-Plackets in my days that I never
drunk for, and now I Will turn swaggerer my self, I Will keep you company and't be
but to keep you honest, true men I cannot, for there is nere a finger on your
hands but is as bad as a lime twig, I Will do my good will, and I can bring ye to
any goodness, then say God a mercy honest Tom Strowd of Harling.


Can. Thou shall be our chief Captain amongst us.


Y. Stro. How your Captain? -- I Will make all split then, come my hearts. Exeunt.


Enter old Momford and sits down, to him Bess Momford. Bess. Father, dear
father succor me from shame,
Young Mr. Playnsey is entered our house,
Has shut the fore-door up, detains the keys,
And swears to kill me, if I do not yield
To his abhorrid and intemperate lust,
Help me good father over the Garden pale,
That I may call for succor on the Green.

Momf. No Daughter, sit thee down, sit down by me,
I call you Daughter, being your own desire,
If you be nobly born as you report,
Why should you to escape your own distress
Leave me poor man alone, and comfortless? Enter Y. Plain.

Bess. He comes!

Momf. Let him, sit down, sit down I say.

Bess. O how shall I escape reproach this day?

Momf. Peace, heaven may give my byzon'd eyes their light,
Stretching these crooked limbs strait and upright.

Y. Plain. Art thou fled hither? think thou his weak strength
Can free thee? come, why should this frosty ice
Clasp his cold arms about thy flowring spring?
Nay strive not Bayard, if ye do, by Heaven
I Will draw my Rapier, and with one thrust
Send thee to Charon as a Passenger:

Momf. Oh, I am feeble, pray ye hurt me nor,
If it be true, as I have heard it told
You married lately with Sir Robert's Daughter.

Y. Plain. Father, I hate her, and she scorneth me,
She pules, she sighs, she pines, she leaves her meat,
She flies by Bridal-bed, she bans, she raves
That ere her father forced her to be mine.

Bess. Good Sir comfort her.

Y. Plain. Comfott thou me, and I will comfort her.

Bess. I will not yield consent to such a sin,
I scorn to be a Princes Concubine.

Y. Plain. Will thou be then my wife?

Bess. No, I have sworn
To dye as pure a Maid as I was born.

Momf. How can she be your Wife?

Y. Stro. My wife will die.

Momf. Tarry that time.

Y. Plain. All lingering I defy.
Old man I Will make thee happy by thy grant;
Fair Maid thou shall be blessed in thy consent;
Deny me and I Will turn a Tereus,
Murder thy Father, then cut out thy tongue,
Deform thy beauty with the hand of wrath,
Lastly make spoil of thy Virginity,
Then leave thee wretched; where if now thou yield,
Against all reproach and wrong I Will be thy shield.

Bess. Help me good Father.

Y. Plain. Bid a sere dried Reed
Oppose his sapless strength against a green Oak.
See me, I am all youth, all love, all beauty,
Thou beauteous, lovely, youthful, it is thy duty
To love thy like, which duty if thou shun,
My hate thy beauteous youth shall overturn.

Momf. Good Sir stand but aside a little while;
I do remember since my self was young
The strong effects of lust; both she and I
Must yield to your desire.

Bess. I Will rather dye.

Momf. Nay say not so, listen to me my Child.

Y. Plain. I marry father if thou can persuade her
I Will make thee rich, and one day mary her.

Momf. Fear nothing Child, but use him gently,
And I will fit his hot lust presently.

Y. Plain. Come, what resolve you? either yield or dye.

Momf. Sir I commit my Daughter to your hands,
But I beseech you woo her with fair words,
She may without compulsion yield at last;
I Will in and we^p, for what can I do more?
You're rich and strong, and I am week and poor.

Y. Plain. Hold Father, take that Gold to comfort thee.

Momf. For money few men now shun infamy.

Bess. Oh me, do you forsake me!

Momf. I a while I do,
But Playnsey I Will anon be even with you. Ex. Momf.

Y. Plain. Now pretty Virgin how are you resolved?

Bess. I yield, yet though I yield I bend my knees,
And ere my spotless Virgin shape I leese Kneels.
Let me delate the many miseries --

Y. Plain. Come do not stain thy lilly cheeks with tears,
Nor fashion to thy self a form of dread,
Thou talk of loss of shape, a fair Lass bears
A shape as goodly in lost Maidenhead,
And far more lovely; then with smiling grace,
They boldly look upon a Lovers face,
Try once, then be assured thou wilt not refuse,
Had thou a hundred Maiden-heads to lose.

B^ss. Impious temptation! I defy thee Playnsey,
Setting my weak strength to resist thy lust;
Off with thy poisonous hands, help, help me Heaven.

Enter Momford like a Serving-man. Momf. But a poor earthly man guided by Heaven
Will keep thee from this deed, hateful as Hell;
Playnsey forbear as thou respects-thy life.

Y. Plain. Thou Autum-shaken leaf, thou bare Anatomy,
Thou withered Elder-pith, thou shape of death,
Sent by that blind exorcist to disturb
The pleasures that young Playnsey's heart affects,
Vanish, I know thou art but lither Air,
Thy hand fell lightly on me like thin smoke
That is disperc'st amongst the spreading clouds.

Momf. What make thou me a Ghost? come take thy weapons,
Thou shall soon try I am both flesh and bone. Fight, Playnsey is down.

Y. Plain: Hold Villain hold!

Momf. No Boy, I am a Man,
Uncle to that wronged Maid, the Blind-mans brother,
Who quaking sits within mourning his Child;
Ar't not ashamed? no thou art impudent,
Westford and you are flesh't in villainies;
Think on your plot about the banished Momford,
If you will repent it I will use you well;
Make means that Momford may be proved clear,
As you know best his harmless innocence,
And on a Soldiers word I do protest
Momford shall make your peace, and sue your pardon.

Y. Plain. What do thou mean? what is this thou talk to me?

Momf. I talk of Treason, rapine, slander, wrong;
Go get thee to Sir Robert, he is hard by,
I saw him walking up along the Green;
Stand not to talk, if thou accept my offer
I Will be a faithful servant in this business,
Preserve your credits, and confer with you;
If not, resolve on this, I Will to the King,
And there accuse you of this heinous wrong.

Y. Plain. Will thou stay here until I fetch Sir Robert?

Momf. I will. Go Maid, h^lp the old man to bed, Ex. Pl.
He Is shrowdly frighted by this violence.

Bess. Wh^t reverend man art thou? or Angel rather,
That speak these wonders of my banished father?

Momf. Go honorable M^iden, Momford's Heir,
A little help the old weak blinded man,
That weeping si^s within, trembling for dread
Lest Playns^y had thy chaste youth injured,
Help him, and then I Will tell thee many wonders.

Bess. To hear but one word of my fathers weal,
I Will undergo a^l work, all pain, all toil. Ex. Bess.

Momf. Poor Girl, how glad she is to hear the voice
Of Momford's honor? with what nimble ^peed
She hyes to help a shadow, there^s no beggar,
No poor blind man, that wants her comforting;
I wonder what she'ill think, when she shall find
Only a staff, a scrip, a gown, a bonnet,
And nere a body to make use of them? Enter Bess.
She comes, and is amazed a^ she comes.

Bess. Where is the blind man I beseech you Sir*
Alone I find his garments in his Chair,
Do not amaze me, tell me where he is?

Momf. He is within fair Maid.

Bess. Aged man,
I should give credit to your milk-white hairs;
Tell me, O tell me, why within a Chair
The case is left; are you a Conjuror,
Where is the blind man that I called my father?

Momf. I am no Conjuror, stay here but a while,
And I will bring the blind-man to thy fight,
Stay here, look on this clowdy Element,
And I Will produce him to your hearts content, Ex. Momf.

Bess. Alas where am I sure this Beggars Cell
Is a base Cottage to betray my honor;
I took him at the first to be a Comforter,
But now I see he is expert in shapes:
But why should I dispraise him? he did free
My body from vild Playnsey's luxury.
Methinks he has been all my Joy to me,
Why should there now arise this difference?

Enter Momford like a Beggar. Momf. Daughter where are you?

Bess. Pray where is your brother?

Momf. I have no Brother, no kin but one Daughter.

Bess. He Is an Inchanter sure, his ways I Will shun.

Momf. Daughter where are you? I conjure you Child
By the true honor of old Momford's name,
By Momford's faith, that was by fraud exiled,
You would not let his honor die in shame*

Bess. Help me ye powers, that give all Mortals power,
To escape this heavy and too troublous hour.
Spirit avoid me, or if thou be no spirit
Surely it is a damned Magicion.
Fly me, thou alter'st shapes, I do not love thee.

Momf. Thou do; see here the Gold thou sent'st thy father,
When I, even I my self brought these fair Arms
To wicked Westford's Gate; poor Child be not amazed,
I am thy Father Momford, by traiterous practice banished.

Bess. Ah me, that I have lived so long unknown,
I still had such a hope.

Mom. Fair Child forbear,
I know Sir Robert Westford, and this Playnsey,
Or one of them at least, will come forthwith;
Say you the blind man is in his bed sick,
And call me Uncle; come, be comforted,
Our sum of honor in despite of guile
Shall brightly shine in England's Hemisphere,
We have been clowded long, but mauger hate,
Truth will advance desert to honor's state. Exeunt.

Enter Sir Robert Westford, Y. Playnsey, Canbee, Hadland, and Tom Strowd. Y.
Plain. Dare you trust Strowd in this same stratagem?


Can. Tush fear him not, since his father has given him over, he has given
over all honesty and lives upon the spoil; come ye mad Rogues here is three of
us, and here is 30 l. each man take his share, and with his share his charge; We
are all for this money to cut the throat of the Blind-beggar, his Brother, and
his Daughter.


Y. Stro. How? cut their Throats? -- I Will see ye hanged first.


Can. Jack thou and I will keep quarter at this end of the Green, and Waylay
the old spruce Serving man, he shall be our share, and Tom Strowd thou shall ly
at this corner for the wench, for this way she comes unto the Conduit-head for
water, she falls to thee.


Had. And fall thou to her, and ye can but agree of price.


Y. Stro. Nay let me alone for falling upon the Wench I warrant ye.


Can. Mr. Playnsey and Sir Robert do you keep about the old Man's Cottage, and
when you see his Daughter gone knock out his Brains with his Crutches; thus
have you heard your several charges; every man to his Court of Guard, and keep
fair quarter.


Sir Rob. Plotted with good discretion; Son Playnsey
I like it well, that you and I go walk
Near to this Cottage, for it much concerns us
To see this Beggar dead, upon whose breath
Proud slander si^s to blemish our good names,
And blast our honest reputations;
Shake hands and part in hope when next we meet, Ex. Sir Rob. and Can. and Had.
Their deaths shall lay all danger at our feet.

Y. Plain. Pray heaven it may; a word good Mr. Strowd.
Although you had in charge to kill the Maid,
I do entreat you use some special care
In your attempt, and in the stead of death
Tell her I love her dearly, and that love
Enforced this shift: for though the Wench be poor,
Yet in the glass of my affection
She seems right wealthy, fair and virtuous;
Commend me to her Strowd, and since my wife
Has given her latest farewell to the world, Ready Swash.
Tell her I do intend to mary her;
Mean time convey her to my farm at Rederiff,
And there is 10 Angels more for thy reward:
But be as trusty to me, as the thought
That sleeps within my bosom, so adue,
I trust the richest of my hopes with you. Ex. Plain.

Y. Stro. Do so, and I do not deceive you let me dye like a Dog on a
Pitch-fork; -- This is excellent, hire me to steal away the Wench I am in love
withal my self, this comes just in the nick in faith, I desire no more, but to
meet her. Whose yonder Swash? how now? whither away so fast Swash ha? Enter
Swash.


Swash. What my young Master? why I am going to the three Colts to saddle your
Fathers Gelding; we both ride into Norfolk this afternoon.


Y. Stro. -- Better and better still, thou come as fit for the purpose as a
Pudding for a Friars mouth, so do thou: I do but stay here to talk 3 or 4
cold words in hugger-mugger with the Blind-beggars Daughter, and I Will ride down
into Norfolk with you; and as God would have it, yonder comes the Mother.


Enter Bess Momford. Bess. Oh what content attends this Country life?
Here proud Ambition's emulating eye
Plays not the find-fault; our thatch'd-shed is built
Without the reach of Treasons bloody Gripe.

Swash. To her Master; it is an old saying in our Country, Long Standers are but
short Doers, Wenches cannot away with them.


Y. Stro. Mass Swash I think thou say true; I Will to her, How now pretty
Mother, whither are you going so fast?


Bess. Alas good Sir I am a poor man's Child,
My Father is the Beggar of this Green,
That ives upon good peoples charities,
I am agoing with this earthen Pitcher
To fetch clean water from the Conduit-head;
We eat the herbs that grow on the Springs brinck,
And count the Conduit-water wholesome drink.

Y. Stro. Nay you drink water you are no hostess for me:

Swash. You are no hostess for me, fie, fie, I am ashamed of you.


Y. Stro. Why? what should I say to her?

Swash. What? you should have praised her little foot,
Her hansome shoe belonging to it:
And then a come to her round knee,
And then Master to her belly.

Y. Stro. I marry Swash, and I were there once I Would do well enough: but pray
thee let me alone, I Will talk to her well enough I warrant thee; this is to the
purpose, VVench you know young Mr. Playnsey?


Bess. I do remember I have seen the man,
He loves my Father well; why names he Playnsey?
I hope he'ill do me no more injury?

Swash. Fie, fie, what have you to do with Playnsey? come to your own business;
as thus you must come upon her, Oh Lady bright, pity this Knight, that in this
plight is thus tormented, if you be willing, to be billing, I dare hold a
shilling you shall be contented.


Y. Stro. I marry Swash, this is excellent in faith; could not thou a taught
me this? but all is one Swash, I Will win her without these Ballads I warrant you;
Well wench, to come to the point, there is young Playnsey loves you well, and
he has hired me to watch for thee here, and carry thee to his Farm house at
Rederiff, where if he find thee, soon at night thou art like to lose thy
Maidenhead before morning.


Bess. Unhappy wretch, that Playnsey sure was born
To make our House and Family a scorn.

Swash. She begins to yield Master, give her not over, to her again Master.


Y. Stro. I warrant thee Swash now I am in let me alone. Well VVench, this is
the plain English on it, and thou love me no worse than I love thee, instead
of carrying thee to his Farm-house at Rederiff, I Will ha thee to the Church and
mary thee, and of a poor Beggar, Daughter, I Will make thee a wealthy Norfolk
Yeomans wife; what say thou to it now sen ye?


Bess. Alas my Father is a poor Blind-man,
And I am all the comfort that he has,
I am his eyes to see, his feet to go,
And hands to dress him, I being gone he is left
Eyeless, handless, footless, comfortless,
Yet if you love me as you make a show,
Come to our Cottage: though our State be poor,
We live content and that is a good man's store,

Y. Stro. Lay thee Swash, I must go into her Cot-house she says; Well VVench,
and thou wot not go with me, thou art never like to see thy Father, nor his
Shed more, for Mr. Playnsey and Sir Robert Westford has hired a couple of false
Knaves to cut thy fathers throat, therefore and thou can love me, say, and
hold, go thou with Swash and raise the Town, and I Will go back and save thy
Father's life I warrant thee.


Bess. I Will go with ye, love ye, I Will do any thing so thou will save my aged
Fathers life.


Y. Stro. -- Let me be hanged like a Dog and I do not; Swash go you with her
and raise the Town, I Will but cross over the Summer lay by the Broom field over
goodman Dawson's Close and be with you presently; -- whither art thou going?
thou do not hear me.


Swash. Yes, yes, I must go by the Broom-field, I hear you Sir, come VVench
come.


Y. Stro. Nay since you are so forward hold, take you the Pitcher, I Will go with
her my self, -- I wod not for any thing but I had turned Cony-catcher, here had
been a black day with some body else; come VVench, dry thine eyes, never cry
for the matter, the worst is past, thou shall see the case altered I warrant
thee, I Will save thy Father's life fear not.


Swash. Oh, oh, oh, I carry the Pitcher I there let it lie, I Will after them.
Exeunt.


Enter Momford driving in Canbee and Hadland. Can. -- I am hurt.


Had. Hold, and thou come of the noble blood of the Trojans hold.


Momf. Nay do not think you desperate Cast-aways,
Though time has hid me with the rynd of Age,
And hung his snowy livery of my face,
Though I am old, that I want strength to fight;
If you be men whose fortune's has been shak'd
By the rough arm of want, or Servitors
That have consumed your living in the wars,
I have a poor blind Brother on this Green,
Who by the Alms of charitable men,
And with the wealth I brought him out of France,
Has store of Gold, and had you shown your wants
To him or me --

Can. I scorn to make my state known to e're a prowling Beggar on ye all, we
know your Brother has Gold, and it is that we come for.


Had And we'll have it or dye for it.


Both. Murder, help, help. They fight.


Enter Sir Robert Westford, and young Playnsey. Sir Rob. What murder? where is
the Murderers?

Y. Plain. Sir Robert draw, it is my friend that is wronged.

Momf. Nay I beseech your worship hold your hands,
Though I be old, I am sufficient
To answer two far better men than these.

Can. Sir Robert, as you are a Knight lay hold upon one, who was have con^ent
to rob us in the Kings high way, but would likewise ho^ taken away our lives.


Y. Plain. Upon my Soul you do the fellow wrong.

Sir Rob. Nay, nay Son Playnsey, never take his part;
How should the B^ggar here of Bednall-Green
Get so much wealth, as the world thinks he has,
And keep his minion at the Beggars house,
But by such practices? yield up thy weapons,
Or set upon him all, I Will answer it.

Momf. Well, well, Sir Robert Westford, time has been
The Blind-man and his Daughter did deserve
More friendship at your hands: and Mr. Playnsey
I could repeat, but let old matters rest. They beat Momf.

Sir Rob. What do ye brave us? set upon the slave.


Y. Plain. What is he gone? how did he escape our hands?


Can. -- I know not, I had a full blow at his left leg, I had thought I had cut
it off. Enter Tom Strowd.


Tom Stro. Ho, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho, Canbee! I Pray Heaven keep the old man from
killing ere I come, and I care not.


Can. What Tom Strowd? well met, where is the Wench? is she safe?


Y. Stro. Safe ^ Do thou make a question on it? I warrant she is safe enough
for telling any more tales, I am no Bunglar ab^ut a VVench: but where is the
Blind-beggar and his Brother?


Can. The Beggar is a Devil, and his Brother his familiar; here is old Madge has
bit off 100 and 50 Legs and Arms in her days, and yet she could not so much as
draw blood of him, he is Musket-proof, or he had dyed for it else.


Y Plain. She is at Rederiff then, there I sent Strowd;
We Will end this task, and then I Will visit her:
But here is the Cottage, pull the Villain out, They knock*
He Is both a Fellon, and a Murderer.

Enter Momford like a Beggar. Momf. What means this outrage at a Blind man's
door?
Are Englishmen become so inhumane
That Beggars cannot escape their violence?

Sir Rob. Leave this dissembling, and send forth thy Brother,
For he has robbed these honest Gentlemen,
We followed him, and saw him enter here,
Therefore dispatch, and either send him out,
Or else we will lock the Doors upon you both,
And fire the rotten Cottage 'ore your ears.

Momf. Indeed I must confess I have a Brother,
An Ancient Serving-man, maym'd in the wars
Under Lord Momfords colors.

Y. Plain For naming Momford run him through the heart.

T. Stro. -- Touch him he that dares; as God sa' me I Will be his Priest that
touches but a hair of him?


Can. Strowd, I hope you do but jest with us.


T. Stro. Jest me no jests shall never be said, Tom Strowd of Harling stood by
and saw a Blind-man murdered, therefore courage old Father, set thy back to
mine, and cover thy head with thy Crutches; I Will take up my lodging on Gods
dear ground, er'e thou shall take any harm, for the pretty Mother thy Daughters
sake.


Enter old Playnsey, old Strowd, and Captain VVestford, Sill, Clark. Old Plain.
How now? what quarrels have we here?
Sir Robert Westford, it ill be^eems a man of your estate
To have a hand in such unlawful riots;
Are you there Son? have you so soon forgo
The timeless death of your deceased wife,
To follow such unseemly practices?

Old. Stro. Ha, sest me so? do take the blind man's part?
Thou Art a Strowd right, a Norfolk Yeoman right,
To take part with the weakest; Well done my Boy,
I do forgive all matters that are past,
For joy to see thy heart so well inclined.

T. Stro. Why I thank you Father, and I forgive you too withal my heart.


Sir Rob. Sir Walter Playnsey you are mis-inform'd,
We come with no intent of injury,
These Gentlemen were Strangers unto us,
We found sore hurt and robbed by a false Thief,
And Brother to this Beggar, whom we saw
Enter into his house.

Old Plain. What say thou Father?
Know thou of such a practice by thy Brother?
Or to thy knowledge is he in the house?

Momf. Sir Walter Playnsey, that I take's your name,
So help me Heaven, as I am ignorant
From any such lewd practice of my Brothers:
But since your worships here, I Will call him forth
In person, to make answer for himself,
Desiring you to pardon me a while,
For what with sorrow and with cares down pressed,
My sightless eyes had need to take their rest. Exit.

Old Pain. Send us thy Brother and be thou discharged:^
But Mr. Strowd, what can you say to this?

T. Stro. Faith Sir, it is a common saying in our Country, You shall know by the
Market-folks how the Market goes; and none knows their Knavery better than I
that was one of their company. Father do you see those two fellows there?


Old Stro. I son, what of them?


T. Stro. Why these were they that cosen'd me of my satin suit, and with the
false Repreeve that had like to a hanged you, and robbed Swash of the 100 l. too.


Old Stro. What these Gentlemen?


T. Stro. Gentlemen! as God mend me, a couple of as arrant Cony-catchers as
e're pist*


Old Stro. Is It possible Son?


T. Stro. Push, you are a Fool Father, you know nothing, I have paid for my
learning; and falling into their company in hope to get some satisfaction for
all my losses; it was my chance to be by when Sir Robert Westford and Mr.
Playnsey there gave them 30 l. to murder the Blind-beggar, his Brother, and his
Daughter: but by my means the Beggar and his Daughter are alive, but what is
become of his Brother I know not; this, as I am Tom Strowd of Harling, and a
true-hearted Norfolk-man, I Will justify against one, two, three, or the whole
pack of 'em, when, where, or how they dare, for the very ears and guts of 'em
all.


Can. Strowd, you are a Nit, a Slave, and a Pessant.


T. Stro. How a Fessant? -- I scorn to soil my hands about thee: but and I had
thee alone, with a tough Ashen Gibbet in my hand, and I did not dry bang ye all
one after another, I Would eat no meat but Mustard; sen ye?


Old Plain. Strowd have a care you speak naught but truth.


Old Stro. And speak the truth Boy as thou art my Son.


T. Stro. And I do not I Will give you leave to call me Cut, sen ye?


Old Plain. Sir Robert Westford this concerns you near,
And Son it touches your reputation too?

Y. Plain. But it shall touch his life that Authors it;
Strowd you are a villain, and for old grudge Enter Momford like a Serving man.
Betwixt your Father and Sir Robert Westford,
Forged this surmise, as both these Gentlemen
Are ready on their oaths to justify.

Can. No more, here comes the Slave that robbed us.

T. Stro. Robbed ye! of what I trow? of your good conditions?

Had. This is he that hack't my Thygh like a leg of Beef.

T. Stro. Thou lie like a Thief.

Old Plain. Are you the Blind-mans Brother?

Momf. Sir, I am.

Old Plain. You are accused here of a Robbery,
What can you answer in your own defense?

Momf Sir Walter Playnsey, and good Captain Westford,
First as I look for comfort from above,
I never nursed a thought to that intent:
Indeed these Gentlemen, Strangers to me,
Did draw upon me, and as I suppose,
By the provokement of Sir Robert Westford
And Mr. Playnsey, sought to take my life.

Old Plain. What reason should they have for that?

Momf. Your worship shall perceive; Sir Robert Westford
Wounded by Strowd, and desperate of life,
Confessed unto my Brother the Blind-man,
That by the means of him and Mr. Playnsey
They counterfeited these Letters that wrought
Momford's banishment; Besides all this,
My Sword shall justify, that first by bribes,
And then by forcive means he would have forced
My Niece unto his lust. All this is true,
And this I^ll justify upon their bodies in the open lists.

Y. Plain. Thou dare not for thy life?

Momf. Playnsey I dare,
And would my Sovereign Liege give me but leave,
This Sun should see thy Treasons punished.

Sir Rob. Were thou a Gentlemen as thou art a Slave,
I Would make thee eat thy words or dig thy Grave.

T. Stro. Eat a Pudding's end, the old man shall take no wrong Sir.

Cap. West. Sir Robert Westford, your Gentility
Shall not tread down the truth; long has my Soul
Thirsted for this occasion: for when I saw
You falsify your faith, wedding your Daughter
Unto Playnsey's Son, that was the Troth-plight Husband to Bess Momford,
I thought as much as this poor man now speaks,
And will in single combat prove as much;
He of you both that thinks himself most touched,
Take up my Gage.

Y. Plain. Westford I Will answer thee.

Can. And I Will maintain Sir Robert Westford's cause.

Momf. Take up my Glove then.

Sir Rob. Give me it, I Will maintain it my self.

Had. This shall justify that Strowd
And that base Villain were agreed to murder us.

T. Stro. I is the wind ei' that door, I Will take up thy Glove: but -- and I
bang not thy Coxcomb, hang me la.


Old Plain. I hope this challenged combat will decide the truth.

Cap. West. Which Heaven assisting, and the King well pleased,
Shall be performed this present afternoon;
I Will to the King, and never raise my Knee from the cold earth,
Till I obtain, by privilege of f^ight
A black revenge for worthy Momford's fall. Ex. Cap. West.

Y. Plain. And thither Westford will I follow thee,
Or born upon the wings of my just cause,
Arive before thee. Exit Y. Plain.

Sir Rob. Each man take his way,
St. George and Conquest guide our swords this day. Exeunt, manent

Old Stro. Courage my Boy, if thou prevail in fight, the Strowds.
I Will swear Lord Momford has not had his right.

T. Stro. Courage sa' ye? as God mend me, I respect them no more than I do a
flap with a Fox tail, and I do not beat'em as ye should cuyle a side of dried
Stock Fish, I Will be bound to go to Rome with a Mortar a my head.


Old Stro. Why well said my Son, let us away.


T. Stro. But hark ye Father; you know I am to go amongst the Court-nowles,
you must needs let me have good store of money with me, let not the name of
STROWDS be disgraced, I pray Father.


Old Stro. Tush Boy, fear not, I Will carry 500 l. with me, and that shall fly
ere thou want.


T. Stro. -- And I Will bring some of my own too, or it shall go hard. Exeunt.
Music. Cornets.


ACT V.
Sound Trumpets. Enter King Harry the 6 th. Gloucester, Cardinal, Lady Ellanor,
and Lords attending. King. Uncle of Gloucester, and Lord Cardinal,
Since all our Court has put on smooth-faced mirth,
Only to grace your Honored Marriage,
Embrace each other in the arms of Love,
And as you join your hands, so let your hearts
Knit your affections in a friendly league.

Glost. Gloucester speaks first, yet speaks he not in fear,
As begging Bewford's friendship, but in love
Both to his King, and to fair Englands good;
Yet ere I set my hand to this new League,
Bewford, if any undisgested wrong
Lies in thy swelling bosom, freely speak't,
And Gloucester will as freely answer it:
But if thy Conscience be as clear from soil
Of hateful treachery, as Glosters is,
Give me thy hand, and with thy hand thy heart,
Which Gloucester will as charily regard,
As the best blood that is chamber'd in his breast*

Card. On that Condition Bewford gives his hand,
And from his heart wipes off all forepass'd wrongs.

King. Witness this League Lords, and now Ant Ellanor
Heaven give you joy, both of our Uncles love,
And of this new born peace. Now Uncle Gloucester I desire to know
The cause of Momford's treason, and his fall,
Which he has lately undergone in France?

Glost. His fall my Liege was great, but his offense
Little or none; for by Velleires his means,
Who as a Prisoner now attends your Grace,
I have found out since Momford's banishment,
That all his accusations were false.

King. Yet Guynes in which Lord Momford had a charge,
Was yielded up by Treason.

Glost. True my Liege,
I have known Momford in my Brothers days,
Put in great trust; yet never heard
That he was found disloyal in his charge.

King. And Uncle Gloucester, we have always had
His honored age in reverent esteem.
We hear he had a Daughter, where lives she?

Glost. Thrust out of all by one old Westford's means.

King. Methinks it is hard the Child should not enjoy
The riches that the painful Father left.
Good Uncle Gloucester let it be your care,
To see old Momferd's Daughter have her right. Enter Old Pl.
But what grave man is that?

Glost. Sir Walter Playnsey,
The bosom friend unto exiled Momford.

King. Sir Walter Playnsey, by our Uncles leave
I pray stand up, methinks those reverent hairs
Deserve a softer pillar than the ground;
I pray stand up, and boldly speak your mind.

Old Plain. My Sovereign Liege, your Subject comes in love
To let you know, that diverse Gentlemen,
On what presumption they themselves best know,
Have underta'en to prove in open field,
That the Lord Momford who late fell in France,
Was treacherously accused.

Glost. Why? 'twas your Son
That first p^oduc'd his accusation.

Old Plain. Your Grace will give me leave to clear my self,
For I was neither privy to that fact,
Nor speak in his excuse; he is my Son,
But if in malice he has wronged Lord Momford,
Let him have Justice, and the Law take place.

King. Are they resolved to try it out in fight?

Old Plain. They are my Liege, and only wait your pleasure.

King. Even what our Uncle Gloucester will set down
We do assent to.

Glost. Herald fetch them in,
See them at all points armed.

Enter with Drum Sir Robert West. young Plain. Canbee and Hadland. At the other
Door old Momf. Cap. West. Tom Srrowd, and old Strowd, and Bess. Glost. Who is
the Plaintiff?

Momf. I my gracious Lord.

Glost. Reach him the Book, and thereon take thine Oath,
That thou art neither drawn by bribes nor hate
To undertake this Comba^. -- It Is enough.
Speak truth, and naught but truth, so help thee Heaven.

Momf. Pleases your Grace, this in a word is all,
Sir Robert Westford and Mr. Playnsey there confessed
To a Blind-man, in hearing of that Maid,
That Playnsey and himself did counterfeit
The Letters that wrought Momfords banishment.

Glost. Give him the Book, now answer on thine oath
In thy defense.

Sir Rob. Then first my Liege it is false,
Next he is a Felon, and by force of arms
Offered to rob these honest Gentlemen
In the high way.

T. Stro. -- Then I can hold my tongue no longer, it is an arrant lie my Lord,
that is the plain English on it: for I was by when Sir Robert Westford and Mr.
Playnsey gave them 30 l. to murder the Blind-beggar, his Brother, and his
Daughter, and if I had not been, they had been all killed too, so had they.


King. Fellows what do you say to this?


^an. My Liege I cannot talk, grant me the Combat, and my Sword shall prove
Iam a Soldier, and my tongue nere knew the art of scolding.


Glost. Give him his will, alarm to the fight.


King. Stay, for me thinks there is some difference,
Both in their years, and their conditions,
And for we highly prize our Subject lives,
Good Uncle Gloucester let them choose their weapons*
It may be a means to save their lives.

Glost. And hearten others in pursuit of knowledge.
Herald bring forth all sorts of weapons,
It Is the King's pleasure that every man
Make choice of those weapons he has practiced most.
Sir Robert choose your weapon first.

Sir Rob. Thanks to my Liege: the common fight of these same serving men is
sword and dagger, therefore I Will choose the sword and target they are unskilful
in; I take the sword and target for my defense.


Momf. And my Liege, because Sir Rob. Westford shall not think I Will take any
advantage, I Will answer him at his own weapons.


Kings. It Is well; on to the next.


Y. Plain. Come Captain Westford, you have been in Spain,
And well are practiced in the desperate fight of single Rapier?

Cap. West. Playnsey I am pleased.

King. So are not we, the single Rapier is too desperate,
And therefore choose some other weapon,
Or we will have no Combat fought this day.

Y. Plain. Backsword then and't please your Grace.


King. So, we are pleased.


Can. Sirrah Jack, methinks Sword and Bucklet's a safe fight.


Had. I Will choose no other, and I had a thousand lives.


Tom. Stro. I do, take your bars of Iron, and your Barn-doors, and I do not
bang 'em together like a couple of Cur-dogs, I Will nere be seen again.


King. Sirrah thou fellow.


T. Stro. Anon.


King. What weapons will thou use?


T. Stro. Weapon me no weapons, I can play at wasters as well as another man;
but all is one for that, give me but an ashen Gibbet in my hand, and I do not
dry-bang them both, I Will be bound to eat hay with a horse, so will I.


King. An ashen-gibbet? what do thou mean by that?


T. Stro. What do I mean by it quoth ye? -- I think you be sib to one of the
London-Cockneys, that ask't, whether Hay-cocks were better meat broyl'd or
roasted, an ashen Plant, a good Cudgel, what should I ca it?


King. If there be such a weapon in the Court, let one go fetch it him.


T. Stro. Nay I Will make a page of my own age, and fet it my self. Swash bring
out my blessed Beggar there.

Enter Swash with an ashen-Gibbet:
Swash. Yes Sir, here is your blessed Beggar Master.


T. Stro. Look ye Sirs, this is en it, and I do not cudgell'em both with it,
I Will give you leave to stick me up at the Court-gate for a Pissing-post, so
will I.


King. But two to one is odds, rather fight single.


T. Stro. No, they know me well enough, I have cudgelled them both before now.


King. Well, if thou dare oppose them both, have thy desire.


King. Alarm to the flight.


Alarm. They fight, and Momford 's side wins. King. Fellow, do hear?


T. Stro. Anon?


King. What should I call thy Country, and thy name?


T. Stro. Sen ye?


Glost. The King would know thy Country, and thy name?


T. Stro. My name? I am not ashamed of my name, I am one Tom Strowd of Harling,
I Will play a gole at Camp-ball, or wrassel a fall a the hip, or the hin turn
with ere a Courtnoll of ye all, for 20 quarters of Male, and march me height
for height.


King. A lusty fellow trust --

We have too few such Subjects in our Land; where is the Blind-beggar and his
brother?


T. Stro. Where the Blind-beggar is I know not, but here is the pretty Mother
his Daughter; and thou be a kind spring all speak a good word for me to my
father that I may have her, and as God mend me and ere thou come into Norfolk
I Will give thee as good a Dish of Dumplings as e're thou layd'st thy lips too,
so will I, sen ye?


Old Stro. How? mary with a Beggar? mix the blood of Strowds with a tatter?
either cast her off, or I will cast off thee.


T Stro. Now we shall have a coyl with ye; and ye were not my father I Would knock
your pate, so would I.


Old Stro. How Is that? do and thou dare.


Momf. Strowd, though she be Daughter to a poor Bind-man that long has lived
on good men's charity, do not disdain her. Be her birth as it may, the portion
I Will give with her, deserves as good a Husband as your Son.


T. Stro. Bate me an ace of that quoth. Bolton, yet I would I had her as naked as
my nayl.


Old Stro. As good a portion as my Son? proud Beggar,
It Is not your Clapdish and your patched Gown can do it.

Momf. However poor, good Sir digrace me not.

Old Stro. It Is my disgrace to be out-worded by a Beggar?
But and thou be'st such a well-monied man
As thou do brag, dare drop old Angels with me?
And he that out-drops other, take up all?

Momf. That were ambition in a beggar Sir.

Cap. West. 'Twere credit for thee, and thou could out-drop him.

Momf. So please my Liege to give me leave, I Will venture
That small Estate I have.

King. We are content,
Amongst cares it is fit to mix some meriment.

Momf. Come hither Daughter; are you ready Master?

T. Stro. -- To him Father, never lose a hog for a halfp'worth of tar; come old
fellow bring thy white Bears to the stake, and thy yellow gingle boys to the
Bull-ring; -- Father wherefore do you hang an arse so? they are all our own and
there were a comb seck full on 'em.


Momf. I thus begin.

Old Stro. And thus I answer thee.

Momf. Thus I reply.

Old Stro. And thus do I join issue.

T. Stro. I had rather join issue with the Mother a great deal, had I.

Old Stro. Some more money Swash.

Swash. Here Master, we'll outdrop the Beggar, we'll make Gill sweat else.


Old Stro. Have thou any money about thee Tom?


T. Stro. An hundred angels, and a better penny, Pigs of your own Sow Father.


Momf. There Is 20 more.


Old. Stro. More yet? the Rascal will disgrace me; more yet?


T. Stro. And yet too, -- you think beggars have no lice father.


Glost. Why how now Strowd, begins it to be low water with ye?


Old Stro. I am even run a ground, have dropped till I can drop no more.


T. Stro. You must even burn of the spit, for I have no more oil of Angels to
bast you father.


Old Stro. Nor thou Swash?


Swash. Only a broken three farthings that I kept in a corner to buy my wench
pins with.


Momf. All this is mine then.


Old. Stro. I not deny't, it is true
That was our match, and so good Gold adue.

T. Stro. -- I have brought my hogs to a fair Market, must I lose the Mother
and all my Gold too?


Old Stro. Yes says, all is gone Tom.


T. Stro. This is your foolery Father, and I had don't, we should have had such
a scolding with you.


Momf. Then Strowd where thou before did scorn my Daughter,
Now I do scorn thy Son; not moved through hate,
For Strowd I hold thee a most honest man,
For right thou did unto Lord Momford's Daughter,
And since thy Son did save my poor Girls life,
And rescued mine with hazard of his own,
This Gold which by our bargain is all mine
I freely give him toward his marriage.

King. Trust me a gallant Beggar.

T. Stro. Beggar? -- He might be a King for his bounty, for he gives away all.


Swash. I know the reason of that, he can beg more, and Begging be so good an
occupation would I had been bound Apprentice to it seven years ago, there was
somewhat to be got by it then, it is out of request now.


T. Stro. This is old excellent, here carry't to my Chamber Swash, and lock the
door fast I charge thee.


Swash. And I meet no false Knaves by the way; Canbee and Hadland here had been
a simple boon for you now. Exit.


Momf. And now my Lord, since Momford is proved clear,
And his Accusers have confessed their guilt,
I freely give my Daughter to the man,
Who for the love of Momford (loved of all)
Will take her to his wife.

Cap. West For Momford's sake, whose honored deeds
Are writ up with the blood of the proud French,
Were she the meanest and deformed'st Creature
That treads upon the bosom of the earth,
Westford would take, love, live and marry her.

Momf. Nay then I see that virtue shall find friends;
Take her good Captain, and for Momford's sake
Use the Maid kindly.

T. Stro. Why farewell 40 pence, I ha fisht fair and caught a frog; well
Mother, though I am no Gentleman, I co'd ha brought you to more Land than a
score on 'em, thou should have had 40 as fair milch kine to your payl, as a
man should need to see in a Summers day, 4 yoke of Oxen, and three team of
Cart-horses; besides; thou should have had thine ambling nag, and thy
side-saddle to ha rid on, a little easier than to be jaunted up and down London
Streets in a lethern wheel-barrow; and then of the other side there is the old
woman my Mother, she would have made thee a vild-good Huswife could have taught
thee how to a made butter, and flap-jacks, fritters, pancakes, I and the rarest
fools, all the Ladies in the Land know not how to turn their hands to 'em: But
I Will take my leave on thee with an oh good night Land lady the Moon is up.


Momford discovers himself. Cap. W. Gl. Card. Momford!


King. Bold Momford living, and proved Loyal,
Thy Love like a rich Jewel we will wear
Next to our hear^; upon those Gentlemen
That have maintained and proved faithful,
We do confer a 100 Crowns a piece.

Momf. Your Grace in this does Momford double right;
And noble Countrymen while we do live,
Your Love and Valor must not be forgotten.

Old Plain. How is it you will we deal with your Accusers?

King. That we refer unto our Uncle Gloucester,
Who better knows those passages than we.

Glost. Since it is your will my Liege, then thus't must be,
For you Y. Playnsey and Sir Robert Westford
Receive a legal Trial; Canbee and Hadland,
We for a President will have you sent
Out of the Land to dateless banishment.

Can. Thanks your good Honor, and we'll do you more good by cheating your
enemies abroad, than ever we did hurt by cosening honest subjects at home.


King. Good Uncle Gloucester, we commend your care
For throwing out such rank weeds forth our Land,
Whose weakened body has been sick too long,
Wanting those helps that should have made it strong.
Amongst whom Lord Momford you are not the least,
(Pray Heaven you be the last) whom this wild beast,
Ambitious treason sought to ruinate:
But in requital of your more than wrong
We make you here our Lord High-Treasurer;
And Captain Westford, make you General
Of all our forces mustered up against France.
Thus our disjointed Kingdom being made strong,
Each Member seated in his proper seat*
Let Us in to praise his name, whose powerful hand
Protects the safety of our peaceful Land,

JOHN DAY.

FINIS

