THE SAINTS ANCHOR-HOLD, IN ALL Storms and Tempests.

Preached in Sundry SERMONS.

And Published for the Support and Comfort of Gods People, in all times of
Trial.

By John Davenport, B. D. sometime Minister of Stephens Coleman-street; London;
and now Pastor of the Church of Christ in New Haven, in New England*

Heb. 6. 18. Lay hold upon the Hope set before us.

19. Which hope we have, as an Anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast, and
which enters into that within the vail.

20. Whither the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus, made an High Priest
for ever, after the Order of Melchisedech.

LONDON. Printed by W. L. for Geo. Hurlock, and are to be sold at his Shop at
Magnus Church corner, in Thames Street, 1661.

The PREFACE.
To the Christian Reader.
AS the whole Creation has groaned ever since its original subjection unto
Vanity, earnestly expecting the manifestation of the Sons of God: so more
especially in these latter days the traveling pains thereof have increased,
as presages of its approaching Deliverance. The vanity of it has always been
great, but the Experimental Discoveries thereof never more than now. In this
case it is the wisdom of a Christian to secure to himself an Interest in a
Portion as sufficient and permanent as Jehovah that never changes: A greater
than which cannot be procured: This may, and a less will never satisfy: By
this men live indeed, and in this is the Life of a Christian. That the Lord's
Portion are his People, adds nothing to him that is alsufficient to himself;
but, that the Lord is their Portion, is all in all to them. And this is the
foundation of their Hope and Comfort. For here we are all embarked in a
Vessel, sometimes caught with Winds, sometimes covered with Waves, and should
soon be at our wits end, but for this sure and steadfast ancre which enters
into that within the Vail.

Now that Portion, and this Hope grounded on it, are the Churches, and a
Christians support in the midst of their lamentations: For the Church at this
time was driven from Jerusalem, Zion, Temple, Temple-Ordinances, and native
Place of residence, greatly afflicted and tossed with Tempests. This is only
remaining, that she has God for her portion, and Hope for her Anchor, never to
be taken from her. And both these are the Subject of the ensuing Discourse,
seasonable and suitable at all times, especially in these last moments of the
last Days, in which God is shaking Heaven, Earth, and Sea, in order to the
appearance of the Desire of all Nations.

As touching the Author of this Treatise (in whose heart the Text was written
by the finger of God, before the Discourse was penned by his own hand) His
Piety, Learning, Gravity, Experience, Judgment, do not more commend him to all
that know him, than this Work of his may commend it self to them that read it:
And the consideration of the two hindges on which the Text turns, Valde sunt
cognatae Sorores, Fides and Spes. Dr. Par. in Heb. 6.
Faith, and Hope, their near cognation, concomitance, usefulness, necessity,
power, comfort, the first exciting the second, the one commensurate with the
other, is enough to procure from thee the expense of a little time, to see and
weigh what is here spoken of these most neces^ary Helps to Eternal Happiness,
which will never relinquish the Believer, till they have resigned him up to the
glorious Vision and fruition of the Objects believed in, and hoped for, there
le^^ing the Soul to the everlasting exercise of never failing Love to God and
the Saints in Glory.

That this holy Faith and Hope in God, together with fervent Love to God, and
one to another, may daily flourish, and be confirmed in the hearts and lives of
all the Saints on earth, till they enter upon their purchased Possession (which
is the end of their Faith and Hope, to the praise of the Glory of God) in
Glory, is the hearty desire and Prayer of

Thy Fellow-Brethren in this Faith and Hope, William Hook. Joseph Caryl.

Errata.
Page 19. Lines 12, and 13. read Causally. p. 66. l. ult. r. him. p. 76. l. 26.
r. resolved. p. 126. l. 13. r. quietness. p. 130. l. ult. r. grounds. p. 134.
l. 24. r. There. p. 145. l. 18. r. brought. p. 151. l. 16. r. notice. p. 164.
l. 25. r. lust. p. 204. l. 4. thereof.

The Saints ANCHOR-HOLD.
Lam. 3. 24. The Lord is my portion, says my soul, therefore will I hope in
him.
THis Book is, according to the judgment of a godly learned Mr. Broughton.
Writer, an Abridgment of all Jeremies Sermons, from the 13th. year of Josias,
unto the 4th. of Joakim; and that Book which God commanded Jeremy to write, and
to cause Baruch to read it publicly, upon the day of a Fast, kept in the ninth
month of the fifth year of Iehojakim, See the story at large, in Jer. 36.
which afterward Iehudi read unto the King, sitting by a fire, in his winter
house, who was so far from repenting, that, when he had read three or four
leaves of it, he cut it with a penknife, and cast it into the fire, till all
was consumed, and rejected the intercession of some of his Princes, that he
would not burn it, and he commanded to lay hold upon Jeremy and Baruch: But God
hid them. Whereupon the Lord commanded Jeremy to write the Book again, with
Additions, which the same Writer thinks, was this Chapter, which consists of
a threefold Alphabet, in the Hebrew. The Prophet, having discharged his
offices, in laboring to convince the Jews of their sins, and to bring them to
repentance, when he found not the success he desired, he falls to lamenting and
weeping, for their pride and obstinacy in sin, and teaches them also how to
lament their own misery in Captivity; and, because there was among them a
basket of good figs, he teaches them how to exercise faith and hope in the
midst of their sorrows. Among other passages, my Text has a tendency
thereunto, which admits a double consideration: 1. As a part of a Lamentation.
2. As an expression of a free spirit. Accordingly I shall handle it, first, as
a part of a Lamentation. In verse 17, 18. you may see their deep dejection and
despondency; I said my strength and my hope is perished from the Lord. In verse.
19, 20, 21. you may see how, from the good fruit of their affliction, in
humbling them, they gather hope. In verse. 22, 23. they can see mercy in God
toward them in their Affliction. In my Text, they are as men that find rest,
after their dangers and tossings at Sea, by casting Anchor upon firm ground,
in a safe Harbor. The Doctrinal note I collect from the words so considered,
is this:

Doct. Though it may be the case of true believers to be greatly dejected for a
time, yet, even then, God does support their spirits, and quicken their faith
and hope in him. To clear this point, we must prove two things. 1. That it may
be the case of true believers to be greatly dejected, for a time. This may be
abundantly confirmed, both by the Scriptures in the examples of Job, David,
Hezekiah, Asaph, Heman, and of Christ himself, in the Garden, and on the
Cross, and by reasons of sundry sorts.

R. 1. From God himself, sometimes withholding the light of his countenance
from true believers. Then it is with them, as it is with the earth, which would
be covered with darkness, coldness, and deadness, if the light and influence
of the Sun were withdrawn from it. He is the God of all comfort, 2 Cor. 1. 3.
without him no true comfort can be had. Sometimes he creates darkness in the
Soul; then it is filled with fear and amazement, and disquietment. And thus he
does, for holy and good ends. 1. To conform believers to Christ, as members to
their head, Romans 8. 29. 2. To inform them, where their life is hid, viz. with
Christ, in God, Col. 3. 3. and that Christ, the last Adam, is made a quickening
Spirit. 1 Cor. 15. 45. that thereby he may quicken his People in God, who
quickens the dead, when themselves had not only a sentence of death, in their
bodies, as Paul had, 2. Cor. 1. 9. but also a sense of death in their souls,
as Heman had, Psalm 88. 5. 3. To reform them. Partly, for correction of their
unthankfulness for former comforts received from him, and for their not
improveing them unto the ends for which he gave them. As a father, when he
sees his child does but play with the candle which he afforded him to work by,
takes it from him, and leave him in the dark. Partly, for prevention of
spiritual pride. 2 Cor. 12. 7. Of spiritual wantonness, and self confidence,
Psalm. 30. 6, 7. Of carnal security, Cant. 5. 6. and sundry other distempers.

R. 2. From Satan, that envious one, who, as in the beginning he sought to cast
Adam out of Paradise, and to bereave him of his happiness in communion with
God, so now, finding believers in the Kingdom of grace, which consists in
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit, when he cannot deprive
them of their righteousness, will endeavor to disturb their peace, and damp
their joy, knowing, that when they perform duties uncomfortably, they do them
weakly and but by halves. To this end: 1. He strives to hide from them those
promises that might comfort them, when they have most need and use of them, and
he sometimes prevails herein. Heb. 12. 5. 2. He suggests any word that may
terrefie them, and presents to their memory and thoughts former sins, to amaze
them. 3. He presents all thimgs unto them in false glasses; the comforts of
God, in a diminishing glass, that God may seem to them less merciful, less
gracious then he is, and the promises of God less free, less general then
they are; that all the consolations of God may seem small things to them, Job
15. 11. but he presents to them their sins in a multiplying glass, that they
may seem more, and greater then they are; their sins, as impardonable; their
miseries, as intolerable, incurable; their state, as desperate. 4. He uses
his instruments to deal with them, as the Philistims did with Izhack, whose
wells they stopped up, to make unprofitable to them those wells of Salvation,
from whence believers might draw waters of consolation. Thus he used Saul to
banish David from the ordinances, and wicked men to insult and reproach him;
saying, Where is now thy God? Psalm. 42. 3. So others, to twit them with their
Religion, when they are in distress, saying, where are now your prayers, your
hearing, reading, meditating, conferring, your conscientious and exact walking,
your confidence in God? You live more dejectedly then others, and are as
fearful, as others, to die. Thus they thrust, as it were, swords and daggers
into their bones, to kill their comforts, as David there complained, verse 10.

R. 3. From themselves: 1. Sin presses down their spirits, and hinders their
cheerful progress in a Christian course, as weight does runners in a race,
Heb. 12. 1. Sorrow in the heart brings it down, especially, when guilt of sin
is added to it. When the shoulder is out of joint, it cannot bear its own pain,
much less other burdens. So it is with the soul, a wounded spirit who can
bear? Prove. 18. 14. 2. Their spirit sometimes suffers from their bodies, by
sympathy; as in melancholy, which so darkens their imagination, that every
thing seems dark to them, and so sowres their spirits, that every thing seems
bitter to them, and so fills them with fears and suspicions, that every thing
affrights them. 3. Sometimes passion so prevails in them, that the higher
faculties of the soul are subjected to the affections, which so bemist the
understanding, that it cannot judge of things according to right reason: The
conscience becomes suspensive, and wavering, and the memory, like a leaking
vessel, lets the grounds of comfort run out, and be forgotten: 4. Sometimes
spiritual gifts of grace are not exercised, but as the body grows listless
when some dull humor seizes upon it; so in the soul, when faith is oppressed
by unbelief, hope with fears, they do not put forth themselves to wrestle with
God, and stir up themselves to take hold on him, but yield unto every
temptation and discouragement. Thus you see, that it may be the case of
believers to be greatly dejected, for a time.

The second thing to be cleared, is; That though it be thus with true
believers, for a time; yet then God will do two things for them.

1. He will secretly support them, so that they may say as Paul did, in 2 Cor.
4. 8, 9. We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we are perplexed,
but not in despair, persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed.
God dealt with the basket of good figs, in Captivity, as Christ did with
Peter, who first let him see his own weakness, in the water, then quickened him
to cry unto him for help, and then stretched forth his hand and upheld him.
Mat. 14. 30, 31. So the Lord left the Church so far that they complained my
hope is perished from the Lord, yet speedily raised them up in sight of his
mercy to trust and hope in him. In like manner, he supports believers.

R. 1. From Gods unchangeablenesse in his love, and unweariednesse in doing
them good. Isa. 64. 5. and 40. 27, 28, 29, 31.

R. 2. From Gods faithfulness in his covenant and promises. Isa. 54. 8, 9.
Psalm. 37. 24. Heb. 13. 5. 2. He will quicken their faith, to look unto himself
for relief and comfort, in such times, 2 Chronicles. 20. 12. Psalm. 12^1. 1* 2. Jon.
2. 2, 4. for these reasons:

R. 1. From the efficacy of the spirit of faith in them. As the needle in the
Compass, being touched with the Lodestone, though it may be moved and shaken
this way and that, for a time, yet rests not till it point to the North; so
the soul, being touched with the spirit of faith, though it may be forced, by
Temptation, from its bent, for a time, yet it has no rest, till it stand
Godward. They may by Temptations be as sheep driven from mountain to
mountain, and forget their resting place. Jer. 50. 6. But the spirit of, faith
in them will cause them to return unto God, and to say, as David, Psalm. 116. 7.
Return unto thy rest, O my soul. Believers are like Noah's Dove, that finding no
rest for the soles of its feet, in the deluge, returned unto the Arc. Other
men will like the Raven, be soon satisfied with other things.

R. 2. From the suitable operation of Gods spirit in them unto Gods end in
afflicting them. Gods end, in afflicting his children, is to drive them from
all other things unto himself. For he corrects them for their good, Heb. 12.
10. And its good for them to draw near to God, Psalm. 73. 28. When afflictions
work us thereunto, it is from the spirits sanctifying operation in them. For,
1. afflictions cannot work thus of themselves, but rather set men further off
from God by coffeehouse with his providence, because it crosses their
carnal affections. And, 2. the soul of it self is apt to misgivings, in such
cases, and to have hard thoughts of God. And 3. Satan takes such occasions to
breed and increase a distance and division between the soul and God. Therefore
it must be from the sanctifying operation of Gods spirit in them and with them,
when they work this good. Romans 8. 28.

Use 1. For Instruction. 1. Here we may see the differenc between believers and
others, in their dejected condition. 1. Believers have the spirit of faith in
them, whereby the soul, though it be over-borne by passion and Temptation, for
a time, yet it will work it self into freedom again, as oil will be uppermost.
The spirit, as a spring, will be cleansing it self more and more, from that
mudde that is in it. But the heart of unbelievers is like a standing poole,
where that which is cast into it rests. They are like the Sea, where trouble
and unquietness are in their proper place, Isa. 57. 20. True rest and peace
are for ever separated from sin in any soul, till the breach between God and
the soul be made up by faith in Christ. 2. Believers have an interest in God,
and he in them, through Jesus Christ. Hence they are kept, as in a Garrison, by
his mighty power, through faith, unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 5. through the
intercession of Christ, Luke 22. 3. by the spirit of Christ dwelling with them,
and who shall be in them and abide with them for ever: So that they shall not
be left comfortless. Joh. 14. 16, 17, 18. Hereupon Paul triumphed, in Romans 8.
35, etc. Where he puts the question about persons, and answers about things,
neither shall separate them from the love, which either Christ bears to them,
or they to Christ. Sin cannot separate them from Christ's love to them, because
he has more than conquered it, by his own power. Tribulation cannot separate
believers from the love they bear to Christ, because they shall more then
conquer it, by the power of Christ. It is not our hold of God and Christ, but
Gods and Christ's hold of us that keeps us to him. The root bears us up, not we
the root. Romans 11. 18. This Asaph acknowledged unto God, when his feet were
almost gone, his steps had well nigh slipped; saying, Nevertheless I am
continually with thee, thou have holden me by my right hand, Psalm. 73. 2, 23.
But unbelievers are without Christ, and without God in the World. Ephesians. 2. 12.
Therefore when their creature comforts fail them, they are as a ship tossed in
the Sea without a Pylot, and without an Anchor, which soon is bulged upon
Rocks, or falls upon quicksands, having no God to guide or support them.

2. Hence we way learn how to carry our selves toward afflicted dejected
Christians. Judge mercifully and wisely of poor weaklings. Psalm. 41. 1. men are
apt, through want of wisdom and love, to mis-apprehend the causes of their
dejectedness. It is the less to be wondered at, that an heathen King
mis-interpreted the dejected countenance of Nehemiah, Neh. 2. 2. seeing godly
and wise Eli, mis-censured Hannah, as a distempered woman, when she was in
bitterness of spirit, 1 Samuel 1. 14, 15. and Jobs friends mis-judged him for
his afflictions, and men generally mis-construed Christ's sufferings, Isa. 53.
4, 5. They are not always the best that are merriest, nor they the merriest in
heart that are so in the face. Nor are they always of the weakest faith, or
spirit, who are sometimes dejected, as we see Ioshuah was; in Josh. 7.
Therefore be not rash, or harsh in censuring the dejected; but rather work
with God for their support and comfort. Two things are required hereunto;
knowledge, and goodness, Romans 15. 14. The first will make you able, the second
willing to be helpful to such. Labor to abound in both, 1. In knowledge both
of the word, Col. 3. 16, and of the temper of the party, that you may speak to
them suitably, and seasonably, Isa. 56. 4. 2. In goodness, to pity them, to
pray for them, and to set them in joint. Gal. 6. 1.

2. As for your selves, beware that you mis-judge not your own estate toward
God, under such dejections, but know that, if ever you had any clear testimony
of Gods love to you, in Jesus Christ, the love of God toward you in Christ is
unchangeable, it is an everlasting love, Jer. 31. 3. Therefore hold the
confidence and rejoicing of your hope firm unto the end, Heb. 3. 6. and say,
with the Church, in Mich. 7. 8. When I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a
light unto me.

Use 2. For Admonition. Take heed of placing your comfort too much in the
creature, which being subject to change, and inconstancy, will be apt to breed
disquietment. Vexation inseparably follows vanity, when vanity is not
apprehended to be where it is. In what degree any are lifted up in expectation
of satisfying good from creatures, or overjoyed with the comforts of them, in
that degree they are dejected in the dis-appointment of their hope, and
distressed in the loss of creature-contentments. Inordinacy of affections
imbitters all such afflictions. Hence arise those bitter complaints; I had
settled my contentment and hope in such a friend, or relation, but now they are
gone, and with them all my joy is gone. Woe is me, I am undone. Therefore Agur
prayed wisely, in Prove. 30. 8. Remove far from me vanity and lies. i. e. vain
and false apprehensions, whereby the affections are too strongly fixed upon
things that are vain, and lying promising that contentment, which they cannot
yield; confidence in vanities makes them Idols, and makes the heart vain, like
the things it relyes upon, Psalm. 115. 8. They shall find continual disquietment
who walk in a vain shadow, Psalm. 39. 6. The best remedy against this is, by
dwelling in the secret of the most High, to abide under the shadow of the
Almighty. Psalm. 91. 1, 2.

Lam. 3. 24. The Lord is my portion, etc: The words having been considerd, as
they lie in the context, as a part of a Lamentation; we proceed to handle them
as in my Text they hold forth the expression of a free spirit, that is, of a
spirit set at liberty from those sad perplexities, wherein it had been
entangled, and held under deep dejection, and despondency. The Text, thus
considered, contains the Anchor-Hold of a tossed afflicted spirit: wherein
three particulars are to be noted. 1. An Assertion, The Lord is my portion. 2.
A Proof of it, says my soul. 3. A Consectary, or inference from the premises;
Therefore will I hope in him. I shall speak only of the first, at this time:
The Lord is my portion. (...), a part, or portion, is not to be taken here in
the Mathematical or common use of that word, as denoting a part of a whole, as
it is frequently in Scripture, when that part of estate, which Parents give
their children, is called their portion, Genesis 31. 14. and that part of the
spoil, which is the Soldiers share, is called their portion, Genesis 14. 24. and
that dimensum of food, which is allowed unto any, is called their portion,
Deuteronomy. 18. 8. and the alms given to the poor is called their portion, Eccl. 11.
2. For God is not parted, or divided, and distributed among his people, so as
one has one part of him, another another part of God; but every one has whole
God wholly; as the whole Sun shines to every one, in which respect God is
called a Sun, Psalm. 84. 11. Therefore God is said to be his peoples portion,
not in a comparative, but in an absolute sense, God himself is theirs, a
suitable and all sufficient goods to them. They have, not only gifts and all
good things from him, but himself also to be their God, in the Covenant of
Grace, through Jesus Christ. He is their portion though not formally, yet in
two senses: 1. Objectively, as he is their ultimate end, and chief good. 2.
Caually, as he gives, together with himself, in Christ, all good to them. The
Doctrinal note shall be this:

Doct. All true believers have such a blessed interest in God, as renders him
their portion. It is the voice of faith, to say, The Lord is my portion: Others
may say, The Lord is an all-sufficient portion: But only Believers truly say,
The Lord is my portion. Because only faith interests a man in God, and
appropriates him to him. This faith does by a double act. 1. By a direct act,
whereby true believers see in God those properties, which are required in a
satisfying portion. They are three: 1. All Sufficiency. 2. Perpetuity. 3.
Safety in placing his happiness and full contentment there. All these the
Scripture declare to be in God alone. 1. Sufficiency, Genesis 17. 1. Psalm. 84. 11.
2. Perpetuity. It tells us, that he is without shadow of change, Jam. 1. 17.
and that he will never fail, nor forsake his people, Heb. 13. 5. 3. Safety, in
placing all our contentment and happiness in him alone, Psalm 144. 15. 2. By a
reflexed act of faith, a believer sees his peculiar right and interest in God,
as his portion. Hence David said, The Lord is the portion of mine Inheritance,
and of my Cup, Psalm. 16. 5. and, Thou art my portion O Lord, Ps. 119. 57. and
Asaph, Whom have I in heaven but thee, and there is none upon earth that I
desire, besides thee: And again, God is the strength of my heart, and my
portion for ever, Psalm. 73. 25, 26. To clear this, two things must be added: 1.
The grounds, whereupon the Saints have claimed this interest in God, as their
portion. 2. The use they have made of God, under this notion and relation. For
the first, Their title unto God, as their portion, is founded: 1. In Gods
voluntary and free donation of himself to them, in the Covenant of Grace,
whereby both they become his portion. Deuteronomy. 32. 9. The Lords portion is his
people, and he becomes their portion; The portion of Jacob is the former of all
things: The Lord of Hosts is his Name, Jer. 10. 16. An act so done, by one,
that is, Suijuris, is a strong binding act, as Peter argued in the case of
Ananias, Acts 5. 4. It was free and deliberate, and therefore exceedingly
dishonorable to break it. God stands much upon his honor in this, Psalm. 89.
34. My Covenant will I not break. And Psalm. 111. 5. He will ever be mindful of
his Covenant. 2. This donation is confirmed sundry ways: 1. By Oath, Psalm. 89.
35. Once have I sworn by my holiness. Again, in Psalm. 105. 9. He remembered his
Oath unto Izhack, The Covenant of Grace, whereby God gives himself to be his
peoples God and portion, Micah says, God has sworn unto our Fathers from the
days of old, Micah. 7. ult. Which also Zachary declares to be performed when
he sent Christ, Luke 1. 73. 2. By Seals: As Circumcision is called a seal of
the righteousness, which is by faith, Romans 4. 11. because it externally sealed
the Covenant, whereby God becomes the God of his people, Genesis 17. 7, 11. So of
is, with both the Sacraments of the New Testament, by parity of reason. 3. By
marriage unto Christ, Hos. 2. 19, 20. Agreements upon marriage, are firm,
because upon rational consideration. A consideration inserted, adds weight to a
Deed and Covenant. The consideration is, that we should be joined unto the Lord
Jesus, and then, all the promises of God, in him, are Yea and Amen to us, in
him, 2 Cor. 1. 20. And Christ's God and Father is our God and portion, Joh. 20.
17. 4. By a recovery, after judgment, if I may so speak, when, after they are
fallen into Gods displeasure, and returned to him, with repentance for and from
their sins, and renewing their faith in Christ, they have renewed their taking
hold of the Covenant and have pleaded it with God, and their plea has been
accepted. Thus did Moses for Israel, after they had sinned, in the matter of
the Golden Calf, Exodus 32. 10, 13. and the Israelites for themselves Isa. 63.
10, 16, 17, 19. The second thing to be shown is, what use the Saints have made
of their right and interest in God, as their portion: They have made use of him
thus, both for themselves, and others. 1. For themselves: 1. To glory in God;
This God is our God. Psalm. 48. ult. 2. To delight themselves in the Lord, in
confidence of his goodness toward them, in the midst of Temptatious, Psalm.
37. 4. Whence follows a rolling themselves upon him in all their ways and
difficulties, verse 5. and a patient waiting upon God in delays, with hope of a
good issue, verse 7. 2. For others, whether they be friends or enemies, or of a
middle sort. 1. Friends, A poor believer can pleasure his richest friends out
of this his portion, his God. This is a Prophets and a righteous man's reward,
Mat. 10. 41. Thus Paul abundantly recompensed all his friends and well-willers
out of his portion, Phil. 4. 19. My God shall supply all your need, according
to his riches in glory by Jesus Christ. 2. Enemies: In Jesus Christ all
believers have sufficient help from God against all sorts of enemies, and can,
in an holy manner challenge them to do their worst, and triumph over them
before the battle, upon this assurance, My God will help me; therefore I shall
not be confounded, Isa. 50. 7, 8, 9. Other men are strong in men, in arms, in
shipping, in fortifications, etc. a believer has all in God, he is strong in
the Lord, and in the power of his might, Ephesians. 6. 10. 3. A middle sort; Laban
fared the better for Jacob, Potiphar, Pharaoh, and all Egypt, for Joseph: The
Sodomites for Lot: The Mariners, and all that were in the Ship, for Paul, Acts
27, 24* The World for the Saints, for the holy seed are (...) the propps that
shore up the places where they live, that the wrath of God does not overflow,
and over-whelm them. Isa. 6. 13.

Use 1. For Instruction: Hence learn to behold and admire the excellency, and
happiness of every true believer in his portion. The All-sufficient God is
their portion. His greatness, power, mercy, grace, goodness, faithfulness,
forgiveness, justice, all are for them; and, that they may possess him, as
their portion, he gives them his son, to be theirs, through faith, and with him
all things, 1 Cor. 3, 21, 22, 23. Thus, The brother of low degree is exalted,
Iam. 1. 9. He has the best portion that God can give, and upon the best
assurance that God can make, Heb. 6. 18. Hence David calls such the excellent
ones, Ps. 16. 3. He had conversed with rich men, great men, wise men, after the
flesh; yet he called none of them, the excellent ones. He well knew that the
righteous is more excellent than his neighbor, Prove. 12. 26.

Use 2. For Exhortation: 1 Generally, to all; to make out for this portion. To
this end, wait upon God in his Ordinances with thirsting souls: It will not be
in vain, Isa. 5. 5. 1, 2, 3. Prove. 8. 34, 35. For thereby, either it shall be
cleared unto you that the Lord is your portion, or the Lord will become your
portion. And he is so unto them, in whom faith is wrought in Christ by the
Spirit, in the Ministry of the Gospel. They that can say to Christ, with
Thomas, My Lord and my God, Ioh. 20. 28. may also say to God, with David, in
Ps. 142. 5. O Lord, thou art my refuge and my portion in the land of the
living. This is the privilege of those, who answer Gods call, by joining to
him in Covenant. So says the Lord, I entered into Covenant with thee, and thou
becamest mine, Ezekiel. 16. 8. And again, in Hos. 2. 23. I will say unto them
which were not my people, Thou art my people, and they shall say, Thou art my
God.

To persuade you hereunto: Consider, 1. Every man desires to have best, for his
portion in other things, in houses, lands, food, apparel cattle. But this
portion is simply absolutely the best. This Christ teaches, in Luke 16. 12.
This he calls our own, those, another man's. When a man views houses, or
surveys land, or tells money for another man, his heart is not so affected with
them, as when he views, surveys, tells for himself. Propriety draws and engages
the heart to that wherein a man has a property, though it be but mean and
worthless, and carries the heart after it; much more, when propriety and a
most worthy property meet together; as David found this to be, Psalm. 4. 6, 7.
2. The misery of those that have not this portion Ephesians. 2. 12. Little, or
rather, no cause have such to bless themselves in their worldly portions and
possessions, as worldly men are apt to do, Psalm. 49. 18. For they have their
portion only in this life, which is but a vapor: But believers are happy in
their portion, in God, both in, and after this life: For they shall behold his
face in righteousness, and shall be satisfied when they awake with his
likeness, Psalm. 17, 14, 15. Attend therefore, in time, to the counsel of
Christ, in Rev. 3. 17, 18.

2. Specially, To believers; To beha^e themselves as it becomes those, who have
God for their portion. That you may so do, 1. Professedly avouch God to be your
portion, Deuteronomy. 26. 17. This is done two ways, 1. When you set your love upon
him, with such an esteem of him, as is meet for such a portion. Where a man's
treasure is, there will his heart be also, Matthew. 6. 21. Let God be your
treasure, when you look upon all things in the world, single out those that you
account most amiable, desirable; then ascend, in your thoughts to heaven, and
contemplate all the excellencies there, the rivers of pleasure, the blessed
fellowship of Saints in glory; each of them as dear to another, as if all
relations of husbands, and wives, of parents, and children, and friends, were
in every one of them; yet let God and Christ be above them all. So did Asaph,
Psalm. 73. 25. So will every one that knows Gods name aright. Psalm. 91. 14.
Because he has set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him: I will set
him on high, because he has known my name. 2. When you are content to part
with all, to enjoy him alone. A maid will say of a man whom she loves, I will
have him, though I beg my bread with him. A man will lay out his estate, in
suit, for his own. 3. When you live in the world with affections free from
worldly engagements, as Pilgrims, whose hearts are at home, when their feet are
travailing abroad. 2. Possess and use, and enjoy God, as your portion. Thus,
1. Live upon God, as the Israelites in Canaan did upon their lots and
inheritances: Live upon Gods favor, in Christ, Psalm. 30. 5. And upon his
promises, Isa. 38. 16. Live by the faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2. 20.
fetching all your comfort thence. 2. Walk with God, Genesis 5. 24. and work in
God, Joh. 3. 21. marry in the Lord, live unto the Lord, exalting his ends, and
rules, in all things. 3. Cast all your care upon him, 1 Pet. 5. 7. you may try
men in smaller things, before you trust them with greater; especially, if they
be strangers. But it is dishonorable to God, if you do not, at the first,
trust him with all that you are, and have. When men's hearts sink in every
danger, it is from a defect, either of faith, or in faith. See how Christ
reproved this in Peter, Mat. 14. 30, 31. David's first recourse was to God, and
what ever means he used, he looked up to him, Psalm. 5. 3. 4. Live contentedly,
when you enjoy God in his Ordinances, without covetousness, Heb. 13. 5. and
with out discontentednesse because of outward afflictions, or wants. David as
he was the sweet singer of Israel, so he expressed a sweet frame of spirit, in
2 Samuel 23. 5. He has made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all
things and sure: this is all my salvation, and all my desire, etc. 5. Make up
all your happiness in God. A worldly man, when he views his houses, lands,
cattle, barns filled with corn, etc. his heart is cheared, like that rich fool
in Luke 12. 19. But see the vanity of that joy, in the answer of God to him,
ver. 20. But a true believer has true cause of rejoicing in his portion,
having such an estate in God, and Christ, and the Covenant, that he shall want
nothing, Psalm. 23. 1. his downlyings and up-risings, himself and his children
are well provided; for what though his estate lies not in lands, or moneys, or
plenty of corn and cattle? he has that which is better, for his portion. A
believer is a Citizen of heaven; there is his inheritance; things on earth are
added to him, only pro viatico, while he is travailing thitherward.

Lam. 3. 24. Says my Soul. Having spoken of the Assertion, the Lord is my
portion; we are now, with Christ's assistance, to speak to the proof of it,
says my Soul. The Church proves that the Lord is their portion, by their
souls saying it. Where note, 1. The Principle of this speech, their soul, which
shows that there is a mental as well as a vocal speaking: The fool says in
his heart, there is no God, Psalm. 14. 1. when his tongue speaks and
professes the contrary, Tit. 1. 16. 2. That, by an act of the soul reflexed
upon it self, they knew what their soul said. So David, in Psalm. 16. 2. O my
soul, thou have said unto Jehovah, thou art my Lord. 3. That the use they make
hereof is, to prove two things: 1. That the Lord is their portion. 2. That they
know that the Lord is their portion. 1. To prove that the Lord is their
portion, they argue thus: What the Soul says is a man's portion, that is his
portion. But my soul says, the Lord is my portion. Therefore the Lord is my
portion. 2. To prove that they know that the Lord is their portion, they argue
thus. What a man knows that his soul says is his portion, that he knows to
be his portion. But I know that my soul says, the Lord is my portion;
therefore I know that the Lord is my portion. In like manner, David putting up
this pettion, Preserve me, O God, presses it by this motive, for in thee do I
trust, and he proves that he trusts in God, by an Apostrophe, a turning of
his speech, to his soul, O my soul, thou have said unto the Lord, thou art my
God. And this he confirms from the testimony of his own soul and conscience,
Psalm. 16. 1, 2. and thence inferred; The Lord is the portion of mine
inheritance, and of my Cup, ver. 5. q. d. The Lord is my land and revenue, and
food, he supplies all, and is himself above all, better then all, unto me.

D. When a believer knows that his soul says, The Lord is his portion, he
has from thence a clear proof that the Lord is his portion. For the proving of
this point, two things must be declared.

1. That a true believer may know that his soul says, The Lord is his portion.
David knew it, when he said, O God! my soul trusts in thee, Psalm. 17. 1. He
knew that he trusted in God, as one trusts in his treasure; and in Psalm. 84.
2. My heart and my flesh cries out for the living God. As, when an house is on
fire, and all is in danger to be lost, the owner cries out, oh, let me have my
casket of jewels, my box of evidences, they are my treasure, the principal of
my estate, I am not undone, unless I lose them. And then, as his desire is
ardent, so his expectation is earnest for them, looking when they shall be
delivered to him. Says he, have you them? have you found them? As the Church
said to the daughters of Jerusalem, concerning her beloved, Cant. 5. 8. and 3.
3. and, as any hope appears, he is the more encouraged to wait, yet still
watching and observing if he can get the sight of them. So David, My soul
waits for the Lord, more then they that watch for the morning: I say, more
than they that watch for the morning, Psalm. 130. 6. And, as David knew thus
that the Lord was his portion; so may other believers, as Paul argues, in a
like case, from David's example, 2 Cor. 4. 13. From parity of reason, seeing we
have the same helps as he had.

R. 1. From the proper excellency, or excellent property of the reasonable
soul, that it can reflect, and discern its own internal acts; much more the
renewed soul. 1 Ioh. 2. 3.

R. 2. From the office and power of conscience, to testify what is within a
man. This the Apostle notes in natural men, Romans 2. 15. and in believers, 1
Ioh. 3. 20* 21.

R. 3. From the spirit of God joining with the renewed spirits of believers,
Romans 8. 16. and 9. 1, 2. My conscience bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost.
And the Holy Spirit brings into the soul a self-evidencing light, whereby he
does manifest unto the renewed soul, that it is himself, and no delusion, who
testifies to us our interest in God. Hereby we know that we dwell in him, and
he in us, because he has given us of his Spirit, 1 Ioh. 4. 13. For the Spirit
is given for this end, that we might know the things that are freely given to
us of God, 1 Cor. 2. 12.

2. That a believer, from his souls saying, the Lord is his portion, has a
good proof that the Lord is his portion. So the Church, in Psalm. 33. 20. from
knowledge that their soul waits for the Lord, proves, that he is their help
and their shield, and from thence they infer, in ver. 21. Our heart shall
rejoice in him, because we have trusted in his holy name: So David proved his
interest in God, by his souls thirsting for him. Psalm, 63. 1. and, by his souls
following hard after him, ver. 8. The same holds in other believers also.

R. 1. Because the souls saying, the Lord is my portion, is the answering of
the soul unto God, calling his Elect effectually, by the ministry of the
Gospel, out of the World and sin and self, unto himself, in Jesus Christ. There
is an outward calling, by the ministry of man only, of which the Prophet
speaks, in Hos. 11. 7. Though they called them to the most High, yet none would
exalt him. This is ineffectual, unto spiritual conversion, of it self, without
the quickening efficacies of the spirit. But when that is added, and works
with the ministry of man (which of it self only sounds in the ear) then God
speaks to the heart, Hos. 2. 14. Thereby the father draws the Elect unto
his Son, Ioh. 6. 44, 45. Then they hear the voice of the Son of God, which they
that hear, shall live, Ioh. 5. 25. The soul being thus quickened, answers the
call of God with the obedience of faith, as David found, in Psalm. 27. 8. Thou
said, seek ye my face; my heart answered, thy face Jehovah, I do seek. This
answer is the voice of the whole soul unto God. The understanding, being
illightned and fully convinced, closes with God, in Christ, as the first
Truth, and the will chooses him as the chiefest good; the affections rest
satisfied with him alone, and the whole soul places all its happiness in its
enjoyment of him, and conformity to him. Hope waits for him, desire longs
after him, and joy delights in him above all things. The Lord calls the
whole soul to come unto him, that it may find true rest, in voluntarily
subjecting it self under his yoke. Mat. 11. 28, 29. and the whole soul, in all
its faculties and affections, answers, as the Church did, in Ier. 3. 22. Lo
we come unto thee; for thou art the Lord our God: With renouncing all other
refuges, as they did, in ver. 23. according to that promise, in Hos. 2. 23. I
will say, thou art my people, and they shall say, thou art my God.

R. 2. Because the souls saying, the Lord is my portion, argues unseigned love
of God, in Christ. For all the affections depend on love. What a man loves, as
his portion, he desires to possess and enjoy; and any impediment thereof
stirs up his anger proportionately, to his esteem and love of it. As we see
with what eagerness and earnestness, men endeavor to remove any thing that
hinders their credits, or estates, etc. Now, if any love God above the world,
above themselves, they will be more jealous of Gods honor then their own, and
against that which tends to Gods dishonor, more then against what crosses
their own worldly honor. Hence will arise hatred against sin, because God
hates it, both in our selves, Psalm. 97. 10. and in others, Rev. 2. 6. Anger is
against particulars, but hatred is general. Anger seeks revenge with
moderation, in proportion to the wrong done us, but hatred seeks the
destruction of its object. Anger is placable, but hatred is implacable. And
according to the degree of men's love to any thing, will be their fear of being
deprived of it, and separated from it, and of all causes and signs of
alienation from it.

R. 3. Because the souls saying, The Lord is my portion, imports the highest
actings of the soul upon God. When Job said, the things that my soul refused to
touch, Job 6. 7. he showed the greatest detestation of them; and when he said,
my soul chooses death rather than life, Job 7. 15, he showed a most vehement
desire. And when the Lord said, I will plant them in this land assuredly, with
my whole heart, and with my whole soul. Ier. 32. 41. he showed the firmness of
his purpose. So, when the soul says, The Lord is my portion, it argues the
most full and firm cleaving of a believer unto God, with purpose of heart, as
Barnabas exhorted them to do, in Acts 11. 23. Else men do not return to him,
nor cleave to him, as to the most High, Hos. 7. 16. unless they turn to him
with all their heart, Joel 2. 12. and love him with all their heart, Deuteronomy. 30.
6. For, it is by such a love that faith works, which is a believing with all
the heart, Acts 8. 37. and produces obedience from the heart, Romans 6. 17.
which is done when all the faculties and affections of the soul do open
themselves, and stand open, to give entertainment unto God, in Christ, as the
King of glory, Psalm. 24. 7. When the Keys of the whole house, and every room
in it are delivered up for the use and service of a King, he is entertained
like a King. Inferior guests are content, one with one room, another with
another, and sometimes two have but one room, yea, one bed for them both. But
the King must have all. So it is in this case, when the God of glory appeared
unto Abraham, and called him, Abraham obeyed him, without reservation, Acts 7.
2, 3. So must we, yea, so will all, whose souls say, the Lord is their portion.

Use 1. For instruction, in four particulars. 1. Hence learn how a man may know
when afflictions are sanctified and blessed unto him, i. e. when the eye of the
soul is, by them, turned, 1. Upward, to look unto God, for an interest in him,
as their portion. 2. Inward, to reflect upon the inward actings of the soul,
that they may know their interest in God, as their portion. Indeed afflictions
of themselves work the contrary, to estrange us from God, and from our selves,
and Satan labors to foment and increase a separation of the soul from God, and
a division, and distraction of the soul within it self. Therefore it is by an
overruling power and sanctifying efficacy of Gods spirit, when they cause us
to return unto the Lord, Hos. 6. 1. and to our selves, Luke 15. 17, 18. It is a
sure rule of discerning ones self to be in the state of grace, when he finds
that every condition brings him nearer to God, and every sanctifying gift of
grace is quickened to its proper function, to turn the faculty and affection of
the soul, in which it is planted, unto God, Romans 8. 28, 29. God is a pure act,
always acting, and every one, the nearer he comes to God, the more gracious
frame of spirit he has, and the more spiritual affections, and suitable
actings of them, sweetly issuing from thence.

2. Learn hence a profitable use of spiritual soliloquies, which are a man's
speaking within himself, to himself, about spiritual things. David prescribes
communing with a man's own heart, to further his repentance, Psalm. 4. 4. and
himself made use of it, to quicken his faith, Psalm. 42. 5. So the Church in my
Text, in times of affliction, being driven out of their creature comforts, and
expectations, they communed, and parlied with their own souls, to clear unto
themselves their interest in God, as their portion, and to excite their faith
and hope in him unto exercise.

3. Learn hence, not to rest in outward profession, in words, that the Lord is
your portion. Many hypocrites say so, whose hearts cleave to some thing else,
as their portion; some to their sinful wills, and ways. They draw near unto
God with their lips, but their hearts are removed far from him. Such were those
in Hos. 8. 23. Israel will cry unto me, my God, we know thee, when, Israel has
cast off the thing that is good; even God himself, in whom and from whom is all
good, and the good word of God, and the rules thereof; though they thus
departed from him, yet, in their distress, they were ready to claim an
interest in him. Others, to their worldly objects. They lay up treasures for
themselves on the earth, and there their hearts are, Mat. 6. 19, 21. Their
belly is their God, and portion, that mind earthly things, Phil. 3. 19. These
steal away their hearts from God, even while they are hearing the Word, Ezekiel.
33. 31. All, to one idol, or other, like those of whom the Prophet speaks, in
Isa. 57. 6. Among the smooth stones of streams is thy portion; they, they are
thy lot. A woeful portion have all such, for at present, their portion is cursed
in the earth, Job. 24. 18. and, for the future, God will rain upon them,
snares, fire, and brimstone, and an horrible tempest; this shall be the portion
of their Cup, Psalm. 11. 6. Again, 2. Rest not in some occasional speeches of
some one affection alone. Balaam had a transient desire that his latter end
might be like theirs, who had the Lord for their portion, Numb. 23. 10. This is
but the saying of one assertion, for a short time. Nothing is to be accounted
as said by the soul, unless all the faculties and affections of the soul
consent in it, acting suitably, Psalm. 103. 1.

4. Learn hence, to make out for an interest in God, as your portion. This is
to be had only by and in Jesus Christ, Joh. 20. 17. For it pleased the Father,
that in Christ, God incarnate, all fullness should dwell, Col. 1. 19. and, that
out of his fullness we all should receive, and grace for grace, Joh. 1. 16. So
that Christ is the immediate fountain of all spiritual blessings unto the
Elect, Ephesians. 1. 3. Gods next end, in this dispensation, is, that all men should
honor the Son, as they honor the Father, Joh. 5. 23. which they do, when they
come to the Father by the Son, Joh. 14. 6. and therefore come to the Son first,
seeking to have an interest in him, and then in the Father, by union and
communion with him, through faith in the Son of God, 1 John 1. 3. Let those who
are out of Christ, see their misery, in that state, and the remedy thereof in
Christ, and accordingly value him above all things, Rev. 3. 17, 18. Mat. 13.
45. Let those that have him, seek more full communion with him, prizing that
above all things, Phil. 3. 8, 9. and answerably prize the word, as David, who
said unto God, the law of thy mouth is better unto me then thousands of Gold
and Silver, Psalm. 119. 72. See that the word be mixed with faith in your
hearts, to receive Christ thereby, as God offers him unto you in his Word,
Joh. 1. 12. Show it to be so, really, and not in outward profession only, by
setting your affections on things above, where Christ sits at the right hand
of God, Col. 3. 1, 2. and by your driving an heavenly trade, in this world,
Phil. 3. 20.

Use 2. For comfort to all who can thussay, The Lord is their portion i. e. to
all true believers, who know that their soul says the Lord is their portion;
be exhorted to rejoice in your portion, Rejoice in the Lord always, and again,
I say, rejoice, Phil. 4. 4. Have you plenty of outward things? Rejoice not in
them, but in the Lord, Ier. 9. 23, 24. In him alone you have fully enough.
There is a vast difference between Jacobs portion and Esau's, though the
Translation holds forth each of them, as saying, I have enough, yet the
Original varieth their expressions, Esau said, (...), I have much, Genesis 33. 9.
but Jacob said (...), I have all, ver. 11. Esau had much in worldly things, but
not enough: Jacob had enough in God, who was his All-sufficient portion. Are
you in any want? Habent omnia qui habent habentem omnia. They cannot want any
thing; who have him to be their portion, who has all things. In wants of
outward things, say with David, Psalm. 23. 1. The Lord is my shepherd, I shall
want nothing; and with the Church, Hab. 3. 17, 18. Although the fig tree shall
not blossom, nor fruits be in the vine, and the fields yield no meat, the
flocks shall be cut off from the fold, and no herds in the stalls, yet I will
rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation. In spiritual wants,
the God of all grace, wisdom, power, and goodness, is your God and portion;
you have all in him, and shall have all that is good for you from him, Psalm.
84. 11. Are you in fear of dangers? Say, as David, in Psalm. 27. 1. The Lord is
my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear, etc. Psalm. 27. 1, 2, 3. Again,
God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble; therefore will
not we fear, though the earth be moved, etc. Psalm. 46. 1, 2, 3, 4. Lastly, are
you in as great distress as David was, in 1 Samuel 30. 3, 4, 5, 6? Yet even then
take the course that he took. What was that? David comforted himself in the
Lord his God. So do you, rejoice in this your portion. For it is, 1.
All-sufficient. 2. Everlasting.

Lam. 3. 24. Therefore will I hope in him, We have already spoken of two parts
of the Text; the Assertion, the Lord is my portion, and the proof of it; says
my soul. We now proceed to the third, the inference, which the Church draws
from the premises; therefore will I hope in him. In which words three
particulars are to be noted. 1. The reason, whereupon their hope was grounded
[therefore.] 2. The resolution of their will to act according to that reason [I
will.] 3. The act it self resolved upon, together with the proper object of it
[hope in him.] For the first, the reason, whereupon their hope was grounded.
This illative particle, therefore, notes the result of a discourse in the minds
of believers, whereby they compare one thing with another, and gather one thing
from another; and thence conclude to act suitably to the truest and best
reason. Faith is an understanding grace, and knows what use to make of the
souls interest in God. When a man has God for his portion, and knows it,
thence faith infers it is my duty, and it is for my good to hope in him:
Therefore I will hope in him. Reason of it self, in this corrupt state of
fallen man, cannot teach men to hope in God. But when God has in the word of
promise given himself to us to be our portion, and faith has closed with him,
as our portion; and the word tells us it is our duty, and for our good to
hope in him, then faith sees good reason that we should hope in him. Faith
uses reason, though not as the ground, yet as a sanctified instrument, to find
out Gods grounds, that it may rely upon him, He believes best, who best knows,
why he believes, and he best hopes in God, who can give the best reasons for
his hoping in him. The affections, though they have not reason grafted in them,
yet they are thus far reasonable, that, in all that are godly-wise, they are
raised up, and laid down, guided, and actuated, by sanctified reason, which is
the highest and best reason.

Doct. They that hope in God a right, have their hope in him raised, and
strengthened by good and strong reasons. Reasons fetched from God, and from the
souls knowing its interest in him, as his portion* are good and strong reasons,
for our hoping in him; and such are the reasons which the Church, in my Text,
gives of their hoping in God. They considered Gods All Sufficiency, in himself,
and to every one that has him for his portion, and what interest themselves
had in him, through faith in Christ, and thereupon conclude; therefore will I
hope in him. So may all believers.

R. 1. From the inseparable connection of hope with faith: Faith believes in
Christ, and in God through Christ, upon Gods authority in his word, and what
faith believes, hope expects. The reasons for a believers hoping in God, are as
good and strong, as for his believing in him. For, as, naturally, beams come
from the Sun, and branches from the root; so, by spiritual discourse, one truth
issues from another; and, as the Sun and its beams, the roots and branches,
are all of one nature; so the grounds of comfortable truths, and reasons taken
from those grounds, are both of the same divine authority in themselves. Though
in us, discourse is apt to be so troubled, in times of Temptation, that we
cannot see how one truth arises upon another; yet so far as faith sees God to
be our portion* the soul sees good and strong reason for our hoping in him for
all good, that may suit all our needs, in the best season.

R. 2. From the convincing light, which the spirit of God brings into the
soul, when he works faith and hope in it. It is the office and work of the
spirit, to convince, and, by convincing, to comfort, Joh. 16. 7, 8. Conviction
is a clear and infallible demonstration, and comfort is a demonstration, with
application unto us, of better and stronger reasons to raise us up, then those
are which tend to cast down our souls. When the spirit convinces, he brings
such a full and powerful light into the soul, as silenceth all disputes and
cavils, and causes the soul to yield, as overcome by the evidence and
authority of the light and truth brought into it. Light has a convincing
property and force in it. When we see the light of the Sun, we know it is day,
and will not believe those that shall deny it, though they were ten thousands,
because the convinction hereof is undeniable, it is an unreasonable thing to
deny it. So the spirit of God brings an undeniable light into the soul, which
discovers the vanity of those windings, and turnings, whereof men's deceitful
hearts are so full, that there can be no thorough conviction, and effectual to
salvation, without the efficacy of the Holy Spirit. A common conviction there
may be, by the light of nature, or of a natural conscience, or of some common
transient work of the Holy Spirit, but that is but weak: For either it
discovers but little, as a little spark shows little light, not enough to
lighten the room, by overcomming the darkness, and turning it into light; or
the light, which it shows, it shows but weakly, like a flash of lightning, or a
blaze in straw, that is soon out again. But saving convinction is a greater and
stronger light, like the light of the Sun, which is a full and powerful light.
This is only from the sanctifying spirit of God. This light shows the evil of
sin, and the good of the contrary, in their spiritual nature, and compass, and
draws the will answerably, from the one to the other, by converting grace,
Acts 26. 18. This light is abiding in the renewed soul. Thus the Church, in my
Text, was convinced and comforted, in their great distress, by the spirit and
word of God, so as they could hold forth good and strong reasons, whereupon
their hope was strengthened, and their hearts were comforted in sad hours.

Use 1. For Instruction, twofold: 1. Learn hence to examine and try the
reasons, whereby you are moved to act; whether they they be good, or not good,
reason is a beam of Gods light. What comes from God, carries the soul to God;
Therefore that which draws the soul from God cannot be a good reason, it is
not right reason, but falsely called reason, it is not from faith, but from
unbelief, not good but evil, Heb. 3. 12. Hence, no good reason can be given for
any s^n^. What ever reasons are pretended for it, they are not according to
Gods Logic, but the Devils Sophistry, Jam. 1. 22. (...) They deceive
themselves with false Syllogismes. You may find in Jam. 3. 15. three Topics,
from whence all such arguings are fetched, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil,
the three great enemies of Gods glory, and of Christ's Kingdom in us; yet they
will pretend their good intention for Gods honor, when they seek no themselves
worldly profits by disobeying Gods commandment. So did Saul; but Samuel
refuted all his false pleas, 1. Sam. 15. 21, 22, 23. See how the Scripture
reproves such as encourage themselves to do evil, that good may come thereon,
Romans 3. 7, 8. Job sharply took up his friends for this, in Job. 13. 7. Will you
speak wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully for him? yet, thus the Devil
deceive^^ his active instruments against Christ, the time comes (says
Christ, in Joh. 16. 2.) that whosoever kills you, will think be does God:
service. There are that argue from worldly advantages to encourage men to sin,
Prove. 1. 13. But Christ shows the pernicious delusion of such reasonings, in
Mat. 16. 26. others from the pleasure of carnal liberty, but Peter shows the
falsenesse of that plea, in 2 Pet. 2. 19. others from worldly preferment of
wicked men, Mal. 3. 15. which the Prophet confuteth in verse 18. Some from Gods
patience, which God himself answers, in Psalm, 50. 21, 22. Such as these are
the (...), the reasonings of natural men, Romans 1. 21. which should warn all men
to deny their carnal wisdom, which is enmity against God, Romans 8. 7. 2. Learn
hence to examine and try the goodness and strength of the reasons, whereupon
it is grounded, remembering that rule, in, 1 Pet. 3. 15. Be ready always to
give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in
you. You say, you hope in God, If you have no reason for it; its a foolish
unreasonable hope. If you have but slight reasons; its a vain hope. And such is
hope of the most: one grounds his hope of salvation upon his creation; saying,
I am Gods creature, and he has not made me to damn me: Therefore, I hope he
will save me. See the delusion of this plea, 1. Are not the Devils Gods
creatures? yet they are damned. 2. Though Gods end in making you, was not to
damn you, yet your impenitency in sin, and unbelief will damn you. 3. See the
Lords own refutation of this plea, in Isa. 27. 11. Another grounds his hope of
blessedness upon Gods blessing him, as he calls it, with worldly success, and
prosperity. But Christ shows the vanity of this hope in that rich man in Hell,
Luke 16. 25. and by telling us that it is that they shall be destroyed for
ever, Psalm. 92. 7. Gods end in prospering such in the world, is like Hesters
end in feasting Haman. Another grounds his hope that he shall have heaven
hereafter, because he has had his Hell, through afflictions, in this life. But
such consider not what the Word says concerning Sodom and Gomorrah, Jude 7.
Suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. What misery wicked impenitent sinners
suffer here, is but a beginning and pledge to them of Hell hereafter. Another
grounds his hope upon his Christian privileges and performances. But this is
plentifully refuted in Scripture, by John's speech to the Pharisees, Mat. 3. 9.
and Paul's to the Romans, Romans 2. 28. and concerning himself, Phil. 3. 7. Others
ground their hope upon Gods mercy, though they continue in their sins. This
indeed is a good reason for hope, in those that confess and forsake their sin,
Prove. 28. 13. But for those that abuse this mercy to the hardening of themselves
in sin by it, see how the Lord thunders against such, in Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20.
Others ground their hope upon their own self-flattering and self-deceiving
thoughts of themselves. Such may see their own folly and madness, by what the
Scripture says, in Prove. 28. 26. and Gal. 6. 3. Let all such, and the like,
renounce their ungrounded hope, which, like that broken reed of Egypt, Isa.
36. 6. will at once both fail them, and ruin them. Till you have an interest in
God and Christ, as your portion, you are without hope, Ephesians. 2. 12. Therefore
the first work of the Spirit, in the soul, by the Gospel, and one great end of
the ministry thereof, is, to make way for true faith and hope, by casting down
those (...), reasonings, and bringing into Captivity every thought, (...),
every sophistical reasoning, to the obedience of Christ. 2 Cor. 10. 5.

Use 2. For Exhortation to believers, being under temptations and afflictions,
whether outward or inward, to improve the reasons, which faith supplieth, for
the quickening and strengthening of their hope in God. For, in such times,
faith is put to it to use reasons. Indeed the soul needs not that help so
much, when it is in a clear and quiet state, for upon its close and sweet
communion with God, in Christ, and from some likeness between the renewed soul
and God, it presently, and without praevious discourse, runs to God, as by a
supernatural instinct; as, by natural instinct, the child runs to his
natural parents in danger, and distress, with confidence. But, in dark times
of great afflictions, and temptations, faith is put to use Arguments, and
reasons to quicken and strengthen hope. Accordingly, study the grounds of hope,
and improve them for your help. 1. Such as may be supplied from the inward
store laid up in the soul, as the Church did in my Text. 2. Such as are, or may
be, suggested by others: Harken, and yield to them, and close with them. For,
thus you will show that you have a frame of spirit suitable to any holy and
comfortable truth, that shall be presented and applied to it. There is a
principle in every renewed spirit, that closes with whatever comes from Gods
spirit, that readily claims acquaintance and kindred with it, as coming from
the same blessed spring, the holy Spirit. When Asaph found the contrary in
himself, that his soul refused comfort, and he remembered God and was troubled,
Psalm. 77. 23. he saw, and said, this is mine infirmity, ver. 10. He saw that it
arose from a sickness, a spiritual disease, and distemper in his soul. While
passion and temptation disturb the soul, they hinder the exercise of spiritual
reason: As we see in David, who said, in his haste, all men are liars, Psalm.
116. 10, 11. This he saw afterward, when his spiritual reason had recovered it
self, which before by his distemper was hindered in its working; then he admired
God for his benefits toward him, notwithstanding his provocation of him to have
taken a contrary course with him, ver 12. Labor therefore, 1. That your mind,
which is the seat of principles, be well furnished with divine and spiritual
truths. For false principles can never produce true comforts. As only truth
sanctifies, Joh. 17. 17. So truth only truly comfort. There is the same
reason of both. For it is the peculiar office of the Holy Spirit, both to
sanctify, and to comfort: And the Holy spirit is the Spirit of Truth, Ioh. 16.
13. Therefore he will not work by a falsehood, but only by Truth, either
sanctification, or consolation. 2. See that your understanding (...), the
dianoetical, discoursing faculty, which is the seat of conclusions, be used to
deduce from spiritual principles, such spiritual conclusions as they are apt to
beget. For, by false reasonings, in times of affliction and temptation. 1.
Believers hinder their faith and hope, when they reason too much from sense and
present feeling, Isa. 40. 27. and 49. 14. Ezekiel. 33. 10.

2. Others have false comforts from the light of a fire kindled by themselves,
Isa. 50. 11. But, if, renouncing such reasonings, you fly to Christ and his
righteousness alone, for your acceptance with God, through faith in his blood,
with true repentance; then you may reason with God, Isa. 1. 18. though not in
your own strength or worth, Job 9. 14, 15. yet you may reason with him in
faithful fervent prayer, in Genesis 2. 10, 11. 12. whereby he prevailed and got
both a new blessing and a new name, ver. 28. Fervent prayers are strong
reasonings with God, in Christ's strength, and for his sake. This will be well
pleasing to God. For, as, when God calls for our obedience, he adds perswasives
to his precepts, and reasons with us as well as commands us; so he allowed
us, in prayer, to add persuasions to our petitions, and to reason with him as
well as entreat him. Only, it must be our care that we reason from right
Topics, and heads of Arguments: Such as these, 1. From the infiniteness and
freeness of Gods merccy and grace. 2. From the immutable firmness of his
Covenant and promises in Christ. 3. From our indigence and dependence upon him.
4. From the concernments of his glory, and our necessary good. In such
reasonings of faith and hope, the spirit, strength, and life of prayer
consists. Such pleadings, in the name of Christ, God approves and requires,
Isa. 43. 26. 3. See that the heart, which is the seat of practical knowledge be
fitted to order the conversation and practice, by sound principles, in the
mind, and right conclusions, in the understanding; that mental discourse may
not vanish in mere empty speculation. As, in my Text, The Lord is my portion,
is the principle laid up in their mind, says my soul, is the proof it; the
conclusion to be from thence inferred, is, Therefore it is my duty to hope in
him. This knowledge becomes practical, when the heart so receives it, that the
will comes to a resolution; therefore I will hope in him. Which is the next
particular to be spoken to.

Lam. 3. 24. Therefore I will hope in him. The reason alleged by the Church
is, not so much an Argument to convince the judgment (though it contains that
also, as we have before proved) as a motive to induce and incline the will to
hope in God. For trusting and hoping in God, being a relying and waiting upon
God for future good, do especially carry the will to him. As the understanding
is led with truth, so the will is led with the goodness of things. As the
judgment must be convinced of Gods ability, so the heart must be sweetened with
his love and readiness to do us good, for the future, that we may hope in him.
For mere knowledge and discourse cannot draw the heart to trust and hope in
God, except it has a relish of his goodness. Therefore David says, O taste
and see that the Lord is good, Psalm. 34. 8. Those reasons are most prevailing
to incline the will toward God, which are drawn from the goodness of God,
whereby the heart is opened and enlarged to expect all good, and nothing but
good from him, who is goodness it self, and our God and portion, in Jesus
Christ. This relish is wrought in the renewed soul, by the spirit of faith,
together with a light to discern our interest in God.

Doct. The reasons whereby believers are quickened and strengthened to hope in
God, do strongly incline their will to resolve to hope in him. This is obvious
frequently in Scripture, that when the will is inclined to any spiritual good,
it is upon spiritual reasons, the Spirit of God joining his efficacy therewith,
and leaving a powerful relish of that good in the soul. This you may see in
Psalm. 40. 8. Cant. 1. 3, 4. Ier. 3. 22. and in sundry Texts.

R. 1. From the different manner of the souls guiding the will, and the bodily
members. The soul swayeth the will and affections, as counselors do a well
ordered state, by propounding reasons to them. But the soul governs the
bodily members, as a Master does his slaves, by mere command. The will moves
the hands and feet, etc. by command, without giving them Reasons. But the will
and affections move not without reason, or at least a show of reason. God made
man an understanding creature, endued with rational faculties, the
understanding to be the leading faculty, and the will to be the appetite of the
soul, according to reason. Therefore it moves toward such a good as is
presented to it by the illightned mind, or understanding, as the most (...) and
unquestionable object of it. For the freedom and willing consent of the heart
is not without rules to order it; but it is therefore said be free, because,
whether, out of a true judgment, it moves one way, or, out of a false, another
way; yet, in both, it moves, in a manner suitable to its own condition. For
this reason it is that God condiscends so far to us, in his word, as to give us
so many reasons to hope in (...); that our wills might be drawn thereunto, by
suitable reasons.

R, 2. From the manner of the spirits putting forth his efficacy to incline the
wills of believers to hope in God. The heart of man, naturally, is not apt, but
averse, hereunto, even when the understanding sees good reasons for it.
Therefore the will must necessarily be renewed and changed. This change
consists in altering the bent, and inclination of the will, which the spirit of
God does, by bringing into the soul a new light, and powerful influence. 1. A
new light, whereby we are enabled to see other things, or the same truths in a
more spiritual and effectual manner, those impedimens being removed, which
might hinder the evidence of spiritual truths, and the judgment being fully
convinced, that we might know things not only notionally, but practically, as
we ought to know them, 1 Cor. 8. 2. This is that illumination and revelation,
whereof the scripture speaks, in Ephesians. 1. 18, 19. 1 Cor. 2. 12. 1 John 5. 20. 2.
A powerful influence: Jesus Christ, both opened the understanding of his
Disciples, Luke 24. 45. And caused their hearts to burn within them, when he
spoke unto them, ver. 32. By this powerful influence the spirit makes every
faculty and affection of the renewed soul, to work unto supernatural ends, and
objects, according to its proper manner. As the soul, in the bodily eye,
causes it to see, and, in the ear, causes it to hear, and, in the tongue,
causes it to speak, etc. So the spirit, in the mind, causes it to understand
aright, and, in every affection, causes it freely to choose and cleave unto
Christ, and to God, in him, and, in every affection, causes it to move toward
Christ and God, in such a manner and way of working, as is suitable to its
nature. This the Holy Spirit does, by creating and implanting in-dwelling
lively spiritual gifts of grace in the soul, which he thereby sanctifies and
lifts up unto God in Christ; the faculties and affections, which were by
nature set upon the world and sin, and self, being now, by grace set upon
things above, and so are said to be quickened and made alive unto God. Hence
every spiritual gift of grace, whereby any faculty and affection of the soul is
sanctified, is called the spirit of that faculty and affection. The sanctified
disposition of the mind is called, the spirit of a sound mind, 2 Timothy 1. 7: The
gift of faith is called, the spirit of faith, 2 Cor. 4. 13. So the gift of
love, and of fear of the Lord, is called, the spirit of love, 2 Timothy 1. 7. and
the spirit of the fear of the Lord, Isa. 11. 2. Because the Holy Spirit,
dwelling in the soul, infuseth those gifts into it, and so renews the
faculties and affections of it, Psalm. 51. 10. And, 2. Quickens and exciteth
these spiritual gifts, and by them the faculties and affections unto spiritual
acts. Without this quickening influence, those spiritual gifts would be, in the
soul, un-acted, as the bodily senses are, in sleep, or as a ship in a calm, at
Sea, Act^ agimus. We act, but instrumentally, subordinately under the spirit,
who is the principal, efficient and agent, in all spiritual good. We act, but
not in our strength, nor in the strength of grace received, but from the
quickening, strengthening influence of the Spirit. As trees, though they have
in them a seminal virtue, yet, except they be helped by influence from heaven,
cannot bring forth their fruits; so it is with these spiritual trees of
righteousness, as believers are called, in Isa. 61. 3. It is God that works
in us, both to will, and to do, of his good pleasure, Phil. 2. 13.

Use. For Instruction, threefold: 1. Hence we may learn the true Reason, why
the sudden resolutions of many to reform this and that, and to do this and
that particular, are so weak and mutable, as the morning cloud, and as the
early dew, Hos. 6. 4. which soon vanish. Some, at an heart-searching and
soul-piercing Sermon, are affected, as that young man, till they are put upon
such conditions, as their praedominant lust will not accept, Mat. 19. 16, 22.
Others, in some strong convictions and awakenings of conscience, are affected,
as Saul was for his unrighteous dealing with David, and do purpose against it,
as he did, yet afterward with him return to their former sin again, 1 Samuel 24.
16, 17. with 26. 2. Some, in great sicknesses, others, in great dangers by
Land, or Sea, resolve that they will become new men, if God will be pleased to
spare them, or deliver them, this time; of whom the Lord may complain, as he
did of the children of Israel in Judge. 10. 11, 12, 13. The reason is, because
they are unregenerate, they are in their natural state. Such may have a
notional light, in their minds, and awakenings of their natural consciences,
and stirrings in their affections, and sudden purposes toward God, and Christ,
and spiritual things, from a transient work of the spirit, exciting their
innate principle of self-love thereunto, for a time; during which, they are in
a better mood, but not in a better state: as in sicknesses, the fits may be
altered, yet the sickness remain in its strength. New resolutions, in an
un-renewed heart, are like seed in an unsuitable soil, which prospers not, but
withers, and dies, and comes to nothing, at last. How many such are now in
Hell; where their remembrance of such fruitless, ineffectual purposes gnaweth
their consciences, as a never-dying worm, and torments them for ever.

2. Hence we may learn, whence it is that true believers have such firm
resolutions of cleaving to God, in Christ, and of hoping in him, when he hides
his face from them, in great afflictions, Isa. 8. 17. Ion. 2. 4. The reason of
it is, because their hearts are purified by faith, Acts 15. 9. which is seated
principally, in the will, whereby it receives Christ, Ioh. 1. 12. Romans 5. 17.
1 Timothy 15. and is the effect of the operation of God, Col. 2. 12. by his
exceeding greatness of power, Ephesians. 1. 19, 20. whose peculiar glory it is, to
persuade the heart, Genesis 9. 27. and to draw the will, to come unto Christ, Ioh.
6. 44. which he does, by changing the disposition, inclination, and bent of it.
If you offer green boughs unto Swine; they regard them not, but trample them
under their feet; but if their nature were changed into the nature of sheep,
then they would be drawn to them. This is done by the spirit of God. 2 Cor. 3.
17. Before regeneration, the will is in bondage unto sin, but, being united
unto Christ, in regeneration, the Son makes us free indeed, Ioh. 8. 36. Then
the will freely moves toward God, in Christ, by faith and hope; as a man,
though he cannot give life to himself being dead, yet, when he is made alive,
he can move himself, from a principle of life in him. So much faith as a man
has, so much free will he has to hope in God, in the worst times. So far as
his spiritual grace and strength goes, so far he is able, by the concourse of
Gods spirit, which he usually joins with the ability he has given to his
people, that it may be quickened and actuated thereby. A man cannot act his
natural abilities, he cannot move his hand or foot, unless he be assisted with
Gods general concourse: So a man can do nothing in spiritual actions, without
special concourse of grace in Christ. Ioh. 15. 5. But, being assisted, with a
supply of the Spirit, proportioned to the exigencies of services to be
performed, and of temptations to be resisted, and of corruptions to be
mortified, he may say, as Paul did, Phil. 4. 13. I can do all things, through
Christ, which strengthens me.

3. Hence we may learn, in what manner believers in Christ resolve to hope in
God. This resolution in them may be known and distinguished from the
resolutions of others, by four characters or properties.

1. It is a sanctified resolution. It is the effect of Gods Holy Spirit
dwelling in them, and removing far from them vanity and lying, Pro. 30. 8. that
is, vain and false apprehensions of things, and turning their whole soul unto
God, in Christ, to seek all their good in him. This is the effect of converting
grace, as the Prophet shows, in Isa. 17. 7, 8. At that day shall a man look to
his Maker, etc.

2. It is an obedient resolution, in answer to Gods calling them to himself, in
Christ, Psalm. 27. 8. it is the yielding up of their wills to be ruled by Gods
will Psalm. 110. 3. When men's wills are not subdued and conformed unto Gods will,
they are, in times of affliction, like sullen birds in a Cage, which beat
themselves to death; like peevish froward children, which will be pleased with
nothing, if their wills be crossed in any thing. But when the will is subdued
unto Gods will, by the spirit, through the minis^^y of the Gospel, 2 Cor. 10.
5. then we can say, with Asaph, It Is good for me to draw near to God, Psalm. 73.
ult. And, with David, 2 Samuel 15. 26. Let the Lord do with me what seems good
in his own eyes.

3. It is a rational resolution, led by the best reasons. For, faith believes
in Christ, and in God, through Christ upon Gods Authority and faithfulness and
truth, in his Word and Covenant. Hence it ministers reasons to quicken and
strengthen hope, from Gods All Sufficiency, and love, in Christ, and
faithfulness in his promises to expect and wait upon God for all good from
him, suitable to our needs, in the best season; and to resolve, as Job did, who
said, though he kill me, yet will I trust in him, Job 13. 15. and (if they see
cause to complain) to complain, not of God, but to God, nor of their crosses,
but of the crossenesse of their wills to Gods holy will; as Ephraim did, in Ier.
31. 18.

It is a dependent resolution, relying upon God, in Christ, for ability to hope
in him, Isa. 26. 12. and therefore praying to him, as David did, in Psalm. 138.
ult. and to keep it ever in the purpose of their hearts, 1 Chronicles. 29. 18. with
true self denial of any sufficiency of themselves, so much, as to think any
thing, 2 Cor. 3. 5. Thus they become strong in the Lord, and in the power of
his might, Ephesians. 6. 10.

Lam. 3. 24. Hope in him. The last thing to be spoken to, is the duty esolved
upon, illustrated by its objectr* which is, to exercise divine hope; for so I
call that hope, which has God for its object and efficient, who is therefore
called the God of hope, Romans 15. 13. and for its ground, the Word of God, as
this hope has, Psalm. 119. 49. The word in the Original, (...) translated hope,
signifies, to expect; which is the formal act of hope. Hence we may gather a
definition of this divine hope. It is a lively, spiritual in-dwelling gift of
grace, whereby believers are inclined to expect, in and from God, what ever
good they want, and he has promised. 1. For the general nature of it, which it
has in common with other fruits of the spirit; it is, 1. A lively gift of
grace, an holy quality, or habit, or disposition, freely given of God; hereby
it is distinguished from that hope, which is merely a natural affection. For,
the natural affection of hope is, by corrupt nature, set upon a man's self, and
earthly things, and cannot savor the things of God; and therefore is said to
be dead. It Is an hope that has given up the Ghost, Job 11. 20. Natural men are
big with hopes, as they that are with child, and are in pain, to bring their
hopes to the birth; but instead thereof, they bring forth wind. After long
looking and hard labor, all is but a gripe of wind, like a fit of the colic,
as the Prophet intimates, in Isa. 26. 18. But, by this gift of grace, which I
call divine hope, that affection is sanctified, and lifted up unto God, and set
upon him and heavenly things, and so quickened and made alive unto God. Whence
believers are said to be begotten again to a lively hope, 1 Pet. 1. 3. This
gift of grace I describe further by two properties: 1. Spiritual, it is a
spiritual gift, for two reasons: 1. Because it is created and perfected in
believers by the power of the Holy Spirit, Romans 15. 13. 2. Because it makes
them spiritual, in whom it is wrought, 1 Cor. 2. 15. and fit instruments for
Gods spiritual service, 1 Pet. 2. 5. 2. In-dwelling; I call it an in-dwelling
gift: 1. Because it abides in all that are in Christ. Union with Christ does
not extinguish it in believers. Therefore, when believers are said to be dead,
in Col. 3. 3. it is not meant, in respect of sanctifying gifts of grace,
inhaerent in them, as if they were dead, and the faculties and affections of
their souls were immediately acted by the Holy Spirit; but, in respect of sin,
they are dead unto sin, but alive unto God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans
6. 11. 2. Because it it is not a transient work upon us, nor abiding in the
Holy Ghost, though he abides in us (for no created gifts or qualities abide in
him; for whatsoever is in him is himself) but it is wrought, preserved,
increased, actuated, and perfected in us by the Holy Ghost, as all other
sanctifying inhaerent gifts of grace are. So much for the general nature of
this divine hope. 2. The subject recipient of it are believers. For this hope
is grounded on faith in the promises, Gal. 5. 5. Therefore, in the Old
Testament, trusting in God, and hoping in God, are promiscuously used in one
and the same sense, and in 1 Pet. 3. 15. hope is put for faith. For they both
act totogether inseparably, in supporting the soul, in times of affliction;
yet, in their manner of acting, there are some differences between them. For,
1. The adaequate object of faith is the whole Word of God, holding forth good
and evil, promises and threatenings, blessings and cursings. But the object of
hope is good only. 2. Faith, in its relying upon the promises, looks to the
word promising, and to the Authority of God, the promiser; but hope to the good
promised, and to the goodness of the promiser. 3. Faith looks to all times,
past, present, and to come, and makes future things present, Psalm. 60. 7. But
hope looks only at good things, and at those only as future. 4. Faith looks
at God, as the first truth; hope relies on God, as the chief good. 3. The
formal act of hope is expectation. Therefore it is said to look for him, in a
way of waiting for him, Isa. 8. 17. The Greek word (...), is well translated,
earnest expectation, in Romans 8. 19. Phil. 1. 20. it being a metaphor taken from
the bodily gestures of those who look for some person or thing, with earnest
desire, and assurance, lifting up and putting forth their head, stretching out
their neck, fixing their eyes with intention and observation, to show the
strength, firmness, and certainty of this hope. For the object of this divine
hope is principally God himself, 1 Pet. 1. 21. and secondarily, all those means
and degrees, whereby believers come unto God, ver. 1^. unto whom this hope
looks, with waiting upon him for all the good they want, and he has
promised: So that this hope is certain and infallible, being objectated upon
God, founded in faith, and grounded upon the promises of God, who cannot lie,
Tit. 1. 2. Hence it supporteth the heart, in the worst times.

Doct. Hoping in God a right is a special means of supporting the soul against
discouragement, in times of great afflictions. The Scriptures are innumerable
which confirm and prove this truth: And it must be so for these Reasons.

R. 1. From the formal object of divine hope, which is God himself, in whom
alone is to be found all ability and readiness to do good unto those that hope
in him, and wait upon him, in such times. 1. All ability to help is in God
alone. Princes are of greatest abilities among men, yet we are forbidden to
trust in Princes, in whom there is no help, Psalm. 146. 3. Men commonly think
themselves happy in the favor and protection of Princes: But they are
deceived. Therefore it is added, in ver. 5. Happy is he that has the God of
Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God. For no creature has
ability, of it self, and what ever ability God has put into any, yet the
exercise and success of it depends on God alone. Except the Lord build the
house, they labor in vain that build it: Except the Lord keep the City, the
Watchman waketh but in vain. It is in vain to rise up early, to go to bed late,
to eat the bread of sorrows. So he will give his beloved quiet sleep, Psalm.
127. 1, 2. that is, in their resting upon him, building, keeping, giving them
bread without sorrows. Therefore, when men say, They hope for this or that,
from such a creature; either they mean, They hope to receive it from God, by
such a creature, or it notes, not a divine, but a mere humane hope; or it is,
not a Christian, but a vain hope. 2. As God only is able, so he is always
ready to do good to all those that hope in him. For he is infinite, as well in
goodness, as in power. Thou are good and do good, Psalm. 119. 68. This David
largely shows by sundry instances, in two cases. 1. In deliverances, where of
he notes four examples, in Psalm. 107. 1. Of men wandering in the Wilderness,
ver. 2. to 10. 2. Of Prisoners, ver. 10. to 17. 3. Of persons dangerously sick,
ver. 17. to 23. 4. Of men in great danger, by Storms, at Sea, ver. 23. to 33.
In all which, he saih, God helps men crying to him, when all help and hope in
the creature fails them. 2. In various changes of men's outward conditions; in
reference, both to the increase of the fruits of the earth, or to the
diminishing of them, whereby men become rich, or poor, ver. 33. to 36. and to
men's preferment, or abasement, ver. 40, 41. The sum of all is, that, which
the Psalmist says elsewhere, in Psalm. 46. 1. God is our refuge and strength, a
very present help in trouble.

Ob. Seeing hope is of things future, and God is a present help; how can it be
said, that God is the object of our hope?

Answ. 1. God is, not only a present help; but also a future help, even for
ever. And so he is the object both of our faith and hope, 1 Pet. 1. 21. And,
for the future, hope relyes upon God, though the soul does enjoy him, at
present, as our God. 1. That he will continue his goodness to us. This God is
our God, and he will be our guide unto death, Psalm. 48. ult. 2. That we shall
have a more clear and full sight of him, Psalm. 42. 11. 3. That he will supply
all our need, Phil. 4. 19. and that he will multiply grace and peace unto us. 1
Pet. 1. 1. and that, as he is the God of all grace, he will, after we have
suffered a while, make us perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle us, 1 Pet. 5.
10. These future good things hope expects, and 4. at last eternal salvation.
Therefore it is called, the hope of Salvation, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8. the hope of
glory, Romans 5. 2. and the hope of eternal life, Tit. 3. 7. all which are good
things to come, and though difficult, yet possible to be had, by his help, and
are most certain, by virtue of his promise, in Christ, which is the ground of
this hope. Hence hope is called an anchor sure and steadfast, Heb. 6. 19.

R. 2. From Gods manner of bringing the soul and this object, himself,
together, by this hope. For 1. By effectual convincing and humbling the soul,
he prepares it for this hope. He gives them the valley of Achor for a door of
hope, Hos. 2. 15. 2. He does it, by revealing his grace to a soul so prepared.
To this end, 1. He opens the eyes of their understanding, Ephesians. 1. 18. 2.
Having given them a spiritual eyesight: he lays his grace and goodness in
Christ, before them, by the ministry of the Gospel, Ephesians. 3. 9. 3. He
particularly applies the same to them, as theirs, by the ministry of the Word,
Acts 13. 26. and by the efficacy of the spirit, Psalm. 35. 3. So that now they
can look upon God, in the Covenant of grace, as their God, 2 Cor. 6. 18. and
upon all the good of the Covenant, as a legacy given unto them by Christ, in
his last Will and Testament, 2 Pet. 1. 3. Hence what they yet have not, in
sense, they see ground to hope for, Psalm. 130. ult. And this hope supports the
heart under great affliction, upon three main propps: 1. The power of Gods
grace: 1. To pardon many and great great sins, Romans 5. 20. 2. To perform all
his promises, how difficult so ever it may seem to our sense and reason, Romans
4. 18. to 22. 3. To comfort in all tribulations, 2 Cor. 1. 3, 4. 4. To help in
all distresses, 2 Cor. 1. 9, 10. 2. Upon the freeness of Gods grace and
promise, notwithstanding all our un-worthynesse, Isa. 43. 25. Mich. 7. 18. 3.
Upon the reality of Gods good purposes toward us, declared by sending his Son,
and his Sons coming, to bring us to God, Luke 19. 10. 1 Pet. 3. 18. and
Christ's calling us unto himself, Mat. 11. 28, 29. and the fathers drawing us
unto his Son, Joh. 6. 44, 45. The relish which believers have of the
sweetness of Gods grace, in Christ, turns the eye of their soul toward him,
in desires and expectations of further good from him, Psalm. 34. 8.

R. 3. From the effects of this hope, all which show that the soul is supported
by it. 1. It brings comfort to the soul. Therefore rejoicing is joined with
this hope, Romans 12. 12. There is joy in hope of good to come, though it be yet
absent. Because the soul has a taste of it, in the beginnings, and first
fruits. Now joy strengthens the heart answerably to the degree of it. The joy
of God is your strength, Neh. 8. 10. As when a man sees the clouds begin to
clear, in a time of rain, he is comforted, in hope that it will be fair
weather; so when the soul, under great affliction, sees some glimpse of the
light of Gods countenance, his hope and joy reviveth, and is increased, as that
is more cleared unto him, 1 Pet. 1. 3, 6. 2. It quieteth and setleth the heart
in peace proportionably to the measure of our trusting and hoping in God; Moses
found it so, at the Red Sea. Exodus, 14. 13. and David, at Ziglag, 1 Samuel 30. 6.
3. It makes the heart patient in waiting on God, with submission to his good
pleasure, Psalm. 37. 7. and 34. 34. How is God their strength in the time of
trouble? By strengthening their hope to wait patiently and quietly upon him,
not using any indirect and unlawful means to escape or come out of trouble. The
Lord cried, concerning this: Their strength is to sit still, Isa. 30. 7. 4. It
causes the soul to cleave unto God, whatever befalls them in the way of
obedience, Romans 5. 23. Heb. 3. 6.

Use 1. For reproof of two sorts: 1. All unregenerate persons may be hence
convinced that their state is wretched and miserable, upon two grounds: 1.
Because they have no hope in God, Ephesians. 2. 12. A Christlesse state is an
hopeless state, and an hopeless state is the worst condition. They pretend to
this hope, but without ground, and an ungrounded hope is a self-deluding hope.
The object of their hope shall fail them, Mat. 7. 22, 23. and the hope which
they seem to have, shall perish, and be cut off, Job 8. 13, 14. It shall be as
a spiders web, finely spun, but not firm, its but an hope of their own making,
as the spiders web is wrought out of its own bowels; and, as the spider thinks
it self, when it is lodged in its web, so they think themselves safe in their
salse hope; but as the spiders web is easily and suddenly swept away, so shall
their hope be by Gods beesome, Isa. 14. 23. 2. Because they abound in vain
hopes; in themselves, Luke 18. 19. in men, Isa. 2. 22. in riches, 1 Timothy 6. 17.
in chariots and horses, Psalm. 20. 7. in their mental and bodily abilities,
Prove. 3. 4. Jer. 9. 23, 24. Such hopes argue ignorance, pride, atheism,
idolatry, setting up the creature above God, Jer. 2. 12, 13. The effects also
are pernicious. 1. Loss, Jon. 2. 8. Phil. 3. 7. 2. Disappointment, Ier. 8. 15.
3. To be ashamed of their hope, Job 6. 20. Isa. 1. 29. and 20. 5. and 30. 5. 4.
Great hurt, Hos. 12. 1. Ephraim feeds on wind, and follows the East Wind.
The East wind, in those eastern countries, was an hot skorching wind, that
blasted things, and made them wither, Genesis 41. 6. Ezekiel. 17. 10. As Pharaoh was
to the people of Israel, so are all false objects of hope, the staff of a
broken reed, whereon if a man lean, it will go into his hand and pierce it,
Isa. 36. 6. Many have found it so, on their death beds, and in Hell for ever.
2. Hence believers are to be reproved, who do not exercise this hope, but give
way to discouragement, in times of affliction. For, 1. Hereby they make
themselves unfit to perform duties toward God and men, in a right manner.
Toward God, in prayer, and receiving the word and the outward seals of the
Covenant, and in thanksgiving and praising God. Toward men, in an
amiablenesse toward all, and in merciful helpfulnesse toward the afflicted.
2. They dishonor Religion, by strengthening ignorant and profane persons, in a
false conceit, that Religion is but a melancholic humor. 3. They weaken
themselves and others. Themselves; For, from fainting, comes discouragement,
and thence, halting, and from thence an aptness to be turned out of the good
way. For take away hope, and you take away all endeavor. Others also, if they
be weak, will be offended; and, if they be prejudiced, will be apt to insult
and to twit such, as Eliphaz did Job, in Job 4. 3. to 7. 4. They give Satan
great advantages against themselves, who diligently observes such times, when
Christians are under deep despondency of spirit, when they have laid aside
their helmet, to wound and weaken them more, he will then ply them with
suggestions, to make them believe any thing against God, and against the
Scripture, and against themselves, and to conclude desperate things, to their
own hurt.

Object. This is my case; therefore I never had a right hope in God.

Answ. Thus one iscouragement follows upon another, as circles in the water,
whereinto a stone is cast, which should humble you for neglect of stirring up
your hope unto exercise. But yet, let it not discourage you. For true hope is
sometimes in a believer, as in those trees, spoken of in Isa. 6. 13. Whose
substance is in them when they cast their leaves. It is only winter with you,
then life is hid in the root, though no sign of it appears outwardly; that you
may learn not to trust in grace received, but in Christ; depending on him to
quicken and actuate his own gifts of grace in you, waiting with fervent desires
and prayers for the Sun of righteousness to arise upon you, with healing in
his wings. In the mean time, remember that Christ himself has pronounced them
blessed, who are poor in spirit, and mourn, are meek, and hunger and thirst
after righteousness, and that he has promised unto such, that heaven is
theirs, they shall be comforted, shall inherit the earth, and shall be
satisfied. Let such encouragements quicken your hope, and quiet your hearts,
that it shall be with you, according to his Word, and that your hope so
grounded, shall not make you ashamed.

Use 2. For Instruction, in three particulars: 1. How to bring and keep the
object and this act, God and this hope together. 2. How to try, whether you
hope in God aright, or not. 3. How to exercise this hope, in sundry cases, in
which you may be called to the practice of it. This instruction is necessary,
at all times, and especially, in these times, wherein we may have more
necessitous use of this hope, then many do imagine. Therefore I shall the more
studiously insist in clearing these particulars, speaking to the first, at this
time, with the help of Christ.

1. How to bring and keep the object and act, God and this hope together. The
holy Penman of the Epistle to the Hebrews, in Heb. 3. 6. compares the Church
of God to an house; saying, whose house we are, if we hold fast the confidence,
and rejoicing of hope firm to the end. As it is in the building of an house,
so it must be in the building of this hope. In the building of an house, that
it may be strong, and kept strong, three things are necessary: 1. That a strong
foundation be well laid. 2. That the house be strongly built upon it. 3. That
it be kept in due repair. So it must be, in this great business, whereof we
now speak. 1. A strong foundation of hope must be well laid. 2. Our hope must
be strongly built upon it. 3. We must be careful that our hope be continually
kept in due repair. Of these three we shall speak distinctly, and shall
endeavor to show how they are to be done. 1. For the first, God himself, as he
makes himself and his will known unto us, by his written Word, is the only
suitable object, and strong foundation, or groundwork of this hope. Therefore
the Church, in my Text, says, I will hope in him. For in him alone are the
properties of that object, on which true hope must rely. A man can be in no
condition, wherein he needs help, but there is in God power and will to supply
it unto him. If comfort be wanting, he is the God of all comfort, 2 Cor. 1. 3.
He can and will create comforts, for his people, out of nothing; yea, out of
the contrary: As he caused at first, light to shine out of darkness, 2 Cor. 4.
6. Those troubles, temptations, and persecutions, and afflictions, which
threaten destruction, become means of our salvation, by his overruling
providence, who is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working, Isa. 28.
ult. In this object, two principles are to be looked at. 1. A principle of
being. 2. A principle of knowing. 1. The principle of being, is God himself,
concerning whom, five particulars must be believed, that our hope may be
objeccated upon him. 1. That God in whom we hope, is an eternal, independent
Being or Essence, who gives being, and order of being, and power of working
unto all things. 2. That in the Being or Essence of God are three Subsistences
or Persons: God, in the first Person, the Father (with the Son and Holy Spirit)
decreed the salvation of the Elect, and all things tending thereunto. God, in
the second Person, the Son, has fully and exactly answered that decree, as our
surety, in the work of Redemption. God, in the third Person, the Holy Spirit,
effectually reveals and applies the love of the Father, and the grace of the
Son unto the Elect, in time, and fits them for communion with the Father and
the Son, from both whom he proceeds. 3. That Christ, the Mediator, is Immanuel,
in whom God was reconciling the World unto himself, 2 Cor. 5. 19. who united
the two natures of God and man, in his Person, and was thereby fit to bring God
and man together, having made man amiable to God, and God amiable to man, who
were enemies before, by the sin of man. 4. That God, in Christ, is fatherly
toward believers, in all his Attributes, whereby he is described, in Exodus 34.
6, 7. and other Texts of Scripture, all which are in God essential; and
therefore eternal, and infinite. 5. That God acts all these his excellencies,
by his fatherly providence, governing and ordering all things for the good of
his people, so powerfully, that Satan and his instruments, in seeking to cross
his revealed will, shall and do fulfill his secret will, to their own confusion.
This providence extends as far as the creation, all things, even the most
casual, and most disordered things, sins, and the most free actings of men are
ordered by it, so that God does sometimes great things by weak means, disabling
more likely means, Eccles. 9. 11. Sometimes without means, and sometimes
crossing the course of means. And, when evil is intended, God either wholly
averts it, or limits and bounds it, in regard of measure, Psalm. 129. 3. 4. or
of continuance, Psalm. 125. 3. Hereby also he causes and orders a cessation
of actions, that some shall not favor us, and others shall want wisdom and
ability to help us, from Gods withdrawing his concurrence, who has sufficient
reason, as well, not to do what he does not, as to do what he does. The right
knowledge of God in his Being, is necessary to the well-laying the groundwork
of this hope, as conducing unto the preparatory purposes and uses. 1. To
silence all disputes and murmurrings: This made Aaron hold his peace, Lev. 10.
2, 3. And David not to open his mouth, Psalm. 39. 9. 2. To cause the soul to
resign up a man's self to the will of God, who works all things according to
the counsel of his will, Ephesians. 1. 11. So it wrought in Ely, 1 Samuel 3. 18. in
David, 2 Samuel 15. 26. and in the Saints, Acts 21. 14. 3. To quicken us to inure
our selves to do Gods will, that we may be fit to suffer it. For passive
obedience springs from active. Then are men's wills in right order, when, as God
is the highest, so his will has the highest place in our hearts; when they are
willing to do what God commands, to suffer what God inflicts, and to be at Gods
dispose, when this stays our hearts, in all events, that they are in covenant
with him, who sits at the Stern, and has committed all power to our Redeemer,
who has our names in his breast plate, and on his shoulders. The second
principle to be looked at in God, that our hope may be well built on him, is a
principle of knowing. This principle is the written Word, whereby God makes
himself and his will known unto us, without which we have no good ground or
warrant to build our hope upon God. But, that his people may thus hope in him
with strong encouragement, He gives us his Word, that thereby we may know his
good thoughts, and purposes toward us, which is a sufficient ground of hope,
it being the Word of him that cannot lie; and not only his bare Word, but a
binding Word, his promises, which are free expressions of his love, with
engagement of it unto us; nor only Promises, but his Covenant, founded upon a
full satisfaction made to his justice, by our Redeemer, as the head of the
Covenant; and thereunto has added his Oath, Hob. 6. 18. and Seals, both
outward, Romans 4. 11. and inward, Ephesians. 1. 13. and all this he has done, that
our hope might be built upon a strong foundation, that believers might be
supported in all tempests, Isa. 54. 9. 10, 11.

2. Having such a strong foundation well laid, our next duty is, to build
strongly upon it. Which that you may do, attend to these directions. 1. See
that you trust and hope in God by light and strength received from himself. 1.
By divine light, not by mere humane reasons. For none can so know God, in his
truth, and goodness, as to trust and hope in him, but by his own light
revealing himself to the soul, by his Word and Spirit; as none can see the Sun,
but by its own light, Psalm. 36. 9. 2. The divine power must accompany this
light. For, neither education, nor examples of others, nor our own resolutions,
can settle our hearts upon God, till we find an inward power and authority
causing divine truths to shine into our hearts, and subduing all our reasonings
and thoughts unto the obedience of faith; only that soul, which has found the
efficacy of the spirit, by the Word, in casting it down, and raising it up, and
renewing it, can hope in God aright for things of God; them, and not before, a
man chooses God for his portion, and cleaves to him, as his chief good; then,
and not before, the sweetness of Gods love is* let into the soul, and
rellished by it, which draws the whole soul to trust and hope in him, Psalm.
9. 10.

3. Suit the Promises to your several conditions. For what ever condition of
life any believer is or can be in, he has Promises in the Word suitable to it;
whether present, or possible. 1. At present, what ever difficulties or
impossibilities, as to second causes, and means appear to sense, or reason,
faith lifts up the soul above them all, to look unto the Promises and power
of God, and thereby quickneth and strengthenth our hope in him, Romans 4. 19, 20,
21. Heb. 11. 27. 2. Possible, The Saints have found great help to their faith
and hope, by putting cases, and answering their own hearts therein from Gods
all-sufficiencies. So David, Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of
death, I will fear none evil; for thou art with me, Psalm. 23. 4. Again, Though
an Host should encampe against me, my heart should not fear, Psalm. 27. 3.
Again, God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble;
therefore we will not fear, though the earth be removed, and though the
Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea, though the Waters thereof roar,
Psalm. 46. 1, 2, 3. Paul excellently puts other cases, of an higher nature than
these, and triumphs over them all, in the unchangeablenesse of Gods love to
believers in Christ, Romans 8. 38, 39.

3. When your hope is quickened, by the Promises, look unto God with a single
eye, trusting and hoping in him alone. To trust upon two props, of which one is
sound, the other rotten, is the ready way to fall. Make use of all helps, which
God gives you, but hope in him alone. For hoping in God is a part of that
natural worship of God, enjoined in the first Commandment, which belongs to
God alone, Mat. 4. 20. and thus to have our eyes toward God alone is the
proper effect of true conversion, Isa. 17. 7, 8.

4. See that the dispositions of your spirits be answerable to the relations
you have to God, when he becomes your portion, and the object of your hope. He
has, 1. The relation of a faithful Creator, and the disposition in you that
must suit that, is, to commit your souls to him in well-doing, 1 Pet. 4. 19. in
the want of means. 2. The relation of a father, and the disposition in you that
suits thereunto, is, to cast your care upon him, believing that he cares for
you, 1 Pet. 5. 7. Mat. 6. 32. 3. The relation of an husband, the disposition
that suits that, is foederal faithfulness, Hos. 2. 19, 20. 2 Cor. 11. 2, 3. 4.
The relation of a guide and teacher, the disposition suitable to that is, to
yield up your selves in all things to be guided by his counsel, as Asaph did,
Psalm. 73. 24. 5. The relations of your Judge, Lawgiver, and King, Isa. 33. 22.
The disposition which answers those relations, is obedience to Gods commands,
and walking in his ways. Else, you do not trust in him, but tempt him, Mat. 4.
7. You may expect God, in his ways of mercy, when you keep in your way of
obedience. Then you may, with comfort, expect what ever good those relations
can yield, from the All-sufficient God, who regarding more our weakness then
his own greatnnesse, condiscendeth so low as to take upon himself such
relations, for the strengthening our hope in him.

5. Often call to mind former experiences, both of your selves, and others.
Experience works hope, Romans 5. 4. 1. Of others, Psalm. 22. 4. and thence
infer, as David did, Thou Lord have not forsaken them that trust in thee, Psalm.
9. 10. 2. Of your selves, 2 Cor. 1. 9, 10. 2 Timothy 4. 17, 18. Christians should
be ready to communicate their own experiences to others, as David did in Psalm.
66. 16. Thus the Word will be as silver seven times tried, Ps. 12. 6.

6. Rest not in your hoping in God, as it is an act done, or a grace exercised
by you. For hoping is but the act of a creature, and the gift of hope it self
is but a created gift, and to hope in any creature, is to make that creature an
Idol. But to depend upon God to quicken and strengthen your hope in himself
alone, who is called, the hope of Israel, Jer. 14. 6. and by his help, through
the promise, to trust and hope in him the Promiser, who gives Promises, and can
create performances (so that, if you close with the Promise, as good, you may
close with the Promiser, as better, who both speaks what he means, and will
perform what he speaks;) this is the way to build your hope strongly upon God.

3. That you may keep this hope in repair: 1. See that your hoping in God be a
continued act, frequently renewed upon every new occasion, not only in
adversity, but also in prosperity, as well in enjoyments as in wants. For we
have use of hoping in God for the continuance of the good we have, and for his
blessing to be continued to us in it. 2. Observe what breaches are made in your
hope, from day to day; whether from within, by corruptions, or from without by
temptations? You will find that the main breaches are either from false
principles, or from doubts of true principles, or from inadvertency, and
mindlessenesse of them. Thence the soul is as sheep that are driven from
mountain to hill, and have forgotten their resting place, Jer. 50. 6. 3. Having
found out the impediments of your hoping in God, stir up your selves as David
did, saying, return unto thy rest, O my soul, Psalm. 116. 7. by stirring up this
gift of God in you, 2 Timothy 1. 6. To this end, 1. See that your judgment be
right. 2. Beware of those things that are opposite to this hope, and cast them
off, Heb. 12. 1, 2. where every thing that bows the soul downward is compared
to a weight; and loose affections, and false reasonings, are compared to a long
loose garment, which easily besets the feet, and will hinder a runner in a
race, if it be not laid aside, or girt up. 3. Speak to your own heart, as you
would speak to another, in a like case. 4. Join prayer with your use of other
means, Romans 15. 13. 5. According to Gods order of promising, do you proceed to
quicken and strengthen your faith and hope in him. 1. He promises that he will
be your God, so let your faith look at him, in Christ, and let your hope expect
that he will be so to you, for the future, and for ever, Psalm. 48. ult. 2. He
promises that he will forgive all sins unto repentant believers. Therefore
renew your repentance and faith in the blood of Christ daily, and then hope in
him, and pray that he will make you to hear joy and gladness, and restore to
you the joy of his salvation, as David did, Ps. 51. 8, 12. 3. He has promised
that he will sanctify, and heal his people. Therefore hope in him, and pray to
him for it, as David did, in Ps. 138. ult. 4. He has promised that he will
give that inheritance in heaven unto all that are sanctified by faith in
Christ. Therefore wait for it in hope, Romans 8. 23, 24. and let that hope
comfort and strengthen your hearrs in all the sufferings of this life, 2 Cor.
4. 16, 17, 18. 5. He has promised that he will give all things needful for
this life, till we come thither, Psalm. 84. 11. Therefore hope in him for daily
bread, and for all things you need. For as the same love of God moved him to
save his elect for ever, and to provide for them in this World, till they be
put into possession of that salvation; so the same hope relyeth upon God, both
for heaven hereafter, and for all necessary supplies, till we come thither.
Thus we have endeavored to instruct you, in this first point, how to bring the
act and object, God and this hope, together, that you may hope in him, which,
you see, is a matter of great importance, and necessary to be understood
practically, that we may hope in God aright.

The second Instruction is, to teach men how to try whether their hoping in
God, which they pretend, is right, or not. The danger is very great, if you be
deceived herein, yet many are deceived, through want of light to discern the
difference between the natural affection of hope and this spiritual gift of
hope in God. This divine hope, whereof we now speak, may be known by 3
Characters.

1. By the ground of it. 2. By the formal act of it. 3. By the proper effect of
it.

1. By the ground of it. If it be rightly grounded, it is the right hope. The
ground of this hope is faith, Heb. 11. 1. which has a double object. 1. God in
Christ. 2. The Word of God. That you may try and examine your hope, whether it
be thus grounded or not; we shall insist somewhat more largely in this, and be
more brief in the two following Characters, which will be more easily
apprehended, after this is cleared.

1. Hope is rightly grounded, when it is grounded or bottomed upon faith,
receiving Christ, and applying to our selves, in him, God as our God, and
portion, in the Covenant of Grace. It is the office and work of faith, to
appropriate God in Christ, to a man's self. The voice of Christ unto believers,
is, My Father is your Father, and my God your God, Joh. 20. 17. And the voice
of faith, in a believer, to Christ, is, My Lord and my God, ver. 28, 29. God
absolutely considered, out of Christ, is an object of the greatest terror unto
sinners, Isa. 33. 14. But God, relatively considered, in Christ, as our God and
portion, is the chiefest object of our hope, and love. Faith cleaves unto God,
as our God and portion. And, when we know that God is our portion, and
thereupon hope in him, then our hoping in God is right, because it is rightly
grounded. Our having God for our portion, begins at our entering into Covenant
with him. For then, and not before, we have a propriety in God, and he in us,
Ezekiel. 16. 8. This propriety in God is given and manifested to us, by degrees.
1. The soul is convinced of the vanity and insufficiency of all other things to
be our portion, and so is made willing to forsake them all, that it may enjoy
God, as his portion. Till this be done, men observe lying vanities, and forsake
their own mercy, Jon. 2. 8, 9. 2. The soul is convinced that God is the God of
some, by a peculiar right, Psalm. 4. 3. These he accounts the only happy men in
the World, Psalm. 144. ult. 3. Hence arise fervent desires that God would be so
to him, in particular. Remember me, O Lord, with the favor of thy people,
Psalm. 106. 4. 4. The soul is quickened, by the Spirit of faith, to turn unto
the Lord with true repentance, and to put it self upon Gods mercy in Christ,
and to wait upon him for the discovery of his love to him, Joel 2. 13, 14. 5.
God, having thus far brought the soul toward himself, does, in his own time,
manifest to us that he is our God, whence the soul actually closes with him,
by faith, in Christ, as our portion, Hos. 2. 13. Psalm. 73. 25. 6. Hereupon we
come to hope in him, for what ever good we need, and he has promised, Psalm.
147. 11. And as faith grows more toward full assurance, so hope grows more
strong in spiritual security, and courage, and glorying in God, Psalm. 48. ult.
yet, in the darkest times, faith inables the soul, from its former taste of
Gods goodness, to claim an interest in him still. Doubtless, thou art our
Father, etc. Isa. 63. 16. with an expectation of future good from him, Psalm.
42. 11. Yea, when experience and sense fails, by reason of our inadvertency,
yet so much virtue of former sense remains, as inables the soul, even when it
is in darkness, and sees no light, to trust in the name of the Lord, and stay
it self upon his God, Isa. 50. 10. and to wait upon the Lord, even when he
hides his face from us, and to look for him, Isa. 8. 17. But, if any desire to
know how they may clearly discern that their hope is grounded on faith in God,
as their God and portion in Christ; I answer, you may know it by Gods influence
in a believing soul, whereby this hope is quickened and strengthened. For, when
God becomes any ones portion, he becomes a fountain of blessings to that
person, God, our own God shall bless us, Psalm. 67. 6. He is a Sun and a
Shield, the Lord will give grace and glory, no good thing will he withhold from
them, Psalm. 84. 11. Especially, of spiritual blessings, which the Apostles, in
their salutations, comprehend in two things, grace. and peace. God as our God,
in Christ, is the God of both to his people. He is the God of all grace, 1 Pet.
5. 10. and the God of peace, Heb. 13. 20. That is, he influenceth believers
with all those graces, which breed peace and quietness in their souls,
supporting them under all burdens of temptations, troubles, wants,
imperfections, till they come to enjoy perfect rest in God himself, and fitting
them, in the mean time, more and more, for all that good, which they want, in
themselves, and he has prepared for them, in Christ. For, 1. God, as our
portion, is the God of love; yea, love it self, 1 John 4. 8. and a taste of his
love is better than wine, Cant. 1. 3. so full of spirit that it will revive a
drooping, sinking, dying soul, and quicken all graces in it, and make any
condition comfortable, any affliction tolerable, and strengthen it to wait for
more full communion with God, in the use of the most difficult means, as Jacobs
love to Rachel, enabled him to wait for her seven years, in an hard service,
and they seemed to him but as a few days, Genesis 29. 20. 2. God, as our portion
in Christ, is the God of hope, Romans 15. 13. whereby, as by an Anchor, he
stays and sixeth the soul upon himself: as a Ship at Anchor, though it may be
moved, and tossed, yet it is not removed from its place and station; so, if you
find that your soul cleaves to God, in Christ, and will not be driven from
him, whatever troubles, or temptations befall you; your hope in him is right.
This Asaph found, in Psalm. 73. ult. 3. God, as our God and portion, is the God
of patience, Romans 15. 5. whereby believers resign up themselves to his
dispose, humbly submitting their wills to his. If you find it so; your hope is
right. David found it so, 1 Samuel 30. 6. 4. God, as our portion, is the Father
of Spirits, Heb. 12. 9. which he so governs, and meekens, that, though we be
sensible of afflictions, he keeps our spirits from coffeehouse and
murmurring, in a quiet frame. Hereby also you may know that your hope is right.
The Church found it so, in Mich. 7. 9. 5. God, as our portion, is God
All-sufficient, Genesis 17. 1. whence he gives us contenment, in all estates, 1 Timothy, 6. 6. If you find it so, your hope is right. Paul found it so, Phil. 4.
11, 12. 6. God, as our portion, is the God of all comfort, 2 Cor. 1. 3. who, by
letting the light of his countenance into the soul, makes it light-some. This
joy strenthens the soul, Neh. 8. 6. against inordinate fears of wants, Psalm.
23. 1. or of dangers, ver. 4. and under sense of afflictions, Romans 5. 2, 3. and
oppositions, Mich. 7. 7. and temptations, 2 Cor. 12. 9, 10. and in all events,
Romans 8. 38, 39. Not, that every believer attains to such high actings of faith
and and hope; yet, if it prevail to cause them to trust in him, and stay
themselves upon him, in the dark, it is a right hope, Isa. 50. 10.

2. Hope is rightly grounded, when it is bottomed upon the Word and Promises of
God believed in. In the first conversion, when the soul had nothing, but the
bare promise of free mercy in Christ, to look at, God did thereby cause us to
trust and hope in him, Psalm. 119. 49. without former experiences. In like
manner, he works in believers, in dark times, when they cannot recall former
experiences, and want present sense of Gods love, God quickens his people, by
quickening their in-looking to the naked promise, Psalm. 119. 50. and thereby
their hope also, Isa. 8. 17. Hence Jacob became such a mighty wrastler with
God, Genesis 32. with Hos. 12. 4. God is ever mindful of his Covenant, Psalm. 111.
5. and faithful in his Promises. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 24. Hope looks at the good of the
Promise, and the goodness of the Promiser, for that part of the Promise, which
is not yet performed, as faith looks at the truth of the promise, and
faithfulness of the Promiser. Now, that hope thus grounded, is a right hope,
may be proved; because, when faith in the Promises quickens and strengthens
hope in believers, then Gods ends are attained, for which he gives Promises.
His ends are these, and the like: 1. To make known unto his people his good
thoughts and purposes concerning them, Jer. 29. 10. This he does, to encourage
them to hope for a good end, and to endeavor, in the use of good means, to
attain it, ver. 11, 12. 2. To draw the Elect unto Christ, in whom all Gods
Promises are Yea, and Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20. 3. To show what credit God has in
the hearts of his people, Joh. 3. 33. 1 John 5. 9. 10. 4. To let believers see
that they are richer, in their lowest estate, than others are in their greatest
worldly possession. For they have God himself, for their portion, when others
have but his gifts, Psalm. 4. 7. They have Christ, and unsearchable riches, in
him, Ephesians. 3. 8. who became poor, that, by his poverty, we might be made rich, 2
Cor. 8. 9. They have spiritual riches, Rev. 2. 9. they are rich in faith, Iam.
2. 5. whereas others have only their bellies filled, Psalm. 17. 14. Believers
have a large estate in Promises, 1 Timothy 4. 8. which are Gods bills, and bonds,
and deeds of gift, for a great while to come, 2 Samuel 7. 19. They have much in
possession, and much more in hope, 1 Pet. 1. 3. so that, when we hope in his
word, God attaineth his end in giving his word. Therefore hope grounded on the
word, is a right hope.

2. By the formal act of hope, you may try, whether it is right or not.
Expectation is the formal act of hope. This expectation has three properties:
1. It Is earnest, Phil. 1. 20. 2. It Is patient, Romans 8. 25. Patient, 1. Of
Laboring. 2. Of Suffering. 3. Of Waiting. Because between hoping and having,
there is a want of the thing desired and promised, till Gods time, for
performing comes. This delay is troublesome, Prove. 13. 12. Therefore we have
need of patience, Heb. 10. 35. The Husbandman sows in hope, and waits with
patience for the precious fruits of the earth, Iam. 5. 7. which the Apostle
there applies to believers. 3. With continuance Job 14. 14. Such waiting on God
gives him the glory of his independency, all sufficiency, immutability,
goodness, faithfulness, and wisdom, it has great blessings, annexed to it,
Prove. 8. 34, 35. Isa. 30. 18. Isa. 40. 31. The contrary is a compound of many
sins, of pride, and impatience, Psalm. 78. 41. and and discontent, 2 Kings 6.
33. and unbelief, Isa. 28. 16.

3. By the proper effect of this hope, you may know, it to be right; love
flows from faith and hope, 1 Cor. 13. ult. especially, to God, in Christ, in
whom we hope. Hence he that has this hope, purges himself, as Christ is pure,
1 Ioh. 3. 3. and is diligent in using all Gods means, with avoiding the
contrary, Heb. 10. 22. to 26. with dependence on God, and trusting in him
alone, not in our abilities, 1 Samuel 2. 9. Prove. 3. 5, 6, or graces, which gave
Peter two falls, nor in our performances, Psalm. 127. 1, 2. nor in the means
themselves, Hest. 4. 14, 16.

Thus you see what are the characters of hoping in God aright: If upon trial,
you find them to be in you, in truth; that hope will not make you ashamed, but
you shall have cause to say, with the Church, in Isa. 25. 9. Lo, this is our
God, we have waited for him, and he will save us, etc.

The third Instruction is, How to exercise hope in God aright, in sundry cases,
wherein you are called to practice it. These cases are of two sorts. 1. Such as
concern men's private conditions. 2. Such as concern the public. The first sort
of cases, which concern the private conditions of believers, are either for the
present, or for the time past, or for the time to come. We shall show how this
hope is to be excercised, in these concernments, severally, and distinctly,
with Gods assistance.

1. For the time present, when believers are under excessive grief, whatever is
the cause of it; whether sin or affliction, in your persons, or relations.
Believers, as well as others, are subject to many afflictions, in this life,
Psalm. 34. 19. Many are the afflictions of the righteous, and, not of some one
kind only, but of diverse kinds. Job says of every one, his flesh upon him
shall have pain, and his soul within him shall mourn, Job 14. ult. Herein two
things are to be cleared. 1. That it is our duty to grieve under affliction,
proportionately to the cause. It is dedolency, stupidity, not to grieve for
afflictions, Jer. 5. 3. it is therefore our duty to grieve, when God afflicts
us, but more for Gods displeasure apprehended therein. 2. It is our duty to
grieve more for sin then for affliction. 3. More for sin in our selves than in
others, And 4. For sin in our near relations more than in others more remote;
yet it is unlawful to let grief exceed the proportion allowed by the rules of
Gods Word, as all do, who have not this hope, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13. The spirit of man
is, by corrupt nature, unstable, as water, Genesis 49. 4. always running forth,
unless (as water is bounded by the bank or vessel, into which it is put, so)
our spirits be bounded, and kept within Compass, by the Spirit of God. Would
you know, when grief exceeds, or is immoderate? You may know it by the effects.
1. If it distempers and hurts the body. Godly sorrow, as such, hurts no man, it
is healing to the soul, and not hurtful to the body, unless, by accident, the
body being before under painful distemper, which is apt to be increased by any
grief. Worldly sorrow causes death, 2 Cor. 7. 10. VVorldly sorrow is, not
only, that which is for worldly things, but also that which is for sin, upon
worldly respects, as the principal motives of it. And that sorrow hurts the
body, and does no good to the soul, as David found, when guile prevailed in his
spirit, Psalm. 32. 2, 3, 4. 2. If it hinders you from, or in, the performance of
any duty. 1. From it. The good ^hief, on the Cross, was in great grief; yet
that did not hinder him from honoring Christ, nor from minding his own
salvation, nor from rebuking his fellow, Luke 23. 39. to 43. Nor did Christ's
sorrow on the Cross, which was far greater than that thiefs, take him off from
minding the future good of his Mother, Joh. 19. 26. 2. In duty. It turned
David's praying, wherein he should have exercised repentance, out of love unto
God, into roaring, out of inordinate self- love, Psalm. 32. 3. and it hindered
the Israelites, in hearing Moses, when he spoke most comfortably to them, from
receiving comfort thereby, Exodus 6. 9. It is with the soul, in this case, as it
is with the body. When Physic works upon the right humor, it carries away
that which distempers, without hurting the body. But, if it only exasperates
the distemper, and removes not the cause; it does hurt. 3. If your minds are so
fixed upon a particular grievance that you cannot be duly thankful for other
mercies, nor take comfort in them; like froward children, that, being crossed
in one thing, throw away all the rest. For this Joab justly blamed David,
though he erred in the manner, because he wept excessively for the death of
Absalom, and did not rejoice in the victory, and give thanks to God for it, 2 Samuel 19. 1. to 8. ^4. If it inclines the will to seek ease and comfort, in some
un-warrantable, and unsafe way. This is called halting, whereby men are turned
out of the way, Heb. 12. 12, 13. 5. If the soul sinks, and faints under it, is
wholly subdued by it, so as it cannot bear up it self. This is one of the
extremes which wisdom forbids all her children to fall into, and which to
forget is a sin, Heb. 12. 5.

Now the exercise of a right hoping in God, is of necessary use, in this case,
to moderate sorrow, and to keep it within due bounds. This it does, especially
two ways. 1. By striking at the root, and weakening the causes of it. 1. If it
be for outward losses and crosses, hoping in God raises up the soul by looking
up to God, and seeing that they are, either from him, as our God in Covenant.
Thus it raised up Job, Job 1. 21. and David, 1 Samuel 30. 6. or that they are for
God, and for their witnesse-bearing to his truth. This enabled the Saints of
old, to take joyfully the spoiling of their goods, knowing in themselves that
they had in heaven a better, and an enduring substance, Heb. 10. 34. 2. If it
be from loss of dear relations, and Gods displeasure apprehended therein; this
hope will quicken in you godly sorrow, and endeavors to seek reconciliation
and peace with God, by repentance and faith in Christ, Hos. 6. 1. 2. It will
purge out inordinate affections to the creatures, 1 Ioh. 3. 3. over-grieving
for the loss of creature comforts arises from over-joying in
creature-contentments. 3. If it be from bodily weakness, or sickness, or
pain, or any distemper, that renders a man unserviceable in his place; this
hope, being rightly exercised, w^ll moderate that sorrow. 1. By bringing a
spiritual light into the soul, to prepare it to receive comfort. For the body
is compared to an house, and to a garment. Hence they can argue, a pari, the
more worn and tattered the garment is, the sooner we shall have a new one. So
it is with the soul 1 Cor. 15. 42, 43, 44. And the more crazy and weak the
house, or rather, the prison is, the nearer the prisoner is to be delivered
from it. So it is with the soul imprisoned in this earthly house of the body, 2
Cor. 5. 1. etc. 2. By quickening us unto those duties which such a condition
calls for, viz. Patience, passive obedience, quitnesse, contentedness, prayer,
etc. Psalm. 39. 9, 10. 4. If it be from sin, in our selves, or others, or in our
families and near relations; this hope will be of necessary use to keep the
soul from being swallowed up with overmuch sorrow. He that grieves for sin,
must grieve in hope. For a vexing, discouraging, despairing grief will do no
good, but much hurt, as you may see, in Ier. 18. 12. and Ezekiel. 33. 10, 11. But
that sorrow for sin which is accompanied with hope of mercy, quickneth to
prayer of faith, Job 7. 20. and to reformation, Ezra 10. 2, 3 5. If it be from
an apprehension that God is your enemy, and fights against you, as he is and
does sometimes, Isa. 63. 10. this hope is of necessary use; whether your
apprehension be right, or wrong. If it be so indeed, it will quicken you to
make all speed to be reconciled unto God, in Christ. Hereunto this hope
encourages: 1. From the mercy and grace of God in forgiving repenting sinners,
Psalm. 130. 4. 2. From his willingness to deal so with you, declared sundry
ways. 1. By sending his Son to make atonement for lost sinners. 2. By sending
his Ambassadors to beseech you to be reconciled unto him, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. 3.
By his never refusing Rebels, that sought his favor in Christ, upon Gospel
terms. 4. By his commanding us to forgive such as repent, though they have
sinned against us unto seventy times seven times; and himself will not be
behind us in mercy and kindness. 2. But if it be not so indeed; if God be not
our enemy; this hope will awe the soul from wronging God, by our
mis-apprehensions. It is an injury to a man, that is our friend, and has
approved himself so to be, by many kindnesses, if we should charge him with
enmity, and say to him, you do not love me, you hate me, you are mine enemy,
when you cannot prove it. Hoping in God will arm the soul against such
conclusions, by former experiences of sundry effects of Gods favor toward
you, in pardoning some sins, subduing some lusts, healing some distempers,
scattering some temptations, working some spiritual good in you; as, faith in
the Lord Jesus, and love to all the saints, granting some prayers. Say not, I
know not, whether God has done thus, in mercy and favor toward me, and
whether he will continue them unto me, or not; for these are Covenant mercies;
and therefore sure mercies, even the sure mercies of David, Isa. 55. 3. Every
answer of prayer, every gift of grace, that makes the more prayerful, humble,
watchful, thankful, serviceable* to God and man, that leads the soul to God, in
Christ, is from his fatherly goodness and love to thee in Christ. Say not, if
God were my Father, I should see his face, but he hides his face from me; For
that does not always follow. Sometimes children are infants, and know not
their Father, though he acts for them, as a father. Sometimes grown children
see not their father, many years together, yet rest in his fatherly love and
care for them. So God will have his stronger children, many times, to walk by
faith and not by light, 2 Cor. 5. 7. Sometimes the child, being forth at
School, or at Prentiship, desires earnestly to come home and see his father,
but the father sees it to be in ^^^dient, at that time, to grant his request.
But he will send him a letter, a (...), a messenger, or some friend to visit
him, he shall see him, in them, not in his person. So God deals, many times,
with his children, who desire to see his face, to have sensi^le demonstrations
of his favor and love to them. They shall see him, in his letters the
Scriptures, and the Promises, or in some token of his love, some strength in
their souls* Psalm. 138. 3. or, in some messenger, Job 33. 23. whom he sends to
comfort them, and his spirit to quicken and strengthen them to wait upon him.

Object. But where the Spirit is, there are the fruits of the Spirit, and,
among the rest, joy, Gal. 5. 22. which I want.

Answ. 1. Take a believer, at the worst, he has that joy which he would not
part with, in exchange, for the jocondnesse of worldly men. 2. He has true
joy, through faith, even when he is in heaviness, for a time, 1 Pet. 1. 8. he
has it, in the root, when it does not sprout forth in leaves, because it is
winter with him. He who desires spiritual joy, and grives for the want of it,
has true joy, in some degree; as that man, from faith, bewailed his unbelief,
Mark 9. 24.

The second way, whereby this hope boundeth and moderateth sorrow, is, by
strengthening the soul to stick to right g^ounds of true comfort, to maintain
their joy in God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, as their portion, not yielding
up their purse to every thief, nor suffering themselves to be wrangled out of
their right in it. If excessive sorrow begins to seize upon the soul of a
believer; this hope will 1. Quicken him to examine its commission, by parlying
with his soul, and enquiring whether there be good reason, a sufficient cause,
for it, or not, as David did, in Psalm. 42. 5. 11. and 43. 5. Why art thou cast
down, O my soul, etc. For sometimes your sorrow is causeless, and groundless,
and commonly it is so: 1. When it is boundless. For reason will set bounds
unto grief, but mistakes, and mis-apprehensions, know no bounds. 2. When it is
plea-lesse, being tried at the bar of right reason, or of the judgment of those
who are godly-wise. Job in a passion, challenged God himself to dispute, and
gives him his choice, whether he will oppose, or answer, he will be for him,
and fill his mouth with Arguments, and doubts not that he shall carry the
cause. But, when God appeared, and spoke to him, Jobs passion vanished, and his
courage failed, and he confessed that he had spoken foolishly, and would now
lay his hand upon his mouth. Compare Job 23. 3, 4, 5. with Chap. 40. 4, 5. and
Chapter 42. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. So sometimes a dejected discouraged Christian thinks he
has so much to say against his comfort, as will put to silence the best and
ablest Ministers. But when any judicious Minister, or experienced Christian,
comes to him, he has either nothing to say, or nothing of weight, but what is
full of error and mistakes. Say therefore to your felves, in this case, as God
did to Jonah, Do thou well to be angry? Do I well to be thus dejected? 2. If
there be cause for sorrow: 1. Examine, whether it be sufficient to justify
such a measure or degree of sorrow, or not. That sorrow, which drives the soul
from God, which indisposeth it to prayer, thanksgiving, to the duties of his
calling, to works of mercy and love, that makes him lumpish, harsh, passionate,
that sowres and distempers his spirit, is excessive and immoderate. 2. Examine
from what Topics the Arguments are fetched, that are used to justify such a
degree of sorrow. The soul of man should not be subjected to sense and feeling,
or to any way of reasoning, but that which is from and according to the Word of
God. To argue, that you have no faith, because you are full of doubting, that
you have no grace, because you have strong corruptions, is to offend against
the generation of Gods children, Psalm. 73. 15. the vanity whereof Asaph saw,
when he went into the Sanctuary of God. So will you, if you consult the
Scriptures. 3. Fly to the God of all comfort, 2 Cor. 1. 3. First issue that
great question, Am I Gods Child, or not? If not; rest not in that state, but
hasten out of it. If yea, and thou art so, if thou have his Image; then set
faith on work: 1. Upon Gods all -sufficiency, and fetch all from heaven, which
thou want on earth. 2. Upon his Efficiency: 1. Recall to mind what he has
done for thee in times past, as Asaph did, in Psalm. 77. 5, 6. 2. For the
future; rest on his bare word, and promise, which shows what he will do.
Account that to be thine, which thou have in grant by the promise, as David
did, Psalm. 60. 7. God has spoken in his holiness, I will rejoice, etc. Gilead
is mine, etc. Thus apply what Christ says, in Mat. 5. 3, 4. 5. and the
Scripture every where. 3. For the present; consider what God does for thee.
Does he support thee, that thou sinkest not under despair? Does he keep thee in
patience, and submission to his will by (...)? Does he quicken thee to use all
good means, with waiting upon him? Give him the glory of his grace, and be
encouraged to spread before him, in prayer, all thy doubts, thy fea^s, thy
temptations, and wants, Phil* 4. 6. and, with prayer, join hoping in him, and
waiting on him. Say, ^here is mercy in him, to pity; and power in him, to help;
though I find no comfort, yet, I hope, I shall; though my prayers be not yet
answered; I hope they will be, in the best season, and I will wait on God, till
he does answer them. If yet comfort come not; improve the communion of Saints,
and the public Ordinances, as David, I will hearken what at God the Lord will
speak, Psalm. 85. 8. use men and means, but let your hope be fixed upon God
only, look to him for comfort, who creates the fruits of the lips, peace, Isa.
57. 19. use the communion of the Saints, in private also; but so, as waiting
for his manifesting himself to your soul, as the Church found he did, in Cant.
5. 8. and 6. 3. And, if thou can not find out what particular hinders thy
comfort, do as men use to do for their bodies, when the distemper is general,
who make an issue, to draw the matter to some head; pitch upon some particular
sin, to which thou art most subject, by natural inclination, or by thy calling,
or company, or the condition of the times, and let out the corruption that may.
Begin repentance there, and join with it faith in the blood of Christ, and so
seek reconciliation with God, and comfort thereby. In thus doing, wait on God,
till he satisfy thy thirsty soul, who has promised, that they, who wait on
the Lord, shall renew their strength; they shall mount up upon wings, as
Eagles; they shall run, and not be weary, and they shall walk, and not faint,
Isa. 40. 31.

The second case, whereon believers are called to exercise this hope, in their
personal concernments, is, in reference to the time past, the seeming
frustration and disappointment of their former expectations. For, having prayed
and waited for the good desired, yet they have not o^tained it. And many, when
they have given up their names unto Christ, looked for peace, prosperity, and
good days, but find troubles, crosses and afflictions of sundry kinds; this
much disquieteth, and sometimes discourageth their spirits. Hence, they are apt
to complain, with the Church, in Jer. 8. 15. We looked for peace, but no good
came, and for a time of health, and behold trouble; and, to conclude, as they
did, in Isa. 49. 14. Zion said, the Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has
forgotten me. In this case, that may be made for a right exercise of hoping in
God, I shall distinguish the subjects of it. Quosdam deserit, quosdam deserere
videtur. Amb. in Psalm. 118.
1. There are some, whom God forsakes really. 1. Such as forsake God. If ye
forsake him, he will forsake you, 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. This is the condition of all
Apostates, that depart from the rules of Gods worship, and the Churches of the
Saints, embracing and following worldly policies and advantages. 2. Such as
seem to seek God, but rest in outward performances without inward sincerity and
spiritualnesse, and trust in their parts and gifts, and duties, not in Christ,
for acceptance with God. This is the condition of all hypocrites, who sin and
pray, and pray and sin, without true repentance, yet think to be accepted of
God for the things they do in religion outwardly, of such the Lord says, in
Hos. 5. 6. They shall go with their flock^^ and with their Herds to seek the
Lord; but they shall not find him* he has withdrawn himself from them. 3.
Such as abuse the mercies they have received, and yet presume that mercies
shall be still continued and added, though they go on in their impenitency.
This is the condition of all obstinate, hard-hearted sinners. These may receive
their doom from that which the Lord denounced against Israel, in Hos. 1. 6.
Call her name Lo-ruhamah; for I will not add any more to show mercy to them.
As if (...) had said, They have received many mercies from me, but they abuse
the^ all, and presume that they shall receive more mercies from me: but (...)
shall not be so. I will not add any more. Of all these and the like, the
Apostle says, they are without Christ* without God, and without hope, Ephesians. 2.
12. Therefore I have no more to say to them, in this point. 2. There are
others, whom God does not forsake, really, but only seemingly, and that, but
in some respect, and, but for a time. And that he is present with them
graciously, when they think he has forsaken them, appears by his efficacy in
them. 1. That he quickens them to seek him in the use of all means, Psalm. 9.
10. For thou, Lord, have not forsaken them that seek thee. 2. That they seek
him, as their portion, as their chief good, without enjoyment of whom nothing
will satisfy them. This is from the efficacy of his grace in them, as it was
in the Spouse, Cant. 5. 4, 5, 6, 8, 10. 3. That Gods withdrawing from them, in
any degree, makes them fearful of his forsaking them utterly, and, for
prevention thereof, careful to engage themselves to obey him more perfectly.
Thus it wrought in David, Psalm. 119. 8. I will keep thy Statutes, O forsake me
not utterly! These are the persons, who are called to exercise hope in God, in
this case. To instruct them how to perform this great duty aright, I shall
propound five Directions.

1. Direction. Make it clear unto your own souls, that you have a good ground
of hope. See that your faith in God is right. For this hope is the daughter of
faith. And, if you are in the dark, as to present sight of your good estate;
consider whether formerly, when you had a clear light, you then knew that your
soul said, the Lord is my portion. For it may be, at sometimes, with a true
believer, spiritually, as it was with Eutychus, bodily, in Acts 20. 10. that,
though life is in him, yet he has not the sense of it. Then, though Gods face
is toward him, yet he complains that he has long hid his face from him; as
David did, in Psalm. 13. 1. and, if his Ministers speak comfortably to him; it
is with him as it was with the people of Israel, when Moses spoke as
comfortably unto them as at any time, but they hearkened not unto Moses for
anguish of heart, Exodus 6. 9. and, when he remembers God, he is troubled, and
complains, and his spirit is overwhelmed, as Asaph found, in Psalm. 77. 3. In
this case, faith it self must be helped, by reflecting upon former experience.
This course Asaph took, and found relief by it, ibid. ver. 5, 6. So a believer
having called to mind form (...) passages* betweeen, God and his soul, when he
made diligent search, and upon trial of his estate toward God, by Scripture
light, found it to be good* has good ground to hope in God, that it is so
still, and that it will so continue for ever, and that from the sure Word of
God in the Scripture, which ass^^^s us tha^ Gods drawing us to himself, in
Christ, is from his everlasting love, Ier. 31. 3. and that Christ, having loved
his own, which are in the World, loves them unto the end, Ioh. 13. 1. and that
the gifts and callings of God are without repentance, Romans 11. 29. As a man,
who has deliberately cast up his accounts, and summed up the particulars
exactly, when he took a fit season for it; if afterward, when being sick, or in
some hurry of business, he is not fit to review the particulars, he be
demanded how the Accounts stand, he will refer himself to the foot of his
Account, in a certain persuasion that it is right; so a believer, being under
temptations and seeming desertion, may, and should exercise this hoping in God,
and has good ground so to do, from what he formerly found, when he diligently
searched into particulars, though now he cannot call them to mind. Or, as a
woman with child, having felt it stir in her womb, knows thereby that she has
been quickened, and conceived, and has thereby comforting hope that it will go
on, though she does not always feel it stir: So (...) is, in this case, and
much rather, For that conception may die, and the woman may miscarry; but so
cannon the regenerate, being born again^ not of corruptible seed, but of
incorruptible, by the Word of God, which lives and abides for ever, 1 Pet. 1.
23.

2. Direction. When thus the ground of hope is cleared to be good, and way is
made for the exercise of it; then let it be exercised, in its purging work.
This is the first use, wherein hope is to be improved, in this case. For, every
man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself, even as Christ is pure, 1 John 3. 3. Else, that which now hinders your comfort and peace, will hinder
them, till it be taken away. Sin is the great impediment of all our good. This
therefore must be the first work of this hope, the purging away of sin.
Therefore the Church in my Text, took that course: Saying, Let us search and
try our ways, and turn again to the Lord, ver. 40. Do ye the like, in a like
case, and, that you may do so, follow these Directions. 1. Pray the Lord to
show wherefore he contendeth with you, Job 10. 2. with purpose of heart to
forsake whatever sin provokes him to anger. This was Elihu's counsel to Job.
Surely, says he, It is meet to be said unto God, I have born chastisement, I
will not offend. That which I see not, teach thou me; if I have done iniquity,
I will do no more. Job 34. 31, 32. Pray him also, to show you what he would
have you to do, as David prayed, in Psalm. 86. 11. Teach me thy way, O Lord, I
will walk in thy truth; unite my heart to fear thy name! Pray him, that as he
sends afflictions, so he would supply grace, that you may profit by them. For
he is the Lord our God, the Holy one of Israel, our Redeemer, that teaches us
to profit. Isa. 48. 17. Repenting Ephraim found the benefit of this course. God
took notice of them bemoaning themselves, with confession of their former
unsubduednesse to Gods will and yoke, and of their prayer, Turn thou me, and I
shall be turned, thou art the Lord my God, Jer. 31. 18. What benefit had
Ephraim hereby? They tell that, in ver. 19. Surely after I was turned, I
repented and, after that I was instructed. I smote upon my thigh, etc. 2.
Having thus done, search the Scripture, and your own hearts, to find out the
particular sin, or sins, which have brought this affliction upon you, or which
do hinder the exercising of your hope. 1. To find out the particular sin or
sins, which have brought the affliction upon you; consider, 1. For what sins
God has threatened, in his Word, or inflicted upon others, such judgments as
are upon you, Ezekiel. 12. 25. Jer. 26. 4, 5, 6. Zeph. 3. 6, 7. 2. How you have
abused those things wherein or whereby God afflicts you. Eli, and David were
too indulgent to their children, and were punished in them and by them. Israel
abused the corn and wine, the wool and flax, the silver and gold that God had
given them. Therefore God took them away, Hos. 2. 8, 9. God caused the land to
keep the Sabbaths, while the Jews were in Captivity, for their not sanctifying
the Sabbaths, in their own land. And for their lightly esteeming the Word
preached unto them, the Lord brought a famine of the Word upon them, Amos 8.
11. There is now much sickness and mortality among us, did you not mis-spend
your time, and strength, in the days of your health? sundry are restrained
from the public Ordinances; Is it not, because they have disregarded them, or
been unfruitful and unprofitable under them? 3. Search, if you have not been
faulty toward others, in the things you now suffer your selves. They that
spoiled and dealt treacherously with others, shall be spoiled and dealt
treacherously with themselves, Isa 33. 1. He that leads into Captivity, shall
go into Captivity; he that kills with the sword must be killed with the
sword, Rev. 13. 10. He shall have judgment without mercy that has showed no
mercy, Jam. 2. 13. Do others wrong you, in your names, in your estates, in any
of their dealings with you? Consider, how you have wronged others. Are others
helpless and hard-hearted toward you, in your afflictions? If upon search you
find, that you have been so to others, give God the glory of his
righteousness, saying, with Adonibesek, as I have done, so has God requited
me, Judge. 1. 7. 4. If you have not profited by afflictions formerly upon you;
you may justly suspect that he renews, and, it may be, increases your
afflictions, for that cause. For so the Lord threatened his people of old, If ye
will not for all this (viz. former lesser punishments inflicted on you) hearken
unto me, then will I punish you seven times more for your sins, Lev. 26. 18.
and the same he repeats again and again, four or five times, in that Chapter.
And he did accordingly, when the people of Israel turned not unto him that
smote them, the Prophet told them, for all this, his anger is not turned away,
but his hand is stretched out still, Isa. 9. 12. and it is thrice repeated, in
that Chapter. So has the Lord dealt with us, in this place; for sundry years
past, he has visited us with returns of sicknesses, every following year
sharper than the former; because whatever purposes men and women had, and
whatever promises they made, when Gods hand was upon them, all wore off and
came to nothing, after he had released them: So that we, in this wilderness,
may be justly charged for dealing with God, as the people of Israel did in the
wilderness, and have cause to expect, as they found from the Most High, Psalm.
78. 32. to 38. In this case, God deals with his people, as Physicians are
wont to do with their patients, upon whom when they find that the physic
formerly given does not work, they second it with some stronger purge; and,
when they find that the disease is so settled, that quicker courses are not
effectual; they prescribe a course of longer continuance. 5. Search, to find
out your own special corruptions; the sins of your nature, whereunto you are
naturally, that is, by your natural constitutions, more addicted and inclined,
then unto other; the fins of your callings, that is, such as whereunto, by
occasion of your place and vocation, or your course of life and conversation,
you may have more and more frequent occasions of, and greater and stronger
inducements, and inticements to, then others, and the sins of the times and
places in which you live. This course David took, and thereby proved that he
was upright before God, Psalm. 18. 23. 6. Call to mind of what sins you have
been formerly admonished and convinced, publicly, by the Ministers of the
Word, or privately, by godly friends, and others; or secretly, by the motions
of Gods Spirit, and checks of your own consciences, but have not repented of
them, nor turned from them. For it is Gods manner, to open the ears of men, and
to seal instructions by afflictions, as Elihu told Job, though he mis-applyed
it to his case. Job 33. 14. to 30. 2. Having found out the particular causes
for which God contendeth with you; add thereunto another search, to find out
those sins which hinder the exercise of this hope more directly and
immediately; as, 1. Your aptness to have hard thoughts of God. This is very
injurious and dishonorable to God, and therefore he frequently in Scripture
expostulateth with and complains of his people for it: As you may see in Ier.
2. 31. Ezekiel. 33. 10, 11. Mich. 6. 1, 2, 3. David found out this evil, in
himself, and repented of it; as you may see, in Psalm. 31. 22. and 116. 11, 12.
2. Your aptness to be short spirited with God, which is contrary to the
waiting of hope. This greatly incensed the wrath of God against his people of
old, of whom it is said, in Psalm. 78. 40, 41. How often did they provoke him,
in the Wilderness, and grieve him in the Desert? yea, they turned back, and
tempted God, and limited the Holy One of Israel. So do all they, whose hoping
in God cease, if he do not grant them the particular thing which they expect,
and in their time, and by their means. 3. Your unwarranted expectations of
good, without mixture of any evil; of peace, without trouble; of health,
without sickness; of ease, without pain; of joy, without sorrow; of prosperous
successes, without crosses; which God has no where promised; but has
foretold the contrary every where in his Word; that he will visit our
transgression with the rod, and our iniquities with stripes, Psalm. 89. 32. and
that we must through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God, Acts 14.
22. and that whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom
he receives, Heb. 12. 6. And the reason why Christ foretold these things, is,
that, when they come to pass, we might not be offended, as himself says, in
Ioh. 16. 1. and, that, when the time shall come, we may remember that he told
us of them, as he says, in ver. 4. 4. Your aptness to be slight spirited and
careless in retaining the favor of God, and in maintaining the workings of
his Spirit in you. The former, the Church found in themselves and confessed, in
Isa. 64. 7. There is none that calls upon thy Name, that stirs up himself
to take hold of thee. For the later, the Lord reproves the Church of Ephesus,
though he took notice of many good things in them, and done by them:
Nevertheless, he tells them, that he has this against them, that they had left
their first love, Rev. 2. 2, 3, 4. and commands them, Remember therefore from
whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy first works: Else I will come
unto thee quickly, etc. ver. 5. 5. Be humbled for, and repent of your
frustrating of Gods expectations, as the great provocation of God to
dis-appoint your expectations. Consider, to this end, what God has done for
us, and therefore does expect from us, in that which the Lord said concerning
the house of Israel, in Isa. 5. 4, 5. and let us fear lest our unfruitfulnesse,
unprofitablenesse, and un-answerablenesse to the means and mercies received
incense his wrath and jealousy against us more then against others, for whom
he has not done so much, as he has done for us. For so he determined
concerning Israel; you only have I known of all the families of the earth;
therefore I will visit upon you all your iniquities, Amos 3. 2.

2. Having thus searched and tried your ways; the next duty is, to turn again
to the Lord, with unfeigned repentance, and faith in the blood of Christ, and
amendment of life. This was the fruit of David's considering his ways, his
turning his feet unto Gods testimonies, Psalm. 119. 59. Else you do but, as if a
wounded man should cry to the Chyrurgeon for ease of his pain, but will not
endure to have the arrow head, or splinter, that sticks in his flesh, plucked
out. If I regard iniquity in my heart, said David, the Lord will not hear my
prayers, Psalm. 66. 18. And the people of Israel found that, when they did evil
as they could, and cast off the thing that is good, and yet prayed unto God, as
their God, he would not own them, nor accept their prayers, but upbraided them
with their sins; as you may see, in Jer. 3. 4, 5. Hos. 8. 2, 3. Therefore the
Church in my Text took a right course to strengthen their hope in God, when
they resolved upon this order, first to search and try their ways and turn
again to the Lord, and, after that, to lift up their hearts, with their hands
unto God in the heavens, Lam. 3. 40, 41. These things being done, that your
hope may act aright.

3. The third Direction, which is to be attended, that you may exercise this
hope, is to use this hope aright in its second work, for encouragement, by your
cherishing in your selves good thoughts of Gods good purposes toward you, and
expectation of good from God suitable to your needs: Hereunto the Lord
encouraged the repenting Jews, in their Captivity in Bayblon, Jer. 29. 11. to
15. Having promised them that, at the time appointed, he would visit them and
perform his good toward them, in causing them to return, he acquainted them
with his good thoughts toward them, as the reason of it, and what he would
work in them, to fit them for that mercy; saying, For I know the thoughts that
I think toward you, says the Lord, thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to
give you an expected end. Then shall ye call upon me, and ye shall go, and pray
unto me, and ye shall seek me, and find me, when ye shall search for me with
all your hearts, etc. Do not conclude concerning Gods thoughts toward you, by
present sense and feeling, but by his own word. Therefore David resolved to
hearken to what God the Lord says, not to what carnal reason and sense would
say, and the reason of his so resolving is drawn from the expectation of his
hope; for he will speak peace unto his people, and to his Saints, Psalm. 85. 8.
and his expectation so grounded, was so strong, that he pleaded it with God,
saying, in Psalm. 119. 49, 50. Remember thy word unto thy servant, upon which
thou have caused me to hope. This is my comfort in my affliction, for thy word
has quickened me. And well may believers be strengthened in this hope, having
it built upon so firm a foundation, as the word of God concerning which David
says, in the same Psalm. ver. 89, 90. For ever O Lord, thy word is settled in
heaven. Thy saithfulnesse is unto all generations; thou have established the
earth and it abides. How is the earth established? we see, if you cast the
least stone upwards in the air, it abides not there, but soon falls down to
the earth; yet the earth it self, though it is an huge, vast, heavy body,
abides in the air, wherewith it is surrounded, and wherein it hangs. How is
this done? It has no pillars to hold it up, but the Decree and Word of that
mighty God, who upholdeth all things by the Word of his power, Heb. 1. 3. His
power accompanying his Word upholdeth the earth in the midst of the air, and
shall it not support our hearts, in the midst of all temptations? If the
greatness of your former sins, of which you have now repented, dismay you;
remember what the word of the Lord says, in Isa. 55. 7. Let the wicked forsake
his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts; and let him return unto the
Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will multiply to
pardon. Say not, I cannot think that God can have any good purposes and
thoughts toward such a sinful wretch and rebel, as I have been. For, to prevent
this, the Lord adds, in ver. 8, 9. My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither
are your ways my ways, says the Lord. For as the heavens are higher than the
earth, so are my maies higher then your ways, and my thoughts then your
thoughts. If the Lord, in the time of your distress, bring to your remembrance
sins formerly, many years past, committed by you, but not repented of, look at
it, as an instruction, which he joyneth with correction, to awaken you to
repentance, as he did Joseph's brethren, when they were committed to prison,
Genesis 42. 21. But, if sins committed before your calling, or since, but repented
of, be set before you; do not think that they are unpardoned, or that the
pardon is revoked, or that God does it to upbraid you with them. God can, for
holy and good ends, read over to his servants old bills of debt, which yet are
cancelled, to humble them, and to make them more thankful, and more watchful.
Thus he made Job possess the sins of his youth, Job 13. 26. And if the Lord
defer the full and satisfying manifestation of his favor to you, after you
have repented; do not impute that dispensation to his not forgiving your sins,
but to his fatherly wisdom and love, to excite you thereby to perfect your
repentance unto the full mortifying of your sins. As David dealt with Absalom,
whom, though his heart was toward him, and, as a token thereof, he sent for
him to return to Jerusalem, yet he let him not see his face, for two years
after his return, 2 Samuel 14. 14, 28. So the Lord dealt with David, he pardoned
his sin. 2 Samuel 12. 13. yet withheld joy and gladness from him, till he had
more thoroughly repented, and fervently prayed that he would restore to him the
joy of his salvation, Psalm. 57.

The fourth Direction, is in reference to Gods delays; if yet you find not the
good you seek then, exercise your hope in its third work, which is, waiting
upon God. Hereunto the Lord encouraged his people in Captivity, by a Vision,
concerning their deliverance, which the Prophet Habbakuk received from God, and
of which the Lord said, The Vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end
it shall speak, and not lie; though it tarry, wait for it, because it will
surely come, it will not tarry, Hab: 2. 3. Set down this for a concluded truth,
which every true believer may rest upon, that, the Lord will not cast off for
ever, but, though he cause grief, yet will he have compassion according to the
multitude of his mercies, Lam. 3. 31, 32. And, that he may do so, he waits
for a fit season. For he is a God of judgment, as Isaiah says, in Isa. 30. 18.
Therefore will the Lord wait, that he may be gracious unto you, and therefore
will he be exalted, that he may have mercy upon you. For Jehovah is a God of
judgment. Blessed are all they that wait for him. The Lord waits for a time,
wherein he shall be exalted in being gracious unto his people. That time is the
time of their renewed repentance and conversion unto God, as to the Most High.
Then God will have the highest place in their hearts. Pray that this may be
wrought in you, and that thereby you may be fitted for the good you hope for,
and wait for it, till Gods time comes. For all they are blessed that wait for
him. They are now blessed in their state, and they shall be blessed in their
injoymens. In the mean time, they that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their
strength; they shall mount up with wings as Eagles, they shall run, and not be
weary; they shall walk, and not faint. Isa. 40. 31.

The fifth Direction is, in reference to afflictions continuing upon you; while
God delays his bestowing the good you wait for; exercise your hope in its
fourth work, which is patience. Wait with patience, For, if we hope for that we
see not, then do we with patience wait for it, Romans 8. 25. It is Christ's
precept, In your patience possess your souls, Luke 21. 19. As faith gives us
the possession of Christ, so patience gives us the possession, first, of our
selves, and, then, of all good things. Let patience have its perfect work,
says the Apostle, Iam. 1. 4. This it has two ways: 1. When it puts forth
perfect acts, whereunto it arises by certain steps. The first is a silent
submission, with a voluntary resignation of our selves to the will of God. So
David did, and said, I opened not my mouth, because it was thy doing, Psalm. 39.
9. The second is, a thankful acceptance of the affliction, with, as it were, a
kissing of the Rod, wherewith our heavenly Father corrects us. This is that,
which, in a soul truly humble, is called the accepting of the punishment of his
sin, Lev. 26. 41. unto this step Jobs patience ascended, who said, when he had
lost all his creature-possessions, The Lord has given, and the Lord has
taken, and blessed be the Name of the Lord, Job 1. 21. The third, and highest
step, is, to count it all joy, when ye fall into diverse temptations, Iam. 1. 2.
This is the highest step, for perfecting the actings of patience: Therefore he
adds to that, Let patience have its perfect work, to show that then it has
it. The second way whereby patience comes to have its perfect work, is, when
patience perseveres in acting. The good ground, says Christ, is the honest and
good heart, that brings forth fruit with patience, Luke 8. 15. where (...),
signifies both patience and perseverance. It is not sufficient to be patient in
some troubles, but it must be exercised in all; nor, at sometimes only, but
always; and then only and not else, patience has its perfect work, and when
patience has its perfect work, then every grace has its perfect work.

The third case, wherein we are to be instructed, how to exercise this hope
aright, in our private and personal concernments, is, in reference to the times
future. When fears of evils to come disquiet men's minds and hearts, many secret
mis-givings of heart are ^ncident even to true believers, by reason of the
flesh remaining in them, in part, that sundry outward afflictions, by crosses,
or losses of dearest relations, or of the means of outward subsistence, or of
liberty, or of life, may befall them: or inward temptations and sins may prevail
against them; which fears do usually dis-sweeten to them present mercies, and
accordingly hinder their thankfulness to God for them. Therefore the
instruction is of great importance, and of continual use, which we are now
upon. For the more distinct handling whereof I shall endeavor to clear two
things. 1. Something concerning such fears. 2. How this hope is to be exercised
about them.

1. For the first. Fear is an affliction acted and exercised upon the
apprehension of some impendent and approaching evil. This fear is, sometimes
culpable, sometimes commendable. 1. Fear is culpable, and a sin, when it is
opposite to trusting in God, of this Solomon says; The fear of man brings a
snare; but who so trusts in the law shall be set on high, Prove. 29. 5. He
shall be set above the reach of snares, and so be safe. This fear may be known
by three characters. 1. By its rise, when it arises from distrust in Gods
promises and providence. This is an habitual, ruling, distemper in all natural
men; it is not so in the regenerate; yet, by the strength of temptation, and
the flesh, in them, it sometimes prevails actually. Hence David discovered a
sudden perturbation of his mind, by unadvised speeches, which were
dishonorable to God, when he said, I shall perish one day by the hand of Saul,
1 Samuel 27. 1. and, I said in my have all men are liars, Psalm. 116. 11. 2. By
its immediate object; whether, it be sin, or trouble. 1. Fear least they should
hereafter fall into such or such a sin, fixes their thoughts upon sin, and
insnares them in sin. It is very dangerous to propound to a man's self any
thought of sin, as sin, especially, of the materials of sin. For such is man's
weakness, and Satan's subtilty, that the contemplation of sin in the thoughts,
though it be not done with any intent to commit it, but to avoid it, defiles
the soul, before men are aware. For sin is a defiler, and leaves a stain behind
it, whereby thoughts of sin soon become sinful thoughts, and the speculation of
sin falls into speculative acting sin. Hereof the Apostle James warns us, in
Iam. 1. 14. Saying, Every man is tempted, when he is drawn aside of his own
lust, and enticed. Then, when lust has conceived, it brings forth sin, etc.
2. Fear of future troubles and sufferings, arising from fore-thinking them,
becomes blameworthy, three ways. 1. When they imagine such as are never
likely to befall them, and are disquieted with fears of them. This is to fear
shadows; which argues weakness in the judgment, or guilt in the conscience.
That may be said to such truly, which Zebul spoke to Gaal skoffingly; Thou
see the shadows of the mountains, as if they were men, Judge. 9. 36. It is
threatened for a punishment upon sinners, in Lev. 26. 36. and executed upon
them, in Prove. 28. 1. 2. When they think of future evils, which are but
possible, and, at the most, but probable, with such terror, as if they were
certain and inevitable; and so give certain strength to an uncertain cross.
This God reproves, in Isa. 57. 11. 3. When they multiply and magnify evils,
that are to be expected as certainly future, above their dueproportion, and so
fear lesser evils, as if they were the greatest evils. Christ warned his
Disciples of this, in Mat. 10. 28. The third Character of such fears, is the
evil effects of them. 1. Bondage, which is contrary to faith, Romans 8. 15. 2.
Torment, which is contrary to love, 1 John 4. 8. 3. Discouragement, from using
good means for the prevention of the thing feared. Hence the distrustful Jews
rejected the Prophets exhortation to conversion; saying, if our transgression,
and our sins be upon us, and we pine away in them; how should we then live,
Ezekiel. 33. 10. 4. Venturing upon the use of unwarranted means to avoid the thing
feared; whereby they bring it upon themselves. Thus Saul, fearing that, if
David lived, his posterity should not succeed him in the throne, sought to kill
him; and the Sanhedrim fearing that, if Christ were let alone, all men would
believe in him, and the Romans would come, and take away both their place and
Nation; concluded, that Christ must be put to death. Both brought upon
themselves that which they feared, by the wrath of God against them, for using
ill means to avoid it. According to Gods threatening denounced against all such,
in Prove. 10. 24. The fear of the wicked shall come upon him.

2. Fear is commendable, and good, and our duty, when it has hope in Gods
mercy joined inseperably with it. Of this fear David says, Behold, the eye of
the Lord is upon them that fear him, upon them that hope in his mercy, Psalm.
33. 18. Again, The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him; in those that
hope in his mercy, Psalm. 147. 11. This ^^lial reverential fear of God may be
known by three Characters. 1. By the rise of it; it arises from faith. By
faith Noah moved with fear prepared an ark, Heb. 11. 7. 2. By the direct and
immediate object of it, which is God himself. This was so eminent in Izhack,
that God has a denomination from Izhacks fear of him, he is called the fear of
Izhack, Genesis 31. 53. When others fear men, fear poverty, fear disgrace, a
believer fears God, the Majesty, Authority, power of the great God is strong
upon his heart. This makes him careful to worship God, according to his
revealed will, and to walk uprightly before God, to honor, serve, and please
him in his whole conversation, and to seek the face of God in Jesus Christ. 3.
By its effects, which are such as these: 1. It keeps from carnal security, and
placing our rest and contentment in worldly things. Thus it wrought in Job,
whilst he lived in outward prosperity. Therefore he said, in his affliction;
the thing that I greatly feared is come unto me. I was not in safety, neither
had I rest, neither was I quiet, Job 3. 25, 26. and from trusting in spiritual
privileges and graces received; whereof Paul warns all Gentile-Christians,
saying; be not high minded, but fear, Romans 11. 20. 2. It makes men careful to
avoid what might provoke God against them, and bring on them the evil feared.
Hence they fear and avoid sin, as a deadly snare. The fear of the Lord, is a
wellspring of life, to depart from the snares of death, Prove. 14. 27. 2.
Hardness of heart, as a mischievous evil, Prove. 28. 14. Blessed is the man
that fears always, but he that hardneth his heart, shall fall into mischief.
3. Departing from God, so says God, I will put my fear in their hearts, that
they shall not depart from me, Jer. 32. 46. 3. This fear quickens to use all
good means to sense our selves against future evils; as fear of an inundation
causes men to raise banks, for keeping out the Sea, and, if a breach be made;
to repair it speedily. Thus this fear wrought in Jacob, when Esau came out
against him; and in Noah, to provide against the deluge; and in those
Egyptians, to keep themselves and their cattle in their houses, to escape the
storm, which Moses foretold would kill all that were in the field. The more we
are prepared, by this fear, for afflictions, before they come, the less we
shall be oppressed with them, when they come. For thereby, either afflictions
shall be weakened, and less able to hurt us, or we shall be strengthened, and
more able to bear them. Now, this hope, whereof we speak, being rightly
excercised, will be of great efficacy, to quicken good fear, and to subdue
sinful fear in us. Therefore, I shall endeavor to show you how you may
exercise this hope aright, in four Directions.

1. Lay a sure groundwork for this hope to be built upon. This is then done,
when you know that your soul says, the Lord is your portion. For, 1. This will
assure your interest in God himself, who is an all-sufficient portion. When you
can say, with David, The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance and of my Cup,
Psalm. 16. 5. you may comfortably add, as he did, in ver. 6. The lines are
fallen unto me in pleasant places: yea, I have a goodly heritage. 2. This will
cause you to cleave to the Lord with purpose of heart, as Barnabas exhorted the
Antiochians to do, in Acts 11. 23. For where a man's treasure is, there will his
heart be also, Mat. 6. 21. As the needle in the Compass, being touched with
the Lodestone, is in continual motion, till it points to the North; the reason
whereof, some conceive, is, because in the North are Rocks of Lodestone, with
which the needle so touched has a sympathy: so the soul being touched by the
spirit of faith, is in continual motion, till it points unto God in Christ,
that living Rock and true Lodestone, who draws believers to him by a spiritual
sympathy which they have with him; as he said in Ioh. 12. 32. I, if I be lifted
up from the earth, will draw all men unto me. Then, and not before, they have
true rest. Then they may say with David, Return unto thy rest, O my soul! Psalm.
116. 7. 3. This will settle and strengthen your hearts against all distracting,
discouraging, distrustful fears about future evils. For, things to come are
yours, when you are Christ's, 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23. The worst that can be-fall you,
shall not loose that blessed union that is between God in Christ and your
souls. Not sin past, for that is already pardoned; and therefore shall not
condemn you hereafter, Romans 8. 1. nor shall sin to come, have dominion over
you, Romans 6. 14. For you are kept by the power of God, through faith, unto
salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 5. Nor death, though it may separate two near friends, the
soul and body; yet it shall join together more fully and perfectly two better
friends, Christ and the soul, which, when it is absent from the body, is
present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5. 8. and, in the Resurrection, when both shall
be reunited, we shall be for ever with the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. Nor
temptations; See how Paul triumphed over all principalities and powers, over
life and death, over things present and to come, in assurance that nothing
should separate him, or any true believer, from the love of God in Christ
Jesus, Romans 8. 38, 39. yea, that all things should work for his and their good,
Romans 8. 28. A believer in Christ is as sure of the time to come, as he is of
the time presentor past. For he can say, with the Church, in Ps. 48. ult. This
God is our God, and he will be our guide unto death; and can look unto Christ,
as Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, which is and which was, and
which is to come, the Almighty, Rev. 1. 8. and he has the promises of God in
Christ for the future, Isa. 46. 3, 4. Joh. 10. 27, 28, 29.

2. This ground work being well laid, build upon it, for the future, by
excersing this hope, 1. In its purging work, 1 John 3. 3. to purge out
inordinate affection, whereby the soul cleaves close and fast to present things
and creatures, whence, they are as afraid to part with them, as one is to have
a piece of linen cloth or plaster plucked off from an ulcerous sore,
whereunto it sticks so fast, that it can hardly be pulled away without great
pain, and without drawing the skin and part of the flesh with it; whereas if
that ulcerous matter were purged, and the sore healed, the plaster would fall
off it self, and the cloth might be taken away, without any pain or difficulty.
Hoping in God, being rightly excercised, works this great cure, by rectifying
men's apprehensions concerning the creatures, and ordering their affections
aright toward God, looking at both with the eye of faith, by Scripture light,
which represents all things, out of God in Christ, when they become the objects
of our hope, as vain, and sinful and hurtful. The creatures are good, as they
come out of Gods hand, but as they are abused, by being idolized, they become
vain, and degenerate into nothing. For as an idol is nothing in the world, 1
Cor. 8. 4. nothing, which men account it to be, not to be trusted in. So,
creature are but vain and empty, like those blasted ears of corn, in Pharaohs
dream, unless God fills them with his blessing. It is a common error and
delusion, to think that, if you had such friends, such relations, such estates,
etc. you should live happily and comfortably. For, as David said of an horse,
in reference to getting the victory, an horse is a vain thing: So we may say of
all creatures being separated from God, in reference to happiness and comfort,
they are vain things to be trusted in, for which Christ called that rich man a
fool, Luke 12. 19, 20. 2. It is a sin against the first Commandment, to give
the honor which is due to God alone, unto any creature, as men do that glory
in them, Jer. 9. 23, 24. and set their hearts upon them, Psalm. 62. 10, 11. This
is idolatry, Col. 3. 5. It is Atheism, a denial of Gods all sufficiency, which
is his peculiar glory, and the foundation of upright walking in the Saints,
Genesis 17. 1. Its the cause of all sins. The Schoolmen do rightly define sin to
be an aversion of the soul from the immutable God and turning of it to the
mutable creature. For all sin implies an over-valuing of the creatures, and an
under-valuing of God. See with what indignation God reproves this sin, in Jer.
2. 13, 14. 3. Thus to cleave unto present things, and creatures is very hurtful
to your selves. For, 1. It steals men's hearts from God (as Absalom stole the
hearts of the people from David) unto things that cannot profit, nor deliver,
for they are vain, 1 Samuel 12. 25. 2. It provokes God to withdraw and
withold his concourse and blessing from the creatures, without which you
cannot have any good from them, nor by them; your own experience may convince
you of this. For hence it is that the creatures work unequally, not always one
way; friends and other things, sometimes comfort us, sometimes afflict us.
Physic could not cure Asa, because he trusted in the Physicians more than in
God; that all may see, creatures cannot of themselves do us any good, but as
God works by them, and with them, whose peculiar glory it is to do good or
evil, Isa. 41. 23. 3. It provokes God to hide his face from you; and then,
though your mountain stand, you will not have peace, as David found, in Psalm.
30. 6; 7. Yea, to fill you with terrors in the midst of your jollities, as
he did Belshazzar, in Dan. 5. yea, to reject your prayers, in the day of your
distress, and to send you to your Idols for help, as he did those, in Judge.
10. 13, 14. For they that observe lying vanities, forsake their own mercies,
Jon. 2. 8.

3. The third direction is, to exercise this hope in its quickening work. For
this hope is a lively hope, 1 Pet. 1. 3. it, being quickened by the livemaking
spirit, has lively operations and efficacy, in the souls of believers to
quicken true child-^ike fear of God in them, which is the beginning of wisdom,
Prove. 1. 7. for, though knowledge and faith go before it, yet there is no true
wisdom in either of them, unless they work in a man this fear. This fear will
make us stand in aw of. God, when we see the effects of his wrath upon others.
So it wrought in David, when he saw Vzzah smitten dead, in 2 Samuel 7. 6, 9. and
when he saw that God did put away the wicked as dross, Psalm. 119. 12. and in
all, that heard of the dreadful stroke of Gods vengeance upon Ananiah and
Saphira, in Acts 5. 5. 10, 11. It will make men tremble at his word, Isa. 66.
2. at the commands of the word, lest they should disobey them; at the
threatenings of the word; lest they should fall under them, 2 Kings 22. 19. at
the promises of the word; lest they should fall short of them, Heb. 4. 1. This
fear breeds care, and quickens to self-humbling, putting his mouth in the dust,
if there may be hope, Lam. 3. 29. and to speedy reformation; as we see in that
speech of Shecaniah unto Ezra, Ezra. 10. 2, 3. and to fervent prayer, as we see
it wrought in Jacob, Hos. 12. 4. with Genesis 32. and Hezekiah, Jer. 26. 19. and
the King and people of Niniveh, Jon. 3. 5. and the Prophet Habbakuk, Hab. 3.
16. It quickens believers to seek access unto God by the Mediator, Deuteronomy. 5.
27, 28. 29. and therefore to fly unto Christ, as chickens get under the wings
of the hen, in affrightments, and to trust in God, through Christ, and in his
word. So it wrought in David, Psalm. 56. 3. Lastly, it quickens us to fear the
Lord and his goodness, Hos. 3. 5. it will not suffer men to be wanton upon the
goodness of God, to slight his goodness, to do evil, because God is good; or
to sin, that grace may abound: but it will cause them to fear the Lord and his
goodness, fear to offend his goodness. The goodness of God will strongly
engage their hearts to walk closely and uprightly with God.

4. The fourth Direction is, to exercise this hope in its encouraging and
strengthening work, to establish and settle our hearts against all discouraging
distrustful fears: 1. Of evil tidings, Psalm. 112. 1, 7. 2. Of evil times; when
all things are turned upside down, and the mountains, Princes and great
Potentates, render themselves terrible to the Church and people of God, and the
profane multitude rage against them, like the roaring of the waters, and they
can have no rest in their dwellings; yet they the Church and people of God
shall have sweet refreshments, by the Promises and Ordinances, as they of
Jerusalem had by the waters of Siloah, and safety, by the protection of God,
who is their refuge, and a present help in times of trouble; as it is
excellently expressed, in Psalm. 46. 3. Of the prosperity and opposition of evil
men, against which David comforted himself by hoping in God, Psalm. 49. 5. 16.
and, upon his experience encouraged all believers to take the same course,
Psalm. 27. 1, 2, 3, 13, 14. 4. Of whatever may or can befall them, in this World,
Psalm. 91. 1, etc, For, 1. God is graciously present with them, Romans 8. 31.
Therefore they may be confident of safety against future evil, as David was,
Psalm. 23. 4. Though armies should surround them, as the Syrians did Elisha,
they have no cause of discouraging fears; for, if the Lord open the eyes of
their faith, they may see an invisible guard of Angels about them, as Elisha's
servant saw about his Master, 2 Kings 6. 15. 2. They are dear to God, as the
apple of his eye, Zach. 2. 8. 3. All future events are in Gods, not their
enemies, not in their own hands, Psalm. 31. 15. 4. They have the sure word and
promises of God, for them, Isa. 41. 10, 11, 12. and 43. 1, 2. 5. God is, in all
the changes that pass over them, unchangeable, as in himself, Jam. 1. 17. so
in his love to them, Jer. 31. 3. and in his faithfulness in his promises,
Psalm. 56. 4. to whom they are called to commit their souls in well doing, as
into the hands of a faithful Creator, 1 Pet. 4. 19. doing their own duties, and
leaving events to God, as Jacob Genesis 43. 14. Hest. 4. 16. and they in Dan. 3.
16, 17, 18:

The second case, wherein we are to be instructed how to exercise this, in
reference to the public state of the Churches of Christ under persecution, and
the oppression of enemies, remains to be spoken to. Which that I may the more
distinctly and fully declare; I shall endeavor to clear two things: 1. What
the present condition of all the Protestant Churches, throughout Europe is. 2.
How we may and ought to exercise this hope, in reference thereunto.

1. To clear the first, I shall give you a true Narrative of the Protestant
Churches, in Europe, singly and severally considered, as I have received it
from a faithful and unquestionable hand. Mr. Duries Representation of the state
of the Protestant Churches in Europe.
1. the Churches in Poland, Bohemia, Moravia, Anstria, and Silesia, which were,
not long since, many and flourishing, are now wholly dissipated and wasted. 2.
Though some Churches remain in Transylvania and Hungary, yet they are in danger
to be ruined by any advantage of power which the house of Austria may get
against them. 3. In Germany, the Churches are so divided, and the Protestant
States are so distracted, that, not only all concurrences in a common way, for
their mutual edification and preservation are hindered; but also, as the
Lutheran party, by their contentious ministry, has set it self to destroy the
rest, so God has suffered their chief Protectors, the Kings of Sweeon and
Denmark, to destroy each other. And the Electors of Saxony and Brandenburg, not
respecting the safety of their Churches, do serve the Austrian design against
the Protestant interest. Nor is there any considerable Prince in Germany,
except the Landsgrave of Hessen, that is able to do any thing of moment to
maintain that interest. 4. In the Low Couutreys; their present actings tend
rather to serve the enemies design against the Protestant Interest, then for
it. 5. In France, the Protestant Churches are deprived of their former
privileges. So that their standing is a mere toleration, at pleasure. 6. In
Geneva, we are informed, from other hands, that the Duke of Savoy would impose
a Governor and a Bishop upon them, or, in case, of their refusal, threatens to
besiege them; and that the King of France refuses to protect them, unless
they will receive a Bishop. 7. In the valleys of Piemont; the Duke of Savoy
does still most cruelly, though not openly, oppress and vex the Protestants,
notwithstanding the peace made with them; by giving them up to the power of the
Popish Inquisition, which threatens their utter ruin, if God does not prevent
it. 8. In Switzerland, the Pope and the Austrians, have stirred up and hired
the Popish Cantons to break their fundamental League with the Protestants, by
persecuting to death or banishment all such as leave their superstitions to
become Proselytes to us. 9. How it is with our native Country, England, and
those conjoined with it, in Scotland and Ireland, you have formerly heard, in
part, and may have more hereafter. 2. If we add hereunto the great advantages
which the Popish party has against the Protestants, and what posture the
Protestant Churches are in, in respect of their mutual relation each to other,
to oppose this combination of their enemies, so strongly and universally laid;
it will be manifest that the Antichristian party had never so great advantage
against the Churches of Christ, since the Reformation began, as now they have.
For, 1. Whereas formerly the Popish parties were divided, now, their
differences being composed, they are all united in one common design against
the Protestant Religion and Churches; and their head, the Pope, does manage
their common interest with much subtlety and vigor, and that openly, by
innumerable Agents and Emissaries, who are subordinate to the Congregation de
propaganda fide, who creep into all Protestant States and professions, to
observe any distance or divisions among them, to widen and foment the same in
the minds of the common sort, and to cast stumbling blocks cunningly before all
the rest, and thereupon to insinuate the more plausibly their own
superstitions. Hence, in France, where the popish Inquisition was not formerly
admitted, it is now of late introduced under a new name of the Congregation de
propaganda fide; which is an Inquisition in effect, and has begun to act there
with public Authority, prohibiting all commerce from abroad, for the vent of
Divinity books; in so much that they do not suffer Bibles brought from Geneva
to be sold any where, but do confiscate them. And in every City in France,
where a Church of Protestants is, there is also a certain number of Emissaries,
belonging to the Congregation de propaganda fide, settled, to oppose and vex
them. And it is intended that this design shall be prosecuted universally
against all protestant Churches in other places, so soon as the Protestant
States shall be sufficiently weakened, by divisions among themselves. 2. It is
greatly to be lamented, that, whilst Satan's Instruments are so active and
united to advance his Kingdom; we who are sujects of Christ's Kingdom, and so
many ways bound to advance it, are so careless of Christ his interest, that,
on the one hand, licentiousness, profaneness, heresies, blasphemies, and
wickednesses break forth, to the reproach of Christian Religion; and, on the
other hand, the divided professo^s thereof seek and follow eagerly their own
advantages, of power and places to undermine the settlement of each other; and
while the enemies have Agents every where, and an universal correspondency to
weaken us by division, and then to ruin us; no such way of Agency or
correspondency is set on foot by public Authority among us to engage the
godly-wise and peaceable to join with us to lay the co^mon-Gospel-interest to
heart, and to communicate counsel and assistance each to other, at least, to
pray for one another suitably to the exigencies of things, that when help
fails on earth, it may be procured from the mighty God immediately. For which
the Lord may justly dash us into pieces, one against another, as vessels unfit
for his honor and service.

2. This being the present state of all the Churches of Christ in Europe, I
proceed to instruct you to exercise this hope aright, in reference thereunto:
Which that I may do, I must clear two things: 1. What disposition of spirit is
necessary to qualify the person, to make him a fit subject of this hope. 2.
How they who are thus qualified must exercise it.

1. For the first; whosoever would have and exercise this hope in reference to
the public state of the afflicted Churches of Christ, they must have and
exercise public spirits in the communion of Saints, that is, they must be
sanctified by faith in Christ, and joined unto Christ visibly, as the head of
his Church, in communion with the Church, which is his body, and take to heart
the public state of the Churches, and Christ his interest in them, whatever
their own private condition is, and to prefer the public concernments before
and above their own private, in their judgments, affections, and endeavors. We
must esteem that spiritual Society, and the concernments of it, as more
considerable then our own. Hereof God himself gives us example, who preferres
his Church before and above all the World besides, as his chief treasure, Exodus
19. 5. his jewels, Mal. 3. 17. tells them that they are so precious in his
sight, and honorable and loved of him; that he will give men for them, and
people for their life, Isa. 43. 4. as he did call off Senacherib from
Jerusalem, by sending Tirrhaka the King of Aethiopia, to invade his land, and
so gave both Aethiopians and Egyptians into his hand, to free his Church from
him. Now, Gods judgment of persons and things should be the rule of our
judgment. For we know that the judgment of God is according to truth. So did
Moses, whose love acted so highly from his high esteem of the Church and Gods
interest of honor in it, that, though God offered to make him a great Nation,
if he would let him alone, that he might consume Israel in the Wilderness,
Exodus 33. 10. yet he was so far from accepting it, that he prayed the Lord to
forgive their sin, and, if not, to blot him out of the Book which he had
written, ver. 32. David was so strongly engaged in his affections to the Church
of God, that if all his petitions were to be put into one; it should be this,
that he might dwell in the house of the Lord, to behold his beauty there, Psalm.
27. 4. he had rather be one day there, then a thousand elsewhere, and to be a
Doorkeeper in Gods House, than to dwell in the Tents of wickedness, Psalm. 84.
9, 10. The place of the public holy assemblies, was a Tent, a Tabernacle, an
unfixed, a moveable place, yet he calls that an House, a fixed Mansion. The
people dwelt in houses firmly built upon foundations; yet David accounted the
houses of wicked men Tabernacles; he looked for no stability in the World, but
only in the Church and fellowship of those that are in Covenant. See how
affectionately he speaks of Church Assemblies and Communion with them, Psalm.
122. 8, 9. of the same mind and spirit were the Saints in the Babilonish
Captivity, Psalm. 137. 5, 6. And the same spirit works the like disposition in
all the members of Christ's mystical body; whether one member suffer, all the
members suffer with it; or one member be honored, all the members rejoice with
it, 1 Cor. 12. 26. And they see good reason for their so acting in the
concernments of the Churches of Christ. For, 1. They know that God has
recorded his Name there; and his Name is put upon Church members, and therefore
his Name is honored, or dishonored, as things are well or ill with his
Church. Hence it was, that Josua was so exceedingly afflicted for the flight of
the people before Ai, though but about thirty six were slain; what shall I say,
when Israel flies before the enemies? and the Canaanites will hear of it, etc.
and what will thou do to thy great Name? Josh. 7. 8, 9. Therefore Christ
teaches us to join these together immediately; Hallowed be thy Name: Thy
Kingdom come, to show us that answerable to the well being of the Church, which
is the Kingdom of grace, will be the honor of Gods Name, in this World. 2.
They know that the welfare of all States and people, where Churches are,
depends upon the welfare of the Church. For so runs the promise; Israel shall
be a blessing in the midst of the land, Isa. 19. 24. Hence it was that the
Saints could not be satisfied with their own private welfare, if the Church of
God was in affliction and danger, or under reproach. As you may see in Vriah, 2 Samuel 11. 11. in Nehemiah, Neh. 1. 3, 4. with 2. 2, etc. and in Daniel, though
he was as highly preferred, as a subject could be, in the greatest Monarchy,
Dan. 10. 2, 3. Hence also, when there has been a double affliction upon them,
both public and private; the public has swallowed up the private, and made
it inconsiderable, in comparison. As we see in Eli. 1 Samuel 4. 18. and his
daughter in law, the wife of Phineas, ver. 21, 22. Lastly, hence it was, that
when they have had a double opportunity, of doing or procuring good to the
public, and to their own private; they have preferred the public advantage
before their own private interest. Thus Terentius a Christian Commander in the
Wars under the Emperor Valens, who was an Arrian, being willed by that Emperor,
for a special service done by him, to demand what he would, made his petition
to the Emperor, which he presented to him in writing; that the Christians might
have the liberty of a Church by themselves, to worship God apart from the
Arrians. The Emperor read his petition, and disliking it, tore it, and threw it
away. Terentius meekly gathered up the scattered pieces, and professed to the
Emperor, that, if he could not be heard in Gods cause, he would not make any
suit for his own profit. How may this worthy man shame most Christians, in
these days, who, if their garners may be full, their sheep multiply, their oxen
be strong to labor, their sons be as plants grown up, and their daughters
polished and set forth with ornaments, and there be no complaining in the
streets; think themselves happy, and regard not what becomes of religion, and
of Christ's cause and interest in the Churches, take not to heart the
afflictions of Gods people; if their trading increase; one good bargain will
more comfort them then all the calamities of the Church can grieve them; they
can hear and speak of the breaches and ruins of Sion, as the Athenians did of
news, without remorse, or regard. Brethren, it is a weighty matter to read
letters, and receive intelligence in them concerning the state of the Churches.
You had need to lift up your hearts to God, when you are about to read your
letters from our native Country, to give you wisdom and hearts duly affected,
that you may receive such intelligences, as you ought. For God looks upon every
man, in such cases, with a jealous eye, observing with what workings of bowels
they read or speak of the concernments of his Church. You see, in Amos 6. 6.
how his wrath was incensed against those who solaced themselves with their
private prosperity, but were not sick, their hearts aked not, for the
afflictions of Joseph. 3. They know that, if they withdraw from being helpful
to the Church, God will do good to his Church without them; but he will be
avenged upon them that desert or neglect his cause and people. This Argument
Mordecai used to Hester, in Hest. 4. 13, 14. and it prevailed mightily with her
to run the utmost hazard of her own person, when there might be hope of some
good to the Church thereby, ver. 16. For the contrary, Meroz was cursed by the
Angel of the Lord, because they came not to the help of the Lord against the
mighty, Judge. 5. 23. Though men cannot help the Lord, essentially or
personally, yet they may be said to help him, relatively, in his cause and
people, when they own his cause and people, and appear on that side, when Satan
and his instruments raise persecutions and reproaches against them: Though the
Lord needs not men's help, in such cases; for, when he saw that there was no
mon, no intercessor, his own arm brought salvation unto him, Isa. 51. 16. yet
it is our duty to show on whose side we stand. For Christ will look at them as
his enemies that disown his cause and people, at such times, as he says, He
that is not with me, is against me, Mat. 12. 30. Are the people and ways of
God under reproach? Christ is reproachd in them and with them, Romans 15. 3.
Object. Ah! but they are called fools and fanatics? Answ. When was it
otherwise? Bernard complained of the like, Bern. de cons. ad Eugen. lib. 4.
in his time; Ipsa Religio in opprobrium venit, and timor Domini simplicitas
reputatur, ne dicam, fatuitas. That is, Religion it self comes into reproach,
and the fear of God is accounted simplicity, that I say not folly. And, before
him, Augustine describes the scoffs August. de Verb. Dom.
and frumps of lukewarm professors against the zeal of those that were fervent
in spirit, serving the Lord, Quid insanis? aiunt nimius est. Nuncquid alii non
sunt Christiani? Ista stultitia est, dementia est. That is, Why art thou mad?
say they, your zeal is too much. What? are none Christians but you? That is
folly, it is fanatiquenesse. And, before his time, long, how were the ancient
Christians in the Ten Persecutions 300, years after Christ traduced reproached!
Rev. 12. 10. Before that, in the Apostles days, Paul says of himself, and the
rest, we are fools for Christ's sake, etc, 1 Cor. 4. 10. and, if we be besides
our selves, it is to God, 2 Cor. 5. 13. Peter and John esteemed it a grace to
be disgraced for Christ, Acts 5. 41. Christ well knew how cross to the natural
affection of all men reproach and disgrace is; therefore he, to arm his
disciples against it, shows them the happiness they should have by suffering
reproaches and revilings, for his sake, and the Gospel, Mat. 5. 11, 12. and the
wo^^^ issue of declining it, Mar. 8. 28. Christ added, as a motive, to
encourage his Disciples in suffering reproaches, that so persecuted they the
Prophets, Mat. 5. 12. which of the Prophets escaped sharp trials, this way?
yea, David himself, though a King, was despised by Michal for his zeal in
bringing home the Ark, and dancing before it, with his head uncovered, as one
of the vain persons, said she: but David was so far from being discouraged
thereby, that his zeal was more inflamed, and his resolution increased; it was
before the Lord, said he, which chose me before thy Father, etc. And I will be
yet more vile then thus, and will be base, in mine own sight, etc. 2 Samuel 6.
21, 22. I have spoken the more largely unto this, because the present
temptation of this time, in the other afflictions of the Churches, is the
reproachful titles put upon the people of God, whom profane men call
Phanaticks. But, if he is a fool that will be laughed out of his coat; much
mure is he a fool, and a mad man, that will suffer himself to be laughed out of
heaven, that will hazard the loss of his soul, and salvation to free himself
from the mocks and scoffs of a profane and sinful World. If Christ had not,
for our sakes endured the cross, despising the shame, we could never have been
redeemed and saved; let us go forth therefore unto him, without the Camp,
bearing his reproach, Heb. 13. 13. In the same Epistle, the Christian Hebrews
are exhorted to call to remembrance the former days, in which, after they were
illuminated, they endured a great fight of afflictions, partly, whilst they
were made a gazing stock, both by reproaches, and afflictions; and partly,
whilst they became companions of them that were so used, Heb. 10. 32, 33. Let
us do likewise, and own the reproached and persecuted people and cause of
Christ in suffering times. Withold not countenance, entertainment,
protection, from such, if they come to us, from other Countries, as from France
or England, or any other place. Be not forgetful to entertain strangers; for
thereby some have entertained Angels unawares. Remember them that are in bonds,
as bound with them, and them which suffer adversity, as being your selves also
in the body, Heb. 13. 2, 3. the Lord required this of Moab, saying, Make thy
shadow, as the night in the midst of the noon day, i. e. provide safe and
comfortable shelter and refreshment for my people, in the heat of persecution
and opposition raised against them, hide the outcasts, bewray not him that
wandereth. Let mine outcasts dwell with thee Moab, be thou a covert to them
from the face of the spoiler, Isa. 16. 3, 4. Object. But so I may expose my
self to be spoiled or troubled? He therefore, to remove this objection, adds,
for the danger is at an end, the spoiler cease, the treaders down, are
consumed out of the land. While we are attending to our duty, in owning, and
harboring Christ's witnesses, God will be providing for their and our safety,
by destroying those that would destroy his people. Two helps I shall propound,
to arm you against those fears of reproach, or dangers, whereby men are apt to
be drawn to flinch from the cause and witnesses of Christ, in suffering times.
1. Strengthen your faith. A sight of the invisible God, and an eye to the
recompense of reward so quickened and strengthened the faith of Moses, that he
chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches,
then the treasures of Egypt, Heb. 11. 25, 26. And, as faith will strengthen
you hereunto; so faith will be strengthened hereby, in your prayers against
being lead into temptation, and left unto scandalous evils, that might expose
you to just reproach. Therefore David having put up this request to God, that
none that wait on God and seek him should be ashamed or confounded for his
sake, urges this, as an Argument, to strengthen his faith; Because for thy
sake I have born reproach, shame has covered my face, Psalm. 69. 5. 6, 7. 2.
Exalt God, as the highest object of your fear. Fear God, as he ought to be
feared, fear him above all. The greater fear will expel the lesser. Therefore
the Lord prescribes this fearing him aright, as the best remedy against all
carnal fears, whereby men are wont to be hindered from obeying God in those
duties that will expose men to hurt from the creature, Isa. 8. 12, 13. and
Chap. 51. 7, 8, 12, 13. So does Christ, in Mat. 10. 28. The balking of any
duty, which God commands, is the ready way to bring upon you, by the wrath of
God, that very evil, which you fear that the doing of your duty will expose you
to, by the wrath of men. This was that Argument, which the Prophet Jeremy used,
to Zedekiah, in Jer. 38. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Because he, fearing lest the Jews,
that were fallen to the Caldaeans, should deliver him into their hand, and they
should mock him; by disobeying the Commandment of God, brought upon himself,
as a just punishment from the wrath of God, the thing which he feared.

2. The next thing to be shown, for your instruction, is, how they that are so
qualified should exercise this hope, in reference to the public concernments
of the Churches, in this their low and afflicted condition. For this purpose I
shall propound two directions.

1. See that you lay a sure foundation of this hope, a firm groundwork for
this hope to be built and exercised upon; faith in God as his Churches portion,
is this groundwork. Therefore, let the eye of your faith, through the glass
of the word, look unto God, in this case; as Jehosaphat did, in 2 Chronicles. 20.
12. We have no might against this great company that comes against us;
neither know we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee. Look not so much with
the eye of sense downward, and round about you, as with the eye of faith
upward, and into the scripture-promises. There, if the Lord open your eyes, you
shall see that more are with the Church and cause, and people of God, then can
be against them. This course David took, and was comforted, even when he was
surrounded with dangers, Psalm. 25. 15. Mine eyes are ever toward the Lord,
said he, for he shall pluck my feet out of the net. That your faith in God may
be strengthened in this hour of temptation, in these times of the afflictions
of Joseph; consider three things: 1. Christ his interest of propriery in the
Churches of the Saints. For the Church is Christ's Vineyard. The Vineyard of the
Lord of Hosts is the house of Israel, Isa. 5. 7. Salomons Vineyard in
Baal-haman was the choicest parcel of his lands. Christ's Vineyard is the
chiefest part of his inheritance in the World. Solomon let forth his Vineyard
to Keepers. But of this Vineyard, his Church, Christ says, My Vineyard which
is mine, is before me, Cant. 8. 11, 12. Christ does not let forth his Vineyard
unto Keepers, but himself keeps it under his own eye continually. Indeed, when
his Vineyard answers not his cost and pains bestowed upon it, but, when he
looks that it should bring forth grapes, it brings forth wild grapes, then,
he will take away the hedge thereof, and break down the wall hereof, and then
it shall be eaten up, and trodden down, Isa. 5. 4, 5. then the boar out of the
Wood will waste it, and the wild beast of the field will devour it, for a time,
till God attain his end, in their repentance and amendment; and then he will be
entreated to return, and look down from heaven and behold and visit this Vine,
Psalm. 80. 13, 14. And when it becomes a Vineyard of red wine, holding forth the
value and virtue of the blood of Christ, in their faith and obedience, see what
he says of it: I the Lord do keep it, I will water it every moment; lest any
hurt it, I will keep it night and day, Isa. 27. 2, 3. 2. The Church is Christ's
house, the house of the living God, 1 Timothy 3. 15. an house which cost him more
then all the silver, and gold, and precious stones in the world will amount
unto. For God purchased the Church with his blood, Acts 20. 27, 28. Christ is
the builder and governor of it, Heb. 3. 3, 6. and therefore he will see to it,
when it suffers any hurt, that it be repaired, and kept in repair. 3. The
Church is Christ's Kingdom, which God will maintain against all rebels, as you
see at large, in the second Psalm. 4. The Church is Christ's spouse, and
therefore nearer and dearer to him then any other society in the World, At his
right hand stands the Queen in gold of Ophir, Psalm. 45. 9. as Solomon set his
Mother at his right hand, to show that she was next to him, and above all other
his subjects. Ahasuerosh his wrath was so incensed against Haman, for plotting
against his Queen, and her people, that he determined evil against him, and
when he saw him fallen upon the bed whereon Hester was (though he did it to
make request for his life) his wrath so boiled up to the height, that he said;
will he force the Queen also before me in the house? Then they covered Hamans
face, and, at the Kings command, hanged him upon the Gallows which he had
prepared for Mordecai, as you may see in the 7th. Chapter of Hester. The love
of Christ to the Church, which is his spouse, infinitely exceeds the love of
Ahasuerosh to Hester. Therefore they consult misery and ruin to themselves and
their families, who plot against the Church. And woe to them that would force
the Church to their own wills and devises, contrary to the mind of Christ. 5.
The Church is Christ's body and fullness; Christ has not his fullness without
his Church. God has put all things under Christ's feet, and has given him to
be the Head over all things to the Church, which is his body, the fullness of
him that fills all in all, Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. Hence he sympathiseth with them.
In all their afflictions he is afflicted, Isa. 63. 9. and what is done against
them, is done against him. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Acts 9. 4. as
when the least toe is trodden upon, the head, by the tongue, cries, why do you
hurt me? you see what Christ's interest of propriety in his Church is, i. e. the
greatest that can be. For it is his Vineyard, yea, more, his house, yet higher,
his Kingdom, yet dearer, his spouse, and nearer yet, his own body. And, you
know, propriety is of great force with all, to use all their wisdom and power
to maintain and preserve their interest. Much more will Christ vindicate his
own interest of propriety in his Church against all opposers of it. 2. Consider
the Covenant, whereinto God has taken his Church and people, together with the
promises, that, as so many branches of the Covenant, belong unto them thereby.
God says unto his Church, I swear unto thee, and entered into a Covenant with
thee, and thou becamest mine, Ezekiel. 16. 8. and of God it is said; he will ever
be mindful of his Covenant, Psalm. 111. 5. upon this ground the faith of the
Church was strengthened, when they were in a very low and forlorn state, to
plead with God; Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of
us, and Israel acknowledge us not; thou, O Lord, art our Father, our Redeemer,
thy Name is from everlasting, Isa. 63. 16. and again, in verse 19. We are
thine, thou never bear rule over them, thy Name was not called upon of them.
The promises that belong unto the Church and people of God, under this
relation, are innumerable. I shall touch upon two or three, that are suitable
unto them, in reference to the opposition of their enemies, Psalm. 37. 12, 13.
The wicked plotteth (or practices) against the just, and gnasheth at him with
his teeth. The Lord shall laugh at him, (that is, shall render him ridiculous,
and contemptible to others, as he plots to make the Church be unto the world)
for he sees that his day is coming. By his Day, is meant, his dismal day, the
day of his calamity, the day appointed of God for his punishment, the
destruction, the day when their iniquity shall have an end. Such a day is
coming upon them: Therefore it is added, in verse 17. For the arms of the
wicked shall be broken; but Jehovah upholdeth the righteous. Behold, (says the
Lord) I will make Jerusalem a Cup of trembling unto all people that besiege it
round about, Zac. 12. 2. The besiegers of Jerusalem, the Church of God, think
they may as easily swallow it up, as a man may drink a cup of wine, and it is
as delightsome unto them to do so; but they shall find it a cup of giddiness,
a drink too strong for them; yea, a cup of poison, that will cast them into a
drunken sleep, out of which when they shall be awakened, horror, astonishment,
trembling shall seize upon them. It is added, in verse 3. And in that day, I
will make Jerusalem a burdensome stone, for all people; all that burden
themselves with it, shall be cut in pieces; though all the people of the earth
be gathered together against it. It is folly for any one to lift at a stone,
that being too heavy for him to manage, will fall upon him and break his bones.
Such a stone shall all that lift at the Church to remove it out of its place,
find it to be unto themselves. The Lord Jesus, to whom all power in heaven and
earth is given, has said, speaking of Peter's confessing him to be Christ, the
Son of the living God, with a divine faith, such as is wrought by the
Revelation of the Father) upon this Rock I will build my Church; and the gates
of Hell shall not prevail against it, Mat. 16. 16, 17, 18. The gates of Hell,
signify all the power and policy of the Devil, and all his instruments, they
shall not prevail against Christ's Church, taken indefinitely. He will preserve
his Church, in one place or other in the World, maugre all their malice. These,
and the like promises, are the streams, which, flowing from that river, the
Covenant of Grace, make glad the City of God, which is his Church, even when
the waters roar, and the mountains are shaken with the swelling thereof, Psalm.
46. 3, 4. That is, what ever changes of government are caused by the fury of a
tumultuous multitude, stirred up by Satanand his instruments against the Church
and people of God.

3. Consider the presence of God, in Christ with his Church, in their lowest
and most afflicted condition; according to Christ's promise to them, being
taught to observe and do what he has commanded, Lo, I am with you always, even
unto the end of the world, Mat. 28. 20. This serves to strengthen the faith of
Gods people concerning the Church, in her lowest and most afflicted estate;
that God is in the midst of her; she shall not be moved, God will help her, at
the looking forth of the morning, Psalm. 46. 5. It is night with the Church,
when the nations make a noise and the Kingdoms are moved, as it is said in the
neXt verse; yet, even then, the Churches faith in God, as their portion, being
quickened and strengthened, they say, Jehovah of Hosts is with us; the God of
Jacob, an high refuge for us, Selah: ver. 7. Therefore, that this consideration
may the better serve to strengthen our faith, I shall show you sundry
Representations of Gods presence with his people in their lowest, and most
afflicted condition, which the Scripture holds forth unto us. Unto Abraham it
was represented, under a double similitude: 1. Of fowls coming down upon the
earcasses, about to be sacrificed, and Abraham's driving them away, Genesis 15. 11.
which represented the Egyptians, and all enemies of the Church, which disturb
the people of God in their religious duties of Gods worship, and that seek to
devour the people of God, as Kites or Eagles, etc. devour carcasses, and Gods
presence and readiness to drive them away. 2. Of a smoking furnace and a
burning lamp, verse 17. The smoking furnace, notes great afflictions, fiery
trials, which shall befall the Israel of God. The burning lamp, signifies that
God in Christ is with them, at such times, to save them, Isa. 62. 1. Unto Moses
it was represented under the appearing of the Angel of God in a flame of fire
out of the midst of a bush, the bush burned with fire, and the bush was not
consumed. Isa. 3. 2. This Moses looked at as a great sight; and so may we. For,
the bush, is the Church of God, which is burned with fiery trials: But whence
is it that it is not consumed? It is not from the impotency of the fire to burn
the bush, nor from the strength of the bush to resist the fire, but from the
presence of God in Christ, as appears, ver. 6, 7, etc. To Ezekiel it was
represented under the similitude of a valley, wherein were many bones, and they
very dry, Ezekiel. 37. 2. The valley signified the low estate of the Church, the
many dry bones denoted the discouraging apprehensions the people of God have,
when they look upon the power of the enemies, and their own weakness, with the
eye of sense, for so the Lord said, in verse 11. Behold, they say, our bones
are dried, and our hope is lost, we are cut off for our parts: Yet the Lord to
quicken their faith, promises a resurrection to them. Another resemblance of
Gods presence with his Church and people, in the midst of their greatest
afflictions, we have in those three companions of Daniel, who were cast bound
into the midst of the fire, yet the fire had no power upon their bodies, not so
much as to singe their hair, or to change their coats. The reason of it was,
because the Son of God was wIth them, Dan. 3. 25. Unto Zachary another
resemblance hereof was presented; he saw, by night a man riding upon a red
horse, and he stood among the myrtle trees, that were in the bottom, Zach. 1.
8. The night, is the time of affliction; the bottom is the low condition of the
Church, which is likened unto myrtle trees for its sweet savor unto God. And,
in this low afflicted estate, Christ is with them, riding upon a red horse, as
ready to fight against those that afflicted his Church, for whom he intercedes
and receives gracious answers. Again, in Zach. 12. 2, 3. the Lord foretold
that he would make Jerusalem a Cup of trembling to the besiegers, who thought
they could as easily swallow them up, as one may drink a cup of wine, and they
would do the one with as much pleasure as the other. But, says the Lord, the
effects of this cup shall be trembling and astonishment in you. And, in ver. 3.
he says, he will make Jerusalem a burdensome stone to all people that are
gathered together against it; they shall be cut in pieces. Then they will see
cause to wish they had never burdened themselves with it. Thus you see, upon
what firm grounds the faith of Gods people concerning the good purposes of God
toward his Church, in their lowest, and most afflicted condition, may be
strengthened and settled.

2. This groundwork being thus laid, build and exercise this hope upon it, in
its suitable operations, and works.

1. In its purging work: For, he that has this hope purges himself, 1 Ioh. 3.
3. Then we work with God, when we improve Gods means to Gods end. Gods end, in
afflicting his Church, is, not to destroy it, but to purge it. So he says, in
Isa. 1. 25, 26. I will turn mine hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy
dross, and take away all thy tin. And I will restore thy Judges as at the
first, and thy Counselors as at the beginning; afterward thou shall be called
the City of righteousness, the faithful City. There he compares the
afflictions of his Church and people to the fire whereinto Gold and Silver is
cast, which loses nothing thereby, but its dross and tin; but the metal it
self is thereby made more pure and fit for honorable uses, and services. In
the 27th. Chapter, the 8. and 9. verses, the same is expressed under two other
metaphors: 1. Of an Husbandman, or Vine-dresser. In measure, and in the
branches, will thou debate with it; as the Husbandman or Vinecoome, does not
stock up the roots, to destroy the fruit trees and Vines, but only lopp them,
and prune them, by taking away their luxuriant and superfluous branches, that
so they may become more fruitful.

2. Of stormy winds. He instanceth in the East Wind, which is hurtful to the
trees and corn, in those hot Eastern Countries, by blasting them, Genesis 41. 6.
by its scorching heat, whence the Graecians call it (...), yet the Lord says
he will so order it, that no hurt shall redound to his Church and people, by
it, but, by this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this shall be all
the fruit, to take away his sin. Now, seeing this is Gods end and way; let all
the Churches and people of God, act accordingly, in this time of Jacobs
troubles, looking up to God in Christ for the assistance of his Holy Spirit, to
make this use of his afflicting providence, to be awakened and excited to
purge, first, their own hearts, then, the Churches, more fully and perfectly.
It is no true policy, but folly, in such times, to seek an escape from troubles
and dangers, by compliance with the inventions of men, and customs of
degenerate Churches and Christians, in the matters of Religion. For that is the
ground of Gods controversy with his people, for which he testifies against
them, with so strong and open rebukes. But account the fear of God to be the
head-point and beginning of wisdom. Till men exercise the fear of God, in all
their ways, they do not begin to act wisely. This point of true wisdom God
taught Iosuae, when he was exceedingly dejected, in Josh. 7. 10. to 14: and the
Church, in captivity practiced accordingly. For they confessed that their
sorrows and sufferings were the effects of their sins; and therefore resolved
to search and try their ways and turn again to the Lord; and then, having
removed the impediments, their hope was quickened to lift up their hearts with
their hands unto God, in the heavens, Lam. 3. 39, 40, 41. Shecaniah also,
observing how the hearts of Gods people were prepared to seek reconciliation
with God, confessed that they had trespassed against God, in the particular sin
discovered to them, and added; yet now there is hope in Israel concerning this
thing. And thereupon inferred, Now therefore let us make a Covenant with our
God, etc. and encouraged Ezra to act vigorously for reformation, Ezra 10. 2, 3,
4. The like course the Church resolved to take, upon encouragement of the like
hope in Hos. 6. 1, 2, 3. This course we also must take, in this hour of
temptation, if we would have a good issue of these afflicting dispensations,
which are upon us.

2. Exercise this hope in its quickening and encouraging work. For this hope is
a lively hope, 1 Pet. 1. 3. It is very dishonorable to God, and uncomely for
Christians, to be despondent and discouraged, in such times of trial. The time
of Jacobs trial should be the time of Jacobs trusting in God. So did the
Church, when the enemies insulted, in Mich. 7. 8. Rejoice not against me, O
mine enemy; when I fall, I shall arise; when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall
be a light unto me. Two objections are wont to arise in the minds of Gods
people in such times, to weaken their hope in God, you have them both in the
answer of Gideon to the Angel, who said unto him, the Lord is with thee, Judge.
6. 12, 13, And Gideon said unto him, oh, my Lord, if the Lord be with us, why
then is all this befallen us? and where be all the miracles which our Fathers
told us of? These are the two temptations which, if they be not scattered, will
hinder the exercise of this hope. 1. If God be with us, why then is all this
befallen us? Therefore, to arm you, consider, that these two, Gods presence
with his people, and calamities incumbent upon them, may well consist together.
For wise and holy ends God suffers extreme calamities to befall his Churches and
people, before he reaches forth his hands to deliver them. Particularly, he
thus dispenses: 1. That he may thereby convince them of the vanity of those
creature-propps, whereupon they are wont to rely too much, and to purge carnal
confidence out of them. This was the great sin of the people of Israel, to
trust in the shadow of Egypt, and to rely upon Assyria, though they were
forewarned that Egypt would be a broken ^eed, which would rather hurt then
help them; therefore, says the Lord, have I cried to her; their strength is to
sit still, Isa. 30. 6, 7. that is, to renounce their creature dependencies, and
to expect salvation from God alone, according to Moses his exhortation, in
Exodus 14. 13. But they continually disobeyed God herein, till the Lord had
convinced them of their sin and folly, by their Captivity in Babylon, from
which no creature could deliver them. Then, when God by affliction had wrought
their hearts to an humble frame, and to repentance, they express it, in
reference to this sin, particularly, saying, Ashur shall not save us, we will
not ride upon horses, etc. for in thee the fatherless finds mercy, Hos. 14.
3. The like controversy God has with his Churches and people, at this day,
for their trusting too much in the arm of flesh, in the Parliament, in the
Army, or in the Protector; and thereupon became carnally secure and wanton, and
slight, when they had such propps to stay upon, and answerably dejected and
almost discouraged, when they failed them. The Lord awaken and humble his
people for it, and cause their eyes, for the future, to be toward him alone.
2. That his people may see him in his glory, and glorify him alone for their
deliverances, he brings them unto a seemingly for lorne condition, and
helpless, to the eye of sense. So in Isa. 33. 9, 10. The earth mourns and
languisheth; Lebanon is ashamed, and withered; Sharon is like a Wilderness;
and Bashan and Carmel. All things fail: Now will I rise, Now will I be exalted;
says the Lord; Now will I lift up my self. Man's extremity is Gods opportunity.
3. That, Gods faithfulness in his promise may be glorified. For so he has
promised in Deuteronomy. 32. 36. The Lord shall judge his people, and repent himself
for his servants, when he sees that their power is gone, etc. And, in Ps. 12.
5. For the oppression of the poor, for the fighing of the needy, now will I
arise, says the Lord, I will set in salvation, he shall have breathing. You
see how low they are brought, they are poor and needy, and oppressed, so, as
they dare not make complaints openly, but sigh and groan secretly. This is the
time when God promises to rise up, and to give salvation to them. And, to show
that this is Gods constant way, in performing his promise, the Psalmist adds
his probatum est to it, in the next verse; the sayings of Jehovah, that is, his
promises, and, in particular, those that are of this import and concernment,
are pure sayings, as silver tried in a subliming furnace of earth, fined seven
times; that is, the Saints have, by constant experience, found the truth and
faithfulness of God in performing them. 4. That thus God may raise and
heighten the esteem of his favors in the hearts of his people, when they are
beyond, and above their expectation. This effect followed the return of the
people of God from their Captivity in Babylon, Psalm. 126. 1, 2, 3. When Jehovah
returned the Captivity of Sion; we were like them that dream; that is, it was
so far above our thoughts, that we questioned whether it was true, or no, as
Peter did, in Acts 12. 9. Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our
tongue with joyful-shouting. This did so raise their joy and thanksgiving to
God, that it brake forth into shooting. The very heathens admired and said, God
has done great things for them. Much more were themselves affected, and
therefore they added, Jehovah has done very great things for us, we are
joyful. 5. That, by such dispensations, their faith and obedience may be more
fully tried and perfected. It is said of Christ, that, though he were a Son,
yet learned he obedience, by the things which he suffered, Heb. 5. 8. that is,
by his sufferings, he had the experimental knowledge of that mediatourly
obedience, which he, as our surety, was to perform; which is noted, in Phil. 2.
8. So the Churches of Christ are brought low, that they may learn,
experimentally, suffering obedience, which is the highest obedience of faith,
They are brought into a widdow-like condition, that, as she that is a widow
indeed, and desolate, trusts in God, and continues in supplications, and
prayers, night and day, 1 Timothy 5. 5. so they may be disposed suitably to Gods
end, in afflicting them, who says, I will leave in the midst of thee an
afflicted and poor people, and they shall trust in the Name of the Lord, Zeph.
3. 12. 6. That they may be more fervent in prayer: this operation hope had in
David, when he was brought so low that he said, I looked on the right hand, and
beheld, and no man acknowledged me, refuge is perished from me, no man seeks
for my soul. This quickened and intended his fervency in prayer, I cried unto
thee, Jehovah, and said, Thou art my refuge, my portion in the land of the
living, Psalm. 142. 4, 5. Despair in the creatures help is oftentimes the
ground of hope in God for help. For infinite goodness, accompanied with
infinite wisdom and power, can never be at a loss, nor can faith and hope,
which look at them, ever be at a stand. As God knows our souls in adversity,
Psalm. 31. 7. so we know God best in adversity. God is best seen in the Mount.
To the second objection; and where be all his Miracles, which our Fathers told
us of? I shall speak briefly. It has been sometimes that which has troubled
the Saints, That they see not such great things done for the Church, in our
days, as we read of in former times. But there is no cause for it. For the
hand of the Lord is not shortened, nor is his Church lower in his esteem than
formerly. When the Lord had said by his Prophet, The People which were left of
the sword found grace in the wilderness, Jerem. 31. 2. the people answered,
Jehovah has appeared of old: as if they should say, Truth, he did so, in time
past; those were good days indeed: but now those days are gone, we must look
for no more of them. The Lord replied, Yea, I have loved thee with an
everlasting love, therefore with loving kindness have I drawn thee, Verse. 3.
teaching us thereby to improve former Experiences, to the strengthening of our
Faith, for the present, and our hope; for the future. Experience is a
multiplied remembrance of former favors, and Blessings, which will help to
multiply our Hope: For Experience works Hope, Romans 5. 4. Hope encouraged by
Experience, will encourage unto Prayer, Psalm. 22. 4. Hence arose that pleading
of Believers with God in Prayer, in Isa. 51. 9. Awake, Awake, put on strength,
O arm of the Lord, awake, as in the ancient days, in the Generations of old.
Art thou not it that has cut Rahab, and wounded the Dragon of the Sea? Art
thou not it which has dried the Sea? V. 10. And fervent Prayer increases and
strengthens this Hope; Thus Christ teaches us, in the Parable of the Widow
importuning the Unjust Judge, Luke 18. 6, 7, 8. Joab never put up a more
acceptable Request unto David, than when he interceded for his banished
Absalon. God is much more pleased to be petitioned for his afflicted Church,
Psalm. 122. 6. He is very ready to answer such Prayers with good Returns: For he
says, Ask me of things to come, concerning my Sons, and concerning the work of
my hands command ye me, Isa. 45. 11.

3. Exercise this Hope in its strengthening work. In every Degree of the
Exercise of this Hope there is an answerable Degree of Joy; We rejoice in
tribulation under the hope of glory, Romans 5. 2, 3. and answerable to our joy in
God will be our strength in God, Neh. 8. 10. Therefore let this Hope strengthen
you, 1. To cleave unto God with purpose of heart, Acts 11. 23. It is good
cleaving to him who will never leave nor forsake his People in their distress,
Heb. 13. 5, 6. They that forsake God to cleave to other helpers, will find
their Hopes disappointed, when they have most need of help; Then God will say,
Where are their Gods, their rock in whom they trusted? Deuteronomy. 32. 37. And they
shall not know what to answer, but be ashamed of that which cannot, profit nor
deliver: for they are vain. When the People of God are in distress* wicked men
will insult against them, and say, Where is now their God? Psalm. 115. 2. But
their answer is ready, Our God is in the Heavens* he has done whatsoever he
pleased, Verse. 3. They will be ready to say, Where are your Fastings? your
Prayers? your confidence in God? The Answer is easy, they are with God in his
Book of Remembrance: they are as seed sown in Heaven, whence we shall reap a
plentiful crop of mercy, in due time. But how easily may that be retorted upon
them, in reference to God, and his People, which Zebul replied unto Gaal, in
reference to Abimelech, in Judge. 9. 38. Where is now thy mouth, which said, who
is the Lord, that we should serve him? Is not this the People whom thou have
despised? Only be sure, if you would cleave to God, that you cleave to his
Word, and every truth in it, when it is opposed by a sinful and unbelieving
Generation: Contend for the Faith which was once given to the Saints, Jude 3.
(...) signifies, not simply to contend, but with all our might, and more, if it
were possible. The thing to be contended for is, the Faith, not a Fancy, but
the Truths received with Faith, upon Gods Authority in his Word, the least jot
and tittle whereof God values at a higher rate than Heaven and Earth, Matthew. 5.
18. and the Martyrs of Jesus esteemed it above all worldly things, and above
their Lives. And so should we. 3. This Faith was once delivered once for all.
If it be lost, or exchanged for error, there is danger that it will be lost
for ever, as we might prove by many examples of Apostates, who have become
Infidels and Atheists. 4. This Faith was delivered, deposited, committed to our
trust, of which a strict Account must be given how we have kept and used it.

There are three things which above all others God expects we should keep most
carefully and faithfully from being wronged: 1. His own Name, which is put upon
us. 2. His Church. 3. His Truths contained in Scripture, 2 Timothy 1. 14. 5. This
Depositum is committed to the Saints, in common; not only to Ministers or
Magistrates, but also to all Believers. It is the common Faith, wherein every
Believer has his interest in common with the rest; as all Planters or
Inhabitants have in the Commons that belong to a Town, for which they will
contend with any man that shall wrong them in that their Interest. 6.
Salvation, and this Faith are joined, to teach us, to provide for our Salvation
by keeping the Faith. Faith and Salvation are kept or lost together. 2. To wait
patiently and constantly upon God, in doing and suffering his will: For God
sometimes puts a long Date to the performance of his Promises. But Gods
deferring is no empty space but a time of fitting his Church and People for the
good things promised. Whiles Physic is working the time is not lost, though
health be not yet recovered: For, when the sick humor is purged out, then comes
health, see Isaiah 30. 18. only be careful, that whilst you wait, you do not
cross your Hope by sinning against him, upon whom you wait. True waiting is not
a mere staying Gods leisure, but a continuing in a gracious inoffensive course,
till the good waited for be attained.

FINIS.

