AN Anatomy of Atheism: A POEM.

By a Person of Quality.

Jmprimatur,

Geo. Royse.
August 24. 1693.


LONDON, Printed for Thomas Speed, at the Three Crowns, near the Royal Exchange
in Cornhil; M DC XCIV.

To the Honorable Sir GEORGE DARCY, Bar.
Dear Sir,
THE great desire I have to see you happy both here and hereafter engages me
to do all that is in my power for the promotion both of your Spiritual and
Temporal Interest. It has pleased God to give you a fair Portion of Worldly
Goods, and a very large share of Intellectual Endowments, whereby you are put
into a Capacity of providing for your self both in this World and that which is
to come. Your only care therefore must be to employ these good Gifts of God to
his Glory, and the Salvation of your own Immortal Soul.

It Is Religion only, Dear Sir, which can carry you safe through this Valley of
Tears, and can at last advance you into that place where all Tears shall be
wiped from your Eyes. It Is this alone which will make you the love of Men and
Angels, nay, and what is infinitely more valuable, of God himself. In fine, it
is this alone which can make this present Lise easy and pleasant, and secure
you from Eternal Misery in a Life after this.

Let Religion therefore, Dear Sir, be your first and early care, that so you
may be wise betimes, and avoid those Follies which too commonly attend the
young Gentlemen of this Age. You are just now entering upon that vast Stage the
World, you have Good and Evil set before you, and the Eyes of all Men are upon
you to see what manner of Choice you will make. Your present and future
Happiness is at stake, and therefore it highly concerns you to make such a
Choice as you may never hereafter have cause to repent of.

You have had the advantage of a Sober and Religious Education from your very
Gradle, and the Examples of as good Parents as ever any Child was blessed with.
Your Deceased Father, whose Memory will live as long as Piety and Virtue are
Sacred here on Earth, was an admirable Pattern of unblemished Goodness: And
your Excellent Mother is still, God be thanked, a Living Pattern of all that is
Virtuous and Praiseworthy.

What then will you be able to say for your self if you degenerate from such
Worthy Progenitors? What Excuses will you be able to make even to this World if
you deceive their expectations by becoming the Unworthy Son of Two such
Incomparable Parents? But alas! There is still a Question which is infinitely
more weighty, and that is, What will you be able to plead for your self at the
great Day of Judgment, if you have behaved your self so wickedly here, that
even your Father and Mother must rise up and condemn you?

But I am persuaded better things of you, and cannot give my self leave to
think you will ever be a Disgrace to your Worthy Family. You have hitherto
given us great hopes of seeing your Father again alive in you. I beseech God of
his Infinite Mercy to preserve you in all Virtue and Goodness, and to make you
a Great and Glorious Instrument of doing good here on Earth.

Having told you that Religion is the greatest wisdom, or, as the wise man
speaks, the beginning of wisdom, I must now tell you that the beginning of all
Religion is the acknowledgment of God, the owning of a Supreme Power who made
us and every thing that has been made from the beginning of the World out of
nothing.

This great and fundamental Truth must be necessarily well established in us
before we can come to any such thing as Religion. For as the Apostle tells us,
He that comes to God must believe that he is. You cannot therefore better
employ your time than in reading such Treatises as serve to make out this
weighty Truth. Such are the present Archbishops Sermon concerning Atheism,
Dr. Barrows Sermons on the first Article of the Creed, and Grotius de Veritate
Christianae Religionis; any one of which Three will sufficiently satisfy any
unprejudiced Man who has not made his reason a Slave to his passions.

After having named these great Men, I know not how to advise you to read the
following Poem of my own. I can only recommend it to your Reading when you are
more inclined to read Verse than Prose. And I beg of you, if you find any
thing in it that you think well said, not to attribute it to me but to those
great Men whom I named but now, whose Works I have only transcribed to their
Authors great disadvantage.

If this small piece shall contribute any thing toward the confirming you in
the belief of a Godhead, I shall think my time well spent in Writing it. If
not, I shall hovvever have this to comfort me, that I vvrote it with a sincere
design to do you good, and to perform the Office that I owe to you of

A most Faithful Friend and Obliged Humble Servant

THE PREFACE.
WHEN I wrote this Poem I designed to have put all the Articles of our
Christian Faith into Verse, that so I might entice those Men to look upon a
Book of Poetry, who have not fixedness and solidity enough to consider the many
Excellent Treatises on this Subject in Prose. And therefore I did intend to
make use of common and obvious Arguments, thereby to make each Article as clear
and plain as possibly I could.

But considering with my self that this would be a work of time, and would
require great Learning and Industry I began to despair of ever compassing it,
and therefore resolved to let this Poem come out into the World by its self,
and try its fortune.

I think I need not make any Apology for printing a Discourse on this Subject.
For if ever any thing of this Nature was necessary, it is certainly so now,
When Men are arrived to that pitch of Impudence and Profaneness, that they
think it a piece of Wit to deny the Being of a God, and to laugh at that which
they cannot argue against: Or at least, when Men live at such a Licentious
rate, that we may easily see they are like the Psalmists Fool, and say in their
hearts, There is no God.

I am therefore well satisfied that I made choice of a very good Subject, I
only wish the Poem may be found worthy of it, and strong enough to defend so
Important a Truth.

Many Reasons I have for the publishing of it, which I think it may not be
improper here to mention.

The first is this, that there are many Copies of it gone abroad which are in
danger of being sent to the Press uncorrected.

The second is, because I know nothing of this Nature extant in our English
Tongue, I mean no particular Poem purposely wrote on this Subject.

My last and main Reason is, because some judicious Men have thought it not
altogether unfit to do some good in the World.

If it be well accepted of, and has its designed effect I may perhaps be
encouraged to publish something else of the same Nature. In the mean while,
till I see what Fortune it has.

Adieu.
AN Anatomy of Atheism.
SInce some with barefaced Impudence deny
The Self-Existence of a Deity
Who is and was from all Eternity; Three sorts of Atheists

Others more civilly a God dispute
Till by disputing they themselves confute;
A Third sort own they do a God believe,
But at such random Rates and Methods live,
That by their Practice they a God defye
And by their Actions give their Tongues the lie.
Since these, I say, so numerous are grown
And fill the Court, the Country, and the Town,
My pious Muse inspired with Holy Rage
These dreadful Monsters singly shall engage,
And, as of old the little Son of Jesse
A mighty Giant did in fight suppress,
Strengthened by God whose Armor then he wore,
And whose just cause upon his Sword he bore,
So, by the help of that Divinity
Whom I assert, they foolishly deny,
Their Errors I so fully shall refute
That I shall leave them answerless and mute.
The fu st sort confused. The frame of the world, proof of a God.
And, first, for him that rashly does disown
The being of the bless't Eternal one,
Let him but tell me whence the World began,
Who made that Lovely, Lordly Creature Man,
Let him around him gently cast his Eyes,
And guess who made the Earth, the Seas, and Skys.
The world not made by chance.
If he be one of that misguided Tribe
Which to blind chance does all these works ascribe,
Let him the beauty of a Plant survey,
The just vicissitudes of Night and Day,
The constant motions of the Moon and Sun
Which in just order do their Races run,
Let him consider his own wondrous make
And, for a time, himself to pieces take,
Then see how every Fiber, Vein and Nerve
Does to it is proper ends and uses serve,
How all we eat, and drink, and take for food
Dissolves to Chyle and mingles with the blood.
If all this Lesson still shall prove in vain,
And he his first dull Maxim will maintain,
That Atoms moving in a heedless dance
Leap't into this Harmonious form by chance,
Then let him say a beauteous Edifice
From Bricks and Stones will of it self arise,
That Letters in abagg together shook
Will make an Uniform, Ingenious Book,
Or that bare Brass and Steel will jump into a Clock.
The Works of Chance are of another kind,
And like their cause irregular and blind,
Without intention and without design,
And far from being beautiful or fine.
Since then the Workmanship we plainly see,
We must infer there must a Workman be,
Thus by the Art the Artist we descry,
And by the Creature find the Deity.
And since the World at first was made too fair,
Too Curious, Excellent and Regular
To be the Work of blind Contingency,
To what new Covert must the Atheist fly?
The World not eternal.
The World's Eternity he next must take
For his last Refuge and his surest Stake,
And by denying that the World was made,
Or that by Art it was in Order laid,
He thinks to ward off the necessity
Of introducing here a Deity,
Whose boundless power and all-contriving thought
This lovely Fabric to perfection brought.
But here, instead of wiping off the Score,
He Is plunged in deeper than he was before;
For, far from owning its Eternity,
We Will show the World in its first infancy,
And as through various turns and windings led
We trace the River to the Fountainhead,
So going backwards still from Man to Man,
We Will find a time when we at first began.
Vide Bishop Pearson on the Creed, page 58, 59.
Most People own it not Six Thousand year
Since first this beauteous Fabric did appear;
Egyptian Priests held a much longer Date,
And reckoned at a very different Rate,
But they alas! were full of Forgeryes,
And famed for naught but Impudence and Lies;
Vide the same place.
Chaldaeans too made their unjust account
Beyond the number of our Cent'ries mount,
But told such gross Improbabilities,
That wisest Men them and their Cheats despise.
Moses alone the Sacred Truth did tell,
And the World's age with faithfulness reveal,
Believed by all but such as want of Sense,
Or obstinate and hardened Impudence
Has blinded with so thick a mist of Night,
That they shall never more behold the light.
On his account, however I rely,
As an Exact, Impartial History,
Because Tradition does it is Faith assure
And with one common voice proclaims it pure.
Here may each Man, as in a Mirror, see
His first Extraction, and his Pedigree,
And find his wished for Genealogy.
Thus then we come to our Original,
And to the God and Father of us all.
But, since the Atheist does this Book disown,
He must have other proof, or he has none.
And though our reason makes it clear and plain
This Book does nothing but the Truth contain,
Wrote by a Man, whose just Integrity
Forbids us to suspect he would write a lie,
Or tell those things, with Confidence, as true
Which he perhaps might fancy, never knew,
Yet against Moses he will still exclaim
And call his Story a Fantastic Dream.
If then there was a World, as some contend,
Which never did begin, and never will end,
Let them the Records of this World unfold,
In which it is mighty actions are enrolled,
And show, before the time of our Creation,
One Kingdom, Empire, Commonwealth or Nation,
One Language, Science, Art or Mystery,
Whose first Original we cannot descry.
But here the Atheist leaves us at a stand,
And bids us seek for an unheard of Land,
Without a Guide to tell the certain way,
And keep false lights from leading us astray.
Doubtless, faith he, there were in times of yor'e
Of Histories and Records plenteous store,
But these to Earthquakes, Floods, and Deluges
More frequent Fires, and sad Contingencyes,
Became a dire inevitable prey,
And with their Author's they were snatched away.
Was there then ever such a Fire or Flood,
So swift and fierce as not to be withstood?
So general, and so full of Cruelty
As to leave none to write its History,
If so, the World was to begin again,
And that is the same as it had never been;
If not, it is strange Tradition should not tell
Those Wonders which our Ancestors befell.
They who survived these sad Catastrophe's
Told them, no doubt, to their Posterities,
And thus the History at first begun
Must through the Line of long Succession run.
Supposing then what Story did relate
In careful Writing, subject was to fate,
Oral Tradition sure could hardly fail
Unless it had been stopped by Miracle,
Some glimm'rings sure we of this World should see
Through the dark Vale of long Antiquity,
Some tidings of that World we needs must have
Which fell almost at once into its Grave,
At least some Rite or Custom would remain
To prove that Men have before Adam been,
Since all these things are wanting, let us conclude
That Adam is our Sire, and we his brood.
And on his Person we with ease shall see
The plain Impressions of a Deity.
Vide l. 5. De rerum natura.
Besides, as wise Lucretius well observes,
The Atheist to his own Conviction serves,
For all his Earthquakes, Floods, and Deluges
Prove only that the World corruptive is,
And since it is decayed, and wastes so fast,
This plainly shows it has not long to last.
Immortal things Immortal Beauty hold,
Unchanged, and sure of never growing old,
Whereas the World does almost every day
Give us fresh Instances of it is decay,
Unhappy Naples more than half overthrown
This dismal Truth unwillingly must own.
And Aetna's flames show by their constant rage
The World is come into her latest Age.
Nothing from ruin can her Fabric save,
But nodding now she bends toward her Eternal Grave
Thus does the World most evidently prove
The Being of that God who sits above.
For since from various reason's we infer
The World's Nativity as plain and clear,
By reason cast the Atheists quit the Field,
And that the World is not Eternal yield.
If not Eternal, then it once was made,
If made, it certainly a Maker had.
Now all Men this must for an axiom take
That nothing can it self produce or make,
For that this contradiction would implye
At the same time to be and not to be.
Some outward cause we therefore must explore,
Either of Chance, or an Eternal Power.
The World's too well proportioned and designed
To be the Work of Chance, ill-shap'd, and blind.
God for her Maker she alone will own
And throws her self at his Allmighty Throne.
Miracles another proof of a God.
Nor does the World and its harmonious frame
The being of a God alone proclaim,
But Moses by his wonder-working Rod
Gives us another proof there is a God,
And each effect surpassing Natures Laws
Bids us look out for a superior Cause;
In vain Philosophers their Wisdom try,
And stretch poor Nature to Extremity,
To make her solve each wondrous Mystery;
To Nature's Master they must often go
If of Effects they would the Causes know.
How strangely must the Atheist look to see
The fire renounce its burning quality?
And things which nat'rally increase it is rage
Clam its fierce scorchings and it is heat assuage.
See Dan. chap. 3.
Yet thus it is Nature did the fire foregoe,
For Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego,
In vain the Tyrant did their Ruin threat,
And sev'n times over his stubborn Furnace heat,
Safe in the midst of the flames the Brethren stood,
And cool as Summer Breezes from the Wood.
See Exodus chap. 7.
What power of Nature can transform a flood
Of Crystal Waters into Scarlet Blood?
See Exodus chapter 14.
Or make the Sea without its Motion stand
And in a moment turn to Solid Land?
Yet thus in Ancient Days did Moses show
The power of God above by Miracles below.
What strength of Art can quicken and restore
A Man when dead to what he was before?
Infuse new Life into his Frozen Veins
And a new Soul to his forsaken Brains?
Yet this did our all-pow'rful Master do,
Who raised from Death himself and others too.
Can Nature say, awake ye Dead, arise,
Shake off your Sleep, lift up your drowsy Eyes?
I will again once more your Corpse inspire,
Kindle your Breath with my enlivening fire,
And give your Soul back to it is Ancient Friend,
Your Soul, which when I please I take or lend;
No, she with Modesty withdraws her head,
And Challeng'es no power to raise the dead;
But owns she has a Lord whose awful sway
She must not, cannot, dares not disobey,
When he commands she leaves her wonted way.
He makes the Water, Earth, and Air, and Fire,
When he sees fit, against themselves conspire.
See Dan. chapter 6.
Makes Lions, though by Nature fierce and wild,
Fearful and gentle as a new-born-Child,
He makes the tender Lambs securely sleep,
Whilst hungry Tigers do the Sheep-folds keep.
Let him but speak, and Nature stops her course,
Abates her pace, and slackens all her force.
See Joshua chapter 10.
At his command the Sun and Moon stand still,
And give his Servants light their Foes to kill.
See 1 Kings chapter 18.
A word from him makes the Clouds cease to rain,
Another Word makes them distill again.
As in our Saviors Passion.
Though Nature says our Noons are always bright
Yet let him speak, and there shall be no light,
But Day it self shall be transformed to Night.
Thus does each Miracle in Letters plain
And at a mighty distance to be seen,
Show the great name of Nature's Sacred Lord
By us with Love and Reverence adored.
To him the Atheist must his Tribute give
From whom alone he borrows leave to live.
His being sure he can no more deny
Of which so many Wonders testify.
The Miracles stand fixed in History,
Stamped by Traditional Authority,
To which no Man of sense will give the lie.
The Credit of the World is much too strong
To be beat down by any single Tongue.
The facts he therefore cannot well disown,
Unless he has resolved to Credit none
But what he sees, to believe nothing told,
Or think no Truth but what his Eyes behold.
If not the Facts, we take our strength from thence
And thus we argue for our Consequence.
If Works are done which Natures power exceed
We in some higher power these wondrous works must read
Gifts of Prophecy another proof of a God.
The Gifts of Prophecy as plainly show
There must be one to whom those Gifts we owe.
Man's knowledge is too shallow to foresee
What shall to Morrow or the next day be,
Much more to tell a Thousand years events
Which all depend on future accidents,
And lay those things before us, bright and clear,
And just as if they were already here,
Which shall not come to pass, till the next Age
Shifts Scenes, and brings a new one on the Stage.
See Gen 15. 13.
Yet thus of old did Abraham foretell
That his poor Offspring should in Egypt dwell,
And for the space of many a tedious year
The toilsome Yoke of cruel Pharaoh bear.
Exactly did the sad Event agree
With what had been foretold in Prophecy.
1 Kings 13. 2.
Thus was Josiah's Birth and Reign of old
Some hundred years before they came foretold.
Isaiah 44. 45.
And thus Isaiah told, as he foresaw,
That Cyrus to the Persians should give Law,
That by his Mighty Arm the Jews should rise,
And, though then Slaves, subdue their Enemies.
And, that the matter might be free from doubt
By Name he marked this Glorious Monarch out.
Thus all the Prophets did praesig nifie
The Blessed Jesus his Nativity,
And laid each Circumstance so nicely down,
That by the Character the God was known.
If all these Prophecies are not fulfilled
We are content with shame to quit the field,
But if they are, as justly we believe,
The Atheist must be damned beyond reprieve,
For they who shut their Eyes, and will not see
The power of an all-knowing Deity
Who looks with ease into futurity,
No Mercy must expect, or Pity pray
When the Great God shall keep his Judgment-Day.
Man they confess is of too short a sight
To fee things future, sown in depth of Night.
Some nobler power they then of course must grant
Which does no measure of foreknowledge want.
This power is God; whom rashaly they deny,
They know not upon what account, or why.
But some perhaps will call for Instances
Out of Prophance and Common Histories;
Though without reason they this favor ask,
Yet I most willingly accept the Task.
And here the Ancient Oracles afford
A Thousand Prophecy's which word for word
Exactly were accomplished and revealed
So clearly that they must not be concealed.
Some were indeed told in a doubtful way
But other's clear as Sunshine at Midday,
Such was that Prophecy which did declare
Vide Herod l. 1. Vide Herod l. 7.
That Cyrus should the Lydians beat in War,
Such that which told it should the fortune be
Of Xerxes's Navy to be beat at Sea
When all things promised the quite contrary.
Before the Bar then let the Atheist kneel,
And take Conviction from his own appeal.
No more Evasions can he hope to find,
But he must see, or must confess he is blind.
For, as when Light will not enter through the Eyes
We strait conclude the Organ's are amiss,
So, if our Atheist still will persevere,
And neither Truth nor solid Reason hear,
We must conclude his Soul so full of sin
That she cannot let her proper object in.
Once more I Will try if like a senseless Rock
Fixed, and unmoved he will stand another shock,
Universal consent our last proof of a God.
I Will ply him but with one more Argument,
From Universal Judgment and Consent,
And if this fails to work upon his Soul
It is because his faculties are foul.
Let us survey the Universe around,
And search each Nook where Men are to be found.
No Nation shall we meet in all our Tour
That does not some Divinity adore.
Of this Divinity, which all believe,
Too few there are that do aright conceive.
Yet with one voice they all agree in this
God is, although they know not what he is.
Some attribute a Godhead to the Sun,
Others with equal Honors crown the Moon,
Some to a Monkey with Devotion bow,
Others Religiously adore a Cow,
And by their misplaced Zeal show they agree
In The general Notion of a Deity.
Great part oth' World believes more Gods than one
But no part ever yet professed that there were none.
See then our Atheists all the World oppose,
And, like Drawcansir, make all Men his Foes,
See with what Sawey Pride he does pretend
His wiser Father's Notions to amend,
Huffs Plutarch, Plato, Pliny, Seneca,
And bids even Cicero himself give way,
Tells all the World they follow a false light
And he alone of all Mankind is right.
Thus, like a Madman who when all alone
Thinks himself King, and every Chair a Throne,
Drunk with Conceit and foolish Impudence
He prides himself in his abounding Sense.
But soon this Pride would to the Ground be brought
If he would allow himself a moments thought.
For let him but consider well within
From whence this general Notion did begin,
Who was it is Author, from what hint it came
And our conceited Bully will grow tame.
This Notion then was either first embraced
Because by Nature on our hearts impress't,
Or else because a Natural Tendency
Persuades us to believe a Deity,
So that whenever any Man we hear
The Being of an all-wise God averr,
This Truth with as much eagerness we own,
As soon as first discovered and made known,
As do the Eyes, whose Organs are aright,
Suck in the beams of the clear shining light.
Or, Thirdly, we from Reason's Sacred Law
This inference most evidently draw,
And, with St. Paul, from things Created prove
The Being of that God who sits above.
Or, lastly, this was from Tradition brought
And by our Fathers to their Children taught.
If, in our search, we shall by Nature find
This principle ingrafted on the mind,
It Is truth of Consequence we must allow,
For Natures Principles are always true,
Her steady light can never go astray
But leads us to one right and constant way.
Or if the Soul is by its Nature bent,
At the first sight, to give its free assent
To this assertion, that a God must be
And has been always from Eternity,
The self-same evidence will still remain
To make the matter beyond Question plain.
Man's Soul is framed by Natural Appetite,
In Truth and Reason's Dictates to delight.
If then our Souls unpraejudic'd and free
Do of themselves to this great Truth agree,
With reason argue and confess we must
Their Judgments equal, and their Verdicts just.
But if our Reason does this Truth evince,
The Atheist never more must make pretense
Even to the lowest pitch of common sense.
Men's Company he must of course forsake
And senseless Brutes for his dear Comrades take.
If from Tradition we this Truth received,
Which all our wisest Ancestors believed,
Into the same Dispute again we fall
About its rise and first Original.
How came it first to him who did begin
To broach it to the World, and let it in.
Nothing but an all-powr'ful, ruling hand
Men's Hearts and Mouths can equally command.
To Adam first God did himself unfold,
He to his Children all his knowledge told
Thus Faith by reason strengthened does obtain
And through the World without resistance Reign.
See then a Cloud of Witnesses appear!
For the whole World bears Testimony here.
See how all Nations in full Consort crowd
And with one voice cry out A God aloud.
Before these let the Atheist show his head,
And hear his dismal Accusation read,
His fatal Crime is of the deepest dye
It Is Treason against the highest Majesty.
His Lord and Maker he denies to own
And rudely kicks against his Sovereigns Throne,
Through all the bonds of right and nature breaks,
Nay, his own reason and himself forsakes.
Puffed up with Pride and Saucy Impudence
He denies things most evident to Sense.
And, as old Zeno motion did dispute
And by his walking did himself confute,
So he, although he every where descryes
Things made, a Maker foolishly denies.
The Accusation read, the Tryal's done
His guilt's as plain as is the Noonday Sun.
There Is not one Man in Court but 's heard to Cry
The Treason's clear, oh let the Traitor dye!
To Sentence then we justly may proceed,
And make the obstinate Rebellious bleed.
In lakes of brimstone must our Atheist dwell
Plunged to the bottom of the hottest Hell,
Where no Day enters, where no Sun appears,
And the sad place with its bright presence cheers,
There he to all Eternity must lie
In pangs of Death, but yet must never dye,
Doomed by that power, whom he too late will know
To never-ceasing pains and Everlasting woe.
The Second sort of Atheists confuted
Nor will their guilt or punishment be less
Who Scepticks in the case themselves profess,
Who think the Case some scruples may admit
And so suspend their Faith and Thoughts of it.
We have no medium left for doubting fools,
No Castles in the Air for faithless Souls.
Winged with belief of a Divinity
Our happy Souls shall to his Mansion fly
But Disbelief, and Skepticism is so,
Will Soul and Body into Ruin throw.
Besides in doubtful cases we deride
That Man who will not choose the surest side,
Prudence commands us with a cautious care
Against the worst can happen to prepare
And names those Men alone discreet and wise
Who choose their Road where certain safety lies.
For once then, let the case for doubtful go
Whether there be a Deity or no,
Till after Death the point must needs remain
Unsolv'd, and Death alone can make it plain.
A wise Man therefore would believe it here
That after Death he may no Danger fear.
Our Faith is purchas'st at no mighty cost,
And we shall sleep securely if it is lost.
But if the sad event shall prove a God
Then will the Disbeliever feel his rod.
Why then will Men their wisdom thus betray
And by their folly cast themselves away?
In things of lesser moment and concern
They can with ease the safest way discern,
But when the Immortal Soul is made the stake
With what contentedness the Fools mistake?
If we on Roads of War and Danger go,
And are not sure but we may meet our Foe,
Wisely we arm against the worst event,
Least made his Slaves we should too late repent,
This differs from our case in Terms and Name,
But in reality is just the same.
Belief of God our Souls securely arms,
And makes them proof against all future harms.
But if unarmed we venture to appear,
And find a God, 'twill cost us very dear.
Darkness and Horror, Pain and Misery
Will be our doom to all Eternity.
Belief like Weapons we about us bear
To guard our selves from danger and from fear.
Thus armed we hope to find a God at last,
After a life in peace and quiet past,
If we succeed, as there is no doubt we shall,
We save our Ruin and Eternal fall,
If not the worst event that we can have
Is to lie senseless in the silent Grave.
The Third sort of Atheists confuted
For the third sort, who by their lives dethrone
That God, whom they for fashions sake will own,
These do more mischief in the World than those
Who do with open force a God oppose.
It Is much the better, and the wiser way
To disallow a God, than disobey,
Better to own no Lord, than this our Lord betray.
Some Men with fatal prejudices blind
Seek for a Deity they cannot find;
And this is some, though but a bad excuse,
And no way fit for Men of sense to use.
But they, who in their sinful courses live
And yet protest they do a God believe,
Speak contradictions, and must either think
That God will at their sin and lewdness wink,
(Which plainly shows their thoughts are much amiss
And that they had as good not own God is)
Or else they only play the Hypocrite
And only say they do believe aright,
But in their hearts they sawcily defye
The Power and Justice of a Deity.
Of all the three, then, our last spark is worst,
And consequently will be most accur'st,
For him the flames of Hell, if it can be,
Shall still be raised to a more quick degree,
As a reward for his Hypocrisy.
Thus have the Atheists been distinctly tried,
The first for rashness, Impudence and Pride,
For his abuse of Natures Sacred Laws,
And holding off when Reason proved the Cause.
The second for his want of Wit to choose
The safest way, the dangerous refuse.
The Third, for his profane Hypocrisy
And boldly telling a Religious lie.
The Trial done, I have no more to say,
Their next Appeal is on the Judgment-Day,
When to their shame God will his power exert,
And in their ruin will himself assert.
Glory be to God.

