THE CHARITABLE PHYSICIAN HIS Hand Extended to the Curing of that Contagious
Disease called the FLUX, OR Griping of the Guts.

With other the most violent Distempers Now reigning amongst us.

As also their Symptoms, whereby they are known.

All freely given to the Poor in distress.

By J. Deacon.

Orandum est ut sit men's sana in corpore sano.

LONDON, Printed by W. G. are to be sold by Isaac Pridme at the Golden Falcon
near the New Exchange and for the Author at the Golden Anchor in Towerstreet
over against Barkin Church. 1657.

The charitable Physician his Hand extended to the Curing of that Contagious
Disease called The FLUX, OR Griping of the Guts.
Dear Contrymen,
IT was the saying of an Heroic Spirit, that Non solum nobis nati sumus: If I
am born to do good for my Native Country, I shall be very happy therein. It
was likewise the saying of one of the wise men of Greece, Largire cum
utilitate. My heavenly Father, my high and mighty Lord has bestowed a Talent
upon me, which I desire not to tie up in a Napkin, but to employ it to the
honor of the Giver, and to bestow it to the profit of the Receiver. For my
Lord has commanded me to cast my bread upon the waters, and I shall find it
after many days: He commands me to do good to all, but principally to those
that are in distress: To such (I say) as groan under the burden of Gods heavy
hand, and consequently those that labor under the violence of this furious and
almost contagious Disease now reigning amongst us, which is called by the
common people The FLUX, with the Gripings in the Bowels. By which I understand
many perish for want of means to purchase fit Medicines for that Disease from
the learned Physicians; unto such alone I do present this Talent, this Mite,
this Drop of the Water of my Affections, which by Gods blessing may be a means
to extinguish, at leastwise to abate the flames of these poor peoples
calamities: Which in the name of God take thus, (if thou art afflicted with
this terrible Disease.)

Four or five Handfuls of Groundsel, or as much thereof as by bruising you may
get almost to the quantity of Half a Pint of Juice; unto which put the
quantity of a Walnut of Fresh Butter, which warm over the fire, and so drink it
off: And every half hour afterward, for the space of four hours, drink one
draught of Posset-Ale: After four hours expired, eat one Yolk or two of Eggs
potched: Six or seven hours after take this Drink following, which you must
make thus:

A Drink. Take one Handful of Plantane leaves, one Handful of Mint, and one
Handful of Marygold flowers, and as much Hartshorn as will lie upon a Shilling
at twice, with half an Ounce of Cinnamon grossly beaten, boiled in a Pottle of
Fair Water until it be half consumed; then strain it, and after it is strained,
boil it a walm or two with three Ounces of Hard Sugar: Of which Drink give the
Patient every two hours four Spoonfuls: But within ten or eleven hours after
the taking of the Groundsel-Drink, which I guess to be the hour of Rest, then
let the Patient take ten or twelve Spoonfuls of the Drink thus boiled and
strained, and let him take it for his ordinary drink for four and twenty
hours after.

(Observe to give unto Children one third part prescribed to men or Women of
the Groundsel-Drink, and half of the Plantane-Drink; and to increase the same
as the Child is in age and strength.)

This Medicine being thus taken, and these Rules observed at the beginning of
the Disease, with Gods help it gives a speedy Cure: But if the Disease have
continued long upon thee, then expect not so sudden a Cure, and therefore use
the same Medicine every other day, viz. the Groundsel-Drink, and the
Plantane-Drink, every day ordinarily, the oftener the better. The best and
fittest time to give the Groundsel-Drink is at 6 a clock in the Morning. But if
thou art suddenly taken sick at any time of the day with this Disease, then
take the Groundsel-Drinke presently, without delay, (for delays in this case
are very dangerous) after thou have been an hour in Bed: And if thy
constitution be so hard to work upon, and thy body withal strong, so that the
Medicine begins not to work effectually in an hour and a halfs time, then
you may take such another draught of Groundsel. But if through stubbornness of
thy Disease, and thy former long neglect, thy body does still languish, then
repair to my habitation, or send me a discreet Messenger (for Urines in this
case are not to be trusted to) though many unworthy Professors of the
honorable Science of Physic do rashly adventure to give Physic upon the
bare inspection of the Urine, to the utter destruction of the sick Patient,
although their idle prattle satisfies, but yet deceives ignorant people: A
discreet Messenger I say that may be able to resolve me some questions
concerning the state of your body: By which Messenger I shall send you a Pill
and a Powder, which you shall have gratis, provided the Messenger bring me a
Certificate under the hand of the Minister that you are poor, that so the Poor
may not be deceived: Which Pill and Powder are of excellent virtue for opening
the Obstructions of the Bowels, and evacuates that sharp humor and wind which
causes this violent distemper; and by the taking thereof not only this, but
many Diseases have been Cured, and as many Prevented, to the preservation of
thousands in this and other Nations.

It is excellent for the cure of the Dropsy, for by its evacuative quality it
unburdeneth the languishing body from those Hydropick humors which invade the
life of the Patient.

The Gout, though a Disease reputed incurable, yet this has cured the same at
twice taking, some Topical Medicine being applied to the part, intentionally to
discuss the humor collected, and farther taking the same Medicine once in
half a year intercepteth the furious reintration of the Disease, which commonly
pursues those that have had the Disease every Spring and Fall.

It has likewise mightily prevailed in the Curing of those which have had the
Stone, which it dissolveth by its penetrative faculty, and afterward by its
expulsive faculty it forces the Stone away.

It Cures the Quotidian, Tertian, and Quartan Ague, though indeed the Quartan
requires longer time, but the rest it most commonly cures at the first taking.

It has cured many of the Disease, Struma, commonly called the Kingsevil, if
the Disease be not too inveterate, and the Mass of Blood wholly corrupted and
consequently it cures many Ulcers, Apostheums, Morphews, Itch, and such like
deformities of the Skin; for by the operative virtue of this Medicine, those
sharp humors which produce these unseemly and unwish'd for disasters, are
carried away, and that at the first or second taking, but generally the third
Dose performs the work without question, if the constitution be any thing
helpful to Nature.

But principally it is highly commended for those who have taken Surfets by
Eating or Drinking: For by its virtue it exonerates the Stomach from those
nauseous humors lately received from that redundancy; which humors by
continuance a very few hours in the body, kindle the flames of violent Fevers,
even to the subversion of Nature, and loss of Life, which too too many see and
find by daily and woeful experience; all which calamities may be seasonably
prevented by taking of this wholesome Medicine.

It is very profitable for those that want an Appetite and Digestion, which
indeed is the forerunner of many Diseases, for a Failing Appetite and a Weak
Digestion speaks the whole body distempered, and gives certain notice of the
pursuit of some furious disease. Many carelessly neglecting these Diagnosticks,
precipitate themselves to their destruction.

Indeed it is a proper Medicine to be taken at the beginning of any manner of
Disease, for by its operative virtue it does Diopilate the Stomach, Liver,
Spleen and Mesentery, and presently cleanses them from those Impurities, which
being lodged in those official parts, their Natural operation is presently
hindered, and the sad effects of ensuing Diseases produced.

This Medicine being a perfect Catholic, works impartially on each redundant
humor; and incountring with that enemy the Disease, in the beginning before he
has intrencht himself, gives him a repulse, and forces him to flight; indeed
it is like little David to great Goliath.

It were fit to be preserved for use in all families that are careful of their
health, but especially for such as are remote from Physicians: it may be taken
at any time if the patient find himself suddenly surprised with the Symptoms
of ensuing Diseases.

The precedent symptoms are commonly these following. An unusual pain in the
Head, unaccustomed passions and trembling of the Heart, oppression and
loathsomeness of the Stomach, with a rare propensity to vomit: also a griping
in the Bowels, pain in the Loins or back, with shivering Chillness or shaking,
with a sudden violent heat, with slothfulness, drowsiness and restlesness to
the whole body.

I say when these or any of these Symptoms appear, then know assuredly there
is a storm coming, then without delay take this Medicine.

It may likewise be given to Children, if you find any of these Symptoms
appearing on them: But to such give not the powder in substance, but that which
is called the infusion of it, which you must make thus. Take the whole powder,
and let it lie in seven spoonfuls of white wine all night, then strain the
white wine from the powder through a three double cloth, of the which wine give
the Child one spoonful in the morning fasting, (if the child be not above four
years old) but if a lusty Child, and near eight or ten years of age, you may
then give the quantity of three spoonfuls, rather less then more, for if it
should not work in an hour and a halfs time you may give another spoonful, when
you find it begins to work, give now and then a draught of posset drink; Let
not the Child stir abroad all that day, nor sleep in four hours after taking
the white wine; To a Child of fourteen or sixteen years of age, you may give
four spoonfuls, always remembering to give rather a spoonful too little, then
one drop too much, in regard you may increase the quantity when you please; it
were fit that one of these powders were always kept in a viol full of white
wine, close stopped, for it will keep a whole year being set now and then by the
fire, or in the Sun, and then it is ready to be taken upon all occasions; for
twelve hours neglect may danger the loss of the Child; if the Child be taken
sick one day and neglect the Medicine, till the next morning whilst the
infusion is preparing: withal remembering that Children take not the Pill.

The General Use of this Medicine to Men and Women is as follows. Take the
Pill always over night two hours after the eating of a light supper, so go to
rest; next morning take the powder fasting in a stewed pruon, pap of an Apple,
a piece of sweet butter, or of honey the quantity of a hasle nut; one hour
after drink a draught of posset Ale, and when it begins to work with you, drink
now and then a draught of the said Ale; Sleep not in four hours after taking
thereof, neither stir out of your Chamber all that day: about Noon eat some
warm meat, making but a light Meal; And if it be needful you may take another
pill and powder three days after, in the same manner as aforesaid. And if the
patients body be Costive, then 4 hours before you give the first pill give him
or her a glister made only with half a pint of pure Sallet oil, and half a
pint of new milk. So likewise the next day six or seven hours after the taking
the powder give the same glister, if the inflexibilitie of the humors have
prevented the Medicine working downwards answerable to your expectation; But
this is notusual, yet the first glister is Common.

But if you shall find any of the precedent Symptoms formerly spoken of
appear; then stay not till night or next morning, but immediately go to Bed,
and as soon as you are warm, there take the pill, and within an hour after take
the powder, in order and manner as before directed; And withal remember the use
of the glisters, if your body be very Costive: And if your body continue still
in a distemper, then the next day in the Evening take another pill, and the
next morning after another powder as before prescribed, not forgetting the
Glisters aforesaid.

Be it likewise remembered, that whereas, each body has its several
constitution, habit, strength or weakness; And therefore you must take notice,
that although the pill is to be given to men or women generally, yet the whole
quantity of Powder is not to be given to every patient: but rather half the
powder at a time to a tender body, or else the greatest part of the infusion of
the whole powder, according to former direction for Children; and if the
Medicine, whether the Powder or the infusion, work not in an hour, or two hours
time; then you may take the rest of the powder or infusion, always observing
to take somewhat less then a grain exceeding the direction.

But withal if you expect a blessing upon these my weak but willing
endeavors, be mindful of that wholesome direction delivered by a holy one,
which speaks thus; My Son? in thy sickness be not negligent, but pray unto the
Lord, and he will make thee whole, set thy whole endeavors on work to
relinquish sin, and to order thy hands aright, and then give place to the
Physician, for the Lord has created him; I say expect not a blessing until
you fit your self for that blessing by repentance,

He that sins before his Maker, let him fall into the hands of the Physician
(says a holy One) and know thou whosoever thou art, that its thy sin has
begot this punishment, which makes thee stand in need of the Physician; and
assure thy self, if this punishment, this sickness, be removed from thee before
an appearance of hearty sorrow be manifested in thee for thy sin, which
occasioneth the same, this punishment, this sickness, is removed but to try
thee, or to give way to a far greater affliction which will undoubtedly fall
upon thee and that suddenly; therefore if you desire not only present but
future comfort,

Begin now an amendment of life: thou that have by continual transgressions
endeavored to Crucify again the Son of Life, repent that your Sins may be put
away (which are the cause of all your present sufferings) when the time of
refreshings shall come from the presence of the Lord, Act. 3. Unto such as are
poor in spirit, whose inheritance is the everlasting Kingdom, Mat. 5. To such I
say as thus mourn, it is my desire to Comfort them, for they shall, they must
be comforted, it is due to them by promise; Unto whom I say as Peter said unto
the poor lame man at the Temple gate who begged his Alms, Gold and Silver have I
none, but only such as I have I freely give thee: In the name of the Lord
Jesus Christ of Nazareth, rise up and walk.

Ask and it shall be given you.

Happy is the man that can say with Solon,

Patria, tibi and dictis and factis obitulatus sum. Books Printed for Isaac
Pridmore and Henry Marsh, and are to be sold at the Golden Faulcon near the
New-Exchange.
1 THE Rogue, or the life of Guzman de Alpherache the witty Spaniard, written
in Spanish by Matthew Aleman, Servant to his Catholic Majesty; the fifth and
last Edition Corrected.

2 A Physical discourse exhibiting the cure of Diseases by signatures,
whereunto is annexed a Philosophical discourse, vindicating the souls
Prerogative in discerning the truths of Christian Religion with the eye of
reason, by R. Bunworth.

Self-Examination or Self-Preparation for the worthy receiving of the Lords
Supper; delivered in a Sermon concerning the Sacrament, by Daniel Cawdrey,
sometimes Preacher

(...)
