Upon the most hopeful and ever Flourishing Sprouts of Valor, the
indefatigable Centryes or Armed GIANTS Cut in Yew at the Physic Garden in
Oxford.
Printed in the Year 1664. Reprinted with some alterations in 1682.

By the Ingenious Author J. D.
ALTHOUGH no Brandish't Cherubins are here,
Yet Sons of Adam venture not too near.
It is decreed by the Eternal Host,
That Paradise must be for ever lost,
Here Is your Nil ultra, else in these
Is both a Pillar and an Hercules.
If you will not dread their looks, yet may you fear
The Arms, and strange Fatalities they bear.
On very The Gardener
Bobert their commands they lay,
And wisely he does yearly Tribute pay
Each Christmas day, submitting to the Fates,
Presents them both with two great Lace Cravates.
The Emblem of Mortality the Yew
Does now the Armed, Bloody Warriors show:
And if unwary Mortals slight their Guard,
Oth' pleasant Gard'n they make a sad Churchyard:
In this Conjunction mischief's never scant,
The Saturnine's become a Martial plant.
Far off in Heaven are these ill-boding Stars,
What Is here at hand, when Saturn joins with Mars?
The Hesperian watchful Dragon, that did lie
By the Apples, and more then Nine ways could see,
Is less renowned: Ours do better keep
Their Treasure, and did never wink or sleep.
Their Blood is poison, pestilent their breath,
Their very Shade is almost sudden death;
Who dares be safe? no Turk is Armed so,
When every member of them is a Bow, Being made of Yew^.

When Arms are Armed, Bows charged with Mace or Bill,
So that at once, with Stroke and Shoot they kill.
And lop each Limb, you cannot strike them dead,
Each Limbwill multiply like Hydra's Head.
Some vegetables do themselves protect
With prickles, stings, or stinks oth' same effect,
Our Garden Genij more General
Do not defend themselves alone, but all.
Old Heroes hung their Weapons on the Trees,
To signalize their well-got Victories;
These daring Souls, these ever brave in War
Triumphing Victors both, and Trophies are.
If Quibling Cambridge when they next Commence
Shall say, here is Terrae Filij void of Sense,
And very Block-heads: know that they were meant
For Military not a learned intent.
Valor and wit at equal Honor fly,
Our Valor often, seldom their wit dwells high.
As wise men most are cowards; so it is fit
That Combatants have neither fear nor wit,
And tho their Education they will not boastt
(And much Respect by Modesty is lost)
They value not the Box that Wickham laid
Who often to them very gravely said,
That every man is by his manners made:
'Cause you Men failed, these Trees assumed of late
The grand proprieties of Humane state,
Couch't in an Oak the Soveraingty you Knew,
See here appropriate Valor in an Yew.
What are they Speechless say? fie, men of Swords
And truly valiant, are not men of words,
They murmur tho, and shake their Crests, disturbed
By saucy Winds; nor would their rage be curbed,
Were It not beneath them, Honor to repair,
When it is to strike the Winds, or beat the Air,
Jove whispers peace, or else we well might wonder,
He so secure lets rust his dastard Thunder.
These Earth-born Giants take a different Course,
By plots, as perilous, as is their force.
Each man's an Ambuscado, and may well
Be said at once Perdue and Sentinel.
How they advance toward Heaven both Night and Day,
And forces do come in upon the way,
Yet march unseen: but Joves all kenning Eye
Did soon their Growing Stratagems espy.
Else might the all Conqueror have been surpised
As was Our own, by men in Boughs disguised.
The poor affrighted Atlas, had he not
At last took heart, had sent them all to pot;
For quaking so, the Heavens too fast ran round
That every God had almost tumbled down.
Vulcan thankt his Stars, that is one Leg was saved
And Venus that her -- was not displaid,
Being much disturbed in Mind, that women must
T'unfaithful Pert coats their Treasures trust.
But now the Sun is sent a league to treat,
And to Caress them with his gentle heat,
With numerous presents of his Golden Rays,
And farther promise of Serener days;
Else they with force would crack Heavens Chariot Wheels.
But prostrate Earth too hangs about their Heels.
And as an ancient loyal Sabine wife,
Ventures to intercede and part the strife.
As often an half-spun sinner --
By the Spirits moved (when he is in Thinking mode)
But straight kept back by his Dear Flesh and Blood;
So they, whose humbler scope in Heavens Crown,
With Darling Earth are Clogged and Fettered down.
Could we believe but what Old women do,
They are not only Men but Christians too,
Who fright the Devil himself. Had God but set
^n his first Colony, this Amulet:
No work for Cherub had their been; no doubt
The Devilish had been, and not poor man cast out.
From Sons of Adam now we must retrieve
Our Warning to the Daughters next of Eve.
You Ladies, whom Priapus cannot affright,
Whose Toyish weapon rather does invite,
(Proscribed as insufficient) since you are
Beneath displeasure, therefore do not dare
To use the Garden so, as men use you,
At once to Love ye, and deflouor ye too.
Weak is your Sex, you know the devilish in Swine
Was nere repulsed by hedge of Eglantine.
If then the Courtier Fox or Bully Bore
Your mounds have never undermind or tore,
Thus fortify your selves: In your defense
Set Giant Honor, Giant Conscience.
So shall you never keep, by this Advice,
Knaves Kitchen Garden, but Fools Paradise.
FINIS.

