AN ANSWER To Those Printed Papers published in March last, 1640. by the late
Patentees of Salt, in their pretended defense, and against free trade.

Composed by JOHN DAVIES Citizen and Fishmonger of London, a well-wisher to the
Commonwealth in general.

Sal sapit omnia. Ne scis quid valeat.

Printed in the year, 1641.

To the Honorable House of COMMONS now assembled in PARLIAMENT.
THe ensuing Treatise, concerning the opposing of the project and Patents for
Salt, tending to the good of his Majesty, and of the Subjects in general,
(wherein all faithful endeavors on the Authors part are performed) is most
humbly presented, praying, that if any error is therein committed, (whereof he
is not conscious) may by this Honorable Assembly be pardoned.

An Answer to those Papers (falsely entitled, A true Remonstrance of the state
of the Salt business, etc.) lately published in print in March, 1640. by the
Projectors of the first and second Patents for Salt, in their own pretended
defense, and against the free trade of all Merchants, Navigators, and Traders
for Fish and Salt of the City of London, and all other Ports, and of all Salt
makers and Salt refiners, and of all other his Majesty's Subjects within the
extent of their several Patents between Barwicke and Weymouth, as follows.
IN this Answer it will not be necessary to be limited within the strict time
where the Projectors began* which was in Anno. 1627. thereby to serve their own
occasions, but is intended to declare the truth of the most usual and constant
prices of Salt at the City of London, as it has been sold for 40. years last
past, as in the sequel shall appear.

That in Anno 1600. even till the latter part of the year, 1627. the most
usual price either of white or bay Salt, was near about 50. s. or 3. l. a
Wey, and often sold under that price, as can be sufficiently proved.

That in the said year 1627. the Wars began between the Kings Majesty of
Great Britain, and the French King, and the King of Spain; in which time,
till the peace was concluded betwixt those Kings, the commodity of Salt was
very dear and scarce, especially French Salt, which was at 6. s. or 7. s. a
bushel at the City of London, which came to pass in regard the Salt-workes in
France were destroyed.

First, at the I Will of Ree by the Duke of Buckinghams design.

Secondly, by the French King himself in the wars when he took in Rochel.

And thirdly, by intemperate Rain which fell that time in France. So that the
Kingdom of France it self, which was wont to supply many other parts, as
England, Ireland, Holland, the Eastland, and Germany, was thereby necessitated
with want of that commodity for its own occasion. And therefore not to be
admired, that the French King made an Edict in Anno 1630. that no Salt should
be exported out of his Kingdom, (until his store should be supplied
again.) Which scarcity in France for that present, forced all men to send into
Spain for Salt, and thereupon a great number of Ships from all parts arriving
there at one time, gave the King of Spain occasion to make use of the present
necessity, and laid a great Impost on the Salt that should be transported from
thence.

The very same cause also moved the Kings Majesty of Great Britain, and the
Lords of the Council, to order in that time of scarcity of Salt, by means of
a Petition exhibited to the Lords by the Lord Mayor of the City of London, and
diverse other Ports in Anno 1630. that no Salt should be transported into any
foreign parts, which was effectually granted them by the Lords. But when in
one or two years after, and that in France there were erected Salt-workes, and
Salt was made plentifully again, as in the year 1632. then by the Edicts of
the said Kings, the great imposition of Salt in Spain and France ceased, and
Salt became cheap again, and Trade free as in former years, as about 3. l.
or 3. li. 10. s. per Wey, for English or French, and 4. l. per Wey for Spanish
Salt at most, which continued till December, 1634.

So that the cause of the dearth of Salt in France, Anno 1628. till Anno 1632.
happened through War and intemperate Weather, as before is specified, and not
by the pleasure of Princes, by laying of a great Impost upon it, as they the
Patentees falsely pretended; but the Projectors were desirous to make that an
occasion of bringing their covetous desires to effect, and about that time they
began to devise to bring an Impost on the English native Salt, which was and
is dearer to the makers of it then any other salt spent in this Kingdom. For
French and Spanish Salt being made only by the heat of the Sun, stands not
the makers of it in above 10. s. or 20. s. or 30. s. a London Wey at the most,
according to the dryness, or the wetnesse of the Summer, whereas the English
Shields Salt at 1. d. per Gallon, (which is the cheap price the Patentees boast
of stands the makers of it in 53. s. 4. s. the like Wey at least, being also
the weakest Salt of all other by one third part, and therefore cannot bear any
Impost, without destroying the English manufactures, as these Projectors have
all this time practiced, to the destruction thereof, although they pretended
the contrary.

It is to be observed, that a Wey of Salt at the City of London, contains 40.
Bushels, and every Bushel 10. Gallons, which is the right measure according to
the Statute; from which, in most other Ports it much differs.

That in December, 1634. the first Projectors, consisting of twenty two in
number, (whereof five were Knights, the other seventeene had the titles of
Esquires and Gentlemen) having determined and practiced formerly to do
mischief in this Land wherein they were borne and bred, and being all or most
of them unexperienced in the matter they took in hand, devised and obtained
this Monopoly of Salt, mis-informing his Majesty, and the Lords of the
Council, that it would be a great benefit to this Kingdom of England, and
that of Scotland, to erect works for the making a sufficient quantity of Salt,
etc. and at a certain moderate price, (as they so termed it) not exceeding 3.
l. a Shields Wey, which is after the rate of 5. l. 12. s. for a Wey delivered
at London, which is an intolerable exaction upon a native manufacture, made and
spent in this Kingdom, as by their Patent more fully does appear; (although
the Salt pannes in those places were erected long before, and not by these
Patentees.) Which Patent being obtained by them, they practiced to oppress the
Subject from January 1635. until August 1638. all which time the first
Patentees having made a Monopoly, in taking all the old Works and Pannes at
the Shields into their hands, forced white Salt at the City of London to the
price of 4. l. 15. s. per Wey, and for the most part to 5. l. per Wey, and so
in all other Ports according to that rate.

And Bay Salt, by reason of their great Impost of 48. s. 6. d. per Wey, which
was raised by a privy Seal, procured by Edward Nuttall, and others his
associates, (but nothing brought to account for his Majesty, as yet appears)
was not all that time sold at London under 5. l. 10. s. per Wey, at least, but
commonly at 5. l. 13. s. 4. d. per Wey, or 6. l. whereas the Western parts,
which were free of their Patent, as Southampton, Exeter, Plymouth, Bristol,
etc. had it in that time at or about 3. l. the like Wey, and sometimes under
that price, which was most unjust and unequal, that the Eastern parts should
suffer so much thereby, not only in the price, but also in hindrance of
Navigation, and loss of Trade.

That about July, 1638. the first Patentees having difference with Master
Murford of Yarmouth, who had a Patent granted before theirs at Shields,
prevailed against them, and some of them of the first Patent being wearied with
the design, voluntarily laid down their Patent.

That after the first Patentees gave over their Patent, the Salt-makers at
Shields in August, 1638. reassumed their Pannes, and sold Salt there cheap
again, and thereby both Scottish and Shields Salt was sold at London for 3. l.
per Wey, or near thereabout, until January following, that Thomas Horth and
his associates obtained a grant of their Patent, which they presently after put
in execution, yet Horth and his associates of the second Patent had no time to
raise the price of white Salt at Shields to that height as they desired; for
the Scots presently after the first Pacification in August, 1639. brought it
down at London to 2. l. 17. s. per Wey, whereas Horth and his Associates in
June and July 1639. would sell none at London under 4. l. 10. s. per Wey.

That whereas the first and second Projectors of both Patents, to clear
themselves of the great wrong done by them to his Majesty and his Subjects, do
in their printed Papers lay the blame on the traders in Salt of the City of
London, seeking thereby to gloss over their oppressing the Subjects even in the
face of this Honorable Parliament, still pretending as formerly, that what
they did was for his Majesty's profit, benefit of Navigation, support of home
manufacture, and general good of the subject, and many such like things, all
which pretenses are mere falsehoods and suggestions.

For first his Majesty's Revenew is no way increased, as does appear by their
payments into his Majesty's Exchequer, being in all but 700. l. whereas they
have received Impost, and remain debtors to his Majesty many thousands, as by
further examination and proof of their accounts will appear.

Secondly, Navigation has been much hindered thereby, as by a former Petition
of the Trinity house to his Majesty and the Lords of the privy Council
appears, as also it has been sufficiently proved before the Committee for
the Salt business, by the Master and Wardens of the Trinity Company, who are
most sensible of the destruction and advancement of the Shipping and Navigation
of this Kingdom.

Thirdly, they have so cherished the home manufacture, by laying a heavy Impost
upon it, that those that had 240. Pannes of their own, and were thriving people
at the Shields, before their Patents were of force, and were the makers there
of Salt, are by the means of these Patentees become so poor, that the greater
part of them are not able to buy coals to set their Pannes on work. And those
the Patentees who bought 34. Pannes of the old traders, did cease working for
the most part of the years 1639. and 1640. by reason they could not attain to
their intended price of 56. s. 8. d. per Wey at the Shields. So that whereas
there was formerly made at the Shields before their Patents began about 16000.
Wey per annum, they made in the time of the first Patent, which continued about
three years and a half, not above 10000. Wey per annum. And in the time of
the latter Patent but 8000. Wey per annum, even before the coming in of the
Scottish Army into those parts: by all which appears how much they have
destroyed the native manufacture, and have no ways advanced or increased it,
as they pretended.

Fourthly, for their pretenses of the general good of the Subject, in place
whereof they have so oppressed the Subject in general, that not only the
traders in Salt of the City of London, have justly complained of their
grievances to the Honorable Court of Parliament, but also Salt-refiners of
Essex and Suffolk, also many Merchants in the West parts as far as Weymouth,
as also from Yarmouth, and many other ports North as far as Newcastle, that
came up to London only to inform the Court of Parliament of the great burden
they have been forced to lie under, even to many of their undoings: And many
more would come up, had they not been so impoverished by them the Patentees,
that they are not able to bear their charges in coming so far to complain
of their grievances. In general, they have been the oppressors of Fishermen,
and all the subjects of these North East parts of England, to the value of many
thousand pounds in estimation, above fourscore thousand pounds since the time
of their entering into these Patents, which can be made plainly to appear by
one years importation for foreign and Scottish Salt, collected out of the
Customehouse books, and Meters books of London, and for native Salt out of
their own books.

Viz.

In the year 1637. (which was in the time of their first Patent) of Bay and
Spanish Salt there was imported but 1364. Wey, which at 48. s. 6 d. per Wey, is
impost 3307. l. 14. s. whereas in the year 1634. when the trade was free there
was 4620. Wey of foreign Salt imported, by which may be observed the decay of
foreign Trade during the time of their Impost.

That the Impost of foreign Salt was received and taken of all the Subjects
between Barwicke and Southampton, by virtue of Privy Seal dated in May 1636.
procured by Edward Nuttall, and others his associates, but nothing brought to
account by them, nor paid to his Majesty's use for the two years and 6.
months, (as can yet appear.)

That of Scottish and native white Salt Shields measure, there were expended
for land use about 16000. Weyes, which at 10. s. per Wey Impost, and 10. s. per
Wey increase of price, which came to pass by the Patentees contracting with
the Scotch for dear selling, and can appear to be damage to the subjects at
least in one year, in the price of the white Salt 16000. l.

That for Fishers use of Scottish and native Salt, an estimate of 3000. Shields
Wey, and upwards, at 3. s. 4. d. per Wey Impost, and 6. s. 8. d. increase of
price, is at least 1500. l.

Whereby it appears that the subjects suffered in one year by the first Salt
Patents, 20807. l. 15. s.

That the Patentees for Salt continued their first and second Patents above 5.
years.

By all which it is manifest how profitable these Patents have been to the
Patentees, how little benefit has accrued to his Majesty thereby, how great a
burden to the Subjects in general, and to the old Salt makers, and the
Merchants for foreign Salt, and all Fishermen, who use great quantities
thereof, and to all traders in the same in their particulars. But if any trader
in Salt has either joined with those Patentees in any indirect way, thereby to
uphold them, or the extreme price of Salt, they are not hereby intended to be
excused, but to be left to the consideration of the Honorable House of
Parliament.

And whereas Horth and his Associates seek to justify their Patent, comparing
it with that which Master Murford intended (which would also have been alike
illegal with theirs, by laying an Impost on native Salt (as they have
practiced.)

For answer thereunto is said, that the unlawfulness of Murfords Patent
intended, cannot make that of Horths to be lawful which was practiced by him.
For as well that of Horths, as also the first Patent, have been sufficiently
discussed by the Committee appointed by the Honorable House of Commons now
assembled in Parliament, for the hearing of that business, and is by them most
justly condemned to be illegal, a Monopoly, and prejudicial to the
Commonwealth. For so it is, that a Monopoly is a kind of commerce in buying
and selling usurped by a few, and sometimes by one person, and forestalled by
them or him from all others, to the gain of the Monopolist, and to the
detriment of other men.

That the latter Patentees further proceed in their justification, declaring
the low rates the subjects have been served at since the time of the
settlement of their Patent, which is (as they say) at 1. d. ob. per Gallon at
the most, which in truth is a most intolerable exaction on the subject. For 1.
d. ob. per gallon is no less then 50. s. a Sheilds Wey, which is but five
eight parts of a London Wey, and so the fraught being added, which is 10. s. a
Shields Wey, without Impost, it will stand the Adventurer in no less then 4.
l. 16. s. a Wey London measure; whereas it may be afforded, delivered at
London, for 3. l. 12. s. per Wey, which is after the rate of 35. s. per Wey to
the Salt makers at Shields for their Wey, at which said price of 35. s. per
Wey, the old Salt makers say, they can afford it, but not under.

And for the rare of 1. d. per Gallon, which is the cheap price they so much
boast on, it being but 33. s. 4. d. a Wey Shields measure, at which price, if
they sold any so cheap, it was much against their wills, for they desired and
always sought to settle it at 56. s. 8. d. per Wey Shields measure for land
use, and 46. s. 8. d. for the fishing Sea expense, which are the prices laid
down in the latter Patent: yet it is true, that they sold some at lower rates:
but they were forced thereto by means of the great plenty that was brought in
by the Scots, who sold it at London, Yarmouth, and some other Ports at 3. l. a
Wey, in Anno 1639. and some under that price, as aforesaid, whereupon the
Patentees gave over making Salt at Shields in their 34 pannes, in regard they
could not attain to their intended price of 56. s. 8. d. a Shields Wey, yet
some of the old Salt makers still wrought, (though to their great loss, and
some of their undoings) selling it not for above 30. s. per Wey, yet
notwithstanding they the Patentees took of them the old Saltmakers, without any
moderation or compassion, the full impost of 10. s. for every Shields Wey, for
Land use, and 3. s. 4. d. per Wey, for the fishery expense. For they had forced
the old Saltmakers and Salt refiners to enter into bond, for the payment thereof
unto them, which if they refused to do, they violently forced them of the
Shields, of great Yarmouth, and Salt Refiners of Essex and Suffolk thereunto
by imprisoning of some, committing of others into Pursuivants hands, and
causing others to come up and answer at the Council Table, to their great
expense both of money and time, which extremity Horth used in that time he was
governor more then any other either of the first or second Patentees.

That in the Months of September, October and November last, Salt became deerer
then it was in eight or nine years before, which came to pass partly by
reason of the great impost continued by the Patentees of the last Patent, both
on the native and foreign Salt, and partly by reason of the imbarring of the
Scottish trade, and the coming in of the Scottish Army, at that time into
Newcastle and Shields, so that white Salt was sold in October last at the port
of London at 6. l. 10. s. per Wey, and Bay Salt in November last, was sold at
the port of London for 8. l. per Wey, in regard Master Strickson, Master
Nuttall, and Master Duke, three of the last Patentees continued the taking
impost even until this present Parliament, which three were also chief of the
Projectors of the first Patent.

That the 23. of November last, the Honorable Assembly of Parliament upon a
Petition of the traders in Salt of London, enjoined the Patentees to bring in
their Patents and cease taking impost, and thereupon the price both of White
and Bay Salt did fall at the port of London to 3. l. a Wey, and some for less:
but the winds proving contrary in the latter part of December, January and
February last, for above ten weeks together: And also small store of Salt
having been laid up in London, or made at Shields by reason of the troubles in
those parts with the Scottish Army, the store of white Salt for want of supply
was soon spent here at London: and had it not been that the Parliament before
that time had taken off the Impost of foreign Bay and Spanish Salt, whereby
there was good quantities of foreign Salt brought in, this City of London had
been so necessitated for Salt, as the like has not been known. Yet from the
Kings Store house, and the East India Company, and other such like places,
there was some small quantities of white Salt found, which supplied the present
want thereof, and was sold in those dearest times at or near Billingsgate by
some of the Traders in Salt for 6. s. 8. d. per Bushel at most, but Bay Salt
all that time was sold for 22. d. or 2. s. a bushel, and not above all that
time, which was in the Month of February, but before that Month was expired,
and ever since it has been sold for 2. s. per Bushel, and five peckes to the
Bushel, at or near Billingsgate.

And whereas the Patentees allege that white Salt was sold for 2. s. a pecke,
at that instant day, when they published their printed papers, it is manifestly
to be proved that ten or twelve days before they published them, white Salt
was cried in London streets at 5. d. a pecke, and so ever since, which proves
their printed papers to be scandalous and false, in laying forth so many
imputations upon the Traders in Salt, as though they were the cause of dear
selling, which was only their continued impositions, and the occasion of the
time as before is showed.

That before the Patentees had obtained their Patent for Salt, there was
imported yearly to London great quantities of Spanish, Straits, and French
Salt, by Merchants, Navigators and Traders. And that many hundred Weyes thereof
were from thence yearly transported for Flanders, Holland, Denmark, and the
East Country, whereby ships had their employments both inwards and outward,
his Majesty's Customs improved, and many poor people, as Porters and
Laborers had their maintenance thereby; which trade of Importation is in a
manner wholly decayed since the time these several Patents were obtained.

Objections and Observations.
THat their Patents are found by the Committee appointed by the Parliament for
hearing the Salt businesses to be illegal, and a Monopoly, by reason they
brought an impost on the native Manufacture, and many other oppressions to the
Subject.

That the prosecution has been most violent by imprisonments, and forcing
many out of their Trades, and also Salt Refiners and Saltmakers, at Shields and
great Yarmouth from their works; and the first Patentees forced diverse at
Shields to let them their Pannes at a Rent, which after two years and six
months use, they returned into their hands much decayed, and not satisfied for
Rent.

That they would have forced his Majesty's Subjects to the only use of white
Salt, which is not so sufficient for fishing Voiages and many other uses, as
the foreign.

That they forced the price both of white and Bay Salt, in the time of their
Patents, to one third part more then otherwise it would have been sold for.

That there was a far greater quantity of Salt made in England before their
Patents began, then in the time of the continuance of their Patents.

That Horth at a hearing at Council Table the 19. of December, 1638. to
maintain his unjust cause in taking his Patent, and upon some speech, which
was moved about the insufficiency of white Salt for preserving of Fish, and an
ancient Trader there saying, that the very scales fell off through the
weakness of the white Salt; he the said Horth did most falsely reply and
affirm, that Codde and Ling Fish had no scales, which he did to convince them
of error who came to oppose him: and he with others (whose names are well
known) did then and there before his Majesty and the Lords of the Council so
far maintain it, that they were believed, and that the others that spoke the
truth, were rejected, whereby the King and Lords were abused by the said Horth
and others, by denying that to the creature which it had received in the
creation either for defense or ornament.

That it is and has been proved both before his Majesty and the Lords, and
also before the Committee by the Trinity house Masters, that if foreign Salt
be prohibited, or some heavy impost be laid upon it, Navigation will be much
hindered and decayed.

That Horth alone above the rest of his partners obtained a Commission out of
the Exchequer, and did thereby put men to their corporal oaths, to confess
what Salt of their own or of others, they knew to be imported, and told the
Commissioners he was at Council about that particular, and his Council
advised him, it must be so, and to be sure, would be with the Commissioners
himself, and urge it.

That the settled moderate rate (as the Patentees pleased to call it) of 56. s.
8. d. per Wey Shields measure, will stand the Adventurer delivered at London in
5. l. 6. s. 8. d. per wey, which is now since their Patent ceased sold at this
City of London for 3. l. 10. s. per wey, and long before their Patents began,
it was sold cheaper, (that time of three or four years of hostility with
France and Spain, when there could be little foreign Salt imported, only
excepted.) And Bay Salt at present is sold at 3. l. per wey.

That beyond the power of the Patents, Horth constrained the Salt refiners of
diverse Counties to pay a double Impost.

That if the commodity of Salt be free for all men to import, or make it, there
cannot be that engrossing, forestalling, or regrating made* which may be done
by a few monopolizing Patentees, who having the command of it all, may confer
the commodity upon some few particular Traders, for some sinister respects, to
the destruction of others in their Trades, (as the late times of their Patents
have made manifest.) And for those 27. years before specified, the commodity of
Salt being then free of Impost, the price was always reasonable, and would be
so now, and so continue, without the help of any Projector.

That a free trade which is now so much desired of the subject, and a settled
price, desired of the Patentee, cannot consist, for a constant price forced
upon a native manufacture is a principal part of a Monopoly.

That foreign Salt being absolutely necessary for special uses, the
inhibition thereof cannot be admitted, but to the great prejudice of the
subject.

That these Projectors, which pretend so much of supporting the home
manufacture of Salt, have in a manner destroyed it, by laying so heavy an Impost
upon it, as 16. s. for every London Wey. And if it be not supported by taking
off the foresaid Impost, it is like utterly to decay, and then indeed (the Salt
Wiches only excepted) this Kingdom must wholly depend upon foreign parts,
for all the Salt shall be therein expended.

(The premises considered) the humble request to the Honorable House of
Commons now assembled in PARLIAMENT, is, That they would be pleased, that the
Projectors and late Patentees for Salt may be brought to an account upon the
premises, that so it may appear what profits have accrued to his Majesty, and
what disadvantage to the Subject, and what persons have been molested and
vexed by reason of them, that so reparations and redress may be made to the
parties so vexed and grieved, as in the judgment of the Honorable Assembly
shall be thought expedient.

FINIS.

