THE Loyal Citizen: OR, SEDITION LAID OPEN. A SATYR Presented to all LOYAL
Citizens and Subjects.

Vivat Rex, Floreat Justitiae.

By J. D. Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Davis, 1682.

To all LOYAL Citizens and Subjects.
COnsidering at this Grand Juncture of Time, the base Scandalous Pamphlets both
against Majesty, and Orthodoxal Divinity, the private envy and Aspersions
thrown upon so Worthy and Loyal a Person as the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor,
and the rest of the Loyal Citizens, has forced me at last, to send forth this
Satyr, under the Patronage of all well-wishing Subjects, that you may a little
perceive the devout holy Zeal, which these envious Whigglanders bear both to
Monarchy, Church, and People, wherein you may partly perceive the Miseries all
Loyalists suffered in the late Rebellious Times, and what we are to expect and
likely to undergo, in case (as God forbid) of a second Relaps. May Heaven of
its mercy protect us from it, and that our preservation in peace may be both
the continual care of Heaven, and all our Earthly Magistrates, is both the
Prayers and Hearty Wishes of your humble, faithful fellow Subject and Servant,

J. D.

TO ALL Serious Dissenters.
If such there be.
IT is not out of Envy either to you or to any Christian Soul upon Earth, that
I have writ this short Pamphlet, but my real Love that I bear both to you and
all my fellow Subjects. That you may see how you are led by the Nose, drawn
into Disloyal Snares by pretended Zeal, and an outside Form of Divinity, by
those that will speak you fair and dissemblingly to the face, and endeavor
your ruin behind your backs, by those that care not (so their interest be
preserved) if all the rest of the World was destroyed. I will entreat so much,
that you will patiently read it, and Seriously consider it, and then if you
find me blame worthy, let some of your Scribbling Party Answer it, and you shall
hear more from him that is both a Lover of his King and Country,

J. D.

THE Loyal Citizen: OR, SEDITION LAID OPEN A SATYR Presented to all Loyal
CITIZENS and SUBJECTS.
BRave Moor! thou glory of this Latter Age;
How are we bound to thank thee for thy pity?
Thy noble Spirit boldly dares t'ingage
Those Zealots of our once called Loyal City,
Of Factions Fathers, right the Factious Son,
Who would with Jealousies, and fears, o'rerun
Our happy I Will, till we were all undone.
The Churches prayer's, whilst they did all repent,
Cut off the sin, against one Commandment:
That plainly tells, the Fathers sins shall fall
Upon the Son's; Heaven still prefer ve our Nation;
Therefore to memory those words recall,
From Generation to Generation.
Has Heaven been Kinder, than we could expect?
And shall our Zeal Heavens Kindness still neglect?
And on our Prince (whom Heavens preserve) reflect.
It Is not so long since, pray call back to mind,
Murdering the Sire, then to the Son be Kind;
And say once more your Zeal had made you blind
'Twas Zeal indeed taught by a homespun Tailor
Doct^ing* that's next a K^n to what James Naylor
In the late times did prea^^; 'tw^s Blasphemy
That Naylor taught against our Heave^ly King*
But Subtle (...) dealt more craftily,
He Sought the ruin of an Earthly King.
Which to our future comforts, let all Know
Created England Misery and woe.
Look to great Moor, although our Father's s^ns
Are taken from us, yet our Zeal begins.
To draw us back unto our Fathers blindness.
Taught by pretended Zeal, dissembling kindness.
We only want to make our Eighty Two
A Forty Eight; then after have at you:
Which if they should (Great Heaven protect us still)
Out of the power of Zealots, and their ills.
Your self must then expect no greater pity,
Then poor young Royalists from proud Committee,
In the late Times; scarecly a piece of Bread
To satisfy their Hunger; or a Bed
To rest their weary Loyal Bones upon.
They might as well to Hell have made their moan,
As unto them, for in faith it was all one;
Here stands a Baron cringing to a Sadler,
A Noble Man saluting of a Cobbler,
Makes his Addresses to his Lady Wife,
Who, at the first beginning of her Life,
Was Dairy Maid unto his loving Mother,
And once from Hanging saved her eldest Brother.
A Gentleman with Hat in hand salutes
A grave Old Broker, yet the Fool Co^nutes;
For though that Sequestration, made 'em rich,
It could not keep their Wives T -- from the Itch,
But some of those poor Gentlemen through want,
Was forced to be their Drudges, and supplant
Number of Horns, to drain their good Wives purses*
Their Zealous Wives, such was their fatal Curses,
To work, though hard, for what they knew their own,
So that to some at last 'twas all one grown:
For they kept Servants, and yet paid no wages*
Hansome Cash-keepers, Youthful, Grave, all Ages,
But yet they was to their Cash-keepers, Pages.
The grave Committee was their faithful Stewards,
Their Zealous Wives were Cash-keepers; in few
They had Estates, and yet they had no Land, (words*
They had no Money, yet money could Command;
They Servants had, yet Servants was their Masters*
Although they Eat, their Servants are their Tasters*
But this good Fate did happen but to some,
The rest may Gang to France or else to Rome.
Fine World in faith, must certain Heaven please, on
Had it reigned longer* we had been deseas'd
With all the Plagues of the Antipodes.
The Fools turned Wise, the Wise men turned Fools;
The Children gone to Change, Old Men to Schools*
Lie on the Floor, and on us laid our Beds*
Wore Hat on Heels, and walked upon out Heads*
Have Slept all day, at night got up to Work*
Left to be Christians, and at last turnld Turk
Doubtless a second Babel had been Founded,
And heaven one more forced the earth to have drowned;
Or else confused their base blaspheming Tongues,
Made them speak nothing right but all things wrong,
Instead of Plalms, made them sing wanton Songs.
It Is coming to it again (My Lord) beware
We be not drawn into a Second Snare.
There is just such illit'rate Whining Fellows,
Puffs out their Nonsense from their Plaugy Bellows*
They talk of Heaven, of Angels, and of Saints,
And in the end, against Kings make Complaints.
They speak of great Jehovah and his Mercies,
Then presently call out of Popish Farcies.
They rail at none, but follows right their Text,
Yet Bawls out Plaguyly, if they be vexed;
They breath you out (O Lord) an Hour together,
Hail, Rain or Snow, in Sunshine or foul weather;
Cries out, Beloved! Oh! Look to your Lives!
But never tells 'em that they kiss their Wives.
O Lord, look down on thy distressed Servants,
His Plaguey Subjects long for great Preferments.
They would not be called Bishops, but would fain
Over their Lands create a Second Reign.
They cry, Beloved, see poor Englands Teachers,
They Are Glutton, Drunkard, Simmonaical Preachers.
O my Beloved, are such men as these
Fit to teach Souls, or great Jehovah please?
Why, no, they are not, but must all Divines
Learned, and worthy men their fold resign:
For three or four, that is taxed with tippling Wine.
They dare not speak of private sius that is sown
But rip up other's faults to hide their own;
Thy others faults in pulpit brave can O^ it
But never speaks of Caudles and Sack Posset,
They with some Zealous Wives in Chamber toss it
Slearing and Simpering as they were afraid*
Stroking the bear Chin *cause they want a Beard*
Drinking the Cu^koldo health, who waits below,
And sends his maid, his wives pleasure to know;
At last the zealot to that height is wound,
That down goes Mistri^ Zeal on Bed, or Ground,
They tickle one another to that hight,
Smiling and winking they fall to it straight*
What, does he wink think you to save his eyes,
Or cause he would not see her Dun-Skin Thighs?
No 'twas the sin of Lerchery to hide,
O Lord, forgive us, we saw not what we did.
A pretty way both Heaven and Earth to Cheat,
But 'twill not pass, when it comes at Judgment Seat.
When they have done, poor Cuckolds called to prayers,
Good man, for have he breaks his shins up-stairs,
Devoutly Kneels at one side of the Room,
And gravely bow's as soon as Prayers is done.
Then sneakingly gives Short-Clock many thanks
For his good Prayers; and also for his Pranks,
Then Scrapes a Leg and calmly takes his leave.
Thus the poor easy Cuckold they deceive.
Let all be judge who is the greatest winner,
The public or the private Cunning Sinner:
Faith I think neither, both at last may have
Another punishment besides the Grave?
They preach against the Clergy take more pains,
In hopes at last their Livings to obtain.
But that must be when Monarchs do not Reign.
Then knowing Monarchy stands in their way
It is no marvel they so faintly, Pray
For Charles and James every good Sabbath day.
Oh, could they get the Staff once more in Hand*
They Would bridle King and Kingdoms, Laws and Land,
Nay if they durst, would Heaven next Command.
O let them still by Heaven be withstood,
And valued less than Lucifer's ill Brood.
Those as a Parallel to them I bring,
Both striving with this difference in the the thing,
Those against their Heavenly --
But they *against both their Heaven and Earthly King,
But yet a King so gracious, good, and great,
Makes all our joys and happiness complete.
Those only are excepted that we see,
Fain wou*d be Monarchs, Kings as well as he*
Go on (most Loyal Sir) to serve your King*
Your City, Country, to us comforts bring*
You have done nothing but what Law directs*
Those that withstand you, may they find neglect
Both from their fellow Subjects and their Prince,
Till they beg pardon for their great offense.
You have both Laws of God and Man to show
For what you do; then let the factious know,
They may to Hell after their Fathers go*
It Is you that next to Majesty* must stop
The raging Zeal, it is you that are the Prop,
Supporter and preserver of our ^ight^
Go on, and may Heaven still you Candle Light*
Increase your reason, and like Mordecai,
Hammon withstand that would our Peace destroy.
Base factious Spirits, what (...) you would see,
Those ills which none but (...)
Have you a mind to see intestine Thunder,
The Plagues of eating Swords, Domestic Plunder.
See the scorned* Father striking at his Sone,
Who without Mercy on their Father runs*
See the Sons base Revenge upon their Father,
Who never leave till all lie Dead together.
Friend fighting friend* a brother killing (...)
Sparing his own blood* less than any other*
Beware* beware I say take heed (...),
Before your Souls feed on such (...)
Let your own reason clear your blind^d eyes,
And as you older are, still grow more wise.
Beware those Monsters that have taught your Zeals,
First to destroy your (...)
Then brings destruction to) (...),
Who never leave whilst all (...).
All greived Loyal souls weep bloody tears,
To see you drawn by jealousies and fears,
To act those things, must murd^ring sorrow bear.
Is it so long since that you have forgot?
Can you so soon wash out those Royal spots
Of sacred Inn'cent blood. O remember
Your January was worse than damned November.
One but contrived, the other Stopped that breath
For which we suffered since, Fire, Sword and Death.
Yet do your private Teacher dare to say
It was the Hand of God, my Friends I pray:
Behold Almighty's Judgments still are just,
They speak you fair, and at the same time thrust
A Sword quite up unto the Hilt, within
Your Bodies; yet it does not pierce the skin.
It is the sword of faction and Rebellion,
Discord, Dissension, Plagues that lead to Hell on?
They have tongues of adders, Serpents, Snaks; a^e evils
That walk like Saints, demurely, grave and civil,
Yet teach and preach damned Doctrine fit for Devils.
Shall we be taught to disobey a Prince
Whom Heaven protected (can the world convince)
From Zealots rage, and Traitors hands long since.
Must we be led by the Nose till Wars are coming,
By zealous prayer created, preached by cunning,
Holy Long winded fervent religious men,
Who seem as inn'cent as the pretty VV^en,
Yet if well tried we easily may find
They unto none but to themselves are kind:
Envies all happiness but what is their own
Have humble out-sids, inwardly over grown
With pride, Ambition, and self-interest
Longing with Crowns, themselves for to invest,
Though to the ruin of all sacred breasts.
For what is Monarchy to them that say,
They are all Monarchs, zealously can pray:
Such deeds as these if not forbore will bring
Once more the Judgments of an Heavenly King;
Let not Religious Cloak your Bodies cover,
And under that both Prince and Country Smother.
To make your selves more hateful and less good
Than Oliver and his Rebellious Brood?
Let not your Loyal fellow subject weep,
And let my weary Muse retire to sleep,
Who never can find rest until she sees
Your Loyalty, too like the Northern freeze,
Flame for your Prince in the warm South degrees.
Let not fond zeal no longer blind our eyes
In England to creat new Tragedies.
Let us not rest until our Souls we find
More Loyal grown, and to our Prince more kind.
Endeavoring still to imitate hose Quires
That with their Hearts, and Harps and sacred Lyres,
Sing to their Heavenly King, who can alone
Set who he pleases (Kings) on Earthly Thrones.
FINIS.

