THE City-Night-Cap: OR, Creed quod habes, and habes. A Tragi-Comedy.

By Robert Davenport.

As it was Acted with great Applause, by Her Majesty's Servants, at the Phoenix
in Drury Lane.

LONDON: Printed by Ja: Cottrel, for Samuel Speed, at the Sign of the
Printing-Press in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1661.

Drammatis Personae.
Duke of Verona. Duke of Venice, Brother to Abstemia. Duke of Millain. Antonio,
the Duke's Son. Lorenzo, Husband to Abstemia. Philippo, his Friend. Lodovico,
Husband to Dorothea. Lords of Verona. Senators of Venice. Sanchio. Lord of
Millain. Sebastiano. Lord of Millain. Pandulpho. Spinoso. Jaspro. Jovani.
Francisco, Servant to Lodovico. Pambo, a Clown. Morbo, a Pander. A Turk, Slave
to Antonio. 2 Slaves to Lorenzo. Officers and Servants.
Women ACTORS.
Abstemia, Lorenzo's Wife, and Sister to the Duke Venice. Dorothea, Lodovico's
wanton Lady. Timpanina, a Bawd. Ladies.
Actus Primus.
Enter Lorenzo and Philippo. Lor. THou shall try her yet once more.

Phil. Fie, fie.

Lor. Thou shall do it:
If thou be'st my friend, thou wilt do it.

Phil. Try your fair wife?
You know 'cis an old point, and wondrous frequent
In most of our Italian Comedies.

Lor. What do I ear for that? let him seek new ones
Cannot make old ones better; and this new point
(Young Sir) may produce new smooth passages,
Transcending those precedent: pray will ye do it.

Phil. Pray fool your self no farther; twice you have swaid me,
Twice I have tried her; and it is not yet, ye know,
Ten days since our reconciliation:
How will it show in you so near a Kinsman
To the Duke, nay, having woven your self into
The close-wrought Mystery of Opinion,
Where you remain a soldier, a man
Of brain and quality, to put your friend
Again on such a business, and to expose
Your fair wife to the tempest of temptation?
And by the white unspotted Cheek of Truth,
She is --

Lor. A woman.

Phil. A good woman.

Lor. Pish.

Phil. As far from your Distrust, as bad ones are from Truth:
She is in love with Virtue, would not boast it,
But that her whole Life is a well-writ story,
Where each word stands so well placed, that it passes
Inquisitive Detraction, to correct
She Is modest, but not fullen; and loves silence,
Not that she wants apt words, (for when she speaks,
She enflames Love with wonder) but because
She calls wise silence the souls harmony.
She Is truly chaste, yet such a foe to coyness,
The poorest call her courteous; and which is excellent,
(Though fair and young) she shuns to expose her self
To the opinion of strange eyes: she either seldom
Or never walks abroad but in your company,
And then with such sweet hashfulness, as if
She were venturing on cracked ice; and takes delight
To step into the print your foot has made,
And will follow you whole fields: so she will drive
Tediousness out of Time, with her sweet Character:
And therefore, good my friend, forbear to try
The Gold has past the fire.

Lor. Thou foolish friend,
Beauty, like the Herb Larix, is cool in the water,
But hot in the stomach: women are smooth flatterers, but cunning injurers.

Phil. Thou wondrous yellow friend,
Temper an Antidote with Antimony;
And it is infectious: mix Jealousy with Marriage,
It poisons Virtue: let the child feel the sting,
He Will fly the Honeycomb: Has she one action
That can expose you to distrust?

Lor. Oh! when the Flesander leaf looks most green,
The fap is then most bitter: an approved appearance
Is no authentic instance; she that is lip-holy,
Is many times heart-hollow. -- Here she comes.
Enter Abstemia. A Prayer Book in her hand! Oh hypocrisy!
How fell'st thou first in love with woman? wilt try again
But this one time?

Phil. Conditioned you will stand
Ear-witness to our conference, that you may take
In at your ear, a Virtue that will teach
Your erring soul to wonder.

Lor. He would wittal me,
With a consent to my own Horns: I will;
I Will give thee a new occasion: There lurks in woman's blood
A vindicating spirit.

Abst. I came, Sir, to give you notice,
Count Lodovico, Stroimo, Spinoso, and Pandulpho, with the rest
Of the Consilliadory, certify,
They are setting forth to meet the Duke your Kinsman
Returning from Venice.

Lor. Oh, there he has seen the Duke your Brother.

Abst. Yes, Sir, and they stay but for your company.

Lor. And you're cloyed with it -- Kicks her and Exit. She weeps.

Phil. And will you still be used thus? Oh Madam,
I do confess, twice I have battered at
The Fort I fain would vanquish, and I know
Ye hold out more 'cause ye would seem a Soldier,
Then in hate to the Affailant; I am again
Inflamed with those sweet fountains from whence flow
Such a pair of streams: Oh strong force of desire!
The quality should quench, has set on fire:
I love you in your sorrows.

Abst. And I sorrow in nothing but your love; twice, Philippo,
Have I not beat back the impetuous storm
Of thy incessant rudeness? will thou again
Darken fair Honor with Dishonesty?
Thou know my Lord has long and truly loved thee
In the wisdom of a Friend, in a fair Cause;
He wears his good sword for thee, lays his heart
A lodger in thy bosom, proclaims thee Partner
In all he has, but me; Oh be not counterfeit:
We all conclude, a Diamond with Clouds
The Goldsmith casts into his dust; and a Gentleman
So blemished in his Honor, blots his Name
Out of the Heralds Book, stands a lost man
In Goodness and Opinion: Oh Philippo,
Make me once more so happy to believe
It Is but a pointed passion.

Lor. Most acute Witch!

Phil. Come, learn of your City-Wagtail; with one eye
Violently love your Husband, and with the other
Wink at your Friend.

Lor. I will not trust you, Brother.

Phil. He seeks, will ye not have him find? cries ye out,
In his mad fits, a Strumpet, rails at all women,
Upon no cause, but because you are one:
He gives wound upon wound, and then pours Vinegar
Into your bleeding Reputation,
Poisoned with bitter Calumny: Pox on him;
Pile a reciprocal reward upon him;
Let Ballet-mongers crown him with their scorns:
Who buys the Bucks Head, well deserves the Horns:
Demur not on it, but clap them on.

Abst. You are, Sir, just like the Indian Hysop, praised of strangers,
For the sweet scent; but hated of the inhabitants,
For the injurious quality: Can he love the Wife,
That would betray the Husband? Have thou not seen me
Bear all his injuries, as the Ocean suffers
The angry Bark to plough through her Bosom,
And yet is presently so smooth, the eye
Cannot perceive where the wide wound was made:
And cannot this inform, I love him better
In his sow'r Follies, then you, in your sweet Flatteries?
If Verona has observed any Errors in me,
I well may call for grace to amend them;
But will never fall from grace to befriend you.

Phil. With what a Majesty good women thunder!

Lor. 'Has given her some close nod that I am here.

Abst. Rip up the end of thy intent, and see
How shame and fear do lurk where you would walk,
Like a pair of Serpents in a flowery Mead:
Lust sees with pleasure, but with fear does cread.

Phil. Very brave woman!

Abst. What is the pleasure thou pursu'st? a sin
Finished with infinite sorrows: read and find
How barbarous Nations punish it with death:
How a minutes sin so stolen, though in the Face
Sit summer calms, all smooth, yet thou will hear,
From the Eternal Alarm of thy Conscience,
How it sets within thy soul continual tempests,
Thunder and dismal blackness: mark but the course
Of the holy-seeming hollow-man, and see
How he that glories Heaven with no Honor,
Covets to glorify himself with Honesty.
And to put you past your hopes, let me leave this with you;
Thou may hold an Elephant with a thread, eat fire
And not be burnt, or catch Birds with desire;
Quench Flame with Oil, cut Diamonds with Glass,
Pierce Steel with Feathers; this thou may bring to pass,
Sooner then hope to steal that Husband's Right,
Whose Wife seems honest, and no Hypocrite.
Exit.
Phil. What think you now, Sir?

Lor. Why now I do think it possible for the world
To have an honest woman in it. -- Good-buy, Sir;
I must go meet the Duke: adieu. Phil. Farewell:
Oh Jealousy! how near thou dwell'st to Hell!
Exeunt. Enter Lodovico, Pandulpho, Spinoso, Jaspro, and Iovani, and Clown.
Lod. The Duke not seven leagues off! my horse, Rogues.

Pand. Our negligence deserves just blame; and how
'T will please his Grace to conster it, we know not.

Jasp. But where is your fair chaste wife, my Lord?

Lod. Marry, with my man Francisco; Oh that fellow!
She were undone without him: for indeed
She takes great pleasure in him; he learns her Music:
To hear what counsel she will give him! if he but screw
His look sometimes, with the pin, she will tell him straight,
'T was an unchristian look: I love him dearly,

Spin. But can your Honor never woo your Lady
To a more sociable affability?
She will not kiss, nor drink, nor talk, but against new fashions.

Lod. Oh, Sir, she is my Crown; nor is it requisite
Women should be so sociable; I have had such a coil with her, to bring her
but to look out at window; when we were first married, she would not drink a
cup of wine, unless nine parts of it were water.


Omn. Admired Temperance!

Lod. Nay, and ye knew all, my Lords, ye would say so: the other day I brought an
English Gentleman home with me, to try a Horse I should sell him; he (as ye
know their custom, though it be none of ours) makes at her lips the first dash.


Clown. He dashed her out of countenance, I Am sure of that.

Lod. She did so powt and spit, that my hot-brained Gallant could not forbear,
but ask the cause: quoth she --


Clown. No, Sir, she spit again, before quoth she left her lips.


Lod. I think she did indeed; but then quoth she, A kiss, Sir, is sins
earnest-penny: is it not true, Pambo?


Clown. Very true, Sir; by the same token, Quoth he to her again, If you
dislike the penny, Lady, pray let me change it into English halfpence; and so
gave her two for it.


Lod. But how she vex't then! then she rattled him, and told him roundly,
Though confidence made Cuckolds in England, she could no Coxcombs in Italy.


Clown. But did ye mark how bitterly he closed it with a midling Jest?


Lod. What was that, I prithee?


Clown. Why quoth he to her again, Confidence makes not so many Cuckolds in
England, but Craft picks open more Padlocks in Italy.


Jov. That was something sharp -- But here she comes.

Enter Dorothea and Francisco.
Lod. Ye shall see how I Will put ye all upon her presently.

Clown. Then I shall take my turn.

Dor. Francis.

Fran. Madam.

Dor. Have you changed the Ditty you last set?

Fran. I have, Madam.

Dor. The Conceit may stand, but I hope you have clothed the method in a more
Christian-like apparel.


Fran. I have, Lady.

Dor. Pray let me hear it now.

Fran. She that in these days looks for Truth,
Seldom or never finds, in sooth.

Dor. That Is wondrous well.

Clown. Yes in sadness.

Lod. Peace, sirrah; nay, she is built of modesty.

Fran. Even as a wicked Kiss defiles the Lips,
So do new fashions her that through them trips.

Dor. Very modest language.

Fran. She that does pleasure use for what 'twill bring her,
will pluck a Rose, although she prick her finger.

Dor. Put in hurt her finger, good Francis; the phrase will be more decent.


Pand. You Are a wondrous happy man in one so virtuous.

Lod. Nay, ye shall have no Count Lorenzo of me, I warrant ye.

Clown. Nor no Count Lorenzo's Lady of your wife, I warrant ye.

Lod. Sweet Chick, I come to take leave of thee: finger in nigh already!
We are all to meet the Duke this afternoon, Bird,
Who is now come from Venice: thou may walk and see
The Count Lorenzo's Lady.

Dor. 'Lae, she is too merry for my company.

Jasp. Too merry! I have seen her sad,
But very seldom merry.

Dor. I mean, my Lord,
That she can walk, tell Tales, run in the Garden.

Clown. Why then your Ladyship may hold your tongue, say nothing, and walk in
the Orchard.


Dor. She can drink a cup of wine not delayed with water.

Clown. Why then you may drink a cup of water without wine.

Dor. Nay, if a Noble man come to see her Lord,
She will let him kiss her too, against our custom.

Pand. Why a modest woman may be kissed by accident,
Yet not give the least touch to her Reputation.

Lod. Well said, touch her home.

Dor. Nay, but they may not: she that will kiss, they say,
Will do worse, I warrant her.

Jov. Why I have seen you, Madam, kissed against your will.

Dor. Against my will it may be I have been kissed indeed.

Clown. Pshew, there is nothing against a woman's will; and I dare be sworn, if
my Lady kiss but any one man, it is because she cannot do with all.


Lod. Nay, I know that to be true, my Lords, and at this time,
Because ye cannot do with all, pray kiss them in order;
Kiss her all over, gentlemen, and we are gone.

Dor. Nay good my Lord, it is against our Nations custom.

Lod. I care not; let naturals love Nations:
My humour's my humor.

Spin. I must have my turn too then.

Jov. It must go round.

Dor. Fie, fie.

Lod. Look how she spits now.

Jasp. The deeper the sweeter, Lady

Clown. The nearer the bone, the sweeter the flesh, Lady.

Dor. How now, sauce-box!

Clown. Did not my Lord bid the gentlemen kiss you all over?

Lod. I have sweet cause to be jealous, have I not, gentlemen? no; Creed quod
habes, and habes still; he that believes he has horns, has them. Will you go
bring my horse, sir?


Clown. I will bring your horse, sir; and your horse shall bring his tail with
him.

Exit.
Lod. Francis, I prithee stay thou at home with thy Lady: get thy instrument
ready; this melancholy will spoil her: before these Lords here, make her but
laugh, when we are gone.


Fran. Laugh before these Lords when they are gone, sir!

Lod. Pish, I mean, make her laugh heartily before we come home; and before
these Lords, I promise thee a lease of forty Crowns per annum.


Fran. Can ye tell whether she be ticklish, sir?

Lod. Oh, infinitely ticklish!

Fran. I Will deserve your lease, then, ere you come home, I warrant.

Lod. And thou shall have it y faith boy.
Enter Clown.
Clown. Your horse is ready, sir.

Lod. My Lords, I think we have staid with the longest; farewell Doll: Creed
quod habes, and habes, gallants.


Pand. Our horses shall fetch it up again: farewell sweet Lady.

Jasp. Adieu sweet Mistres: and whensoere I marry, fortune turn up to me no
worse Card then you are.


Clown. And whensoere I marry, Venus send me a Card may save fortune the
labor, and turn up her self.

Exeunt.
Dor. How now? why loyter you behind? why ride not you along with your Lord?


Fran. To lie with your Ladyship.

Dor. How?

Fran. In the bed, upon the bed, or under the bed.

Dor. Why, how now Francis?

Fran. This is the plain truth on it, I would lie with ye.

Dor. Why Francis.

Fran. I know too that you will lie with me.

Dor. Nay but Francis.

Fran. Plague of Francis: I am neither Frank nor Francis,
But a Gentleman of Millain, that even there
Heard of your Beauty, which Report there guarded
With such a Chastity, the glittering'st sin
Held no Artillery of power to shake it.
Upon which, I resolved to try conclusions;
Assumed this name and fortune, sought this service:
And I will tell ye truly what I guess you.

Dor. You will not ravish me, Francis.

Fran. No; but unravel ye, in two lines Experiences writ lately:
Extremes in Virtue, are but Clouds to Vice:
She Will do in the Dark, who is in the Day too nice.

Dor. Indeed ye do not well to belly me thus.

Fran. Come, I Will lie with thee, Wench, and make all well again; though your
confident Lord makes use of Creed quod habes and habes, and holds it impossible
for any to be a Cuckold, can believe himself none: I would have his Lady have
more wit, and clap them on.


Dor. And truly Francis, some women now would do it.

Fran. Who can you choose more convenient to practice with, then me, whom he
doats on? where shall a man find a friend but at home? so you break one
Proverbs pate, and give the other a plainer: is it a match, wench?


Dor. Well, for once it is: But and ye do any more, indeed I Will tell my
Husband.


Fran. But when shall this once be? now?

Dor. Now? no indeed, Francis.
It shall be soon at night, when your Lord's come home.

Fran. Then! how is it possible?

Dor. Possible? women can make any of these things possible,

Francis: now many casualties may cross us; but soon at night my Lord, I Am
sure, will be so sleepy, what with his journey, and deep healths for the Dukes
return, that before he goes to Bed (as he uses still, when he has been hard a
drinking) he will sleep upon the bed in's clothes so sound, Bells would not
wake him, rung in the chamber.


Fran. The Cuckold slumbers: though his Wife hit him of the
Forehead with her Heel, he dreams of no such matter.

Dor. Now Pambo, that makes him merry in his Chamber, shall, when the candle's
our, and he asleep, bring you into the Chamber.


Fran. But will he be secret?

Dor. Will he good soul! I am not to try him now.

Fran. 'Sfoot this is brave,
My kind Lords fool, is my cunning Ladies knave:
But pray how then?

Dor. When you are in at door on right before you, you shall feel the bed;
give me but softly a touch, I Will rise, and follow you into the next chamber:
but truly and you do not use me kindly, I shall cry out and spoil all.


Fran. Use you kindly! was Lady ere used cruelly in the dark? do you but prepare
Pambo and your maid, let me alone with her Mistres: about 11 I desire to be
expected


Dor. And till the clock strick 12, I Will lie awake.

Fran. Now ye dare kiss.

Dor. Once with my friend, or so: yet you may take two, Francis.

Fran. My cast is Ams-Ace then.

Dor. Deuce-Ace had got the game.

Fran. Why then you're welcome. Adieu my dainty Mistres.

Dor. Farwell kind Francis
Exeunt. Enter Lorenzo, as from horse.
Lor. I have given them all the slip, the Duke and all;
And am at home before them: I cannot rest,
Philippo and my wife run in my mind so:
I know no cause why I should trust him more
Then all the world beside: I remember
He told her that I bought the Bucks Head, therefore
Deserved the horns: although I bid him try her,
Yet I did not bid him bid her with one eye
Love me, and with the other wink at a friend.
How we long to grow familiar with affliction!
And as many words do aptly hold concordance
To make one sentence, just so many causes
Seem to agree, when conceit makes us Cuckolds.
Enter Philippo, and Abstemia. And here comes proof apparent, hand in hand too;
Now their palms meet, that graspe begers a Bastard.

Phil. By your white hand I swear 'twas only so.

Lor. Poison of Toads betwixt ye.

Abst. Philippo, you have fully satisfied me.

Lor. Insatiate whore! could not I satisfy ye?
I shall commit a murder, if I stay:
I Will go forge Thunder for ye. Oh let me
Never more marry! what plague can transcend
A whorish wife, and a perfidious friend!
Exit.
Phil. By the unblemished faith, then, of a gentleman;
And by your potent goodness, a great oath;
(For you are greatly good) by truth it self,
(For still I swear by you) what again has past,
Was at the first, but trial of her chastity
Far above time or story: as I speak truth,
So may I prosper.

Abst. And came these trials from your breast only?

Phil. Only from my breast; and by the sweet
Excellent blush of virtue, there is in you
Plenty of truth and goodness.

Abst. You have nobly
Appeased the storm o'ertook you; and you are
Again a good man.
Enter Lorenzo, Pandulpho, Spinoso, Jaspro, Jovani.
Lor. Trayto to truth and friendship!
Did not mine honor hold me, I should rip out
That blushing hypocrite, thy heart, that has broke
So strong a tie of faith; but behold,
How much of man is in me! there I cast them
From this believing heart, to the iron hand
Of law, the wronged man's saint.

Phil What means this?

Pand. My Lord, here is warrant for what is done immediate from
The Duke, by force of which you're early in the morning
Before his Grace, to answer to such injuries
The Count Lorenzo shall allege against you.

Phil. Injuries! Why friend, what injuries?

Lor. Can ye spell Stag, sir? it is four letters with two horns.
Good gentlemen convey him from my fury,
For fear of greater mischief.

Phil. Thou yellow fool.
Exit.
Abst. I would you would instruct me, noble sir,
But how to understand all this.

Lor. Do ye see her? look on her all, and wonder: did ye ever
see so foul guilt stand underneath a look so innocent?

Jov. I should have pawned my blood upon her honor.

Pan. Colors not in grain,
Make as fair show, but are more apt to stain.

Abst. My Lord.

Lor. Ye Whore.
Kicks her, She sowns.
Jasp. Look to the Lady

Lor. Look to her! hang her: let me send her now
To the devil, with all her sins upon her head.

Spin. Bear her in gently, and see her guarded.

Pan. You are too violent, my Lord.

Lor. That men should ever marry! that we should lay our heads, and take our
horns up out of woman's laps.

Jov. Be patient, good sir.

Lor. Yes, and go make porguns.

Jasp. It Is late, and sleep would do you good, my Lord.

Lor. Sleep! why do you think I am mad, sir?

Jasp. Not I, my Lord.

Lor. Then you do lie, my Lord,
For I am mad, horn-mad: I shall be acted
In our Theaters of Verona. Oh what poyson's
Like a false friend? and what plague more ruinous
Then a lascivious wife? they steal our joys,
And fill us with afflictions; they leave our names
Hedged in with calumny: in their false hearts
Crocodiles breed, who make grief their disguise,
And in betraying tears, still through their eyes.
Oh! he that can believe he sleeps secure
In a false friends oaths, or in a bad wives arms,
Trusts Circes witchcraft, and Calipsoes charms.

Omnes. It Is late, let us to the Court.
Exeunt Omnes.
Finis Actus Primi.
Actus Secundus.
A bed thrust out: Lodovico sleeping in his clothes: Dorathea in bed: Enter
Clown leading in Francisco. Fran SOftly sweet Pambo: are we in the Chamber yet?

Clown. Within a yard of my Lady, and ye can be quiet.

Fran. Art sure my Lord's asleep?

Clown. I know not, I Will go and ask him.

Fran. No, no, no, do not wake him; we are undone then man.

Clown. Ha, ha, ha, now do I see, cuckold-making is as ticklish a profession as
Cunny-catching: my Lord was so paid with healths at court, he is fast enough.


Fran. But still I pursue wonder, why my Lady should prescribe this strange,
nay wondrous desperate way to her desires.


Clown. Is that a question to ask now? would you would groap out the bed; for I
sleep in my talk, I am sure of that.

Lodovico coughs.
Fran. We are lost for ever: did he not cough?

Clown. It Is nothing but the last cup comes up in stew'dbroath: if ever you
make true whore master, I Will be bound to resign my place up to my Lords page:
Sea-sick before you come to the salt water? let me go in your stead.


Fran. No, I Will venture, stood a gulf between belching up
A Tempest. Oh valiant lust!
How resolute thou go to acts unjust!
Pambo, good night.
Desire drowns fear, in presupposed delight:

Clown. Turn of your left hand, 'twill lead you to the devil, to my Lady, I
should say, presently.

Exit.
Fran. Let me four steps on the left hand: I have the bed, and on this side she
lies: 'Sfoot there is a beard? but all is well yet, she lies on this side sure:

I have her, it is her hand, I know the touch:
It melts me into passion; I have much ado
To contain my wild desires: as the wind strains
In Caverns locked; so through my big-swolne veins,
My blood cuts capers.

Dor. Who Is there?

Fran. It Is I.

Dor. Francis!

Fran. Fortunate Francis, that was wrapped in's mothers smock.

Dor. Give me your hand Francis.

Fran. There it is: I melt already.

Dor. My Lord, Count Lodovico, awake.

Fran. I am lost for ever, Madam,

Dor. My Lord, my Lord!

Fran. If I pull too hard, I shall pull her out of the bed too.

Dor. My Lord, will ye not wake?

Lod. What Is the matter? what is the matter?

Fran. How I do dwindle!

Dor. Pray hear me sir, I cannot sleep till you

Have resolved me one thing.

Lod. What is it, sweetheart?

Dor. Of all your men, which do you love best?

Lod. That Is a strange question to ask at midnight; Francisco.

Dor. And that same false Francisco in your absence

Most leudly temped me to wrong your bed.

Fran. Was ever woodcock caught thus?

Lod. Oh rogue, I Will go cut's throat sleeping.

Dor. Nay I have fitted him most daintily.

Fran. Now, now, now, now, I am spitted.

Dor. I seemed sweetheart to confent to him.

Fran. A plague of seemings; I were best confess, and beg pardon.

Dor. And to make him sure for, your revenge, I appointed

About this hour, the door left open on purpose.

Fran. Ah!

Dor. To meet me in the garden.

Fran. All Is well again.

Dor. Now sweetheart.

If thou would but steal down thither, thou might catch him,
and snap the fool very finely.

Lod. Oh my sweet birds-nie! what a wench have I of thee? Creed quod habes, and
habes still; and I had thought it possible to have been cuckloded, I had been
cuckolded: I Will take my rapier as I go, sirrah: and the night being dark, I Will
speak like thee, as if thou had kept thy word. Oh Villian! nothing vexes me,
but that he should think I can he a cuckold, and have such a Lady: do thou lie
still, and I Will bring thee his heart for thy Munkies breakfast.


Dor. And would you part unkindly, and not kiss me?

Lod. I have no more manners then a goose; farewell
My chaste delitious Doll: what may his life
Be compared to, that meets with such a wife?
Exit. Enter Clown.
Fran. Pish Pambo.

Clown. Here boy.

Fran. Go meet him in the graden, and hark.

Clown. Excellent! I Will play my Lady, I warrant ye.

Fran. Do It daintily.

Clown. Well I may hope for a Squires place, my father was a Costermonger.
Exit.
Fran. Well now I see, as he who fain would know
The real strain of goodness, may in her read it;
Who can seem chaste, and can be what she seems:
So, who would see hells craft, in her may read it,
Who can seem too, but not be what she seems:
In brief, put him to school (would cheat the de'il of's right)
To a dainty smooth-faced female hypocrite.
Exit. Enter Lodovico and Clown.
Lod. Here Is a wife, Pambo!

Clown. Now, Creed quod habes, and habes, sir.

Lod. Why right man: let him believe he has horns, and he has 'em.

Clown. To discover upon the pinch to ye!

Lod. Oh! you kind loving husband's like my self,
What fortunes meet ye full but with such wives!

Clown. Fortune's in the fashion of hay-forks.

Lod. Sir Pambo, thou shall seldom see a harsh fellow have such a wife, such
a fortunate wedding.

Clown. He will go to hanging as soon.

Lod. No, no, we loving souls have all the fortunes;
There Is Count Lorenzo for example now,
There Is a sweet coil to morrow 'bout his wife:
He has two servants, that will take their oaths
They saw her dishonest with his friend Count Philippo,
Nay in the very act: now what was it brought her to it, but his dogged usage of
her?

Clown. Nay she never lived a good day with him.

Lod. How she goes flaunting too! she must have a feather in her head, and a
cork in her heel.


Clown. I that shows her light from head to heel, sir; and who have heavier
heads, then they whose wives have light heels? that feather confounds her.


Lod. I shall so laugh to hear the Comical History of the great Count Lorenzo's
horns; but as I have such a wife now, what a villain did I entertain to teach
her music? 'has done her no good since he came, that I saw.


Clown. Hang him, 'has made herr a little perfect in prick-song, that is all;
and it may be she had skill in that, before you married her too.


Lod. She could sing at the first sight, by this hand, Pambo.
But hark, I hear somebody.
Enter Francisco.
Clown. It Is he sure, 'has a dreaming whore-masters pace; pray let me practice
my Ladies part, and counterfeit for her.


Lod. Can thou imitate to the life?

Clown. Can I? Oh wicked Francis!

Lod. Admirable! thou shall do it.

Clown. Pray be you ready with your rapier to spit him then and I Will watch him
a good turn, I warrant ye


Fran. Here they are. If Pambo now comes off with his part neatly, the Comedy
passes bravely: Who Is there -- Madam?


Clown. Francis!

Fran. The same.

Clown. I think this place lies too open to the air, Francis?

Lod. Delicate Pambo.

Clown. And truly there is a great dew fallen to night,
The grass is wondrous wet.

Lod. Sweet rouge!

Clown. Come Francis,
And let us sport our selves in yonder rushes;
And being set, I Will smother thee with busses.

Lod. Oh villain!

Fran. Hear me, Lady,
It is enough my Lord has now a friend,
In these dishonest days, that dares be honest.

Lod. How is this?

Clown. Nay for thy Lord, he is a mere coxcomb, Francis.

Lod. Out rogue!

Fran. It Is but your bad desires that tell you so:
Can I contain a heart, or can that heart
Harbor a thought of injury against him,
Under whose wing I safely stretch my penions?
Has he not nobly entertained me? stand I not
Next neighbor save your self, unto his heart?

Lod. I by this hand do thou.

Fran. And should I quit him thus? no, Lady, no.

Lod. Brave Frank!

Fran. I am too wise to fall in love with woe,
Much less with woman: I but took advantage
Of my Lords absence, for your trial Lady,
For fear some fellow (far hotter rein'd then I)
Might have sought, and sped; and I would be loath
A Lord so loving. --

Lod. Shall have five leases, by these fingers.

Fran. Should have a Lady false.
Back Lady, to your yet unblemished bed;
Preserve your honor, and your Lords Calves head.

Clown. Well Francis, you had been better: if I do not tell my Lord of this!

Lod. He has put him to it now.

Fran. Then I am lost for ever,
You Will turn it all on me, I know; but ere
I Will live to wrong so good a Lord, or stand
The mark unto your malice, I will first
Fall on my sword and perish.

Lod. Hold, hold, hold man.

Fran. Ha, who are you?

Lod. One that has more humanity in him, then to see a proper fellow cast
himself away, I warrant thee: it is I, it is I man, I have heard all.


Clown. And 'twas I played my Lady, to have snap'd ye.

Fran. Has she been then so good to tell your honor?
Now am I worse afflicted then before,
That she should thus outrun me, in this race of honesty.

Lod. Nay she has bob'd thee bravely; she has a thousand of these tricks, in faith
man; but howsoever, what I have found thee, I have found thee: hark in thine
ear, shall have five leases, and mine own Nag, when thou have a mind to ride


Fran. Let me deserve, sir, first.

Lod. Shall have them: I know what I do, I warrant thee.

Fran. I joy in such a Lady.

Lod. Nay there is a couple of you, for a wife and a friend; shall be no more my
servant: I had thought to have made thee my Steward, but you are too honest for
the place, that is the truth on it.


Clown. His superfluity is my necessity; pray let me have it, sir.

Lod. I will talk with thee to morrow, Pambo; thou shall have something too;
but I Will to bed: honest Francis, the dearest must part, I see; I will so hug
the sweet rascal that thinks every hour ten, till I come yonder! good night
Frank, to bed Pambo. What delight in life.

Can equal such a friend and such a wife?
So my dainty Doll, I come to thee.
Exit.
Clown. So a City-Night-Cap go with thee. -- But shall
I not be thought on, for my nights service?

Fran. Oh look ye, pray forget nor ye had something.

Clown. Well, and pray do you remember I had nothing.

Fran. Nothing! what is that?

Clown. Nothing before I had something, I mean: so you are well returned from
Utopia.


Fran. You're very nimble sir, good morrow.
Exeunt. A Bar set out. Enter the Duke of Verona, Pandulpho, Spinoso, Jaspro,
Jovani, Lorenzo, Philippo, Abstemia, a Guard, and two Slaves.
Vero. Call the accused to the Bar.

Phil. We appear,
With acknowledged reverence to the presence.

Vero. We meet not
To build on circumstances, but to come plainly
To the business that here placed us: Cozen Lorenzo,
You have free leave to speak your griefs; but this
Desire the Senate to observe, and nearly:
I come here not your kinsman neither, Madam,
Looking unto the greatness of your blood,
As you are fister to the Duke of Venice;
But as an equal Judge, I come to doom,
As circumstances and proof informs.

Lor. Thus then,
(Great Sir, grave Lords, and honorable Auditors
Of my dishonor) I affirm it is known
To the signorie of Verona, the whole City,
Nay the great multitude without, that come
This day to hear unwilling truth, can witness,
How since my marriage with that woman (weepst thou!
Oh truth, who would not look thee in a woman's tears!
But showers that fall too late, produce deer years)
All know that since our marriage, I have performed
So fairly all judicial wedlock-offices,
That malice knew not how at my whole actions
To make one blow: and to strike home, I did rather
Honor her as a saint, sir, then respect her
As she was my wife: on pilgrimage I sent
All my endeavors to the fair seeming shrine
Of her desires, where they did offer daily
A plenal satisfaction, which she seemed
Reciprocally to return, paid back
As much obedience as I sent of love:
But then the serpent stings, when like a dove.
Opinion feathers him: women's sweet words
As far are from their hearts (though from their breasts
They fly) as Lapwings cries are from their nests.

Pan. Oh you enveigh!

Lor. I would appear no satyr.
And for this man (how fain I would call him friend!)
I appeal to the whole state, if at the fight
Betwixt Bizerta Galleys and your Grace,
Wherein you pleased to send me General there,
That he deserved (let me not take from him
His merits meet confession) but I was there
The man (the erring man) that crowned his merit
With approbation and reward; brought him home,
Preferred him to those graces you heaped on him:
Wore him a neighbor to my heart, as lovers
Wear Jewls, left by their dead friends; I locked him
Into my heart, and double-bar'd him there
With reason and opinion: his extremities
Fastn'd me more unto him, whilst like an arch
Well built, by how much the more weight I bore,
I stand the stronger under him; so loved him,
That in his absence still mine ear became
A sanctuary to his injar'd name.

Vero. And what from hence infer you?

Lor. That 'twas base,
Base in the depth of baseness, for this wife
So honored, and this smooth friend so beloved,
To conspire betwixt them my dishonor.

Vero. How?

Lor. To stain my sheets with lust, a minutes theft:
To brand perpetually three faces; a husbands,
A wives, and friends.

Abst. Oh good my Lord,
Cast out this devil from you.

Lor. Oh good my Lady,
Keep not the devil within you, but confess.

Phil. Hear me, great sir; I will confess, Lorenzo,
And print thee down the fool of passion.

Spin. Speak, sir.

Phil. It Is true, this boasting man did thus erect me
In his opinion, placed me in his love,
Graced me with courtesies: Oh the craft of jealousy!
As boys to take the bird about the pit,
Cast wheat and chaff, contriving a neat train
To entice her to her ruin: so this friend
Falser then City-oaths, it is not doubted,
Having so far indear'd me, when he came
To enjoy a fair wife, guest it impossible
For me to share with him in all things else,
And not in her; for fair wives often we see
Strike discord in sweet friendships harmony:
And having no way to ensnare me so,
To separate our loves, he seriously
Wooed me to try his wife.

Lor. It Is false.

Phil. It Is true,
By all that honest men may be believed by,
Three several witnesses, I tried her, by him urged to it,
Yet still my truth not started, kept so constant,
That till this hour this Lady thus much knew not
I bore her brave reproofs: Oh when she spoke,
The saints sure listened, and at every point
She got the plause of Angels! now upon this,
This jealous Lord infers (and it may be but
To shun futurity) that I
(His betrayed friend) could not hold the cup,
But I must drink the poison: no, Lorenzo,
An honest man is still an unmoved rock,
Washed whiter, but not shaken with the shock;
Whose heart conceives no sinister device:
Fearless he plays with flames, and treads on ice.

Vero. Cosen, did you, as your friend here affirms,
Counsel him to these trials?

Lor. I?

Phil. You did.

Lor. Philippo, thou art fallen from a good man,
And have taken leave of modesty: let these my servants
(That incredulity should be induction
To my more certain shame) let these speak
And relate what they saw: they grew so public,
My servants could discover them.

Pan. Speak, friends, be fearless;
And what you know, even to a syllable,
Boldly confess.

1 Slave. Then know, great, sir, as soon
As ere my Lord was gone to meet your Grace,
Signor Philippo and my Lady privately
Went up to her bedchamber: we two suspecting
What afterward we found, stole softly up,
And through the keyhole (for the door was locked)
We saw my Lady and Count Philippo there
Upon the bed, and in the very act,
As my Lord before affirmed.

Abst. Can thou hear, heaven,
And withhold thy thunder?

Phil. My Lords one devil, ye know,
May possess three bodies.

Vero. Will you swear this, sir?

1 Slave. I will, my Lord.

Spin. And you?

2 Slave. I will, and dare, sir.

Lor. Brave rascals!

Vero. Reach them the book.

Abst. Ye poor deluded men, Oh do not swear!

Lor. Think of the chain of pearl.

1 Slave. Give us the book:
That we affirm the truth, the whole truth,
And nothing but the truth, we swear.

Pan. Believe me, I am sorry for the Lady.

Phil. How soon
Two souls more precious then a pair of worlds
Are levelled below deach!

Abst. Oh hark! did you not hear it?

Omn. What, Lady?

Abst. This hour a pair of glorious Towers are fallen;
Two goodly buildings beaten with a breath
Beneath the grave: you all have seen this day,
A pair of souls both cast and kissed away.

Spin. What censure gives your Grace?

Vero. In that I am kinsman
To the accuser, that I might not appear
Partial in judgment, let it seem no wonder
If unto your gravicies I leave
The following sentence: but as Lorenzo stands
A kinsman to Verona, so forget not,
Abstemia still is sister unto Venice.

Phil. Misery of goodness!

Abst. Oh! Lorenzo Medico,
Abstemia's lover once, when he did vow
And when I did believe; then when Abstemia
Denied so many Princes for Lorenzo,
Then when you swore. Oh maids! how men can weep!
Print protestations on their breasts, and figh,
And look so truly, and then weep again,
And then protest again, and again dissemble!
When once enjoyed, like strange fights we grow stale,
And find our comforts like their wonder, fail.

Phil. Oh Lorenzo!
Look upon tears, each one of which well valued,
Is worth the pity of a King; but thou
Art harder far then Rocks, and can not prize
The precious waters of truths injurd eyes.

Lor. Please your Grace proceed to censure.

Vero. Thus it is decreed, as these Lords have set down
Against all contradiction: Signor Philippo,
In that you have thus grossly, sir, dishonored
Even our blood it self, in this rude injury
Lights on our kinsman, his prerogative
Implies death on your trespass; but your merit
Of more antiquity then is your trespass,
That death is blotted out, and in the place
Banishment writ, perpetual banishment
(On pain of death (if you return) for ever)
From Verona, and her signories.

Phil. Verona is kind.

Pan. Unto you, Madam,
This censure is allotted? Your high blood
Takes off the danger of the law, nay from
Even banishment it self: this Lord your husband
Sues only for a legal fair divorce,
Which we think good to grant, the Church allowing:
And in that the injury
Chiefly reflects on him, he has free lience
To marry when and whom he pleases.

Abst. I thank ye,
That you are favorable unto my Love,
Whom yet I love and weep for.

Phil. Farewell Lorenzo.
This breast did never yet harbor a thought
Of thee, but man was in it, honest man:
There Is all the words that thou art worth; of your Grace
I humbly thus take leave; farewell my Lords,
And lastly farewell, thou fairest of many,
Yet by far more unfortunate: look up
And see a crown held for thee; win it, and die
Lovers martyr, the sad map of injury:
And so remember, sir, your injured Lady
Has a brother yet in Venice.
Exit.
Abst. Farewell Lorenzo,
Whom my soul does love. if you ere marry,
May you meet a good wife, so good, that you
May not suspect her, nor may she be worthy
Of your suspicion: and if you hear hereafter
That I am dead, enquire but my lasts words,
And you shall know that to the last I loved you;
And when you walk forth with your second choice,
Into the pleasant fields, and by chance talk of me,
Imagine that you see me lean and pale,
Strewing your paths with flowers: and when in bed
You cast your arms about her happy side,
Think you see me stand with a patient look,
Crying, All hail, you lovers, live and prosper;
But may she never live to pay my debts:
Weeps.
If but in thought she wrong you, may she die
In the conception of the injury.
Pray make me wealthy with one kiss: farewell, sir:
Let it not grieve you when you shall remember
That I was innocent: not this forget,
Though innocence here suffer, sigh and groan,
She walks but through thorns to find a throne.
Exit.
Vero. Break up the Court, and Cosen learn this reed;
Who stabs Truths bosom, makes an Angel bleed.

Lod. The storm upon my breast, sir.
Exeunt.
Finis Actus Secundus
Actus Tertius.
Enter Lodovico Jaspro, Jovani and Clown. Lor. DId Chronicle ever match this
couple, genetlemen?

Jasp. You maks us wonder,
That both should seem to yield to the temptation,
And both so meet in one resolved goodness,
Unknown to one another!

Lod. There lies the jest on it. Sirrah Pambo, I do but think and she had met
him in the gardon, how she would have ^atled him.


Clown. And ruffled him too, sir; the Camomile would have been better for it
many a day after.


Jov. Such an honest minded servant, where shall one find?

Lod. Servant? my sworn brother, man, he is too honest for an office he will never
thrive in it: ye have few servants will deal so mercifully with their Lords.


Jasp. A wife why she is a saint, one that ever bears
A good sound soul about her.

Clown. Yes, when she wears her new shoes.

Jov. Shall we see her, my Lord?

Lod. Where is she, Pambo?

Clown. VValking a turn or two in the garden with Francisco, sir:
I go call her.

Lod. No, no, no; let her alone, it is pity indeed to part them, they are so
well matched: was he not reading to her?


Clown. No, sir, she was weeping to him: she heard this morning that her
confessor father Jacomo was dead.


Jasp. Father Jacomo dead?

Lod. Why now shall not we have her eat one bit this five days.

Clown. She Will munch the more in a corner, that is the Puritans fast.


Lod. Nay do but judge of her my Lords by one thing; whereas most of our dames
go to confession but once a month; some twice a quarter, and some but once a
year, and that upon constraint too; she never misses twice a Week.


Jasp. It Is wonderful.

Jov. It Is a sign she keeps all well at home: thy are even
With the whole world, that so keep touch with heaven.

Lod. Nay, I told ye, ye should find no Philippo of Francisco.


Clown. And I remember I told your honor, you should find no Abstemia of my
Lady.


Lod. Nor no Lorenzo of my self; he was ever a melancholy stubborn fellow, he
kept her in too much, and see what comes on it; I give my wife her will; and see
what comes on it too.


Clown. Nay sir, there is two come on it, and a man could discover 'em.

Lod. Two what, I prithee?

Clown. It may be two babies, sir, for they come commonly with giving a woman
her will.


Lod. I Would laugh at that, in faith boy: but who has she now for her confessor?


Clown. She looks for one they call him father Antony, sir, and he is wished to
her by Madona Lussuriosa.

Enter Dorothea, Francisco.
Lod. There Is another modest soul too, never without a holy man at her elbow:
but here comes one out-weighs them all: Why how now chick! weeping so fast?
this is the fault of most of our Ladies, painting, weeping for their sins I
should say, spoils their faces.


Fran. sweet Madam!

Lod. Look, look, look, loving soul, he weeps for company.

Clown. And I shall laugh our-right by and by.

Dor. Oh that good man!

Lod. Why bird?

Jasp. Be patient, Lady.

Dor. Would he go to heaven without his zealous pupil?

Clown. It may be he knew not your mind, forsooth.

Dor. He knew my mind well enough.

Clown. Why then it may be he knew you could not hold out for the journey; pray
do not set us all a crying --

Weeps.
Lod. Prithee sweet birds-nye be content.

Dor. Yes, yes, content, when you too leave my company?
No one comes near me; so that were it not
For modest simple Francis here. --

Clown. As modest as a gib cat at midnight.

Dor. That sometimes reads
Virtuous books to me; were it not for him,
I might go look content: but it is no matter,
No body cares for me.

Lod. Nay prithee Doll; pray gentlemen comfort her.
[Weeps.
Clown. Now is the devil writing an encomium upon cunning cuckold-makers.


Fran. You have been harsh to her of late, I fear, sir.

Lod. By this hand, I turned not from her all last night: what should a man do?


Jasp. Come, this is but a sweet obedient shower,
To bedew the lamented grave of her old father.

Clown. He thinks the devil's dead too.

Dor. But it is no matter, were I such a one
As the Count Lorenzo's Lady, were I so graceless
To make you wear a pair of wicked horns,
You would make more reckoning of me --
Weeps.
Lod. Weep again? she will cry out her eyes, gentlemen.

Clown. No I warrant ye; remember the two lines your
Honor read last night.
A Woman's Eye, 'S Aprils Dust, no sooner wet but dry.
Lod. Good pigs-nye! Frank, prithee walk her the other turn in the garden, and get
her a stomach to her supper; we'll be with ye presently, wench.


Dor. Nay when ye please -- But why should I go from ye?


Lod. Loving soul! prithee Frank take her away.

Dor. Pray let me kiss ye first Come Francis,
No body cares for us -- At the door Francis kisses her.
Exeunt.
Lod. Well, there goes a couple; where shall a man match ye indeed? Hark Pambo!


Jasp. Did you observe?

Jov. They kissed.

Jasp. Peace.

Lod. And entreat Madona Lussuriosa to sup with us, as you go, tell her my
Lady's never well, but in her company.


Clown. What if your honor invited the Count Lorenzo? he will be so melancholy
now his Lady and he are parted!


Lod. Pray do as you are bid, kind sir, and let him alone; I Will have no cuckold
sup in my house to night.


Clown. It Is a very hot evening, your honor will sup in the garden then.


Lod. Yes, marry will I, sir; what is that to you?

Clown. Why, your honor was ever as good as your word: keep the cuckolds out
of door, and lay a cloth for my Lord in the Arbor, gentlemen.

Exit.
Lod. I have been this three months about a project.

Jov. What is it, my Lord?

Lod. Why I intend to compose a pamphlet of all my wives virtues, put them in
print, and dedicate them to the Duke, as orthodoxal directions against he
marries.


Jasp. 'Twill give him apt instructions, when he does marry, to pick out such a
woman.


Lod. Pick her, where will he pick her? as the English proverb says, He may as
soon find a needle in a bottle of hay: would I know what sins she has
committed, I would set them down all one with another; they would serve as
soyles to her virtues: but I do think she has none; do you think she has any,
gentlemen?


Jov. Oh none sir but has some!

Lod. I, pidling ones it may be, a when a pin pricks her fingers to cry at
sight on it, and throw't away; but for other matters. --


Jasp. Now I think on it, sir, I have a device newly begotten, that if you be so
desirous to be resolved of her perfections, 'twill be an apt means for your
intelligence.


Lod. That will be excellent, and then my book grounded upon mine own
experience, the report of my judgment in the choice of a woman, will sell them
off faster than the Compositor can set the Letters together.


Jasp. We will discourse it as we go; mean time, Sir,
Let this prepare the path to your construction.
Conceit and confidence are juglers born:
One grafts in air, the other hides the real born.

Lod. Well, he that believes he has horns, has horns;
And Creed quod habes and habes, shall be my Motto.
Exeunt. Enter Pandulpho and Spinoso.
Spin. The powers of Venice upon our Confines!

Pand. Yes, Seignor Philippo, it seems, having possessed him
With the passages that past upon his Sister;
Ambassadors were dispatched to Bergamo,
Where then his Forces lay; who thus returned,
That he came not a public foe unto Verona,
But to require justice against Count Lorenzo,
To approve his sister innocent.

Spin. What witness,
Proof or apparent circumstance builds he
His bold attempt upon?

Pan. He says, besides
The honor of Philippo, he has proof
So unresistable to affirm the plot
Of Count Lorenzo, that he only craved
(Hostages being rendered for their safe returns)
Here in the Senate-chamber, the fair trial
Might publicly be censured: and by this
They are at hand.
Enter at one Door, Duke of Venice, Philippo and Lords: At the other, Duke of
Verona, Jaspno, Jovani, Lorenzo guarded. A bar set out. The 1 Slave.
Vero. Fair sir, the presence is levelled for your grevances.

Ven. First summon to the bar the Count Lorenzo.

Pan. Lorenzo Medico, stand to the bar.

Lor. I do stand to the bar.

Ven. I come not here, witness the good man's comfort, to add one step
Unto my territories: and though I burden
The neighbour-bosom of my confines with
The weight of armor, or do wound your breast
(My Dukedoms near next neighbor) with the hoofs
Of war-apparell'd horses; it is not to seek
For martial honors, but for civil justice.
Conceave mine honor wounded, a sisters shame
Is an unpleasant spot upon our Arms:
Yet that we come not here to sanctify
A sisters sin; for if she so be proved,
Shame sleep within her epitaph, and brand her;
Let Bears and Wol^es that Angels Face confound,
Gives goodness such a foul unfriendly wound:
But if she chaste be proved, what balin can cure
A wounded name? As he that not inflicts
The bitter straok of law upon the strumper,
Fattens the sad afflictions of a thousand:
So who but stains an honest woman's name,
Plagues are yet kept for him, steel is no defense
For the unclean tongue injures innocence.
I affirm my sister wronged, wronged by this man,
This that has wronged pure judgment, and thrown poison
Upon the face of truth, and upon him
I secek a satisfaction.

Lor. I reply:
The law must give you satisfaction,
That justly did divorce us: I appeal
To the whole Consiliadory, it equal law
In her progression went a step astray,
Either by proof or information:
Let the Duke speak (not as he is my kinsman)
If I produced not legally in Court,
Besides mine own assertion (which even reason
Grounded on probability) two of my servants
That upon oath affirmed they saw your sister
Even in the very act of sin and shame
With that Philippo there: blame me not then, sir,
If I return an error to your cause,
Reason (the Base where on we build the laws)
You injure in this action; give her the lie:
Who dares not build his faith upon his eye?
They swore what they did see; and men still fear,
(Reason concludes) what they not see, to swear,

Vero. You hear my kinsmans answer.

Pan. And it is requisite
That you produce your author: it is held
Mere madness on a hill of sand to build.

Phil. The foundation-work is mine, and that I answer:
He builds on truth, the good man's mistress,
And not in the sanctuary.
Of this injui'd brothers power, but the integrity
And glory of the cause: I throw the pawn
Of my afflicted honor, and on that
I openly affirm your absent Lady
Chastitie's well-knit abstract, snow in the fall,
Purely refined by the bleak Northern blast,
Not freer from a soil, the thoughts of Infants;
But little nearer heaven: And if these Princes
Please to permit, before their guilty thoughts
Injure another hour upon the Lady,
My right drawn sword shall prove it.

Lor. Upon my knee, sir,
(How my soul dances!) humbly I entreat
Your grant to his request; fight with Philippo
In The midst of flame, or pestilence in a Cave,
Where Basiliskes do breed.

Vero. We must take counsel,
The price of blood is precious.

Lor. Blood desires burden:
The price of Truth is precious: for all the fights
I have fought for you on land; the fears at lea,
Where I have tug'd with tempests, stood storms at midnight,
Out-star'd the flaring lightning; and the next morning
Chased the unruly stubborn Turk with thunder:
For all the bullers I have bravely shot,
And sent death singing to the slaughter, Sir

Vero. Peace.

Lod. What should a soldier do with peace? remember
Mine Honor lies a bleeding, and in mine yours;
Her wide wound inward bleeds; and while you cry peace,
Shame wars upon my Name: Oh rather kill me,
Then cast me to this scandal.

Spin. The doubtful cause,
With such dare approved, you may permit it.

Vero. Your request is granted, Coze

Lor. You have now, Sir, breathed
Fresh air in the face of fainting Honor
Rapiers of fair equality.

Ver. Look with what cunning
The spider, when she would share the fly, does weave;
With neater Art appearances deceive.
Stay, as you said, sir, blood is a precious price.
Let me but see the men produced, who swore
They saw them in the shameful act: and then
Farewell a sister and her honor.

Pan. Produce your servants, sir.
Venice sends off a Lord.
Lor. Plague of this change, here is one of them; the to other
In that I threatened him for some neglect,
The next day ran away.

Ven. Did you sir, swear
You saw our sister and this gentleman
In this base act of sin?

Lor. Fear nothing.

1 Slave. To deny truth, is more dangerous then to displease a Duke:
I saw it and did swear it.
Enter Lord and 2 Slave.
Venice. But here comes one,
Will swear you saw it not, and are forsworn.

1 Slave. 'Sfoot, Stratzo!

Spin. This is the other fellow took his oath.

Vere. What come you here to say, sir?

2 Slave. That we swore falsely, may it please your Grace,
Hyr'd by my Lord with gifts and promises:
And as I now have spoke the muth, so heaven
Forgive my former perjury.

Vero. Hear you, cosen?

1 Slave. Would you would say something; I have nettles in my breeches.

Lor. Now, now, I hope your eyes are open, Lords,
The bed of snakes is broak, the tricks's comes about,
And here is the knot in the rush: good heaven, good heaven,
That craft in seeking to put on disguise,
Should so discover her self!

Vero. Explain your self.

Lor. Now see sir, where this scorpion lutks to sting
Mine honor unto death: this noble Dule
By nature is engaged to defend a sister:
And to this Duke so engaged, this malicious Lord
(For sin still ha her scourger) makes repair,
And prepossesses him with that supposed innocence
Of an injured sister; which he had hired this Slave
To follow him, and affirm, and lays the cause
To scruple, and to conscience: they did consent
To steal belief by seeming accident.
Sin Jugler-like, casts sin before our eyes;
Craft sometimes steals the wonder of the wise.
With an equal hand now weigh me, and if I want
A grain of honor, tear me from your blood,
And cast me to contempt.

1 Slave. My Lord would have made an excellent state-sophister.

Vero. In what a strange dilemma judgment sits,
Charmed to her chair with wonder.

Ven. Shall I have justice?

Pan. Yes, in that this fellow swears for the Duke:
Reach him the book, you shall see him again
Take the former oath.

Vero. This doubt must be so ended;
If it give not satisfaction, send back our hostage,
You have fair regress to your forces: but
The blood remains on you; and still remember
The price of blood is precious.

Phil. Let us end it.

Ven. Oh what a Combat Honor holds with Conscience!
Reach him the book; and if thou false do say,
May thine own tongue, thine own foul heart betray

1 Slave. Amen, say I:
Give me the book, my oath must end all then.

Spin. It must.

Lor. Now you shall hear him swear,
He saw them both in the base act.

1 Slave. Nay I swear
They are now both seen in the base act.

Omn. How Is this?

Pan. It Is a strange oath.

1 Slave. It Is true though.

Lor. True, villain! are both now seen in the base act?

1 Slave. Yes, both.

Lor. Which both?

1 Slave. You and I, sir.

Omn. How?

1 Slave. Both you and I are seen in the base act,
Slandering spotless honor; an act so base,
The barbarous Moor would blush at.

Phil. Do You hear him now?

Lor. Out Slave, will thou give ground too? fear works upon 'em.
Did you not both here swear in the Senate-chamber
You saw them both dishonest?

1 Slave. Then we swore true, sir.

Lor. I told you 'twas but fear.

Vero. Swore ye true then, sir, when ye swore
Ye both saw them dishonest?

1 Slave. Yes marry did we, sir:
For we were both two villains when we saw them,
So we saw them dishonest.

Ven. Heaven, thou art equal!

1 Slave. This is a jealous Lord, his Lady chaste,
A rock of crystal not more clear: this gentleman
Basely abused: this great Prince dishonored;
And so we kneel for mercy.

Vero. You have redeemed it:
Depart, prove honest men: that I should bear
Dishonor in my blood!

Omn. Much injured Lady!

Ven. What justice, sir, belongs unto the injured?

Vero. First, witness heaven, I tear thee from my blood,
And cast thee off a stranger: Assume you, sir,
(Since the great cause is yours) my seat of justice,
And sentence this foul homicide; it must be,
And suddenly; he will infect the air else:
Proceed, great sir, with rigor, whilst I stand by
And do adore the sentence.

Ven. Answer, Lorenzo,
Art thou not guilty?

Lor. Give me my merit, death;
Princes can build and ruin with one breath.

Ven. The cause may seem to merit death, in that
Two souls were hazarded, a Princess iame,
A Duke dishonored, and a noble Lord
Wounded in reputation: but since she lives,
And that no blood was spilt (though something dearer)
Mercy thus far stretches her silver wings
Over your trespass, we do banish you,
Both from our Dukedomes Limits and your own:
If you but set a daring foot upon them
Whilst life lends you ability to stand,
You fall into the pit of death, unless
You shall find out our most unfortunate sister,
And bring her to our Court.

Lor. You sir are merciful!

Vero. This let me add, in that you have made impartial justice, sir,
Princes should punish vice in their own blood:
Until you find that excellent injured Lady,
Upon this gentleman, who has suffered for you,
We confer your lands, revenues, and your place;
That during three days stay within our confines
It shall be death, to any that relieves you,
But as they do a beggar at their door.
So cast him from our presence.

Lor. Your dooms are just!
Oh love, thy first destruction is distrust!
Exeunt Lord, Jaspro and Jovani.
Vero. For you, fair sir, until we shall hear tidings
Of your most injured sister, please you to call
My Court your own, conceive it so: where live,
Two partnersin one passion we will be,
And sweeten sorrow with a sympathy.
Exeunt. Enter Lodovico like a Friar, Jaspro and Jovani.
Lod. What, am I fitted, gallants? am I fitted?

Jasp. To the life, able to cheat suspicion, and so like
Father Antony the confessor, that I protest
There Is not more semblance in a pair of eggs.

Jov. An apple cut in half, is not so like.

Lod. Well, of Lords you're mad Lords to counsel me to this; but now in this
habit shall I know the very core of her heart, all her little pedling sins,
which will show in my book as foils to her giant-bodied virtues.

Jasp. That will be admirable!

Jov. We'll step aside: by this she is upon coming.

Jasp. We shall know all.

Lod. Reveal confession: but go your ways; as much as may lawfully be revealed,
we'll laugh as, at next meeting


Jasp. Come, let us be gone: but once upon a time, sir,
A beggar found a larks nest, and o'er-joy'd
At his sudden glut, for he thought 'twas full of young ones,
Looking, they were all gone; he was forced again to beg,
For he found in the Larks nest a Serpents egg;
So much good do you sir. --
Exeunt. Enter Dorothea.
Lod. Well, thou surpassest all the courtiers in these pretty ones; if a man
had the wit to understand them -- Yonder she comes; I can hardly forbear
blushing, but that for discovering my self.

Right reverend habit, I honor thee
With a Sons obedience, and do but borrow thee,
As men would play with flies, who in the midst of modest mirth
With care preserve themselves.

Dor. Hail holy Father.

Lod. Welcome my chaste daughter.

Dor. Death having taken good father Jacomo,
Upon the plenal and approved report
Of your integrity and upright dealing --

Lod. Delicate Doll.

Dor. I have made a modest choice of you, grave sir,
To be my ghostly father: and to you I fall*
For absolution.

Lod. Empty then, my daughter,
That vessel of your flesh, of all the dregs,
Which (since your last confession cleared you) have
Taken a settled habitation in you;
And with a powerful sweet acknowledgment,
Hunt out those spirits which haunt that house of flesh
Tears makes dry branches flourish green and fresh.

Dor. Since last I confessed, then I do confess,
My first sin was, that my Tailor bringing home
My last new gown, having made the sleeves too slanting;
In an unchristian passion I did bid
The devil take him.

Lod. That was something (...), dear daughter
Yet the more pardonable, for it may be your tailor
Lies in hell, night by night: pray to your second.

Dor. Next, in a more savage rage, my chambermaid
Putting a little saffom in her starch,
I most unmercifully broak her head.

Lod. 'Twas rashly done too: but are ye sure, dear daughter,
The maids head was not broak before?

Dor. No, no, sir, she came to me with near a crack about her.


Lod. These will be brave sins to mix with her virtues; why they will make no
more show then three or four bailiffs amongst a company of honest men. These
sins, my Dove-like daughter, are out of contradiction venial, trivial and
light: have you none of greater growth?


Dor. Oh Yes, sir, one!

Lod. One? what should that be; I wonder?

Dor. One yet remains behind,
Of weight and consequence: the same order
Heralds prescribe in shows, I now observe
In placing of my sins; as there inferiors
(Because the last lives freshest in our memories) --
Far more the persons of great note, so last
My great sin comes to obliterate those past.

Lod. She Has trod some chicken to death, I warrant her.

Dor. Hear me, and let a blush make you look red,
Unseemly I have abused my husbands bed.

Lod. You did ill to drink too hard ere you went to bed.

Dor. Alas, sir, you mistake me; I have lain
With another man, besides my husband

Lod. How?

Dor. Nay the same way I use to lie with him,
But not altogether so often.

Lod. Why then Creed quod habes, and habes; I will believe I have horns, for
I have 'em: 'Sfoot, a woman, I perceive, is a neat Herald, she can quarter her
husbands coat with Butchers Arms at pleasure: but I have a penance for your
pure whoreship: you are somewhat broad, are you not with child, daughter?


Dor. Yes, yes, sure 'twas that nights work.

Lod. How know you that?

Dor. Alas, by experience, sir: the kind fool my husband
VVishes all well; but like a light piece of gold,
He Is taken for more then he weighs.

Lod. With child! there is charges too: at other side, there should follow
A zealous exhortation: but great affairs
That brook no stay, make me be brief, remembering
Lawful necessity may dispense with ceremony:
You are ingenuously sorry?

Dor. Yes indeed sir.

Lod. And resolve to fall no more so?

Dor. No in truth sir.

Lod. I then pronounce you here absolved: now for your penance.

Dor. Any thing.

Lod. As the fact in you seems strange, so blame me not
If your penance be as strange: you may wonder it;
But it is wondrous easy in performance,
But as your penance I enjoin it: nay now I remember,
In an old French Authentic Author, his book
Titled, De Satisfactione, I read the same
Enjoined a Lady of Dauphin. It Is no holy fast,
No devout prayer, nor no zealous pilgrimage;
It Is out of the prescribed road.

Dor. Let it be
So strange, story never matched the injunction, I do vow
The plenal strict performanc^.

Lod. Listen to me.
Soon at night (so rumor spreads it through the City)
The two great Dukes of Venice and Verona
Are feasted by your Lord, where a mask's intended.

Dor. That Is true, sir.

Lod. Now when ye all are set round about the Table
In depth of silence, you shall confess these words
Aloud to your husband: YOU ARE NOT THIS CHILD'S FATHER;
And 'cause my orders bar me such inquisition,
You shall say, Such a man lay with me, naming the party
Was partner in your sin.

Dor. Good sir!

Lod. This is your penance, I enjoin you; keep it,
You are absolved; break it, you know the danger of it: god-buy.

Dor. Oh good sir stay, never was penance of more shame then this.

Lod. You know the danger of the breach as to us,
It Is the shameful loss of our religious orders if we reveal.

Dor. For heaven sake,
Enjoin me first upon my knees to creep
From Verona to Loretto.

Lod. That Is nothing.

Dor. Nothing indeed to this: is this your penance so wondrous easy in
performance?

Lod. It Is irrevocable.

Dor. I am silent: your new penance nay meet a new performance: farewell, sir.
You are the cruelst ere confessed me before.

Lod. And this the trick to catch a near pure whore.
Exeunt.
Finis Actus Tertius.
Actus Quartus.
Enter Abstemia. Abst. HEre miserable despised Abstemia,
In Millain let thy misery take breath,
Wearied with many sufferings. Oh Lorenzo!
How far in love I am with my affliction,
Because it calls thee father! unto this house,
Where gentlewomen lodge, I was directed;
But I here discover
Strange actions closely carried in this house.
Great persons (but not good) here nightly revel
In surfets, and in riots, yet so carried,
That the next day the place appears a sanctuary,
Rather then sins foul receptable; these ways
Have to me still been strangers; but Lorenzo,
Thou could not though believe it: Oh jealousy!
Loves eclipse, thou art in thy disease,
A wild mad patient, wondrous hard to please.
Enter Timpanina and Morbo.
Mor. Yonder she walks mumbling to her self; the Prince Antonio has blessed her
with his observation; and ye win her but to him, your house bears the bell away;
accost her quaintly.


Tim. I warrant thee, Morbo Madona, Timpania has effected wonders of more
weight then a maidenhead: have I ruined so many City-Citadels, to let in.
Court-martialists; and shall this Country-Cottage hold our? I were more fit for
a Cart then a Coach, then in faith: how now Millicent, how do you this morning?


Abst. Well, I do thank so good a Landlady.

Tim. But hark you, Mill, is the door close, Morbo?

Mor. As a Usurers conscience. Grace was coming in, till she saw the door shut
upon her*


Tim. I Will set Grace about her business, and I come to her: is here any work
for Grace, with a wannion to her? we shall have Eaves-droppers, shall we?


Abst. Chastity guard me, how I tremble*

Tim. Come hither mistress Millicent; fie, how you let your hair hang about
your ears too? how do you like my house, Mill?


Abst. Well, indeed well.

Tim. Nay I know a woman may rise here in one month, and she will her self: but
truths truth, I know yoo see something, as they say, and so forth. Did you see
the gallant was here last till 12?


Abst. Which of them mean you? here was many.

Tim. Which? he in the white feather that supped in the gallery, was it not
white Morbo?


Mor. As a Ladies hand, by these five fingers.

Tim. White? no, no, 'twas a tawny, now I remember.

Mor. As a Gypsy, by this hand; it looked white by candle* light though.

Tim. That lusty springal Millicent, is no worse man
Then the Duke of Millains Son.

Abst. His excellent carriage spoke him of noble birth.

Tim. And this same Dukes son, loves you, Millicent.

Abst. Now heaven defend me!

Tim. What from a Dukes son? many come up with a murren, from whence came you:
tto, ha?


Mor. Thus nice Grace was at first, and you remember.

Tim. I would have ye know, houswife, I could have taken my Coach and fetched
him one of the best pieces in Millain, and her husband should have looked after
me, that is neighbors might have noted, and cried farewell Naunt, commend me to
mine Uncle.


Mor. And yet from these perfumed fortunes, heaven defend you.

Abst. Perfumed indeed.

Mor. Perfumed! I am a Pander, a Rogue, that hangs together like a beggars
rags, by geometry: if there were not three Ladies swore yesterday that my
mistres perfumed the coach! so they were fain to unbrace all she side-parts, to
take in fresh air.


Tim. He tells you true, I keep no (...) a company, I warrant ye; we vent no
breathed ware here.


Abst. But have ye so many several women to answer so many men that come?


Mor. I Will answer that by demonstration: have ye not observed the variation of
a Cloud? sometimes 'twill be like a Lion, sometimes like a horse, sometimes a
Castle, and yet still a Cloud.


Abst. True.

Mor. Why so can we make one wench one day look like a Country-wench, another
day like a Citizens wife, another day like a Lady; and yet still be a punk.


Abst. What shall become of me? Oh the curse
Of goodness, to leave one woe for a worse!
Enter Philippo.
Phil. Morrow sweet Madam; Oh look how like the Sun behind a Cloud, the beams
do give intelligence it is there.


Tim. You're reciprocal welcome, sir,

Phil. What have ye not brought this young wild haggard to the lure yet?


Tim. Faith sir, she is a little irregular yet; but time, that turns Citizens
Caps into Court-periwigs, will bring the wonder about.


Phil. Bless you, sweet mistres.
Enter Antonio and Slave.
Mor. 'Sfoot here is the Prince, I smell thunder.

Tim. Your Grace is most methodically welcome: you must pardon my vareity of
phrase, the Courtiers even cloy us with good words.


Anto. What Is he?

Mor. A gentleman of Ferrara, sir, one Pedro Sebastiano.

Anto. And do ye set her out to sale, I charged ye reserve for me alone?

Tim. Indeed sir.

Anto. Pox of your deeds. --
Kicks her.
Tim. Oh my Sciatica!

Anto. Sirrah, you perfumed rascal. [Kicks Philippo, they draw.

Tim. Nay good my Lord.

Mor. Good sir, it is one of the Dukes chamber.

Phil. Let him be of the devils chamber.

Anto. Sirrah, leave the house, or I will send thee out with thunder.

Slave. Good sir, it is madness here to stand him.

Phil. 'Sfootkickt? pray that we meet no more again, sir;
Still keep heaven about you.

Abst. What ere thou art, a good man still go with thee.

Anto. Will you bestow a cast of your professions?

Mor. We are vanished, sir.

Tim. This it is to dream of rotten glasses, Morbo.

Abst. O what shall become of me? in his eye
Murder and lust contends.

Anto. Nay fly not, you sweet,
I am not angry with you, indeed I am not:
Do you know me?

Abst. Yes, sir, report has given intelligence
You are the Prince, the Dukes son.

Anto. Both in one.

Abst. Report sure
Spoke but her native language; you are none of either.

Anto. How?

Abst. Were you the Prince, you would not sure be slav'd
To your bloodspassion: I do crave your pardon
For my rough language; truth has a forehead free,
And in the tower of her integrity,
Sits an unvanquish'd virgin: can you imagine
'Twill appear possible you are the Prince?
Why when you set your foot first in this house,
You crushed obedient duty unto death,
And even then fell from you your respect:
Honor is like a goodly old house, which
If we repair not still with virtues hand,
Like a Citadel being madly raised on sand,
It falls, is swallowed and not found.

Anto. If you rail upon the place, prithee how came thou hither?

Abst. By treacherous intelligence: honest men so
In the way ignorant, through thieves purlewes go.
Are you son to such a noble Father?
Send him to's grave then
Like a white Almond-tree, full of glad days,
With joy that he begot so good a son.
Oh sir, methinks I see sweet Majesty
Sit with a mourning sad face full of sorrows
To see you in this place: this is a cave
Of Scorpions and of Dragons; Oh turn back!
Toads here engender, it is the stream of death;
The very air poisons a good man's breath.
Enter Timpanina and Morbo.
Anto. Within there!

Mor. Sir.

Anto. Is my Caroach at door?

Tim. And your horses too, sir; ye found her pliant.

Anto. You Are rotten hospitals hung with greasy satin.

Tim. Ah!

Mor. Came this nice piece from Naples, with a pox to her?

Tim. And she has not Neapolitanis'd him, I Will be flead for it.
Exeunt Baud and Pander.
Anto. Let me borrow goodness from thy lip: farewell:
Here Is a new wonder, I have met heaven in hell.
Exeunt. Enter Venice, Vorona, Lodovico, Pandulpho, Iaspro.
Vero. Is this your chaste religious Lady?

Lod. Nay good my Lord, let it be carried with a silent reputation, for the
credit of the conclusion; as all here are privy to the passage, I do desire not
to be laughed at, till after the Mask and we are all ready: I have made bold
with some of your Graces gentlemen, that are good dancers.


Vero. It Is one of my greatest wonders, credit me,
To think what way she will devise here openly,
To perform her so strict penance.

Ven. It busies me, believe me too.

Jasp. Ye may see now, sir, how possible it is for a cunning
Lady, to make an Ass of a Lord too confident.

Lod. An Ass! I will prove a contented Cuckold the wisest man in's company.

Vero. How prove you that, sir?

Lod. Because he knows himself.

Vero. Very well brought in.
Is all our furniture fit, against the morning,
To go for Millain?

Jasp. Ready, and like your Grace.

Vero. We are given to understand, the injured Princess,
Whom Count Lorenzo and noble Philippo
Are (unknow to one another) gone in search of,
Has been seen there disguised: strict inquisition
From the Duke himself shall ere many days
Give our hopes a satisfaction.
Enter Dorothea, Ladies, Francisco and Clown.
Jasp. The Ladies, sir; Francisco keeps before, sir;
And Pambo keeps all well behind.

Lod. Yes, there is devout lechery between hawk and buzzard: but please ye set
the Ladies: the Mask attends your Grace.

Exit.
Vero. Come Ladies sit: Madona Dorothea,
Your ingenious Lord has suddenly prepared us
For a conceited Mask, and himself it seems
Plays the presenter.

Dor. Now fie upon this vanity:
A profane Mask! chastity keep us, Ladies.

Ven. What, from a Mask? whereon grounds your wish?

Dor. Marry my Lord upon experience.
I heard of one, once brought his wife to a Mask,
As chaste as a cold night; but poor unfortunate fellow
He lost her in the throng, and she poor soul
Came home so crushed next morning!

Ven. Alas that was ill:
But women will be lost against their will.

Vero. Silence, the Masquers enter.
Enter Lodovico, Clown and Masquers; a Stag, a Rom, a Bull and a Goat.
Clown. Look to me, Master.

Lod. Do not shake, they will think thou art out. -- A Mark.

Clown. A Mask, or no Mask; no Mask but a By-clap;
And yet a Mask yclep'd a City-Night-Cap.

Lod. And conve --

Clown. And conveniently for to keep off scorns,
Considerately the cap is hedged with horns.

Lod. We insnuate.

Clown. Speak a little louder.

Lod. We insinuate.

Clown. We insinuate by this Stag and Ram so pretty,
With Goat and Bull, Court, Country, Camp and City.

Lod. Cuckold

Clown. Cuckold my Lord.

Lod. It Is the first word of your next line.

Clown. Oh -- Cuckold begins with C. And is it not sport?
Then C. Begins with Country, Camp and Court:
But here is the fine figary of our Poet,
That one may wear this Nightcap, and not know it.

Dor. Why chicken, shall they make such an Ass of thee? good your Grace, can a
woman endure to see her loving husband wear horns in's own house?


Vero. Pray Lady, it is but in jest.

Dor. In jest? nay for the jest sake, keep then on sweet bird.

Clown. Now to our Masks name: but first, be it known-a,
When I name a City, I only mean Verona.
Those two lines are extempore, I protest, sir; I brought them in because here
are some of other Cities in the room that might snuff pepper else.


Ven. You have fairly taken that fear off; pray proceed.

Lod. Your kindest men.

Clown. Your kindest men most cuckolds are, Oh pity!
And where have women most their will, Oh City!
Sick for a Nightcap, go to cuckolds luck;
Who thrives like him, who has the daintiest duck
To deck his stall? nay at the time of rapping,
When you may take the watch at corners napping;
Take it forsooth, it is a wondrous hap
If you find Master Constable without his cap:
So a City Nightcap; for whilst he does rome
And frights abroad, his wife commits at home.

Ven. A Verona Constable.

Clown. A Constable of Verona; we will not meddle with your
City of Venice, sir.
Therefore it is sit the City, wise men say,
Should have a Cap called Cornucopia.

Lod. To Con --

Clown. To conclude our Cap, and stretch it on the tenter,
It Is known a City is the whole lands center:
So that a City-Night-Cap, ours we call
By a conclusion philosophical.
Heavy bodies tend to the center so (the more the pity)
The heaviest heads do but upon the City:
And to our dance this title does redound,
A City-Night-Cap, alias Cuckolds round.

Dor. Cuckolds round! and my sweet bird leads the dance!

Vero. Be patient, Madam, It Is but honest mirth:
From good construction pleasure finds full birth.
Dance.
Vero. Jaspro, fill some wine.

Jasp. It Is here, sir.

Vero. Count Lodovico!

Lod. Sir.

Vero. I Will instantly give you a fair occasion to produce
The performance of her penance.

Lod. I Will catch occasion by the lock, sir.

Vero. Here, a health to all, it shall go round.

Lod. It Is a general health, and leads the rest into the field.

Clown. Your honor breaks jests as serving-men do glasses, by chance.

Vero. As I was drinking, I was thinking, trust me,
How fortunate our kind host was to meet
With so chaste a wife; troth tell me, good Count Lodowick,
Admit heaven had her.

Lod. Oh good your Grace, do not wound me.
Admit heaven had her! alas what should heaven do with her?

Vero. Your love makes you thus passionate; but admit so:
Faith, what wife would you choose?

Lod. Were I to choose then, as I would I were, so this were at Japan,
I would wish, my Lord, a wife so like my Lady,
That once a week she should go to confession;
And to perform the penance she should run,
Nay should do naught, but dream on it till 'twere done.

Jasp. A delicate memento, to put her in mind of her penance.

Dor. Now you talk of dreams; sweet heart, I Will tell ye a very unhappie one; I
was a dreamed last night of Francis there.

Lod. Of Franck?

Dor. Nay, I have done with him.

Lod. Now your Grace shall see the devil outdone.

Vero. Pray let us hear your dream?

Dor. Bless me! I am even ashamed to tell it: but it is no matter, chick,
A dream is a dream, and this it was:
Me thought, sweet husband, Francis lay with me.

Lod. The best friend still at home, Francisco.
Could the devil, sir, perform a penance neater,
And save his credit better? on, chick, a dream is but a dream.

Dor. Me thought I proved with child, sweet heart.

Lod. I, bird?

Fran. Pox of these dreams.

Dor. Me thought I was brought to bed, and one day sitting
In The gallery, where your Masking suits and vizards hang,
Having the child me thought upon my knee,
Who should come thither as to play at soils,
But thou, sweet heart, and Francis?

Lod. Frank and I! does your Grace mark that?

Vero. I do, and wonder at her neat conveyance on it.

Dor. Ye had not played three venies, but me thought
He hot thee such a blow upon the forehead,
It swelled so that thou could not see:

Lod. See, see!

Dor. At which the child cried, so that I could not still it;
Whereat, me thought, I prayed thee to put on
The hat thou wor'st but now before the Duke, thinking thereby
To still the child: but being frighted with it,
He cried the more.

Lod. He? Frank thou get'st boys.

Fran. In dreams it seems, sir.

Dor. VVhereat I cried, me thought, pointing to thee,
Away you naughty man, you are not this child's father.

Lod. Meaning the child Francisco got.

Dor. The same: and then I waked and kissed thee.

Omn. A pretty merry dream!
Enter Jaspro.
Jasp. Your servant tells me,
Count Lodowick, that one father Antony,
A holy man, stays without to speak with you.

Lod. With me, or my Lady?

Jasp. Nay, with you, and about earnest business.

Lod. I Will go send him up, and he shall interpret my Ladies dream. Pist Jaspro.
Exeunt.
Dor. Why husband, my Lord.

Fran. Did mark? I must interpret.

Clown. I smell wormwood and vinegar.

Ven. She changes color.

Dor. He will not sure reveal confession.

Vero. We Will rise and to our lodging: I think your Highness
Keeps better hours in Venice?

Ven. As all do, sir,
We many times make modest mirth, a necessity
To produce Ladies dreams.

Fran. How they shoot at us! would I were in Millain:
These passages frye me.
Enter Jaspro and Lodevico.
Jasp. Here Is strange juggling come to light.

Vero. Ha, juggling!

Jasp. This Friar has confessed unto Count Lodowick.
That his Lady here being absolved,
Confessed this morning to him here, in her own house,
Her man Francisco here had lain with her.
At which her Lord runs up and down the garden
Like one distracted, crying, Ware horns ho.

Dor. Art mad? deny it yet, I am undone else.

Clown. Father Tony.

Lod. I confess it, I deny it, I any thing, I do every thing, I do nothing.

Vero. The Fryer's fallen Frantic; and being mad,
Depraves a Lady of so chaste a breast
A bad thought never bred there.

Dor. It Is my misfortune still to suffer, sir.

Lod. Did you not see one slip out of a cloak-bag in the fashion of a flitch of
bacon, and run under the table amongst the hogs?


Ven. He Is mad, he is mad.

Clown. I, I, a tythe-pig it was overlaid last night, and he speaks nonsense all
the day after. --


Dor. Shall I, sir, suffer this in mine own house too?

Clown. I Would scratch out's his eyes first.

Vero Since Lady you and your man Francisco
Are the two injured persons, here disrobe
This Irregular son of his religious mother,
Expose him to the apparent blush of shame,
And tear those holy weeds off.

Fran. Now you my frantic brother,
Had you not been better spared your breath?

Dor. And ye keep counsel sir no better?
We'll ease you of your orders.

Clown. Nay, let me have a hand in it: I Will tear his coat with more zeal then a
Puritan would tear a surplis.


Fran. See what it is to accuse when you're mad.

Dor. I confess again to you now sir, this man did lie with me.

Clown. And I brought him to her chamber too: but come, turn out here.

Dukes. Who Is this?

Omn. It Is Count Lodowick.

Lod. How dreams, sweet wife, do fall out true!

Clown. I was a dreamed, now I remember, I was whipped through Verona.

Lod. I was your confessor:
Did not I enjoin your chaste nice Ladyship
A dainty penance?

Jasp. And she performed it as daintily, sir, we'll be sworn for that.

Dor. Oh good sir, I crave your pardon!

Lod. And what say you, Francis?

Fran. You have run best sir, vain it is to defend,
Craft sets forth swift, but still fails in the end.

Lod. You brought him to her chamber, Pambo.

Clown. Good my Lord, I was merely inveagled to it.

Lod. I have nothing to do with ye, I take no notice of ye, I have played my
part off to the life, and your Grace promised to perform yours.


Vero. And publicly we will still raise their fame:
Who ere knew private sin escape public shame?
You sir that do appear a gentleman,
Yet are within slave to dishonest passions;
You shall through Verona ride upon an Ass
With your face toward his back-parts, and in your hand his tail 'stead of a
bridle.

Clown. 'Snailes, upon and Ass: an 'th nd been upon an horse it had been
worthy gramercy.


Vero. Peace, sirrah:
After that, you shall be branded in the forehead,
And after banished: away with him!

Fran. Lust is still
Like a midnight-meal, after our violent drinkings,
It Is swallowed greedily: but the course being kept,
We are sicker when we wake then ere we slept.
Exit.
Clown. He must be branded, if the whore-master be burnt: what shall become of
the procurer?


Vero. You Madam, in that you have coferr'd sanctity,
To promise her the vows you never paid,
You shall unto the Monastery of Matrons,
And spend your days reclusive: for we conceive it
Her greatest plague, who her days in lust has past
And soiled, against her will to be kept chaste.

Dor. Your doom is just, no sentence can be given
Too hard for her plays fast and loose with heaven.

Lod. I will buss thee, and bid fair weather after thee: but for you, sirrah.
--

Clown. Nay sir, it is but Creed quod habes and habes, at most; believe I have a
halter, and I have one.


Vero. You sirrah, we are possessed were their pander.

Clown. I brought but flesh to flesh sir, and your Grace does as much when you
bring your meat to your mouth.


Vero. You sirrah at a Carts tail shall be whipped Through the City.

Clown. there is my dream out already; but since there is no remedy but that
whipping-chear must close up my stomach, I would request a noat from your
Grace, to the Carman, to entreat him to drive apace; I shall never endure it
else.


Vero. I hope, Count Lodowick, we have satisfied ye.

Lod. To the full; and I think the Cuckold caught the Cuckold-makers.

Vero. 'Twas a neat penance; but oh! the art of woman in the performance.

Lod. Pshew sir, it is nothing, had she been in her great Granams place.
Had not the Devil first began the sin,
And cheated her, she would have cheated him.

Vero. Let all to rest; and noble sir, in the morning,
With a small private train, we are for Millain.
Vice for a time may shine, and virtue sigh;
But truth like heavens Sun plainly does reveal,
And scourge or crown, what darkness did conceal.

Finis Actus Quarti.
Actus Quintus.
Enter Antonio and a Slave, one in the others habit. Slave. BUt faith, sir,
what is your device in this? this change
Infinuates some project.

Anto. Shall I tell thee?
Thou art my Slave, I took thee (then a Turk,
In the fight thou know we made before Palermo)
Thou art not in stricter bondage unto me
Then I am unto Cupid.

Slave. Oh then you are going, sir,
To your old rendevow, there are brave rogues there:
But the Duke observes you narrowly, and sets spies
To watch if you step that way.

Anto. Why therefore man,
Thus many times, I have changed habits with thee,
To cheat suspicion, and prejudicate nature
(Mistres of inclinations) sure intended,
To knit thee up so like me, for this purpose,
For thou have been taken in my habit for me.

Slave. Yes, and have had many a French cringe
As I have walked in the Park; and for fear of discovery,
I have crowned it only with a nod.
Enter a Lord.
Anto. Thou Art a mad villain:
But sirrah, I am wondrously taken
With a sweet face I saw yonder; thou know where.

Slave. At Venus College, the Court-baudy-house.

Anto. But this, man, howsoever she came there,
Is acquainted so with heaven, that when I thought
To have quenched my frantic blood, and to have plucked
The fruit a king would leap at; even then she beat me
With such brave thunder off, as if heaven had lent her
The Artillery of Angels.

Slave. She was coy then.

Anto. Coy, man! she was honest; left coyness to court-Ladies:
She spoke the language of the saints, me thought.
Holy spectators sat on silver Clouds,
And clapped their white wings at her well-plac'd words.
She peicemeal pulled the frame of my intentions,
And so joined it again, that all the tempest
Of blood can never move it.

Slave. Some rare Phaenix, what is her name?

Anto. It Is Millecenta, and wondrous aptly,
For she is Mistress of a hundred thousand holy heavenly thoughts.
Chastely I love her now, and she must know it:
Such wondrous wealth is virtue, it makes the woman
Wears it about her worthy of a king;
Since kings can be but virtuous, farewell.
A crown is but the care of deceived life,
He Is king of men, is crowned with such a wife.
Exit Antonio, and the Lord after him.
Slave. Are your thoughts levelled at that white then?
This shall to the Duke your dad, sir; he can never talk with me,
But he twits me still with, I took thee at that fight
We made before Parlermo; I did command
Men as he did there, Turks and valaint men:
And though to wind my self up for his ruin,
That I may fall and crush him, I appear
'To renounce Mahomet, and seem a Christian;
It Is but conveniently to stab this Christian,
Or any way confound him, and escape cleanly,
And one expects the deed: to hasten it,
This letter came even now, which likewise certifies
He waits me three leagues off, with a horse for flight
Of a Turkish Captain commander of a Gally:
He keeps me as his slave, because indeed
I played the devil at sea, with him; but having
Thus wrought my self into him, I intend
To give him but this day to take his leave
Of the whole world; he will come back by twilight:
I Will wait him with a pistol: Oh sweet revenge!
Laugh our great prophet, he shall understand,
When we think death farthest off, he is nearest hand.
Enter Philippo.
Phil. You and I must meet no more sir; there is your kick again.
Kicks him.
Slave. Hold, hold, what mean you sir?

Phil. I have brought your kick back sir --
Shoots him.
Slave. Hold man, I am not --
Falls.
Phil. Thou have spoken true, thou art not -- What art thou?
But I am for Verona.
Exit.
Slave. Mine own words catch me, it is I now understand,
When we think death farthest off, he is nearest hand.
Dies. Enter Lorenzo. She lives not sure in Millain: report but wore
Her usual habit, when she told in Verona,
She met Abstemia here: Oh Abstemia!
How lovely thou look now? now thou appearest
Chaster then is the mornings modesty
That rises with a blush, over whose bosom
The Western wind creeps softly: Now I remember
How when she sat at Table, her obedient eye
Would dwell on mine, as if it were not well,
Unless it looked where I looked: Oh how proud
She was, when she could cross her self to please me!
But where now is this fair soul? like a silver cloud
She has wept her self, I fear, into the dead sea,
And will be found no more: this makes me mad,
To rave and call on death; but the slave shrinks,
And is as far to find, as she. Abstemia,
If thou not answer or appear to knowledge,
That here with shame I sought thee in this wood,
I Will leave the blushing witness of my blood.
Exit. Enter the Duke of Millain, Sebestian, Sanchio, and the Lord.
Mil. Followed you him thus far?

Lord. Just to this place, fir:
The slave he loves left him, here they parted.

Mil. Certain he has some private haunt this way.

Seb. Ha -- private indeed, sir: Oh behold and see
Where he lies full of wounds!

Lords. My Lord.

Mill. My son Antonio! who has done this deed?

Sanch. My Lord Antonio!

Mill. He Is gone, he is gone; warm yet, bleeds fresh, and whilst
We here hold passion play, we but advantage
The flying murderer. Bear his body gently
Unto the lodge: Oh what hand has so hid
That sunlike face, behind a crimson cloud!
Use all means possible for life: but I fear
Charity will arrive too late. To horse,
Disperse through the wood, run, ride, make way,
The Sun in Millain is eclipsed this day.

Omn. To horse, and raise more pursuit.
Exeunt. Enter Lorenzo, with his sword drawn.
Lor. Abstemia! Oh take her name you winds upon your wings,
And through the wanton Region of the Air,
Softly convey it to her: there is no sweet sufferance,
Which bravely she past through, but is a thorn
Now to my sides: my will the center stood
To all her chaste endeavors: all her actions,
With a perfection perpendicular,
Pointed upon, she is lost; Oh she
The well built fort of virtues victory!
For still she conquered: since she is lost, then,
My friendly sword find thou my heart.
Within. Follow, follow. Enter Millain, Sanchio, Sebastiano.
Mill. This way, what is he? lay hands on him.

Sebast. The murderer on my life, my Lord, here in the wood
Was close beset, he would have slain himself.

Mill. Speak villain, art thou the bloody murderer?

Lor. Of whom?

Sanch. His dissembled ignorance speaks him the man.

Seb. Of the Dukes son, the Prince Antonio, sir; 'twas your hand that killed
him.

Lor. Your Lordship lies, it was my sword.

Mill. Out slave!
Ravens shall fedst upon thee: Speak, what cause
Had thou with one unhappy wound, to cloud
That Star of Millain?

Lod. Because he was an erring star,
Not fixed nor regular; I will resolve nothing:
I did it, do not repent it; and were it
To do again, I Would do it.

Omn. Blood-thirsty villain!

Mill. Leave him to swift destruction, tortures and death.
Oh my Antonio! how did thy youth stray,
To meet wild winter, in the midst of May?

Lor. Oh my Abstemia! Who cast thy fate so bad,
To clip affliction, like a husband clad?
Exeunt. Enter Antonio and Abstemia.
Abst. Good sir, the Prince makes known his wisdom,
To make you speaker in his cause.

Anto. Me? know, Mistress,
I have felt loves passions equal with himself,
And can discourse of loves cause: had you seen him
When he sent me to ye, how truly he did look;
And when your name slipped through his trembling lips,
A lovers lovely paleness straight possessed him.

Abst. Fie, fie.

Anto. Go says he to that something more then woman,
(And he looked as if by something he meant saint)
Tell her I saw heavens army in her eyes,
And that from her chaste heart, such excellent goodness
Came like full rivers flowing; that there wants nothing
But her soft yiedling will, to make her wife
Unto the Prince Antonio: Oh will you fly
A fortune which great Ladies would pursue
Upon their knees with prayers?

Abst. No, Lorenzo:
Had law to this new love made no denial,
A chaste wifes truth shines through the greatest trial.
Enter Morbo.
Mor. How now, what makes you in the wood here? where is my old Lady?

Abst. I know not.

Mor. All the countrie's in an uprore yonder, the Prince Antonio's flain.

Ambo. How?

Mor. Nay no man can tell how; but the murderer with his sword in's hand is taken.

Anto. Is he of Millain?

Mor. No, of Verona: I heard his name, and I have forgot it.

Anto. I am all wonder, it is the slave sure.

Mor. Lor, Lor, Lorenzo.

Abst. Ha, Lorenzo! What I pray?

Mor. Lorenzo Me -- Medico has run him in the eye, some thirty three inches,
two barley corns: they could scarce know him for the blood, but by his apparel.
I must find out my Lady: he used our house, intelligence has been given of his
pilgrimage thither: I am afraid I shall be fing'd to death with torches, and
my Lady stewed between two disnes.


Anto. Why has this thus amazed you, Mistress?

Abst. Oh leave me, leave me, I am all distraction, Struck to the soul with
sorrow.
Enter Millain, Lords and Lorenzo guarded.
Anto. See where they come:
My father full of tears too? I Will stand by:
Strange changes must have strange discovery.

Abst. It Is he: heart, how thou leap'st! Oh ye deluded,
And full of false rash judgment! why do ye lead
Innocence like a sacrifice to slaughter?
Get garlands rather, let palm and laurel round
Those temples, where such wedlock-truth is found.

Lor. Ha?

Omnes. Wedlock.

Abst. Oh Lorenzo! thou have suffered bravely,
And wondrous far: look on me, here I come
Hurried by conscience to confess the deed:
Thy innocent blood will be too great a burden
Upon the judges soul.

Lor. Abstemia?

Abst. Look, look how he will blind ye; by and by he will tell ye
We saw not one another many a day,
In loves cause we dare make our lives away.
He would redeem mine, it is my husband, sir,
Dearly we love together: but I being often
By the dead Prince your son solicited
To wrong my husband bed, and still resisting,
Where you found him dead, he met me, and the place
Presenting opportunity, he would there
Have forced me to his will; but prizing honesty
Far above proffered honor, with my knife
In my resistance most unfortunately
I struck him in the eye: he fell, was found,
The pursuit raised, and ere I could get home
My husband met me, I confessed all to him:
He excellent in love as the sea-inhabitant,
Of whom it is writ, that when the flattering hook
Has struck his female, he will help her off
Although he desperately put on himself;
But if he fail, and see her leave his eye,
He swims to land, will languish and there die:
Such is his love to me; for pursued closely,
He bid me save my self, and he would stay
With his drawn sword, there about the place, on purpose
To require my loyalty, though with his death.
Fear forced my acceptance then, but conscience
Has brought me back to preserve innocence.

Seb. The circumstances produce probability.

Lor. By truth her self, she slanders truth: she and I
Have not met these many months: Oh my Abstemia!
Thou would be now too excellent.

Anto. These are strange turns.

Mill. Let not love strangle justice; speak on thy soul,
Was it her hand, that slew the Prince?

Lor. Not, on my life,
It Is I have deserved death.

Abst. Love makes him desperate,
Conscience is my accuser: Oh Lorenzo!
The Duke and Lords whisper. Live thou and feed on my remembrance,
When thou shall think how ardently I loved thee;
Drop but a pair of tears, from those fair eyes,
Thou offer'st truth a wealthy sacrifice.

Lor. Did ye hear her, sir?

Mill. No, what said she?

Lor. She asked me why I would cast my self away thus,
When she in love devised this trick to save me?

Sanch. There may be juggling sir in this, it may be
They have both hands in the deed, and one in love
Would suffer for it.
Enter a Lord.
Mill. What news?

Lord. The Dukes of Venice and Verona
With some small train of gentlemen are privately
This hour come to the Court.

Mill. Bear them to prison,
Until we have given such entertainment, sorrow
Will give us leave to show: until that time
The satisfaction of my lost sons life
Must hover 'twixt a husband and a wife.
Exeunt: manet Antonio.
Anto. How strangely chance to day runs! the slave killed
In my apparel, and this fellow taken for it,
Whom to my knowledge I never saw: she loves him
Past all expression dearly: I have a trick
In that so infinitely dear she loves him,
Has sealed her mine already; and I Will put
This wondrous love of woman to such a nonplus,
Time has produced none stranger: I will set
Honor and love to fight so life and death:
Beauty (as Castles built of cards) with a breath
Is levelled and laid flat.
Enter Philippo, putting on a disguise, lays down a pistol.
Phil. Misery of ignorance!
It was the Prince Antonio I have slain.

Anto. Ha! the clew of all this error is unravelled;
This is the valiant gentleman so threatened me;
He met the flave doubtless in my habit,
And sealed upon him his mistaken spleen:
If it be so, there hangs some strange intent
In those accuse themselves for it.

Phil. It seems some other had laid the plot to kill him;
This paper I found with him, speaks as much,
And sent to the intended murderer,
Happened it seems to his hands: it concurs;
For, they say, there is one taken for the fact,
And will do me the courtesy to be hanged for me:
Antonio takes up the Pistol. There Is comfort yet in that: so, so, I am fitted,
And will set forward.

Anto. Goose, there is a fox in your way.

Phil. Betrayed!

Anto. Come, I have other business afoot; I have no time to discover 'em now,
sir; see, I can enforce ye: but by this hand, go but with me, and keep your own
counsel; garden-houses are not truer bawds to cuckold-making, then I will be to
thee, and thy stratagem.


Phil. Thou Art a mad knave, art serious?

Anto. As a usurer when he is telling interest-mony.

Phil. VVhatere thou art, thy bluntness begets belief: go on,
I trust thee.

Anto. But I have more wit then to trust you behind me sir: pray get you
before, I have a private friend shall keep you in custody, till I have past a
project; and if you can keep your own counsel, I will not injure you: and this
for your comfort, the Prince lives.


Phil. Living! thou make my blood dance: but prithee let us be honest one to
another.


Anto. Oh sir, as the Justices clarke, and the Constable, when they share the
crowns that drunkards pay to the poor; pray keep fair distance, and take no
great strides.

Exeunt. Enter Lorenzo and Abstemia, as in prison.
Lor. Can then Abstemia forgive Lotenzo?

Abst. Yes, if Lorenzo can but love Abstemia,
She can thus hang upon his neck, and call
This prison true loves palace.

Lor. Oh let Kings
Forget their crowns, that know what it is to enjoy
The wondrous wealth of one so good; now
Thou art lovely as a young spring, and cornly
As is the well-spread Cedar; the fair fruit,
Kissed by the sun so daily, that it wears
The lovely blush of maids, seems but to mock
Thy souls integrity; here let me fall,
And with pleading sighs beg pardon.
Enter Antonio.
Abst. Sir, it meets you,
Like a glad pilgrim, whose desiring eye,
Longs for the long-wish'd altar of his vow;
But you are far too prodigal in praise,
And crown me with the garlands of your merit,
As we meet barks on rivers, the strong gale,
(Being best friends to us) our own swift motion
Makes us believe that the other mimbler rows,
Swift virtue thinks small goodness fastest goes.

Lor. Sorrow has bravely sweetened thee: what are you?

Anto. A displeasant black cloud: though I appear dismal,
I am wondrous fruitful: what cause soever
Moved you to take this murder on yourself,
Or you to strike your self into the hazard
I or his redemption, it is to me a stranger,
But I conceive you are both innocent.

Lor. As newborn virtue, I did accuse
My innocence to rid me of a life
Looked uglier then death, upon an injury
I had done this virtuous wife.

Abst. And I accusd
My innocence to save the beloved life
Of my most noble husband.

Anto. Why then? now 'twould grieve you,
Death should unkindly part ye.

Lor. Oh but that, sir,
We have no sorrow: now to part from her,
(Since heaven has new married, and new made us)
I had rather leap into a den of Lions,
Snatch from a hungry Bear her bleeding prey,
I would attempt desperate impossibilities
With hope, rather then now to leave her.

Anto. This makes for me.

Abst. And rather then leave you, sir, I would eat
Hot coals with Portia, or attempt a terror,
Nature would snail-like shrink her head in at,
And tremble but to think on.

Anto. Better and better!
If you so love him, what can you confess?
The greatest kindness can express that love.

Abst. To save his life, since there is no hope,
Seeing he so strongly has confessed the murder,
We shall meet the happyness to dye together.

Anto. Fire casts the bravest heat in coldest weather,
I Will try how ardently you burn; for know
Upon my faith, and as I am a gentleman,
I have (in the next room, and in the custody
Of a true friend) the man that did the deed
You stand accused for.

Abst. Hark there, Lorenzo.

Lor. Will you not let him go, sir?

Anto. That Is in suspense; but mistress, you did say
You durst eat coals with Protia, to redeem
The infinitely loved life of your husband.

Abst. And still strongly protest it.

Lor. Oh my Abstemia!

Anto. You shall redeem him at an easier rate:
I have the murderer you see in hold.

Lor. And we are blessed in your discovery of him.

Anto. If you will give consent that I shall taste
That sence-bereaving pleasure so familiar
Unto your happy husband.

Abst. How?

Anto. Pray hear me:
Then I will give this fellow up to the law:
If you deny, horses stand ready for us,
A bark for transportation, where we will live
Till law by death has severed ye.

Lor. But we will call for present witness.

Anto. Look ye --
Shows the Pistol. Experienced navigators still are fitted,
For every weather: it is almost past call
To reach the nimblest ear: yet but offer it,
I part ye presently for ever.
Consider it;
The enjoying him thou so entirely love
All thy life after; that when mirth-spent time
Has crowned your heads with honor, you may sit
And tell delightful stories of your loves:
And when ye come to that poor minutes escape
Crowns my desire, ye may let that slip by,
Like water that never the meets Millers eye:
Compare but this, to the soon-forgotten pleasure
Of a pair of wealthy minutes: the thirstiest Lapidarie
Knows the most curious Jewel takes no harm,
For one days wearing: could you sir (did your eye
Not see it worn) your wife having lent your cloak,
(If secretly returned and folded up)
Could you conceive, when you next looked upon it,
It had neatly furnished our a poor friends want?
Be charitable, and think on it.

Lor. Do hear, Abstemia?
Oh shall we part for ever, when a price
So poor might be our freedom?

Abst. Now goodness guard ye!
Where learnt you, sir, this language?

Lor. Of true love:
You did but now profess, that you would dye
To save my life, and now like a forward chapman,
Caught at thy word, thou giv'st back ashamed
To stand this easy proffer.

Abst. Could you live,
And know your self a cuckold?

Anto. What a question's that?
Many men cannot live without the knowledge:
How can ye tell,
Whether she seems thus to respect your honor,
But to stay till the law has choked ye? it may be then
She will do it, with less entreaty.

Lor. I, there, there it is.

Abst. It Is your old fit of jealousy, so judges:
A foul devil talks within him.

Lor. Oh the art,
The wondrous art of woman! ye would do it daintily,
You would juggle me to death, you would persuade me
I should dye nobly to preserve your honor;
That dead ignobly you might prove dishonorable,
Forget me in a day, and wed another.

Abst. Why then would I have dyed for you?

Anto. That was but a proffer, that dying you might Idolize her love;
'Twould have put her off the better.

Lor. Oh you have builded
A golden Palace, strewn with Palm and Roses,
To let me bleed to death in! How sweetly
You would have lost me! Abstemia, you have learned,
The cunning Fowlers art, who pleasantly
Whistles the bird into the snare: good heaven!
How you had strewn the enticing top of the cup
With Arabian Spices! but you had laid in the bottom
Ephesian Aconite: you are loves hypocrite:
A rotten stick in the nights darkness born,
And a fair Poppie in a field of corn.

Abst. Oh sir I hear me --
Kneels.
Lor. Away, I will no more
Look pearl in mud: Oh sly hypocrisy!
Durst ye but now die for me? good heaven! die for me!
The greatest act of pain, and dare not buy me
With a poor minutes pleasure?

Abst. No sir, I dare not; there is little pain in death,
But a great death in very little pleasure:
I had rather, trust me, bear your death with honor,
Then buy your life with baseness: as I am exposed
To the greatest battery beauty ever fought,
Oh blame me not, if I be covetous
To come off with greatest honor; if I do this
To let you live, I kill your name, and give
My soul a wound; I crush her from sweet grace,
And change her Angels to a furies face:
Try me no more then, but if you must bleed, boast,
To preserve honor, life is nobly lost.

Lor. Thou wealth worth more then kingdoms, I am now confirmed,
Past all suspicion, thou that art far sweeter
In thy sincere truth, then a sacrifice
Decked up for death with garlands: the Indian winds
That blow off from the coast, and cheer the Saylor
With the sweet savor of their spices, want
The delight flows in thee: look here, look here,
Oh man of wild desires; we will die the Martyrs
Of Marriage, and stead of the loose ditties
With which; they stab sweet modesty, and engender
Desires in the hot room; thy noble story
Shall lawrel-like crown honest ears with glory.

Anto. Murder, murder, murder!
Enter the three Dukes, with Lords.
Mill Ha, who cries murder?

Phil. As you are a gentleman, now be true to me.

Abst Sir.

Ven. Sister?

Vero. My shame, art thou there?

Ven. Oh sister, can it be
A Princes blood should stain that white hand?

Ambo. Hear us.

Anto. No, no, no, hear me, 'twas I cried murder:
Because I have found them both stained with the deed,
They would have throtled me.

Lor. Hear us, by all.

Mill. Upon your lives be silent; speak on, sir:
Had they both hands in our sons blood?

Anto. Two hands apiece, sir:
I have fifted it, they both have killed the Prince;
But this is the chief murderer: please you give me audience,
Ye shall wonder at the manner how they killed him.

Mill. Silence.

Anto. He came first to this woman, and truth's truth,
He would have lain with her.

Mill. Her own confession.

Anto. Nay good your Grace.

Mill. We are silent.

Anto. Coming to seize upon her, with the first blow
She struck his base intent so brave a buffer,
That there it bled to death: she said his horse
Would teach him better manners: there he died once.

Vero. What does this fellow talk?

Abst. I understand him.

Anto. He met her next in the wood, where he was found dead:
Then he came noblier up to her, and told her
Marriage was his intent; but she as nobly,
(Belike to let him know she was married)
Told him in an intelligible denial,
A chaste wives truth shined through the greatest trial:
There the Prince died again.

Lod. There Is twice, beware the third time.

Anto. The third time, he came here to them both in prison,
Brought a pistol with him, would have forced her again,
But had ye seen how fairly then she flew him,
You would have shot applauses from your eyes:
Oh she came up so bravely to that Prince,
Hot potent Lust, (for she slew no Prince else)
With such a valiant discipline she destroyed
That debosh'd Prince, Bad Desire; and then by him
So bravely too fetched off, that (to conclude)
Betwixt them they this wonder did contrive,
They killed the Prince, but kept your son alive
Discovers himself.
Mill. Antonio?

Omn. The Prince.

Ven. Come home my sister to my heart.

Vero. And now Lorenzo is again my beloved kinfman,

Anto. Oh sir, here dwells virtue epitomized,
Even to an abstract, and yet that so large,
'Twill swell a book in folio.

Lod. She swells beyond my wife then:
A pocketbook bound in Decimo Sexto
Will hold her virtues, and as much spare paper left
As will furnish five Tobacco-shops

Mill. But here is the wonder, who is it was slain
In your apparel?

Phil. I will give them all the slip.
Offers to go.
Anto. Here Is a gentleman of Ferrara.

Phil. As you are noble.

Anto. That saw them fight: it was the Slave was slain, sir,
I took before Palermo; he that killed him,
Took him but for a gentleman his equal:
And as this eye-witnss says, he in my apparel
Did kick the the other first.

Phil. Nay, upon my life, sir.
He in your apparel gave the first kick; I saw them fight,
And I dare swear the the other honest gentleman
Little thought he had slain any thing like the Prince;
For I heard him swear but half an hour before,
He never saw your Grace.

Mill. Then he killed him fairly.

Phil. Upon my life, my Lord.

Ven. The Other had but his merit then: who dies,
And seeks his death, seldom wets others eyes.

Anto. Let this persuade you, I believe you noble,
I have kept my word with you.

Phil. You have outdone me, sir,
In this brave exercise of honor: but let me
In mine own person thank you.

Omnes. Philippo!

Phil. Unwittingly I did an ill (as 't happened)
To a good end: that slave I for you killed,
Wanted but time to kill you: Read that paper
Which I found with him, I thinking by accident
You had intercepted it: we all have happily
Been well deceived; you are noble, just and true;
My hate was at your clothes, my heart at you.

Vero. An accident more strange has seldom happened.

Lor. Philippo, my best friend, 'twixt shame and love
Here let me lay thee now for ever.

Abst. Heaven
Has now plained all our rough woes smooth and even.

Mill. At Court, large relation in apt form
Shall tender past proceedings; but to distingush
(Excellent Lady) your unparalled praises
From those but seem, let this serve: bad women,
Are natures clouds eclipsing her fair shine;
The good, all gracious, saint-like and divine.

FINIS.

