THE ANCIENT RITES, and MONVMENTS OF THE Monastical, and Cathedral CHURCH OF
DURHAM.

Collected out of Ancient Manuscripts, about the time of the Suppression.

Published by J. D. of Kidwelly.

Tempora mutantur --

LONDON, Printed for W. Hensman at the King's Head in Westminster Hall, M. DC.
LXXII.

TO My much Honored Friend, JAMES MICKLETON, Of the Inner Temple, Esquire
SIR,
IT has always been a commendable design in those Authors, who have spent
their Labors in the survey of Ancient places, when they could no longer
entertain us with an account of their flourishing condition, to give us the
most satisfactory prospect they could of their Ruins. Such is the Relation
given here of your Ancient Monastical, and Cathedral Church of Durham; of
which, I question not, but much more might have been said, had any one made it
his business to give a complete Description thereof.

As soon as this Piece, in Manuscript, came to my hands, I must confess it
renewed in me the memory of my obligations to a famous Native of that place, my
early Friend, and Patron, John Hall Esquire to whom you were by a happy Alliance
so nearly Related. Wonder not then, if, partly upon that inducement, and partly
upon the score of your being an Inhabitant of the same City, as also that of
your being a person particularly addicted to the study of Antiquities, I
address the Print to your Patronage. Which I do with this further wish, that
what I have occasionally communicated to the Public, may prove an incentive to
your self, or some others in your parts, to make what Additionals you think
fit, concerning your St. Cuthbert, and the Cathedral of Durham, so famous
through the World upon his account. I am,

SIR, Your most affectionate humble Servant, J. DAVIES.
London, Oct. 4. 1671.
A TABLE Of the Principal Heads of this ensuing Treatise.
THe Nine Altars. Page 1. St. Cuthbert's Feretory. 6. The Quire. 12. The
Passion. 21. The Resurrection. 22. The North-Alley of the Quire. 29. The
South-Alley of the Quire. 31. The Cross-Alley of the Lantern, before the
Quire-door, going North and South. 33. The North-Alley of the Lantern. 36. An
Ancient Memorial, taken out of the best Antiquaries, concerning the Battle of
Durham, in John Fosser's time. 37. The South-Alley of the Lantern. 50. The
Causes why Women may not come to the Feretory of St. Cuthbert, nor enter within
the Precinct annexed to the Monastery. 60. The North-Alley of the Body of the
Church. 64 The South-Angle of the Body of the Church. 68. The Galilee; and
whence the Chapel dedicated to the honor of St. Mary came to be so called.
73. The Rite, or Custom of the Church of Durham, in the burying of Monks. 88.
The Rite, in burying of Priors. 90. The Priors of Durham, buried within the
Abbey-Church. 92. A Catalogue of the Bishops of Durham, buried in the
Chapter House there. 93. The Rite, or Custom of burying Bishops in the
Chapter House. 96. The Names of the Bishops of Durham, who were sumptuously
buried out of the Chapter House, within the Abbey-Church of Durham, etc. 98. Of
St. Cuthbert's Death, and the Translation of his body to Durham. 105. The Tomb
of William Carlipho in the Cloyster-garth, etc. 117. The East-Alley of the
Cloisters. 119. The South-Alley of the Cloisters. 124. The Frater-House. 126.
The North-Alley of the Cloisters. 131. The West-Alley of the Cloisters. 132.
The Dortoir, or Dormitory. 133. The Loft. 136. The Common-House. 137. The
Guest-Hall. 139. The Names of some of the Monks, and Officers within the
Abbey-Church of Durham. 143. Processions in the Abbey-Church of Durham, upon
certain Festivals, etc. 156. Procession on the three Cross-dayes. Ibid.
Procession on Holy-Thursday, Whitsunday, and Trinity-Sunday. 157. St.
Cuthbert's Shrine defaced. 159. St. Bede's Shrine defaced. 161. The Procession
upon Corpus-Christi-day, within the Church, and City of Durham, before the
Suppression of the Abbey-Church. 162.
THE ANCIENT RITES, and MONVMENTS OF THE Monastical, and Cathedral CHURCH OF
DURHAM.
The Nine Altars.
FIrst, in the Front, or highest part of the Church, were the Nine Altars;
Dedicated, and Erected in honor of several Saints, and from them taking their
Names; as the Inscriptions thereof shall declare. The Altars being placed North
and South, one from another, along the Front of the Church. In the midst of the
Front of the Church, where these Nine Altars were placed, was the Altar of the
Holy Fathers, St. Cuthbert, and Saint Bede, having all the foresaid Altars
equally divided on either hand; on the South hand four, and on the North hand
four. On the South were these four Altars following.

1. The Altar of St. Oswald, and St. Lawrence. 2. The Altar of St. Thomas of
Canterbury, and St. Catharine. 3. The Altar of St. Baptist, and St. Margaret.
4. The Altar of St. Andrew, and Mary Magdalene; being the outermost
Altartowards the South.
On the South-Angle of the said Nine Altars, next the Cemitery, commonly
called, the Centry-garth, and next the said Altar, there was an Almery set,
wherein singing-Bread, and Wine, were usually placed; at which, the Sacristan
of the Abbey caused his Servant, or Scholar, daily to give Attendance, from six
of the Clock in the Morning, till high Mass was ended; from out thereof to
deliver singing-Bread, and Wine, to those who assisted the Monks to Celebrate
and say Mass.

Richard de Bury, Bishop of Durham, lies buried before this Altar, under a
fair Marble stone, whereon his own Image was most curiously, and artificially
engraven in Brass, with the Pictures of the twelve Apostles; divided, and
embroidered on either side of him; and other fine Imagery-work about it, much
adorning the Marble stone.

On the North side of St. Cuthbert's Shrine, and St. Bede's Altar, were these
four following.

1. The Altar of St. Martin.

2. The Altar of St. Peter, and St. Paul.

3. The Altar of St. Aidan, and St. Helene.

4. The Altar of the Holy Archangel, St. Michael, being the outermost toward
the North. Betwixt the two last Altars lies buried Anthony Beek, Bishop of
Durham, and Patriarch of Jerusalem, in a fair Marble Tomb, underneath a large
Marble stone; being the first Bishop that ever attempted to lie so near the
sacred Shrine of St. Cuthbert; the Wall being broken at the end of the Abbey,
to bring him in with his Coffin.

All the foresaid Nine Altars had their several Shrines, and covers of Wainscot
overhead, in a very decent and comely form; having likewise betwixt every Altar
a very fair, and large Partition of Wainscot, all varnished over with fine
branches and flowers, and other Imagery-work, most finely, and artificially
Pictured, and gilt; containing the several Lockers, or Ambries, for the safe
keeping of the Vestments, and Ornaments belonging to every Altar; with three,
or four little Ambries in the Wall, pertaining to some of the said Altars, for
the same use and purpose.

In the East end of the said Church there is a goodly fair round Window, called
St. Catharine's Window; the breadth of the Quire all of stone, and cunningly
wrought, and glazed, having in it twenty four lights, very artificially made;
and the Picture of St. Catharine is set in Glass on the right side underneath
the said Window, in another glazed Window, as she was set upon the Wheel, to be
tormented to death; which Wheel did burst in pieces, and caught the turners of
it, and with the pikes thereof rent them all to pieces; St. Catharine being
safe her self, by the provision of Almighty God.

And in the said Window there was a frame of Iron, wherein stood nine very fair
Cressets of earthen metal, filled with Tallow, which were lighted every Night
when Day was gone, to give light to the Nine Altars, and St. Cuthbert's
Feretory, in that part, and over all the Church besides; and they burned till
break of Day next Morning.

In the South Alley-end of the said Nine Altars, there is a good glazed Window,
called, St. Cuthbert's Window; which has in it all the whole story and
Miracles of that Holy man, St. Cuthbert, from his Birth and Infancy, unto his
end; and the discourse of his whole Life, marvellously fair, and curiously set
forth in Picture, in fine colored glass, according as he went in his Habit to
his dying day; being a most godly and fine story to behold of that Holy man,
St. Cuthbert. In the North Alley of the said Nine Altars, there is another
goodly fair great glazed Window, called Joseph's Window; having in it all the
whole story of Joseph, most artificially wrought in Pictures, in fine colored
glass, as it is read, and set forth in the Bible; very goodly and godly to the
beholders thereof.

In St. Cuthbert's Feretory.
Next to these Nine Altars was the goodly Monument of St. Cuthbert, adjoining
to the Quire and the high Altar on the West, and reaching toward the nine
Altars on the East, and toward the North and South, containing the breadth of
the Quire in quadrant form; in the midst whereof his sacred Shrine was exalted,
with most curious workmanship of fine and costly green Marble, all lined and
gilt with gold, having four seats, or places convenient, underneath the Shrine,
for the Pilgrims, or lame men setting on their knees, to lean and rest on in
the time of their devout Offerings, and fervent prayers to God, and Holy St.
Cuthbert, for his miraculous relief and succor; which being never wanting,
made the Shrine to be so richly invested, that it was esteemed one of the most
sumptuous Monuments in all England, so great were the Offerings and Jewels
bestowed upon it; and no less the miracles, that were done by it, even in these
latter days; as is more patent in the History of the Church, at large.

At the West end of the Shrine of St. Cuthbert was a little Altar adjoined to
it for Mass to be said, only on the great and Holy Feast of St. Cuthbert's day
in Lent. At which Solemnity the Prior, and the Convent did keep open Household
in the Frater-house, and dined altogether on that day, and no day else in the
year. And at this Feast, and certain other Festival days, in time of Divine
Service, they were accustomed to draw up the cover of St. Cuthbert's Shrine,
being of Wainscot, whereunto was fastened, unto every corner of the said cover,
to a loop of Iron, a very strong cord, which cords were all fastened together
at the end over the midst of the cover; and a strong Rope was fastened unto the
loops, or binding of the said cord; which Rope did run up and down in a pulley
under the Vault, above St. Cuthbert's Feretory, for the drawing up of the cover
of St. Cuthbert's Shrine. And the said Rope was fastened to a loop of Iron to
the North Pillar of the Feretory, having very fine sounding silver Bells
fastened to the said Rope; which, at the drawing up of the cover, made such a
goodly sonnd, that it stirred all the Peoples hearts within the Church to
repair unto it, and to make their prayers unto God, and the Holy man, St.
Cuthbert. And that the beholders might see the glory and ornaments thereof, the
said cover had at every corner two hoops of Iron made fast to every corner of
the Cover, which did run up and down on four round staves of Iron, when it was
drawing, which were made fast in every corner of the Marble that St. Cuthbert's
Coffin did lie upon; which said cover on the outside was all over very finely,
and artificially gilt; and also on either side of the said cover were painted
four lively Images, curiously wrought, and miraculous to all the beholders
thereof. And on the East end was painted the Picture of our Savior sitting in
the Rainbow to give Judgment, very artificially, and lively to behold; and on
the West end of the said cover, was the Picture of our Lady, and the Picture of
Christ on her knee; and on the height of the said cover, from end to end, was a
most fine brandishing of carved work cut throughout with Dragons, and Fowls,
and Beasts, most artificially wrought, and set forth to the beholders thereof.
And the inside of the said cover was all varnished and colored with a most
fine sanguine color, that the Beholders might see all the glory, and all the
ornaments thereof; and at every corner of the said cover there was a lock to
lock it down, from opening and drawing the same up.

Also within the said Feretory, on both North and South side, there were
Ambries of fine Wainscot, varnished and finely painted, and gilt over with fine
little Images, very beautiful to behold, for the Relics belonging to St.
Cuthbert to lie in. And within the said Ambries did lie all the holy Relics
that were offered to that Holy man, St. Cuthbert; and when his Shrine was
drawn, the said Ambries were opened, that every man that came thither at that
time might see the holy Relics therein. So that the costly Relics and
Jewels that were in the said Ambries, and all the other Relics that hung
about within the said Feretory, upon the Iron there, were accounted the most
sumptuous, and richest Jewels in all this Land; with the bountifulness of the
fine little Images which stood in the French Pierre, within the Feretory. For
great were the gifts, and godly Devotion of Kings, Queens, and other States, at
that time toward God, and holy St. Cuthbert, in the Church.

Within this Feretory of St. Cuthbert were many fine little Pictures of several
Saints, of Imagery work, all being of Alabaster, set in the French Pierre, in
their several places, the Pictures being curiously wrought, engraven, and gilt;
and the Nevil's Cross, and Bull's Head set upon the height, and on the other
side of the two doors in the said French pierre, and also in diverse other
places of the French pierre besides; which Feretory, and French pierre, were
made at the charges of John, Lord Nevil, as may appear at large, in the History
of the Church.

At the East end of St. Cuthbert's Feretory were wrought upon the height of the
Irons, toward the Nine Altars, very fine Candlesticks of Iron, like Sockets,
which had lights set in them before day, that every Monk might have the more
light to see to read upon their books at the said Nine Altars, when they said
Mass; and also to give light to all others that came thither to hear and see
the Divine Service.

The King of Scot's Ancient, and his Banner, with the Lord Nevil's Banner, and
diverse other Noble-mens Ancients, were all brought to St. Cuthbert's Feretory,
and there the said Lord Nevill did make his Petition to God, and that holy man,
St. Cuthbert, and did offer Jewels and Banners to the Shrine of the Holy and
Blessed man, St. Cuthbert, within the Feretory. And there the said Banners and
Ancients stood, and hung till the suppression of the House. The Lord Nevil's
Banner-staff was done about with Iron, from the midst upward, and did stand,
and was bound to the Irons on the North-end of the Feretory; and the King of
Scot's Banner was bound to the midst of the said Irons, and did hang on the
midst of the Alley of the Nine Altars, and was fastened to a loop of Iron being
in a Pillar under St. Catharine's Window, in the East end of the Church. And a
little after the suppression of the House they were all taken down, spoiled,
and defaced, that the memory thereof should be clean taken away, though a great
honor to the Realm, and decent Ornament to the Church.

The Quire.
In the East end of the Quire joining upon St. Cuthbert's Feretory, stood the
high Altar, the goodliest in all the Church, being a very Rich thing, with many
precious and costly Ornaments appertaining to it, as well for every principal
day, as for every of our Lady's days. The said High Altar, and St. Cuthbert's
Feretory, is all of the French Pierre, curiously wrought, both inside, and
outside, with fair Images of Alabaster, and gilt, being called in the Ancient
History, the Lardose; the said curious workmanship of the French Pierre, or
Lardose, reaching in height almost to the middle Vault, and containing the
breadth of the Quire in length. In the midst whereof, right over the said High
Altar, were artificially placed, in very fine Alabaster, the Picture of our
Lady standing in the midst, and the Picture of St. Cuthbert on one side, and
the Picture of St. Oswald on the other, all richly gilt. And at either end of
the said Altar was a wand of Iron fastened in the Wall, whereon did hang*
Curtains, or Hangings of white silk daily. The daily Ornaments that were hung
both before the Altar, and above, were of red Velvet, with great flowers of
gold in embroidered work, with many goodly Pictures besides, very finely gilt:
but the Ornaments for the principal Feast, which was the Assumption of our
Lady, were all white Damask, all beset with Pearl, and precious Stones; which
made the Ornaments more glorious to behold.

Within the Quire, over the high Altar, hung a rich, and most sumptuous Canopy
for the Blessed Sacrament to hang within it, which had two Irons fastened in
the French Pierre very finely gilt, which held the Canopy over the midst of the
said high Altar that the Pix did hang in, that it could not stir, nor move;
whereon did stand a Pelican, all of Silver, upon the height of the said Canopy,
finely gilt, giving her blood to her young ones, in token of Christ, who gave
his blood for the sins of the World; and it was goodly to behold, for the
Blessed Sacrament to hang in. And the Pix, wherein the Blessed Sacrament did
hang, was of pure gold, curiously wrought of Gold-smith's work; and the white
cloth that hung over the Pix was of very fine Lawn, all embroidered, and
wrought about with gold and red silk, and four great knobs of gold, curiously
wrought, with great tassels of gold and red silk hanging at them, and at the
four corners of the white Lawn cloth. And the Crock that did hang within the
cloth, on which the Pix hung, was of gold; and the cord that drew it up and
down, was made of fine strong white silk. And when the Monks went to say, or
sing high Mass, they put on their Vestments in the Revestry, both the Epistlers
and the Gospellers; they were always revested in the same place. And when the
Office of the Mass was begun to be sung, the Epistlers came forth of the
Revestry, and the other two Monks following him, all three arow at the South
Quire door, and there did stand to the Gloria Patri of the Office of the Mass,
begun to be sung. And then, with great Reverence and Devotion, they went all
three up to the high Altar; and one of the Vergers that kept the Revestry did
go before them with a tipped staff in his hand, as it was his Office so to do,
bowing themselves most reverently to the Blessed Sacrament of the Altar; the
one on the one side of him that said Mass, and the other on the other. Also the
Gospeller did carry a mavelous fair Book, which had the Gospels and Epistles
in it, and did lay it on the Altar; which Book had on the outside of the
covering the Picture of our Savior Christ all of Silver, of Gold-smith's work,
all parcel-gilt, very fine to behold; which Book did serve for the Pax in the
Mass. The Epistler, when he had sung the Epistle, did lay the Book again upon
the Altar; and afterward, when the Gospel was sung, the Gospeller laid it down
upon the Altar likewise, until the Mass was done. Mass being ended, they went
all three into the Revestry, from whence they came, and carried the Book with
them; and one of the Vergers meeting them at the South Quire door, after the
same sort, went before them into the Revestry.

There pertained also to the high Altar two goodly Chalices, one of gold, the
other of silver, double gilt, and all the foot of it set full of precious
stones. That of gold was for principal days, and the other to serve every day.
Likewise there were pertaining to the said high Altar two goodly great Basins
of silver; one for principal days, double gilt, a great large one; and the
other Basin for every day, not so large, being parcel-gilt, and engraven all
over; and two great Crewets of silver, containing quarts apiece, parcel-gilt,
and graven all over; and other two lesser Crewets for every day, all of silver;
one pair of silver Censers for every day, and two pair of silver Censers for
every double Feast, double gilt; and two pair of silver Censers, parcel-gilt,
and the Chains also, for every principal day, with two Ships of silver,
parcel-gilt, for principal days, and other two of silver ungilt for every day,
to carry Frankincense in; and two silver double-gilt Candlesticks for two
Tapers very finely wrought, of three quarters height, to be taken asunder with
wrests; other two silver Candlesticks for every days Service, parcel-gilt,
with goodly, and rich, and sumptuous Furniture, for every Festival day, of
changeable suits. Diverse of the Vestments were set all round about with Pearl,
Stoles, and Fannels. There were also other very rich and costly Jewels and
Ornaments pertaining to the said high Altar.

There were also two Crosses to be born on principal days for Procession; one
all of gold, and the staff it stood in was of silver, and of Gold-smith's work,
very curiously, and very finely wrought, and double gilt. The other Cross was
of silver, and double gilt, and the staff was of wood, after the same
workmanship, and double gilt also. There was another Cross of Crystal, that
served for every day in the week. There was born before the Cross, every
principal day, a Holy-water-font, all of silver, very finely engraven, and
parcel-gilt; which one of the Novices did carry.

In the North-side of the Quire there is an Ambrie nigh to the high Altar,
fastened in the Wall, for to lay any thing in pertaining to the high Altar.

There is likewise another Ambrie in the South side of the Quire, nigh the high
Altar, enclosed in the Wall, to set the Chalices and Basins, and the Crewets
in, that they did minister withal at the high Mass; with locks and keys for
the same Ambries.

At the North end of the high Altar there was a goodly fine Lantern, or
Letteron, of Brass, where they sung the Epistle and Gospel, with a great
Pelican on the height of it, finely gilt, billing her blood out of her breast,
to feed her young ones, and her wings spread abroad, whereon did lie the Book,
in which they sung the Epistle, and the Gospel. It was thought to be the
goodliest Letteron of Brass in all this Country. It was all to be taken
asunder with wrests, every joint, one from the other.

Also there was lower down in the Quire another Lantern of Brass, not so
curiously wrought, standing in the midst against the Stalls, a mavelous fair
one, of Brass, with an Eagle on the height of it, and her wings spread abroad;
whereon the Monks did lay their Books, when they sung their Legends at Mattins,
or at other times of Service.

Before the high Altar, within the Quire abovementioned, were three mavelous
fair silver Basins, hanging in chains of silver; one of them did hang on the
South side of the Quire, above the steps that go up to the high Altar; the
second on the North side, opposite to the former; and the third in the midst
betwixt them both, and just before the high Altar. These three silver Basins
had latten Basins within them, having pricks for Serges, or great waxen Candles
to stand on, the Latten Basins being to receive the drops of the three Candles,
which did burn continually, day and night, in token that the House was always
watching to God.

There was also another silver Basin, which hung in silver Chains before the
Sacrament of the foresaid high Altar, but nearer to the Altar than the others,
hanging almost over the Priest's back; which was only lighted in time of Mass,
and, that ended, extinguished.

There was further a goodly Monument, belonging to the Church, called the
Paschal; which was wont to be set up in the Quire, and there to remain from the
Thursday, called Maundy-Thursday, before Easter, till the Wednesday after
Ascention-day. It stood upon a apiece thick plank of wood, against the
first greese, or step, hard behind the three Basins of silver that hung before
the high Altar. In the midst of the said greese is a nick, wherein one of the
corners of the said plank was placed; and at every corner of the said plank was
an Iron Ring, whereunto the foot of the Paschal was adjoined, representing the
Pictures of the four flying Dragons; as also the Pictures of the four
Evangelists, above the top of the Dragons, underneath the nethermost Boss; all
supporting the whole Paschal; and the four quarters have been four Crystal
stones, and in the four small Dragons foreheads four Crystal stones; as by
the holes do appear. And on every side of the four Dragons there is curious
Antickwork; as Beasts, and Men upon Horses backs, with Bucklers, Bows, Shafts,
and Knots, with broad leaves spread upon the knots, very finely wrought; all
being of most fine, and curious Candlestick-metal, or Latten-metal, glistering
as the gold it self, having six Candlesticks for flowers, of Candlestick-metal,
coming from it, three on either side; whereon did stand, in every of the said
flowers, or Candlesticks, a Taper of wax. And on the height of the said
Candlesticks, or Paschal of Latten, was a fair large flower, being the
principal flower, which was the seventh Candlestick. The Paschal, in Latitude,
did contain almost the breadth of the Quire; in Longitude, it did extend to the
height of the lower Vault, whereon did stand a long piece of wood, reaching
within a man's length to the upper Vault, or Roof of the Church; whereon did
stand a great long squared Taper of wax, called the Paschal; having a fine
conveyance through the Roof of the Church to light the Taper withal. In
conclusion, the Paschal was esteemed to be one of the rarest Monuments in all
England.

The Passion.
Within the Abbey-Church of Durham, upon Good-Fryday, there was mavelous
solemn Service, in which service time, after the Passion was sung, two of the
Ancient Monks took a goodly large Crucifix, all of Gold, of the Picture of our
Savior Christ, nailed upon the Cross, laying it upon a Velvet Cushion, having
St. Cuthbert's Arms upon it, all embroidered with gold, bringing it betwixt
them upon the Cushion to the lowest greeses, or steps in the Quire, and there
betwixt them did hold the said Picture of our Savior, sitting on either side
of it. And then one of the said Monks did rise, and went a pretty space from
it, and setting himself upon his knees, with his shoes put off, very
reverently, he crept upon his knees unto the said Cross, and most reverently
did kiss it; and after him the other Monks did so likewise, and then they sat
down on either side of the said Cross, holding it betwixt them. Afterward, the
Prior came forth of his Stall, and did sit him down upon his knees, with his
shoes off in like sort, and did creep also unto the said Cross, and all the
Monks after him, one after another, in the same manner, and order; in the mean
time the whole Quire singing a Hymn.

The Service being ended, the said two Monks carried the Cross to the Sepulcher
with great Reverence; (which Sepulcher was set up in the Morning on the North
side of the Quire, nigh unto the high Altar, before the Service time,) and
there did lay it within the said Sepulcher, with great Devotion, with another
Picture of our Savior Christ, in whose Breast they did enclose, with great
reverence, the most holy, and Blessed Sacrament of the Altar, Censing, and
praying unto it upon their knees a great space; and setting two Tapers lighted
before it, which did burn till Easter Day in the Morning, at which time it was
taken forth.

The Resurrection.
There was in the Abbey-Church of Durham very solemn Service upon Easter Day,
betwixt three and four of the Clock in the morning, in honor of the
Resurrection; where two of the Eldest Monks of the Quire came to the Sepulcher,
set up upon Good-Fryday, after the Passion, all covered with red Velvet, and
embroidered with gold, and then did Cense it, either of the Monks with a pair
of silver Censers, sitting on their knees before the Sepulcher. Then they both
rising, came to the Sepulcher, out of which, with great reverence, they took a
mavelous beautiful Image of our Savior, representing the Resurrection, with
a Cross in his hand, in the breast whereof was enclosed, in most bright
Crystal, the holy Sacrament of the Altar; through the which Crystal the
Blessed Host was conspicuous to the beholders. Then after the Elevation of the
said Picture carried by the said two Monks upon a fair Velvet Cushion, all
embroidered, singing the Antheme of Christus Resurgens, they brought it to the
high Altar, setting it on the midst thereof, the two Monks kneeling before the
Altar, and Censing it all the time that the rest of the whole Quire were
singing the foresaid Antheme of Christus Resurgens: Which Antheme being ended,
the two Monks took up the Cushion and Picture from the Altar, supporting it
betwixt them, and proceeding in procession from the high Altar to the South
Quire door, where there were four Ancient Gentlemen belonging to the Prior,
appointed to attend their coming, holding up a most rich Canopy of purple
Velvet, tassell'd round about with red silk, and a goodly gold fringe; and at
every corner of the Canopy did stand one of these Ancient Gentlemen, to bear it
over the said Images, with the holy Sacrament carried by the two Monks round
about the Church, the whole Quire waiting upon it, with goodly Torches, and
great store of other lights; all singing, rejoicing, and praying to God most
devoutly, till they came to the high Altar again; upon which they placed the
said Images, there to remain till Ascention-day.

Lodovic de bello Monte, Bishop of Durham, lies buried before the high Altar
in the Quire, under a most curious, and sumptuous Marble stone, which he
prepared for himself, before he died, being adorned with most excellent
workmanship of Brass, wherein he was most excellently, and lively Pictured, as
he was accustomed to sing, or say Mass, with his Mitre on his head, and his
crosier-staff in his hand, with two Angels finely pictured; one on the one side
of his head, and the other on the other side, with Censers in their hands
Censing him; and containing also most exquisite Pictures and Images of the
twelve Apostles, divided, and bordered on either side of him; and next them are
bordered, on either side of the twelve Apostles, in another border, the
Pictures of his Ancestors, in their Coats of Arms, being of the Blood Royal of
France; and his own Arms of France, being a white Lion placed upon the breast
of his Vestment, underneath the verses of his breast, with Flower-de-luces
about the Lion, the two Lions pictured; one under the one foot of him, and
another under the other foot, supporting, and holding up his Crosier-staff, his
feet adjoining, and standing upon the said Lions; and other two Lions under
them, in the nethermost border of all, being most artificially wrought, and set
forth, all in Brass, most curiously and beautifully, in the said Through of
Marble, wherein was graven in Brass such Divine, and Celestial sayings of the
Holy Scripture, which he had peculiarly selected for his spiritual consolation,
at such time as it should please Almighty God to call him out of this
Mortality; whereof some of them are legible to these days; as these that
follow.

Epitaphium.
-- In Gallia natus
De bello Monte jacet hic Lodovicus humatus,
Nobilis ex font Regum Comitumque creatus,
Praesul in hac Sede Coeli laetetur in aede.
Praeteriens siste, memorans quantus fuit iste,
Coelo quam dignus, justus, pius, atque benignus,
Dapsilis ac hilaris, inimicus semper amaris.
Super Caput.
Credo quod Redemptor meus vivit, qui in novissimo die me resuscitabit ad vitam
aeternam; et in carne mea videbo Deum Salvatorem meum.

In Pectore.
Reposita est haec spes mea in sinu meo; Domine miserere.

Ad Dextram.
Consors sit Sanctis Lodovicus in arce Tonantis.

Ad Sinistram.
Spiritus ad Christum, qui sanguine liberat ipsum.

There were three pair of Organs belonging to the said Quire, for maintenance
of Gods Service, and the better celebrating thereof. One of the fairest pair of
the three stood over the Quire door, only opened, and played upon on principal
Feasts, the pipes being all of most fine wood, and workmanship very fair,
partly gilt upon the inside, and the outside of the leaves and covers up to
the top, with branches, and flowers finely gilt, with the name of Jesus gilt
with Gold. There were but two pair more of them in all England of the same
making; one in York, and another in Paul's.

Also there was a Lantern of wood like unto a Pulpit, standing, and adjoining
to the Wood Organs over the Quire door, where they had wont to sing the nine
Lessons in the old time on principal days, standing with their faces toward
the high Altar.

The second pair stood on the North side of the Quire, being never played upon,
but when the four Doctors of the Church were read, viz. Augustine, Ambrose,
Gregory, and Jerome, being a pair of fair large Organs, called the Cryers. The
third pair were daily used at ordinary Service.

There did lie on the high Altar an excellent fine Book, very richly covered
with gold and silver; containing the names of all the Benefactors toward St.
Cuthbert's Church, from the first Original Foundation thereof; the very Letters
of the Book being, for the most part, all gilt, as is apparent in the said Book
till this day. The laying that Book on the high Altar, did show how highly they
esteemed their Founders and Benefactors; and the Quotidian remembrance they had
of them, in the time of Mass, and divine Service. And this did argue, not only
their gratitude, but also a most divine and charitable affection to the souls
of their Benefactors, as well dead, as living; which Book is as yet extant,
declaring the said use in the Inscription thereof.

There is also another famous Book as yet extant, containing the Relics,
Jewels, Ornaments, and Vestments that were given to the Church by all those
Founders, for the further adorning of Gods service, whose names were on Record
in the said Book that did lie upon the high Altar. And they were also Recorded
in this Book of the aforesaid Relics, and Jewels, to the everlasting praise
and memory of the Givers, and Benefactors thereof.

The North Alley of the Quire.
At the East end of the North-Alley of the Quire, betwixt two Pillars, opposite
one to the other, was the goodly fair Porch, which was called the Anchoridge;
having in it a mavelous fair Rood, with the most exquisite Pictures of Mary,
and John, with an Altar for a Monk to say daily Mass, being in ancient times
inhabited by an Anchorite, whereunto the Priors were wont much to frequent,
both for the excellency of the place, and to hear the high Mass, standing so
conveniently unto the high Altar, and withal so near a Neighbor to the Sacred
Shrine of St. Cuthbert, whereunto the Priors were most devoutly addicted. The
entrance to this Porch, or Anchoridge, was up a fair pair of stairs adjoining
to the North door of St. Cuthbert's Feretory, under which stairs the Paschal
did lie; and in time of Lent, the Children of the Ambrie were enjoined to come
thither daily, to dress, trim, and make it bright, against the Paschal Feast.

In this North-Alley of the Quire, betwixt two Pillars, on the South side,
before St. Blaise's Altar, afterward called Skirlaw's Altar, lies buried
Walter Skirlaw, Bishop of Durham, under a fair Marble stone, very sumptuously
beset with many brazen Images, having his own Image most artificially
portrayed in Brass in the midst thereof; with this saying engraven upon his
Breast: Credo quo^ Redemptor meus vivit, et in die novissimo (...) terra
surrecturus sum, et in carne mea videbo Deum Salvatorem meum.

Right over the entrance of this North Alley, going to the Song-School, which
was heretofore the Segefetons Exchequer there was a Porch adjoining to the
Quire o^ the South, and St. Benedict's Altar on the North; the Porch having in
it an Altar, a^^ the Rood Picture of our Savior; which Altar and Rood were
much frequented in Devotion by Dr. Swallwell, sometimes Monk of Duresme; the
said Rood having mighty sumptuous Furniture for Festival days belonging to it.

The South Alley of the Quire.
At the East end of the South Alley of the Quire, adjoining to the Pillar next
St. Cuthbert's Feretory, next the Quire door on the South side, opposite to the
aforesaid Porch, in the said North Alley, there was a most fair Rood, or
Picture of our Savior, called the black Rood of Scotland; with the Pictures of
Mary, and John; being brought out of Holy Rood-House in Scotland, by King David
Bruce, and was won at the Battle of Durham, with the Picture of our Lady on the
one side of our Savior, and the Picture of St. John on the other side. Which
Rood, and Pictures, were all three very richly wrought in silver, the which
were all smoaked black over, being large Pictures of a yard, or five quarters
long, and on every one of their heads a Crown of pure beaten Gold, of
Goldsmith's work, with a device, or wrest to take them off, and to put them on.
And on the backside of the said Rood, and Picture, there was a piece of work
that they were fastened unto, all adorned with fine Wainscot-work, and curious
Painting (well befitting such costly Pictures) from the midst of the Pillar, up
to the height of the Vault; which Wainscot was all red, varnished over very
finely, and all set forth with Stars of Lead, every Star finely gilt over with
gold. And also the said Rood and Pictures had every one of them an Iron stuck
fast in the back-part of the said Images, that had a hole in the said Irons
that went through the wainscot, to put in a pin of Iron to make them fast to
the Wainscot.

Thomas Hatfeald, Bishop of Durham, lies buried over against the Revestry-door
in the South Alley of the Quire, betwixt two Pillars, under the Bishop's seat,
which he did make before he dyed; his Tomb being all of Alabaster, whereunto
was adjoined a little Altar, which he prepared for a Monk to say Mass for his
Soul after his Death, the Altaring environed with an Iron grate.

Within this South Alley of the Quire was the Revestry, where the Bishop, or
his Suffragane had a peculiar Altar, where they did use to say Mass only at
such time as they were to consecrate Priests, or to give any holy Orders.

The Cross-Alley of the Lantern before the Quire Door, going North, and South.
In the former part of the Quire, on either side the West door, or chief
entrance thereof, without the Quire door in the Lantern, were placed, in their
several Rooms, one above another, the most excellent Pictures, all gilt, very
beautiful to behold, of all the Kings, and Queens, as well of Scotland, as
England; who were devout, and godly Founders, and Benefactors of this famous
Church, and Sacred Monuments of St. Cuthbert, to invite, and provoke their
Posterities to the like Religious endeavors, in their several Successions, and
Kingdoms; whose names here after follow.

Edgarus, Rex Scotorum. Katharina, Regina Angliae. Davia Broys, Rex Scotorum*
Richardus Secundus, Rex Angliae. Alexander, Rex Scotorum. Henricus Quartus, Rex
Angliae. Richardus Primus, Rex Angliae. Alexander, Rex Scotorum. Matilda,
Regina Angliae. David, Rex Scotorum. Edwardus Tortius, Rex Angliae. Henricus
Secundus, Rex Angliae. Edwardus Primus, Rex Angliae. Henricus Quintus, Rex
Angliae. Alexander, Rex Scotorum. Sibylla, Regina Scotorum. Gulielmus Rufus,
Rex Angliae. Richardus Tertius, Rex Angliae. Gulielmus Conquestor, Rex Angliae.
Haraldus, Rex Angliae. Johannes, Rex Angliae. Edwardus Secundus, Rex Angliae.
Ethelstanus, Rex Angliae. Stephanus, Rex Angliae. Matilda, Regina Angliae.
Knutus, Rex Angliae. Malcolmus, Rex Scotorum. Duncanus, Rex Scotorum. Henricus
Tertius, Rex Angliae. Elianora, Regina Angliae. Henricus Primus, Rex Angliae.
Elianora, Regina Angliae. Malcolmus, Rex Scotorum. Gulielmus, Rex Scotorum.
In the Lantern, called the New Work, were hanging three very fine Bells, which
Bells were rung ever at Midnight, at twelve of the Clock; for the Monks went
evermore to Mattins at that hour of the Night. There were four men appointed to
ring the said Bells at Midnight, and at such other times of the day as the
Monks went to serve God; two of the said men appertaining to the Revestry, who
always kept the Copes, with the Vestments, and five pair of silver Censers,
with all such goodly Ornaments pertaining to the high Altar. Which two men did
lie every night in a Chamber over the West end of the said Revestry. And the
other two men did lie every Night within the said Church, in a Chamber in the
North alley, over against the Sextons Exchequer. These two men did always
sweep, and keep the Church cleanly; and did fill the Holy-water-stone every
Sunday in the Morning with clean water, before it came to be hallowed, and did
lock in the Church doors every Night.

Also there is standing in the South Pillat of the Quire-door of the Lantern,
in a corner of the said Pillar, a apiece stone, which has been finely
wrought, in every square a fair large Image, whereon did stand a apiece
stone about it, which had twelve Cressets wrought in that stone, which were
filled with Tallow, and every night one of them was lighted, when the day was
gone, and did burn to give light to the Monks at Midnight, when they came to
Mattins.

The North Alley of the Lantern.
John washington, Prior of Durham, lies buried under a fair Marble stone, with
his Verses engraven in Brass upon it, before the Porch over the entrance of the
North Alley, as you go to the Song-School, adjoining to St. Benedict's Altar.

Robert Berrington, of Walworth, Prior of Durham, first obtained the use of the
Mitre with the Staff. He lies buried under a fair Marble stone, being Pictured
from the waste up in Brass, on the North-side of Prior Washington, in the
North-plage, over against St. Benedict's Altar, being the first of the three
Altars in the North-plage.

Next to St. Benedict's Altar, on the North, is St. Gregory's Altar, being the
second Altar.

An Ancient Memorial, Collected forth of the best Antiquaries, concerning the
Battle of Durham, in John Fosser's time.
In the Night before the Battle of Durham stricken and begun the seventeenth
day of October, Anno Dom. 1346. There did appear to John Fosser, then Prior of
the Abbey at Durham, a Vision commanding him to take the Holy Corporax-cloath,
which was within the Corporax, where with St. Cuthbert did cover the Chalice,
when he used to say Mass, and to put the same holy Relic like unto a
Banner-cloath upon a Spear point, and on the Morning after to go and repair to
a place on the West part of the City of Durham, called the Red-Hills, and there
to remain, and abide till the end of the said Battle. To which Vision the Prior
obeying, and taking the same for a Revelation of Gods grace and mercy, by the
Mediation of Holy St. Cuthbert, did accordingly early the next Morning,
together with the Monks of the said Abbey, repair to the said place, called
Red-Hills, there most devoutly humbling, and prostrating themselves in Prayer,
for the Victory in the said Battle; a great number, and multitude of Scots
running, and passing by them, with intention to have spoiled them, yet they had
no power, or sufferance to commit any violence and force to such Holy Persons,
so occupied in Prayers, being protected, and defended by the mighty providence
of Almighty God, and by the Mediation of Holy St. Cuthbert, and the presence of
the said Holy Relic. And after many conflicts, and warlike exploits there
had, and done betwixt the English men and the King of Scots and his Company,
the said Battle ended, and the Victory was obtained, to the great overthrow,
and confusion of the Scots, their Enemies. And when the said Prior, and Monks,
accompanied with Ralph, Lord Nevil, and John Nevil, his Son, the Lord Percy,
and many other Nobles of England, returned home, and went to the Abbey-Church,
there joining in hearty prayer, and thanksgiving to God, and holy St. Cuthbert,
for the Conquest, and Victory achieved that day; a Holy Cross, which had been
taken out of the Holy-Rood-House in Scotland, by King David Bruce, was won, and
taken upon the said King of Scots, at the said Battle. Which Cross, by most
Ancient, and credible Writers, is Recorded to have come to the said King most
miraculously; and to have happened, and chanced into his hand; being Hunting
the Wild Heart in a Forest, nigh Edinborough, upon Holy-Roodday, commonly
called, The Exaltation of the Holy Cross; the said King separated, and parted
from his Nobles, and Company, suddenly there appeared unto him, as it seemed, a
most fair Heart, running toward him, in a full, and speedy Course; which so
affrighted the King's Horse, that he violently coursed away; whom the Heart so
fiercely, and swiftly followed, that he bare forcibly both the King, and his
Horse to the ground. He being much dismayed thereat, did cast back his hands
betwixt the tynes of the said Heart, to stay himself; and then, and there, the
said Cross most strangely, and most wondrously slipped into the King's Hands;
at the view whereof the Heart immediately vanished away, and was never seen
after, no man knowing certainly what metal, or wood the said Cross was made of.
In the place where that Miracle was so wrought does now spring a Fountain,
called the Rood-Well. And the next night after that the said Cross so bechanced
unto him, the said King was charged, and warned in his sleep, by a Vision, to
build an Abbey in the same place; which he most diligently observed, as a true
Message from Almighty God; and so did send for Workmen into France, and
Flanders; who at their coming were retained, and did erect, and build the said
Abbey accordingly; which the King caused to be Furnished with Canons Regular,
and Dedicated the same in honor of the Cross, and placed the said Cross most
sumptuously, and richly in the said Abbey, there to remain as a most renowned
Monument. And it so there remained, till the said King, the night before he
addressed him forward to the said Battle, was in a Dream admonished, that in
any wise he should not attempt to spoil, or violate the Church Goods of St.
Cuthbert, or any thing that appertained unto that Holy Saint; which for that he
most contemptuously, and presumptuously did disdain, and contemn, violating,
and destroying, so much as he could, the said Goods and Lands belonging to St.
Cuthbert, he was not only punished by God Almighty by his own Captivity, being
taken at the same Battle, in the Field, and therein sore wounded, having first
valiantly fought; but there were also taken with him four Earls, two Lords, the
Archbishop of St. Andrews, one other Bishop, one Knight, with many others; and
in the same Battle were slain seven Earls of Scotland, besides many Lords, and
Scoth-men, to the number of, one and other, fifteen thousand; as also by the
loss of the said Cross, which was taken upon him, and many other most excellent
Jewels, and Monuments, which were brought from Scotland; as his own Banner, and
other Noble-mens Ancients, all which were offered up at the Shrine of St.
Cuthbert, for the beautifying, and adorning thereof, together with the Black
Rood of Scotland, so termed, with Mary, and John made of silver; being, as it
were, smoaked all over; which was placed, and set up most exactly in the Pillar
next St. Cuthbert's Shrine, in the South Alley of the said Abbey. And shortly
after that, the said Prior caused a goodly, and sumptuous Banner to be made
with pipes of silver, to be put on a staff, being five yards long, with a
device to take off and on the said Pipes at pleasure, and to be kept in a Chest
in the Feretory, when they were taken down; which Banner was showed, and
carried in the said Abbey on Festival, and principal days. On the height of
the over-most Pipes was a fair pretty Cross, of silver, and a wand of silver,
having a fine wrought knob of silver at either end, that went underneath the
Banner-cloath, whereunto the Banner-cloath was fastened, and tied; which wand
was of the thickness of a man's finger, and at either end of the said wand
there was a fine silver Bell. The wand was fastened by the middle to the
Banner-staff, hard under the Cross; the Banner-cloath was a yard broad, and
five quarters deep; and the nether part of it was indented in five parts, and
fringed, and made fast all about with red silk, and gold. And also the said
Banner-cloath was made of red Velvet, on both sides most sumptuously
embroidered, and wrought with flowers of green silk and gold; and in the midst
of the said Banner-cloath was the said holy Relic, and Corporax-cloath
enclosed, and placed therein; which Corporax-cloath was covered over with white
Velvet, half a yard square every way, having a red Cross, of red Velvet, on
both sides over the same holy Relic, most artificially, and cunningly
compiled, and framed, being finely fringed about the skirts and edges with
fringe of red silk, and gold, and three little fine silver Bells fastened to
the skirts of the said Banner-cloath, like unto sacring-Bells; and being so
sumptuously finished, and absolutely perfected, was dedicated to holy St.
Cuthbert, to the intent, and purpose, that the same should be presented, and
carried always after to any Battle, as occasion should serve; and which was
never carried, or showed at any Battle, but, by the especial grace of God
Almighty, and the Mediation of holy St. Cuthbert, it brought home the Victory.
Which Banner-cloath, after the dissolution of the Abbey, fell into the
possession of one Dean whittingham; whose Wife, called Catharine, being a
French-woman, as is most credibly reported by those who were eyewitnesses, did
most injuriously burn, and consume the same in her fire; to the notable
contempt, and disgrace of all Ancient, and godly Relics.

Further on the West side of the City of Durham, there was a most notable,
famous, and goodly large Cross, of Stone-work, erected, and set up, to the
honor of God, and for the Victory had, shortly after the Battle of Durham, in
the same place where the Battle was fought; called, and known by the name of
Nevell's Cross, as having been set up at the cost and charges of the said Lord
Ralph Nevell, being one of the most excellent, and chief persons in the said
Battle, and Field. Which Cross had seven steps about every way square to the
Sockets, that the stalk of the Cross did stand in; which Socket was made fast
to a apiece broad stone, being the sole, or bottom-stone, of a large
thickness, that the Socket did stand upon, which is a yard and an half square
about every way; which stone was one of the steps, and the eighth in number.
Also the said Socket was made fast with Iron and Lead to the said sole-stone in
every side of the said corner of the Socket-stone, which was three quarters
deep, and a yard and a quarter square about every way, and the stalk of the
Cross going upward, containing in length three yards and a half up to the Boss,
being eight-square about, all of one piece of stone, from the Socket that it
did stand on, to the Boss above, into the which Boss the said stalk was deeply
soldered with Lead, and Solder. In the midst of the stalk, in every second
square, was the Nevell's Cross, in a Scutcheon, being the Lord Nevell's Arms,
very finely cut out, and wrought, in that said stalk of stone. Also the nether
end of the stalk was solder'd deep in the hole of the said Socket that it did
stand in with Lead, and Solder; and at every of the four corners of the said
Socket below, was one of the Pictures of the four Evangelists, Matthew, Mark,
Luke, and John, very finely set forth, and carved in stone, Masonwork. And on
the height of the said stalk did stand a most large fine Poss, of stone, being
eight-square, round about finely cut out, and bordered, and mavelous
curiously wrought; and in every square of the nether side of the Boss, in the
Mason's work, was the Nevell's Cross in a Scutcheon, in one square, and the
Bull's Head, having no Scutcheon, in another square; and so continued in every
square after the same sort round about the Boss. And on the height of the said
Boss, having a stalk of stone (being a Cross standing a little higher than the
rest) which was solder'd deeply with Lead, and Solder, into the hole of the
said Boss above, whereon was finely cut out, and Pictured on both sides of the
stalk of the said Cross, the Picture of our Savior Christ Crucified, with his
Arms stretched abroad, his Hands nayl'd to the Cross, and his Feet nayl'd to
the stalk of the same Cross below, almost a quarter of a yard from above the
Boss, with the Picture of our Lady, the B. Virgin Mary, on the one side of him,
and the Picture of St. John, the Evangelist, on the other side, most pitifully
lamenting, and beholding his Torments, and cruel Death, standing both on the
height of the said Boss. All which Pictures were very artificially, and
cunningly wrought all together, and finely carved out of one whole entire
stone, some part thereof through carved work, both on the East side, and the
West side of the said Cross, with a Cover of stone likewise over the head,
being all most finely, and curiously wrought together out of the said hollow
stone; which Cover of stone was covered over very finely with Lead. And also in
token, and remembrance of the said Battle of Durham, and to the perpetual
memory, and honor of the said Lord Nevell, and his Posterity for ever, it was
termed by the Title, and Name of Nevell's Cross, as is abovesaid; and so did
stand, and remain most notorious to all Passengers, till of late, in the year
of our Lord God, 1639. in the night time, the same was broken down, and defaced
by some lewd, and contemptuous wicked persons, thereto encouraged (as it
seemed) by some who loved Christ the worse for the Cross sake, as utterly, and
spightfully despising all Ancient Ceremonies, and Monuments.

And further in the said place, called the Red Hills, lying on the North side
of the said Nevell's Cross, a little distant from a piece of ground, called the
Flase, above a Close lying hard by the North-Chilton Pool, and on the
North-side of the hedge, where the Mayd-Bower had wont to be, where the said
Prior and Monks standing, and making their prayer to God with the Holy Relic
of St. Cuthbert, during the time of the said Battle, and after the said Battle
finished, and Victory achieved, there was erected, and set up by the said
Prior and Monks, a fair Cross of wood, in the same place, where they standing
with the holy Relic, made their prayers, in token, and remembrance of the
holy Relic of St. Cuthbert, which they carried to the Battle. Which being a
fair Cross of wood, finely wrought, and very large, and of height two yards,
which there long stood, and continued, by the remembrance of many now living,
the said Prior and Monks ever after, in memory of the said holy Relic, after
the said Victory achieved, did in times of Recreation, as they went, and came
to and fro Beau Park, to the Monastery, and Abbey of Durham, make their humble,
and solemn prayers to God, and holy St. Cuthbert, at the foot of the said
Cross, in perpetual praise, and memory for the said Victory, and recovery of
the said Battle; till it was now of late, within these thirty five years,
suddenly defaced, and thrown down by some lewd, and ill disposed persons, who
despised Antiquities, and Worthiness of Monuments, after the suppression of the
Abbey. And the Collection of this Memorial Antiquity was in the year of our
Lord God, 1593.

John Fosser was the first Prior that ever attempted to be buried within the
Abbey-Church, out of the Centry-Garth. He was buried in the North-plage before
the Altar of St. Nicholas, and St. Giles, being the last of the three Altars in
the North-plage, toward the North; over whom was laid a curious, and sumptuous
Marble stone, which he prepared in his Life time, with his own Image, and other
Imagery work engraven in Brass upon it, with the Pictures of the twelve
Apostles in Brass, divided, and bordered on either side of him, with three
other Pictures in Brass.

The South-Alley of the Lantern.
Circa Annum Domini, 1082. villa de Hemmingbrough data fuit Monachis Dunelm.
John Hemmingbrough, Prior of Durham, lies buried in the South-plage on the
right hand, as you go to the Revestry, under a fair Marble stone, with his
Picture curiously engraven upon it, having the twelve Apostles pictured on
either side of him; six South, six North, in Brass, with other Imagery work all
about his Head, before the Altar of our Lady, alias Howghells, or Ho^gwells
Altar, being the first of the three Altars in the South-plage.

William Ebchester, Prior of Durham, lies buried in the South-Alley-plage, on
the right hand, under a fair Marble stone, before the Lady of Boltons Altar,
with his Verses, or Epitaph engraven upon the said stone, in Brass; which stone
was taken up there, and removed, and lies now before the Quire door, the
aforesaid Altar being the second of the three Altars in that plage. Over which
Altar there was a mavelous lively, and beautiful Image of the Picture of our
Lady, so called the Lady of Bolton; which Picture was made to open with gimmes
from her Breast downward; and within the said Image was wrought, and Pictured
the Image of our Savior, mavelous finely gilt, holding up his hands, and
holding betwixt his hands a large fair Crucifix of Christ, all of gold; the
which Crucifix was to be taken forth every Good-Fryday, and every man did creep
unto it that was in the Church at that time, and afterward it was hung up
again within the said Image; and every principal day the said Image was opened,
that every man might see pictured within her, The Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, most curiously, and finely gilt; and both the sides within her very
finely varnished with green varnish, and flowers of gold, which was a goodly
sight for all the beholders thereof. And upon the stone which she did stand on,
underneath was drawn a fair Cross upon a Scutcheon, called the Nevell's Cross;
signifying that the Nevells had born the charges of it.

Robert Ebchester, Prior of Durham, lies buried under a fair Marble stone,
with his Picture, and Verses, from the waste up in Brass, before the said Lady
of Bolton's Altar.

Next to the Lady of Bolton's Altar, on the South, was St. Fides's Altar, and
St. Thomas, the Apostle, being the third Altar in the South-plage.

There is a Library in the South-angle of the Lantern, which is now above the
Clock, standing betwixt the Chapter House, and the Te-Deum-Window, being well
replenished with old written Doctors, and other Histories, and Ecclesiastical
Writers.

In the North end of the Alley of the Lantern, there is a goodly, fair, large,
and lightsome Glass-window, having in it twelve long, pleasant, and beautiful
Lights, being made, and built of fine stone, which in the old time was gone to
decay; and the Prior, at that time renewed, and rebuilt it, and called it the
Window of the four Doctors of the Church; which has six long fair lights of
glass in the upper part of the said Window; and therein is Pictured our B.
Lady, with the Picture of our Savior Christ in her Arms, and the Picture of
holy St. Cuthbert on the West side of her; both which Pictures standing in the
midst of the said Window, in most fine colored glass; and on the East side of
our Lady are two Doctors of the Church pictured, and the other two Doctors
pictured on the West side of St. Cuthbert; all being very large Pictures, and
very curiously set forth in fine colored glass. And the Picture of Prior
Casteil, who bore the whole Charge in building the said Window, both of stone,
and glass, as is aforesaid, is setting on his knees, (in fine blew glass, in
his habit) and holding up his hands to our Lady, under the feet of the Blessed
Virgin Mary; whose Image stands above his head; one saying, Virgo Matter Dei,
Miserere mei. And there are other six fair Lights in the aforesaid Window,
under our Lady, St. Cuthbert, and the aforesaid Doctors, that is beneath them,
being very finely glazed, with all the Instruments of Christ's death set in
round glass, and wrought in fine colors in the said Window, being all but one
glass Window.

Also in the South end of the Lantern, above the Clock, there is a fair glass
Window, called the Te-Deum-Window, very fairly glazed, according as every Verse
of Te-Deum is sung, or said, so is it pictured in the Window, very finely, and
curiously wrought in fine colored glass, with all the Orders of Angels; viz.
Thrones, Dominations, Cherubims, etc. with the Picture of Christ as he was upon
the Cross Crucified, and the B. Virgin Mary with Christ in her Arms as he was
born.

These Monuments following were placed from the Lantern in the midst of the
Church in their several places, till you come to the West end of the Church
adjoining upon the Gallely.
In the Body of the Church, betwixt two of the highest Pillars supporting, and
holding up the West side of the Lantern, over against the Quire door, there was
an Altar, called Jesus-Altar, where Jesus-Mass was sung every Friday throughout
the whose year. And on the backside of that said Altar there was a fair high
stone Wall, and at either end of the Wall there was a door, which was locked
every night, called the two Rood-doors, for the Procession to go, and come in
at; and betwixt those two doors was Jesus-Altar placed, as is aforesaid; and at
either end of the Altar was closed up with fi^e Wainscot, like unto a Porch
adjoining unto either Rood-door, very finely varnished with fine red varnish.
And in the Wainscot at the South end of the Altar, there were four fair Ambries
for to lock the Chalices, and silver Crewets, with two others for their Suits
of Vestments, and other Ornaments belonging to the said Altars, for the
holy days, and principal days. And at the North end of the Altar, in the
Wainscot, there was a door to come into the said Porch, and a lock on it, to be
locked day and night. Also there was standing on the Altar against the said
Wall a most curious, and fine Table, with two leaves to open and shut again,
all comprehending the Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, most curiously, and
richly set forth in most fine, and lively Colors, all like the burning gold,
as he was tormented, and as he hung on the Cross; which was a most lamentable
sight to behold. This Table was always locked up, but only on principal days.
Also the forepart of the said Porch, from the utmost corner of the Porch to
the other, there was a door with two broad leaves to open from side to side,
all of fine-joyned, and through-carved work; the height of it was somewhat
above a man's breast, and the upper part of the said door was stricken full of
Iron pricks, that no man should climb over; which door did hang all in gimmes,
and clasps in the inside to clasp them. And on the principal days, when any
of the Monks said Mass at the Altar, then the Table was opened, which did stand
on the Altar; and the doors with two leaves, which stood in the forepart of
the said Closet, or Porch, were set open also, that every man might come in and
see the said Table, in manner and form as is aforesaid. There was also in the
height of the said Wall, from Pillar to Pillar, the whole story, and Passion of
our Lord, wrought in stone most curiously, and most finely gilt. And also above
the said Story, and Passion, there was the whole story, and the Pictures of the
twelve Apostles, very artificially set forth, and very finely gilt, containing
from the one Pillar to the other, wrought very curiously, and artificially in
the side-stone. And on the height, above all the foresaid story, from Pillar to
Pillar, was set up a border, very artificially wrought in stone, with
mavelous fine colors, very finely gilt, with branches, and flowers,
insomuch, that the more a man looked on it, the more desires he had, and the
greater was his affection to behold it; the work was so rarely, curiously, and
finely wrought in the said stone, that it could not have been finelier wrought
in any kind of Metal. And also above the height of all, upon the Wall, did
stand the goodliest, and most famous Rood that was in all this Land, with the
Picture of Mary on the one side of our Savior, and the Picture of John on the
other, with two splendent, and glistering Archangels; one on the one side of
Mary, and the other on the other side of John. So that what for the fairness of
the Wall, and stateliness of the Pictures, and the liveliness of the painting,
it was thought to be one of the goodliest Monuments in the Church.

Also on the backside of the said Rood, before the Quire door, there was a
Loft and in the South end of the said Loft the Clock did stand; and underneath
the said Loft there was a long Form, which did reach from the one Rood door to
the other, where men did sit to rest themselves, and say their prayers, and
hear Divine Service.

Also every Friday at night, after the Even-song was done in the Quire, there
was an Antheme sung in the Body of the Church, before the Altar of St. John,
called Jesus-Antheme, which was sung every Friday at night, throughout the
whole year, by the Masters of the Quiristers, and Deacons of the said Church;
and when it was done, the Quiristers did sing another Antheme by themselves,
sitting on their knees all the time that their Antheme was singing, before the
said Jesus-Altar; which was very devoutly sung every Friday night, by the
knelling of one of the Galilee Bells.

Thomas Castle, Prior of Durham, lies buried under a fair Marble stone, in
the Body of the Church, being pictured from the waste up in Brass, in the midst
of the stone, with his Verses, or Epitaph upon it, before Jesus-Altar, where
there was on the North-side, betwixt two Pillars, a Loft, for the Masters, and
Quiristers to sing Jesus-Mass every Friday, containing a pair of Organs to play
on, and a fair Desk to lay the Books on in time of Divine Service.

John Aukland, Prior, lies buried within the Abbey-Church of Durham.

John Burnby, Prior of Durham, lies buried under a fair Marble stone, pictured
in Brass from the waste up, beneath the North door, in the midst of the Church,
not much distant from the Marble Cross, with his Verses, or Epitaph adjoining
thereto.

There is betwixt the Pillars, on the North-side, which the Holy water did
stand in, and the Pillar which stands over against it on the South Side, from
the one of them to the other, a Row of blue Marble; and in the midst of the
said Row there is a Cross of blue Marble, in token that all Women, who came to
hear Divine Service, should not be suffered to come above the said Cross; and
if it chanced that any Woman came above it, within the Body of the Church, then
straitwayes she was taken, and punished for certain days; because there was
never Woman came there where the holy man, St. Cuthbert was, for the Reverence
they had to his sacred Body. Also if any Woman chanced to come within the
Abbey-Gates, or within any Precincts of the House, if she had been seen but her
length within any place of the said House, she was taken, and set fast, and
punished, to give example to all others, for doing the like.

The Causes wherefore Women may not come to the Feretory of St. Cuthbert, nor
enter within the Precinct annexed to the Monastery.
There are diverse Books written of the Life and Miracles of that holy
Confessor, St. Cuthbert; partly written by the Irish, partly by the English,
and partly by Scottish men, being not able to comprehend the same in one work.
For, as venerable Bede reported, in the Prologue of his Book which he wrote of
the Life, and Miracles of St. Cuthbert, that there were many other things
nothing inferior to those which he wrote of the Life of that virtuous blessed
Man, which were related unto him, and were commanded to be had in perpetual
memory. Which works, though they were perfectly, and deliberately finished, it
was thought inconvenient to insert, or add any new matter. Of which Books,
there is one entitled, Of the coming of St. Cuthbert into Scotland, taken
forth of the Scottish History; where, among other things is set down the
solitary Conversation of the said Holy Man St. Cuthbert, as follows.

Blessed St. Cuthbert, for a long time, led a most solitary Life, in the
Borders of the Picts, at which place great concourse of people daily used to
visit him, and from whom, by the providence and grace of God, never any
returned without great comfort. This caused both young and old to resort unto
him, taking great pleasure both to see him, and hear him speak. In the mean
time, it chanced that the King's Daughter of that Province was got with Child
by some young man in her Father's house. Her belly swelling, and the King
perceiving it, diligently examined her who was the Author of that fact. Upon
examination, she made this answer, That solitary young man, who dwells
hereby, is he who has overcome me, and with whose beauty I am thus deceived.
Whereupon the King, furiously enraged, presently repaired, with his defloured
Daughter, accompanied by diverse Knights, unto the solitary place, where he
presently spoke to the Servant of God in this manner. What, art thou he, who,
under the color of Religion, prophanest the Temple and Sanctuary of God? Art
thou he, who, under the title and profession of a solitary Life, exercisest all
filthiness of the World in Incest? Behold, here is my Daughter, whom thou by
thy deceits have corrupted, not fearing to make her dishonest. Therefore now at
last openly confess this thy fault, and plainly declare here before this
company, in what sort thou have seduced her. The King's Daughter marking the
fierce speeches of her Father, more impudently stepped forth, and boldly
affirmed, that it was he who had done that wicked fact. At which thing the
young man greatly amazed, perceiving that this forgery proceeded from the
instigation of the Devil, thereupon, though brought into great perplexity,
applied his whole Heart unto Almighty God, and said as follows. My Lord, my
God, who only know all things, and art the searcher of all secrets, make
manifest also this work of iniquity and indignity, and by some example
approve-the same, which, though it cannot be done by Humane policy, make it
manifest by some divine Oracle. When as the young man with great lamentations,
and tears, incredible to be reported, had spoken these words, even suddenly, in
the self-same place where the King's Daughter stood, the Earth (making a
hissing noise) presently opened, and swallowed her up in the presence of all
the beholders. This place is called Co^wen, where she, for her corruption, was
conveyed and carried into Hell. As soon as the King perceived this mavelous
chance to happen in the presence of all his Company, he began to be greatly
tormented in his mind, fearing lest he himself should incurr the like
punishment. Whereupon he, with all his Company, humbly craved pardon of
Almighty God, with further desire and petition to that good man St. Cuthbert,
that by his prayers he would crave at God's hands to have his Daughter again;
Which petition the said holy Father granted, upon condition that no Woman after
that time should have resort unto him. Whence it came, that the King did not
suffer any Woman to enter into any Church dedicated to that Saint; which to
this day is duly observed in all the Churches of the Picts, which were
Dedicated in the honor of that Holy man.

The North-Alley of the Body of the Church.
In the North-Alley, from the North-Church-door, to the Cross-Alley in the
midst of the Church called the Lantern-Alley, where the Lantern stands, in
the entrance of the end of the said North-Alley into the said Lantern-Alley,
from pillar to pillar, there was a Trellasaome, which did open and close with
two Leaves like unto a fall-down Door, and above the said Door, it was likewise
Trellised almost to the height of the Vault above, and on the height of the
said Trellis, or Trellasdome, it was stricken full of Iron pricks, of a quarter
of a yard long, to the intent that none should climb over it, and was evermore
locked, and never opened but upon Holy Days, or on such Days as there was any
Procession. And likewise the North-Rood-door, which was on the hither-side of
the Pillar, at the North-end of Jesus's Altar, was never opened, but when there
was some Procession.

There were two fair Holy Water Stones belonging to the Abbey-Church of Durham,
of a very fair blew Marble: The fairest of them stood within the
North-Church-door, over against the said Door, being wrought in the Corner of
the Pillar, next adjoining to our Lady of Pitty's Altar, on the left hand as
you turn into the Galilee, having a very fair shrine of Wainscot over head,
very finely painted, with blew and little gilt Stars, being kept very clean,
and always fresh water provided against every Sunday-morning, by two of the
Bell-ringers, or servants of the Church; wherein one of the Monks did Hallow
the said Water, very early in the Morning, before Divine-service.

The other stood within the South Church-door, not altogether so curious, yet
all of blew Marble, very decently kept in the same manner, with fresh water
every Sundaymorning, by the said Bell-ringers, or Servants of the Church;
where, in like sort, one of the Monks did Hallow the water early in the
morning, before Divine-service. One of these Holy-water-stones, viz. That at
the South-door, served the Prior, and all the Convent, with the whole House;
the other at the North-door (joined into the Pillar) served all those that came
that way to hear Divine-service.

There was betwixt two Pillars on the left hand, in the North-Alley, as you
turn into the Galilee, from the North-Church-door, our Lady of Pitty's Altar,
being enclosed on either side with fine Wainscot, with the Picture of our Lady
carrying our Savior on her Knee, as he was taken from the Cross; very
lamentable to behold.

Then on the right hand of the said North-Alley, as you go into the Galilee,
under the Bellfry, called the Galilee-Steeple, was St. Savior's Altar; the
North-end of the said Altar-stone being wrought and enclosed into the pillar of
the Wall, from the first Foundation of the Church, for Mass to be said at, as
appeared at the Defacing thereof, and remains there to be known till this
Day, by a Corner of the said Altar-stone, not to be pulled forth, but by
breaking of the wall. In the West End of the Church, in the North-Alley-end,
over the Galilee-door, there in a Bellfry, called the Galilee-steeple, did hang
four goodly great Bells, which were never Rung, but on principal Feasts, or at
such other times as the Bishop came to the Town. Every Sunday in the year there
was a Sermon preached in the Galilee, in the Afternoon, from one of the Clock
till three; and at twelve of the Clock, the great Bell of the Galilee was
towl'd every Sunday three quarters of an hour, and rung the fourth quarter,
till one of the Clock, that all the people of the Town might have warning to
come and hear the word of God preached. There were certain Officers pertaining
to the said House, who were always charged, whenever the said Bells were
Knelled, to be ready for the Ringing of them, viz. Two men of the Kitchen were
charged with the Ringing of one Bell, and four men of the Church, that did lie
always in the Church, were charged with the third Bell, and six others were
charged with the Ringing of the great Bell, viz. Two of the Bake-house, two of
the Brew House, and two of the Kiln. And in the latter days of King Henry the
eighth, the House was suppressed, and after that time, the said Bells were
never Rung. Then Dean whittingham perceiving them not to be Occupied, nor Rung
a great while before his time, was purposed to have taken them down, and broken
them for other uses. Then Thomas Spark, the Bishop-Suffragan, Iying at Durham,
and keeping House there at the same time, having intelligence what the Dean's
purpose was, did send into Yorkshire, with all speed, for a Workman, and
caused the said Bells to be taken down. The fourth Bell remains there still,
and was never Rung since that was suspected; and he caused those other three to
be hung upon a new Work, called the Lantern, and made a goodly Chime to be set
on the said Bells, which cost him thirty or forty pounds; which Chime endures
to this Day, or else the said Bells had been spoiled and defaced

The South-Angle of the Body of the Church.
Robert Nevel, Bishop of Durham, lies buried in his Ancestors porch, in the
South-Angle near to the Cloister-door, on the South, and Jesus Altar, on the
North of the Porch, containing three Pillars; and so much of the Angle, having
in it an Altar with a fair Alabaster-Table above it, where Mass was daily
Celebrated for their Souls; and therein a Seat or Pew, where the Prior was
accustomed to sit to hear Jesus-Mass. The East End of the Porch, where the
Altar stood, was closed up with a little Stone-wall, somewhat higher then the
Altar, and Wainscotted above the Wall; and the West End with a little
Stone-wall, and an Iron grate on the top of the wall, and all the North-side
toward the Body of the Church environed with Iron.

And also on the backside behind the Nevels Altar, from the Nevels Altar to
the midst of the pillar, behind the Church-door, in compass from pillar to
pillar, there was a Chamber, where one that kept the Church, and rung the Bells
at midnight, did lodge. Also over the Church-door, the compass of four pillars,
two on either side, when one entered within the Church-door, was all covered
over head with Wainscot, very finely painted, and varnished Azure, and set out
with stars of Gold. And in the forepart of the Wainscot, from pillar to pillar
within the Church, over the Holy-water-stone, there was a brandishing on the
forepart of the Wainscot, or Roof, very finely and curiously wrought, and gilt
with Gold, as finely as the Angel; and in the midst of the said brandishing
there was a Star of a great compass, like unto the Sun, very artificially, and
most curiously wrought with Gold, and enameled very richly to the beholders
thereof; so that there could not fall any dust, or filth into the
Holy-water-stone, it was so close above, and so close within the Church-door.

In the West End of this South-Alley, betwixt the two nethermost Pillars,
opposite to our Lady of Pitty's Altar, there was an Altar with a Rood,
representing the Passion of Christ, having his hands bound, with a Crown of
Thorns on his head, being commonly called the Bound-Rood, enclosed on each side
with Wainscot, as was the said Altar of our Lady of Pitty's.

Near unto the said Altar on the South Side adjoining to the Galilee-door, was
the Grate, wherein the Sanctuary-Country-men were wont to lie, when they fled
thither for resuge.

In the old time, long before the house of Durham was suppressed, the
Abbey-Church, and all the Churchyard, and all the circuits thereof was
Sanctuary for all manner of men, that had done, or committed any great offense;
as in killing any man in his own defense, or any person that had broken out of
Prison, and fled to the said Church-door, and knocking, and rapping at it, to
have it opened; there were certain men that did lie always in two Chambers
over the said North-door for the same purpose, that when any such offenders did
come, and knock, strait way they were let in at any hour, and then they did run
strait-way to the Galilee-Bell, and did tole it, to the intent that any man
that heard it might know that some man had taken Sanctuary. And when the Prior
had Intelligence thereof, he sent word, and commanded them to keep themselves
within the Sanctuary; that is to say, within the Church, and Churchyard, and
every one of them to have a Gown of black cloth, made with a Cross of yellow,
called St. Cuthbert's Cross, set on the shoulder of his left Arm, to the
intent, that every one might see that there was such a privilege granted by
God unto St. Cuthbert's Shrine, for all such Offenders to fly unto sor
succor, and safeguard of their Lives, until such time as they might obtain
their Prince's pardon; and that they should lie within the Church, or
Sanctuary, within a Grate, which Grate is remaining, and standing to this day,
being made only for the same purpose, adjoining to the Galilee-door on the
South Side. And likewise they had Meat, Drink, Bedding, and other necessaries,
for thirty seven days, at the charge of the House, such as were meet, and
necessary for such Offenders, till such time as the Prior, and the Convent
could get them conveyed out of the Diocese. And this Freedom was confirmed, not
only by King Guthrid, but also by King Alured.

In the West End of the said Church, over the Galilee, there is a most fine
large Window, of Glass, being the whole story of the Root of Jesse, in most
fine colored glass, very finely, and artificially pictured, and wrought in
colors, very goodly, and pleasant to behold, with Mary, and Christ in her
Arms, at the top of the said Window, in most fine colored glass also.

The Galilee; and when the Chapel dedicated to the honor of St. Mary came to
be called the Galilee.
And for the comfort of all Women, and solace of their Souls, there was an
Ancient Church in the ^ern-Island, where the Church of that Town now stands;
which was appointed for Women to repair unto, for hearing of Mass; making their
Prayers, and receiving the Sacraments. For which cause there was Chapel made,
and dedicated to the Blessed Virgin Mary, now called the Galilee; upon the
naming whereof it is to be noted, as you may read in the Book entitled, The
Acts of the Bishops, Chap. 26.

Hugo Pusillar, Bishop of Durham, (who was consecrated the 21. of December, in
the year of our Lord God, 1154. at Rome, by Pope Athanasius, upon the Feast Day
of St. Thomas, the Apostle) considering the diligence of his Predecessors in
building the Cathedral Church, which was finished but a few years before his
time, no Chapel being then erected to the Blessed Virgin Mary, Mary, whereunto
it should be lawful for Women to have access; began to erect a new piece of
work at the East-Angle of the said Cathedral-Church, for which work there were
diverse Pillars of Marble-stone, brought from beyond the Seas. But this work,
being brought to a small height, began, through great clifts appearing in the
same, to fall down; whereupon it manifestly appeared, that it was not
acceptable to God, and Holy St. Cuthbert, especially by reason of the Access
which Women were to have so near his Feretory. In consideration whereof, the
work was left off, and a new one begun and finished at the West-Angle of the
said Church, into which it was lawful for Women to enter, having no holy place
before, where they might have lawful access for their comfort, and consolation.

It is called the Galilee, by reason (as some think) of the Translation of the
same; being once begun, and afterward removed; whereupon it took the name of
Galilee: to which place such as repaired, had granted unto them sundry pardons,
as plainly may appear in a Table there set up, containing the said pardons.

Within the Galilee, in the Chantry, being all of most excellent blew Marble,
stood our Lady's Altar, a very sumptuous Monument, finely adorned with curious
Wainscot-work, above-head, at the back, and at either end of the Altar, the
Wainscot being devised, and furnished with most Heavenly Pictures, so lively in
colors, and gilt, that they greatly adorned the said Altar, where our Lady's
Mass was sung daily by the Master of the Song-School, with certain Deacons, and
Quiristers, the Master of the Song-School playing upon a pair of very fair, and
fine Organs, in time of our Lady's Mass; wherein the first Founder of the said
Chantry, Bishop Langley, his Soul was most devoutly prayed for, both in the
beginning, and ending thereof. There was also belonging to the said Altar very
sumptuous, and glorious Furniture, not only for principal days, but for
ordinary Service; and for the preserving, and safe-keeping of those goodly
Suits of Vestments, and Ornaments appertaining to the said Altar, there was at
either end thereof behind the Portal two very fine close Ambries, all of
Wainscot; wherein, after the celebrating of our Lady's Mass, they were safely
enclosed.

Thomas Langley, Bishop of Durham, lies buried under a fair Marble Tomb within
the said Chantry before our Lady's Altar. He founded upon the Palace-Green a
Grammar School, and a Song-School, with yearly stipends; whereof two Priests
were Masters, who did daily say Mass, and also daily prayed for his Soul.

On the North-side of the said Galilee was an Altar called the Lady of Pitty's
Altar, with her Picture carrying our Savior on her knee as he was taken from
the Cross; a very dolorous aspect. The said Altar was ordained for a
Chauntry-Priest to say Mass every Holy day, having above the Altar, on the
Wall, the one part of our Savior's Passion in great Pictures, the other part
being above St. Bede's Altar on the South Side.

There was on the South Side, betwixt two Pillars, a goodly Monument, all of
blew Marble, the height of a yard from the ground, supported by five Pillars,
at every corner one, and under the midst one; and above the said Through of
Marble Pillars stood a second Shrine of St. Cuthbert's, wherein the Bones of
the holy man, Saint Bede were enshrined, being accustomed to be taken down every
Festival day, when there was any solemn Procession, and carried by four Monks
in time of Procession, and Divine Service. Which being ended, they conveyed it
into the Galilee, and set it upon the said Tomb again, having a fair cover of
Wainscot, very curiously gilt, and appointed to draw up and down over the
Shrine, when they pleased to show the sumptuousness thereof. And for further
verity in this enarration of St. Bede's Shrine, I have set down the Verses
which are in the Ancient History, declaring both the time of his Translation
from St. Cuthbert's Tomb; and withal, the Maker, and Founder of the Shrine in
the Galilee.

Hugo Pulissar, Bishop of Durham, after he had finished the Chapel, called the
Galilee, caused a Feretory of Gold and Silver to be made, wherein the Bones of
Venerab^^ Bid, Priest, and Doctor, Translated, and removed from St. Cuthbert's
Shrine, were laid. In the first work whereof, the lower parts thereof, these
Verses underwritten were engraven in Latin, now Translated into English, as
follows.

In cujus Feretri prima fabricatura in part inferiori isti versus sunt
insculpti.
Continet haec theca Bedae venerabilis ossa,
Sensum Factori Christus dedit atque Datori;
Petrus opus fecit, proesul dedit hoc Hugo donum;
Sic in utroque suum veneratus utrumque patronum. In English.
This Coffin does contain the Bones of venerable Bede;
Christ to the Maker sense did give, and to the Giver Gold;
One Peter framed the work, the cost Bishop Hugo made;
So Peter, and Hugo, Patrons both, Saint Bede enclosed in mould.


Anno Milleno ter Centum septuageno,
Postquam Salvator^ arnem de Virgin sumpsit,
Tra: stulit hoc Peretrum Cuthberti de prope tumba,
Istius Ecclesiae prior hic poscente Richardo
De Castro dicti Bernardi, cujus et ossa
Non procul hinc lapide sub marmoreo requiescunt.
In the year of our Lord God, One thousand, three hundred and seventy, Richard,
of Bernard-Castle, did most earnestly procure, that the Bones of Saint Bede,
lying nigh St. Cuthbert's Shrine, should be Translated into the Galilee, there
to remain.

This Richard, upon his decease, for the love he bore to Saint Bede, caused his
own Bones to be laid near him, under a Marble-stone.

It appears in the Description of the State of the Church of Durham, that the
Bones of Saint Bede were first laid in the Monastery of Jarrow, and afterward
brought to Durham, and placed in a golden Coffin on the right side with the
Body of St. Cuthbert.

Egfridus, a Priest, Bishop of Lindisfarne, in that time, viz. in the year of
Grace, 1430. or, according to others, 1319. did affirm, and certainly record,
that one Coffin did cover, and contain both the Body of St. Cuthbert, and the
Bones of Venerable Doctor Bid.

On the South of the said Galilee was the Altar of Saint Bede, before which his
Bones and Relics lie Interred, under the same place where before his Shrine
was exalted.

Adjoining to the lower part of the great Window, in the West End of the said
Galilee, was a fair Iron Pulpit, with bars of Iron for one to hold them by
going up the steps into the Pulpit; where one of the Monks preached every
Holy Day, and Sunday, at one in the Afternoon.

At the West End of the South-Angle was a Font to Baptize Children, when the
Realm was interdicted by the Pope; which Thomas Langley, Bishop of Durham, did
only procure, as a privilege, upon especial favor, at the Pope's hands. In
the same West End of the Galilee there be four fair colored, and sumptuous
glazed Windows.

In the first, toward the South, there are three fair Lights, the middle
having in it the Picture of Christ, as he was Crucified on the Cross, most
curiously painted, and wrought in glass, with the Sun and Moon above the head
thereof.

In the highest part of the said Light there is the Picture of the Star which
appeared unto the three Wise men, or Kings of Collen, underneath depictur'd,
directing them to the East, to search out the newborn Child, Jesus, the holy
One, born betwixt an Ox and an Ass; to offer to him Oblations, and Sacrifices
of Gold, Myrrh, and Frankincense; together with the Picture of our Lady, the
Virgin Mary, with Christ naked sitting on her knee, in most fine colored glass.

In the Light toward the North is Pictured God Almighty, having in his hand a
Ball, or Globe, signifying the Heaven, Earth, and Sea; and underneath that, the
Salutation of the Angel Gabriel made to the B. Virgin Mary, and the picture of
the Holy Ghost appearing to her in the likeness of a Dove, in fine colored
glass also.

In the Light toward the South is the Picture of our B. Lady, as she was
assumed into Heaven, ascended, glorified, and Crowned; and underneath that, the
Picture of our B. Lady, with Christ newborn naked, sitting on her knee, and
sucking of her Breast, very lively set forth, all in fine colored glass.

In the second, containing six fair Lights, of glass, severed by stone; three
above, and three beneath.

The middle Light above has the Picture of St. Cuthbert, most lively colored
in glass, in his ordinary Episcopal Vestments to say Mass, with his Mitre on
his head, and a Crosier, or Pastoral-staff in his left hand, having the Image
of St. Oswald's Head painted on his Breast, upholden with his right hand, all
in fine colored glass; and under his feet, at the lowest part of his Picture,
is written in the glass;

Sanctus Cuthbertus quondam Lindisfarnensis Episcopus, hujus Ecclesiae et
Patriae maximas Patronus.
The Light on the North-side of St. Cuthbert has the Picture of Saint Bede, in
his blew Habit, in fine colored glass; under the feet of whose Picture is in
glass written,

Sanctus Beda, qui vitam Sancti Cuthberti, et mulla alia ab Ecclesia approbata
conscripsit; cujus ossa in hac Capella in feretro contenta.
The Light on the South Side of St. Cuthbert has the Picture of Aidanus, the
Bishop, most artificially set forth in fine colored glass, as he was
accustomed to say Mass, with his Mitre on his head, and a Crosier-staff in his
left hand; under whose feet this is written.

Sanctus Aidanus, Episcopus Lindisfarnensis Ecclesiae primus, primus in hac
Sanctissim a Dunelmensi Ecclesia fuit Prioratus.
Under which three Lights, by a partition, are three more large Pictures, in
fine colored glass, most curiously wrought; containing the Images of Aldunus,
Edmundus, and Eata, three Bishops of Landisfarne, in fine colored glass, as
they were accustomed to say Mass, with their Mitres on their heads, and their
Crosier-staffs in their left hands. Under the feet of Eata's Picture is written;

Sanctus Eata, Lindisfarnensis Episcopus.
And above, in the highest part of this Window, are six little glazed Lights,
in Tower-manner, in fine colored glass, containing some part of the History of
Christ's Nativity, the Marriage in Galilee, and his Miracles done upon the
Earth.

In the third Window, being most fair, and sumptuous, are also six Lights,
severed as before. In the highest part thereof are three Pictures, in fine
colored glass; the middle being the Image of the glorious, and B. Virgin Mary,
with Christ in her Arms, most excellently wrought in glass; under whose feet is
written, SANCTA MARIA.

And on the North-side of her is the Picture of St. Oswald the King, in fine
colored glass, very neatly set forth, with a fair Cross in his hand; under
whose feet is written;

Sanctus Oswaldus, Fundator Sedis Episcopalis Lindisfarnensis, quae nunc est
Dunelmensis; cujus anima in Feretro Sancti Cuthberti est humata.
And on the South Side of her is the Picture of holy King Henry, in fine
colored glass, with his Princely Scepter in his hand; under whose feet is
written,

REX HENRICUS.
Under those three there are other three fair large Lights oppositely; and
first, to St. Mary is placed the Picture of Thomas Langley, Bishop, most
curiously, and worthily wrought, in fine colored glass, with his Mitre on his
head, and his Crosier-staff in his left hand, as he was accustomed to say Mass;
having his Arms very excellently blazoned in fine colored glass above his
head; he being a most famous Benefactor in re-edifying this place, called the
Galilee; as most truly, and largely is recorded in the History of the
Monastical Church of Durham; under whom is written;

Thomas Langley, Rector Ecclesiae, ad honorem Dei, Episcopus Dunelmensis; et
duas Cantarias in eadem fundavit, et dotavit.
And under St. Oswald's is the Picture of Wilfridus, Bishop, in fine colored
glass, as he was accustomed to say Mass, with a Mitre on his head, and a
Crosier-staff in his left hand; under whose feet is written;

Sanctus Wilfridus, primo Lindisfarnensis Monachus, post Abbas Ripensis, ultimo
Archiepiscopus Eboracensis, uno anno rexit Episcopatum Lindisfarnensem.
And under King Henry is the Picture of Bishop Cedda, in fine colored glass,
as he was accustomed to say Mass, with his Mitre on his head, and his
Crosier-staff in his left hand; under whose feet is written;

Sanctus Cedda primo Lindisfarnensis Monachus, post Abbas in Lestingham, tribus
annis rexit Archiepiscopatum Eboracensem, et etiam rexit Episcopatum
Lichfieldensem.
And in this Window above all are six little glazed Tower-Windows, in fine
colored glass, representing the flight of Christ, Joseph and Mary, into Egypt,
being pursued by Herod; and the most part of the story thereof.

In the fourth there be also six fair Lights severed as before, containing
three fair large Pictures in three Lights in the higher part, most exactly
fashioned, being the Images of three holy Kings, most goodly, and beautiful to
the Church, and to St. Cuthbert; viz. Alured, Guthred, and Elfrid, most
Princely decked, and framed in their Royal Apparel, with their Scepters in
their hands, in fine colored glass; of whose Liberality, and mavelous
Magnificence, the History of Saint Bede does make mention.

Under them are Pictured in large Pictures, in fine colored glass, three
Bishops of Lindisfarne, as they were accustomed to say Mass, with their Mitres
on their heads, and the Crosier-staffs in their left hands. Under their feet is
to be seen;

Sanctus Egfridus Lindisfarnensis, Sanctus Ethelwoldus Lindisfarnensis.
The third having no name to be seen, saving Episcopus. All which Pictures
aforesaid are most largely, and sumptuously set forth, in their several formal
Apparel, as is before described.

In the highest part of which Window are six little Tower-windows, finely
colored, and glazed, containing most part of the story of Christ's Death,
Burial, Resurrection, and Ascension, most excellently set forth, pourtrayed,
and described, in fine colored glass.

The Rite, or Custom of the Church of Durham in the burying of Monks.
The Monk, so soon as he sickneth, is conveyed, with all his Appurtenances, or
Furniture, from his own Chamber in the Dortoir, to another in the Farmery, or
Infirmary, where he might have fire, and more convenient keeping; for that they
were allowed no fire in the Dortoir. And at such time as it appeared to them
that accompanied him in his sickness, that he was not likely to live, they sent
for the Priors Chaplain, who staid with him till he yielded up the Ghost. Then
the Barber was sent for, whose Office it is to put down the clothes, and bare
him, and to put on his feet Socks, and Boots, and so to wind him in his Cowl
and Habit. Then is he from thence immediately carried to a Chamber, called the
Deadman's-Chamber, in the said Farmery, there to remain till night. The Prior's
Chaplain, as soon as he is removed, and conveyed into the Dead-man's-Chamber,
locks the Chamber Door where he died, and carries the Key to the Prior. At
night he is removed from the Dead-man's-Chamber into St. Andrew's Chapel,
adjoining to the said Chamber, and Farmery, there to remain till eight of the
Clock in the Morning, the Chapel being a place only ordained for solemn
Devotion. The night before the Funeral, two Monks, either in kindred or kindness
the nearest to him, were appointed by the Prior to be especial Mourners,
sitting all night on their knees at the dead Corpse feet. Then were the Children
of the Ambrie, sitting on their knees in Stalls, or Seats, on either side of
the Corpse, appointed to read David's Psalter all night over, incessantly, till
the said hour of eight in the Morning. At which time the Corpse was conveyed to
the Chapter House, where the Prior, and the whole Convent met it, and there did
say their Dirge, and Devotion; it not being permitted that any should come near
the Chapter House, during the time of their Devotion, and Prayers for his Soul.
And after their Devotion, the dead Corpse was carried by the Monks from the
Chapter House, through the Parlour, (a place for Merchants to utter their
standing betwixt the Chapter House and the Church-door, and so throughout the
said Parlour) into the Centry-garth, where he was buried, and a Chalice of Wax
laid upon his Breast, having his blew bed holden over his Grave by four Monks
during his Funeral; which Bed is due to the Barber for his duty aforesaid, and
the making of his Grave; and at the time of his Burial, there was but one peal
rung for him.

The Rite, or Custom, in burying of Priors.
The Priors of the House of Durham were accustomed to be buried, in the old
time, in Boot, and to be woond in their Cowls by the Barber, as the Monks were
accustomed to be buried; that is, the Prior was carried forth of his Lodging to
a Chamber in the Infirmary, called the Dead-man's-Chamber, and there did remain
a certain space; and at night he was carried into a Chapel over against the
said Chamber Door, called St. Andrew's Chapel, and was watched all that night
by the Children of the Ambrie, reading David's Psalter over him; and two Monks,
either in kindred, or kindness, were appointed to sit all night at his feet,
mourning for him. And in the Morning he was carried into the Chapter House, and
there was a solemn Service for him, as the Monks had at their Burial. From
thence he was carried through the Parlour, into the Centry-garth, there to be
buried; where every one of them did lie underneath a fair Marble stone. And the
Monks and Barber did Bury him with a little Chalice of silver, other metal, or
Wax; which was laid upon his Breast within his Coffin, and his blew Bed was
holden over him, by four Monks, till he was buried, and the Barber had it for
his pains, for making his Grave, and burying him, as he had sor the Monks. But
in after times, the Priors came to be Buried within the Abbey-Church of Durham,
and not in the Centry-garth, in the same order, and habit, with the Mitre, and
all other their Furniture belonging thereto, as their Predecessors were Buried
before them in the Centry-garth, as is aforesaid, in every respect. All which
Priors were great Benefactors to the said Church, both during their Lives, and
at their Deaths; as the History of the Church more at large declares.

The Names of the Priors of Durham, who were buried within the Abbey-Church.
Johannes Fosser was the first Prior that ever attempted to be buried within
the Abbey-Church, out of the Centry-garth.

Robertus Berrington de Walworth, Prior, did first obtain the use of the Mitre,
with the Crosier-staff.

Johannes Hemmingbrough, Prior.

Johannes Washington, Prior.

Gulielmus Ebchester, Prior.

Johannes Barneby, Prior.

Robertus Ebchester, Prior.

Johannes Aukland, Prior.

Thomas Castle, Prior.

Hugo Whitehead dyed at London, and lies Buried in the Church of the
Minorites, nigh the Tower of London. He was the last Prior of the Church of
Durham, and the first Dean.

The Bishops of Durham were wont in Ancient time to be interred in the foresaid
Chapter House, standing in the East-Alley of the Cloisters, because they would
not presume to lie any nearer to the holy Body of St. Cuthbert; whose Names
hereafter ensue.

A Catalogue of the Bishops of Durham, whose bodies are found buried in the
Chapter House of Durham; as appears by their Names engraven in Stone, with the
Sign of the Cross annexed to every one of their said Names.
Aidanus, Episcopus, qui obiit, Anno Domini, 651.

Aldunus, and Aldwinus, the first Bishop of Durham, and first Founder of the
Abbey-Church, Anno 990.

Edmundus, Episcopus; Eadredus, Episcopus: These two were buried under one
stone.

Gualterus, Episcopus: This Walter, Bishop, was buried under the same stone
with Aldunus.

Gulielmus primus, Episcopus.

Ranulphus, Episcopus.

Geofridus, Episcopus.

Gulielmus secundus, Episcopus.

Hugo de Puteaso, Episcopus.

Philippus, Episcopus.

Richardus de Marisco, Episcopus.

Nicholas de Farnham, Episcopus.

Gualterus de Kirkham, Episcopus.

Robertus Stitchell, Episcopus.

Robertus de Insula, Episcopus.

Richardus de Kellow, Episcopus. Both these last lie buried before the Bishop's
seat, under two fair Marble stones, with their Images in Brass, curiously
engraven, but now defaced.

Turgotus, Prior of Durham, was consecrated Bishop of St. Andrew's in Scotland,
Anno Domini 1109. He wrote the Lives of Queen Margaret, and Malcolm her
Husband, in the Scottish Tongue; upon whose request, and petition at his death,
he was carried to Durham, and lies buried in the Chapter House of Durham,
amongst the rest of the Bishops.

In the said Chapter House of Durham, at the upper end there is a fair Chair,
Stall, or Seat, of stone, where the Bishops have been, and are to this day
installed, being also a place where the Bishop sits when he keeps his
Visitation for the Cathedral Church. And next to it there is a Chair of wood
fastened in the wall, where the Priors did, and the Dean does now, sit at the
said Visitation. And in the South Side of the said Chapter House there was a
Prison, whereunto the Monks were committed, for a certain space, if they had
committed any light offenses, such as might happen amongst themselves.

In the said Chapter House, above the Chapter-door, there is a fair glass
window, being the whole story, and containing the offspring of the root of
Jesse, in most fine colored glass, very artificially pictured, and wrought in
the said colored glass, very goodly and pleasant to behold; in the top whereof
is the Picture of the Blessed Virgin Mary, and Christ in her Arms, in fine
colored glass.

The Rite, or Custom of burying Bishops in the Chapter House.
The Bishops of Durham, when they died, were brought to the Abbey-Church of
Durham, to be interred, and buried. The Prior, and Monks of Durham, did meet
the deceased at the Abbey-Church-yard gate, at the Palace-green, and received
him there, and brought him through the said Church, into the Chapter House to
be buried; at which burial there was used great solemnity, and devotion by the
Prior, and the Monks of the Church of Durham, according to the accustomable
burying of Bishops in the Ancient time. The accustomed burial of Bishops in
those times was, that they should be interred with the Habit they were wont to
say Mass in, with their Albes, Stoles, and Phannels, and their other Vestments,
with Mitres on their Heads, and their crosier-staffs in their hands, and so
laid in their Coffins, with a little Chalice of silver, other metal, or Wax;
which Wax-chalice was gilt very finely about the edge, and the knob in the
midst of the shank of the Chalice, and about the edge of the patten, or cover,
and the foot of it also was gilt. One of which Chalices was laid upon his
breast in the Coffin with him, and the cover thereof nailed down to it; and
very solemn service was done at their Funerals.

The Prior, and Monks, had the Horses, Chariot, and all other things which came
with the deceased Bishop, being due to them by their Ancient custom; as more
plainly does appear in the History of the Church of Durham; alias Dunhelme, at
large.

And afterward the Bishops came to be interred within the Abbey-Church of
Durham, and not in the Chapter House, in these latter days.

The Names of all the Bishops of Durham, who were sumptuously buried out of the
Chapter House within the Abbey-Church of Durham, as they were accustomed to say
Mass, with all their Furniture belonging thereto, as their Predecessors had
been in the Chapter House, as is aforesaid, in every respect; as appears by
their Monuments, and Inscriptions thereof. Which Bishops had been great
Benefactors to the said Church.
Anthony Beak, Bishop of Durham, and Patriarch of Jerusalem, was the first
Bishop that ever attempted to be buried in the Abbey-Church (out of the
Chapter House) and to lie so near the Sacred Shrine, and Body of St. Cuthbert.

Lodovicus Beaumont, Episcopus.

Richardus de Bury, Episcopus.

Thomas Hatfield, Episcopus.

Gualterus Skirlaw, Episcopus.

Thomas Langley, Episcopus.

Robertus Nevill, Episcopus.

Cuthbertus ^onstall, Episcopus. This Cuthbert being deprived of his Bishopric
by Queen Elizabeth, was kept Prisoner in the Archbishop of Canterbury's House
at Lambeth, where he dyed a professed Catholic; and lies buried under a fair
Marble stone, in the Parish Church of Lambeth; where he was first consecrated,
and made Bishop.

Forty years before that, at the East end of the Chapter House, and on the
South side of the Quire, there was a Yard, or Garth, called the Centory-garth,
where all the Priors and Monks were buried; in which said Garth there was a
Vault, all set within on either side with Mason work, of free stone; and
likewise at either end, and over the midst of the said Vault, there did lie a
fair Thorowstone, and at either side of the stone it was open, so that when any
of the Monks was buried, whatsoever bones were found in his Grave, they were
taken out of the Grave where he was buried, and thrown through the same into
the said Vault; which Vault was made for the same purpose, to be a
Charnell-house to cast dead men's bones in?

There were also diverse Gentlemen of good Worship buried in the said
Centory-garth, out of a desire that they might be buried nigh unto that holy
man, St. Cuthbert. And amongst the rest there was one Gentleman of good
Worship, called Mr. Racket, (who was buried in the said Centory-garth, near
unto the Nine Altars-door, over against the Shrine of the holy man, St.
Cuthbert) who had a fair Tomb over him, and a fair white Marble stone above the
said Tomb, whereon was wrought very curiously the Picture of the said Mr.
Racket, all in Brass, in his Coat Armor, with his Sword girt about him, and at
every corner of the said Marble stone was one of the four Evangelists, all in
Brass likewise.

There was also another Gentleman, called Mr. Elmeden, buried in the said
Garth, without the Nine Altars door, and a fair through-stone above him; and
diverse other Gentlemen, whose memories are now perished, and all their
Monuments defaced, and gone.

Also in the same place all the Priors and Monks were buried in Ancient time.
All the Priors had every one a fair Through-stone laid upon their Tombs, or
graves; some of Marble, some of Freestone. Which stones Dean Whittingham
caused to be pulled, and taken away; and did also break, and deface all such
stones as had any Pictures of Brass, or other Imagery-work, or Chalice wrought,
and engraven upon them; and the residue he took away, and employed them to his
own use, and did make a washing-house of them at the end of the Centory-garth;
so that it cannot be discerned at present that ever any were buried in the said
Centory-garth, it is so plain, and strait: for he could not abide any Ancient
Monuments, nor any thing that appertained to a goodly Religiousness, or
Monastical Life.

Within the said Abbey-Church of Durham were two Holy-water-stones, of fine
Marble, very artificially made, and engraven, and boss'd with hollow bosses,
upon the outer-sides of the stones, very curiously wrought. They were both of
the same work, but one much greater than the other; and they were both taken
away by Dean Whittingham, and carried into his Kitchen, and employed to profane
uses, and there stood during his Life; and his people steeped their Beef, and
Salt-fish in them, having a conveyance in the bottoms of them to let forth the
Water, as they had when they were in the Church. And after his death, the
greater of the two Holy-water-stones was removed to the lower end of the Dean's
Buttery, where the water-Conduit is set, and next unto the Wine-Cellar, that
therein the Servants might wash and make clean their Pots, and Cups, before
they serve at the Table. The foot of the said Holy-water-stone was laid without
the Church door, and was afterward placed in the ground in one Lamb's Shop, a
Blacksmith, upon Framwell-gate-bridge-end, and is now there to be seen.
Moreover, Mrs. Whittingham, after the death of her Huband, took away the lesser
Holy-water-stone out of the Dean's Kitchen, and brought it into her House in
the North-Baily, over against the Dean's Orchard, at the East End of the
Church, and set it in their Kitchen. And she also carried away diverse
Grave-stones, of blew Marble, and other Through-stones that lay upon the
Priors, and Monks, out of the Centory-garth, when she built her house in the
Baily with stones. Some of them are laid in the thresholds of the doors, and
two great ones did lie without the doors, over against the Wall, before the
Frontsteed; for which Fact she was complained upon; and so she laid those
stones without the door, which before were made well fast within her House.
Thus were the godly things, intended for God's Service in the Church, converted
to profane uses.

There was in the Centry-garth, under the South-end of the Church, called the
South-end of the Nine Altars, betwixt two Pillars, adjoining to the Nine Altars
door, a Song-School, built for six Children to be learnt to sing, for the
maintenance of Gods Divine Service in the Abbey-Church; which Children had
their meat and drink at the Housecharge amongst the Children of the Ambrie. The
said School was built time out of mind before the suppression of the House, and
was neatly boarded within round about, a man's height above the Walls, and a
long Desk from one end of the School to the other, to lay their Books upon; and
all the floor was boarded for warmness, and long Forms about it set fast for
the Children to sit on. And the place where the Master did sit and teach, was
all close boarded, both behind, and on either side. And the said Master was to
teach those six Children to sing, and to play on the Organs every principal
day, when the Monks did sing their high Mass, and at Even-song. And the said
Master was bound to play on the Organs every principal day, when the Monks did
sing their high Mass, and likewise at Even-song; but the Monks, when they were
at Mattins, and Service at Midnight, then one of the said Monks did play on
the Organs; so that the Master played only upon principal days, in the high
Mass time, and at Even-song, as aforesaid. Also the said Master had his Chamber
adjoining to the said School, where he lodged, having his meat and drink in the
Prior's Hall, among the Prior's Gentlemen, and all his other necessaries were
found at the charge of the Prior, and the House, till such time as the House
was suppressed. And shortly after, because there was no teaching in that School
any longer, but in another place, or School appointed for that purpose, the
aforesaid School in the Centry-garth fell to decay, and was pulled down, so
clearly, that one cannot tell almost in what place it stood.

Of St. Cuthbert's Death, and the Translation of his body to Durham.
The 20. of the Calends of March, in the year of Christ, 587. St. Cuthbert
ended his Life, and was buried in Holy Island (where he was Bishop three years)
in St. Peter's Church by the Altar, on the East Side, in a Grave of stone
purposely made for him. Being thus buried in St. Peter's Church in Holy Island,
and having lain there for the space of eleven years, he was taken out of the
ground the 20. of the Calends of March, in the same Calends he had dyed in,
entire; lying like a man asleep, being found safe, uncorrupted, flexible, and
leath-wake, and all his Mass-cloaths safe, and fresh, as they were the first
hour they were put on him; at which time they enshrined him in a new Sepulcher,
or Feretory, a little above the pavement of the Church, and there he stood many
a day. she is said to be descended from the Blood Royal of the Kings of
Ireland, being Son of one Muriardach, and Sabina his Wife, who was Daughter to
a King there. He was brought up in the Abbey of Mailrose; first, under (his
Predecessor) Eata, and afterward under Boisil, who succeeded Eata. After the
death of Boisil, he was made Abbot of that Monastery, which he governed with
great care and sincerity. He was Anchorite thirteen years. He was Monk thirty
seven years, and Abbot fourteen years. Also in the year 55. Eardulf was Bishop,
at which time certain Danes and Pagans, Infidels of sundry other Nations,
invaded, and destroyed the Realm of England in diverse places. And after a
certain space, Halden, King of the Danes, with a great part of the Navy, and
Army of the Infidels, arrived in Tinmouth-Haven, intending to sojourn there all
the Winter following; and the next Spring he meant, with all his power, to
invade, spoil, and destroy the County of Northumberland. Whereof when Eardulf,
the Bishop, had intelligence, with all his Clergy and people, after long
consultation had amongst themselves, what course was to be taken in that
extremity, to prevent the barbarous cruelty of the Savage, and merciless
Infidels, they, in the end, called to mind the words, and monition delivered by
St. Cuthbert, to his Brethren. The said Holy man, before his departure out of
this Life, amongst other wholesome counsels, and godly admonitions, then
delivered, uttered these, or the like words. If you, my Brethren, shall be at
any time hereafter, urged, or constrained unto one of the two extremitics
following, I do much rather choose, and wish, that you should take my Bones up,
and fly from those places, and take your place of abode, and stay wheresoever
Almighty God shall provide for you, then that you should by any means submit
your selves to the yoke, and servitude of wicked Schismatics. Which words he
then spoke by the spirit of Prophecy, foreseeing the perillousness of the time
to come.

Bishop Eardulf, and Abbot Edred did take, and carry away the Body of St.
Cuthbert from Holy Island Southward, and fled seven years from Town to Town, by
reason of the great Persecution, and slaughter of the Painims, and Danes. And
when the Inhabitants of the Island saw that St. Cuthbert's Body was gone, they
left their Lands, and Goods, and followed after him. Whereupon, the Bishop, the
Abbot, and the rest, being wearied with Traveling, thought to have stolen
away, and carried St. Cuthbert's Body into Ireland for its better safety. Being
upon the Sea in a Ship, three Waves were miraculously turned into blood, and
the Ship was driven back by tempest, and forced upon the shore. Nay, the said
Ship wherein they were, by the greatness of the Storm, and the rage of the
Waves, was turned on the one side; and the Book of the Holy Evangelists fell
out of the Ship into the bottom of the Sea. The said Book was most curiously
written, and all adorned with gold, and precious stones on the outside. Now,
while they were all troubled, and in great perplexity for the loss of the said
Book, St. Cuthbert being loath to see his honourers in such sorrow, did appear
in a Vision to one Hundredus, a Monk, and commanded him that they should
diligently seek for the Book upon the Coasts thereabouts; where they did find
it three miles from the Seashore, cast (as it seemed) by the force of some
Wave, and carried thither by the violence of some happy gale of Wind, or by
some divine power. They found the book much more beautiful than before, both in
Letters, and Leaves; and excelling in the outer beautifulness of the cover,
being nothing blemished by the salt water, but polished rather by some Heavenly
hand; which did not a little increase their joy. But being wearied with seeking
the book, and with carrying about St. Cllthbert's body, he presented to their
eyes a Bridle hanging up in a Tree, and a red Horse running toward them, and
offering himself to be Bridled, to ease their pains in carrying the Chest,
wherein St. Cuthbert's body was laid. Upon which Horse they carried him to
Crake-Minster, and rested them four Months; from thence they brought him to
Cuneagester, (now called Chester) Anno Domini, 1387. and there they remained
with the body of St. Cuthbert 93. years, during the rest of the time of the
Danes Wars; at the end whereof Aldwinus the Bishop fled with St. Cuthbert's
body to Rippon, to lie by the body of holy St. Wilfrid. But four Months after
their arriving at Rippon, the Danes Wars did cease; and then intending to bring
him back again to Chester, and coming with him on the East side of Durham, to a
place called Wardlaw, they could not with all their force remove his body from
thence, which seemed to be fastened to the ground, for that the Chariot wherein
the holy Corpse was carried miraculously stood unmovable, either by the
strength of man, or beast. Which strange, and unexpected accident wrought great
Admiration in the hearts of the Bishop, the Monks, and their Associates.
Whereupon the Bishop fasted three days, and prayed to God with great
reverence, and devotion, to know from God by Revelation what to do with him.
Which was accordingly granted them, it being revealed unto Eadmer, a virtuous
man, that he should be carried to Dunholme, which is composed of the two Saxon
words, Dun, signifying a Hill, and Holme, an Island in a River, and there he
should be received into a place of Rest. But being again distressed, because
they were ignorant where Dunholme was, as they were going, a Woman, that lacked
her Cow, did call aloud to her Companion, to know if she had not seen her Cow;
who answered with a loud voice, that her Cow was in Dunholme, (a happy, and
Heavenly echo to the distressed Monks, who by that means had intelligence that
they were near their Journeys end) where they should find a resting place for
the Body of the Saint. And thereupon with great joy and gladness, they brought
his Body to Dunholme, in the year 1499. which was inculta tellus, a barbarous,
and rude place, replenished with nothing but Thorns, and thick Woods, save only
in the midst, where the Church now stands, which was plain and commodious for
such a purpose. Where they first built a little Church of Wands and Branches,
wherein they did lay his Body (whence the said Church was afterward called
Bough-Church) till they had built a more sumptuous Church, wherein they might
inshrine him, which they assayed to do with all their power; Uthred, Earl of
Northumberland aiding them, and causing all the Country people to cut down all
the wood, and thorn-bushes which did molest them, and so made all the place
where the City now stands habitable, and fit to erect Buildings upon; which
gave great encouragement to Aldwinus the Bishop, to hasten the finishing of the
Church. Which accordingly being done, he translated the Body of St. Cuthbert
from the wanded, or Bough-Church, to the White-Chappel (for so it was called)
which he had newly built, which was a part of the great Church, not yet
finished, where it lay four years. But after the great Church was finished, and
consecrated, upon the 20. of September, he translated his Body out of the
White-Chappel into the great Church, which he made a Cathedral, erecting his
Bishop's seat at Durham (where it still remains) about 353. years after it
was first Founded in the Holy-Island, by St. Aidan, and St. Oswald, which was
Anno Domini, 637. and 306. years after the death of St. Cuthbert, which was in
the year 684. Bishop Aldwinus died thirty years after he had Founded his
Bishop's See at Durham, in finished his Cathedral Church in the year 1020.
Which Church was famous for the Succession of six Bishops in it; viz.
Eadmundus, Eadredus, Egelrir, Egelwin, Waltherus (whom William the Conqueror
created Earl of Northumberland) and William Carlipho, or Carilef that
magnificent Prelate, who not being content with the smalness, and homliness of
the Edifice which Aldwinus built, as being too little for so great a Saint, did
pull it all down, 76. years after Alwinus had finished it, and instead thereof
did erect the magnificent, and famous Structure, which is now to be seen.
Malcolm, King of Scotland, Turgot, then Prior of the Church, and the Bishop
himself laid the three first stones in the new Foundation, upon the 30. of
July (as some say) or, on the 11. of August (as others affirm) in the year
1093. For which famous work, Anthony Beak (one of his Successors) with a great
sum of Money got him to be Canonized. This Bishop Carlipho caused the Monks to
labor in the Holy work all the day long, excepting mealtimes, and times of
Prayer, and Service; King Malcolm being the chief Benefactor in the Building
thereof. The Bishop before the people ordained, and appointed surgot, then
Prior, to be his Archdeacon, and Vicargeneral within his Diocese; and going to
Rome two years before his death, he obtained License of Pope Gregory the
seventh, to remove the Monks who were at Wermouth, and Jarrow, and were of the
Order of St. Bennet, to his Church at Durham, where he placed them in the room
of the Canons, whom he expelled for their lewd and lazy lives. But he did not
live to see his Church finished, for he dyed in the year 1095. two years after
he had laid the Foundation. Then Ranulph Flambard, his immediate Successor,
favoring, and with all his might furthering so good a work, did in the 29.
years that he was Bishop build the said Church from the Foundation almost to
the Covering. Yet was it not fully finished till the time that Nicholas Farnam,
or Fernham, was Bishop, and Thomas Melscome was Prior, which two good men did
Arch it over, Anno, 1242. viz. in the 26. year of King Henry the Third; and
they lie both buried under one stone in the Chapter House. But long before the
Church was finished, the Body of St. Cuthbert was by the said Bishop Ranulph
translated again out of the Cloister-garth, where the said Bishop Carlipho had
made him a very sumptuous Tomb to lie in, when he removed him out of the old
Church which Aldwinus built for him, which was then taken down, that his fair
Church, now extant, might be erected in the same place where that old Church
was. In which new Church was built a goodly, fair, and sumptuous Shrine, called
the Feretory, or Fereter, about three yards from the ground, on the backside
of the great, or high Altar, which was at the East End of the Quire, where his
Body was solemnly placed in an Iron Chest within the said Shrine, and lay
quietly without molestation, till the Suppression of the Church, as is above
related. And the said Book of the four Evangelists, which fell into the Sea,
and was so miraculously brought to Land, and found again, was laid on the High
Altar in the said Monastical, and Abbey-Church of Durham, as a place most
worthy, and a fit Monument to preserve the memory of so great a Saint. And at
the West End of the said Church, Hugo, who was also called Pudesay, Pusar, or
de Puteaso, Bishop of Durham, and Earl of Northumberland, King Stephen's
Nephew, did build a very fair, and beautiful Chapel, which he dedicated to the
Virgin Mary, and was called the Galilee, or our Lady's Chapel, but now simply
called the Consistory. And there in a silver casket gilt with gold, he laid the
Bones of Venerable Bede; and erected a costly, and magnificent Shrine, of black
Marble, over it, as is above declared. He also Founded the Priory of Finkley,
in honor of St. Gordrick the Hermit. He Founded also the Hospital of
Allerton; and the famous Sherburne-Hospital, near Durham. He built also
Elvet-Bridge over the Weer, with two Chapels upon it. He also built both a
Manor, and Church at ^arlington; and he bought of King Richar^ the First the
Earldome of Sadberge for (...) ^uccessors. And because those holy Bisho^ and
Monks would not be unmindful of the least favor which was done for them, and
for the honor of their holy Saint, Aldwinus, on the outside of his Church,
and Ranulph Flambard, according to the intention of William Carlipho, made the
Pourtraiture of a Woman milking her Cow on the outside of the North-west
Turret of the Nine Altars, at the building of the new Church, in a thankful
remembrance of that Maid who so fortunately in their great perplexity directed
them to Dunholme, where the Body of their great Saint was to rest until the
Resurrection; which Monument, though defaced by the Weather, to this day is
there to be seen.

The description of the Tomb which William Carlipho erected in the
Cloister-garth, till a fair Shrine might be made in his new Church, where he
might be enclosed.
William Carlipho, Bishop of Durham, before he took down the old Church, built
by Bishop Aldwinus, did prepare a fair, and beautiful Tomb, of Stone, in the
Cloister-garth, a yard high from the ground, where St. Cuthbert was laid, until
his Shrine was prepared for him in the new Church, that now is, over which Tomb
was laid a great, fair, and comely broad Through-Marble stone. But when his
Body was Translated to the Feretory, where it was inshrined in honor of him,
they made a goodly, large, and curious Image, of Marble, representing St.
Cuthbert, very finely, and curiously pictured, and wrought in the stone, with
painting, and gilding very beautiful, and excellent to behold, in that form in
which he was wont to say Mass, with his Mitre on his head, and his
Crosier-staff in his hand, and his other Vestments, very curiously engraven on
the said Marble; which after his body was inshrined in the new Church, was
placed above the said Tombstone; and round about the said Tombstone, both at
the sides, and at either end, were set up neat Stanchells, of Wood, joined so
close, that one could not put in his hand betwixt one and the other, but might
only look in and see that exquisite Picture, which lay within them, and was
covered over above, all very finely, and closely, like unto a little Chapel,
or Church. Which comely Monument did stand in the Cloister-garth (till the
suppression of the Abbey) over against the Parlour-door, through which the
Monks were carried into the Centry-garth to be buried; which Parlour is now
turned into a Storehouse, and a Room made above it for the Register's Office.
And also it did continue to the suppression of the House, as is aforesaid, and
afterward unto the time of Dean Horn, who caused the said Monument of St.
Cuthbert to be pulled down, and converted the Leads and all to his own use; and
the said Image of St. Cuthbert was laid on the one side against the
Cloister-wall, over against the Parlour-door, as they go through into the
Centry-garth. And afterward, when Whittingham came to be Dean, he caused the
said Image of St. Cuthbert, as he had done many other of the Ancient Monuments,
to be defaced, and broken all to pieces, to the intent that there should be no
memory or token of that holy man, St. Cuthbert, or of any man who formerly had
been famous in the Church, and great Benefactors thereunto (as the Priors, his
predecessors were) left whole, and undefaced, in memory, or token of that holy
man, St. Cuthbert, who was sent, and brought thither by the power and will of
Almighty God, and proved the occasion of the Building of the said Monastical
Church, and House; where they have all their Livings, and commodities to live
on at this day.

The East-Alley of the Cloisters.
It was many years after the Building of the Cloisters to the time of Bishop
Walter Skirlaw, who was first consecrated Bishop of Lichfield. He sat there one
year, and was translated to Wells, and sat there two years; and in September,
1388. he was removed to Durham. He gave toward the Building of the Cloisters
two hundred pounds in his Lifetime, and four hundred pounds in his Will; and he
bestowed also two hundred and twenty pounds in the Building of the Dirivitory.
He sat Bishop of Durham eighteen years, and died in the beginning of the year
1406. And after him, Thomas Langley, Bishop, gave to the Building of the said
Cloisters 838 lib. 17s. 6d. So that these two Bishops were the two first
Founders, and Builders of the said Cloisters, and did bear all the charges of
the Building, and Workmanship of the said Work; and were the first that did
cause (from the Cloister-door to the Church-door) to be set in Glass in the
Window the whole story, and miracles of that holy man, St. Cuthbert, from the
day of his Birth to his dying day. And there you might have seen his Mother
lying in her Childbed, and how that after she was delivered, the bright beams
did shine from Heaven unto her, and upon the Child as he lay in the Cradle,
insomuch, that to every man's thinking, the Holy Ghost had over-shadow'd him;
for every one that did see it thought that the house had been all on fire, the
beams did shine so bright over all the House, both within and without: And the
Bishop baptized the Child, and called him Yullock, in the Irish Tongue, in
English, Cuthbert. The Bishop's Name who baptized, and had the keeping of the
virtuous, and godly Child, was Eugenius. The Name of the City where St.
Cuthbert was baptized, was Hardbrecunb, for he was blessed of God even from his
Mothers Womb. So that every Miracle that he did after, from his Infancy, was
set in the said Windows by it self; and under every miracle there were certain
Verses, in Latin, declaring the contents and meaning thereof, in most
excellent colored glass, most artificially set forth, and curiously wrought.
And the said stories, thus set up in the Windows, were set in that place (at
the charge of those two godly Bishops) to be annexed, and joined to the said
Tomb of St. Cuthbert, in the Cloister-garth, and his Picture thereupon, most
lively to behold, to be a memorial of that holy man; that every one that came
through the Cloister might see all his Life and Miracles, from his Birth, and
Infancy, to his dying day. He was of a Princely Extraction; for his Father was
a Prince, and his Mother a Prince's Daughter, as is aforesaid; and may appear
in the History of the Church at large. In the time of King Edward the sixth,
this story was pulled down by Dean Horn, and broken all to pieces, for he could
never abide any Ancient Monuments, Acts, or Deeds, that gave any light of, or
to godly Religion.

There is also in the Cieling of the said Cloister, over head, cut in Wainscot,
the Arms of certain Bishops, and Noblemen, as also Knights, and other men of
Worship, who had bestowed any thing upon that Church.

There was a goodly Ceremony used by the Prior, and Monks, every Thursday
before Easter, called Maundy-Thursday. There were eighteen poor aged men
appointed to come to the Cloister-Abbey that day, having their feet clean
washed, there to remain till such time as the Prior, and whole Convent did come
thither, at nine of the Clock, or thereabouts, the Aged men sitting betwixt the
Parlour-door and the Church-door upon a long Form, which stood always in the
Church, beyond the Revestry-door, and was brought only on Maundy-Thursday into
the Cloister. The Prior and the Convent being come to the Cloister, after some
prayers said, one of the Prior's Servants brought a Basin full of fair Water,
and the Prior did wash all the poor men's feet one after a another, with his own
hands, and dried them with a Towell, and kissed their feet. Which done, he
liberally bestowed thirty pence in money on every one of them, with seven Red
Herrings a-piece, and did serve them himself with drink, three loaves of bread,
and certain wafer-cakes. All which done, the Form was carried back into the
Church, to the place whence it had been taken, that men might also sit on it
there, when they came to hear Divine Service; which Form is yet remaining under
the Te-Deum-Window, and the Clock.

Also, as you go out of the Cloister through an Entry to the Deans Lodging, at
the head of the stairs behind the door, called the Vesher-door, on the right
hand behind the said door, there is another door going into the Register,
wherein certain old written Books of Records, and Evidences of the Monastical
house of Durham did lie; as also a Copy of the Foundation of the Hospital of
Greatham, which was also registered in the said Book of Records, and there to be
found, if any misfortune should happen to the Foundation of the said Hospital
of Greatham. The Keeper of said Register-house was called George Baits, and he
was also Clerk of the Feretory at that time. And it was ever the
Register-House, till of late, that Mr. Tobias Matthew, Dean of Durham, altered
the state of it unto another place, called the Parlour, as is aforesaid.

The South-Alley of the Cloisters.
On the South Side of the Cloisters, adjoining to the Cloister-door, stood a
Stool, or Seat, with four feet, and a back of wood, made fast in the Wall, for
the Porter to sit in; and before the said stool, it was boarded underfoot, for
warmth. The last Porter was Edward Pattinson. From the said stool Westward, on
the South Side, there was a fair long Bench, of stone, almost to the
Fraterhouse-door, whereon certain Children sat a-row, from one end to the
other, upon Maundy-Thursday, being made for that purpose. The whole Convent of
Monks had every one a Boy assigned him, whose feet they were to wash, and wipe
with a Towel; which done, they kissed the said Childrens feet, every one the
feet that he had washed, and gave every Child thirty pence in money, and seven
Red Herrings, and three loaves of bread, and every one a certain wafer-cake,
the Monks serving every Child with drink themselves. The Godly Ceremony thus
ended, after certain prayers said by the Prior, and the whole Convent, they did
all depart in great holiness. And at the end of the said Bench, betwixt it and
the Frater-house-door, there was a fair Ambrie joined in the Wall, and another
on the other side of the said door; and all the fore-parts of the Ambries were
thorow-carv'd-work, to give Air to the Towels, which were there kept for the
Monks to dry their hands with before Meals. The Stool and Bench Tobias Matthew,
Dean of Durham, caused to be taken down, and made as plain as the rest of the
floor of the Cloister.

The Frater-House.
In the South-Alley of the Cloisters is a fair large Hall, called the
Prater-House, finely Wainscoted on the North and South-sides, as also on the
West; and on either part of the Frater-House, there is a fair long Bench, of
Stone-Mason-work, from the Cellar-door to the Pantry, or Covey-door. Above the
Bench is Wainscot-work, two yards and a half in height, finely carved, and set
with embroidered work; and above the Wainscot there was a fair large Picture of
our Savior Christ, the B. Virgin Mary, and St. John, in fine gilt work, and
excellent colors; which Pictures, though washed over with Lime, yet do appear
through it. This Wainscot-work has engraven on the top of it, Thomas Castle,
Prior, Anno Dom. 1518. Mensis Julii. So that Prior Castle Wainscoted the
Frater-House round about. And within the said Frater-House-door, on the left
hand as one goes in, there is a strong Ambrie in the Stone-wall, where a great
Mazer, called the Grace-cup, did stand, which did Service to the Monks every
day, after Grace was said, to drink in round the Table. Which Cup was largely,
and finely edged about with silver, and double-gilt with gold; and many more
large, and great Mazers, after the same sort; amongst which was a goodly great
Mazer, called Judas-Cup, edged about with silver, and double-gilt, with a foot
underneath it to stand on, of silver, and double-gilt; which was never used but
on Maundy-Thursday at night, in the Frater-House, where the Prior, and the
whole Convent did meet, and keep their Maundy. There lay also in the same
Ambrie the goodly Cup, called St. Bede's Bowl, the outside whereof was of
black Mazer, and the inside of silver, double-gilt, the edge finely wrought
round about with silver, and double-gilt; and in the midst of it was the
Picture of the holy man, Saint Bede, sitting as if he had been Writing. The foot
of the said Bowl was of silver, and double-gilt, with four joints of silver
coming down, all double-gilt, from the edge to the foot, to be taken asunder.
In that Ambrie lay all the chief Plate that served the whole Convent in the
said Frater-House, on Festival days, and a fine work of carved Wainscot before
it, and a strong lock, yet so as none could perceive that there was any ^^morie
at all; for the key hole was under the carved work of the Wainscot. There (...)
also another fair large Ambrie with^^ the said Frater-House-door, on the right
hand, as you go to the Cellar, of Wainscot, having diverse Ambries within it,
finely wrought, and varnished over with red varnish, wherein lay Table-cloaths,
Salts, and Mazers, a Basin and Ewer, of Latten, with other things pertaining to
the Frater-House, and to the Loft, where all the Monks did dine, and sup. And
every Monk had his Mazer severally by himself, to drink in, and had all other
things that served for the whole Convent, and the Frater-House, in their daily
Service, at their D^^t, and at their Table. And all the said Mazers were
largely, and fin^ly edged with silver, double-gilt, and a fair Bas^^n and Ewer,
of Latten; the Ewer pourtray*d like a man on Horseback, as if he had been
Riding a Hunting; which served the Sub-Prior to wash at the foresaid Table,
where he sat as chief.

And within the said Frater-House the Prior, and the whole Convent of Monks,
held their great Feast of St. Cuthbert, in Lent, having their Meat served out
of the Dresser-Window of the great Kitchen, into the Frater-House, and their
Drink out of the great Cellar. And in the East End, being the highest end of
the Frater-House, and adjoining to the Dean's House, the high Roof of Lead was
taken by Dean Whittingham, and enclosed to his House, and use, and he made it a
flat Roof of Lead, whereby he gained at least twenty pounds.

Also, in the East End of the Frater-House stood a fair Table, with a Shrine of
Wainscot upon it, being kept all the rest of the year, for the Master of the
Novices, of the Elects, and the Novices to Dine and Sup at, having their Meat
served in to them, at a Dresser-Window from the great Kitchen, and their Drink
out of the great Cellar. At which time the Master observed these wholesome, and
godly orders, for the continual instructing of their Youth in Virtue, and
Learning. That is, One of the Novices, at the Election and appointment of the
Master, did read some part of the Old, and New Testament, in Latin, at Dinner
time, having a convenient place at the South-end of the high Table, within a
fair glass-window, compassed with Iron, and certain steps of stone, with Iron
Rails on the one side to go up to it, to an Iron Desk there, on which lay the
Holy Bible. Which reading being ended, the Master did towl a gilt Bell hanging
over his head, thereby giving warning to one of the Novices to come to the high
Table and say Grace; which done, they departed to their Books. Within the
Cloister-garth, over the Frater-House-door, was a fair Laver, or Conduit, for
the Monks to wash their hands and faces, being round, covered with Lead, and
all of Marble, saving the outermost walls, within which they might walk round
about the Laver. It had many Spouts, of Brass, with twenty four Brass Cocks
round about it, having in it seven fair Windows, of stonework, and over it a
Dove-coat covered with Lead, finely wrought; as appears to this day.

Adjoining to the East Side of the Conduitdoor hung a Bell to call the Monks,
at eleven of the Clock, to come and wash, before dinner, having their Closets,
or Ambries, on either side of the Frater-House-door, on the outside within the
Cloister, kept always with clean Towels to dry their hands.

The North-Alley of the Cloisters.
In the North-side of the Cloisters, from the corner over against the
Church-door, to the corner over against the Dorter-door, was, from the height
of the sole within, a little of the ground unto the Cloister-garth, all finely
glazed, and in every Window three Pews, or Carrels, where every one of the Old
Monks had his Carrel several by himself; to which, having dined, they did
resort, and there study their Books, every one in his Carrel, all the
Afternoon, till Even-songtime. And this was their exercise every day. Their
Pews, or Carrels, were finely Wainscoted, and very close; the fore-side having
carved work, of Wainscot, to let in light to their Carrels, and in every Carrel
was a Desk to lay their Books on. And the Carrels were no greater than from one
Stanchel to another of the Window. Opposite to the Carrel, against the
Church-wall, stood certain great Ambries, of Wainscot, full of Books, as well
the Ancient written Doctors of the Church, as other profane Authors, with
diverse other holy men's works. So that every one studied what Doctor he pleased,
having the Library at all times open to go and study in, besides their Carrels.

The West-Alley of the Cloisters.
In the West Side of the Cloister, South of the Dorter-door, a little distant
from the said door, there is a strong House, called the Treasury, where all the
Treasure of the House, while it was a Religious House, did lie, having a strong
door, and two strong Locks. Within the said Treasury was a strong Iron grate,
set fast in the groundwork, in the Roof, and in either Wall, the breadth of the
House, so fast as not to be broken; and in the midst of the Grate a door of
Iron, according to the Workmanship of the Grate, with a strong lock upon it,
and two great shuts of Iron for the said door. And within the said Grate was a
apiece Table, covered with green cloth, for the telling of their Money.
Within this Treasury were likewise the Evidences of the House, and the
Chapter-Seal, as also the Evidences of several Gentlemen's Lands in the
Country, who thought them safer there than in their own Custody.

Over against the said Treasury-door was a fair Stall, of Wainscot, were the
Novices were taught. And the Master of the Novices had a pretty Seat, of
Wainscot, adjoining to the South Side of the Treasury-Door, over against the
stall, where the Novices sat. And there he taught the said Novices, both
Forenoon, and Afternoon. No Strangers, or other Persons were suffered to
molest, or trouble the said Novices, or Monks, in their Carrels, while they
were at their Books within the Cloister. For, to that purpose, there was a
Porter appointed to keep the Cloister-door.

The Dorter, Dortoir, or Dormitory.
On the West Side of the Cloister there was a large House, called the Dorter,
where the Monks and Novices lay, every Monk having a little Chamber, of
Wainscot, very close, to himself, and their Windows toward the Cloister, every
Chamber a window, by reason the partit on betwixt every Chamber was close
Wainscoted; and in every of their Chambers was a Desk for their Books. On the
West Side of the Dorter, were the like Chambers, with Desks, and Windows
toward* the Infirmary, and the Water. The Novices had their Chambers in the
South-end of the said Dorter, adjoining to the foresaid Chambers, having eight
Chambers on either side, every Novice his Chamber to himself; not so clo^^, nor
so warm as the other Chambers, nor having any light but what came in at the
fore-side of their Chambers, being all close else, both above, and on either
side. At either end of the said Dorter was a fair square stone, wherein were a
dozen Crossets wrought in the stone, being always filled, and supplied by the
Cooks, as they needed, to give light to the Monks, and Novices, when they arose
to their Mattins at Midnight, and for their other necessary uses.

There was also a large, and decent place, adjoining to the West Side of the
said Dorter, toward the water, for the Monks, and Novices to resort to, called
the Privies, two great Pillars of stone bearing up the whole floor thereof.
Every Seat, and Partition was of Wainscot, close on either side, so that they
could not see one another when they were in that place. There were as many
Seats on either side as there were little Windows in the Wall to give light to
the said Seats; which afterward were walled up, to make the House more close.
At the West End of it there were three fair glass Windows, and on the
South Side, over the said Seats another fair glass Window; which great windows
gave light to the whole House.

Also in the Dorter, every night, there was a privy search made by the
Sub-Prior, who called at every Monk's Chamber, to see good order kept, and that
none should be wanting. The floor of the Dorter was paved with fine tile-stone.
The Sub-Prior's Chamber was the first in the Dorter, that he might the better
see good order kept.

The Sub-Prior always Dined and Supped with the whole Convent, and sat at the
upper-end of the Table; and when Supper was done, which was always at five of
the Clock, upon the ringing of a Bell, to give warning to say Grace, they all
went to the Chapter House to meet the Prior, there to remain in Prayer and
Devotion, till six of the Clock. At which time, upon the ringing of a Bell
again, they went to the Salvi, and all the doors of the Cells, the
Frater-House, the Dorter, and the Cloisters were locked, even at six of the
Clock, and the Keys delivered to the Sub-Prior, till seven of the Clock the
next Morning.

The Loft.
There was also at the West End of the Frater-Hous, hard within the
Frater-House-door, another door, at which the old Monks, or Convent went in,
and so up a Greese, with an Iron Rail to hold them by, into a Loft, which was
at the West End of the Frater-House, above the Cellar, where* the said Convent
and Monks Dined, and Supped together. The Sub-Prior sat at the upper end of
the Table, as chief; and at the Greesefoot there was another door, that went
into the great C^llar, or Buttery, where all the Drink stood that did serve the
Prior, and the whole Convent of Monks, having their Meat served them in at a
Dresser-window, from the great Kitchen, through the Frater-House, into the Loft
over the Cellar.

The Monks were also accustomed every day, after Dinner, to go through the
Cloisters in at the Cloister-door, and so through the Entry in under the
Prior's Lodgings, and strait into the Centry-garth (where all the Monks were
Buried) and there they all stood bareheaded a certain long space, praying
amongst the Tombs, and Throughs, for all the Souls of their Brethren, who were
Buried there. And when they had done their Prayers, they returned to the
Cloister, and studied till three of the Clock, then they went to Even-song.
This was their daily exercise after Dinner.

The said Monks were the only Writers of all the Acts, and Deeds of the
Bishops, and Priors of the Abbey-Church of Durham, and of all the Chronicles,
and Histories. And they also did set forth all things worthy to be noted; and
what Acts, and what Miracles were done in every year, and in what Month. They
were always virtuously occupied, and never Idle; but either writing of good,
and godly works, or studying the Holy Scriptures, to the setting forth of the
Honor of God, and the edifying of the people, as well in example of good Life,
and Conversation, as by Preaching the Word of God. And these were the
employments of Monks, and Religious men in Ancient time.

The Common House.
On the Right hand as you go out of the Cloister into the Farmary, or
Infirmary, was the Common-House, and a Master thereof, the House being to this
end, to have a fire kept in it all the Winter, for the Monks to come and warm
themselves at, being allowed no fire but that only, except the Masters, and
Officers of the House, who had their several fires. There was belonging to the
said Common House a Garden, and a Bowling-Alley, on the backside of the said
House, toward the water, for the Novices sometimes to recreate themselves when
they had leave, their Master standing by to see their good order. Within this
House also did the Master thereof keep his O Sapientia, once in the year; viz.
between Martin-Mass and Christmas; a solemn Banquet that the Prior, and
Convent did use at that time of the year only; consisting of Figgs, and
Raisins, with Ale, and Cakes, and thereof no superfluity, or excess, but a
Scholastical, and moderate congratulation among themselves.

Within the Farmary, underneath the Master of the Farmary's Chamber was a
strong Prison, called the Lying-House, ordained for such as were great
Offenders; as, if any of the Monks had been taken in any Felony, or Adultery,
he must have sat there in the Prison for the space of a whole year, in Chains,
without any Company, save that of the Master of the Farmary, who let down his
meat through a trap-door, by a cord, being a great distance from those who were
in the Prison. And if any of the Temporal men pertaining to the said House had
offended in any of the premises aforesaid, they were punished by the Temporal
Law.

The Guest-Hall.
There was a famous House of Hospitality, called the Guest-Hall, within the
Abbey-garth of Durham, on the West side toward the Water, the Terrer of the
House being Master thereof; as being appointed to give entertainment to all
sorts, Noble, Gentle, and of what Degree soever, that came thither as
Strangers; their entertainment not being inferior to any place in England,
both for the goodness of their Diet, the Sweet, and dainty Furniture of their
Lodging, and generally, all things necessary for Travelers. And with all this
entertainment, they commanded not any one to depart, while he continued of
honest, and good behavior. This Hall is a goodly brave place, like unto the
body of a Church, supported on either side by very fair Pillars; and in the
midst of the Hall was a large Range for the fire. The Chambers, and Lodgings
belonging to it were most sweetly kept, and so richly Furnished, that they were
not unpleasant to lie in; especially one Chamber, called the King's Chamber,
deserving that name, in that a King might well have lain in it. The Victuals
that served the Guests came from the great Kitchen of the Prior, the Bread, and
Beer from his Pantry, and Cellar. If they were of Honor, they were served as
Honorably as the Prior himself; otherwise, according to their several
Qualities. The Terrer had certain men appointed to wait at his Table, and to
attend upon all his Guests, and Strangers; and for their better entertainment,
he had evermore a Hogshead, or two, of Wines lying in a Cellar appertaining to
the said Hall.

The Prior (whose Hospitality was such as that there needed no Guest-Hall for
the entertainment of those that came to him) kept a most honorable, and noble
House, being attended by Gentlemen, and Yeomen, and the best of the Country,
so great were the liberalities, and benevolences of his Housekeeping, that
constant Relief, and Alms were always open, and free; not only to the poor of
the City of Durham, but to all the poor people of the Country besides.

The Lord Prior had two Porters, one of his Hall-door, called Robert Smith; the
other of the Usher-door, as you go from the great Chamber to the Church, called
Robert Clark; which two were the last Porters to the last Prior.

There were certain Children, called the Children of the Almery, who only were
brought up in Learning, and relieved with the Alms, and Benevolence of the
whole House; having their meat and Drink in a Loft on the North-side of the
Abbey-Gates, before the Suppression of the said House, or Abbey; which Loft had
a long Porch over the Stair-head, slated over; and at either side of the said
Porch, or Entry, there was a stairs to go up to it, and a Stable underneath the
said Almery, or Loft, having a door, and an Entry into it under the Stair-head;
which at the Suppression of the House became Mr. Stephen Morley's Lodging. Not
long after the Suppression he altered it, and took down the Porch, and the two
Greeces, that went to the said Almery, or Loft, and made his Kitchen where the
Stable was, and his Buttery where the said Almery, or Loft was above. And the
said Children went daily to School to the Farmary-School without the
Abbey-Gates; which School was Founded by the Priors of the said Abbey, and at
the charges of the said House. The last Schoolmaster was called St. Robert
Hartburne, who continued Master to the Suppression of the House, or Abbey. And
the said Master was bound to say Mass twice in the Week at Magdalen's Chapel,
nigh Keapyear, and once in the week at a Chapel at Rimblesnorth. And the meat
and drink of the foresaid Children was what the Master of the Novices, and the
Monks had left, and reserved; and it was carried in at a door adjoining to the
great Kitchin-window, into a little Vault at the West End of the Frater-House,
like unto a Pantry, called the Covey, and had a window within it, where one, or
two of the Children did receive their meat and drink of the said Clerk out of
the said Covey, or Pantry-window so called, and carried it to the Almery, or
Loft; which Clerk did wait upon them every meal, to see they kept good order.

There were four Aged Women, who lived in the Farmary, without the South-gate
of the Abbey of Durham, every one having her several Chamber to lie in, being
found and fed only with the Relief that came from the Prior's own Table.

There was also in the Farmary a Chapel, where the Schoolmaster of the
Farmary (having his Chamber, and Scool above it) or some other Priest, for him,
was appointed to say Mass to the four Aged Women, every Holy Day, and Friday.

The Names of some of the Monks, and Officers within the Abbey-Church of Durham.
Dom. Stephen Morley, the Sub-Prior, and Master of the Frater-House. The
Sub-Prior's Chamber was over the Dorter-door, that he might hear if any
stirred, or went forth. And his Office was to go every night, as a privy-watch,
before midnight, and after midnight, to every Monks Chamber Door, and to call
upon him by his name, to see whether any were wanting, or stolen forth, to go
about any kind of Vice, or naughtiness. The Sub-Prior also sat always amongst
the Monks at meat, to see that every man did use himself according to the Order
he had taken him to. He always said Grace at Dinner, and Supper. And after
five of the Clock at night, he was to see all the Doors locked; as the
Cellar-door, the Frater-House-door, the Fauden-gates, and the Cloister-doors,
he kept the keys of all the foresaid doors all night, till six in the morning,
and then returned them to the Porters, others, who had them all the day.

D. William Watson, alias William Wylome, Master, and Keeper of the Feretory,
and Vice-Prior. The Master of the Feretory's Chamber was in the Dorter, and he
was Keeper of the Holy Shrine of St. Cuthbert. His Office was, when any man of
Honor, or Worship, was disposed to make their Prayers to God, or St. Cuthbert,
or to Offer any thing to his Sacred Shrine, to have it drawn up, that they
might see it. Then the Clerk of the Feretory (called George Bates) gave notice
to his Master, the Vice-Prior, the Keeper of the Feretory, and then the said
Master brought the Keys of the Shrine with him, giving them to the Clerk, to
open the Shrine. His Office was to stand by and see it drawn, commanding the
said Clerk to draw it. It was always drawn up in Mattins time, when the
Magnificat was sung, and when they made Prayers, and did offer any thing to it.
If it were Gold, Silver, or Jewels, it was straitway hung on the Shrine; and if
it were any other thing, as an Unicorn's horn, Elephant's tooth, or such like,
it was hung within the Feretory, at the end of the Shrine. And when they had
ended their Prayers the Clerk let down the cover thereof, and locked it at
every corner, returning the Keys to the Vice-Prior. The said George Bates was
Register of the House, and did all that pertained to the Register's Office.
Many goodly Relics belonged to the said Shrine.

There belonged also a Banner to the said Shrine (in the keeping of the said
Vice-Prior) called St. Cuthbert's Banner, five yards in length. All the pipes
were of silver, to be sliven on a long silver cross-spear, on the over-most
pipe. On the top of it was a little fine staff, and a goodly Banner-cloath
pertaining to it, and the midst of the Banner-cloath was all of white Velvet,
half a yard square every way, and a fair Cross of red Velvet over it; and
within the said white Velvet was the Holy Relic, the Corporax-cloath, that
the Holy man, St. Cuthbert, did cover the Chalice withal when he said Mass;
and the residue of the Banner-cloath was of red Velvet, embroidered with gold
and green silk. The said Banner was, at the winning of Branfield, or
Brankinfield Battle, in King Henry the Eight's time, and did bring home the
King of Scot's Banner with it, and diverse other of their Noblemen's Ancients
of Scotland that were lost that day; which Banner, and Ancients, were set up
at St. Cuthbert's Feretory, where they all stood, and hung till the Suppression
of the House. And at the Suppression of the House, the aforesaid Banner of St.
Cuthbert, and all the Ancients of the Noblemen of Scotland were shortly after
clearly defaced, to the intent there should be no memory of the said Battle,
and of their Ancients being spoiled, which were won at the said Battle at
Branfield, that there should be no remembrance of them in the Monastical Church
of Durham. And the said Saint Cuthbert's Banner was at many other places.
Besides, it was thought to be one of the goodliest Relics of any in England;
and it was born only upon principal days, when there was a general Procession;
as on Easter Day, Ascention-day, Whitsunday, Corpus-Christi-day, and St.
Cuthbert's day, and some other Festival days. It was st up at the East End of
the Shrine, because it was so weighty. Also, whenever it was born, it was the
Clerk's Office to wait upon it with his Surplice on, with a fair red painted
staff, having a fork, or cleft at the upper end of the staff, which cleft was
lined with silk, and down under the silk (to prevent the hurting, or bruising
of the pipes of the Banner, which were of silver) to take it down, and raise it
up again, by reason of the weightiness thereof.

There was also a strong girdle of white Leather worn by him who carried St.
Cuthbert's Banner, when it was carried abroad, and it was made fast to the said
Girdle by two pieces of white leather, and at either end of the two pieces of
white leather a Socket of Horn was made fast to them, that the end of the
Banner-staff might be put into it. For to ease him who carried the said Banner
of St. Cuthbert (because it was so heavy) there were four men always appointed
to wait upon it, besides the Clerk, and the person who bore it.

The Vice-Prior had the keys, and keeping of St. Bede's Shrine, which stood in
the Galilee. And whenever there was any general Procession, he commanded his
Clerk (giving him the keys of St. Bede's Shrine) to draw up the cover of it,
and to take it down, and carry it into the Revestry. Thence it was carried by
four Monks in time of Procession, every principal day; and when the Procession
was done, it was brought back into the Galilee, and the cover let down, the
keys being returned by the Clerk to the Master of the Feretory.

D. Richard Crosseby, Master of the Novices. There were always six Novices,
who went daily to School within the House, for the space of seven years
together; and one of the eldest Monks, that was learned, was appointed to be
their Tutor. The said Novices had no wages, but meat, and drink, and clothing
for that space. The Master, or Tutor's Office was to see that they lacked
nothing; as Cowls, Frocks, Stamyne, Bedding, Boots, Socks; and when they did
want any of these Necessaries, the Master had charge to call upon one of the
Chamberlains, for such things, for they never received wages, nor handled any
money in that space, but went daily to their Books within the Cloister. And if
the Master found any of them apt to learn, and that he applied himself to his
Book, and had a pregnant wit, he gave notice thereof to the Prior. And some
time after he was sent to Oxford to School, and there he did learn, and study
Divinity; and the residue of the Novices were kept at their Books, till they
could understand their Service, and the Scriptures. Then at the seven years end
they did sing their first Mass. The House was no longer charged with finding
them Apparel, for then they entered into wages, to find themselves Apparel,
which wages was twenty shillings in the year. He had no more to find himself
Apparel withal. The eldest Monk in the House had no more, except he had an
Office. His Chamber was in the Dorter.

D. John Porter, alias John Smith, called Master Segerston, alias Sexton. The
Sexton's Exchequer was within the Church in the North-Alley, over against
Bishop Skirlaw's Altar, on the Ieft hand as you go up to the Abbey to St.
Cuthbert's Fereter.

His Office was to see that nothing were wanting within the Church; as to
provide Bread and Wine for the Church, and Wax, and Lights in Winter. He had
always one Tun of Wine lying in the Exchequer aforesaid, for the use of the
said Church. He had also Segerston-haugh in his keeping, it was his charge; and
St. Mary's Cup-board was in his Office. He was also to see all the glass
Windows repaired, and the Plummer's work of the Church, as also the mending of
the Bells, and Bell-ropes, and leathering, and all other works that were
necessary to be employed, both within the Church, and without, and to see it
kept clean. All these things were to be called for at the Sexton's hands. His
Office was also, every day to lock up all the keys of every Altar in the
Church (every Altar having its peculiar Ambrie, and some two) and to lay them
forth every morning betwixt seven and eight of the clock, upon the height of
the Ambrie (being of Wainscot) wherein they were locked, standing within the
North-Quire-door, that every Monk might take the key, and go to what Altar he
was disposed to say Mass at. They also went to the Chapter House every day
(where all the Bishops in the old time were Buried) betwixt eight and nine of
the Clock, and there prayed for all their Benefactors, and Founders, who had
bestowed any thing on that Church. And at nine of the Clock there rung a Bell
to Mass, called the Chapter-Mass, which was always sung at the high Altar; and
he that sung the Mass had always in his Memento all those that had given any
thing to the Church. One half of the Monks said Mass in the Chapter-Mass time,
and the other half that sung the Chapter-Mass said Mass in the high-Mass time.
There were at every Altar two Chalices, and two silver Crewets appertaining to
it, with Albes, and Vestments for the principal Feasts, as also for all other
days besides. Every Altar had its double Furniture, for adorning all parts of
the Altar, serving both for holy days, and principal Feasts. Their Founders,
and Benefactors were prayed for every day, and had in remembrance in the time
of Mass. The Sexton's Chamber was in the Dorter, and he had his meat served
from the great Kitchen to his Exchequer.

O. her Officers of the House of Durham.
D. Robert Bennet, Bowcer of the House. His Exchequer is a little stone-House
adjoining to the Coal-garth, pertaining to the Great Kitchen, a little distant
from the Dean's Hall-stairs. His Office was to receive the Rents of the House,
and all other Officers made their accounts to him, and he discharged all the
Servants wages, and paid all the expenses, and sums of money that were laid
forth about any work appertaining to the said Abbey. His Chamber was in the
Farmary, and his meat was served from the great Kitchen to his Exchequer.

D. Roger Wreight, Cellarer of the House. His Exchequer was afterward Dr.
Tod's Chamber, adjoining to the West End of the great Kitchen, having a long
Greese going up to it, over the Solden-gates. His Office was to see what
expenses were made in the Kitchen; what Beefs and Muttons were spent in a week,
and all the Spices, and other necessaries consumed in the Kitchen, as well for
the Prior's Table, as for the whole Convent, and for all Strangers that came to
it. 'Twas his Office also to see all things orderly served, and in due time. He
lodged in the D^^ter.

D. Roger Watson, Terrer of the House. His Exchequer was as you go into the
Guest-Hall, on the left hand in the Entry, as you go in, or come into the great
Hall. His Office was to see all the Guests Chambers cleanly kept, and all the
Table-cloaths, Napkins, and all the Napery within the Chambers, as Sheets, and
Pillows, to be sweet, and clean. And he always provided two Hogsheads of Wine
to be ready against Strangers came, and provided Provender for their Horses,
that nothing should be wanting for any Stranger, what degree soever he was of.
And there were four Yeomen allowed to wait upon the said Strangers. His Chamber
was in the Farmary.

D. William Foster, Keeper of the Garners. The Master of the Garners Exchequer
was over Mr. Pilkington's Hall-doors. All his House, and Mr. Bunny's, were
Garners, where all their Wheat, and other Corn did lie. His Office was to
receive all the Wheat that came, and all the Malt, and to make account what
Malt was spent in the week, and what Malt-corn was delivered to the Kiln. The
Kiln was where Mr. Bennet's Lodging was, hard beyond the Conduit; which Lodging
he built at his own charge. The Master of the Garner's Chamber was in the
Dorter.

D. Thomas Spark, Chamberlain. His Exchequer was where Mr. Swift has his
Lodgings, nigh to the Abbey-gates. His Office was to provide Stamine, otherwise
called Lindsey-woolsey, for Sheets, and for Shirts, for the Novices, and the
Monks, for they did not wear Linen. And he had a Tailor working daily, making
Socks of white woollen-cloath, both whole Socks, and half Socks, and making
Shirts, and Sheets, of Lindsey-woolsey, in a Shop underneath the said
Exchequer; which Tailor was one of the Servants of the House. His Chamber was
in the Dorter.

D. Henry Brown, Master of the Common-House. His Exchequer was in the
Common-House. His Office was to provide all such spices against Lent as might
be comfortable for the said Monks, by reason of their great austerity of
fasting, and praying, and to get a fire continually made in the
Common-House-Hall, for the Monks to warm them, when they were disposed, and to
have always a Hogshead of Wine for the Monks, and for the keeping of his
entertainment, called O Sapientia, and to provide Figgs, and Wall-nuts against
Lent. His Chamber was in the Dorter.

D. William Watson, the Prior's Chaplain. His Exchequer was over the stairs as
you go up to the Dean's Hall. His Office was, to receive at the Bowcer's hands
what sums of money the Bowcer was to pay to the Lord Prior's use, for the
maintenance of himself, and the expenses of his whole Household, and all his
other necessaries. It was also the said Chaplain's Office to provide the Lord
Prior's Apparel, and to see all things in good order in the Hall, and his
Furniture for his Table to be sweet, and clean, and that every man diligently
applied himself to his Office as he ought to do; and to see that no strife, or
debate, were within the House. He had the charge of all the Lord Prior's Plate,
and Treasure, as well for the delivery of it out, as the receiving of it again.
He was also to discharge, and pay all Gentlemen, Yeomen, and all others the
Servants, and Officers of the Lord Prior's House their wages, and to pay all
other Reckonings of the House whatsoever. His Chamber was adjoining to the
Prior's Chamber.

All these Monks before rehearsed were in these Offices when the House was
suppressed, and the Monks, and Novices were always named after this sort (as
these Monks are named) before the suppression of the House. And the Prior of
the house was always called the Lord Prior, even to the suppression of the
house.

The Rite, or Ancient Custom of Processions in the Abbey-Church of Durham,
upon certain Festival days: And first, the Procession of the Prior, and Monks,
on St. Mark's day.
Upon St. Mark's day, after Easter, which was commonly fasted through all the
Country, and no flesh eaten upon it, the Prior, with the Monks, had a solemn
Procession, and went to the Bow, or Bough-Church, with their Procession, and
did very solemn Service there; and one of the Monks did make a Sermon to all
the people of the Parish, and of the Town, that came thither.

The Procession on the three Cross-dayes, by the Prior, and Monks.
On Monday, in the Cross-week, they had another solemn Procession, and went to
St. Oswald's Church, in Elvet, and there did solemn service, and had a Sermon
Preached by one of the Monks. The next day, being Tuesday, they had another
solemn Procession to St. Margaret's Church, in Cross-gate, with solemn Service,
and with a Sermon. And the next day they had the like Procession to St.
Nicholas Church in the Marketplace, with Service, and Sermon, before a great
Audience of People.

The Procession on Holy-Thursday, Whitsunday, and Trinity Sunday.
The next day being Holy-Thursday, they had a general Procession, with two
Crosses born before them; one, both Cross, and Staff, was all of gold, the
other of silver, parcel-gilt, both Cross, and Staff, with that Holy Relic,
St. Cuthbert's Banner, which was born foremost in the Procession, with all the
rich Copes that were in the Church, every Monk one; and the Prior had a
mavelous rich one of cloth of gold, which he was not able to go upright
with, for the weightiness thereof, but one held it up on every side. He had his
Crutch, (or Crosier-staff) in his hand, being of silver, double-gilt, with a
rich Mitre on his head. Also St. Bede's Shrine, that holy Relic, was carried
in the said Procession by four Monks on their shoulders. Other Monks carried
about with them in the said Procession diverse other holy Relics; as the
Picture of St. Oswald, of silver, gilt, and St. Margaret's Cross, of silver,
double-gilt. The Procession came out of the North-door of the Abbey-Church, and
went through the Churchyard, and down Ly-gate, by the Bow-Church-end, and up
the Souch-Baily, and in at the Abbey-gates, where stood a great number of
people, men, and women, and Children, with great Reverence, and Devotion; a
good sight to behold: and so it went through the Abbey-garth, with a number of
men following it, but no Women were suffered to go further then the
Abbey-gates; and so through the Cloister into the Church.

And upon Whitsunday there was the like general Procession, with the same
solemnities as had been observed on Holy-Thursday, with St. Bede's Shrine, St.
Cuthbert's Banner, and all the holy Relics; as the Image of St. Oswald, and
the Image of St. Aidan, and the holy Relic of St. Margaret's Cross, with
diverse others.

On Trinity Sunday also, there was another general Procession, as aforesaid,
with all the foresaid Relics, taking the same circuit as the forementioned.

St. Cuthbert's Shrine defaced.
The sacred Shrine of holy St. Cuthbert, before mentioned, was defaced at the
Visitation which Dr. Lee, Dr. Henley, and Mr. Blithman held at Durham, for the
subverting of such Monuments, in the time of Henry the 8th. at his suppression
of the Abbeys. They there found many worthy, and goodly Jewels, but especially
one precious stone, which, by the estimate of those three Visitors, and their
skilful Lapidaries, was of value sufficient to Ransom a Prince. After the spoil
of his ornaments, and Jewels, coming* near unto his Body, thinking to have
found nothing but dust, and bones, and finding the Chest that he lay in very
strongly bound with Iron, the Goldsmith taking a great fore-hammer of a Smith,
broke the said Chest; and when they had opened it, they found him lying whole,
incorrupt, with his face bare, and his beard, as it were of a fortnight's
growth, and all his Vestments about him, as he was accustomed to say Mass, and
his Metwand of gold lying by him. When the Goldsmith perceived he had broken
one of his legs, as he broke open the Chest, he was troubled at it, and cried,
Alas! I have broken one of his legs. Dr. Henly, hearing him say so, called
upon him, and bid him cast down his Bones. Whereto the other answered, that he
could not get them asunder; for the sinews and the skin held them so that they
would not come asunder. Then Dr. Lee stepped up to see whether it were so, and
turning about, spoke in Latin to Dr. Henley, that he was entire; yet Dr.
Henley would not give credit to his words, but still cried to have his bones
cast down. Then Dr. Lee made answer, if you* will not believe me, come up your
self, and see him. Whereupon Dr. Henley stepped up to him, and did handle him,
and found that he lay whole. Then he commanded them to take him down; and so it
happened, contrary to their expectation, that not only his Body was whole, and
uncorrupted, but also that the Vestments, wherein his Body lay, and wherein he
was accustomed to say Mass, were fresh, safe, and not consumed. Whereupon the
Visitors commanded him to be carried into the Revestry, where he was close and
safely kept in the inner part of the Revestry, till they knew the King's
further pleasure, what to do with him; and upon notice of the King's further
pleasure, the Prior, and the Monks buried him in the ground under the same
place where his Shrine was exalted.

The Shrine of Saint Bede defaced.
In like manner the Shrine of holy Saint Bede, before mentioned, was also defaced
by the said Visitors, and at the same suppression, his bones being interred
under the same place where his Shrine was before erected. There are two stones
that were of St. Bede's Shrine in the Galilee, of blew Marble, which after the
defacing thereof, were brought into the Body of the Church, and lie now over
against the East-most Tomb of the Nevels, joined both together. The upper-most
stone of the said Shrine has three holes in every corner, for Irons to be
fastened in, to guide the covering when it was drawn up, or let down, whereupon
did stand St. Bede's Shrine. The other is a plain Marble-stone, which was
lowest, and lay above a little Marble Tomb, whereon the lower end of the five
small Pillars did stand; which Pillars did also support the upper-most stone.
These stones now lie both together, (as is aforesaid) end-wayes, before the
place where Jesus-Altar stood.

Who desires a more particular account of this famous, and Ancient Church, and
the ceremonies used therein, may consult the History of the Church at large,
where he will meet with fuller satisfaction.

Many were the goodly rich Jewels, and Relics, appertaining to the said
Church; insomuch that it was accounted the richest Church in all this Land; so
great were the Jewels, and Ornaments, which were bestowed on that holy man, St.
^uthbert. King Richard gave his Parliament-Robe, of blew Velvet, wrought with
great Lions, of pure gold, a mavelous rich Cope. There was another Cope, of
Cloth of gold, given to the Church in honor of that holy man, St. Cuthbert,
by another Prince. So great were the godly minds of Kings, Queens, and other
great Estates, upon account of the devotion, and love they had to God, and holy
St. Cuthbert, in that Church.

The Procession upon Corpus Christi day, within the Church and City of Durham,
before the Suppression of the Abbey-Church.
There was a goodly Procession upon the Place, or Palace-Green, on the Thursday
after Trinity-Sunday, in the honor of Corpus-Christi-day, which was a
principal feast at that time. The Bailiff of the Town did stand in the To
booth, and did call all the Occupations, that were Inhabitants within the Town,
every occupation in its degree, to bring forth their Banners, with all their
Lights appertaining to their several Banners, and to repair to the
Abbey-Church-door. Every Banner did stand a-row in its degree, from the
Abbey-Church-door to Windisholl-gate; on the West Side of the way did all the
Banners stand, and on the East Side of the way all the Torches stood pertaining
to the said Banners. There was also a goodly Shrine in St. Nicholas Church
appointed to be carried the said day in Procession, called
Corpus-Christi-Shrine, all finely gilt, and a goodly thing to behold; and on
the height of the said Shrine there was a apiece box, of Crystal, wherein
was enclosed the holy Sacrament of the Altar. And it was carried the said day
by four Priests up to the Palace-Green, the whole Procession of all the
Churches in the said Town going before it. And when it was come a little space
within Windisholl-gate, it did stand still. Then was St. Cuthbert's Banner
brought forth, with two goodly fair Crosses to meet it; and the Prior, and
^onvent, with the whole company of the Quire, all in their best Copes, did meet
the said Shrine, falling down on their knees, and praying. The Prior did fetch
it, and then carrying it forward to the Abbey-Church, the Prior, and Convent,
with all the Quire following it, it was set in the Quire, and solemn Service
done before it, and Te-Deum solemnly sung, and played on the Organs, every man
praising God. And all the Banners of the Occupations did follow the said Shrine
into the Church, going round about St. Cuthbert's Feretory, their Torches being
lighted, and burning all the service time. Then was it carried thence, with the
said Procession of the Town, back to the place whence it came, all the Banners
of the Occupations following it. And they set it again in the Church; after
which, all having made their prayers to God, and being departed, the said
Shrine was carried into the Revestry, where it remained till that time
twelve-moneth.

Afterward, in the first year of King Edward the sixth, there were certain
Commissioners appointed to deface all such Ornaments as were left in the
Parish-Churches at Durham, undefaced in the former Visitation. The
Commissioners were Dr. Harvey, and Dr. Whitby. Dr. Harvey called for the said
Shrine, and when it was brought before him, he did tread upon it with his feet,
and broke it all to pieces, with diverse other Ornaments pertaining to the
Church.

FINIS.

