THE HUMBLE ADDRESS AND Remonstrance OF RICHARD DAWSON Gentleman, now Prisoner
in the FLEET.

To the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, With
all possible Submission, Representing the sad Oppressures under which he
groans, his Estate being plucked away from him by Injustice, Perjury, and
Subornation thereto, Forgery, Counterfeiting his Hand and Seal, and other
Unjust, Illegal Unconscionable Grievances; By the (...) Confederacy of Roger
Portington Gentleman, Philip Read Attorney of the Kings Bench, Edward, and
Francis Luttrel, Solicitor, and Counselor of Law, Sir John Lenthall Knight
Marshall of the Kings Bench, and others, set on, encouraged, and defended by
them.

Because of the Cry of the Oppressed, and the Groans of Prisoners, I will Arise
says the Lord.

Let God Arise, and His Enemies will be Scattered.

London, Printed for the Author 1661.

Right Honorable Lords, and Worthy Gentlemen;
THE External happiness of mankind, consisting in Society, of which the
briole, or check, is the Law, which curbs and restrains the unruly exorbitances
of unreasonable men; what can be fall more miserable in this life, than to have
this remedy (by the Injustice of its Execution) made worse than the disease? to
find Judgment turned into Gall and Wormwood, as is evident in your poor
Petitioners Case, who to the ruin of his Wife and Children, has for several
years found experimental proof thereof, which being his lot in those times,
when our Sun of Earthly happyness was eclipsed, and only the Screetchowles of
Horror and Distraction were heard in our almost ruined Land; when Corruption
and Villainy was the natural milk to feed our Infant Monster the Commonwealth;
His hope and assurance is, that the return of our Sun of Majesty, will be like
unto that of him, who has been, and is his true pattern, the Sun of
Righteousness, with healing under his wings, to poor, oppressed, and otherwise
despairing Prisoners, among whose number, your Petitioner humbly acknowledges
himself.

Nor is he only pricked forward to this Address, by the sharpness and
tediousness of his sufferings, and present distress brought upon him thereby;
but is also encouraged (nay more) assured of success, in confidence of your
Honors true Gallantry, Justice and Wisdom, who your selves in these late
overturning times* have tasted of the same cup of affliction, many of you drunk
thereof deeply.

Yea, His Most Sacred Majesty, has not escaped the same Lot; but (in imitation
of our Savior, his immediate Lord and pattern) has suffered in the like kind,
(though not in the same manner) and therefore my confident assurance is, that
having in this Humble Address to deal with such a King, the like of whom
England never saw, nor brought forth, experimentally (by Gods inscrutable
providence) made sensible of the distresses and sufferings of his meanest
Subjects, such Lords and Nobles, who themselves have been tried in the same
Furnace of Affliction, and for many years last past, have (not through their
Princes displeasure; but for being Loyal to their Prince) by the meanest and
worst of Plebeians been plundered, and stripped of all, and afterward
imprisoned, with as much reproa^h and contempt, as if they had been Chips of
the same Block with the most Contemptible Commoner: Such Knights and Burgesses
to Sit in Parliament, who if in these times of distraction, they lived in
England, and are unacquainted with the miseries of Imprisonment, it argues in
them little Cordial Fidelity to their Sovereign Lord, or his Father of Blessed
memory, whose real friends mildest Lot was reiterated, and severe
Imprisonments, others being Banished, not a few Murdered.

On which Considerations, your Humble Petitioner begs of, and Humbly beseeches
you, who by the good hand of our most Gracious God, have been dragged, many of
you out of the Dungeon, some recalled from Exile, to enjoy your Ancient
Privileges and Freedoms, and sit (according to your true desert and merits) at
the Helm of State, to cast back your Gracious Eyes upon such who once were
fellow Sufferers with you, and not (like Pharaohs Butler) being now your selves
restored, to forget the languishing Estate of Joseph, (viz.) your once fellow
Prisoner.

This my Lords and Honorable Gentlemen, I speak not as in the least doubting or
fearing any such thing; but out of the mere sense of my long, and most unjust
suffering; pardon my boldness that I am thus importunate (if possible) to find
an effectual and speedy remedy.

And not to trouble your Honors with a long Preamble, whose very weighty
occasions, cannot admit a tedious discourse, I shall come Humbly to represent
my Grievances, so illegal, so many, and carried on with a high hand, on purpose
to ruin your Petitioner, whom several persons of note and power, have
confederated to undo and destroy, in so barbarous, and wickedly malicious a
manner and way, as I question not, but in the following particulars to make so
plainly evident to your Honors and Wisdoms, as will cause your hearts in
reading of them to relent, and commiserate your poor Petitioners Case, yea so
to pity him, as effectually to relieve him.

In the year of our Lord 1648 October. 21. Richard Dawson Gentleman, then
residing in the County of Norfolk, and dealing in the Capacity of a Grasier,
had at one time, forcibly taken from him 267 Oxen, which were all driven into
the Castle of Pomfret, by some who pretended themselves Soldiers of that
place, and there came to the possession of one Roger Portington, the Governor
denying, that he had any thing to do with them, when Dawson (owner of the
Cattle,) demanded them of him; but sent him to Portington, to treat with him
concerning them, being (as he affirmed) wholly in his power, and withal
required Portington to rostore them to Dawson, but he refused to return them,
or any part of them, using this exasperating expression, to the owners face,
That would he give 100 l. for ten of the worst, he should not have them; with
which most rugged answer, Dawson being justly provoked, (as well as exasperated
by his great loss) in the year 1649, he brought his Action of Trover and
Conversion against Portington, which being tried by Nisi prius, at Guild Hall,
in the year 1650. the Plantiff recovered against the Defendant Portington,
(with costs of Suit) 1297l. 13s. 4d. according to which verdict, Judgment was
entered, and Dawson had granted him a Writ of Execution thereupon.

A man would now have thought that the Plantiff had not been far from his money,
having able bail for bringing forth the Body of the Defendant, and him a man of
sufficient estate to satisfy a greater debt; But the sequel of this discourse
will make it most evident, that as our Laws have been, and are in the Execution
of them still abused, there is no Case, so notoriously corrupt and injust; but
meeting with a suitable Conscience, joined with ability of Purse, he may be
provided with Lawyers, who for the sake of gain, will maintain and defend the
same, in despite of Justice.

For this Portington to discharge his Bayl, rendered himself Prisoner to the
Kings Bench, where Dawson charged him in Execution, upon the sore-recited
Judgment, and there he to this time continues a Prisoner, although for many
years he has been, and still is at large, dwelling at his own house in
Yorkshire, to the defrauding, and great damage, of the injured Creditor, who
can look upon such actions, no otherwise than Cheats, however seemingly backed
with Color of Law; But of this I shall have cause given to speak more fully
hereafter in this discourse: I will now come to show by what vexatious
troubles, the Condemned Defendant, has for ten years molested the greatly
suffering Plantiff, by which he has been put to so much cost, (besides
molestation,) that he had better have been himself Condemned in as much more
money, and clearly lost his debt, then recovered against the Defendant that
Judgment, of 1297l. 13s. 4d. For to avoid payment thereof, the Defendant
Portington has not only himself endeavored, but combined with others, to
bring Dawson to ruin, and has effected it, so far as tedious Lawsuits, and
Imprisonments could do the same, to the Expense and Damage of him the
forenamed Plantiff, more than 8000l. which he can make appear; and this by such
monstrous courses of Villainy, as can scarce be believed, but that the Plantiff
can by many Records make out the same.

His first vexatious Dog-trick was, when that invention of Salters-Hall was
hatched, for the relief (as was pretended) of Creditors and Debtors: To these
Commissioners Portington Addressed himself by Petition, which was granted, and
Dawson Summoned thereupon, to have the Case heard by them, who instead of
relieving the Creditor, ordered only a rehearng of the Cause before themselves,
to which order (patience perforce) Dawson submitted; but the event proved
neither relief to Creditor, or Debtor; for that Court after hearing the Cause,
and with mature deliberation weighing the merits thereof on both sides, dismissed
Portingtons Petition, which cooled his hopes and expectation of relief; and for
the Creditor Dawson, all his relief was, that after the expense of 200l. in
that second hearing and Trial, (several of his Witnesses living 200 miles from
London, besides other ways of great charge and cost) he had only his former
Judgment confirmed, and yet as far from his money as before.

This Dog-trick failing, Portington was soon provided with another, which was,
to Petition the usurper Oliver for relief against so due a debt doubly now
confirmed by two Trials; in which Petition (being on Record, and the Copy of it
in Dawsons hands, to be showed any that desire satisfaction therein,)
Portington (to his praise be it spoken) who would by all means be thought a
Cordial Royalist, did basely, and perfidiously acknowledge the Supreme
Legislative Power to be in that bloody Rebel; betraying both his Conscience,
and the Cause he pretended to maintain, with design only to cheat his Creditor
Dawson of a just debt, so injuriously detained. The Usurper, in answer to his
Petition, ordered several references: In attendance upon which, the Creditor
was put to a new charge of 100l. or thereabout, the Prisoner finding as little
relief, as he before had at Salters-Hall (that is none at all) not do I believe
he ever expected relief from either, only used these delatory means, if not to
defraud, at least to retard his Creditor from getting, what by Law he had
recovered; and by multiplying expensive proceedings (although illegal) to weary
him out, and tire his patience, seeing more moneys daily thrown away after the
former, of which he could now have but little hopes, to receive either
Principal, Interest, or Costs of Suit.

Yet for all these disappointments, he is not weary; but since his Majesty's
happy Restoration, presented his Petition against Dawson in the Upper House of
Parliament, where the Lords after several hearings, thought no relief fit to be
granted in the Case, wherein the Law had no less than twice had its full, and
due course; however, his restless spirit has lately prompted to him another
poor shift, and that is, to bring an Audita querela, in which he pretends an
acquittance by the Act of Indemnity, although he has been a Prisoner in
Execution (therefore) now above ten years since he was first charged therewith.

Howbeit, although I call him a Prisoner, yet (thanks to good Sir John
Lenthall) he is one at large* this Gentleman when great Rogues come to be
Cannonized, shall pass for a precious Saint, the rules of whose Prison, where
he meets with one like himself, that makes no more Conscience of giving, than
he of taking a bribe, reach as far as Constantinople, some say to the
East-India's, by which means, those who can dispense with their Consciences,
va^ue the Execution of the Law not a rush; as particularly appears in
Portington, who being suffered (though in Execution) to live at home, and
sometimes for nigh three years together, not to come so much as to Town, has
taken up a resolution, never to pay his Credit or Dawson a groat, yet boasts,
that he can, and will have his Liberty in spite of him, although the hopes of
Dawson are, that this Parliament will take such effectual course against these
kind of tricks, as may truly relieve the oppressed, and curb the insolences o^
unconscionable men.

And so at present I shall leave my first Customer of this kind, and proceed to
new, and more prodigious Villainies, acted by others, but countenanced and
fomented by this Portington, who to secure himself in his unjust proceedings,
has not been backward, in the most hellish designs to act his part, to the
shame of those who have abetted him, and his Associates, who were men of Rank
and Repute.

In the year of our Lord 1656. November. 11. Dawson being then in Norfolk, had
occasion to make use of three hundred pounds for the manageing of his Trade,
which he offered to repay in London by Exchange nine days after; which Sum, one
Phillip Read, an Attorney in the Court of the Kings Bench, undertook to furnish
him with all, in two days time, provided Dawson would give him a Warrant to an
Attorney to confess a Judgment to him for five hundred pounds, (with a
Defeasance, for nine days) for his better security of the payment of the said
300l. which Dawson consented to, Signed and Sealed a Warrant, and Read also
Signed and Sealed the foresaid Defeasance annexed thereto, which being
delivered mutually by both parties; Dawson came at the time appointed, ( viz.)
two days after, to receive the 300l. according to agreement, but could have no
more paid him then 158l. which was repayed by Dawson to Read, and his
appointment in London by the time limited and allowed in the Defeasance, (yea
in truth two days before) with 15 pounds more, which was lent by him to Read,
to be repaid upon demand; upon which payment Dawson called for his Warrant of
Attorney, which Read at that time put off with this excuse, That he had forgot,
and left it at his house in the Country, promising the delivery of it as soon
as he returned to Norfolk; but not performing his word, Dawson made several
times other demands of the said Warrant, but had for answer, It was lost: Yet
before several persons of Repute and Credit, Read acknowledged himself fully
satisfied by Dawson, and nothing to remain due to him from the same. However,
Sept. 12, 1657. Read having privately, without the least knowledge or suspicion
of Dawson, entered that Judgment, took out Execution upon it, against the goods
of Dawson, and by virtue thereof did levy in the County of Norfolk to the value
of 700l. and after sent one Thomas Hide into Huntingtonshire, who by his order,
without Writ of Execution, or any other Authority but his direction, took away
47 fat Bullocks, worth 200l. and sold them; nor content with this, he in the
same year and month, in the County of Norfolk, at a place called Wallpool in
Marshland, did by Color of the said Execution, seize of the proper goods of
the said Dawson, viz. Hay (in Stacks and Reecks) to the value of 500l. which
though he had no power to condemn and dispose of, yet he detained by color of
his own Execution, till he could, and did procure one Robert Dun by a pretended
Execution to Levy the same, and sell it.

Upon which illegal abuse, Dawson made complaint to the then judges of the
Kings Bench, (in those days called the Upper Bench) by whose order, Read was
committed Prisoner in the Custody of Sir John Lenthall; but by favor of some
of his Fraternity, forthwith had his Liberty, which he employed so well, that
before the end of the same Term, he procured one Disney to commit wilful
perjury, with intent to overthrow Dawson in his most just cause, he when Read
first moved to him that he should make such an Oath, replied, Master I know no
such thing, who then swore by his Maker, that unless he would make that Oath,
as he directed him, he was utterly undone; so partly by importunity, partly by
promises, he procured the said Disney desperately to swear against his own
knowledge,; Whereupon Dawson endicted Disney for this perjury, and this Master
for subornation thereto, since which Disney's Conscience accusing him, he has
confessed to several persons of worth and repute, that his Master Read would
never permit him to be at rest, till he had persuaded him, to make Oath of such
things, of which he had not the least knowledge.

For which Cause in Easter Term 1658. Dawson filed a Declaration in the Kings
Bench against Read, (who did, and still does practice there as an Attorney)
upon the Case, in a special Action, which the first of July he brought to a
Trial, and recovered 700l. damage, besides costs of Suit, 18l. for which the
following Michaelmas Term he had Judgment, and Execution granted thereupon,
against the person of Read, which Writ being delivered to the Sheriff of
Norfolk; the business was so jugled between them, that although Read was often
in the Sheriffs Company, yet he was not taken in Execution, nor would the
Sheriff at the instance of Dawson return the Writ, for several Terms, and at
last returned a non est inventus thereupon, when Read during the time of
detaining this Writ, without Execution or Return, had embroyled Dawson in a
tedious and chargeable Chancery Suit, which because of its Exemplary Injustice,
and Corruption, discovered in the manageing thereof, shall be particularly here
set down.

Not long after, Dawson had got against Read this Judgment, and Execution; the
Defendant sues for relief in Chancery, and serves Dawson with a Subpaena to
that purpose, and proceeds the Vacation following to examine witnesses, and by
favor with the Master of the Rolls ( William Lenthall) procures the cause to
be forthwith set down for a hearing in Easter Term (suddenly then following)
1659. which Term being adjourned, the Cause was again set down for hearing at
the Rolls, the 9th. of June following, where as soon as it was opened by Reads
Counsel, Lenthall (the Conscientious Master of the Rolls) called for Dawson,
and in seeming familiar friendship told him, he would make a bargain with him,
( viz.) that Read should within two days pay him Four hundred pounds, and the
differences between them made up, and fully ended thereupon, to whom Dawson
replied, his debt was 718l. in recovery of which it had cost him no less then
500l. When Lenthall saw that this bait would not allure Dawson to bite at it,
who had sufficient former experience of his corrupt baseness, and dissembling
villainy, (as before the Close of this discourse shall be discovered in another
case,) he then demanded of Reads Counsel, if they could produce any Presidents,
where relief in Equity, had been granted, in the like case after recovery,
Judgment, and Writ for Execution, who replied, there were several Presidents,
upon which answer, Lenthall put off the hearing till the 18th. following, of
the same month, against which time he willed them to have those presidents in
readiness, and then he would determine the Cause; but in the mean time tied up
Dawson not to take Read in Execution: the appointed day for hearing being come,
upon reading the first president, Lenthall told them plainly, it made not at
all for, but against them; but he had since the last hearing, Considered of the
Cause on his pillow, and so forthwith, without farther hearing Counsel on
either side, ordered them to go to a new Trial at Law, after which he would
reserve the Equity to himself; but in the mean time Read should not be taken in
Execution, with which orders Dawson being much agrieved, Petitioned the then
Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal (as they were called) complaining of the
great injustice he suffered thereby; in answer to which Petition, they granted
him a rehearing before them, upon which, Counsel having spoken on both sides,
they dismissed Reads Bill, and discharged the several orders made by the Master
of the Rolls, with costs to be taxt by a Master of Chancery, which were
accordingly taxed at an hundred marks; Whereupon Sir John Lenthall (one of the
Rebel Olivers mock Knights) Son to the Master of the Rolls, being at that time
a Member of that thing, then called a Parliament, seeing Read thus left to the
Law, (notwithstanding his honest Fathers devices to obstruct the same) gives
him his protection during the sitting of that Convention.

Read finding himself thus countenanced, by the Master of the Rolls and his
Son, (for which as himself confesses, it cost him three hundred pounds thinks
he is now armed Capape, for any villainy, and having a prodigiously villainous
wit, goes through stitch to the purpose, and thus performs it. First he
persuades and prevails with one Robert Dun, that he might make use of his name,
(at his own charge and costs) to confess, and enter a Judgment against
Dawson, for the Sum of 350l. upon which grant. Read as representing the person,
and taking upon him the name of Richard Dawson, forged the foresaid Warrant of
Attorney, Subscribes and Seals it, as if himself had been the person of Dawson,
and then delivers it to the use of Robert Dun, having witnesses in readiness,
(who upon examination affirm that they knew neither the persons of Read or
Dawson) to subscribe to the delivery thereof as the Act and Deed of Dawson.

Upon which Warrant so given by himself, he procured a Judgment to be entered,
and Execution taken out, and levied on the Goods of Dawson in the County of
Norfolk, where by a Combination between him and the Sheriff, with his under
Officers, (who knew very well the Judgment to be grounded upon a forged
Warrant of Attorney before the Execution of the Writ,) 1000l. worth of Goods
were seized and sold, yet valued but at 150l. which Goods so under valued, were
bought by one John Prat, whom Read procured to buy them upon a joint account,
between them both.

Which 1000l. being thus swallowed up between these two devourers, and the
Execution still unsatisfied more than one half; in the next place, Read sues
forth a Commission of Bankruptship against Dawson, in the name of Dun, for the
unconscionable remainder of the pretended Execution; to sit upon which, he
picked up Commissioners of his own Confederates, who in a very short time after
the Commission came to their hands, declared Dawson a Bankrupt, and discharged
Read from payment of any monyes to him, no other pretense of Debt, being
brought before these Commissioners to prove this Statute against Dawson, but
only the forged Warrant for Judgment, as is before at large recited, and
testified by those very witnesses who were present at the Sealing and
Delivering that Warrant of Attorney, who deposed that Read (whom then they had
no personal knowledge of) Subscribed, Sealed, and Delivered it, in the name and
counterfeiting the Person of Dawson.

Things being thus corruptly and unjustly carried, Dawson to prevent (if
possible) the ruin, which he saw inevitably hanging over the heads of himself
and Family, unless such villainies were redressed, in Michaelmas Term 1659.
made his complaint before the Judges of the Kings Bench, of the fore-recited
horrible Forgery of Read in his name, as also of false witnesses, which were
suborned by him, and in readiness to swear that Dawson was the very person,
who Signed and Sealed the Warrant of Attorney, to the use of Dun; upon which
complaint the Court, referred, the matter of fact in the Case to the
examination of Mr. Herne Secondary of the same Court, who upon examination of
Dun, and several other witnesses, found that no monyes were due from Dawson to
him; but on the contrary, Dun was indebted to Dawson in the Sum of 400l. due
upon Bond, who had a general release from him under Hand and Seal, before the
forging that Warrant of Attorney, (by Read, in his name) nor did ever Dawson
deal with him since, as he has confessed in the hearing of several persons; To
make which more evident, Dawson has now from Dun a Judgment upon Record,
acknowledged by himself, for that same debt of 400l. then due when this forgery
was committed, Dun having moreover confessed on his Oath, that Read to acquit
himself of the Judgment for 718l. and 100 Marks Costs, did Solicit him to
consent to, and own this forgery, and suing forth the Statute of Bankruptship
against Dawson thereupon.

Mr, Herne having carefully sifted the whole truth of the Case, made thereof a
just report to the Court, who thereupon ordered a Trial at Law, and the rule
was, that this Trial should be (according to the Election of Dawson) at the
next Assizes in Norfolk, or Suffolk, upon a feigned Action, whether the Warrant
of Attorney were the Act and Deed of Dawson or no, which if upon trial, the
Jurors should find in the affirmative, then the monyes in the Sheriffs hand
(made of the goods levied in Execution) to be delivered to Dun, but if they
should find in the Negative, then the Judgment to be vacated, and the moneys
restored to Dawson; Dawson upon this order moved, that the Trial might be
either in London or Middlesex, where the Forgery was committed, because at so
great distance, Knights of the post might stand for substantial witnesses.

Yet in this he was overborne by the Court, and the Trial ordered in one of
those two Counties, who because he could have it no better, chose of two Evils
the least, and had his Trial at Bury St. Edmonds, at the Assizes holden Sept.
10. 1660. for the County of Suffolk.

Read making Cock-sure of the Trial to go on his side, being at such a
distance, carries down the Record, and with it Witnesses that knew how to swear
home; Dawson also knowing the justice of his Cause, fearing the other should
neglect it, (though Defendant) he also carried the Record with him, to trial,
in case Read, and Dun should not; So two Juryes were Impannelled, one on the
Plaintiffes, another on the Defendants score; And although Dawson might have
just cause to fear the packing of a Jury, on the behalf of Read and Dun, whom
his former experience had taught him, to be notoriously villainous, yet trusting
to the righteousness of his Cause, rather than contend, was content to lose
the benefit of his own Record, and proceed to trial by their Jury.

Who being sworn upon the Case between Dun and Dawson, Read who was at the
charge of that Trial, and carrying the witnesses out of London, as has been
since confessed upon Oath, by the Plaintiff Dun, and several other witnesses,
and may be concluded by this undeniable Circumstance, that Read gave Ten
thousand pound security, to the Warden of the Fleet, to whom Dun was then a
prisoner, to have him personally present at the Trial to own the same, yet this
Read appears as one witness in the behalf of Dun, and swore that Warrant of
Attorney was a true Warrant, and Signed and Sealed by Dawson to Dun, for 220l.
which Dawson owed him, although in truth Read did himself Forge, Sign, and Seal
that Warrant, as has been already said, and also made appear by Oath upon
Record.

Having thus led the Dance, he next produces another witness like himself, to
confirm his testimony, who went by the name of William Holmes (which name also,
was so subscribed to the Warrant of Attorney) but that person being dead, this
Counterfeit swears positively, that he was the same William Holmes, who
subscribed his Hand to that Warrant of Attorney, which he upon Oath said, was
Signed, Sealed, and Delivered by that same Richard Dawson, who was then
Defendant in that Cause; But it was discovered in Court, that this pretended
William Holmes, was indeed Isaac Harding a Scrivener, now, and for thirty
years last past dwelling in Swan-Alley near Holborn-Bridge, and was hired by
Read for the Sum of 45s. paid him in hand by his appointment, besides what was
promised him afterward, to make that desperate Oath, which he knew to be false
in every Circumstance of it.

Now how God was pleased to discover the falsehood and perjury of these
Villains, whose feared Consciences durst attest his Divine Majesty so solemnly,
yet so falsely, it will not be amiss to declare briefly.

In the time of the hatching, and prosecuting the aforementioned Villainy
against Dawson, one Thomas Gunning, was by Robert Dun persuaded to go to a
certain person, unknown (but only to the Procurers and Abbetters of the
intended Cheat) to make demand of 220l. of him (as if he had been Richard
Dawson) which sum he was to pay unto him upon Defeasance of a Warrant of
Attorney, to confess a Judgment for 350l. which Dun told Gunning, Richard
Dawson had Signed and Sealed, and that Party to whom he sent him, was the same
person; Gunning (at that time not knowing Dawson) made demand accordingly; That
Counterfeit person owning the name of Richard Dawson, promised payment of the
Sum demanded in a Weeks time; Of which demand, and an answer thereto returned,
by the supposed Richard Dawson, Gunning (being persuaded by Dun) made
Affidavit: The true Dawson hearing this news, so strange to him, testified upon
Oath, was alarmed thereby to look about, and being Authorized by an Order, to
bring in this Deponent Gunning, to see if he would make good his Deposition the
whole Plot was in part discovered, for seeing the true Richard Dawson in
presence, he not only upon his Oath denied him to be the same, of whom he made
the aforesaid demand of 220l. (who then professed himself to be the same Party)
but also Deposed, that Dun in the name of Read, had offered him 40l. to swear
that Warrant of Atorney to be the Act and Deed of Dawson, and bringing him to
Read's Chamber in Davids-Inne, there Read himself proffered him (in Case he
would so make Oath) to maintain him at his Country House, furnish him with a
good Horse, and give him forty pounds in money, as is at large declared in the
Deposition of Thomas Gunning, before the Right Honorable Justice Mallet, taken
July 27. 1660.

This first light in short time (with Gods blessing) discovered the whole
design; For afterward, Richard Ramsey one of the witnesses to that Warrant of
Attorney, being Subpaena'd by Read, four days before the Trial at Bury
Assizes, at his Chamber in Davids-Inne, to be witness in the Case between Dun
and Dawson, there Read proffered him five pound in hand, to swear that the
Defendant Dawson did Sign, Seal, and deliver that Warrant of Attorney, to the
use of Dun, he when he came in Court ingeniously related the truth, viz. that
he was present at signing, and sealing that Warrant of Attorney, and subscribed
his Mark as a Witness thereto, but then knew not either Dun or Dawson, but
since knowing both, he on his Oath affirmed, Dawson not to be present at that
time, but Read was the very person who signed, sealed, and delivered it in the
name of Dawson; he also upon Oath declared the proffer of five pound in hand,
made him by Read, in case he would swear as was before related; also, that
then, and several other times, he saw Read give Dun money to prosecute the said
Suit of Forgery, and that Jacob Wrag, Clerk to Read, told him after the Trial,
that had not he been at Bury Assizes, his Master Read and Dun, had overthrown
Dawson, by the evidence of Isaac Harding, who there swore by the name of
William Holmes.

Which William Holmes being then dead, on his death bed did declare, that he
was solicited, but was not witness to the Warrant of Attorney against Dawson,
to Dun, yet his name was subscribed, his person and hand counterfeited; and
though at the Trial he were dead, yet Harding, who as a Scrivener had attested
several Leases, and Deeds, (for above thirty years space) by the name of Isaac
Harding, for the sum of forty five shillings, paid in hand, (besides what was
afterward promised) he desperately swore what he knew to be false, under the
counterfeit name of William Holmes, whose name and hand, was at first only
forged, as before was said.

Thus it pleased God to defeat the Devices of these two malicious desperate
Villains, and to discover their forgeries, so that the old perjured Wretch,
that swore by a disguised name, got nothing by his counterfeiting, and
forswearing himself, not those who employed him, but a bare detection of their
Villainy, to the confusion of themselves, and the amazement of the hearers.

Dawson having this ground to work upon, proceeds to the examination of Dun
whose Conscience beginning to relent, had compelled him to acknowledge what he
had acted against him, to several of his acquaintance; which he hearing of,
procured his examination before the Right Honorable Lord Chief Justice Foster,
Nov. 26, 1660. who there upon Oath confessed, that the Warrant for Judgment to
an Attorney, and Commission for Bankruptship, sued forth thereupon, were both
carried on in his name, by the instant importunity of Read, and at his Costs
and Charge, with design only to defraud Dawson of the 718l. Judgment recovered
by him against Read and the Costs taxed in Chancery upon the dismission of his
Bill, by the Lords Commissioners, and that he did verily believe, the
Commissioners, who sat upon the Statute taken out in his name, did declare
Dawson a Bankrupt, under their hands and seals, only at the request, and
importunate desire of Read. He also confirmed upon his Oath, Reads suborning
Isaac Harding, to swear at Bury Assizes, under the false borrowed name of
William Holmes, that he saw the Warrant of Attorney, which was made to Dun, for
350l. signed, and sealed, by that very Dawson who appeared Defendant in that
Case in the Court, for which Oath so to be made, Read gave him forty five
shillings in hand; Likewise, that by the Confession of Read, as well as the
information of diverse credible persons, he was assured, that Read was often in
company with the Under-Sheriffe of Norfolk, during that very time, he had a
Writ of Execution against him, (at the Suit of Dawson) for a Judgment of 718l.
recovered by law. And lastly, that one Jacob Wrag (Servant to Read) came to him
(the Deponent) in his Masters name, to desire him not to discover any of these
things before mentioned, and for so doing, he would be careful for him, and not
suffer him to want.

Thus, at length was made a complete discovery of all the windings and turnings
of these Serpentine Monsters in Villainy, one of them, in whose name, and by
whose industry (in great measure) things were thus corruply (or rather
hellishly) carried, upon his Oath discovering himself, and accusing, and so
branding his wicked partner, with a black note of infamy, not to be wiped off
by all the cunning he, or his accursed Tutor in these Forgeries, Perjuries, and
subornation to perjury, can find out, or invent. To God the true Author of this
discovery, be ascribed the sole praise, and glory thereof.

The several chief heads of the testimonies of these three Deponents, I thought
fit here to set down with what perspicuity and brevity I could, (not swerving
in the least from the true intent and meaning of the Affidavits themselves)
which are at large upon Record, taken before Honorable Persons, as was before
touched in each of them; the name of the Right Honorable the Judge, before
whom taken, being particulary remembered, in giving their testimonies in brief,
for the Readers fuller satisfaction, and further confirmation.

To which I might add many more of the like Kind, thirty several at least, but
that I here account needless, since in the mouth of two or three witnesses,
each thing in controversy, is, and ought to be confirmed, and here we have not
only witnesses, but ( ipsos fatentes reos) the persons concerned in the
forgery, (either ignorantly or knowingly, drawn in thereto,) upon Oath
confessing against both themselves, and one another, which is a testimony as
firm as can be desired or expected.

I shall now speak a little more particularly to the Statute of Bankruptship,
sued forth by Read in the name of Dun against Dawson, and firmed by
Commissioners picked, and packt for the same purpose, only to discharge Read
from paying any moneys to Dawson, whose just debt, upon a legal recovery was
upward of 800l.

For taking forth, and granting, or affirming the same, Dawson brought his
action against Read, and those Commissioners, his Confederates; and upon Trial
in Jan. 1660. recovered against them 500l. notwithstanding which, upon an
Affidavit of Reads, read openly in the Court, at the Kings Bench Bar, a motion
was made to have a second hearing, which was had by the consent of both
Plantiff and Defendants the Hillary Term following; where Read (according to
his old wont) procured in readiness four several witnesses, to swear Dawson a
real Bankrupt, ( viz.) Thomas Wigge, one of Honest Sir John Lenthalls
Engineers, a villain so notorious in that kind, that if in any Case, (where he
is well paid) his Evidence come short, (that is) be not sworn home enough,
blame the Lawyer that gave him not better and larger instructions, and not him,
who wants only to be informed, what manner of Oath will serve turn; then as for
performance, let him alone for one. The second Jacob Wragge, servant to Read,
one who had learned so much of his Masters qualities, that no wise man can
trust his Word, or believe his Oath; the third Robert Coghill, a neighbor to
Read, who by this hopeful beginning, gives great assurance, what a complete
Knight of the Post he may prove in time, if he continue the acquaintance, and
follow the direction of Read; the last, Thomas Adamson formerly a Clerk to
Read, who it seems still wants his help at a dead lift, (knowing his abilities)
though at present he has left his Service: These four, being pre-instructed,
could (if occasion had required) have sworn any man of dealing, in England a
Bankrupt; for to give them their due, in their depositions, there wanted
nothing but Truth, Malice enough, and Formality sufficient, with a home shot to
reach the mark aimed at by Read, their Tutor, who put cruel words of falsehood
into their mouths, and told them what manner of Oaths would serve his turn, and
they accordingly swore as dangerously, desperately, and resolutely against the
Credit and Reputation of their innocent Neighbor, whom some of them knew not,
others very little; all of them, knew certainly that what they swore against
him, was absolutely false, and so God by his providence has plainly since
discovered it to be, to the great shame of those poor perjured wretches; but
most especially of that Monster, who suborned them to do it, as he had done
others often before.

For which wilful perjury (palpably now detected) these four abovenamed, stand
indicted at the Old Bailey in London, by Dawson, who doubts not, but to have
them brought to Condign, and Exemplary punishment.

Thus have I in brief decyphred out to you, a great Monster in villainy, as in a
Landscape, given you a large volume of Roguery contracted into an Epitome, a
short narrative of what to his cost and trouble, Dawson (who has still been
the sufferer hitherto) has felt for these many years, to the ruin almost of
his Wife, Children, and Family, and whose Case or Lot may it not be next? nay
who can escape for future? if such Villainies be countenanced, as they will be
if not prohibited, and severely punished to the terror of others? It is
reported of a Bravoe, that he would vauntingly boast, how he had at his beck
ready an hundred to swear for him, an hundred to fight for him, and an hundred
more to supply him with money.

The thing, (though* I cannot affirm the number) is most true of this Read; who
as for swearers, has made his boasts, that he is so provided with a stock of
them, as never to fail in any Case, and that his manner of dealing with such
Knights of the Post, is suitable to that of the Dutch before a Sea Fight, with
their Mariners, viz. to give them 20 or 30 glasses of Sack, just before they
come upon their Oaths, then (quoth he) they are fit to serve my turn, and swear
resolutely, bravely, and boldly, without making the least scruple of any thing
that is told them makes absolutely for the good of the Cause depending, to have
it sworn either thus, or otherwise.

And for fighting (or rather maintaining his quarrel,) 'twould make a man
bless himself to see prodigious Villains so favored, before one that
mannageth a Cause as just as Justice it self, (having been so often determined
just, by the reiterated Sentences of Common Law, Commissioners for Equity;
etc.) How did the honest Master of the Rolls (Speaker to the reforming Rump)
endeavor to entrap Dawson in favor of Read? How was Read with great charge,
brought into a Prison, where he deserved to lie till death, yet ( Presto be
gone Sir) discharged forthwith? and Dawson brought in upon a large Scroll of
Fob'd Actions, to keep the other, and such as he procured to commit Perjury
wilfully and maliciously, from Condign punishment? How ready was the Sheriff
of Norfolk to Execute a Writ upon a forged Warrant for Judgment, against
Dawson, and yet knew it to be so, (using this expression, He would Execute 1000
the like, if they were brought to him, and Goods of Dawsons to be found in his
Balywick;) yet how loath, nay absolutely unwilling to Execute a true Writ, upon
a Judgment, justly recovered, in Court, (after the discovery of a pack of
Roguery) against Read; though often in his Company, nor would be persuaded to
make return of the same, till Reads Cockatrise Eggs of Villainy were hatched?
How have the Gaolers, and their fetting dogs, complied with this perjured
Monster and his Confederates, to ruin one in defense of the other? Portington
a Condemned Debtor to Dawson, and Prisoner to Sir John Lenthall in Execution,
having liberty to choose whether he would live in restraint or no; and Read
cast into Prison, for Perjury, and Subornation thereto, Forgery, personating
other men, and taking upon him their names, not without great cost and charge
to the Plaintiff, yet he in short time, let out, upon inconsiderable Bayl,
though Dawson wrongfully imprisoned upon feigned, false Actions, maliciously
brought against him, to hinder his prosecuting these so abominable Villains,
has not liberty to remain in one prison; but is tossed (like a Curr in a
blanket) from Gaol to Gaol, to a vast expense of monyes, nor without danger to
his person, being this present Term, removed from the Fleet (where he was so
happy, as to be free from gross incivilities,) to the Kings Bench, where the
Keeper Sir John Lenthall, for a base bribe, has injustly (yet much like
himself, and his Brother, the Quondam Ravenous Master of the Rolls) suffered
Portington, a Prisoner in Execution, at his Suit, to have free liberty, these
many years, to the defrauding his greatly oppressed Creditor, and his
extraordinary damage; and is now become a deadly Enemy to Dawson, because he
Sues him for an Escape.

I might be large here, but that I study and must affect brevity; In a word
then to close this sad discourse concerning this bad Subject, I wish only that
the effect and tendency of such practices would be seriously weighed, which is
no other than the total subversion of all our Laws, and destruction of civil
policy; for if all that is recovered by legal process, may be so evaded, and
detained from the Plantiff, and Costs multiplied by vexatious after hearings,
his Estate plucked away violently, by forged Judgments, and these proved true
and real by wilful perjury, till the party thus wronged has not monyes left
him to prosecute such injuries, or to make a motion in Court, yet when this is
discovered, and openly made to appear, the parties doing the wrong, be not
curbed, and discountenanced, what hopes can an honest man have for future in a
just and righteous Cause, well then may we cry out with the Philosopher, fiat
Justitia, aut ruet Coelum.

Willingly could I now throw aside my pen, but that more injuries compel me to
a farther complaint: From relating the Villainies of an Attorney; I would next
proceed to match him with a pair of as great Villains as himself, in his own
profession, viz. a Solicitor and a Counselor, which three, if the Devi^ had a
Cause to be prosecuted, he could not be better fitted with a leash of Lawyers.

But before I come to a survey of their Villainous actings, I shall relate a
short particular Case, which for ought I know has no relation to any of the
rest, but was carried on by the Conscientious Master of the Rolls, and a
Kinsman of his (as very an honest man as himself) to the Damage of Dawson at
the least 2000l.

About the year 1649. Dawson Commenced a Suit with Matthew Binkes a Grasier, for
a great sum of money, which he injuriously detained from him, and by Law
recovered 805l. and had Judgment entered for the same, Binkes brings his Bill
for relief in Chancery, whereupon after a tedious Suit, and great Expenses (the
Commissioners for examination of witnesses, sitting above a hundred and eighty
miles from London,) at last the cause came to hearing, before the honest
Speaker William Lenthal, at the Rolls, who persuaded Dawson to refer the
matter to a person whom he should name, promising to name an honest indifferent
man, a stranger to both their persons, and the Cause; but scorning to be as
good as his word, nominated a Kinsman of his own, by name John Nabbs, whose Son
was Solicitor in that Cause against Dawson for Binks, and pleaded it before
his Father so effectually, that Nabbs gave away the Judgment of 805l. from
Dawson, and moreover, ordered him to pay 44l. 4s. 6d. costs to Binks, a strange
order, which could not be expected otherwise, considering how it was brought
forth, for neither Dawson, or any friend of his for him, was present or heard,
but only Binks and such who spoke on his side, the chief of whom was Nabbs Son,
a Solicitor retained by Binks.

Nor was the Judgment only given away, but Dawson ordered to acknowledge
satisfaction for the same upon Record, which he refusing, appealed to the then
Lords Commissioners, Lisle, etc. who without proofs or allegations, ordered
Dawson to be committed Prisoner to the Fleet, until he submitted to perform the
order of Nabbs, whom the Master of the Rolls had empowered to hear, and finally
determine that Cause without appeal.

Nabbs understanding that Dawson questioned his decretal order, in a most
unjust revenge, further ordered 180l. more to be paid to Binks for costs, which
payment Dawson refusing, a Sergeant at Arms was commanded to seize and
imprison him, till he did acknowledge satisfaction on the Judgment for 805l.
pay the first 44l. 4s. 6d. and the other 180l. awarded for Costs, and give a
general Release, never more to question Binks.

Now the injustice of Nabbs decree may easily be evinced, for that the Master
of the Rolls, before Dawson consented to the reference, proffered to give him
by decree, 380l. (taking the rule of those Conscientious Jurors, who at a
venture hang half, and save half,) which Dawson refusing as unjust, and too
much damnifying him, at last consented to a reference, where such a Refer was
appointed by Lenthal, who gave not only the judgment away wholly, but above
200l. more, for imaginary costs, refusing to hear any testimony on Dawsons
side, but perremptorily binding him up to his determination, upon pain of
imprisonment, to avoid which, Dawson was a long time hunted from County to
County, by the Officers of the Fleet, and at last finding such a fugitive life,
to tend to his absolute ruin, he was enforced to submit to this monstrous
piece of injustice, not seeing then any hopes of remedy. Lenthal being a man so
powerful, and Nabbs supported by him, that not to yield to them then, signified
nothing else but present ruin, they being able to crush at their pleasure whom
they listed.

He that knows the manner of dealing of the Master of the Rolls, may give a
shrewd guess at what it cost Binkes to purchase this piece of injustice, who
thrived so well upon it, that he who then was visibly responsible for such a
debt trebled, is now as far from being master of a tithe of such a sum, as he
was then from honesty; from whence may be concluded undeniably, that at the
long run, honest dealing will prove the best policy.

And now I am at leisure to take notice of, and lay open the injuries wherewith
I have been, and still am oppressed, by the procurement of two Lawyers, a
Counselor, and a Solicitor, Brothers in Profession, Name, and Villainy,
Francis Lutterel, and Edward Lutterel, who both write themselves of
Grayes-Inne, but their practices have been so basely foul, and grossly
corrupt, as may justly be the shame of all the Innes of Court, which I hope
will shortly spue out such, (I will not say Villains, because they are Lawyers)
but who are the scorn and shame of the long Robe.

Edward Lutterel, who prectiseth as a Solicitor, was in that Capacity emp^oyed
by Dawson for several years, who was indeed the chief means o^ his sustenance
for that time, he having not bread for either himself or children, but what was
bought with the money wherewith Dawson relieved him, who thought he had so
engaged him by many kindnesses* that he might boldly commit his very life into
his hands, as he unadvisedly be-trusted him with his means of live^yhood,
almost to his utter undoing, as shall be particularly related with as much
brevity as I can.

He as I said being employed by Dawson as a Solicitor, was acquainted with the
forgery, and unjust devices of Read and Dun, in tended for the ruin of Dawson,
who, as soon as by his industry, and Gods blessing thereon, he could get
together 500, or 1000l. worth of Goods, would immediately with Executions taken
out upon forged Warrants sweep all away.

Dawson at that time having in the County of Norfolk at Walpool, Hay ^o the
value of about 1200l. being at least six hundred Load, which at that time might
have been sold in the place for forty shillings the Load, or thereabout, and a
short time of some months interest in the Land on which it grew, and then stood
made up in Stacks, in which time the grass upon the Land, was (for feeding
Cattle) worth at least threescore pound or upwards. Edward Luttrel persuaded
Dawson for avoiding the malicious mischief intended against him by Read and
Dun, to sell and make over those Goods and Leases to him, out of which he would
discharge 402l. 10s. 2d. which Dawson was engaged to several persons for, and
bring him into his purse 500l. more, and himself defray all incident charges.

Dawson confiding in the honesty of Edward Luttrel, consents hereto, and gives
him a Scedule particularly mentioning all his Debts, to whom due, and when
payable,; summed up in the Total, as was above expressed, in Consideration of the
payment of which, and the Sum of 500l. over and besides to be paid to Dawson by
Luttrel, he consents to the making of an Indenture of Sale, which was
accordingly made by his Brother Francis Luttrel the Counselor, with the
Scedule of Dawsons Debts annexed to the Deed, which Edward Luttrel upon receipt
of this Deed, undertook to discharge, and for ever to acquit Dawson from, and
every part of them, then and there assuming, and faithfully engaging his
promise to pay to Dawson 500l. over and above the Debts; This Deed was made
July 25. 1659. as by it and the Scedule does more at large appear. Edward
having gotten this Estate in his hands, began to slight Dawson, bidding him pay
his Debts himself, nor did he either satisfy them as he had engaged, nor pay
to Dawson one penny, according to his Assumption, and faithful promise.

Dawson being thus deluded, and unworthily dealt with, addresseth himself to
the Counselor ( Francis Luttrel) who had promised, and undertaken to him, that
his Brother Edward should fully perform and make good his promise, or he in
default of him would himself make it good, but he was so far from performing
what he promised, that he threatened Dawson, that in case he sued or molested
him upon the score of his promise, he would grind him to powder: his Brother
Edward boasting, that before he should pay to Dawson, or for him, one Groat,
the Counselor his Brother would furnish him with a 1000l. to spend in Law.

From which time both the Luttrels, have most maliciously combined with Read,
the old implacable Enemy of Dawson, and other of his associated Confederates,
to avoid whom was the first pretense used, and urged by Edward Luttrel, to
induce and persuade Dawson to make over the Estate unto him.

Which by his own words and Confession, as is testified upon Oath by one of his
acquaintance, was worth more than 1000l. and made over to him upon that
Consideration, that he should first of all pay Debts, to which he agreed, and
promised the same, but said he would neither do it, nor give Dawson an account
of his Estate, of which Intention, being demanded the reason, gave this, that
he had got into his hands the whole by which Dawson intended, or was able to
pay his Debts, or live upon, and therefore was resolved if he would keep
himself but honest, he would keep him poor enough; Which word of his he has
kept to his ability, For when ever Dawson brought his Action against one or
both of them, at Common Law, they would sue for relief in Chancery, as namely
that the Goods were but only made over to Edward in trust, for the use of
Richard, and so that Condition of payment of Debts, etc. to be only pro forma,
and not intended to be interpreted to the prejudice of Edward; upon which and
the like false suggestions, Dawson was tied up by Injunction and Orders not to
proceed at Common Law, till the Cause were heard in the Court of Chancery,
where when Dawson preferred his Cross-bill of Complaint, expecting to have the
merits of his Cause heard by the Right Honorable the Lord Chancellor; In stead
of Answer, he had an old Outlawry, long before reversed, and superseded,
pleaded in Bar to his Complaint, to disprove which, cost the said Richard much
money, besides great trouble and delay of time; To add to whose encumbrance,
and if possible to make him for ever incapable to prosecute those oppressing
betrayers of his peace, Edward has caused to be sued against him most of those
Debts which he had engaged to discharge and pay, yet keeps his Estate without
satisfaction therefore, or account thereof given to Dawson, pretending it was
formally made over to him only in trust, which trust he has made good with a
vengance; But in truth the Goods were absolutely sold* and the Deed of bargain
and sale delivered to him ( bona fide) upon which he received them, took them
into his possession, sold as much of them as according to his own words would
serve his turn, and then complied with Read to seize the rest (as Dawsons
goods) which he upon absolute sale, and delivery, had enjoyed and possessed for
many months together, with the Land which Dawson made over to him, for the full
time of his Leases therein, without molestation of Read, Dun, or any other, and
had them also six months in possession after the time was expired, which Dawson
made over to him by virtue of his Leases.

Yea when Dawson after the Sale and Delivery (being with him in Norfolk)
advised him to the selling of the Hay, in which he had more insight then
Luttrell; he bad him meddle with his own business, for he had nothing to do
there with either the Goods or Ground, which were sold and made over to him;
And after that, when Dawson perceived that he did not pay those debts, he
desired of him, that he would either sell the Goods, and make payment, or
resign them to some other, who would give security, to indemnifie him, (the
said Luttrell,) as to his engagement of paying debts; but he replied, the Goods
were his own, which he would neither resign, nor sell, but when he saw his own
time. Nor was he ashamed to boast, that he had met with such a bargain from
Dawson, that he would put 500l. into his own purse thereby, which it were
strange if he could do any other way, than by cheating him of the whole, and
that was the course he took, in which he was encouraged and supported by his
Brother.

And suitable to the dealing of him, in this Case of Hay and Leases of Land,
was another trick of knavery put upon Richard by Edward about the sale of a
Coach, which costing Richard 40. l. he sold it to Luttrell for 30l. by a Deed
of Sale, which 30l. he the said Richard ordered Edward to pay 5l. to his Brother
Francis Luttrell, and 25l to Richard Norwich, which payments (so ordered) Edward
Luttrell did assume and promise to make; upon which only consideration, the
Bill of Sale for the Coach was by Richard delivered to Edward.

Francis Luttrell who ordered the Deed to be made, accepted of this payment
from his Brother Edward, and did thereupon discharge Dawson of the Debt of five
pounds, though since the Coach is sold by Edward, and the money for it
received, and spent, Francis makes new demand of the money from Dawson, Edward
refusing to pay either his Brother Francis, or Richard Norwich, but when sued
for this Debt of thirty pounds by Dawson, he first by Levata querela, removed
it into the Mayors Court, where by his Bill, he pretended himself only a
Trustee for the Coach, as before he was for the Hay, though such trusts so
discharged, will shortly bring him to be trusted by none.

For these have been his continual Subterfuges, first to pretend only a trust
in Dawsons Goods, that he might have color to sue for relief in Chancery, and
there in stead of making answer material to the Cause depending, to plead old
reversed Outlawryes in Bar, so that at once Dawson is tied up from his legal
course of proceeding (by Injunctions) and debarred in Chancery to prosecute
those his Bills, till he has with great cost and trouble disproved the
pretended Outlawryes to be in force, of which Luttrel has made his brags to
several of his Companions, as is by some of them testified upon Oath, and also
upon Record.

Nor is this all* though it argue a mind as bad as bad may be, but by
compliance with the Clerks of Chancery, this Luttrel has not seldom penned
his own Orders, which have been entered down according to his own words (as can
be proved against him undeniably) upon which advantage it is not to be wondered
at, that Dawson is still the sufferer, when his Enemies profell, are in effect
the Contrivers of their own Orders, which no doubt (having that liberty) they
pen with the greatest advantage for themselves* To prove which Charge real, the
last Order which was left for Richard at the Registers Office, was every word
thereof, the handwriting of Edward Luttrel, which he has in readiness to
show, in case it be required of him.

Now how sad the Case of Dawson is, may be collected briefly, if we consider
his present Condition, and compare it with what he was formerly, one who dealt
for at least 20000 l. per annum. Rented in Land (for feeding of Cattle, and for
Hay) 900 l. annually, and by Gods blessing upon his Endeavors, had by his
Industry gotten such an Estate, by which He and his Family lived comfortably
and plentifully, whose Credit would have past without scruple for 3. or 4.
thousand pounds: now to find him a Prisoner, his Estate plucked away from him by
Knavery, Injustice, Perjury, and Subornation thereto, Forgery, and
Counterfeiting his Name and Person, by which means he is damnified at the least
8000 l. besides what by his Industry in this time he might have got thereby, in
his way of dealing, for want of which money (although he has made legal
recovery of the greatest part of it) he has Contracted some Debts, which he is
unable to satisfy, unless he might have his due from others, one of which
Debts due to him upon Judgment (if paid) would discharge every real Creditor
that could justly make demand of moneys from him.

But in stead of payment, these honest Debtors to Dawson, have all combined
together in a mutual engagement never to discharge one Farthing, yet are men of
able Estates, Portington a man responsible, detaining 1297 l. 13 s. 4 d. for
above 12. years, and putting Dawson to at least 1000 l. charge first and last,
in recovering and defending that Judgment against him: In Execution for which,
although he has been 10. years and upwards, one of Sr. John Lenthall^ (fast
and loose) prisoners, yet so he is resolved rather to dye, than to pay a
Farthing of this Debt; Read also, against whom Dawson has recovered 718l. for
his deceitful seizing his Goods by virtue of a Warrant of Attorney (which was
satisfied) and 500 l. against him, and other his Confederates, for Damages
sustained by a Commission of Bankruptship, sued out against Dawson, upon a
forged Warrant to confess a Judgment, as has at large been declared, yet he
boasts that (rather than pay a Groat) he will rot in prison, though he has at
command several thousand pounds to maintain him, which with his Land he will so
make over to Feoffees in trust, that the Plaintiff shall never get penny, not
know how to find his Estate: And although at another time he took away a
thousand pounds worth of the Goods of Dawson, upon a forged Judgment; In
disproveing of which, and discovering the Forgery, Perjury, and Subornation to
Perjury, committed therein, it cost Dawson several hundred pounds, and though
the order of Court were, that upon disproving that Warrant to be real, the
Goods levied in Execution should be returned to the Owner of the same, yet he
has not yet received nor can get the least satisfaction therefore; Nor will
the Sheriff of Norfolk make return of that Writ of Execution, upon which he
took away the Goods of Dawson, and sold them almost two years since; To which
oppressions may be added the giving away a Judgment of 805 l. recovered
against Binks, by Nabbs, upon Commission granted him by Lenthal, then Master of
the Rolls, to hear and determine that Cause without appeal, which he
determined without hearing Dawson, or any Witness, Counselor, or Solicitor
in his behalf, giving away moreover, besides the Debt, 200 l. and upwards for
Costs.

And lastly Edward Luttrell upon pretense of securing Dawson from the like
future plots of Read, and his accomplices, with promise (as has been related) of
paying Dawsons real Debts, and bringing an overplus into his purse, for the
maintenance of him, his Wife, and Family, has cheated him of all he had left,
his Brother and he now complying with Read and Portington not only to defraud,
but to grind and squeeze Dawson, and bring him to utter ruin, (a bad requital
of the many years kindnesses showed by Richard to Edward, whom he kept from
starving) who now if it lay in his power would starve him and his.

And that the falsehood and baseness of these two Brothers in iniquity may be
made more evident, besides the ingratitude of Edward, which according to the
Aphorism in Ethics ( Ingratum si dixeris omnia dixisti*) includes all that can
be spoken evil concerning any person; it will not be amiss to hint in brief,
the remarkable honesty of the Counselor Francis, who being summoned by Richard
at the Trial between him and his Brother Edward, concerning the Debt of thirty
pounds, due upon Sale of a Coach, at which Deed of Sale, Francis was present,
and ordered the making thereof, and thereupon accepted 5 l. from his Brother
Edward, which was due to him from Dawson, yet he against his own Conscience and
Knowledge, swore that the Deed was there made fraudulently, for the defrauding
of some Creditors, which Edward upon a former Deed of Sale (of Hay and Leases
of pasture ground) made to him by Richard, had a year before, undertaken to
discharge, yet Francis upon Oath declared, that to Evade those Debts, the Coach
was only colourably made over to Edward in trust, and no otherwise, to be
redelivered upon demand at the pleasure of Dawson; At the time of making which
Oath, all of the Long Robe present in Court, blessed themselves to hear him so
swear, the Judge telling him openly, that Oath could not be true, or if it
were, it would argue himself to be a very Knave: not long after which Trial the
Coach was sold, and the money shared, but not a penny paid either to Dawson or
his Order. Now what Justice can be expected against such persons, that can, and
dare so swear, let the World Judge*

Nor was this only a failing at that present in the Counselor Francis, but
according to the relation of his Brother Edward, to Dawson (in the hearing of
several persons,) Francis the Counselor, made offer to him (the said Edward)
of 300 l. sterling, conditionally, that he should make Oath against Sir Allein
Appesly, that he was one in Sir George Booths design, in those times to have
brought both the life of that worthy person into danger, and confiseated his
Estate, which he in his conceit was just grasping, only wanted such a desperate
swearer, fully to accomplish this intended Villainy; from whom, and such as he
is, God of his Mercy deliver each honest man.

For of late Edward Luttrell, has gone from party to party, with whom Dawson
had formerly any dealing, to procure them to enter Actions against him, and
several with whom he never had to do, nor does know the persons, have by his
persuasion, and Reads, brought against Dawson great Actions, upon which (to the
number of 30 and upwards amounting to the Sum of about 1600 l.) he is now
detained Prisoner, of which there is not an hundred pounds due; but some of the
parties dead two years since, in whose names Actions are now brought, others
satisfied as long time ago, nor know of the entering any such Actions at their
Suit; others never known to, or heard of by the Defendant Dawson, yet have
Actions against him, ( viz.) 560 l. pretended to be due upon Bond, unto William
Marriot and Thomas Bre^tford, of whom he never had knowledge, much less
dealing with them. Also 200 l. entered at the several Suits of Thomas Osborne,
and John Bates, with whom likewise Dawson never had dealing, besides other
Fob'd Actions, too tedious to name particularly.

The greater part of which were not charged upon Dawson at his first
imprisonment, although then the Luttrels, Read, and their Confederates boasted,
they had him fast for his life time. To accomplish which design (to their
power) Sir John Lenthal (with whom Dawson never had to do, more than to sue him
for the wilful escape of Portington, whereby he is damnified at least 1500 l.)
this last Easter Term, 1661. by Habeas Corpus, fetched him over to his prison,
where he was loaded with fob'd Actions, to hinder his prosecution of that
escape of Portington, and the several in^ictments of perjury, which are found
against Read, and such as were suborned by him, and his procurement, among whom
one is an Enginee^ to, and Servant of Sir John Lenthal, that keeps many such
Cattle, who it is to be feared, serve his turn in the like Cases, oftener, than
I hope will hereafter be suffered, or else woe to those whom he and others of
such Conscience design to ruin. From which prison with very great costs and
charges (which were increased by the number of feigned Actions) Dawson was
compelled to remove himself back to the Fleet, not accounting his person safe,
in the Kings Bench Prison, where the Keeper is so great a Confederate with his
most malicious implacable Adversaries.

HAving thus, with as much brevity as I could, related my great grievances,
under which I have long groaned, and for remedy whereof I have tried many ways
(for diverse years) both in Law and Equity; But by reason of the Corruption of
former times, the power, and number of my Adversaries, and mine own inability
(at length) to prosecute them in a Legal Course, being reduced by these long
oppressures, to great streights, and at present a Prisoner, loaded with many
Malicious Forged Actions, to hinder my Liberty, upon reasonable security such
as my present conditition will afford me to procure.

Some of my Creditors by the instigation of Read, Portington, and the
Luttrells, having prosecuted me to Judgment, and charged me in Execution
thereupon, only to hinder my going abroad without charge of an Habeas Corpus,
or Day Writ, which (with the allowance for a keeper, Chamber-rent and Outgoing
Fees) amounting to at least 10 or 12 s. each day, is so great a burden, that
while I am so Confined, or have Liberty at such rates, I can expect nothing but
utter ruin to my self, and all that are nearly related, and dear unto me.

Wherefore all other hopes failing me, the last remedy, left me, is to fly unto
the shelter of the most Honorable, the Lords and Commons in Parliament now
Assembled, to spread (most Humbly) my Cause before them, and with all possible
Submission to Beg and Implore their Gracious Help and Assistance.

My Case Right Honorable Lords, and Worthy Gentlemen, although private, is not
of private Concernment, nor bounded within private limits, for as Read has
dealt by me, and mine, so has he dealt by diverse others, twenty Families at
least I could name, whom by the like A^ts he has ruined and destroyed, and
several Fellow Prisoners I meet with daily, oppressed by the same courses of
injustice, false Oaths, counterfeit Warrants for confessing Judgments, false
Actions, under which they are detained, etc. by which ways of unjust vexation,
together with the excessive, unreasonable charges which (through the corruption
of times) now accompany imprisonment, many are reduced to that extremity that
they want for the conveniences of life, much more unable are they, by any means
of address to seek for relief.

My Lords and Gentlemen; You are your selves the fathers of Children, whom God
long preserve and bless; Howbeit none of you can promise to them a future
immunity from the like miseries, unless this Cockatrice-Egge of corruption and
injustice be crushed, which no foot, but such a foot of Authority can do. These
unjust vexatious, Law Suits, or rather Law Cheats, bringing sweet gain to very
many, who though they will not openly defend, yet will connive at such
practices, so lucriferous and beneficial to themselves, and their dependants.

But considering there is legal profit sufficient, allowed to all honest
Ministers of Justice, and what comes in this way, is squeezed out of the heart
blood of his Majesty's most faithful Subjects, thousands of whom have been
ruined in their Estates, Credit, or both, by such illegal proceedings. My case
also being so grossly and foully exemplary, that it causes amazement in all
who hear it: I doubt not, but that your Honors and Wisdoms will think of a
way of relief, as for all the like oppressures in general, so for your most
humble Supplicant in particular, that we may have cause (from our hearts) to
bless God for the happy change of times, when our bowels shall be refreshed,
our miseries considered, and out unjust vexatious oppressures relieved, by your
power, prudence, and justice.

I shall not dare to prescribe any means to so grave, wise, and honorable a
Council, but with all humble submission expect and wait for such a remedy as
shall appear meet to your judicious breasts, praying the great God (who sits in
your Assembly,) so to assist you with his blessing from above, that you may
your selves become a blessing to this Kingdom, a Sanctuary to the distressed,
a defense against wrongs and injustice, and a refreshment in particular, to

Your poor ruined Petitioner, (if not by your Piety and justice relieved)
RICHARD DAWSON*


