A PARAPHRASE AND COMMENTARY UPON THE EPISTLE OF Saint PAVL TO THE ROMANS.

By William Day, M. A. Vicar of Mapledurham in the County of Oxon, and Divinity
Reader in his Majesty's Free Chapel of Saint George within the Castle of
Windsor.

The secret things belong unto the Lord our God: But those things which are
revealed, belong to us, and to our Children for ever, Deuteronomy. 29.29. (...).
Theophylact. in Argumento Epist. ad Romanos. LONDON, Printed by S. Griffin for
Joshua Kirton, and are to be sold at his shop, at the sign of the Kings Arms in
Saint Paul's Churchyard, 1666.

IMPRIMATUR.

Perlegi Paraphrasin hanc cum Commentariis in Epistolam ad Romanos; in qua
nihil reperio doctrinae, disciplinaeve Ecclesiae Anglicanae, aut bonis moribus
contrarium.

Joh. Hall Rev. in Christo Pat. Domino Episc. Land. a sac. Domest.
Ex Aedibus Londinens. Feb. 20. 1664.
Ornatissimis and Doctissimis Viris.
Richardo Allestry D.T. Doctissimo sacrae Theologiae in Academia Oxoniensi
Professori Regio, and Collegii ^egalis de Etona Praeposito Dignissimo.

Jacobo Fleetwood D. T. Et dignissimo Collegii Regalis de Cantabrigia
Praeposito.

Omnibusque, Vtriusque Collegii Sociis.

Hanc suam Paraphrasin una cum Commentariis in Epistolam Sancti Pauli ad
Romanos.

Gulielmus Day Vtriusque Collegii olim Alumnus, and Cantabrigiensis etiam
Socius, nunc autem Vicarius de Mapledurham in Comitat. Oxoniensi, and
Praelector Theologiae in libera Capella Regia Sancti Georgii infra Castrum de
Windesora.

D. D. D.

The PREFACE.
THis Epistle of Saint Paul to the Romans, is set in order of place before all
other his Epistles; not because it was before all the other in order of time,
but because it was written unto the Romans, whose City at that time excelled
all other Cities in dignity and renown, and in pre-eminence of Rule and
Dominion; for if we look to the order of time in which they were written, both
the Epistles of Saint Paul to the Corinthians, were written before this to the
Romans. For Saint Paul in his second Epistle to the Corinthians, Chap. 8. and
9. Stirs the Corinthians up to a liberal contribution for the poor Saints
at Jerusalem: But in his Epistle to the Romans, Chap. 15. Ver. 25, 26. He
tells the Romans, that he was to go to Jerusalem, to minister unto the
Saints; for it had pleased them of Macedonia and Achaia (part of which was
Corinth) to make a certain contribution, for the poor Saints which were at
Jerusalem. This contribution therefore was perfected then, when he wrote his
Epistle to the Romans, which was not made when he wrote to the Corinthians; and
therefore his Epistles to the Corinthians were in order of time written before
his Epistle to the Romans, though his Epistle to the Romans, has in order of
place, the Priority before his Epistles to the Corinthians.

Saint Paul wrote this Epistle in the Greek tongue, though he wrote to the
Romans, whose language was the Latin; Because the principle Subject or
Argument of this Epistle, was not some occasional matter, as the Subject or
Argument of other his Epistles was; but such a Subject, or such an Argument, in
which there was no Church, but was concerned. For the principle Subject or
Argument of this Epistle conteins in a manner the sum of the Gospel or Doctrine
of Christ. And therefore, though he dedicates it, as it were, to the Church or
Saints, which were at Rome, because Rome was the head City of all the Gentiles,
and from thence by the frequency of men of all Nations, and Countries resorting
thither, the truth might be carried and spread abroad, among other people, yet
is it likely that he did intend to communicate it to other Churches also, and
to send them Copies thereof, for their instruction and confirmation: And for
such a purpose, it was more suitable to write in the Greek tongue, then in the
Latin. For the Greek was the tongue, which was then most generally known and
used, which even the Roman women could speak, and by which Strangers and
Travelers had commerce with, and understanding one of another: But the Latin
tongue (though it be now the tongue most generally learned and known, yet) was
it at that time confined within narrow limits, and not a general language;
which Tully confesses in his Oration, pro Archia Poeta. For Graeca (says he)
leguntur in omnibus fere Gentibus, Latina suis finibus, exiguis sane,
continentur. That is, The Greek writings are read almost in all Nations, but
the Latin are contained within their own bounds, and those but small ones too.
But of this, See more in Brerewoods Enquiries touching the diversity of
Languages, Chap. 1. and 3.

CHAP. I.
As for the Subject of this Epistle it is partly Doctrinal, and partly Moral.
And the Doctrinal part thereof is chiefly concerning Justification, which he
teaches to be not by Works of the Law, but by the Faith of Christ.

CHAP. II. and III.
He teaches that Justification is not by the works of the Law, for that all
had sinned, both Jews and Gentiles: And this, that all had sinned, he shows, as
to the Gentiles, Chap. 1. from verse 19. to the end of that Chapter; And as to
the Jews he shows it Chap. 2. and 3. from the first verse of the second
Chapter, to the one and twentieth of the third. And by the way he shows also,
that a Jew is not justified, neither as he is a Jew according to the flesh;
neither as he has the Law and the knowledge thereof; neither as he is
circumcised; and having showed both of the Jews and of the Gentiles, that they
have all of them sinned; he concludes that therefore by the deeds of the Law no
flesh shall be justified in the sight of God, Chap. 3. ver. 20. Then verse 21.
He shows, That Justification is by the Faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon
all them that believe.

CHAP. IV.
Having showed that none are justified by the works of the Law, but by Faith;
in the fourth Chapter, he proves and makes that good, which he had said
concerning Justification, by the example of Abraham, and shows that Abraham
(who was not unworthily in high esteem among the Jews) was not justified by
the Works of the Law, but by Faith.

CHAP. V.
Having thus done, in the fifth Chapter, he shows the blessedness of those
which are justified by faith through Christ. And at the 12. verse thereof he
shows, how that original sin entered into the world, through Adam, and death by
sin; declaring thereby, what Miseries both of Sin and Punishment accrued to us,
by that first man; that he might take occasion from thence to magnify the
benefit which we have by Christ, by the gracious pardon not only of that
original sin, but also of all our actual sins, etc. So that when sin abounded
Grace (as he speaks Chap. 5. verse 20.) did much more abound.

CHAP. VI.
But now least any one, which had been justified by Faith, should think that he
might continue in sin, that the grace of God might the more abound, and so the
mercy of God might be the more glorified (As some had objected) to the
Christians, that they did, and held, though falsely, to whom he had answered
before, Chap. 3. ver. 6, 7, 8.) In the sixth Chapter he shows, how
inconsistant it is with him, who is justified by faith, and had his former sins
pardoned by Grace, to live in sin, and uses many arguments to stir him up to
live an holy life.

But least that any faint-hearted Christian in general, or Jew in particular
(for of him by the answer, which he gives in this sixth Chapter, and which he
prosecutes in the seventh, he seems especially to speak) should say. Yea, but
for my part I cannot follow Righteousness, as you would have us, nor can I be
but a slave to sin, having been so great a follower of unrighteousness, and sin
having had such dmoinion over me. The Apostle tells him, Chap. 6. verse 14.
that Sin should not have dominion over him as it had had, for he was not now
under the Law, but under the Gospel, which afforded him these means to free
himself from sin, which the Law could not afford him.

CHAP. VII.
And this his answer he prosecutes, Chap. 7. and shows the Jew, that the Jews
were freed from the Law (which was the strength of Sin, 1 Cor. 15, 56.) and
were brought under the Gospel, that they might serve God by a new kind of Life,
which the Gospel works in us, and that they might not follow that old kind of
life, which they led, while they were under the Law, through the Motions of
sin, which were by the Law.

But now, because some might say, that there could be no motions of Sin by the
Law; and others might say, that the Law would be the cause of Sin, if there
were any motions of Sin by it; He shows verse the seventh, and so forward to
the end of the Chapter, both that the Law was the occasion of sin, to those
which were under it; and that it was not for all that, the true and genuine
cause thereof; wherefore (at the seventh verse) the better to show these things
which he speaks of, and the condition of the Jews, which lived before the Law
was given by Moses; and the condition of the same people when they were under
the Law after it was given: He puts one in his own person, the person of the
Jews, both as they lived before the Law, and under the Law.

CHAP. VIII.
Now after the Apostle has finished these things he comes again in the eighth
Chapter, to show the happiness of them, who are justified by faith, or who are
in Christ Jesus (for those are all one) whom he also describes by that, That
they walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, in relation to what he had
taught in the whole sixth Chapter, concerning the Life of a man, which is
justified by Faith, or which is in Christ Jesus, that it ought to be such as is
Holy and free from all Unrighteousness. And to this holiness of life does he
use here diverse new Arguments to excite them from the first to the seventeenth
verse of this Chapter; at which verse showing, that we must not only do the
works of Righteousness, but also suffer (if need be) for Righteousness sake.
He does in the ensuing part of the Chapter use diverse arguments to move them to
suffer afflictions patiently, and ends this Chapter, with the narration of
the happiness of those which he spoke of from the fifth Chapter hitherto; that
is, of those which are justified by Faith, or (which is the same) of those
which are in Christ Jesus.

CHAP. IX.
Now in the ninth Chapter (reflecting upon what he said before, that a man is
justified by Faith, and not by the works of the Law, and reflecting upon the
happiness of those which are justified by Faith, and considering withal that
the Jews, for the most part, were such as he spoke of, Chap. 2. Verse 8. That
is, such as were contentious against the Gospel, and obeyed not, or believed
not that Word of Truth, but obeyed Unrighteousness, against whom indignation
and wrath is revealed.) He manifests the great heaviness and continual sorrow,
which he had in his heart. For those Jews which were his Kinsmen according to
the flesh, and to whom (among many other privileges) the promises of God did
belong, to think, that they resisting that way, which God had appointed, for
obtaining Righteousness, or Justification, should invent another way of their
own, and go about to establish that their own way, and submit not, or yield not
to follow that way of Righteousness, which God had prescribed And this
heaviness and continual sorrow of his heart for them, he does show that they
considering and contemplating his sorrow for them, might pity their own selves,
and embrace the truth, that they might be saved at the last.

But though he manifests here the great heaviness, and continual sorrow,
which he had in heart, for those his Kinsmen, to wit, the Jews, yet he does
not here express the cause of this his sorrow, being interrupted with an
objection, which might arise from what he had said, and to which he would
answer, but deferreth it to the next Chapter and there resumeth, and
perfecteth, what he here broke off, though in other terms.

The Objection which might arise from what he had sad, is this. He said that
among other Privileges, which belonged to the Jews, which were the people of
Israel according to the flesh, this was one. That the promises of God were
theirs, upon which a Jew might thus object and say. That if we Jews, who are
the Childrn of Israel according to the flesh, were not justified, but were
under Wrath and Indignation, as thou Paul say. Then would the promises of
God be void and of none effect; which is, to make God false in his word: For
God promised by his servant Jeremy (and many other his servants the Prophets)
that he would make a new covenant with them, and justify them, Jer. 31. ver.
31, 32, 33, 34. To this objection Saint Paul answers here verses 6, 7, 8, 9. to
this effect. True it is, that God made a promise to the Israelites that he
would justify them, but whereas there are to sorts of Israelites, one which
are Israelites according to the Flesh, which descended from Jacob, and Abraham
by carnal propagation. The other which were Israelites, and the Children of
Abraham according to the Spirit, because they did imitate, and follow Abraham
in this Faith (for they which are of Faith, they are the Children of Abraham,
Gal. 3.7.) That promise of Justification does belong absolutely and
immediately, not to those, which are the Children of Jacob, or the Children of
Abraham according to the Flesh, as Such; but to those which believe, as Such;
and so are the Children of Jacob, and of Abraham according to the Spirit,
whether they be Jews, or whether they be Gentiles.

Now, because the same or another Jew might reply upon this, and say. Yea, but
for all thy saying (Paul) though I should grant, that that promise does not
belong to us Jews, as we are the Children of Jacob, or of Abraham, according
to the Flesh, as Such, yet surely it does appertain to us: as we seek
justification by the works of the Law, and we are, or shall be justified by so
doing.

To this objection the Apostle answers verse 10, 11, 12, 13. to this effect.
No, neither shall ye be justified for this, neither; which may be proved by
that, which God said unto Rebecca, while she had two Twins Esau and Jacob, the
heads of two People in her womb: For at that time, when the Children were not
yet born, before they had done either good or evil, he said unto her, The Elder
shall serve the Younger; and this God said to her at that time to signify in a
type, that his purpose concerning his actual Electing men to Justification
(which Election is performed in time, by justifying them) was and should be to
elect or justify them, not for their works sake (for which no man can be
justified, and if he could he might claim justification of debt,) but for his
own Mercy and Grace sake, who calls us by the preaching of his Gospel, that
we may believe, and believing may be justified, and has appointed, that to be
our way for Justification.

But because a Jew would be apt to say, that if it were so as St. Paul had
said, Viz. That God would not justify a Jew, though he were a Jew by birth,
and though he did moreover seek justification by works, if he believed not; and
yet would justify every one which believes, though he were a Gentile: Then
there would be unrighteousness with God.

Saint Paul takes away this objection, showing first, That there is no
unrighteousness with God, in justifying those which believe, though they be
Gentiles; for he may justly have mercy on whom he will have mercy, ver. 15. And
(by the by, ver. 16) he shows them, who being ignorant of Gods way of
Righteousness, or Justification, went about to establish a way of their own,
that it was not in them, who chose a way of Righteousness or Justification of
their own, though they were zealous in that way, and run earnestly in it, to
attain to Justification: but it was only in God, who shows mercy to whom he
will, and to what way he will. Then, as he had showed, that there was no
unrighteousness in God, if he did justify those which did believe, though they
were Gentiles: He shows, verse 17. by the Example which God showed upon
Pharaoh, that there is no unrighteousness in God, if he did not justify a Jew,
though he were a Jew by birth, and sought Justification by works, if he
believed not; And concludes, verse 18. That God does justly justify whom he
will, and does justly deny justification to whom he will, yea, and harden them
too.

And now being, that God does every where complain of the Jews, and threatens
to destroy them, for the hardness of their heart: A malepart Jew starts up, and
hearing Paul say, that God hardens whom he will, Says: But if God hardens
whom he will, why does he now find fault with us and threatens us for our
hardness of heart? For it is he that hardneth whom he will; and if he will
harden us, how can we help it? are we able to resist him? To this objectian
made verse 19. Saint Paul answers, first by rebuking the Objector, for his
Sauciness, who dares to chop Logic thus with God, verse 20, 21. Then verse 22,
23. he gives a more direct answer, by which he shows that God did harden them
only occasionally, in that he did not cut them off, but did endure them with
much long-suffering, by which those vessels of wrath, that is, they which were
contentious, and obeyed not the truth, but obeyed unrighteousness, fitted
themselves for destruction; for though by his long-suffering God led them to
repentance, yet they by the abuse thereof, contracted hardness, and an
impoenitent hearts upon themselves, heaping up wrath against the day of wrath,
and Revelation of the Righteous judgment of God; and therefore there was no
unrighteousness in God, if he being willing to show his wrath upon those
vessels of wrath if they would not repent, he found fault with them when they
repented not. And if by so doing he showed the abundance of his goodness also,
to the vessels of mercy by justifying them, and so preparing them to glory, as
he had before determined. Which vessels of mercy he shows. verse 24. to be
them, which believe, not of the Jswes only, but of the Gentiles also. Then to
confirm what he had said concerning those disobedient Jews, and the believing
Gentiles, he brings diverse testimonies out of the Scriptures, verses 25, 26,
27, 28, 29. And then he gathers out of what he had said, that the believing
Gentiles had attained to Justification by their Faith, ver. 30. But the Jews
for the greatest part of them, missed of Justification, because they sought it
not by Faith, but by the works of the Law. And so having made way to that,
which he left imperfect at the sixth verse of this Chapter.

CHAP. X.
In the tenth Chapter he shows, what that was, which he said (in the
beginning of the ninth) did grieve him for the Jews, which was this: that they
being ignorant of Gods way of Righteousness, and going about to establish their
own way of Righteousness, submitted not themselves unto that way of
Righteousness, which God had appointed, verse 3. (but he ushereth it in, Verse
1, 2. with other words, then he used in the beginning of the ninth Chapter)
Then verse 4. he shows, why they submitted not themselves to that way of
Righteousness or Justification, which God had appointed. The reason was,
because they were offended at Christ, who was the end of the Law for
Righteousness. Then he shows that the Righteousness of the Law, and the
Righteousness of Faith are not all one Verse 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
Then from verse 14, to the end he shows, that the Gospel ought to be preached
to the Gentiles, and was preached to them, and they received it gladly. But
though it was preached to the Jews, yet they refused it, and would have none
of it.

Wherefore because some might doubt concerning the perverseness of the Jews,
whether God had not, or would not cast them off wholly, for this their
perverseness.

CHAP. XI.
The Apostle in the eleventh Chapter moves the question, whether God had cast
off his people the Jews, or no: And answers it in the negative, verse 1. And to
prove, that he had not cast them all off, he shows, that he was a Jew and yet
was accepted of God. And that the Jews were a people, whom God did foreknow,
that is, whom God did determine, from eternity so to love, as not utterly to
forsake them, verse 2. and that even then there were a Remnant of Jews, whom
God had justified, verses 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. But yet he says, that the Jews for
the greatest part of them, which sought for Justification by works, obtained it
not, but those few which believed, atteined to it, and the rest were blinded,
and fell, verses 7, 8, 9, 10. and that into their place the Gentiles were
received, verse 11. But yet, he says, that they fell not so, as that they
should not rise again, but might recover their fall; and this he proves by the
calling of the Gentiles, which were called and received, that they might
provoke the Jews to jealousy, and make them to strive to hold, or regain the
love of God, which they had lost or well nigh lost, verses 11, 12. He proves it
also by the end of his own preaching, which was that (if by any means he could)
he might save some of them, verses 13, 14, 15. He proves it also by that; that
they were the branches of an holy root, that is, that they were the children of
Abraham, which was holy, and therefore of the Church, or People of God, which
was holy verse 16. But yet, because some of the branches of that tree, were
broken off, and cast out of the number of Gods people or Church, and the
Gentiles were grafted in, in their room; he admonishes the Gentiles not to
boast against the Jews, but rather to fear: For as the Jews were cut off by
reason of their unbelief, and as they were grafted into their room, and stood
because of their Faith: So might they be cut off again, if they fell back into
unbelief, and the Jews be grafted in again, if they would believe, verses 17,
18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.

Then verses 25, 26, 27. he returns to prove that God had not utterly cast off
his people, because he intends to send them a Deliverer, by whom they shall be
saved from their sins, when the fullness of the Gentiles is come in. And
because they were a People whom God had elected, to be a peculiar people to
himself, and such as that he would not utterly leave destitute without the
means of Salvation (though many of them fell from the Society of that people by
unbelief) and that for their Fathers sake, verse 28, 29. and because though God
had concluded them, for the greatest part in unbelief, yet he did it for this
end, that he might have mercy upon them, verses 30, 31, 32. Which dispensations
he says were done in wisdom by God, though his Counsel and Wisdom is
unsearchable therein, verse 33.

Thus having finished the Doctrinal part of this his Epistle, he comes
artificially in the twelfth Chapter to the second part thereof, to wit, the
moral part, which he continues from thence to the End of his Epistle.

Saint Peter in his second Epistle Chap. 3. ver. 15, 16. Says that in the
Epistle, which Paul wrote to the Jews, as also in all other his Epistles, there
are some things hard to be understood, which they which are unlearned and
unstable wrest as they do all other Scriptures unto their own destruction.

Whether this Epistle of Saint Paul be the peculiar Epistle, which Saint Peter
meant, by that which Saint Paul wrote to the Jews (as some would have it:) Or
whether the Epistle, to the Hebrews, (as others) or no. Sure it is, that in
this Epistle of his to the Romans, there be some things hard to be understood,
and there be things, which they which are unlearned and unstable, have wrested
to their own destruction.

For because that Saint Paul declares in this his Epistle, that Justification
is not by the works of the Law, but by Faith and so by Grace (to omit many
other errors, falsely collected out of other passages of this his Epistle not
well understood) some have contented themselves with the empty name of Faith,
as though that were enough, not only to Justify them, but to save them, and
have altogether neglected good works, and even fought against them. For that
there were those even in the Apostles time, which taught that a barren Faith
which produces not works, was sufficient to salvation.

We may learn both from Saint James, and from Saint Jude in their Epistles, and
Saint Augustine shows as much, in his book De Vnico Baptismo contra
Petilianum, Cap. 10. Tom. 7, page 85. col. 2. A. This was Simon Magus's
doctrine, or wicked heresy rather, and the doctrine and heresy of his
Disciples called from him Simoniani, as also of the Menandrians, Basilidians,
Gnostics, Manichees, Aetians, and Eunomians: All or some of which did
willingly embrace all manner of sin, and turpitude, as the fruit of the grace
of God, by which we are saved. Such Heretics did the ages following bring
forth; and to Skip to later times, such were, and are they, which are called
Antinomians, whose Tenets concerning good works and faith (among other are
these. That the Law is not given to Christians. That the ten Commandments ought
not to be taught in Churches. That it is sufficient for a wicked man to
believe, and not to doubt of his Salvation. That neither good works profit to
Salvation, neither ill works do no hurt. That to say that the Law is a rule of
life, is blasphemy in Divinity, etc. Then which nothing can be more destructive
of a man's Salvation; and these their Heresies they drew from the
misunderstanding of Saint Paul's words, in this his Epistle.

But because in this Epistle of Saint Paul's, there are many things, which are
hard to be understood, for the better understanding of this Epistle, it will be
expedient to know,

First, What is the main Scope of the doctrinal part at least, of this Epistle
of Saint Paul.

Secondly, How one thing hangs or depends upon another.

Thirdly, How the Scriptures, which he alleges so often, make for the proofs,
for which he alleges them.

Fourthly, How he uses many words, which he uses, and in what sense.

For the first of these, that short Epitome, which I have given of the eleven
first Chapters, may suffice.

As for the second, know first, that it is the manner of the Apostle, as in
other of his Epistles, so especially in this, to prevent objections, which may
arise out of that which he said either immediately, or a little before; which
objections because he does not express, but pass them over in silence, and
only give the answer in express terms, makes the greater Hiatus, and seeming
independence of one sentence upon another to be in his writings; which would
not have been, if he had expressed the objections, as well as he does the
answers. And the variety of men's conjectures, what the objection, in every
place from whence it arises is, I conceive to be one great cause, that men so
much differ in their judgments concerning the interpretation of diverse places
of this Epistle. But the objections, which the Apostle prevents, or answers,
are not made always in the person of one sort of men, but sometimes in the
person of one, and sometimes in the person of another; but most commonly his
objections are to be understood, as made in the person of a Jew: and yet not
always of one kind of Jew, but sometimes of one, and sometimes of another;
according to the diversity of opinions, which were among the Jews. For some
Jews thought it enough to their Justification, that they were the Children of
Abraham; others, that they were circumcised; others which were more learned,
that they had excellent skill in the Law: And others who were highly conceited
of the purity of their lives, relied upon their works for justification, etc.

Know secondly, That the Apostle, when he has treated of a matter, and is
passed from that particular matter of which he treated, and is upon another
subject, if in treating of this latter subject, any thing may arise to prove
his former matter, he takes notice of it oftentimes, though it be but by the
by, and though he has no other reason so to do, but because it proves his
former matter. An Example of this you may have Romans 10.17. in those words, So
then Faith comes by hearing, which was not the conclusion of the subject,
which he had then in hand. For the subject, which he was then about, was to
prove, that all the Jews believed not. For they (that is, the Jews) have not
all obeyed the Gospel, says he, Verse 16. And this he proves there, Verse 17.
by the testimony of the Prophet Isaiah. For (says he) Esaias says, Lord, who
has believed our report? Now out of this testimony of Esaias, this conclusion
may be as well drawn, Viz. That Faith comes by hearing, as that Viz. That the
Jews did not all believe. Wherefore because this conclusion, Viz. Faith comes
by hearing may be drawn thence, as well as that other, he makes mention of it
here verse 17. only to prove, that which he said before, ver. 14. Viz. That
none could believe in him of whom they have not heard. And after this manner
(as I conceive) does the Apostle bring in those words of the Ninth Chapter to
the Romans, and the sixteenth verse, Viz. So then it is not of him that
wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy. Which
conclusion he draws (and it evidently follows) out of those foregoing words
Verse 15. Viz. For he says unto Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have
mercy: And I will have compassion, on whom I will have compassion. But yet this
is not that for which he quoted those words, but he quoted them to show, that
there was no unrighteousness in God in showing mercy to, or in justifying those
which were figured either in Isaac, or in Jacob; that is, in justifying the
faithful, though they were Gentiles. But yet because he had bewailed the Jews,
for that that they being ignorant of Gods Way of righteousness or
Justification, went about to establish a way of their own, and had not
submitted themselves to Gods way, and because that from these words of the
fifteenth verse, an Argument might be drawn to convince them of their error, he
draws that Argument from thence, though by the by, and though it was not that
conclusion or Thesis, which he was to prove in this place, when he was (as I
said) to prove here, that there was no unrighteousness in God for showing mercy
to, or justifying those which were typified either in Isaac, or in Jacob; that
is, for justifying the faithful, though they were Gentiles.

The third thing, which I said was expedient to be known for the better
understanding of this Epistle of Saint Paul, was to know, how the parts of
Scriptures which he alleges ^herein so often, make for the purposes for which
he alleges them: For indeed if any one should turn to the several places, out
of which he takes his testimonies of Scripture, it would seem strange at the
first, to see how Paul could bring them, to prove such things by them, as he
brings them for.

But that it may not seem strange, this must be observed, that many places of
the Scriptures of the Old Testament have a double sense; One concerning terrene
and corporeal things, and things to come to pass before the days of the
Messiah; Another concerning heavenly and spiritual things, of which those
terrene and corporeal things were a Type. The first may be called the Literal,
or Historical, or meaner sense: The second, the Mystical or Sublime sense. Of
which because I have spoken fully in my Preface to my Exposition upon the
Prophet Isaiah, I shall speak no more here: only this I add, that the Jews did
acknowledge this twofold sense.

Now the Apostle, in his testimonies of Scripture, which he brings to prove
several matters, which he handles, takes those testimonies of Scripture for the
most part, not as they are in their first, literal, historical, or meaner
sense; but as they are to be taken in their Mystical and Sublime sense,
according to which, I have also interpreted them, in these my Commentaries
respectively.

The fourth thing which I said was expedient to be known, for the better
understanding of this Epistle of Saint Paul was to know, how he uses many
words which he uses herein, and in what Sense he uses them, and of as many of
such words, as I think convenient I shall now speak in their Alphabetical
order, adding some things also by occasion of those words, which will make to
the further explication of some passages of this Epistle. The words are as
follow, Call, Called. (...). Election. Faith. Flesh. Foreknow. Hardening. Holy.
In. Justification. (...). Long-suffering. Righteousness, Spirit. World. Works.


TO CALL, CALLED.
Our Apostle does make often (...), to call, an act of God, as Romans 9.11. That
the promise of God may stand; not of Works, but of him that calls. And verse
24. Even us whom he has called, not of the Jews only but also of the Gentiles.
And that act of calling does oftentimes by a Metonymie, include the effect
intended by the act, so that because God intends by the calling of men, by
the preaching of the Gospel, to the grace therein contained, that they should
believe the Gospel preached to them, (...), whom he has called, is put for
(...) who believe; and so in the aforenamed place, Romans 9.24. Viz. Even us whom
he has called, not of the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles; is put for,
Even us which believe, not only of the Jews, but also of the Gentiles; and
after the same manner, they to whom any thing is revealed, when it is revealed
with effect, are said to believe that which is revealed. As Isaiah chap. 53.
verse 1. Who has believed our report? or to whom is the Arm of the Lord
revealed? That is, Who has believed how great the strength of the Lord is,
which he declares by his Prophets, that he would show for the deliverance of
his People?

There is a difference to be observed, between the Verbal (...), and the
Participle (...), both which are englished, Called; (...) are such as are
called, whether they answer or no, or whether they believe being called, or no.
(...), are they, which are not only called, but answer the call and believe.
Grotius observes this difference or distinction in his Commentaries upon those
words of our Savior, Matthew. 20, 16. (...). i. e. For many are called, but few
are chosen. But he says withal, that this difference or distinction is not
always observed, because these words (...) and (...), are promiscuously used,
Mat. 22. And Beza in his notes upon the same words, (...), etc. observes the
same difference or distinction between (...) and (...), Mat. 20.16. For
speaking there of (...), he says: (...), id est, (...); nam alioqui (...), ii
demum sunt, qui Deo ad vitam ipsos vocanti responderunt, i. e. This word (...),
is used here as (...), for otherwise (...) are they which answer God when he
calls them to life immortal. Schinidius in his Annotations upon Mat. 22.3.
observes the same difference or distinction between (...) and (...), and makes
it perpetual: and among other rules, which he gives concerning verbals in
(...) there, he gives this: Verbalia deducta a verbis vere activis (non
neutralibus) quibus offertur, vel confertur aliquid alteri, quod accipere vel
non accipere potest, aut quibus vere, vel non vere aliquid de altero dici
potest, differunt a Participiis, ut id quod est, ab eo, quod esse poterat, vel
debebat. i. e. Verbals drawn from verbs truly active (not neuters) by which
something is offered, or conferred upon another, which he may take or not take;
or by which something may be said truly, or not truly, of another; differ
from Participles, as that which is, from that which might be or ought to be. So
from (...) to teach or instruct, comes the Participle (...) taught; taught, to
wit, so far as was in the power of the teacher, whether he that was taught,
become learned by his teaching, or not: And from thence comes also the verbal
(...), which signifies one who by teaching is truly learned: And so from
(...) to call comes the Participle (...), which signifies called, whether he
which is called answers or no; and the verbal (...), which signifies him
which is called too, but being called answers to the call: so that every
(...) is also (...), but every (...) is not (...); and every (...) is (...),
but every (...) is not (...). Thus he: in whom you may read more to this
purpose.

When our Apostle makes (...) or (...) an Act of God, and expresses not the
object, to which God calls them, whom he calls (if the circumstances of the
Place intimate no other object) we must understand, that the prime, though more
remote object thereof, is, Salvation, or Gods heavenly Kingdom and Glory.
According to that which is written, 1 These, 2.12. That you would walk worthy of
God, who has called you unto his Kingdom and Glory. And according to that
which is written, 2 These. 2. ver. 13, 14. God has from the beginning chosen
you to salvation, whereunto he called you, by our Gospel, to the obteining of
the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. And according to that which is written, 1
Pet. 5.10. The God of all grace, who has called us to eternal glory, etc. And
that the nearer object, which is subordinate to that former, and is as a means,
or way conducing to the obteining thereof, is Holiness, according to that which
we read, 1 These. 4.7. God has not called us to uncleanness, but to holiness.
And that the way by which God calls us to those objects, is the preaching of
the Gospel; according to that which we read in the forecited place, 2 These. 2.
ver. 13, 14. God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation, through
Sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the truth, whereunto he called you
by our Gospel:

And now, according to that which has been said, whereas there is often
mention made in this, and other Epistles of Saint Paul, of The called, or of
them which are called Graece (...), when the object thereof is Salvation, or
Gods heavenly Kingdom or Glory (which I may call the Grace of the Gospel) It
does signify, Them which believe; for it does signify, not them which are
barely called, but them in whom their calling has some effect, so that they
believe the Gospel by which they are called. So that in conclusion, (...) and
(...), that is, The called, and The faithful or They which believe, are the
same. Whereupon such as our Apostle called (...), The called of Jesus Christ,
Romans 1.6. He calls (...), i. e. The faithful in Christ Jesus, Ephesians 1.1.

And perhaps (...), Romans 8.28. may, by a Metonymie, moreover signify in that
place, Them which are justified by Faith. For they which are (...), that is,
They which are so called, as that they believe, are justified by their Faith.
And the Apostle from the beginning of the first Chapter hitherto, speaks of
those, which are justified by faith, which he also calls, Them which are in
Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1.

And now if this interpretation of (...), Romans 2.28. be accepted of; Then
(...), in the following verse must be interpreted, Them whom he did determine
so to love, as to justify them. For whatsoever the word (...) signifies, is
to be included in the words (...), being he gives a reason of, or does assert
in these words, (...), what he said in those (...), q. d. I say, (...)

(...).
The Apostle uses this word (...) in diverse places of this Epistle, as Romans
1.32. Where (...) is taken for the just or righteous sentence of God given as
it were in Judgment, upon a man brought before his judgment seat, and there
accused or arraigned. It is used also Romans 5. verse. 16, and 18. And in both
those places, it is taken for Justification. It is also used Romans 2.26. Where
we read (...), and Romans 8.4. where we read (...), in both which places our
Interpreters render it, The righteousness of the Law. Now we may have various
notions concerning the word (...) in those places, according to the various
acception of the word (...) The Law. If we take (...) the Law there for the
Moral Law in particular, then by (...) and by (...) we must understand the
precepts or commands of that Law, which he may call (...), and collective
(...), to signify that they are holy, and just, and good, as he speaks, Romans
7.12. But if we take (...) there for the whole Law which was given by Moses,
and as it contains the Moral, Ceremonial, and Judicial Law together; Then must
we take (...), and (...) partitive (as Grammarians speak) that is, to signify
one part of that Law, to wit, the moral part, that is, the Moral Law only. And
it is observed, that the Seventy Interpreters (whom Saint Paul follows) use
the word (...) or (...): for the most part, for those precepts or commands,
which are of things good in their own Nature (and therefore not alterable at
any time) and such as are imprinted in the heart of man, as the Moral Law was:
whereas they take (...) for those Laws or Precepts, which are of positive
constitution, and therefore alterable, as the Ceremonial, and Judicial Law were.

ELECTION.
Election, Graece (...), is a word which Saint Paul uses in the ninth Chapter
of his Epistle to the Romans, verse 11. and I take it there for Justification.
And the sense of those words, Viz. That the purpose of God according to
Election might stand, etc. (for I conceive that (...) must be translated rather
concerning Election, then according to Election) I take to be this, Viz. That
the purpose of God concerning Justification might stand, etc.

For I take this Election to be an Act of God performed or done in time, upon
men in Real Being. And that this Election is immediate to justification, and
that this Election to justification is made by Gods free and gracious putting
the man Elected into the estate of justification, that is, by Actual justifying
him.

It is true, that there is an Election, or decree of Election, which God made
before the foundation of the World, or from eternity. For he has chosen us in
him before the foundation of the world, etc. says our Apostle, Ephesians. cap. 1.
ver. 4. But yet there is an Election, which God does make in time, yet in order
to, or in execution of some eternal purpose, or decree of his or other. For God
does nothing in time, but what he purposed to do from eternity.

For thus we read Isaiah 14.1. The Lord will have mercy on Jacob, and will yet
choose Israel. And Zechar. 1.17. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, My Cities
through prosperity shall yet be spread abroad, and the Lord shall yet comfort
Sion, and shall yet choose Jerusalem. And Zechar. 2.12. The Lord shall inherit
Judah his portion, and choose Jerusalem again. All which words, being in the
Future tense, show that there is an Election, which God makes of things or
persons in time.

But to come nearer to our present purpose. There is an Eelection of God, which
follows calling. For Many are called, but few are chosen, says our Savior,
Matthew. 22.14. And ye see your calling, Brethren, that is, ye see the event of
your calling, how that not many wisemen after the flesh, not many mighty, not
many noble are called; But God has chosen the weak things of the world, to
confound the things, which are mighty, and base things of the world, and things
which are despised has he chosen; yea and things which are not, to bring to
naught the things which are, 1 Cor. 1. Verses 26, 27, etc.

Now as the Election in those places is an Election of God in time, so do I
conceive the Election to be, of which we speak of, to wit, that Romans 9.11.

And this Election I take to be not immediately to eternal glory, or
glorification, but to justification. For Election is a word, which signifies
only the act of electing. But the Author of the Election, and the things, or
person elected, and that to which they are elected, are to be gathered from the
circumstances of the place: And from the circumstances of the place, I gather,
that this Election is immediately not to glory, or glorification, but to
justification.

For justification has been in a manner the only Subject of the doctrinal
part of the Apostles discourse hitherto; And of justification does he speak in
this Chapter, and he concludes therewith, and therewith does he begin, and
prosecute the Chapter following.

And that the Election, which the Apostle here speaks of ( viz. Romans 9.11.) is
immediately to the same thing, to which that Election is, which he spoke of, in
the eleventh Chapter of this Epistle, and the fifth verse; I think no man does
so much as doubt: But that that Election cannot be understood of an Election
immediately to eternal glory, but of an Election immediately to justification,
may be easily, and apparently gathered from that place and the context thereof;
for the Apostle calling that Election an Election of grace, adds this verse 6.
And if by grace then it is no more of works, otherwise grace is no more grace:
But if it be of works, then it is no more Grace, otherwise work is no more
work. Where he shows that that thing to which that Election is immediately, is
so due to works, as that there is no grace or favor at all requisite to his
obteining of it, who has works, that is, who has so fulfilled the Law, as
that he never brake it in the least particle or jot thereof, at any time. For
to him that works is the reward not reckoned of Grace but of Debt, Romans 4.4.
And if it be of works, then it is no more of Grace, otherwise work, were not
work. Says our Apostle thence, Romans 11.6.

But now (a man may say) cannot eternal glory be due as a reward to works? That
is, cannot it be due to a man, if he has kept the Law so exactly, as the Law
requires and so as that he never broke the Law at any time in the least
particle of it, as suppose Adam would have done, if he had continued in his
innocence?

I answer, No, For though we should suppose a man to have kept the Law so
exactly as the Law requires, and never to have broke it in the least tittle
thereof; yet would not eternal Glory be due to him for it, of debt: For there
is no proportion betwixt his works and that glory, which shall be revealed in
the Saints.

But perhaps you will say, that eternal glory would be due to such a one for
his works, by a contract or covenant of works, which God made with Adam.

But suppose, that God had made such a covenant or a contract with Adam, yet
would not eternal glory be due to the works of such a man of debt, without the
grace and favor of God. For it would have been the mere grace and favor of
God, to covenant or promise such a reward to such a man for his works; nor
would that reward, which is due even to such works upon this account be due to
them of merit, (which is that which our Apostle means by debt, Romans 4.4. etc.)
but only by reason of that gracious promise or covenant by which God freely
and graciously bound himself to reward the works of such a man with eternal
glory; so that in our Apostles language the reward would be still of grace: For
if the covenant or promise, which God made to Adam, of rewarding such works
with eternal glory, were enough to make the reward to be due to such works of
debt, and not of grace: Why should not the New Covenant, or Promise, which God
has made to them which believe, that he will reward their Faith (if they
continue in it to the End) with eternal glory, as Saint John 3.16, etc. make
the reward to be due to Faith, of debt, and not of grace, as well as that old
Covenant would to works. But yet notwithstanding the Apostle says. The reward
is therefore of Faith, that it might be by grace, Romans 4.16.

The Election therefore which the Apostle speaks of Romans 11.5. cannot be an
Election immediately to glory: And if the Election there spoken of, cannot be
immediately to glory; then surely neither is the Election here spoken of, viz.
Romans 9.11. an Election immediately to eternal glory.

But may justification be a reward due to works of debt? that is, suppose that
a man did perfectly keep the Law, and as exactly as the Law requires (as
suppose Adam would have done, if he had continued in his innocence) would
justification be due to him of debt, by reason of his works, and not of Grace?

I answer, it would be due to him of debt, and not of grace. For (with
reverence be it spoken) God would be unjust, if when such a one, as had exactly
kept the Law, and never broke it at any time in the least tittle thereof,
should be accused as a sinner, before him, he should not justify him, that is,
if he should not acquit him, and clear him of sin, but should condemn him for a
sinner. But that there should be unrighteousness with God, God forbid; for then
how should God judge the World.

And thus by what I have said it may appear, that the Election which is spoken
of Romans 9.11. is immediately (not to eternal Glory, but) to justification,

Now in the last place, as God may be said to Elect or choose, and does elect
or choose men in time; and as he may be said to elect or choose men in being,
in time, to justification, and does so elect them; So his Election of such, is
(as I conceive) by his actual, but free and gracious taking of them, by
justifying them out of the number of those, which are not justified.

For a man may be said to make choice of a thing by some external, but free
action of his toward or about the thing, which he is said to choose.

For when certain of those which were bidden to a dinner, sat down in the
highest places, our Savior is said to have marked them, how they chose out the
chiefest rooms, Luke 14.7. They chose therefore the highest or chiefest rooms,
by their seating themselves in them. For to sit down in the highest Rooms, and
to choose the highest rooms, are there both one. And when our Savior said,
when thou art bidden to a wedding, sit not down in the highest room, Luke 14.8.
It is, as if he should say, when thou art bidden to a wedding, choose not the
highest room.

Now as a man may be said to make choice of a thing, by some external, but free
action of his toward or about the thing, which he is said to choose, so may
God.

But to come closser to the business in hand, and to show you how God chooses
whom he chooses in time. It is said to Israel, Deuteronomy. 7. ver. 6, 7. Thou art an
holy People unto the Lord thy God, and the Lord has chosen thee to be a
peculiar people unto himself above all the Nations, that are upon the face of
the Earth. The Lord did not set his love upon you, nor choose you because you
were more in number than any people, for ye were the fewest of all people, but
because the Lord loved you and because he would keep the oath which he had
sworn unto your Fathers, has the Lord brought you out with a mighty hand, and
redeemed you out of the house of bondage, from the hand of Pharaoh King of
Egypt. Here we see, how God chose Israel, it was by bringing them out of
Egypt, and redeeming them out of the house of bondage, by which he took them
to be a peculiar people to himself.

And so in all those places aforementioned, which mention Gods choosing in
time, we may say, that God is said actually to have chosen them, of whom he
speaks, when he did put them into that Estate, into which he says, he would
choose them.

But that (...) may be taken, and is often taken for the actual choosing of a
thing, by a real and actual separating of that thing from other things which
are left, See Badoeus in his Commentaries, Page 645.

Now the Apostle may seem to make choice of this word Election, for
Justification in this place of Romans 9.6. not only to show Gods free act, about
the believer, viz. that he so justified him, as that he might choose whether he
would have justified him or no, because he could not challenge it of debt: But
also to show, that whereas one Jew stood for justification, because of his
descent from Abraham according to the flesh: Another, because he sought it by
works: And the Believer sought it by faith, God chose the Believer though a
Gentile, and justified him, whereas he passed by those Jews.

If it be asked therefore, who it is which God thus chooses or purposed thus
to Elect to justification, I say, it is the Believer. For whatsoever Gods
primary decree was; in the execution of that decree, and in the bringing of men
to justification or salvation in time, he justifies none, but such as do first
truly believe, and all such he justifies; and he saves none, but such as do
truly believe, and persevere therein to the end, and all such he will save;
and so to do in time, and to observe that order, he purposed to do from
eternity, notwitststanding any Antecedent purpose or decree of his, going any
way before.

But yet our Apostle attributes our justification wholly to God, who calls,
Romans 9.11. And this he does, to signify that it is wholly of God, to prescribe
the way to justification (who has prescribed faith to be the way thereunto,
that justification may be known to be of his mere grace, and mercy) and that it
is not in man to prescribe the way, though man makes an account to obtain
justification by works, as the Jews did, who went about to establish their own
way to justification, Romans 10.3. and saught it by works, Romans 9.32. which if
they could obtain by works, the Way of justification would be in man indeed,
and justification would be not of grace, but of debt. Again he may ascribe it
wholly to God; because God is the principle cause thereof. For it is usual,
when two causes concur to the same effect, to ascribe the effect wholly to the
principal cause, yea, and so to ascribe it to the principal cause, as to deny
it to the cause less principal. Thus the Apostle says, I labored more then
they all; yet not I but the grace of God which is in me, 1 Cor. 15.10. And
again. It is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me, Romans 7.17.
After this manner, I say that justification may be ascribed wholly to God, Who
calls, though Faith be required thereunto.

Elected, Romans 8. Is taken for Elected to justification, that is for them which
are justified.

The Election Chap. 11. ver. 7. Is put for the Elected, an abstract, for a
concrete, as Circumcision is put for the circumcised, Chap. 3.30. And by the
Elected are to be understood such as God (according to the order which he
observes or decreed to observe in electing, or justifying men in time)
justified or Elected to justification, and they were such as believed. Beza in
his Notes upon those words, Mat. 20.16. Viz. Many are called but few are
chosen, says, the (...) i. e. The Elect or chosen, are taken there for (...),
i. e. For such as answer Gods call, when he calls them to eternal Life, i. e.
For the faithful, or such as believe; and so may we take the Election or
Elected there, Viz. Romans 11.7.

The Election spoken of Romans chap. 11.28. Is taken for that Election, whereby
God chose the Jews to be his Church, that is, to be a peculiar people to
himself, to serve him, and worship him after a religious manner, according to
that form or prescript of Religion which he should appoint, and to be a people
whom he would never quite forsake, and leave utterly without all means of
Salvation, and that for their Fathers sake, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

This Election God might make of the Jews, for their Fathers sake, and for
their sakes might he not leave them utterly without all means of Salvation. For
the Oracles of God (which none can deny to be a Means to salvation) were
committed to the Jews, as they were Jews, that is, as they were the Children
of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob according to the flesh, Romans 3. ver. 1, 2. But yet
that they, or any of them, should be Elected to justification, or to eternal
Glory. I dare not say that it was for any other, then for Jesus Christ his
sake; nor dare I attribute any thing flowing from that Election, to any other
then to him. And if our Interpreters render the word (...), Romans 3.2. right,
when they render it chiefly; The greatest or chiefest good, which they
received, as they were Jews, that is, as they were the Children of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob according to the flesh was this, That they had the Oracles of
God committed to them.

FAITH.
The Object of justifying faith, is the whole Gospel of God, or at least, the
essential part thereof, which contains the new Covenant, which God was
pleased to make with sinful man in Christ Jesus our Lord. For we read, Mark
1.15. Repent and believe the Gospel. And Romans 1.16. I am not ashamed of the
Gospel of Christ for it is the power of God unto salvation unto every one that
believes, that is, to every one that believes it. And again Romans 10.16. but
they have not all obeyed the Gospel, that is, they have not all believed the
Gospel. For Isaiah says, Lord who has believed our report. And it is written,
Ephesians. 1.13. Christ, in whom ye trusted also, after ye heard the word of truth,
the Gospel of your salvation in whom also after ye believed (the said Gospel)
ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of promise. And Philip. 1.27. Striving
together for the faith of the Gospel. The Gospel therefore, or that essential
part thereof, to wit, the new covenant of God with man is the object of saving
or justifying faith.

Which being so, I may say, that saving or justifying faith, is a full or firm
assent of our heart or mind, to the Gospel of God, or at least to the new
Covenant, which God was pleased to make with sinful man, in Christ Jesus our
Lord, therein contained, by reason of which we do infallibly set our selves one
work, one that part of the Covenant, which we are to perform, according to the
ability, which God has given us.

The new Covenant made by God with man in Christ Jesus, consists (as other
Covenants do) of two parts, One part which God promises, and covenanteth for
himself, on his part to perform: The other, which God requires us to do, and
which we must promise and covenant to perform on our part; without the
performance whereof on our part. God is not bound to make good to us, what he
covenanted and promised to do for us, one his part.

The eye therefore of our Faith, must be firmly fixed on both parts of this
covenant, as well on that part, which we our selves are for our part to
perform, as on that which God is to perform on his part, or else our Faith
will never avail us to justification.

But if we look on that part of the Covenant, which God has promised for his
part to perform and firmly believe the truth thereof, and that our only
happiness consists therein: And on that part of the Covenant, which we for
our parts are to perform, and firmly believe that by doing our parts, we shall
attain to that happiness, which God for his part promised to bestow upon us,
and that, only by doing so, we shall attain to it: Surely we shall be
justified. For this will prove an operative Faith and set us on work, according
to our power, to obtein our only happiness, and make us sedulous in the duties
of holiness without which no man shall see God, Hebrews 12.14.

For every one does naturally desire his own happiness; and every one labors
for his own blessedness: and that so many miss of happiness, and come short of
blessedness, it is not because they desire not to be happy, or labor not for
it: but because they are ignorant in what true happiness, or true blessedness
does consist; and embrace a cloud for Juno, a shadow for the substance.

For (as the Aristot. Ethic. lib. 1. c. 1.
Philosopher tells us) some place their happiness in riches, some in honor,
some in pleasure, some in one thing, some in another. Yet every one,
endeavors to attein to that, in which he has placed his happiness, and
abandon that, which hinders him, from that which he aims at, and makes his
summum bonum.

Wherefore if we did truly believe, that our chiefest happiness, and our
summum bonum did consist in that Glory, and immortality, which God has
promised and covenanted to give us; and that we should attein to it, if we walk
in that way, which he has prescribed to lead us to it, surely we should walk
in it.

Our Savior tells us, that the Kingdom of heaven is like to a treasure hid in
a field, which when a man had found it, he hides it, and for joy thereof,
goes and sells all that he has, and buyeth that field, to wit that he might
be the Lord and possessor of that treasure, which went a long with the
possession of that field, Mat. 13.44. And he tells us again that the Kingdom
of Heaven is like a Merchant-man seeking goodly pearls, who when he had found
one pearl of good price, he went and sold all that he had and bought it, Mat.
13.45, 46. And what do these parables mean in the issue, but that a man, when
he has found by a sound faith, that his true happiness, and real bliss, and
chiefest good (that treasure, that precious pearl which he desires) is in
heaven, he will part with all things which may hinder his pursuit, and expend
and lay out all his strength and might which he has, that he might obtein that
treasure, that precious pearl.

But see what I have said more of this Faith on Romans chap. 2. ver. 17. page 17,
18.

FLESH CARNAL.
By flesh in its prime signification, is meant, the whole kind of the softer
parts of the body, as Fernelius Descript. human. Corp. Cap. 14.
Fernelius tells us. And by a Synecdoche, it is put sometimes for the whole
body it self, as Collossians 1.24. where Saint Paul speaking of himself, says,
who now rejoice in my sufferings, and fill up that which is behind of the
afflictions of Christ in my flesh, that is, in my body. It is sometimes also
taken by a further Synecdoche, for the whole man, as Romans 3.20. By the deeds of
the Law shall no flesh (i. e.) shall no man be justified. But there be other
significations of this word Flesh, which are peculiar to the Scriptures and
Penmen thereof. The flesh therefore is sometimes taken for the Understanding
of a man, which has been verst only in fleshly, that is, in earthly things, as
Romans 6.16. I speak after the manner of men, because of the infirmity of your
flesh, that is, by reason of the weakness and dullness of your understanding in
conceiving spiritual things, having been verst altogether in fleshly, that is,
earthly things. It is sometimes also taken for the Will, and the inferior or
irrational appetite together, as Romans 7.18. where the Apostle, speaking in the
person of a man which is under the Law, says, I know that in me, that is, in
my flesh dwells no good thing, that is, I know that there is neither in my
sensual appetite, nor yet in my Will (being depraved with ill habits) any good
which bears rule, and is able to subdue sin which has dominion there. But
sometimes again the flesh is taken for the carnal or sensual appetite or
affections, moving, or stirring up to sin, or that which cannot be obtained
without sin, as Romans 8.13. where it is said, If ye live after the flesh ye
shall die. But by the carnal or sensual appetite, or affections, or by the
flesh, we must there understand, not only that carnal and sensual appetite, or
those affections which stir us up, or move us to those things, wherewith the
taste or touch is delighted, and which we cannot obtein without sin: but we
must understand also thereby, whatsoever mover or motion there is within us,
(be it what it will be) which moves us, or stirs us up to any sin
whatsoever, or to any thing whatsoever, which we cannot attain to, or enjoy
without sin, as such. For when the Apostle gives us an example of the works of
the flesh, he does not name only Adultery, and Fornication, and Uncleanness,
and Lasciviousness, and Drunkenness, and Revellings, and such like; but also
Idolatry, and Witchcraft, and Hatred, and Variance, and Emulations, and Wrath,
and Strife, and Sedition, and Heresies, Galat. 5. v. 19, 20, 21. So that there
is no sin against any part of the Law, which may not be called a work of the
flesh. And where he reckons up some certain sins, though he mentions not
among them any sin delightful to the touch or to the taste of the body; yet he
calls them which commit them carnal. For whereas there is among you Envying,
and Strife, and Devisions, are ye not carnal, says he to the Corinthians, 1
Cor. 3.3. And what should he mean by carnal there, but men addicted to, and
prone and apt to follow the motions which move in any kind to sin: It is plain
therefore, that by the name of Flesh, the Apostle means all and every inward
mover or motion to sin, be it, or they in what power or fuaclty of the soul, or
of man whatsoever, or to what sin soever it or they move. But why he should so
call it, is not easy to say, except we should say, that because the flesh is
in many places opposed to the spirit (as Isaiah 31.3.) Their horses are flesh,
and not spirit, and John 3.6. That which is born of the flesh, is flesh, and
that which is born of the spirit, is spirit, and again John 6.36. It is the
spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing. He calls them flesh,
because they are opposite to the spirit, and its motions and inclinations, that
is, to the spirit of Regeneration, or Sanctification, which is given us by the
Holy Ghost, of which spirit he speaks, Romans 8. Galat. 5. and elsewhere.

TO FOREKNOW.
To foreknow, In Greek (...), in Latin, Praescire, are words all of them
compounded. And the Prepositions Fore, and (...), and Prae, when the Verbs with
which they are compounded, are spoken of God, they denotate some act of God
before he did know, or love them, whom he is said to know or love, that is, his
determination before they were, to love them when they were.

As for the simple word (...), Scire, to know, it is taken sometimes for to
love. And the reason why (...), which signifies ordinarily to know, signifies
sometimes to love, is, because there is therein an allusion to the Hebrew word
Iaday, which signifies both to know and to love; And because that Hebrew word
Iaday, has that latitude of significations, the same latitude is given to the
Greek word (...), to signify both to know and to love. So the Participle
(...), which our Translators render speaking the truth, Ephesians. 4.15. must
signify there, being established, or fixed, as appears by those words,
Tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind, for thereto it is opposed
verse 5. And therefore does it come to signify being established, or fixed
(though it does most frequently signify to speak the truth) because (...), is
made to answer the Hebrew word Aman, which signifies both to speak the truth,
and to be established and fixed, or to be firm and constant.

The word foreknow Graece (...), the Apostle uses twice in this Epistle, viz.
Chap. 8.29. and Chap. 11.2. And in both places it signifies Gods loving them
before they were, or his determination, even from eternity to love them, whom
he is there said to have foreknown.

Now how God is said to foreknow or forelove them, which are spoken of, Chap.
8.29. I have partly spoken of before. How he is said to foreknow or forelove
them, which are spoken of Chap. 11. Ver. 2. I shall now speak.

Chap. 11. Ver. 2. Our Apostle speaks of the Jews, whom he there says, that
God foreknew. And God is said there to foreknow them, because he did determine
so to love them, as to make them his Church, that is, to take them to be a
peculiar people to himself to serve him, and worship him after a religious
manner, according to that form and prescript of Religion or Worship, which he
himself should prescribe, and so to love them, as never to leave them all
utterly without the means of Salvation.

And now, if God has determined thus to love the Jews, as never to leave them
utterly without the means of Salvation, it is an argument, to prove, that he
has not cast off that his people. For where God is determined to give a people
the means of Salvation, there will he give some of them to believe (as the
Apostle speaks Phil. 1.29.) that they might be saved. For when the Lord would
have had Paul to continue in Corinth, and there to speak (that is, and there to
make known the way of Salvation) he gave this reason of it, saying, for I have
much people in this City, Act. 18. ver. 9, 10.

But to speak yet further of that love which God determined to show unto the
Jews. First, as God determined, he took them to be a peculiar people to
himself, Exodus 6.7. Isa. 41.8. He made them his Church (by whom he would be
worshipped and served after a religious manner) Acts 7.38. He gave unto him his
Service, that is, the Ordinances and form of Worship, by which he would be
served, Romans 9.4. This he gave by Moses: But though this Service which was
given by Moses, being but Ceremonial, was to cease at the coming and death of
the Messiah; yet when God took them to be his people and his Church, he took
them to serve him, not only after the prescript and form of Worship which was
delivered by Moses, but also after the prescript and manner of Worship, which
the Messiah, which is Christ should prescribe in his Gospel; for which reason
they were called the Children of the Kingdom, Mat. 8.12. And for this cause
was Christ sent in a peculiar manner to them, Mat. 15.24. Acts 2.26. for which
he was called the glory of the people Israel, Luke 2.32. and the Minister of
the Circumcision, Romans 15.8. and for this reason also was the Gospel to be
preached first to them, Acts 1.8. and 13.26, 46, 47. which also was foretold by
the Prophets, Isa. 2. ver. 2, 3. Micha 4. ver. 1, 2. Micha 8.23.

And although they should (as they did) forsake God and his Worship, yet did
God determine so to love them and does so love them, as that he will not leave
them utterly without all means of salvation. For it is written of them, 1 Samuel
12.22. The Lord will not forsake his people, for his great names sake, because
it has pleased the Lord to make you his people. And Levit 26.44. Yet for all
that (says the Lord) when they be in the land of their enemies, I will not
cast them away, nor abhor them to destroy them utterly, and to break my
covenant with them: for I am the Lord their God, And Romans 3. ver. 3, 4. What if
some did not believe? shall there unbelief make the faith of God without
effect? God forbid.

Those two former parcels of Scripture, viz 1 Samuel 22. and Levit. 26.44. carry
a double sense with them, to wit, an Historical and a Mystical, and both of
them concern the Jews. The Historical sense, concerns their temporal or bodily
estate, of which I speak not now. The Mistical concerns their spiritual estate,
and in relation to that, the promise is, that God would not leave them all
utterly without the means of salvation. A promise which God never made to any
nation but themselves.

How much the Jews were offended at Christ, and how they did, not only not
believe the Gospel, but where contentious against it, we read and know. Yet for
all that did not God leave them without the means of Salvation; For the
Apostles and Servants of God, did preach the Gospel among them, while they were
yet in their land; And though the Jews be now dispersed up and down throughout
the world, yet are they not now utterly without such means.

For they always had and have the Scriptures of the old Testament, those
Oracles of God which God committed to them, and which testify of Christ, and
which would be manifest unto them. For the obedience of the Faith, by the
things which have been acted in the world, and the events, which have happened,
if they would observe them.

But moreover, though their dispersion, through the world, was laid upon them,
as a curse for their sins, and especially for their enmity against Christ and
his Gosple; yet as that curse which Jacob denounced against Simeon and Levi,
saying, I will divide them in Jacob and scatter them in Israel, Genesis 49.7. was
turned into a blessing, so may we say, that the dispersion of the Jews, has a
blessing in it to, in that by this, a very great part of them had and have
their conversation among, or commerce with Christians, by whom they might and
may come to the knowledge of the truth.

And who can tell but that it may be by these means even at this day, as Saint
Paul said it was in his time (though it cannot demonstratively be pointed at)
that there is a remnant acording to the Election of grace, Romans 7.4. that is,
that there is a Remnunt of Jews even at this time which is justified through
faith.

But moreover our Apostle says, that When the fullness of the Gentiles are come
in, God will send a deliverer, and he shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob,
Romans 11.26. Which Deliverer is Christ; who shall by such servants as he shall
make choice of, and by such means as he shall think fit, (and he sees that they
will for a great, or the greatest part of them, embrace;) bring them sweetly
without any irresistible force to believe. And though he has in the mean time
concluded The greatest part of them in unbelief, yet it is for this end, that
He might have mercy upon them (though we cannot perceive by the light of our
understanding, how God produces such an effect, by means seeming so repugnant
to the end) Romans 11.32.

HARDENING.
Under this title of Hardening, I shall take occasion to speak something more
fully, concerning that hardness, which we read of Romans 9. verses 17, 18. etc.
Then I have done in my Commentaries, and to explain more fully here, what I
meant there.

Romans 9. ver. 17. For this same purpose have I raised thee up, etc.] q. d. For
this same purpose, have I hardened thine heart and stirred thee up thereby,
against my people, that I may show my power in the, in bringing great plagues
upon thee, and at the last, in drowning thee, and thy people with thee, in the
Red Sea, by which my name shall be spoken of, throughout the whole earth,
except thou let my people go.

These last words, viz. Except thou let my people go, I add because in the
History of Pharaoh recorded in Exodus, every plague almost there threatened
against him, is threatened with this exception, except thou let my people go, or
with words to that sense.

That which is here said have I raised thee up, is in the Greek, (...), which I
interpret, have I hardened thee, or stirred thee up against my people (to wit)
by hardening thee. For that Pharaoh was stirred up the more against the
Israelites upon Gods message to let them go, will appear by Exodus 5.6. and
10.10. and 10.28, etc.

The word in Exodus 9.16. from which this testimony is taken, is in the Hebrew
Heemadticha, which the Septuagint render (...), thou have been preserved; By
the Interlineary, Stare te feci, I have made thee stand; By the Arabique, Te
reservavi, I have reserved thee; By the Samaritan, Subsistere te feci, I have
made thee subsist; By the Chaldee, Sustinuite, I have sustained thee, as their
respective Interpreters render them.

But the word (...) does properly signify, to raise out of sleep, and by a
Metaphor, to stir up; in which sense it is most frequently used, as in
profane, so in sacred writers; and by the Septuagint as in other places, so in
these following, Viz. Prove. 25.34. Jonah 34.4. Jerem. 51.38. Jonah 1.13.

Moses speaking almost in the same manner of Sihon King of Hesbon, as it is
spoken here of Pharaoh King of Egypt, says, (...), etc. The Lord our God
hardened his spirit, and made his heart obstinate, that he might deliver him
into thy hand, Deuteronomy. 2.30.

And the Sun of Syrach, alluding without all doubt to that place of Exodus,
Exodus 9.16. says, (...), etc. i. e. The Lord hardened Pharaoh that he should
not know him, that his powerful works migh the known to the whole Earth,
Ecclesiasticus 16.15. wherefore I conceive, both for these reasons, and also
because the Apostle does draw out of this sentence of Scripture, which he here
alleges, that conclusion which is here set down in the next verse, viz.
Therefore whom he will he hardneth that the word (...), does signify or imply
the same as (...) does, to wit, to harden.

Whereupon I further conceive, that it was not our Apostles intent to render
the word Heemadticha here, by the words (...) I have raised thee up, nor yet to
bring his whole testimony out of Exodus 9.16. but partly out of that verse, and
partly out of the history of Pharaoh; that is, the words, (...) out of the
history of Pharaoh, where mention is made of the Lords hardening Pharaoh's
heart, and Pharaoh's high and rough carriage toward the Children of Israel;
And the other words out of Exodus 9.16.

For it is enough for the Apostle, when he alleges Scripture, to allege it
according to the true sense thereof, though he fetches it out of diverse
places. And that this is not unusual with him, we may learn from these one or
two examples following. For, Romans 9.32, 33. he says, for they stumbled at the
stumbling block, as it is written, Behold, I put in Sion a stumbling block and
Rock of offense, and whosoever believes in him shall not be ashamed. The
greatest part of which words are taken out of Isaiah 28.16. But these words, a
stone of stumbling and Rock of offense, are taken out of Isaiah 8.14. as
Interpreters do generally agree. He says likewise, Romans 11.26, 27. And so all
Israel shall be saved, as it is written, There shall come out of Sion he which
does deliver, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob, And this is my
Covenant with them, when I shall take away their sins. The former part of which
testimony is taken out of Isaiah 59.20. The latter part, to wit, that which is
contained in the twenty seventh verse, is taken partly out of Isaiah 49.21. and
partly out of Isaiah 27.9.

Now if any say, that there is no such words as (...), or of Gods stirring up
of Pharaoh, in the history of Pharaoh recorded in Exodus: I will grant it; But
yet, there is that which is equivolent to it, for there is the word (...), and
the mention of Gods hardening Pharaoh, and Pharaohs exalting himself against
Gods people, there; And it is to be noted, that when Saint Paul does allege a
testimony out of the Scripture, he does not always cite it in the same words,
but thinks it enough, if he quotes it in equivolent words. For, for example
sake, whereas we read, Exodus 9.16. (...) Saint Paul quoteth it Romans 9.17.
(...). And whereas we read Exodus 21.9, 16. (...); Saint Paul cites it Romans
9.17. (...).

But yet though God be said (...) and (...), i. e. to harden and to stir up
Pharaoh; yet think not that God did it, by infusing any positive quality into
Pharaohs soul; or by a positive operation upon his heart; but he did it only by
suffering Pharaoh to harden his own heart: Which Pharaoh did, when God sent him
a message, to let his people go; at the hearing of which message, Pharaoh was
so offended, to think that he should let go so great a people, by whom he
received so much profit, and by whom he had so much work done, as that he would
not only, not let them go, but laid a greater burden upon them, requiring of
them their wonted tale of Bricks, and yet allowing them no Straw as formerly,
to make them, or burn them with; And which he did, when God permitted the
Egyptian Magicians to do such miracles in appearance, as Moses did in reality;
And which he did, when God took off those Plagues from Pharaoh and his people,
which he had laid upon them for his refusing to let the people go, which
perhaps might have mollified Pharaohs heart, and made him have yielded to let
the people go, if they had continued longer upon him and them. Pharaonem non
divina potentia, sed divina patientia credenda est obdurasse. St. Augustine
Tom. 10. Sermon. 88. Not the power of God, but the patience or patient suffering
of God, is to be believed to be that which hardened Pharaohs heart.

But you will say, that God did positively harden Pharaoh: for (...) and (...),
which God is said here to do, do signify positively, and directly, to harden
or stir up, as being Verbs active, or words of action and not of permission.

But to this I answer, that Verbs active, do not always signify the doing of
that which they do import. For God says unto Jeremy, See, I have this day set
thee over the Nations and over the Kingdoms, and to root out, and to pull down,
to destroy, and to throw down, and to build, and to plant, Jerem. 1.10. whereas
God set him only to prophecy of the rooting out, and of the pulling down, and
the destroying, and throwing down of some Nations, or Kingdoms, and the
building up, or planting of others.

And God says, that if the Prophet be deceived, I the Lord have deceived him,
Ezech. 14.9. whereas the Lord did not use any deceit to that Prophet, but did
only suffer him, either to deceive himself, by the illusions of his own
fantasy, or the Devil to deceive him, by being a false Spirit in his mouth.
For, as God cannot be deceived, so he cannot deceive; and as he cannot be
tempted, so he cannot tempt, Jam. 1.13.

So God is said to have afflicted or evil entreated his people; whenas it was
Pharaoh indeed which did positively afflict them, or evilly entreat them (being
offended and angry at that message which God sent to him by Moses) not God: yet
Moses when he saw that Pharaoh did evilly entreat the people of Israel, upon
his message to Pharaoh to let them go, he returned unto the Lord and said,
Wherefore have thou so evilly entreated this people? Exodus 5.22.

So, according to that old Proverb, Blanda Patrum segnes facit indulgentia
Natos, The fond indulgency of Fathers is said to make the Children naught, when
they do only connive at them, but instill no naught into them; And qui non
vetat, cum possit, peccare jubet, says Seneca Troas. Ver. 289. He which
forbids not or hinders not a man, that he sins not (but permits him to sin)
when he might hinder him, commands him or makes him to sin. And thus God is
said to harden Pharaohs heart, or to stir him up against his people, only
because he permitted Pharaoh upon those occasions, which Pharaoh took, to
harden his heart, and to exalt himself against his people, when he might have
hindered him from so doing, and might have mollified him by his dispensations,
as he had done others, if he would.

But when God does not hinder men from so doing, but permits them so to do, and
mollifies them not, he does it, as a Judge, to punish some former evil thereby,
which they had done. And Pharaoh indeed had done evil, in keeping the people of
Israel in such bondage as he had, and by so oppressing them as he did (for they
were not a people which were subdued, or brought into bondage, either to
Pharaoh or to the Egyptians by any just War; but were a people whom they had
received into their protection, or tutelage, for Joseph's good deserts at their
hands) which evil of Pharaoh nevertheless God, no doubt, would have passed by,
if Pharaoh at Gods command had freely and willingly let the people go. Gods
primary intent therefore of sending to Pharaoh, was, that Pharaoh might let the
people go, that so he might do him good, as he did Cyrus good in aftertimes,
for delivering his people Israel out of the Babylonish Captivity, Isaiah 45.
But because Pharaoh would not let his people go (as he foresaw and foretold
Moses) Exodus 3.19. but would harden his heart, and stir up himself the more
against them, he suffered him so to do, because he knew how to bring good out
of evil; and to make his power known by the wonderful Plagues, which he would
bring upon him, if he let not his people go; and how to get himself great glory
in his destruction in the Red Sea, if he persisted in his obstinacy; in which
he persisting, God brought wonderful plagues upon him, and at length
overwhelmed him and all his huge Army in the Red Sea, while they pursued the
Israelites there.

Thus did God (in manner as I have said) justly harden Pharaohs heart, and if
he hardened Pharaoh justly, he may (as the Apostle concludes from hence Romans 9
18.) justly harden whom he will.

And if he can justly harden whom he will, he may much more deny remission of
sins and justification to whom he will; and, by consequence, he may justly deny
remission of Sins and justification, to those that obey not, or believe not the
Gospel, whatsoever they are, whether Jews or Gentiles; and justly harden them
too, if they continue obstinate in their unbelief, and are contentious against
the Gospel.

But a malepart Jew, when he hears Saint Paul say, that whom God will he
hardens Romans 9.18. starts up here and says, why then does God find fault
with us Jews for the hardness of our hearts, for if he will harden our hearts
we cannot help it; for who has resisted his will? whom the Apostle takes up
for this his sauciness in chopping Logic with God, in the nineteenth and
twentieth verses, and then in the 21. and 22. verses gives him a more direct
answer to his objection, in those words, What if God willing to show his wrath,
and to make his power known, has endured with much long-suffering the vessels
of wrath fitted to destruction, etc. The meaning of which words may be gathered
from Cap. 2. ver. 4, 5, 8. as I conceive.

I conceive therefore the sense thereof to be this, What if God willing to show
his wrath, and to make his power known in their destruction, if they would not
repent, has endured the Vessels of Wrath (those I mean, which are contentious,
and obey not the truth, but obey unrighteousness) with much long-suffering,
(which leads in it self to repentance:) But they ( abusing that
long-suffering of God,) and hardening their hearts, and becoming impenitent, by
occasion of that:) by their hardness, and impenitent hearts, treasure up unto
themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous
judgment of God, and so are fitted by themselves to destruction; What I say,
if God be angry or find fault with them for this? or what if God be said to
harden them, because they took occasion from this his long-suffering, to harden
their own hearts? What can thou say to this? or what unrighteousness is there
in God for this? And what if moreover he did this (as it follows verse 23.) for
this end, viz. that he might make known the Riches of his Glory on the Vessels
of mercy, which he had before prepared to Glory; What can thou say to it, or
what unrighteousness is there in God, for it?

Note therefore first, that the Apostle does here give in this, 22. verse, a
more direct answer, then he did in the two foregoing verses, to that saucy
question (which a malepart Jew made, when he heard Saint Paul say of God, that
whom he will he hardens) viz. Why does he yet find fault, for who has
resisted his will? In which answer, he shows, that God might justly find fault
and be angry with, the hardened Jews; And that God is not said to harden them,
because he positively wrought hardness in them, but because they themselves
hardened their hearts, and he suffered them to harden them, by his
long-suffering to them.

Note secondly, that those Jews, whose hardness God is said to complain of,
Ver. 19. were such as sought justification otherwise, than by faith, and would
not believe the Gospel when it was preached to them; but were contentious
against it. For the Jews for the most part when the Gospel was preached unto
them, did not only not believe it, but were contentious against it, as will
appear by the History of the Acts of the Apostles.

Note thirdly, that those Jews are called Vessels of Wrath in opposition to
those believers, which are called Vessels of mercy, ver. 32. And they may be
called vessels in allusion to Potters Vessels, of which he speaks verse 22. And
Vessels of wrath, because wrath and indignation was denounced against them, or
such as they are, Chap. 2.8. to wit, if they repented not.

Note fourthly, That these Vessels of wrath may be said to be fitted to
destruction, because when God was long-suffering to them, thereby to lead them
to repentance, they abused that long-suffering of God, and were so far from
being led to repentance, as that they hardened their hearts against the Gospel,
and grew impenitent, and by their hardness and impenitent hearts, treasured up
unto themselves, wrath against the day of wrath, Chap. 2. ver. 5.

This account I have given of what I conceived concerning the hardening of
Pharaohs heart, and of those words, Romans 9.17. Even for this same purpose have
I raised thee up, etc. In my Commentaries.

But having since the printing of them read, and seriously considered the
Annotations of that learned, industrious, judicious, and acute Doctor, Doctor
Hammond, upon Rom 9. ver. 17.18. (who has given much light to many dark places
of Scripture.) And having the opportunity to do it by reason of the standing of
the press since the printing of my Paraphrase and Commentaries by reason of
these late sad times, I would not hide, that singular light, which that
Reverend Doctor has given to this place, but hold it out here.

He therefore having judiciously weighed the whole story of Pharaoh written by
Moses in his book of Exodus, and the several passages thereof, observes, that
when God was sending Moses to Pharaoh to let his people go, God foretold Moses,
that Paraoh would harden his heart, when he sent to him, in those words, Exodus
3.19. I am sure that the King of Egypt will not let you go, no not by a mighty
hand. And he foretold him also, that he the Lord would harden Pharaohs heart,
in those words, Exodus 4.21. Do all thy wonders before Pharaoh which I have put
into thy hand, but I will harden his heart, that he shall not let the people go.

But though God did early foretell, that he would harden Pharoahs heart, yet
(as he observes) God did not do it immediately. For at the six first plagues
or judgments, which God sent upon him, Pharaoh is said to have hardened his
own heart; and God is not said to have hardened Pharaohs heart until the
seveneth. So that Pharaoh hardened his own heart six times, before that God is
said to have hardened it.

And from this observation of the time when God is said to have hardened
Pharaohs heart (which was not till after Pharaoh had hardened his own heart six
times, against Gods signs and judgments) He gathers, that Gods hardening
Pharaohs heart, was the total withdrawing of his grace of Repentence from
Pharaoh, in the same manner as when one is cast into Hell, which Pharaoh at
that time had been, had it not been more for Gods glory to continue him alive a
while, in that desperate irreversible condition, which sure was no whit worse
to him, but somewhat better, and more desirable, then to have been adjudged to
those flames at that time.

When therefore God had thus hardened Pharaohs heart. He said (by Moses) unto
Pharaoh. And now at this time (or turn) will I pour out all my plagues upon
thine heart, etc. And now I had stretched out my hand, and had smitten thee and
thy people with the pestilence, and thou had been cut off, from the earth:
But in very deed for this cause have I made thee stand (or kept thee alive) to
show or make to be seen my power in thee, Exodus 9. ver. 16, 17. For thus does
he accutely interpret these words.

But read his own Annotations, in which are many things of this kind, worthy of
observation.

Thus as he observes did God harden Pharaohs heart, and this was (as he
observes) a notable and withal (as far as we find in Scripture) a singular
example of Gods dealing with an impoenitent, that had filled up his measure,
keeping him alive but without any Grace, and consequent possibility of amending.

And now, say I, from Gods thus dealing with Phaaraoh we may conclude, that God
can deny mercy to whom he will, and so by consequence deny remission of sins,
or justification to those who will not believe the Gospel, yea and harden them
too in the highest degree, if they are obstinately contentious against it.

But if that passage of Saint Paul taken out of Exodus 9.16. be to be read thus,
Even for this same purpose have I kept thee alive, that I might show my power
in thee, etc. It may be asked, how that conclusion which Saint Paul mentions
there, verse 17. viz. Whom he will he hardens, can be deduced from thence.

I answer, That that conclusion, Whom he will he hardens, may be deduced from
those words, For this same purpose have I kept thee alive, that I might show my
power in thee, etc. Those words, For this same purpose have I kept thee alive,
must be considered in relation to the story of Pharaoh, as it is recorded in
Exodus, and then they will imply an hardening. For they will imply Gods hardening
Pharaohs heart. For it was upon Gods hardening Pharaohs heart, that God kept
Pharaoh alive, that he might show his power in him. And then that conclusion,
Whom he will he hardneth, is deducible from it.

Another question may be asked here. How that hardening, whereby God hardened
Pharaohs heart, can be understood of Gods total withholding of his Grace of
Repentance from Pharaoh, whereas Pharaoh afterward repented, and let the
people go.

I answer, That though Pharaoh did repent, and let the people go, yet did he
not truly and heartily repent, as appears by that, that soon after he had let
the people go, he pursued after them to bring them back again into Egypt,
whereby he was drowned in the Red Sea.

HOLY.
To be holy, signifies to be separated from other things by way of
pre-eminence; or to be set in some state of singularity, whereby it is
separated and advanced above the common condition of things, of the same order.

For whereas it is said concerning the Cities of refuge, Thou shall separate
three Cities for thee in the midst of thee, Deuteronomy. 19.2.7. In Joshua Chap. 20.7.
where this command is put in execution, it is said in the Hebrew, and as it is
read in the Margent of our Bible, They sanctified three Cities, Kedesh,
Shechem, and Hebron, which shows, that to sanctify and to separate are
equivolent one to the other.

And so Saint ^hrysostome, writing upon those words of Genesis Chap 2.3. And
God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it, has these words (...). i. e.
What is that? or what means that? and sanctified it? He separated it says he.
So that to sanctify is the same as to separate.

And that to sanctify signifies to separate, will appear also by what we
read, Levit. 20. verse 24, 26. I am the Lord your God, which have separated you
from other people; and ye shall be holy unto me, for I the Lord am holy, and
have severed you from other people that you should be mine. For mark there that
to separate is to make holy, and that to be holy, is to be separated from
others of the same rank: wherefore holiness consists in a separation or
discrimination of a thing or person.

Now we read of this word Holy, Romans 11.16. where it is said, If the root be
holy so are the branches; In which place the Apostle compares Abraham, the
Father of the Jews, to the root of an Olive Tree, and the Jews which sprang out
of Abraham, by carnal propagation, to the branches of that Tree. And says of
both of them, that they were holy.

But why does he say of Abraham that he was holy, and of the Jews that they
were holy.

He says of Abraham that he was holy, because God called him from his own
kindred and from his Fathers house (who were Idolaters) and separated him from
them, to be a worshipper of him, and to serve him, and promised him above all
the world besides, that he would be a God unto him. And he says of the Jews,
the Children of Abraham, that they were holy, because God chose them, and
exalted them to be a peculiar people and Church unto himself, to worship him
and serve him, as he should appoint; and promised them that he would never
leave them or forsake them utterly, so as that they should be at any time
utterly without the means of Salvation; which was a promise and a blessing
which God never made to any other people then to them, and so by that separated
and discriminated them from all other people else.

But now, how does this follow, or wherein does the validity of that
consequence consist, That if the root be holy, so are the branches? For the
Father may be holy, and yet not his Children: Abraham might be holy, and yet
not the Jews which sprang of Abraham. And if they were holy, yet might they not
therefore be holy because he was holy. Answ. The validity of that consequence
is founded upon that promise, or covenant of God to, or with Abraham, whereby
He promised or covenanted, by an everlasting covenant, to be a God to him and
his seed after him in their generations, Genesis 17.7. which covenant he also
established with Isaac, Genesis 17.19. And what God covenanted or promised is not
to be doubted but that he will perform.

But now, whereas some, yea the greatest part of the branches of the
Olive Tree, are said to have been broken off; It supposes, that they were once
in the Olive Tree. When therefore were they in the Olive Tree, and how? And
when and how were they broken off? We may gather an answer to this question,
from these two places of our Apostle, viz. Romans 7.4. and Romans 9.32. put
together. For whereas the Apostle said to the Jews, Romans 7.4. Ye are become
dead to the Law, by the body of Christ, that ye should be married to another,
even to him, who is raised from the dead, which is Christ; we may say, that
they which served God according to the prescript of the Law, were said to be in
the Olive Tree, that i^, to be in the Church, and Members of the Church of God,
so long as the Law lasted, which was till the death of Christ, by which that
Law ceased; and because at the cessation of the Law, the Church of God and
every M^mber thereof was to obey the Gospel: so many of them as obeyed the
Gospel of Christ, continued in the Olive Tree, that is, in the Church of God,
as Members of his Church, and branches of the Olive Tree; But so many as
stumbled at the stumbling block (as most of the Jews did Romans 9.32.) that is,
so many as were offended at Christ and at his Gospel, and believed not in him,
nor obeyed his Gospel, they, for their unbelief, ceased to be Members of the
Church of God, of which they were Members before, by professing and living
according to the prescript of the Law, while the Law was in force; and they
were broken off, as branches from the Olive Tree, by their unbelief, and
disobedience to the Gospel of Christ, which the Church of God was to believe,
and to profess, and to live according to, so soon as the Law ceased or expired;
or else it was no longer the Church of God, nor were any of them to be
accounted his Servants or worshippers of him, or Members of his Church.

Note therefore, that by the Olive Tree, is meant the Church of God, and that
the branches which were broken off, were in the Olive Tree, so long as they
were of the company of those, which professed that religion or manner of
worship, which God had prescribed to his Church, and served God with them
according to it (which was so long as the Law which was given by Moses
continued in force) but when the Law ceased, they were broken off from the
Olive Tree, in that they departed from that company which believed, and would
not with them, believe in Christ, and obey his Gospel, and live according to
it, which was that which the Church of God, that is, the company of them which
served him were to do, when the Law was dead, or ceased, otherwise not to be
taken for his Church, or any of them for Members thereof.

Note, that the Church of God is but one, and was but one from the beginning,
though that Economy thereof (as I may so term it) was diverse in diverse times,
according to the Will and Wisdom of God.

Though the greatest part of the Jews were broken off from the Olive Tree, by
those means which I have spoken of, that is, by their unbelief and disobedience
to the Gospel of Christ; yet God left them not without all means of being
engraffed into the same again; which our Apostle seems to say, when he says,
If the root be holy so are the branches, and that by reason of the promise of
God, that God would be a God to Abraham, and to his seed in their generations,
and that he would never utterly forsake them to destroy them. Of which I have
spoken before, in the word Foreknow.

In the first to the Corinthians 7.14. The Apostle says, that the children of
such parents, whereof one is a Believer the other an Unbeliever, if their
Parents live together, are holy: And therefore are they called holy, not
because they would otherwise be Bastards, but because, by reason of their
Parents living together, they would have by their believing Parent the means of
salvation, and the opportunity of coming to the knowledge of Christ, which the
Children of those Parents, which were both Infidels, or where both were not
Infidels, yet if they parted one from the other (the children being in danger
to follow the unbelieving parent) had not; and now if such children may be
called holy, because they had this Advantage above the children of Infidels:
How much more may the Jews be called holy; yea even then, when they are broken
off from the Olive tree, and have lost that part of holiness, which consisted
in being actual members of the Church of God. and part of the people which
served him, during the time of their unbelief, when as God has promised not so
to leave them, as that they should be utterly without all means of salvation.

IN.
In is a Preposition, which the Apostle uses with more variety of
significations, then the Greeks do their (...), or the Latins their In. And
this he does, because he uses it, as the Hebrews use their praefix Beth, which
though it does most commonly signify In. Yet they put it for almost any
Praefix or preposition whatsoever.

TO JVSTIFIE, TO BE JVSTIFIED, JUSTIFICATION.
To justify, as it is most frequently used in this Epistle of Saint Paul, is a
Law term, used and borrowed from Courts of Justice, wherein he is said to be
justified, who is absolved, or freed, or acquitted, or cleared from some
capital crime whereof he was accused by the Sentence pronounced by the Judge;
and being acquitted or absolved from the Crime, is also absolved or acquitted
from the punishment, which the Accusers asked against him, as due to the crime
whereof they accused him, and is dealt with, as with an innocent and upright
man.

Hence to be justified, and to be condemned are opposed as contraries one to
another, as Mat. 12.37. By thy works thou shall be justified, and by thy works
thou shall be condemned.

To be justified therefore is for a man to be absolved or acquitted by the Judge
from those crimes and accusations, which are laid to his charge by his accusers.

Now he that is accused may be, either an upright and innocent man; or he may
be a Delinquent or Offender. And either of these may be justified, that is, may
be acquitted of the crimes laid to his charge, and the punishmont due to those
crimes, by this Judge. The former, that is to say, the upright and innocent
man, by reason of his innocence, or by reason of that, that he was not found
guilty of the crimes whereof he was accused. The other, to wit, the Delinquent
or Offender, by reason of the mercy and favor of the Judge to him, who
notwithstanding that that he was guilty of the crimes laid to his charge, did
acquit him of the Action or Accusations put in against him, and absolve him
from it, and give him a free pardon of those his offenses.

To the first, to be justified, or to be cleared, or absolved, from the
accusation wherewith he was accused, did appertain of due, or of right, or of
justice: For the Judge would have been unjust, if he had not acquitted him: But
to the Second, to be justified, or to be cleared, or absolved from the
accusation, wherewith he was accused, was merely an Act of grace and favor, in
that the judge did out of Grace and favor acquit him, or absolve, or clear,
him from the action or crime laid unto his charge, and the punishment thereunto
due, and did pardon his offenses, whereas he might justly have condemned him
for them.

Now according to this, or in allusion to this, which I have said, He that does
the works of the Law so strictly and exactly as the Law requires, is said by
our Apostle to be justified by his works, for the doers of the Law shall be
justified says he Romans 2.13. That is, they shall be justified by their doing
the Law. And they which are so justified, are said to be justified of debt. For
to him that works is the reward (which is Justification) not reckoned of
grace but of debt, says our Apostle, Romans 4.4. And again, If it (to wit,
justification) be of works, then it is not of grace, otherwise work is no more
work, says he, Romans 11.6. And indeed if Satan should accuse such a one before
God as a sinner, and require that he might be cast into the same condemnation
with himself, God would (with reverence be it spoken) be unjust, if he should
not acquit him, and clear him of that for which Satan accused him; and this
justification may be called the justification of an innocent or righteous man.

Again, according to that which I said, Is he which believes justified. For a
man (which Believes) is justified by his faith, Romans 3.27. But this
justification is not of debt, but of Grace. For therefore it is of faith, that
it may be by grace, says our Apostle Romans 4.16. I say such a man which
believes, is said to be justified, because though Satan should accuse him
before God the Judge of all, as such a one, who has broken the Law, and should
require of him, that he should be damned for it, yet would God absolve him and
give him a free pardon of all his sins, and deal with him, as with an innocent
and righteous man, for Jesus Christ his sake, in whom he believes. And this
may be called the justification of a sinner.

The justification of the former man is reckoned to him for his works sake: The
justification of this latter is imputed to him through the Grace and mercy of
God in Christ Jesus, and consists in the free pardon and remission of his
sins, according to that which is written, Romans 4.7. Blessed are they whose
iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered, blessed is the man unto
whom the Lord will not impute sin.

Note, that the Justification of an innocent and righteous man, and the
Justification of a Sinner which believes, agree both in this, that they are
both absolved, and acquitted from the accusation laid against them by Satan, but
they differ in this, that one is acquitted for his works sake, the other is
acquitted through the mere grace and mercy of God in Christ Jesus.

Note also, that though I have showed how a righteous man, which has exactly
kept the Law is justified, I do not thereby affirm, or hold, that there is, or
has been, or ever will be any such man ( For by the works of the Law shall no
flesh be justified, Gal. 2.16. For if Righteousness come by the Law, then
Christ is dead in vain, Galat. 2 12. And all the world is become guilty before
God, Romans 3.19.) but I say only, that if we should suppose, that there were
any righteous man, which had exactly kept the Law, he would be justified after
that manner, which I have spoken of. So when our Apostle said that the doers of
the Law shall be justified, Romans 2.13. He did not say that there were any such
doers of the Law, as had so done the works of the Law, as the Law in rigor
exacts, but he did only show what they must do, who would be justified by the
Law, they must not be only hearers of the Law, but doers also of the Law. And
when he said now to him that works is the reward not reckoned of Grace, but
of debt, Romans 4.4. He said not that there was any which did work, or had
wrought, that is, he said not that any one did work, or had wrought the work of
the Law, so exactly as the Law requires, which required a perfect observation
thereof of a man throughout the whole course of his life; but this he said that
if we should suppose that there were any such man, then the reward would not be
reckoned to him of grace, but of debt. And after the same manner is he to be
understood, when he says. If it be of works then it is no more of grace,
otherwise work is no more work, Rom 11.6.

(...).
(...) is a Greek praeposition, to the various acception of which we have
neither in Latin, nor in English one single praeposition, which will fully
answer. It signifies frequently when it is joined with an Accusative case,
secundum, that is according to, as (...), the Gospel according to Matthew.
(...), the Gospel according to Luke. But it does also when it is joined with an
accusative case signify De, that is of or concerning, as (...), Arist. Pol.
lib. 5. Laws of or concerning excess. And (...), 2 Cor. 11.21. I speak as
concercerning reproach. And according to this acception of the praeposition
(...) do I render those words of our Apostle, Romans 9.11. (...), That the
purpose of God concerning Election may stand.

There is also a Rule which Grammarians give concerning an other use or
acception, of this praeposition (...) which you may find in H. Stephan's
Thesaurus Vocab. (...) Tom. 2. page 87. G. and it is this, Interdum verbum
substantivum cum (...) habente accusativum ponitur, and tunc hae tres orationis
parts Vnico verbo, vel participio resolvi possunt, as Thucidid. lib. 5. (...),
for (...) differing. After this manner does our Apostle say, (...), Romans 8.8.
for (...), i. e. They which are according to the Flesh, for carnal, or they
which are carnal. And according to this Rule do I interpret those words of our
Apostle, Romans 11.5 (...) There is a Remnant Elected. Except you would interpret
(...) Per, as it sometimes signifies, and say, (...) Per Dei electionem: but I
prefer the former.

LONG-SVFERING.
Long-suffering is attributed often to God, and it is that by which God defers
those punishments, which are due to Sinners for their sins, and punishes them
not according to their deserts, so soon as they have sinned.

It is attributed to God twice in this Epistle of Saint Paul to the Romans,
viz. cap. 2.4. and cap. 9.22. and it is there spoken of him, by reason of those
Jews, which were contentious and obeyed not the truth of the Gospel, but
resisted it, and oppugn'd it with all violence (for how violently the Jews for
a great part of them, did resist and oppugn the Gospel Saint Luke tells us in
many places of the Acts of the Apostles) whom notwithstanding, God is said to
have endured with much long-suffering, because he brought not any signal
punishment upon them, or rather because he did not cut them off in anger, for
that their unbelief, and violent contention against the Gospel, and cruel
persecution of the Preachers and Professors thereof, by which they made
themselves the vessels of wrath, Cap. 9.22. and for which he threatened them
with indignation and wrath, Cap. 2.8.

For notwithstanding he was long-suffering toward them, that, that his
long-suffering toward them might lead them to Repentance, cap. 2, 4. yet were
they for the greatest part of them, so far from being led to repentance
thereby, as that they did thereby harden their hearts. And by their hardness
and impenitent hearts, treasure up to themselves wrath against the day of
wrath, cap. 2.5. For which God was willing to show his wrath, and to make his
power known upon them, cap. 9.22. because they repented not, but did heap up to
themselves wrath against the day of wrath.

RIGHTEOUSNESS.
This word Righteousness is taken sometimes for conformity with the Law of God.
But in this his Epistle to the Romans Saint Paul does most frequently take it
for justification. It is sometimes joined with the word Law, as when it is
said, the Righteousness of the Law, concerning which, see the word (...).

SPIRIT.
Our Apostle in his Epistle to the Romans, uses this word often, viz. The
Spirit, and that after diverse ways, with the word Holiness joined with it, he
takes it for God, or the divine nature, for when the Apostle says according to
the Spirit of Holiness Graece (...), Romans 1.4. It is as if he should say, as he
was God, or according to his divine nature, concerning which see Beza in his
notes upon that place. Sometimes he takes Spirit for the Holy Ghost, as Romans
8.23. Sometimes by a Metonymie. For the gifts of the Holy Ghost, by which we
are regenerated, and enabled to work the works of Righteousness, and by which
we are inclined to Holiness and Righteousnese, as Romans 8.13. Where it is said,
that, If ye live after the flesh ye shall die, but if ye through the Spirit do
mortify the deeds of the Flesh ye shall live, after which manner the gifts of
the Holy Ghost are called the Holy Ghost, Romans 5.5. Where he says the love of
God is shed abroad in our hearts, by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us; In
this sense of the word Spirit, the Spirit is most frequently opposed to the
Flesh as Romans 8. Galat. 5. etc. Sometimes our Apostle takes the Spirit for the
Gospel, and then he opposes it to the Letter, that is to the Law, as Romans
2.29. and 7.6, which also he does 2 Corinthians. 3.6. And sometimes again he takes
it for the soul of man, as Romans 8.10. where the Spirit is opposed to the Body.

WORLD.
The world, as it is most properly, taken is, (...), As the Philosopher defines
it. Arist. (...). cap. 2. that is, The World is a Cistern or Fabrike consisting
of heaven and earth, and those Nature which are therein contained; In this
sense our Apostle takes the word World, Romans 1.20. and 16.25. He takes the
world sometimes also for all the men of the world, whether good or bad, as Romans
3.6, 19. Sometimes he takes it for the wicked men of the world, or men adicted
to the profits, pleasures, and vanities of the world, as Romans 12.2. Sometimes
he takes it for the Gentiles in general, as Romans 11.12, 15. Sometimes he takes
it for the whole habitable earth, as Romans 10.18. Sometimes he takes it for the
Land of Canaan, which was but a little part of the world, yea, a little part of
the whole earth, as Romans 4.13. And marvel not that our Apostle should take the
world for the Land of Canaan, when the Prophet Isaiah takes the earth, yea, the
world, for the Land of Israel, which was but part of the Land of Canaan, Isaiah
24 4. And here by the way, observe, that as Joshua was a Type of Jesus Christ,
so was the Land of Canaan into which he brought the Israelites, a Type of all
and every part of that blessedness, into which Jesus Christ has, and will
bring us.

WORKS, WORKS.
Our Apostle does often make mention of Works in this his Epistle, while he
treats of Justification: as Romans 3.23. Where is boasting then? It is excluded,
by what Law? of works: Nay, and Romans 4.2. If Abraham were justified by works,
he had whereof to glory, and verse 4. Now to him that works, (i. e. to him
which has works) is the reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt, and verse
6. Even as David also describes the blessedness of the man, to whom God
imputes righteousness, without works; and Romans 11.6. If it be of works, then
it is no more of grace; and Romans 3.28. We conclude that a man is justified by
faith, without the deeds or works of the Law. In all which places, and the
like, he takes works for works exactly done according to the Law, so that the
doer of them did never, through the whole course of his life, break the Law,
either in thought, word or deed; either by commission or by omission, or by any
other way, in the least tittle or point thereof; which works, if we should
suppose, that any one had so done, he would be justified by his works, and that
of debt; for otherwise, if God should not justify him (with Reverence be it
spoken) he would be unjust, as I have said before.

Whereas therefore it is said, that Abraham was not justified by works; and
that no man is justified by the deeds or works of the Law, and that the purpose
of God should stand not of works, etc. It is not so to be understood, as that
either Abraham, or any other had such works, and yet were not, or should not be
justified by them. But it is so to be understood, as that neither Abraham, nor
any other, ever had, has, or will have any such works; And therefore as many
as are justified, are justified without them, or though they have them not. And
for this reason it is, that no man is said to be justified by the works which
he does, or has done, or shall do, I may add or can do, because no man does
keep, has kept, will keep, or can keep the Law, so strictly and exactly as the
Law requires, so as that he has not, does not, or will not break it at any
time. For, our Apostle, to prove that no man is justified by the works of the
Law, proves that every man has sinned, Romans Chap. 1.2, 3. And therefore
because every man has sinned, no man has works in that sense which he
speaks of; For if a man has sinned but never so little, he has not works as
our Apostle takes works in the places first named. For, cursed is every one
that continues not in all things which are written in the Book of the Law to
do them, In the voice of the Law, Galat. 3.10. and Deuteronomy. 27.26.

Our Apostle denies plainly, that Abraham was justified by works, Romans 14.
verse 1, 2. And yet Saint James says that he was, when he says, Was not
Abraham our Father justified by works? James 2.21. what then? shall we say that
Saint Paul and Saint James thwarted or contradicted one the other? God forbid.
For they were both led by the same Spirit, even the Spirit of Truth, and
therefore could not err, or contradict one the other. They take works
therefore in several senses, one after one sense, the other after another:
Saint Paul speaks of works exactly done according to the command of the Law,
from the very birth or infancy of a man, which works Abraham had not. But Saint
James speaks of such works as Abraham had, and therefore not of works which
Abraham did in the first part of his Age, who no doubt, in the first part of
his Age was an Idolater.

Saint Paul speaks of works which Abraham should have done (if he had been
justified by works) before his Call. Saint James speaks of works which he did
after his Call. Saint Paul speaks of works done without faith (for he opposes
such works as he speaks of to faith, and faith to works, Romans 3.27, 28. (And it
is his scope to prove the necessity of faith, because no man had done, or could
do such works) but Saint James speaks of works proceeding from faith, yea,
Saint James takes works by a Metonymie, for faith it self: And therefore does
he so do, that he may show, against such as are contented with an empty and
barren faith, that justifying faith is an operative faith, and fruitful of good
works. To the works which Saint Paul speaks of, justification is due of debt,
otherwise, those works would not be works in his sense, Romans 11.6. and 4.4. But
to the works which Saint James speaks of (if we should suppose they were
requisite to justification) justification would be due, not of debt but of
grace. But they are not requisite to justification (for they follow it) But yet
they are requisite to Eternal Salvation. For, If we live after the flesh we
shall die, but if through the Spirit we mortify the deeds of the flesh, we
shall live, Romans 8.13. But yet, though the works which Saint Paul speaks of, do
require, a most exact conformity with the Law throughout a man's whole life,
without the least interruption or deviation from the Law (otherwise a man
cannot be justified by them) yet may a man be saved, though after his
justification by faith (when the works which Saint James speaks of do begin)
there be some failer in those his works, and they do not exactly answer the
rigor of the Law.

To these words, which I have treated of, might be added, the Explication of
other words, but because they will be found sufficiently explained (as I hope)
in their places in these ensuing Commentaries, I add no more.

But as the Explication of these words before explained, is convenient, for the
better understanding of diverse passages of this Epistle; so would the
explication of those Figures of Speech, which Saint Paul uses, be for the
Vulgar, who are unacquainted with them. But because I have been more large upon
these elsewhere ( viz. in the Preface of my aforenamed Book) I shall be the
briefer here, and only give the description of those following (to wit)
Metaschematismus, Prosopopoeia, Synechdoche, with some examples of each.

METASCHEMATISMVS. (...).
Metaschematismus is a Figure, by which a man speaks of that, as done by
himself, and in his own person, which was done or acted by others in their
persons. An evident example of this we have, 1 Cor. 4 6. where Saint Paul, when
he had spoken of some things which were done by others, as if they had been
done by himself, and by Apollos, says, And these things, Brethren, I have in a
Figure, transferred to my self and to Apollos, for your sakes, etc. This same
Figure does Saint Paul also use, Romans 7. verse 7. etc. where he says, I had
not known sin but by the Law, and so forward. For from that place to the end of
the Chapter, he acts in his own person a Jew, or rather the whole people of the
Jews (among whom were diverse, of diverse dispositions) as they lived both
before, and under the Law; and transfers their manners and doings to himself.

And that it may not seem uncouth for one man, to act the part of a whole
people, and that in several estates, in his own single Person. That Polite
Historian L. Florus, considered the people of Rome, in their several ages and
estates, as one single Man. For, Siquis populum Romanum quasi; hominem
consideret, totamque ejus aetatem percenseat, ut coeperit atque adoleverit, ut
quasi ad inventae florem pervenerit, ut postea velut Consenuerit, qua^^or
gradus processusque ejus inveniet, says he in the Proaeme of his History. i.
e. If any one shall consider the people of Rome as it were a man, and thoroughly
consider its whole age, how it began, how it grew up to its stripling, and how
it came to its more manly age, and how afterward it did as it were wax old, he
shall find, as it were, four degrees or proceedings thereof, etc.

But that I may take occasion here to speak more fully of those whom Saint Paul
personates, from the seventh Verse of the seventh Chapter to the Romans to the
end thereof; I conceive, that the Apostle does from those words of the seventh
Verse of that Chapter, viz. Nay, I had not known sin but by the Law, etc. and
so forward (...), and that he speaks not in his own peroson, but in the person
of others, that is, that he personates here the people of Israel, that is, the
Jews which lived both before the Law, and under the Law which was given by
Moses, and so personates them as if they were but one single Man; and yet not
all the Jews neither, but the greatest part of them, and these considered, not
as they might have been (for surely they might have been better, if they had
put out themselves to the utmost, and used their utmost endeavors to have been
better) but as they were: And they were for the most part of them, a carnal,
untoward, stubborn, and rebellious people, and a people of the worst Natures.

I said first, that the Apostle does not (as I conceive) speak here in his own
person ( nor yet in the person of a regenerate man) for reasons which I gave in
my Commentaries on those words, Ver. 14. But I am carnal, sold under sin.

Secondly, I said that the Apostle does speak here in the person of the People
of Israel, or of the Jews; for it is most evident, that in the former part of
the Chapter, he spoke of the Jews, and they are they who he said were delivered
from the Law, wherein they were held that they should serve in the newness of
the Spirit, and not in the oldness of the Letter, verse 6. And from that, that
the Apostle said, that they had lived in the oldness of the Letter, is the
ground of that Objection, which is made in the seventh verse, viz. What shall
we say then, is the Law sin? which Objection the Apostle could not better, or
more aptly answer, than by showing what kind of people the Jews were, both as
they lived before and under the Law, and thereby clear the Law of sin. And
therefore does he (...), or take upon him their person.

Thirdly, I said, that he does not here personate all the Jews, and therefore I
said it, because all the Jews were not such as he speaks of here, to wit,
carnal, and sold under sin, and such, as in whom sin wrought all manner of
concupiscence, for it is written of Zachary and Elizabeth his Wife, that they
were both righteous before God, walking in all the ordinances and commandments
of the Lord blameless, Luke 1.6. Of David it is said, that he did that which
was right in the eyes of the Lord, and turned not aside from any thing that he
commanded him all the days of his life, save only in the matter of Uriah the
Hittite, 1 Kings 15.5. And of Asa, that his heart was perfect with the Lord all
his days, ibid. ver. 14. The like we read of others which lived under the Law.
And what shall we say of Isaiah, Jeremy, and other Prophets of the Lord? what
of those worthy Jews which the Apostle commends, Heb. 11. shall we say that
they were carnal, sold under sin, and that they were forges of all manner of
concupiscence? where does ever the Scripture speak such things of such men?

These and all such as these were, were not carnal, but spiritual, and though
they lived under the Law, that is, under the obligation of the Law; yet were
they not under the imperfection of the Law, for they through the Types of the
Law, which were Temporal, pierced to the Substance of those Types, which was
Eternal; they were of those which looked for redemption in Israel, and which
died in faith, not having received the promises, but having seen them a far
off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them, so that they were
spiritual; and yet not by virtue of the Law (though they lived under it) but of
Faith and of the Grace of God in Christ Jesus, and I may well exempt these, and
such as these were, out of the number of those Jews which our Apostle here
personates.

But yet I said, that our Apostle does personate or speak here in the person of
the greatest part of the Jews: For, for the greatest part of the Jews, they
were carnal and sold under sin; for the Jews were, for the greatest part of
them, such as I spoke of before. And therefore such as might be worse under the
Law, than without the Law; being under both the obligation and imperfection of
the Law, and looking not to, nor beholding things eternal, but minding
altogether earthly things, by reason of which they were adicted to the profits
and pleasures of this life. Yet among these there were some better than others,
though the best of them were carnal, sold under sin; And the best of them does
the Apostle personate more peculiarly at the fourteenth verse of this Chapter,
even to the end thereof.

Whilst therefore he personates the best of these, he says verse 14. But I am
carnal, sold under sin, whereas he says that he was carnal, because he was
easily and most frequently carried by his carnal lusts and affections, to any
carnal or sinful object whatsoever, to which they should allure him; so he
says that he was sold under sin, ^y reason of those particular sins especially
which he was accustomed to, and of which he had contracted habits. For such a
one as is accustomed to any sin, and is habituated in it, is said in the
Scripture phrase, to be sold under that sin. For he who by long custom has
contracted an habit of any sin, can scarce, or not scarce abstein from that
sin, when he has an opportunity to commit it, and is tempted by it.

That the Jews, which were under the imperfection of the Law, should contract
all of them habits of sins, some of this kind, some of that, according to their
several tempers and dispositions, will not seem a wonder, if we consider, that
a Child and Son of Adam, until he comes unto the use of his reason, is
altogether led by his sensitive appetite and affections, and when he comes to
the use of his reason, his reason is but weak in him at the first, so that
before he can come to the strength of it, his sensitive appetite and affections
are grown so unruly, as that it is hard, if not too hard for his reason to get
any mastery of them: And again if we consider, that the people of the Jews,
among whom, and by whom, their young ones were to have their education, were a
stubborn, rebellious, untoward, and stiff-necked people.

Whilst he personates the same men, he says, verse 15. What I do I a^low not,
for what I would that do I not? which words sound generally, as though he did
never do any one thing which he would do, nor ever omit any one thing which he
would not do. But yet such general speches, are often to be understood with an
(...), or (...). i. e. with this restriction, viz. For a great part, or for the
most part. And so do I conceive, that they are to be interpreted here.

For whereas it is said of Abijah, the Son of Jeroboam, that there was some
good thing found in him toward the God of Israel, in the house of Jeroboam, 1
Kings 14.13. Why may not the like or more be said of these Jews, whom Saint
Paul here personates, which were better than Abijah, and are supposed to have
atteined to the highest degree of goodness, which any ever attained to which
were under the imperfection of the Law.

It is true, that they are said to be carnal, because they are supposed to have
been adicted, or to have been propense to follow whatsoever their carnal
appetite and affections moved them to; but notwithstanding this adiction or
propension, they might sometimes, abstein from evil, and at some time or other
do that which is good; though for the most part they neither did that which is
good, nor absteined from that which is evil.

They are said also to be sold under sin, but that is (as I said) by reason of
the habits of sins which they had contracted by long use and custom, by reason
of which they could not forbear to commit those sins, when they had opportunity
to commit them, or were allured to them. But it is improbable, yea, impossible
that one man should have the habits of all manner of sins, being that one sin
is often opposite and contrary to the other; Again, the opportunity of every
habitual sin, does not offer it self at all times; therefore notwithstanding
that a man is sold under sin, he may nevertheless abstein sometimes from evil,
and sometimes do that which is good, at least Secundum substantiam operis. And
notwithstanding, that that he does sometimes abstein from that which is evil,
and sometimes do that which is good, he may be carnal and sold under sin.

Verse 18. He says in the person of the Jews aforesaid, that in me, i. e. in
my flesh, dwells no good thing, i. e. I know that in me, that is in my flesh,
under which his Will is comprehended, dwells no good thing, by any habit
thereof which is therein.

Note that he says not, I know that in me, that is in my flesh there is no
good thing; but he says, I know that in me, that is in my flesh, there
dwells no good thing. For there might be some good in him, as there was in
Abijah the Son of Jeroboam, 1 Kings 14.13. And yet no good dwell in him, that
is, no good habit of good or virtue be in him.

As sin is said to dwell in a man, by reason of those habits which custom in
sin produces in him; so may such good as is here spoken of, be said to dwell
in the man, in whom it is found, by reason of those habits which custom
therein produces in him. And where either sin or virtue dwells by reason of
such habits, there they may also be said to rule respectively, that is, virtue
where virtue or goodness dwells, and sin where sin dwells.

He proves by those words, I know that in me, that is, in my flesh dwells no
good thing, that sin dwells in him. For if there be no habit at all of virtue
in him, there is nothing to hinder, but that it is credible, that sin dwelt in
him.

He says verse 21. that when he would do good, evil is present with him, by
which he means, that his carnal appetite is present with him, moving him and
inciting him to that which he cannot attain to without sin, which would have
been in a great measure refrained, if there had been any habitual good in him:
and therefore he complains thus of it.

PROSOPOPOEIA.
Prosopopoeia, is a Figure whereby we attribute reason and understanding, and
other properties of a man, to things which have no reason or understanding,
yea, to qualities and other accidents, as though they were persons, that is, as
though they were individual substances endued with reason and understanding.

Our Apostle uses no Figure more frequently than he does this. By this Figure
he speaks of Sin as of a Man or Woman, when he says, Sin entered into the
world, Rom 5.12. and sin shall not have dominion over you, Romans 6.14. And
again, ye were the servants of sin, verse 17. And again, the wages of sin is
death, verse 23. And thus he speaks of Righteousness, as if it were a Person,
when he says, yield your Members Servants to Righteousness. By this does he
also speak of Death as of a Person, when he says, Death reigned from Adam to
Moses, Romans 5.14. And by this does he speak of the Law as of a Person, when he
says, The Law entered that the offense might abound, Romans 5 20. And when he
makes the Law as an Husband to them which were under it, Romans 7.1.

SYNECHDOCHE.
Synechdoche is a Figure whereby the whole is put sometimes for a part, and a
part sometimes for the whole. The first is called Synechdoche Integri, The
second Synechdoche Partis. An example of the first we may have in the word
World, which is put for the Land of Canaan, Romans 4.13. And for all men, Romans
ver. 6.19. And for the Gentiles, Romans 11.12. And for the wicked of the world,
Romans 12.2.

An example of the second we have Romans 3.20. where it is said, that by the
deeds of the Law there shall no flesh be justified in his sight, where Flesh,
which is but part of a Man, is put for the whole Man. And Romans 14.2. where it
is said, Another who is weak eats Herbs, where Herbs which were clean by the
Levitical Law, and lawful to be eaten by the Jews which were under it, are put
for all kind of meats which were clean, and might lawfully be eaten by that
Law. And Romans 10.9. where it is said, That if thou shall confess with thy mouth
the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thy heart that God has raised him from
the dead, thou shall be saved, where one or two Articles of our Creed are put
for the whole object of our Faith, which conteins many Articles and points as
well concerning our practice as our belief, which if we believe not
effectually, it will not be enough to bring us to Salvation, to believe and
confess, that Jesus is the Lord, and that God raised him from the dead.

I have spoken, under the Titles of Foreknowing and Holy, of some things, which
may make to the better understanding of some passages, of the eleventh Chapter
to the Romans: And I shall here add, by way of Appendix, something for the
better understanding, or explanation of my meaning, concerning some other
passages thereof, before I conclude.

The Apostle says Chap. 11. verse 25, 26. that when the fullness of the
Gentiles is come in, all Israel shall be saved, as it is written, there shall
come out of Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn away iniquity from Jacob, etc.
By this Deliverer is meant our Lord Jesus Christ, yet I do not conceive, that
the Lord Jesus Christ, shall come in person to the Jews, but that what is said
of him here, he will effect by such ministers, or servants of his, as he will
make choice of, whom he will so furnish for this purpose with all things
necessary and convenient, as that they shall win the greatest part of the Jews
to the faith, by which they shall be saved from their sins.

For many things are said and prophesied of Christ, which yet Christ performed
not by himself in his own person, but by his Ministers. For (that I may give
one example for many) It was prophesied of Christ, by Isaiah, that he should be
a light of the Gentiles, Isaiah 49.6. And by old Simeon, that he should be a
light to lighten the Gentiles, Luke. 2.32. yet did not Christ fulfill these
Prophesies in his own person, but by his Apostles. For if we consider him in
his own person, He was not sent, but to the lost sheep of the House of Israel
(and so not to the Gentiles) Mat. 15.24. But that Christ fulfilled these
prophesies by his Apostles Saint Paul will teach us, when he says to the Jews
seeing ye put the word of God from you, and judge your selves unworthy of
everlasting life, Lo we turn to the Gentiles, for so has the Lord commanded
us, saying, I have set thee to be a light of the Gentiles, that thou should
be for salvation to the ends of the Earth, Acts 13. ver. 46, 47.

Nor do I conceive, that there is any ground from hence to assert, that the
Jews shall be gathered together under any one visible head, but that this
Prophecy may be fulfilled in them though they should live dispersed in many
parts of the world, as now they do.

That which is prophesied here of the conversion of the Jews, our Apostle
says, shall be, When the fullness of the Gentiles shall come in, cap. 11. ver.
25. That is, when the full number of the Gentiles are come in, which the
Prophets speaks of: Or, when that number of Gentiles which God determined to
bring in into his Church, before he would extend that amplitude of Grace which
is here spoken of to the Jews, is brought in.

But now when this number or fullness of the Gentiles shall be brought in, I do
not conceive, either that all and Every one of the Gentiles of the world will
be then saved; Or that after this grace is extended to the Jews, the door of
grace will be shut up for the same, to those Gentiles, which shall then remain
in their sins and unbelief: For as it is not probable, that every particular
Gentile will then believe; so it is not probable that the extension of this
grace of God to the Jews will be an exclusion of the Gentiles from Gods grace,
which shall then remain in unbelief. For if the fall of the Jews be the Riches
of the world, and the diminishing of them be Riches of the Gentiles, how much
more their fullness? Says our Apostle, verse 12, And again, If the casting away
of the Jews be the reconciling of the world, what shall the receiving of them
be, but life from the dead? Verse 15.

I shall add nothing more, Gentle Reader, but here conclude this my Preface,
praying God to be our Guide in all things, and rest,

Thine in the Lord WILLIAM DAY.
From my Study at Mapledurham Jan. 16. 1665.
An Exposition upon Isaiah, in Folio, written by the same Author, is to be
sold at the sign of the Kings Arms in Saint Paul's Churchyard.

Corrigenda and Addenda.
Page 8. col. 1. lin. 32. read, And that by his own power. Page 11. col. 1.
lin. 24. read, Shalom. Page 12 col. 2. lin. 37. read, To what follows. Page
14. col. 1. lin. 10. read, (...) lin. 18. (...) may by an (...) be put for
(...). lin. 22. r. (...). col. 2 lin. 26. r. (...). Page 23. col. 2. lin. 29
read, (...). Page 24. col. 1. lin. 21. read, Tertul. de Idolatria. Page 26.
col. 1. lin. 42. read, And withheld. Page 28. col 1. lin. 3. read, In some by
ways and here in particular, an erring from that which nature it self showed.
Every sin. -- lin. 55. r. (...). Page 29. col. 1. lin. 19. read, Thus. Page 37.
col. 2 lin. 49. read, They had of themselves through Gods long-suffering. Page
42. col. 1. lin. 23. read, And. Page 54. Verse 23. of the Paraphrase, read, Of
the praise of God. Page 60. col. 2 lin. 5. read, When he says. Page 63. col. 2.
lin. 8. read, Produces. Page 72. col. 1. lin 47. read, The faith of, and faith
in. Page 82. col. 1. lin. 28. read, For him. Page 83. col. 1. lin. 14. read,
Works not. Page 89. col. 1. lin. 34. read, Being faith. Page 90. col. 1. lin.
41. read, Sense is this. Page 97. col. 1. lin. 17. read, That the love of God is
made known. Page 100. col. 2. lin. 19. read, Romans 8.32. Page 102. col. 1. lin
41. dele, And. Page 105. col. 1. lin. 51. read, As it does verse 9. lin. 52. r.
Yet they do not so indeed. Page 106. col. 1. lin. 36. read, (...) col. 2. lin.
49. r. (...). Page 107. col. 1. lin. 9. read, Though this. Page 109. col. 1.
lin. 49. read, Was this, that sin did abound. Page 114. col. 2. lin. 30. read,
At his baptism. Page 116. col. 2. lin. 30. read, Does commonly infer. Page
118. col. 2. lin. 30. read, Grace; But by what means soever our old man is
crucified, it is crucified for this end, that the body of sin might be
destroyed, that from thenceforth we might not serve sin. Page 120. col. 1. lin.
50. read, Nor ever had he any motions of sin in him, whereby he might be said
to have ceased from yielding to her motions. col. 2 lin. 45. r. Suitable to her.
Page 130 Verse 18. in the Paraphrase, read thus, No habitual good in me, that
is, in my flesh to quell sin. For to will that which is good is present with
me. Ver. 21. In the paraphrase, read thus, that no habitual good dwells in
me: But I find also a Law. Ver. 23. r. dictates of my mind. Page 132. col. 1.
lin. 6. read, Over a man Page 133. col. 2. lin. 29 read, That as Christ was
raised. Page 134. col. 2. lin. 35. read, Not any true Genuine cause. Page 136.
col. 2 lin. 23. read, A Genuine cause. Page 137. col. 1. lin. 27. read, Acrius
urit. Page 138. col. 1. lin. 30. read, Here from the seventh verse. col. 2.
lin. 45. r. A commandment properly taken. col. 2. lin. 56. r. A cause of
death. Page 139 col. 1. lin. 1. read a cause. lin. 11. r. a cause. lin. 44 r. a
cause. Page 139. col. 2. lin. 5, 6, 7. read, Which was under the imperfection
of the Law, yet which had atteined to the highest degree in that estate, which
any one of them whom he personates came to. Page 140. col. 2. lin. 21. read,
Whereby he concludes. lin. 28. r. That do it Page 141 col 1. lin. 45. read, An
habitual good, and such an habitual good. col. 2. lin. 45 r. No habitual good.
lin 47. r. Whereby to subdue sin. Page 142. col. 1. lin. 1. read, That when I
would do good, evil is present with me, i. e. That there is that in my flesh.
col. 2. lin. 4. r. I do not. Page 143. col. 2. lin. 11. read, Here after this
manner, through the sense. col. 2. lin. 38. r. The Congeries of particular
sins. Page 144. col. 1. lin. 24. read, But yet such a one. Page 150. col. 2.
lin. 43. read, i. e. Impotent and weak. col. 2 lin. 49. r. (...). Page 151.
col. 2. lin. 21. read, With a Noun and Verb or Participle Substantive. Page 152.
col. 2. lin. 57. read, To the Objector, viz. that they which are in the flesh,
do walk after the flesh, that by granting. Page 159 col. 2 lin 54. read, A
glorious, i. e. an incorruptible. Page 160. col 1. lin. 46. read, And their
desire. Page 163. col. 1. lin. 51. read, Conjugation. Page 164. col. 2. lin. 3.
read, A correction. Page 170. col. 2. lin. 10. read, Such are often. Page 175.
col. 1. lin 23. r^ad, Fortassis miserereris. Page 178. col. 1. lin. 54. read,
Not taken none effect. Page 181. col. 1. lin. 5. read, Which was figured. Page
182. col. 1. lin. 21. read, That does accord. Page 185. col. 2. lin. 52. read,
These as such. Page 186 col. 1. lin. 2. read, Of which. col. 1. lin 34 r. God
is not unjust in justifying all those which are the Children of the promise, or
Children according to the Spirit, though they were Gentiles most of them. col.
2. lin. 30. r. As we shall observe, Chap. 10.17. col. 2. lin. 54. r. Having
therefore. Page 187. col. 2. lin. 35. read, Heemaditha. Page 189 col. 1 lin.
15. read, Satan to harden them, and to foster. col. 1 17. r. As by suggesting.
col 2. lin. 8. r. But he had rather before he gives a direct answer. col. 2.
lin. 43. r. Of mankind, i. e. over all sinners. col. 2. lin 50. r. But yet it
meets. Page 190. col. 1. lin. 12. read, That core. Page 192. col. 2 lin. 25.
read, Dwelling, and become Proselytes of the Jews. Page 196. col. 1. lin. 18.
read, And ushers in a reason. Page 200. Verse 14. in the Paraphrase, read, Note
here ye Jews. Page 217. col. 1. lin. 13. read, With a Noun and Verb Substantive.
Page 219 col. 2. lin. 48. read, (...). lin. 49. r. (...). Page 224 col. 1. lin.
36. read, For to Abraham, and to his seed were many. Page 227. col 2. lin. 18.
read, Or else to those words. Page 228. col. 1. lin. 35. read, Decree, before
he did extend. Page 2^9. col. 1. lin. 31, read, In relation to. lin. 46. r.
Does rather say. Page 257 col. 1. lin. 14. read, Or it is taken for the carnal
affections. Page 268. col. 1. lin. 23. read, (...). Page 270. col. 1 lin. 16.
read, Not of the evil of sin. Page 276. col. 2. lin. 17. read, Therefore. Page
277. col. 2. lin. 17. read, And when they avoid. Page 287. col 1. lin. 17. read,
Sanctified or consecrated. Page 288. col. 2. lin. 38. read, Which is of the
Dative. lin. 40. In Latin.
A PARAPHRASE and EXPOSITION ON THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS.
ROMANS CHAP. I.
1. PAul a Servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an Apostle, separated unto the
Gospel of God.

1. Paul a Servant of Jesus Christ, and an Apostle (not which intruded himself
into that Office, but) which was called to the Apostleship, and separated by
the Holy Ghost unto the Ministry, and Preaching of the Gospel of God.

2. (Which he had promised before by his Prophets in the holy Scriptures.)

2. Which Gospel he had promised (long before it was revealed) by his Prophets
in the Holy Scriptures of the Old Testament.)

3. Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, which was made of the seed of
David according to the flesh.

3. Which Gospel was concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who was made of
the seed, or born of the Posterity of David, according to his humane Nature.

4. And declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the Spirit of
Holiness, by the Resurrection from the dead.

4. And was the Son of God, and declared so to be by the power which he showed,
by his Resurrection from the Dead, according to his Divine Nature.

5. By whom we have received Grace, and Apostleship for Obedience to the faith
among all Nations for his name.

5. By whom we have received the grace, or free gift of Apostleship; for this
end, that all Nations may, by our Ministry or Apostleship, come to the
obedience of the Faith, or to belief of the Gospel, that so his Name may be
glorified throughout all the Earth.

6. Among whom are ye also the called of Jesus Christ:

6. Among which Nations are ye also the called of Christ Jesus, whom Christ
Jesus has effectually called to the grace of that his Gospel.

7 To all that be in Rome, beloved of God, called to be Saints: Grace to you,
and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

7. I Paul, I say, do wish all happiness, both temporal and eternal, to all
that be at Rome, (whether they be Jews or Gentiles, Noble or Ignoble, Bond or
Free) which are beloved of God, and Saints effectually called to holiness,
saying, Grace be to you, and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus
Christ.

8. First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all, that your faith is
spoken of throughout the whole world.

8. Now, I thank my God, through Jesus Christ our only Mediator, for you all;
that your faith is such and so illustrious, as that it is spoken of, and talked
of, throughout the whole world.

9. For God is my witness, whom I serve with my spirit in the Gospel of his
Son, that without ceasing I make mention of you always in my prayers.

9. And think not (I pray) that when I say, I thank my God for this, that I do
complement with you; for God is my witness, whom I serve with all my heart,
faithfully and sincerely, in the Ministry of the Gospel of his Son, that
without ceasing I make mention of you always in my prayers, giving thanks to
him for all the blessings which he has bestowed upon you.

10. Making request (if by any means now at length I might have a prosperous
journey by the will of God) to come unto you.

10. And also making request (if by any means I might have a prosperous journey
to Rome, by the good will and pleasure of God) to come unto you.

11. For I long to see you, that I may impart unto you some spiritual gift, to
the end you may be established;

11. For I even long to see you, not that I might receive any thing from you,
but that I may impart some of those spiritual gifts which God has given me, to
you; for this end, that you may be established in the faith of the holy Gospel
which ye have received.

12. That is, that I may be comforted together with you, by the mutual faith
both of you and me.

12. That is, that we may be comforted together when I am among you, by the
mutual faith both of you and me, I in you, when I see the steadfastnesse of
your faith; and you in me when you see the steadfastness of mine.

13. Now I would not have you ignorant, Brethren, that oftentimes I purposed to
come unto you, (but was let hitherto) that I might have some fruit among you
also, even as among other Gentiles.

13. Now, because I said, that I long to see you; (that you may not think that
my heart does not go along with my words) I would have you know, Brethren, that
oftentimes I purposed to come unto you, (but was let hitherto) that I might
preach the Gospel to you, that so I might have some fruit among you also, even
as I have among other Gentiles, by the joy which I have, by their obedience
thereunto.

14. I am debtor both to the Greeks, and to the Barbarians; both to the wise
and to the unwise.

14 For I am bound by virtue of my Apostleship, and also by the command of God,
to preach the Gospel to the Greeks, and to the Barbarians; to the wise, and to
the unwise.

15. So, as much as in me is, I am ready to preach the Gospel to you that are
at Rome also.

15. So that as much as is in me, I am ready to preach the Gospel, not to
ignorant people only, which dwell in obscure parts of the world, who may be
easily deceived, and before whom a man may freely vent that which he would be
ashamed to say before learned, and knowing men, such at are Citizens or
Inhabitants of great and famous Cities, and places of literature; But to you,
which are at Rome also, the Mistress of the world, the Receptacle and Nurse of
the highest Wits.

16. For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ: for it is the power of God
unto salvation, to every one that believes, to the Jew first, and also to the
Greek.

16. For though some account the Gospel of Christ to be mere foolishness, yet
I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, neither to profess it, nor yet to
preach it For so far is it from foolishness, as that it is a powerful
instrument, which God uses to bring every one that believes, to salvation,
the Jew first, and then the Gentile.

17. For therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to says: as
it is written, The just shall live by faith.

17. For therein is the righteousness and justification, of which God is the
Author, and by which we are justified before him, revealed and made manifest;
and not only revealed and made manifest, but thereby conveyed and conferred,
as by an instrument upon men. A Righteousness and Justification which is of
faith, and which is revealed to this end, that it might gain faith, and be
believed of them, to whom it is revealed; I say, a Righteousness or
Justification which is of faith, for (that you may know that I speak not of any
new thing, or that I vent a figment of mine own brain) it is written, Habakkuk
2.4. That the just shall be justified by their faith.

18. For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness, and
unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness.

18 A man shall not be justified by his works (as they teach, who are the
greatest opposers of righteousness or justification by faith) for the wrath of
God is revealed from heaven (both by his word, and by the plagues which we see
poured down upon sinners) against the ungodliness and against the
unrighteousness of all men, whether they be Jews or Gentiles, because they
hold the known truth which they have, both of godliness and righteousness, in
ungodliness and in unrighteousness, as in a Prison; so that the known truth
which they have thereof, can no more show it self, nor no more go forth into
good or virtuous deeds or actions, than a Prisoner can show himself, or go
forth, which is shut up, or imprisoned in a close Prison or Dungeon.

19. Because that which may be known of God, is manifest in them; For God has
showed it unto them.

19. But some man may here object and say, That surely the Gentiles do not hold
the known truth of godliness and righteousness, in ungodliness and
unrighteousness; for being that they never had the Law given to them, as the
Jews had; they cannot have the true knowledge of godliness and righteousness,
as the Jews have.

But to this, I answer, That the Gentiles, though they had not the Law given to
them, as the Jews had, to whom it was given, fairly written in Tables of Stone,
yet they have the true knowledge, both of godliness and of righteousness.

For, to speak of Righteousness first, which concerns our duty toward our
Neighbor; the Gentiles have the true knowledge of this; because, that which
God has appointed by his Law, to be done, by one neighbor to another, is
manifest to them; for God has showed it unto them, by that light of Nature,
which he has set up in their hearts.

20. For the invisible things of him from the creation of the World are clearly
seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and
Godhead; so that they are without excuse.

20. And as for Godliness, which concerns our duty toward God; They have the
true knowledge of this also, for those things of God, which cannot be seen by
our bodily eyes, nor perceived by our outward senses, to wit, his eternal power
and Godhead (by which understand his Providence and Goodness to his Creatures
too) have been (ever since the world was made) and are clearly known, being
understood by the things which are created, so that the Gentiles are without
excuse.

21. Because that when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither
were thankful; but became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart
was darkened.

21. Because that when they knew God, to be a powerful God and a good God,
ruling by his Providence, and providing for his Creatures, all things which
were necessary, and convenient for them, they glorified him not, neither were
thankful to him for his benefits, but became vain in their imaginations, and
had their foolish heart darkened, and overspread with mists of error.

22. Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools:

22. And though they professed themselves to be wise, yet they became fools.

23. And changed the Glory of the uncorruptible God, into an Image made like to
corruptible man, and to birds, and four-footed beasts, and creeping things.

23. For they changed the glorious and incorruptible God, whom they should have
adored; for an Image made like to corruptible man, and for birds, as the Ibis,
and for four-footed beasts, as Crocodiles, Wolves, Lions, Dogs, Cats, etc. And
for creeping things, as Serpents, Fishes, etc. And for their Images, giving
Divine Worship to them.

24. Wherefore God also gave them up to uncleanness, through the lusts of their
own hearts, to dishonor their own bodies between themselves.

24. Wherefore God did, in the way of retaliation to them, give them up to
uncleanness, through the lusts of their own hearts (which he restrained not) to
dishonor their own bodies between themselves.

25. Who changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and served the
Creature more than the Creator, who is blessed for ever, Amen.

25. Because they changed the true God, for that which was not God, and
worshipped and served the creature, passing by the Creator; so dishonouring
him, who is blessed for ever (though they thus neglect and pass him by) And
ever may he be blessed, Amen.

26. For this cause God gave them up unto vile affections: for even their women
did change their natural use into that with is against nature.

26. For this cause, I say, God gave them up to vile affections, and base
lusts, to be slaves to them, and to obey them, and to do whatsoever they
tempted them, or moved them to. For even their women did change the natural use
of their bodies, into that which is against nature, carrying themselves as men,
in those acts which should tend to Generation.

27. And likewise also the men, leaving the natural use of the woman, burned in
their lust one toward another, men with men working that which is unseemly, and
receiving in themselves that recompense of their error which was meet.

27. And likewise also the men, leaving the natural use of the woman, which is
such as husbands have of their wives, became Buggerers, Ganimedes, and
Catamites, etc. and burned in their lust one toward another, men with men
working that which is most filthy and more than beastly; and receiving by
hemselves (themselves being the Authors and Actors of their own shame and
punishment) that recompense of their wickedness, and of their dishonor which
they did to God, which was meet, and answerable (in a general way) to their sin.

28. And even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave
them over to a Reprobate mind, to do those things which are not convenient:

28. And even as they did not approbate, or like to retain God in their
knowledge, by worshipping him, (whose worship would have been as a Remembrancer
to them of him) so he gave them over to a reprobate or base mind (a mind so
perversely judging of virtue and vice, as that it called evil good, and good
evil; light darkness, and darkness light; bitter sweet, and sweet bitter)
that they might do those things which are most foul, and worthy even of eternal
death.

29. Being filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness,
covetousness, maliciousness, full of envy, murder, debate, deceit,
malignity, whisperers,

29. So that they were filled with all unrighteousness, fornication,
wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness, and were full of envy, murder,
debate, deceit, malignity; and became whisperers,

30. Backbiters, haters of God, despightful, proud, boasters, inventers of evil
things, disobedient to parents,

30. Backbiters, haters of God, despightful, proud, boasters, inventers of evil
things, disobedient to Parents,

31. Without understanding, Covenant-breakers, without natural affection,
implacable, unmerciful;

31. Without understanding, Covenant breakers, without natural affection,
implacable, unmerciful.

32. Who knowing the judgment of God, (that they which commt such things are
worthy of death) not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them.

32. And such as, who knowing both by the light of reason, and by tradition,
the judgment of God, which is, that they which do such things are worthy of
death, not only do the same, but (which is the height of al wickedness) have
pleasure in them, that do them.

CHAP. I.
Ver. 1. Paul.] This Paul is he, of whom we read Acts 9. who is there called
Saul, but here Paul.

A Quaestion is here usually moved, How Saul comes to be called Paul?

For answer to this, some think, that he was called Saulus Paulus, that is,
Saul Paul, from the time that he first received a name, like to that, Flavius
Josephus: and that, because he was an Hebrew of the Hebrews (Phil. 3.5.) he was
called Saul, which is an Hebrew name; and because he was born a Freeman of
Rome, Acts 22.28. he was called Paul, which is a Roman Name. And they think,
that they are favored, in this their opinion, by that which is written, Acts
17.9. Then Saul, which is also called Paul, etc.

But others think, that he was called Paul; not from the time that he first
received a name: But from the time that he first preached the Gospel to the
Gentiles (whereof the chief were Romans) and that he was then first called
Paul, (a name usual among the Romans, and a name not much abluding from his
name Saul) by reduction of the Hebrew name Saul, to the Roman name Paul, which
is like unto it: No respect being therein had to the signification of the words
in their several Languages, but only to the literal sound, and likeness
thereof.

And this I take as most probable; for it is observed, that he was called Saul,
till such time as he was separated (by the command of the Holy Ghost) to the
Ministry of the Gospel, and entered into that Ministry; but upon that he was
called Paul, Act. 13. But whether Paul then changed his name himself, from Saul
into Paul, the more to insinuate himself into the Gentiles, to whom he was sent
(the chiefest part whereof were Romans) or whether the Gentiles, with whom he
conversed, changed this name, is yet in question, and so I leave it. Being (as
it seems to me) a matter of no great concernment.

A Servant of Jesus Christ] If you ask who this Jesus Christ was: It is he of
whom none of us should be ignorant: It is the second Person of the glorious
Trinity, the everlasting Son of God the Father, God of God, Light of Light,
very God of very God, who, that he might redeem us men out of that Abyss of
misery, into which we were plunged by sin; was made flesh, John 1. v. 14. He
was made flesh by the Holy Ghost, of the Virgin Mary, Math. 1.20. And this name
Jesus was given him while he was yet in the womb, of God himself, by an Angel,
Matthew. 1.21. Yea, that he should be called Jesus was told before he was
conceived, Luke 1.31. And accordingly was he called by the name of Jesus, when
he was circumcised Luke 2.21. Which name signifies a Savior in the Hebrew
Tongue; and therefore was it given to him, because he should save his people
from their sins, Matthew. 1.21.

Jesus therefore is his proper name, and to this proper name of his, to wit,
Jesus, is this name Christ (which signifies in the Greek tongue Anointed)
added. A name of Honor, and a Name of Office: for they which bore those
honorable Offices of King, Priest, and Prophet in Israel, were called the
Anointed, because they were anointed with oil at their designation or entry
into their respective Offices: And as they, so Jesus also, because he was made
a King, a Priest, and a Prophet, is here called Christ, that is, the Anointed:
and that either in allusion to that, that the Kings, Priests, and Prophets,
(which were Types of him) were called Christ's, that is Anointed, because they
were Anointed (as I said) with material oil: Or, because he himself was
anointed (not with material, but immaterial oil, that is) with the most
excellent gifts of the Holy Ghost, which were most bountifully bestowed on him;
which immaterial oil, that is, which gifts of the Holy Ghost, which were so
bountifully bestowed on him) were praefigured by that material oil, with which
the Kings, Priests, and Prophets under the Law, were anointed.

He is called Jesus Christ, a name partly Hebrew, and partly Greek, to signify
he was the Savior both of Hebrews and Greeks, that is, both of Jews and
Gentiles.

A Servant of Jesus Christ.] Every Christian is a Servant of Jesus Christ, in
that he is by his profession to be obedient to the commandments of Christ; But
it is not in this common Notion, that Paul calls himself a Servant of Jesus
Christ in this place: But therefore does he call himself a Servant of Jesus
Christ here, because he served Jesus Christ with his Spirit in his Gospel, as
he speaks v. 9. For what kind of Servant he was, He specifieth in the next
words, when he says, Called to be an Apostle, separated to the Gospel.

Called to be an Apostle] The Greek is (...), a called Apostle, That is, An
Apostle (which ran not of himself, but) which was called to the Apostleship.

Of Paul's calling read Acts 9. And of the word (...), called, see more verse 6.

An Apostle] This word Apostle, is in its native signification, as large as the
word Messenger is with us. But Saint Paul, when he calls himself an Apostle,
calls himself so, not in so large, but in a stricter signification of the word;
As when our Savior called those twelve Disciples of his (whom he chose Luke
6.13.) Apostles. So that the name of an Apostle, as it is taken here, is a name
of Power, and a name of Dignity, in the Church of Christ; and the signs and
notes of an Apostle, (as it is here taken) are these following;

First, He which was an Apostle, was taught immediately of God.

Secondly, He was sent to preach the Gospel, with an immediate Commission from
God himself.

Thirdly, His Commission did extend to the preaching of the Gospel where the
Gospel was never preached before, and to the constitution and plantation of
Churches, where never was Church before.

Fourthly, He had a Supereminent power over all the Churche^ of Christ.

Fifthly, He had the Gift of Miracles given him to confirm his Doctrine, and to
confirm his Commission.

And now if we examine Saint Paul's Apostleship, according to these Notes, we
shall find, that he was truly an Apostle: For, first, He was taught
immediately of God, Gal. 1. v. 11, 12. Secondly, He was sent to preach the
Gospel with an immediate Commission from God Himself, Acts 9.15. and 1 Cor.
1.17. Thirdly, He had Commission to preach the Gospel where it was never
preached before, and to constitute and plant Churches, where never was Church
before, Acts 9.15. Romans 15.20. 2 Cor. 10. v. 13, 14, 15, 16. Fourthly, He had a
Supereminent power over all the Churches of Christ, Acts 14.23. 1 Cor 4.17. 2
Cor. 11.28. Fifthly, He had the power of Miracles, as a Seal and Sign to
confirm his Doctrine and Commission, Acts 19.11.

Separated to the Gospel] i. e. Separated to the Ministry or Preaching of the
Gospel.

The Gospel is put here for the Ministry or Preaching of the Gospel, Per
Metonymiam Subjecti. Paul was separated to the preaching of the Gospel from his
Mothers womb, Gal. 1.15. And he was separated again at the command of the Holy
Ghost by the imposition of hands, Acts 13. v. 2, 3. Though they do not much
amiss, which interpret this place of both or either of these Separations; yet I
conceive, that the Apostle respects here chiefly his separation from the womb,
of which he speaks, Gal. 1.15. q. d. Paul a Servant of Jesus Christ, That is to
say, an Apostle, called, yea separated from his Mothers womb, to the
Apostleship or Preaching of the Gospel.

Paul calls himself a called Apostle, and says, That he was Separated from
the womb to the Gospel, to show, that he did not intrude himself into the
Apostleship, and arrogate that Holy Function to himself, as some did who
boasted themselves to be Apostles, yet were never called or separated
thereunto, which kind we read of, 2 Cor. 11.13. As also that he might assert
the Dignity of his Office, to the end, that his Epistle might be the better
received of them to whom he wrote.

To the Gospel] The Greek word here used is (...), which word signifies in
general Good news; but it is here taken in a particular sense, for The good
news of man's Redemption and eternal Salvation by Jesus Christ: and so is it for
the most part used by the Penmen of the new Testament, and by all
Ecclesiastical writers from them. But the English word Gospel is a word
compounded of the word [God] and the word [Spell] which last word signifies a
Mystical Speech or an Oracle, or Hidden Knowledge; so that the Gospel is as if
you should say, The Mystical word, or the Oracle, or the Hidden Knowledge of
God: And well may this word Gospel in this sense, be taken to signify The news
of man's Redemption and eternal Salvation by Christ, for the news of man's
Redemption and eternal Salvation by Christ, is called the Oracles of God, Heb.
5.12. And it is called a Mystery, Ephesians. 6.19. And the hidden Wisdom of God, 1
Cor. 2.7. and the Knowledge of God, 2 Cor. 2.14.

To the Gospel of God] The Gospel is called The Gospel of God, because God is
the Author of it; and he adds the Name of God, the more to commend the Gospel
to which he was called and separated.

Ver. 2. Which he had promised before by the Prophets] God promised the Gospel
by the Prophets before it was revealed, in that he inspired the Prophets, to
foretell and to promise in his name, that a great Prophet and a great King
should arise, for the Redemption and Salvation of his People: and in that he
inspired them, to foretell and make promise in his name, of a New Covenant that
he would make with his People, and that he would send Preachers to preach
redemption to them. See among other places, Deuteronomy. 18.15. and compare it with
Acts 3.22. See Psalm 2. Psalm 22. Psalm 45. Psalm. 110. And compare them with
Luke 20. v. 41. See also Isaiah 7.14. and compare it with Mat. 1.22. and Isaiah
chap. 9.6. and chap. 11. and chap. 53. See also Isaiah, c. 42.1. etc. compared
with Mat. 12.18. etc. See also Jerem. 31.33. compared with Heb. 8.10.

Afore] That is, before it was revealed.

In the Holy Scriptures] The Scriptures which are written by Gods inspiration
are called The Holy Scriptures, (...), because there are no Writings more holy
than they are.

The Apostle seems to add these words, lest any should doubt of the truth of
what he said, to wit, That God had promised the Gospel before by his Prophets;
For if any should doubt of this, he tells them, that the Scriptures which were
writ by the Prophets are extant, and therein may he find the Gospel promised.
And he makes mention of this, to wit, That the Gospel was promised before by the
Prophets in the Holy Scriptures, that he might show the excellency, and dignity
of the Gospel. For it must needs be an excellent thing, which God did not only
think of, but did also promise to his people by his Prophets, so long a time
before it came to pass: He did it also, that no man might be offended with the
Novelty of the Gospel.

3. Concerning his Son Jesus Christ] These words (being that the second verse
is read with a Parenthesis) are to be referred to those, to wit, The Gospel of
God, and they show the Subject of that Gospel. For the Gospel of God is wholly
conversant about the Son of God, namely, in delivering the Doctrine which he
preached unto men, in relating what he did, and what he suffered for men, in
telling of his Birth, his Life, his Death, his Resurrection, and Glory, and
Power over all things, etc.

Jesus Christ is called the Son of God, in diverse respects: First, in respect
of his eternal Generation, whereby he was God of God: Secondly, in respect of
his manner of Conception, when he took our flesh upon him. For because he was
conceived by the power of the most High, without the help of a man, he was
called The Son of God, Luke 1.35. In which sense also, Adam was called The Son
of God, Luke 3.38. namely, because he was produced by the Supernatural power of
God. Thirdly, he was called The Son of God, because The Father sanctified him,
and sent him into the world, John 10. v. 35, 36. Fourthly, he was called The
Son of God, because God raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right
hand, in heavenly places, Acts 13. verse 32, 33.

Now if you ask which of these ways Jesus is here called The Son of God, I
say, the first, or in respect of his Eternal Generation.

Our Lord] Christ is called our Lord, not only as he was Lord of all by virtue
of Creation, but also because he bought us with a price, 1 Cor. 6. ver. 19, 20.
and 7.23. and 2 Pet. 2.1. That is, with his blood, Acts 20.28.

Which was made of the seed of David according to the flesh] Jesus Christ is
said to have been made of the seed of David according to the flesh; Because he
was made (as he was Man) of the Substance of the Virgin Mary, who was of the
Posterity of David.

It is a known thing, that by the name of Seed, in the Hebrew language, is
meant the Offspring, or Posterity of a man.

Note, the Apostle prevents an Objection; for whereas he called Jesus Christ
the Son of God: It might be objected by some, saying, that Jesus Christ was the
Son of David; How then can he, which was the Son of David, be the Son of God?
To this the Apostle answers in this and the following verse, after this
manner. In Christ says he there be two Natures; One I call the flesh; the
other the Spirit, even the Spirit of Holiness. If you consider Christ
according to the flesh, then was Christ indeed the Son of David: But if you
consider him according to the Spirit, the Spirit of Holiness, he was the Son
of God, and declared so to be after a powerful manner, that is, by the
Resurrection from the dead.

According to the Flesh] i. e. As he was Man. For the Flesh, which is but part,
is put here, by a Senechdoche, for the whole Man.

4. And declared to be the Son of God with Power, according to the Spirit of
Holinesse] i. e. And being considered according to the Spirit of Holiness, he
was the Son of God, and declared so to be, after a powerful manner, or by his
Power.

Declared to be the Son of God.] That is, he was the Son of God, and declared
so to be.

Note that in the word Declared, his Being also, what he was declared to be, is
contained by a Syllepsis: for oftentimes one word of a single signification
does contain more, by a Syllepsis, than it does naturally signify, especially
when it does necessarily praesuppose more than it signifies, as here; for it
must needs be that Christ was the Son of God, if he were declared to be the Son
of God.

With Power.] That is after a powerful manner, or by his Power, The Greek is
(...), and it may be put for by or through after the Hebrew manner, whereby the
Hebrew particle Beth is so used.

Note that these words are better to be joined with Declared, than with (...)
The Son of God, for such words are better joined with a Verb or Participle,
than with a Noun. The like manner of Speech we have 2 These. 1.11. and Colos.
1.29.

According to the Spirit of Holinesse] Supple, which was in him. i. e.
According to that, That he was God.

Note, that a Substantive of the Genitive case is put here after the Hebrew
manner for an Adjective, The Spirit of Holiness, for the Holy Spirit. And that
Spirit of Holiness, or Holy Spirit, is God.

Note also, that not only the Third Person in the glorious Trinity, but The
Essence of God it self, or God according to his Essence, is sometimes also
called by the name of Spirit, as John 4.24. And if he be a Spirit, certainly he
is an Holy Spirit.

Note, again that (...), That is, (...) according to the Spirit of Holiness,
is opposed to (...), that is, to (...) According to the flesh.

By the Resurrection from the Dead] q. d. That is, by the Resurrection from the
dead. This is the powerful manner by which Christ was declared to be The Son
of God, to wit, his Resurrection from the dead.

Quaest. But how could Christ be declared to be the Son of God, by the
Resurrection from the Dead?

Answ. Christ did raise himself from the dead, John 2. v. 19, 21. and John
10.18. that by his own power, as those aforesaid places show: and none can by
his own power raise himself from the dead, but he, who is God; for a Privatione
ad habitum non datur regressus, as the Philosopher teaches; from a Total
privation to a Habit, such as Death, and Life are, there is no return, to wit,
by any natural or created Power.

Object. But you will say, that though this might show Christ to be God, yet
how does it show him more to be the Son, than the Father, or the Holy Ghost?

Answ. For answer to this we must consider, what the Man is, in whose person
the Objection, which we spoke off, is moved: and certainly it is moved in the
person of such a one, as doubted wholly of the Divinity of Christ. For when
such a one heard Paul call Jesus Christ the Son of God, conceiving that Paul
meant (as he does indeed) that if Jesus was the Son of God, than was he true
God; as he that is the the Son of Man, is true Man: He presently objects, That
Jesus Christ was the Son of David, and so true Man; How then (says he) can he
which is the Son of Man, and so by consequence true Man, be the Son of God, and
so true God? Wherefore Paul, in answer to the Objection, looks not so much to
the formality of it, as to the ground from which it sprung; which was, from a
doubt whether Christ was true God or no: And if he did but make it appear, that
Christ was God, the Objector would rest satisfied; and therefore, Paul might
only make this appear, that Christ was true God, and not stand to show, that he
was the Son of God, or the Second Person in the Trinity. So when they which
denied the Resurrection, argued thus with Paul; How are the dead raised up, and
with what bodies do they come? Paul answers thus, Thou fool, that which thou
sowest is not quickened, except it die, 1 Cor. 15. v. 35.36. which was not an
answer to the formality of the Argument, but to the ground and occasion
thereof, which was this, that The dead rise not again: So when the Sadduces,
which said that there is no Resurrection, asked our Savior, saying, Master,
Moses said, if a Man die having no Children, his Brother shall marry his Wife,
and raise up seed unto his Brother: Now there were with us seven Brethren; and
the first, when he had married a Wife, deceased, and having no Issue, left his
Wife unto his Brother; likewise, the second also, and the third, unto the
seventh, and last of all, the Woman died also; therefore, in the Resurrection,
whose Wife shall she be of the seven; for they all had her. O our Savior
answered, and said unto them, As touching the Resurrection of the dead, have ye
not read that which was spoken to you by God, saying, I am the God of Abraham,
the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? God is not the God of the dead, but of
the living, Mat. 22. v. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 31, 32, 33. In which words, our
Savior looks to the ground which moved the Sadduces to argue as they did, not
to the Argument it self: And if our Savior had said no more to this; nor Paul
more than I have spoken of, to that; they had both sufficiently answered those
that argued against the Resurrection.

But, Secondly, if we look back to some of our Saviors sayings, and referr his
Resurrection to them, his Resurrection will not only prove him to be God, but
the Son of God also; for before his Passion, he had often told the Jews that he
was the Son of God, but they would not believe him, yea, they persecuted him
for this very reason, because He made himself the Son of God, John 19.7. But
says our Savior, when ye have lifted me up then ye shall know that I am He;
(that is, that I am he whom I have said I am, and whom I have made my self to
be) John 8.28. And how could he better show himself to be Him whom he had said
himself to be, when they had lifted him from the earth, that is, when they had
crucified him and put him to death, than by raising himself, and bringing
himself to Life again; for that was sufficient to confirm the truth of his
words, when he gave that as a sign and confirmation of the truth which he then
spoke. For to raise from the Dead, must needs be the work of him that could not
lie, for it must needs be the work of him who is God.

5. By whom we have received Grace and Apostleship] i. e. Of whom I have
received the Apostleship, or by whom I was made an Apostle.

Paul, mentioning the Name of Jesus Christ, in the foregoing verse, returns
to speak of his Office, and does here more fully explain of whom he received
it, and for what end. He said therefore in the first verse, that he was a
called Apostle, now he shows of whom he was called, and of whom he received
that Office; he was called of Christ, and of him he received the Apostleship.

By whom] i. e. Of whom. This Praeposition (...), By, has that efficacy, in
this place, to show not only by whose authority he was made an Apostle; but
also of whom he was immediately called and designed thereunto.

We have received] Some think, that Paul speaks of all the other Apostles here,
as well as of himself: Because he speaks in the Plural number, and because he
says, for the obedience of the faith among all Nations, whereas he himself
went not into all Nations. But yet I think it most probable, that he speaks
only of himself.

Whereas therefore he says, we have received, he uses a Plural for a Singular
number; as he does elsewhere, Gal, 1. v. 8, 9. Heb. 5.11, etc. and this he does
out of Modesty; (for it may seem a kind of Arrogance, for a man to ascrib any
great thing, as this was, to himself singularly) or else he does it, because
the grace of his speech requires it.

Grace and Apostleship] i. e. The grace or gift of Apostleship, so some, who
would have a figure called (...), here to be used. Or Grace, that is to say,
The Apostleship, so others, taking the Conjunction Copulative, And, for a note
of declaration, or to signify as much as, That is to say.

He takes Grace here, by a Metonymie, for the Effect of the grace; that is, of
the favor and goodness of Jesus Christ; and that it was of that favor and
goodness of Jesus Christ to him, to put him into this Ministry, Saint Paul
acknowledges, 1 Timothy 1.12.

For obedience to the Faith among all Nations] i. e. That the faith may be
believed among all Nations. That is, q. d. for this end, That any Nation
whatsoever might, by my Ministry, be brought to believe the Gospel, or Doctrine
of Faith.

He shows here, the end of his Apostleship.

Note, that the word Faith, is taken here by a Metonymie for the Doctrine of
Faith; that is, for the Gospel which is to be believed, as it is also taken,
Acts 6.7. Gal. 1.23, etc. And by Obedience to the Faith, is meant the belief of
the Faith, or of the Gospel. For though belief be an Act or Habit of the
Understanding, yet that we may believe, there is need of obedience, and an
humble and lowly submission of the Will: And therefore the Apostle, speaking of
the Office of his Apostleship, says, that he casting down imaginations, and
every high thing, that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, brings
every thought to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5. And again, the Apostle
speaking of the unbelief of the Jews, says, that they have not submitted
themselves to the Righteousness of God, Romans 10.3. That is, they have not
believed that Righteousness which God has revealed.

Note also, that when he says all Nations, he takes all for any whatsoever,
for Paul preached not to all Nations, yet was there no Nation whatsoever, but
he might have preached to, for God forbade him none, but made him free to all.

Note again, that some refer these words among all Nations, not to those [For
obedience to the Faith) which went immediately before, but to those [We have
received Grace and Apostleship) q. d. We have received the Apostleship to all
Nations: And these interpret the praeposition (...) not (among) but (to.) But
these words may be very well referred to, and cohere with, those words which
they do immediately follow, to wit, those [for obedience to the Faith.)

For his Name] i. e. For this end, that his Name might be known, and that he
may be glorified among the Gentiles. See 2 These. 1.12.

The Apostles preached not themselves, but Jesus Christ the Lord, 2 Cor. 4.5.
And when Jesus Christ died for all, he died for this end, that they which live
should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him, which died for them
and rose again, 2 Cor. 5.15.

Ver. 6 Among whom are ye also] i. e. Among which Nations, or in the number of
which Nations, are ye also.

He intimates a Reason here, why he wrote unto the Romans, and it was, to wit,
because he thought it a part of his duty so to do, being that he was an
Apostle, and Minister of the Gentiles (in the number of the which the Romans
were) and that he was peculiarly called of Christ to bring them to the Faith.
See Chap. 15. ver. 15.16.

The Called of Jesus Christ.] By the Called of Jesus Christ, he means those
which were the Servants of Jesus Christ, and believed his Gospel.

For this word (...), in this and the like places, does not signify such an
one, as has been only called by the preaching of the Gospel, to be the
Servant of Christ, or to the participation of the Graces of the Gospel or such
an one, to whom the Gospel has been only preached: But such an one, as has in
some measure embraced that to which he has been called, and believed that
which the has been preached to him: So that by called here, are meant those
which have been called with effect; So Isaiah 53.1. the Prophet cries, To whom
is the Arm of the Lord revealed? where by Revealed he means revealed with
effect.

The Apostle by calling the Faithful and the Servants of Christ by the name of
(...), or, The called, would put them in mind, that both what they are, and
what they hope for, is from the free mercy and goodness of God, who loved them
before they loved Him, 1 John 4.19. And who called them, before they received
or looked after him.

Note that this word (...) though it be an Adjective sounding like a
participle, yet is it used here as a substantive, and so other words of the
same rank and nature also are elsewhere used, as (...) and (...), etc. For we
read (...), the Beloved of God, ver. 7. (...), his Elect, Mark 13 27. etc.

Ver. 7. To all that be in Rome] i. e. To all which are dwelling in Rome,
whether they are Jews or Gentiles, whether they be Noble or Ignoble, whether
they be Bond or Free, for all are One in Christ Jesus.

Yet he writes not to all absolutely, but only to all such as are so qualified
and limited, as he limiteth and qualifieth them in the next words:

Beloved of God] They were the Faithful, and they which believed the Gospel,
to whom Paul here writes; and they might well be called the Beloved of God:
First, Because God had called them to salvation, and given them to believe the
Gospel, and so had showed exceeding love to them, by being reconciled to them
(which were his Enemies) in his Son Christ Jesus. Secondly, they were beloved
of God, in that God did prosecute them with all effects of his love: For if God
did love them by reconciling himself to them, and them unto himself, when they
were Enemies, much more would he love them after this his reconciliation, Romans
5.10.

Called to be Saints] i. e. Called to an holy life. But the words in the
Original are (...) (as v. 1. (...)) as if you should say, called Saints, or
Saints by, Calling. And they are termed, called Saints or Saints by calling,
because they were called of God to an holy life, and so separated by his Grace
from the wicked and profane sort of men; whereunto they were moved, not by any
private inclination or consultation of their own, but merely by Gods call.

Saints signifies here such as were separated from the vulgar or common sort
of Men, by their godly life and conversation. And such are all Christians by
profession, and such should all Christians be by Life and Conversation also.

Note that here is an (...), or defect of these or the like words, Praying,
Thus says q. d. Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, etc. Praying, Thus says, to
all that are at Rome, beloved of God, called to be Saints, Grace to you and
peace from God, etc.

Yet some understand not those, but these words here, I write this Epistle, q.
d. I Paul a Servant of Jesus Christ, etc. write this Epistle to all that are at
Rome, etc. and say Grace to you, etc.

Grace to you, and Peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ]
Here is another (...) or defect, which some make up by (...), sit, be. Others
by (...), Multiplicetur, Be multiplied as 1 Pet. 1.2. and 2 Pet. 1.2. q. d.
Grace and Peace be unto you; Or, Grace and Peace be multiplied to you from God
the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.

Grace] By Grace is meant here the Love and Favor of God, and of Christ Jesus
his Son, who is the Fountain of all those spiritual Gifts and Graces, which we
receive from God.

Peace] By Peace is meant all felicity or all good things (according to the
common acception of the Hebrew word Schalom) flowing from the Grace, that is,
flowing from the Love and Favor of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord.

Yet some do take it here in special manner for that peculiar Peace, which we
have with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, of which Paul speaks, Chap 5.1.

From God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ] 1. From God our Father, as the
Prime Author thereof, and from the Lord Jesus Christ, as the Mediator of God
and Man.

God is called our Father, that is, the Father of those which believe in
Christ, because of his Fatherly love and affection to them, and because as
Fathers use to provide an Inheritance for their children, so has God provided
an Inheritance for them that truly believe in him, and his Son Jesus Christ, an
Inheritance, which shall never fade away.

Note that St. Paul uses here the ancient manner and form of writing Letters;
for the ancient manner and form of writing Letters was, not to put their names
to the foot of their Letters, as we do, but to set them in front, as (...).
Marcus Cicero salutem dicit. A. Torquato. Cicero Attico salutem. Claudius
Lysius unto the most excellent Governor Faelix sends greeting, Acts 23.26 etc.

8. First I thank my God through Jesus Christ, for you all, that your faith is
spoken of through the whole World] Here the Apostle begins his Epistle it
self, for that which went before, was but the Salutation, which used to be
praefixt before the Epistle. And note here, that the Apostle does almost in all
his Epistles (the more to insinuate himself) begin with the commendation of
them to whom he writes, which commendation he ushereth in with thanks to God
for the same. And these thanks he uses first to commend the Graces (for which
he does commend them to whom he writes) as being such as proceed from God.
Secondly, to show them, that, and to whom they should return thanks, for what
they have. Thirdly, to manifest his love toward them, for whereas such Gifts
and Graces, may procure envy in some, yet such is his love to them as that they
do not procure envy in him, but thanksgiving rather to God in their behalf.

First, Note, that whereas this word First, is usually followed with these
words Secondly, Thirdly, etc. Or, Then, after This, etc. Here no such word thus
follows it. And indeed so it is, that it is oftentimes put alone, examples
whereof you may have, Acts 1. 1. Matthew. 10.2. etc. And not only Sacred Writers
but profane Writers also do so use it; for Isocrates in his Oration to
Daemonicus says, (...) i. e. First of all therefore religiously observe those
things, which belong unto the Gods: where there is this word (...), First,
without any word to answer it,

Some therefore say, that this (...) First, when it is thus used, is, Vox non
numerantis, sed incipientis, A word not of numbering, but of beginning a matter,
because it does not lead any number, but begin an Epistle, or Oration, or a
Letter, and when it is so put, it is as if you should say, That I may begin my
Epistle, or that I may begin my Otation, etc. Others say that there is an (...)
or Defect to be supplied, of some of those words, Secondly, or then, or after
this. Others yet again say, that wheresoever this word (...), first, is used it
is always answered, though not with formal words, yet with the sense of the
place, which is enough to make it an Ordinall.

I thank my God] He called God, his God, because of that love wherewith God
loved him, and because of the relation of that service, in which he stood to
God. ver. 9.

But when he says I thank my God; he speaks with a great deal of feeling of
some favor and blessing which God has showed to him, even in that for which
he gives thanks; and he accounted it even a favor and blessing to him, that
the Romans had received the Faith after such a manner as they did, because he
exceedingly desired, that they might believe.

Through Jesus Christ] As we pray unto God through Jesus Christ, for what we
stand in need off (for what we receive, we receive for his sake) So we give
thanks to God, for what we receive through him; for as he is the Purchaser of
all our blessings; so is he our High Priest to offer up all our Oblations: He
is therefore the Mediator of our Prayers, and the Mediator of our
Thanksgivings, and they are all accepted through him and for him.

For you all] He puts no difference here betwixt High and Low, Rich and Poor.

That your Faith is spoken of throughout the whole World] i. e. That you so
believe the Gospel, as that your Faith is spoken of throughout the whole world

He seems to put here the Consequent for the Antecedent, that is, the report
of their Faith, for the Faith which was reported and spoken of.

Throughout the whole World] i. e. Through out all the Churches of Christ,
which are throughout the whole World, so Some: yet we need not to restrain it
to the Churches of Christ only; for being that the Romans were the most eminent
people in all the world, their change of Religion and embracing of Christianity
might be taken notice and spoken of, of all the strangers throughout the whole
world (though they were not Christians) which had occasion to come to Rome.

Note here that their is an Hyperbolicall Synechdoche in these words. The whole
world; And it is an usual thing to put some parts, especially the civilest
parts of the World, for the whole world in general, as Colos. 1.6

Ver. 9. For God is my witness whom I serve with my Spirit in the Gospel of
his Son, that without ceasing I make mention of you always in my prayers] The
Apostle would by this persuade the truth of what he said in the former verse,
to wit, That he did thank God in their behalf.

Because the Romans might not otherwise easily believe, that Paul should be so
Zealous for them, whom he never saw in his life, and with whom he had no
acquaintance at all; he that he Might make it the more credible, which he says
concerning them, confirms it here with an Oath:

Whom I serve with my Spirit in the Gospel of his Son] i. e. Whom I serve in
the preaching and ministration of the Gospel of his Son, withal readiness,
willingness, and sincerity of mind.

Paul adds this, that he might not be thought, to call God to witness what he
said, rashly, irreligiously, and with the contempt of God: For this shows how
highly he accounted of the Majesty and Honor of God, to say, that he served
him with his spirit: And because he did so highly esteem of him, surely he
would in no ways dishonor him, as he should do, if he should swear falsely by
him.

With my spirit] That is (as we use to say) with my heart, which phrase
speaks willingness, and readiness, and sincerity.

In the Gospel of his Son] This Gospel, Paul called the Gospel of God ver. 1.
Because God was the Author of it: Here he calls it the Gospel of his Son,
because it is concerning his Son Jesus Christ, ver. 3. And by this Gospel he
means the preaching thereof by a Metonimy.

Without ceasing I make mention of you always, in my prayer] He might make
mention of them in his prayers, when he gave thanks for them, and he might make
mention of them in his prayers, when he prayed for some blessing to be bestowed
upon them; and both these ways may he be understood here to make mention of
them. In relation to what went before, he might be said to make mention of
them, in that he gave thanks for them: In relation to what followed, he may be
said to make mention of them, in that he prayed and made request for them. He
might say that he made mention of them always in his prayers without ceasing,
because he prayed often, and as often as he prayed he made mention of them. For
(by an usual Hyperbole) we are said to do a thing always and without ceasing,
which we do often, and in which we are studious and sedulous: So Anna the
Prophetess is said not to have departed from the Temple, but to have served
God with fasting and Prayers night and day, Luke 2.37. Whereas she was but
frequent in the Temple, and frequent in prayers there. So it is said of the
Disciples, that they were continually in the Temple praising and blessing God
Luke 24.53. Whereas they were not always there, but only so often as
occasion offered.

Ver. 10. Making request, etc.] q. d. And I make not only mention of you in my
prayers by thanksgiving, but by making request also for you. By this he does
yet further insinuate himself into these Romans.

If by any means now at length, etc.] These words show the ardent desire which
Paul had to obtain, that which he speaks of, That is, To see these Romans. But
that particle, (If) does withal signify, that Paul was not certain, whether
he should obtain what he prayed for, or no; and therefore he prays for it
conditionally, If it stood with the glory and good will of God, to give him a
prosperous journey to them.

By the will of Ood] (...), here rendered the will of God, signifies sometimes
the General Providence of God, disposing of our affairs; yet we may well think,
that the Apostle did take his journeys from place to place, by the special
instinct of God, especially such journeys as this was

Ver. 11. For I long to see you, that I may impart, etc.] He shows the reason
here, why he desired so much to see the Romans.

That I may impart unto you some spiritual gift] The end of Paul's desire to see
them, was not to receive any worldly profit from them, though they were
Citizens of a rich City, but that he might impart some gift to them, but a
spiritual gift.

Some spiritual gift] Some interpret this, of such gifts as were wont to be
given by the laying on of the hands of the Apostles, as the gift of tongues,
and other such gifts as we read of, Acts 19.6. But others interpret it, of some
such gifts as was Doctrine, and Revelation, and Interpretation, and Prophecy,
etc. which built the hearers up, and established them in the faith. These he
calls gifts, not in respect of his imparting them to the Romans, but in respect
of his freely receiving them from God: and therefore in this his expression, he
uses a great deal of Modesty.

To the end that ye may be established] i. e. That ye may be confirmed, to wit,
in the faith of that holy Gospel, and that holy Religion which ye have received.

V. 12. That is, that I may be comforted together with you by the mutual faith
both of you and me] Because it might seem somewhat distasteful to the Romans,
to say, that he desired to come to them, that they might be established: he
does here mitigate and mollify his speech, and put it into more pleasing
terms, when he says, That is, that I may be comforted together with you by
the mutual faith both of you and me.

That is, that I may be comforted together with you by the mutual faith both of
you and me] q. d. That is, that we may be comforted both you and I, when we
mutually see, you the stedfastness of my faith, and I the stedfastness of yours.

It seems by these words, [that I may be comforted together with you] that
Paul, and the Romans to whom he wrote, were both afflicted at this time: for,
comfort is a medicine for the afflicted: and in respect of the Romans, this
seems probable from what we read, chap. 8.17. And Paul might be afflicted for
this; That he was afraid, least the Romans should fall from the faith, through
that their affliction, And otherwise also.

Because it might seem somewhat distasteful to the Romans to say, that he
desired to see them to the end that they might be established (for these words
[That ye might be established] might offend some weak ones amongst them, who
thought themselves strong and well grounded in the faith) he does here (as I
said) mitigate his speech, and change it into more pleasing terms, when he
says That is, that I may be comforted together with you, with the mutual faith
both of you and me: for that which he says here, is but that which he said
before, only the terms are more pleasing. He said before, That he desired to
come to them, to the end that they might be established; and he faith the same
now, when he says, That he desired to see them, that he might be comforted
together with them, by the mutual faith both of them and him.

Should they not be established in the faith, but be shaken and fall from it,
they could neither receive comfort by Paul's faith (for to receive comfort by
the faith of another, is proper only to them, which are themselves established
and well rooted in the faith) nor could Paul receive comfort by their faith:
Because they had had no faith for him to take comfort in: But if they were
established in the faith as Paul was, they would take comfort in Paul's faith
and Paul in theirs. That therefore which he said in the eleventh verse, is the
same which he says here, only the terms (as I said) are more pleasing. For it
is more pleasing for him to say, That he might be comforted in them, than to
say, That they might be established; and it is yet more pleasing to say, That
they might both be comforted by the mutual faith one of another; for by this
Paul does rank himself with them or them with himself.

That the faith of the faithful is a mutual comfort of one to another, we learn
from the 1 These. 3.7. where Paul thus speaks; Brethren, we are comforted over
you, in all our affliction and distress, by your faith, The interpretation of
these words, (...) may be good, as they are thus interpreted, That I may be
comforted together with you, by the mutual faith both of you and me. But it may
seem better if they should be interpreted thus, That we may be comforted
together, (when I am with you, or among you) by the mutual faith both of you
and of me, for (...) may by an (...) be put for, (...), when I am among you,
See 1 These 1.5. where (...) may seem to be put for (...).

Ver. 13. Now I would not have you ignorant, Brethren, that oftentimes I
purposed to come unto you, etc.] The Apostle prevents an Objection here; for
because he had showed, that he had a great desire to have come unto them, they
might say; but Paul, if thou had so great a desire to come unto us, what was
the reason thou did not come all this while: To this he answers in this
verse, saying, Now I would not have you ignorant, Brethren, that oftentimes I
purposed to come unto you, etc.

I would not have you ignorant, etc.] I would have you know.

Brethren] This was the common name and appellation of Christians to
Christians, which was caused, first, in regard that they did acknowledge one
and the same Father, even God; secondly, in regard of the strait tie and band
of love which should be between Christians, which should be even as great, as
between Brethren.

But was let hitherto] The occasions (at least in part) which let him, he tells
chap 15. v. 20, 22. but besides them, it might be that the settling of diverse
contentions and controversies (raised by Satan) might hinder him, for he says
in the like case, That Satan hindered him, 1 These. 2.18.

That I might have some fruit among you also, even as among other Gentiles]
That as by my preaching, other Gentiles have, some believed, some been
confirmed in the faith, so it may be among you.

Object. But how could their faith, or their establishment in the faith, though
they believed, or were confirmed by his preaching, be fruit to him.

Answ. Their faith, and their establishment in the faith, would bring glory to
God whom he loved, and whom he served in the Spirit: and a good Servant,
counts it gain and fruit to himself, when his Master gains or reaps fruit by
his service.

Again, Faith brings Salvation to the Believer, and a true Minister of the
Gospel, has the fruit of joy, in the bringing of a soul to salvation, for he
rejoices therein exceedingly, Phil. 2.17.

Thirdly, he that brings a man to the faith, or confirms him in the says,
brings him to righteousness, or confirms him in righteousness: But, they
that bring many to righteousness shall shine as the Stars, for ever and ever,
Dan. 12.3.

Observe here, that as our Apostle used a great deal of Modesty, in that speech
when he said, That I may impart unto you some spiritual gift, verse. 11. So he
does here, when he says, That I may have some fruit among you also: for herein
he speaks Metaphorically of the Romans, as of Trees yielding goodly fruit: and
of himself, as one that eats of the fruit of their yielding: and more blessed
it is to give than to receive, Acts 20.35.

As among other Gentiles] i. e. Even as I have among other Nations.

Ver. 14. I am a debtor both to the Greeks and to the Barbarians] i e. I am a
debtor to preach the Gospel: That is, I am bound to preach the Gospel (as a
Debtor is bound to his Creditor) to all Nations, whether Greeks or Barbarians,
This Obligation was imposed upon Paul, both by the command of God, and by
virtue of the Ministry to which he was called; by reason of which Paul said,
that there was a necessity laid upon him of preaching the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.16.

By what he says here, he confirms yet further what he said of his desire of
coming to them, v. 10. He shows also by this, that when he spoke of coming to
them to establish them, he spoke not of that which appertained not to him, but
of that which highly concerned him: So that it was not out of vainglory, that
he did so much affect to come to them, but out of conscience, to discharge his
duty.

To the Greeks and to the Barbarians] The Greeks were wont to distinguish all
the Nations of the world into Greeks and Barbarians, accounting all Barbarians,
which were not of their own Nation: But Paul takes this distinction otherwise
than the Greeks used to do; for by the Greeks he means (by a Synechdoche) all
Civiller Nations, and by the Barbarians all Ruder kind of People. I say, by the
Greeks he means all Civiller Nations, and so under that name includes the
Romans also. For it is not likely, that he would account the Romans among
Barbarians, writing to them as he does. Therefore does he put the Greeks for
all Civiller Nations, because the Greeks were renowned for Wisdom now for a
long time, among all Civiller Nations, and were, as it were, Masters of Wisdom
to them all. Moreover, they stretched far and near, and their Language passed
throughout all Civiller Nations, as the Latin now does.

They were called (...), That is, Barbarians at the first, which used an ill
and unpleasing kind of pronunciation of the Greek Tongue: A name made per
Onomatopoeiam (as the Grammarians speak) That is, by imitation of that sound,
which they which spoke so ill and unpleasingly, made or seemed to make in their
pronunciation; And the Graecians, when they observed this illness or
unpleasantness of pronunciation, in men of all other Languages, than their own,
they called all men, differing in Language from themselves, in contempt (...),
That is Barbarians.

At the first therefore this word was attributed only to some few, which used
an ill and unpleasing kind of speech, or pronunciation in the Greek Tongue.
Then it came to be given to all men which were not Greeks. Neither did the use
of the word stay here; but it did proceed further, to signify men of rude and
uncivil manners: So that at the length, they which were of rude and uncivil
manners, were called (...), That is, Barbarians. And that not by reason of
their Language, but of their manners.

Both to the wise and to the unwise] Some take this to be a repetition of the
former Sentence, as though by the wise, that is, by those which are learned,
the Apostle meant those which he called Greeks; and by the unwise, that is, by
the Illiterate, he meant those which he called Barbarians: But others had
rather apply those words [to the Greeks and to the Barbarians] to the Nations
themselves in general: and these words [to the wise and to the unwise] to
single persons of those Nations.

Here we may observe; That with God there is no respect of persons, who
commands his Servants to preach the Gospel as well to Barbarians as to Greeks,
and to the unwise as well as to the wise.

Ver. 15. So, as much, etc.] So, is put here for a note of Illation, and is as
much as Therefore: For he does infer that which he says here, from what he
said immediately before: And Cicero himself does sometimes use Ita, So, for
Itaque, Therefore. See Rob. Stephani vocab. Ita.

As much as in me is] By this he would signify, that he was ready and very
willing to come to Rome, and to preach the Gospel there, but was hindered, as
he said, verse 13.

I am ready to preach the Gospel to you that are at Rome also] Note, that there
is an Emphasis in these words [to you that are at Rome also] and the sense of
the words is this, q. d. I am ready to preach the Gospel, not only to Rude,
Illiterate, and not-knowing men, which dwell in obscure parts of the world; but
to you also, which dwell at Rome, the Mistress of the World, the Head of all
Nations, the most Famous, Learned, and most Civil City of the Earth.

This he says, least any one should think, that he could carry himself boldly
in preaching the Gospel, among Ignorant, Illiterate, and Simple men, but should
be ashamed to preach before Knowing, Learned, and Wise men, because of the
foolishness thereof; for though that which is foolish might pass with ignorant
and simple men, yet will it not pass with learned and wise men; and therefore
many which are not ashamed to utter their follies to ignorant men, are ashamed
to speak of them before learned men.

Ver. 16. For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ] q. d. For though the
Greeks, accounted the Gospel of Christ foolishness, yet I am not ashamed of it.
That the Greeks accounted of the Gospel of Christ as foolishness, see 1 Cor
1.23. which they did because the chief subject thereof was a Crucified Man.

Note, that when he says, I am not ashamed, it is to be understood, that he
was not only not ashamed of the Gospel, but did glory in it. For he uses a
(...) here, of which see verse 28.

The Gospel of Christ] Why the Gospel is called the Gospel of Christ, see verse
9.

He called this Gospel the Gospel of God, verse. 1. But the reason why he rather
calls it the Gospel of Christ here, than the Gospel of God is, Because the
Gospel was despised among the wise men of the world, (because it concerned
Christ, who was crucified) and was therefore accounted a foolish thing: The
Apostle therefore to show, that he was not ashamed of the Gospel, though it
concerned Christ, calls it here the Gospel of Christ. So he says, 1 Cor.
1.22. the Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom; But we preach
Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks
foolishness.

Note, that the Gospel here, is taken for the preaching of the Gospel, as v. 1.
and 9. q. d. I am not ashamed to preach the Gospel of Christ.

For it is the power of God unto Salvation, to every one that believeth] i. e.
For the Gospel (which is preached by the Servants of God) is a powerful
instrument for the Salvation of such as believe: And they which believe do
attain to Salvation by the Gospel. The Gospel is called the Power of God, not
because there is any natural or physical power in the words of the Gospel: But
because God shows his power in those that believe the Gospel, in saving them;
that is, in delivering them from all evil both of Sin and Punishment, and in
bringing them at last to everlasting joy and happiness.

And well may this be called the Power of God, for what created power can save
us from our sins? who has power enough to deliver us out of the Claws of the
Devil, to whom we were captive at his will? 2 Timothy 2.26. who has power to keep
us safe from him that goes about a roaring Lion, seeking whom he way devour?
who has power to free us from the miseries of this mortal body? who can raise
us up from the dead, after death? who has power to change these vile bodies of
ours into glorious bodies, and this corruptible of ours into incorruptible? who
has power to carry us up into heaven, there to enjoy bliss for evermore, but
God? who is Omnipotent, and able to subdue all things to himself, and to do
whatsoever he pleases in Heaven and in Earth.

The Gospel therefore is called the Power of God, Metonymically, that is to
say, because the power of God is so joined with it, as that God will so show
his power in saving them that believe it, as that he will bring them to
everlasting Salvation.

They therefore, which interpret the power of God to Salvation, of a powerful
instrument to save men, must not take it for a Physical instrument, but for a
Moral instrument (as I may so call it) that is, for such a thing with which God
will so go along with his power, as that he will save them, which believe the
Gospel, even because they believe it.

We know that the Power of God did go along in the Primitive times with the
preaching of the Gospel, in that God did bear the preachers of it witness, both
with Signs and Wonders, and with diverse Miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost,
according to his own will, Heb. 2.4. But this is not the power here spoken of;
(but that which we have already mentioned) for signs are not for those which
believe, but for those, which believe not, 1 Cor. 14.22. but the Power of God
in this place, is for them which believe.

Unto Salvation] (...), i. e. For Salvation, or for this end, that it may bring
men unto Salvation.

(...), is here a Note of the final cause, or of the end,

The Schools use to distinguish of a double Salvation, the one Inchoate, the
other Consummate: Salvation Inchoate, consists in Remission of sins, or
Justification, etc. and may be had in this life; In this sense the Apostle
says, By Grace ye are saved through faith, Ephesians. 2.8. And again, Not by works
of Righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us,
Titus 3.5. But Salvation Consummate is only to be had in the life to come, and
consists in Eternal life. Now some understand this place only of Salvation
Inchoate, not Consummate: But it is better to take it for our full and whole
Salvation.

To every one that believeth] i e. To every one that believes the Gospel. As a
Medicine does not profit how good soever it be except it be taken down: So does
not the Gospel profit (though it be the Power of God unto Salvation) except it
be believed and embraced.

To the Jew first and also to the Greek] i. e. To the Jew first, and then to
the Greek.

And also, is put here for Then, or Afterward. The like manner of speech we
read the 2 Cor. 8.5. They first gave their own selves to the Lord and unto us;
i. e. They did first give themselves to the Lord, and then to us his Ministers.

Note, that by the Greek is here meant all the Gentiles, per Synedochen
Species; and to is the Greek to be taken, so often as he is opposed to the Jew,
and therefore is the Greek put for all the Gentiles, the rather than any other
Nation, because the Greek tongue was at this time, from the time of Alexander
the Great, most generally used amongst all Nations; as also because the Greeks
were now of a long time more known to the Jews, than any other People were; by
the Jew therefore and the Greek, all the People of the World are here meant.

There is a Praerogative here given to the Jew above the Gentile: which
Praerogative consists in this, that the Gospel was preached, and to be
preached to the Jew, before it was preached, or to be preached to the Gentile,
Acts 13.46. And in that, that the Gospel did appertain to the Jew, which
believed, more peculiarly than it did to the Gentile: by reason of particular
promises thereof made to them. But it does not consist in this, that the
believing Jew did or should obtain more exuberance of grace or greater
salvation, than the believing Gentile should.

Ver. 17. For therein is the Righteousness of God revealed] For therein is
Justification, effectually revealed, and thereby performed and wrought.

That which is here rendered Righteousness, is in the Greek (...), which comes
from the verb (...), justificare, to justify, So that Righteousness may be,
and is to be taken here for justification; and justification signifies with
our Apostle remission of sins, or absolution from sins, and it is a term
borrowed from the Law courts, and is opposed to condemnation.

That which is called Righteousness, or Justification is also called
Redemption, Chap. 3.24. Ephesians. 1.7. etc. And it is called Salvation, Math.
1.21, etc. And both by a metaphor taken from Prisoners, or Captives, or Slaves,
which were under hard imprisonment or bondage or slavery, and were as men
appointed unto death, but are delivered and redeemed with a price, or saved by
might out of that miserable condition: and a condition no better than theirs,
were we in, while we were under sin: So that the Remission of our sins may be
called as Righteousness, or justification, so Redemtion and Salvation too.

And note now, that Salvation and Righteousness are often put for one, and the
same thing, as Psalm. 98.2. The Lord has made known his Salvation, his
Righteousness has he openly showed in the sight of the Heathen, and Isaiah
56.1. My Salvation, is near to come, and my Righteousness to be revealed. And
Isaih 61.10. He has clothed me with the garments of Salvation: He has covered
me with the robe of Righteousness: which, I observe, that it might seem strange
to none, that besides the derivation of the Greek word Righteousness should be
put or taken for justification or redemption and Salvation from sins.

The Righteousness of God] He calls it the Righteousness of God, because God is
the Author of it, and because we are thereby justified before God.

Revealed] The Righteousness of God, is not only revealed or manifested in the
Gospel, but it is exhibited also and wrought by the Gospel: so that by these
words [For therein is the Righteousness of God revealed] We must understand
effectual Revelation, and that justification is not only manifested in the
Gospel, but also that it is exhibited and wrought thereby, by an Hebrew
Syllepsis. For the Hebrews do oftentimes with the Antecedent Sylleptically
understand the consequent also.

Note that the Apostle does go about here to prove that, which he said before
in the 16. verse, To wit, That the Gospel is the power of God to Salvation to
every one that believes: But he proves it by parts: For whereas Salvation
complete consists of two parts, justification, and glorification: He proves
it of justification here in this verse, and of glorification, Chap. 5. Where he
says that being justified by Faith we rejoice in the hope of the glory of God,
which hope makes not ashamed, etc.

From Faith] Repeat those words, the Righteousness of God, here, q. d. I say,
the Righteousness of God, which is (not from or by works, but) from or by
Faith: Or refer these words from Faith: To those, the Righteousness of God,
that the Sentence may run thus, therein the Righteousness of God, which is from
Faith is revealed.

The words in the Original are (...); and (...) signifies here the
instrumental cause, as some call it, Or, the Condition required in him, that
would be justified: As others, which they so call, because Faith is a condition
required on our part, in that new Covenant, which it pleased God to make with
us, for justification.

Now that we may understand, what that Faith is, which is here required and
mentioned as a cause or condition of our Justification. I say, that the faith
here required is an explicit and firm assent to the Gospel of God, or at least
to so much thereof, as contains the New Covenant, and all the Essential Parts
thereof, which it pleased God through Christ to make with man in his Misery for
his Salvation, and to reveal, in the Gospel an assent so firm, so strong and
arising so high, as that it does immediately and infallibly set the Believer on
work (as he has opportunity) to do those things, which God requires on man's
part to be done in that Covenant He that has such a faith cannot but trust in
God, nor can he be without repentance.

Whosoever has such a faith, as this, and thus believes, I doubt not, (from
this and other the like places) but that he has a justifying Faith, and that
by reason of this his Faith, God will deal with him as with a Just and
Righteous Man, and as though he had never transgressed the Law of God.

But I dare not call that a Justifying Faith, which comes not up to this.

There be many which read Histories, and give credit to the Histories which
they read, yet they only read them because they are delighted with them, and
with the various passages and accidents therein contained, without any regard
of imitating them, or putting what they read in practice: If any one should so
read or hear the Gospel, he may be said so have an Historical Faith, but a
Justifying Faith he has not.

For good works, can no more be separated from a true justifying faith, than
light can from the Sun, or heat can from the fire. For faith without works is
dead, James 2.20. And was not Abraham our Father justified by works? says
Saint James, James 2.20. That is, was not Abraham our Father justified by
faith, such a faith as produces works? For Saint James puts works there by a
Metonymie of the effect, for a faith, which produces works.

Object. But you will say, There is a great deal of strength required to such a
faith as this, but God accepts even of a weak faith.

Answ. To this I answer, That faith may be considered two manner of ways;
First, in Genere Entis; Secondly, in Genere Morum, as I may so speak In Genere
Entis, that is, a true faith, which assenteth to the word of God as to that
which is Truth: In Genere Morum, that, and that only is a true faith, which so
assenteth to the word of God, as that it sets the believer infallibly on
good works, as he has strength and opportunity to do them. The former faith
God accepts not of, be it what it will be, and as strong as may be, while it
is only faith in Genere Entis, But as for the latter, that faith which is true
faith in Genere Morum, God accepts of, though it be never so weak, being
sincere.

From faith to faith] i. e. From a faith which ought not to stand at a stay,
but to go on from a lesser to a greater faith: So some, which referr the words
[to faith] to the words immediately going before them, viz. from faith.

But I think the words [To faith] may be better referred to the word [revealed]
than to the words immediately going before them. As if he should say, Therein
is the Righteousness of God revealed, a Righteousness which is of faith; And it
is revealed for this end, that men may believe, or yield their faith to that
which is revealed.

The last words in the Greek are (...), which I conceive to be the same for
sense with (...), verse 5. which is there rendered, for Obedience to the faith;
And (...), chap. 16. verse. 26. which is there rendered, for the Obedience of
faith; In both which places, the end is set down, why the Mystery of the Gospel
is revealed, which is, that it might be believed and received by faith: And as
there, so here, the end may be set down, why the Righteousness of God is
revealed in the Gospel, which is (...) for faith, That is, for this end, that
it may gain faith, and be believed of the Sons of Men.

Note therefore, that the Praeposition ((...)) (which is here) may be rendered
[For] and be a sign of the Final cause, as it is verse 5. of this Chapter, and
Chap. 16. v. 26.

Now, if Justification by faith be revealed for faith, That is, That men may
believe. Then ought the Apostle to preach the Gospel, wherein this
Justification is revealed, For how shall they believe, except they hear, and
how shall they hear without a Preacher, chap. 10.14. By this therefore may the
Apostle also intimate, that he is a debtor, and ready to preach the Gospel to
the Romans also.

Justification by faith, was the great Controversy at this time between Paul
and the Jews, and this is that which is the main drift of this Epistle to show
that justification is by Faith: and this he now falls upon as his chief
business, though he seems to speak of it only occasionally. For the Apostle
is wont by occasion of other matters, which he affirms and would prove, to
slip, as it were to his main purpose, so he does Gal. 2.16. And in other places
as well as here.

As it is written] To wit, Habakkuk 2.4.

The Just shall live by Faith] i. e. The Just-man shall be justified (not by
his works, though he be called just) but by Faith: Or thus, he that shall be
justified shall be justified by Faith.

The Apostle proves here by the Testimony of the Prophet Habakkuk, that the
Righteousness of God is by Faith. But note, that these words as they lie in
the Prophet (as many words and passages in the old Testament do) carry a
twofold sense with them; A Literal, and a mystical: In their literal sense,
they relate to the Jews which were in Captivity to the Babilonians: In their
mystical sense they relate to men as they are under sin, and guilty of the
punishments due to sin, to wit, death, etc. And therefore have these words this
double relation, because the things thereby signified are, One the Type of the
Other: the former of the latter: The Captivity of the Jews under the
Babylonians, of the Captivity of Man, under Sin and Death, and him which has
the power of death, the Devil. For it is very well known, that the Captivity of
the Jews under the Babilonians, was a Type of the Captivity of Man, under Sin
and Death, and him, which has the power of Death the Devil. And that the
messages, and good news, which God sent by his Prophets of the delivery of the
Jews, out of the Babylonian Captivity, was a Type of the Gospel and good news
of Man's salvation out of his spiritual captivity, which was preached by Christ
and his Apostles; and that Cyrus, whom God had used as an Instrument to deliver
the Jews from the Babylonians was a Type of Christ by whom Man is delivered
from Sin, and Death, and the Devil: And when one of these is prophesied of in
the Letter, the other is prophesied of in the Mystery: Yea, and while things
of this nature are thus prophesied of, the Holy Ghost does oftentimes so order
and guide the Penman of his Prophesies, that some passages will (...) and in
word agree, as well to the one, as to the other, as well to the Type, as to the
Antitype, of which, this parcel of Scripture written by the Prophet Habakkuk
is one.

According to the literal sense therefore, these words, as they lie in the
Prophet Habakkuk may be thus expounded; They which are just, among the
Babilonian Captives, though they are under them, from whom they may fear death
through hard usage, yea to be put to death by reason of their power, being
Conquerors, yet if they believe the message and good news of their deliverance
by Cyrus, out of their captivity, which I shall send them by my Prophets. They
shall be delivered from their Captivity and shall not die under the hands of
the Babylonians, but live and live a joyful life.

According to the Mystical sense, which is the sense in which our Apostle takes
the words here, we may interpret these words thus;

The Just (which believe the Gospel) shall be justified from their sins by
their Faith.

The Just] According to the frequent use of Holy Scripture, he is called a just
or Righteous Man, [who is a man of a good and honest mind and desires to walk
uprightly though he slips yea falls often; such a man as this is, is ready to
receive the message of God, whenever it pleases God to send it: and does
verily believe it, when it is sent:

Again if we look into the place of Habakkuk beforementioned, to wit, Habakkuk
2.4. we shall find, that our just Man there is opposed to him, whose soul is
lifted up, that is, to a proud man; and so may be taken for the humble minded
man, such an one as trusts not in himself, nor boasts of his own worth. And
who is more likely to be a Believer, than He? for Pride is the greatest keeper
out of Faith, as can be; For how can ye believe, which seek honor one of
another, says our Savior to the Jews, John 5.24.

But besides this the Just may be taken for him which it justified, and so may
it be taken here, when we expound the words in the mystical sense, q. d. He
that shall be justi ed, shall be justified by his Faith.

Shall live] This is, as if he should say in our Saviors words, He shall not
come into condemnation, but is passed from death to life, John 5.24. That is,
he shall be justified, that is, he shall be absolved of his sins, he shall not
be condemned for them, though he has deserved death by them.

A man that is arraigned and tried for his life, upon some Criminal or Capital
matter; If he be condemned, he is put to death: but if he be justified or
absolved he lives. To live therefore, may be put here, Per Metonymiam
Consequentis, for to be justified.

That which Saint Paul drives at, and for which he produces the Testimony of
the Prophet, Habakkuk, is, (as I said) to prove that righteousness is of faith:
or (which is the same) that he that believes is accepted of God and freed from
sin, and death, which is the penalty of sin, (not for his works sake, but) for
his faith. And to express this freedom, the Scripture, calls it sometimes by
the name of Salvation and Redemption, (which are words borrowed from Captives,
which are saved or redeemed, whereas, by their condition, they were as men
appointed unto death.) Sometimes again (and that is the term most frequently
used in this Epistle) by the name of Justification, which is a name or word
borrowed from men (as I said immediately before) accused of some Capital matter
in a Court of Justice, where the Person accused, is acquitted or absolved, of
the crimes laid against him, and so justified by the Judge and freed from the
Censure of the Law, viz. Death.

The words of the Prophet Habakkuk, as they are here alleged by our Apostle,
may in their Mystical sense, be interpreted, either in allusion to the
Salvation or Redemption of Captives, or in allusion to the Acquitting,
Absolving, or Justification of a man, accused in a Court of Justice, of some
Capital crime. And after which of these ways the Reader will interpret them, I
leave to his choice; for the issue of both, is Life.

By faith] i. e By reason of his faith, or if he believe the Gospel.

For the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven, against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men] The Apostle prevented an objection here. For whereas he
said, that the Righteousness of God is revealed in the Gospel from faith: And
again, it is written The just shall live by faith, signifying thereby, that the
way of obtaining Justification is by faith. A man may object and say, But why,
Paul, do thou say, that the way of obtaining justification is by faith, and
not by works rather, seeing that the Law says, that the man that does the
things of the Law, shall live by them? To this the Apostle here answers, q. d.
I therefore said not, that the way of obtaining justification is by works:
because no man can be justified by works: for the wrath of God is revealed
against all the ungodliness and unrighteousnes of men, etc.

Where note, that the Apostle by this his answer, to this objection, comes to
treat of one main Subject of this his Epistle, to wit, that justification is
not by works: A way which he often uses, in teaching what he has to teach.
And by proving that justification is not by works, he does by consequence
confirm his former Thesis, viz. that justification is by faith, by destroying
that, which was most opposed against it, which was, justification by works.

Note here, that he which looks for righteousness from his works, must so
perform the works of the Law, as the Law requires; and therefore, he must so
perform them, as that he breaks not the least commandment, at any time. For
cursed is every one, that continues not in all things which are written in the
Book of the Law to do them, Deuteronomy 27 26. Galat. 3.10. Now then, if a man has
sined, but in one sin at any time, he cannot be justified by the Law or by
Works: For the man that is justified is blessed, Romans 4. v. 6, 7. But he that
has sinned, though but in one sin, and that but once, is cursed, until he
comes to be justified by Faith.

The wrath of God is revealed from heaven] Referr those words [from heaven] to
these [the wrath of God] q. d. The wrath of God, which is from heaven, is
revealed against all ungodliness, etc.

By saying, that the wrath of God is from heaven, he shows the heaviness and
grievousness of this wrath; for if this wrath is from heaven, it is greater
than that which can come out from man.

Note, that the word (Revealed) signifies that which is made manifest by its
effects, as well as that which is made manifest by words: And both these ways
is the wrath of God revealed against all unrighteousness and ungodliness of
men: for it is made manifest by the punishments which God inflicteth upon
sinners, some of which we read of in this Chapter, verse. 24, 26, 28, etc. And
it is made manifest also by the word of God; for God has often in his word,
and by his word, threatened all manner of sinners with judgment, which judgment
he will be sure to execute upon them, if not before, yet at the last day, 2
These. 1.8, etc.

Against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of Men] Note that the word
ungodliness is to be taken here, for those sins which are committed immediately
against God: And unrighteousness for those sins which are committed immediately
against our Neighbor and when he says al ungodliness and unrighteousness of
Men; he signifies that the ungodliness and unrighteousness of Men was manifold
by reason of their manifold sins.

Of Men] He speaks indefinitely, and therefore he is to be understood, as if he
spoke of all Men: or else we must say, that there is an Hypallage here, and
that the Apostle says against all the ungodliness and unrighteousness of Men;
For against the ungodliness and unrighteousness of all Men.

Note, that out of this Generality of Men, they are to be excepted who believe:
for though no other are to be excepted, yet they are to be excepted; as
appears, as in general, by the main Scope of the Apostle here, so in
particular by Chap. 5, ver. 1. etc. And by the words immediately following, for
they which truly believe hold not the truth in unrighteousness.

Who hold the truth in unrighteousness] By Truth, I understand here, the truth,
or true knowledge, which these men had of godliness, and of righteousness, and
by unrighteousness, I understand both the ungodliness and unrighteousness,
which he spoke of before; and therefore unrighteousness is to be taken in a
larger signification here, than it was immediately before.

They are said to hold the truth in unrighteousness, who have the true
knowledge of Godliness and righteousness, but by their ungodliness and
unrighteousness, do so keep in this knowledge and so imprison it (as it were)
as that it cannot go out into act, or show it self, or any more be seen, than a
Prisoner can go out or be seen, or show himself to those which are without,
when he is kept in, and imprisoned in some dark prison or dungeon.

Knowledge of things to be done cannot be made manifest, but by our Actions,
which are the fruits thereof: Therefore evil actions do not manifest but
obscure and hide, as in a Prison, such a Knowledge.

Note, that when he says, who hold the truth in unrighteousness, he does not
intend to exempt any man (except Believers) from what he said, as though there
were some others who believed not, and yet held not the Truth in
unrighteousness: But he does it, either to declare the common condition of all
men, that they are such as hold the truth in unrighteousness: Or else to give a
reason, why the wrath of God was revealed against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, which was because they held the truth in
unrighteousness. For the Pronoune, which is sometime put (...), or as a sign of
the cause.

Ver. 19. For that which may be known of God is manifest in them] Between this
and the foregoing verse understand these, or the like words: For even the
Gentiles have the truth of righteousness, q d. For even the Gentiles have the
truth of righteousness, for that which may be known of God is manifest in them.

Where note, that the Apostle prevents an Objestion here. For whereas he said
in the foregoing verse generally of all men (except Believers) to this purpose,
viz. That they held the Truth, to wit, of Godliness and righteousness, in
ungodliness and unrighteousness. A man might object and say; But how can the
Gentiles hold the Truth of Godliness in ungodliness; or of Righteousness in
unrighteousness, whereas the Gentiles had not the truth either of godliness or
of righteousness; for they had not the Law to teach them these Truths as the
Jews had: To this whole Objections the Apostle here answers by Parts: And first
to that Part of it, which concerns the truth or true knowledge of
righteousness, he answers in this verse: And Secondly, to that part of it,
which concerns the Truth or true knowledge of godliness, he answers in the
verses following.

That which may be known of God] The Greek is (...), by which, as I conceive is
meant, either the Law of Nature, or that which is commanded by the Law of
Nature, in order to our Neighbor.

The verb (...), among other things signifies statuere, constituere,
decernere; to ordain, constitute, decree. Hence (...), which is derived from
thence, may signify that which is commanded or appointed and ordered by any
ordinance, Constitution, and Decree, yea it may signify any Ordinance,
Statute, Constitution, or Decree it self: and being that our Duty to our
Neighbor is commanded, and appointed, and ordered by the Ordnance, Statute,
Constitution, or Decree of God. The Ordinance, Statute Constitution, or Decree
of God concerning that may be called (...), in this place.

Again there are certain (...), or Common notions, and principles, concerning
the duty of Man toward his Neighbor, which are easy to be known, and are
universally known among all Nations. These (...), or Common notions, and
principles, because they are easy to be known, and are so universally known
among all Nations, he may call (...), and (collective) (...), that is, those
things, which are easy to be known, and are universally known deriving the
word (...) from (...), as it signifies to know.

If we look upon the word (...) in its own nature, whether we take it, for that
which is known, or whether we take it for a Law or Statute, it may extend
farther, than to those things which concern our Neighbor; but by a Synecdoche
integri or Generis it may be restrained to those things only, which concern
him; as the word (...), the Law, though in its own nature it comprehends
whatsoever God commanded, yet it is restrained sometimes to the duties of the
second Table: As Romans 13.8. Galat. 5.14.

Of God] (...), I take this Genitive case here to be, not Genitivus objecti or
subjecti, but efficientis: and to signify that God was or is (not the object
either total or partial of this (...)) but the Author and Commander thereof,
and Imprinter thereof in the hearts of men.

Is manifest in them] i. e. Is manifest in their hearts, and in their
consciences: See Chap. 2. ver. 14, 15.

For God has showed it unto them] God showed it unto them, by that Light of
Nature, which he set up in their breasts: or by imprinting it in their hearts.

Whereas the Apostle had taught in the foregoing verse, that all men had
sinned, he goes about here to make that his Assertion good, both of Jews and
Gentiles by a Partition: and he makes it good, as concerning the Gentiles, in
this Chapter: and as concerning the Jews in the two next Chapters following,
And though this is a main intent of his, yet he slippes to it as if it were a
thing accidental or by the bie.

Ver. 20. For the invisible things of him, etc.] For may be taken here for And:
Otherwise between this and the former verse understand these or the like words
[And even the Gentiles have the truth of godliness too, as well as they have of
righteousness: q. d. And even the Gentiles have the truth of godliness too, as
well as they have of Righteousness: For the invisible things of him (that is of
God) from the creation of the World are clearly seen, etc.

The Apostle answers here the second part of the Objection which I mentioned,
ver. 19.

For the invisible things of him from the Creation of the World are clearly
seen] i. e. For the Invisible things of him are and have been clearly seen from
the very time that God first created the world.

By the Invisible things of God, are here meant the Eternal Power and Godhead
of God, as the Apostle explaineth himself. And these are called the invisible
things of God, because they are not to be seen by bodily eyes and as they are
in themselves, though they may be seen by the understanding, and gathered from
the works, which God has made

From the Creation of the World] This is that which he says, in other terms:
Heb. 4.3. from the Foundation of the World: That is, from the time that the
World was first created, and the foundations thereof laid.

Are clearly seen] i. e. Are and have been clearly seen and understood, by the
eye of Reason, which is the eye of the Soul: The verb here is of the Present
tense, but includes the Praeterfect tense also by a Syllepsis.

Note here, that the Hebrews love to express, both the outward, and inward
Perceptions, and apprehensions of the Soul, by the name of Seeing.

Being understood by the things that are made) Here he shows how the
invisible things of God are clearly seen or understood They are seen or
understood by the things that are made: for as the Psalmist speaks: The heavens
declare the glory of God and the Firmament shows his handy work etc. Psalm.
19. ver. 1.2. etc. Read Wisdom Chap 13. which may serve as a Commentary upon
this Place.

Even his eternal Power and Godhead] By Power here understand the Power of
strength as I may call it not the Power of Rule and Dominion. For that is
included in the next words, Godhead.

The Power, that is, the Strength and Ability of him who made the world and
preserves it in its being, and must heeds be exceeding great, and surpassing
the power of All, but of him, who is God: For who is able to make so huge a
Fabrique as the world is, and the variety of Natures therein contained; and to
preserve them in their Being, ever since they were made; but he who is of
himself, of a vast Power, yea a Power infinite? And who is of such a Power, but
God only.

When therefore we consider, the huge Fabrique of the world, and the
preservation thereof in its Being: We cannot but conclude from thence, that he
which made it was of a vast Power, yea a Power infinite. And whereas there is
no such Power competible to any but to God, we conclude from thence, that he
that made the world was a God, and that this God, shows himself to be of
exceeding Power, by the world which he made, and preserves.

Yea, because he so preserves the world and sustaineth it, as that there is no
decay therein (if we look not to the Individua, but to the Species therein
contained) and nothing to hinder the Perpetuity thereof, but his own Will, we
may infer from that also, That this Power of God shall have no end, and
therefore is Eternal.

The first thing that offers it self to our Understanding, when we contemplate
the world, and the variety of Natures therein contained, is the Power of him
that made them. And from the Power of him that made the world, and all the
things therein contained, we come to gather the Godhead of him that made them
all, or this that he is God: Because the Power of him, which made the world is
such, as that it is competible to no other, than to God: And hence it is, that
the Power of God, is here put before his Godhead: Though his Godhead be in
Nature, (as we weak men use to speak) before his Power, if at least the word
(...) signifies his Godhead here.

But when we consider not only the huge Fabrique of the world, but also how
wisely and orderly all things are governed therein, which without a Governor,
would quickly come to confusion, as a Ship without a Pilot: And when we see how
all things are provided for; and how all things are ordered to the good and
benefit of the Creature, as every one is by Nature capable of it, (of which
they are most capable, which are endued with Reason, as Man is) We gather from
thence, the Rule and Dominion of God over all things, as over the works of his
own hands, and that the exercise of his Rule and Dominion is Fatherly, by which
he does not only Rule and Govern, but Provide also, and look to, and care for
all things, which he has made, after a Fatherly manner.

And therefore note, that if by the word (...), the Godhead, be here meant,
yet the Godhead alone, must not be hereby signified, but this his Fatherly
Rule and Dominion also; together with his Providence and Care for, and over all
his Creatures, and man especially.

For that the word (...) Godhead, as it is here taken, speaks benefit to the
Creature, and to man especially, is to be gathered from thence, that the
Heathen are said to be without excuse, for that they were not thankful, v. 21.
And had they not received benefits at the hands of God, which deserved thanks,
they had not been thus spoken of, for unthankfulness.

When one man is exceeding beneficial to another; a greater especially to a
lesser; he is said to be to him a God: for Homo homini Deus, says the Proverb:
And thus is gooodness and bounty, included in the word Godhead here, as it is
in the word Deus, God in the Proverb there. Yea, as (...), 2 Pet. 1.4.
signifies not the Essence or Existence of God, but his Proprieties, and
especially that of his Goodness: So say some does the word (...) signify here,
not the Essence or Existence of God, but his Bounty and Goodness.

Not only the word Maximus but Optimus too is attributed to God, even by the
Heathen: For they often say, Deus Optimus Maximus; and therefore are they
inexcusable if they are unthankefull to him for his goodness.

If the Gentiles could come to know the Power and Godhead, that is, the
goodness of God, by the things which he has made, they must needs come to know
this, that God was to be worshipped, and that honor, and glory, and power, and
thanksgiving were to be given to Him.

When therefore they worshipped Him not, but worshipped Idols, they held the
truth of godliness in ungodliness.

So that they are without excuse] In what they were without excuse, he shows
in the next words.

Ver. 21. Because that when they knew God] Supple, By the things that he had
made.

The knowledge of God, is to be taken here, not only for the knowledge of his
Existency or that, that he was God, but also, (and that chiefly) for the
knowledge of that, that he was a Powerful God, King of all the world, and Good
and Merciful to all his works, etc.

They did not glorify him as God] i. e. They did not glorify him, being God.

These words [as God] seem not so to be added, as to signify that the Gentiles
did glorify God, but not in that manner, as they ought to glorify him (though
the words may sometimes so signify in themselves) But, that they did not
glorify him at all: For we seldom, if ever read that the Heathen worshipped
the true God, but some false and feigned Deity, instead of God: And the Apostle
accuses them here, because they changed the glory of the incorruptible God, in
to an Image, made like to corruptible Man, and to Birds, and four-footed
Beasts, and Creeping things. v. 23. Omnia colit Humanus error praeter ipsum
omnium Creatorem, Tertull. De Pololatria, cap 4.

They did not glorify him] To glorify, when it is spoken of God Passively,
or, as of the object of our glory, it does properly signify the Celebration or
Praising of his holy Name, which is performed by words, as when we speak good
of his Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness, and Dominion, and the like: But in
this place it is a word of a larger Extent, and includes other kinds of honor
and worship also, which consists, either in the inward reverence of the Soul
toward God, or in outward signs of the Body, testifying that inward reverence
of the Soul; or both.

As God] This Particle [As] in Greek ((...)) though it be oftentimes used as a
Note of Similitude, yet sometimes it is taken as a Note of Identity, or is at
least redundant as, John 1.14. And as the like word (...), even as, is taken,
or is redundant, 2 Cor. 3.18. And the Apostle had rather say, They glorified
him not as God, or being God, That is, They glorified not God, than say, They
glorified not him, because there is a greater Emphasis, in these words, They
glorified him not as God, or being God, that is, They glorified not God, than
there is in these, They glorified not him.

Note here, That they which did actually know, what might be known of God, by
the things which are made, were only the Philosophers and Learned men, and
their Disciples; and such only does the Apostle seem to speak of here, in
direct terms, as may appear by diverse circumstances, occurring between this
and the end of the Chapter; but what they only knew, others also might have
actually known, as well as they, if they would, for they had the same means and
the same Book to read God and his Attributes in, to wit, the Book of the
Creature; if therefore other men knew not, what might be known of God from
hence, it was their own fault, and is to be imputed to their own Supine
negligence and gross affected ignorance, which shall never wholly excuse them
for not glorifying God, as they ought to glorify him.

Neither were thankful] This is one Species or kind of glorifying God, to wit,
to be thankeful to him, for the benefits which we receive of him, as will
appear, Psalm 50.15. And this the Apostle mentions in particular, because the
Heathen most neglected it: And yet they could not be ignorant, but that it was
due to God, because they knew, that all good things which they received, were
from God, as being Maker, Governor, and Disposer of all things.

Tanksgiving is but a part or species of glorifying God, yet does the Apostle
mention it here after glorifying God, which is as the Genus of this Species.
But this is not incongruous, yea, it is a point of Rhetorique to mention a
particular sometimes after a general, or a species after its genus, when there
is reason for taking special Notice of the Species.

But became vain in their imaginations] Note, that that which answers by way
of opposition, to that which went immediately before; namely to that, They
glorified him not as God, is that, which follows in the 23. verse, to wit, But
they changed the glory of the incorruptible God, into an Image, made like to
corruptible man, etc. But now because it is so foolish a thing for a man to
change the glory of the incorruptible God, into an Image made like unto
corruptible Man, the Apostle to proclaim their folly, does usher in those their
doings, with these words; But became vain in their imaginations: and their
foolish hearts were darkened, professing themselves to be wise, they became
fools.

But became vain in their imaginations]

i. e. But they did imagine vain and foolish things: Or conceived vain and
foolish thoughts in their minds.

Their thoughts and imaginations were vain and foolish, in that they thought,
that the Image and Similitude of bodily things, ought to be worshipped as God,
neglecting in the mean time, the thoughts of God himself.

Note, that the word Imaginations, is in the Original, (...); And (...)
signifies not a simple imagination or thought, but the thought or imagination
of a man, which reasons or argues a matter with himself, or some other, and
passes his judgment thereupon.

And their foolish heart was darkned] Their heart was darkened, by drawing a
Curtain, as it were, of darkness and ignorance between them, and the knowledge,
which they had of God, by the things which he made, through their own vain
imaginations: For by these their imaginations, they came to be so blind, as not
to see that God was to be glorified; but that the glory was to be given to
Stocks, or worse than Stocks.

Their foolish heart] The Heart is taken though figuratively, yet frequently in
the Scripture, for the Understanding, and frequently again for the Will of man:
For the Will, so often as it is called a Right heart, an Evil heart, a Soft
heart, an Hard heart, an Unclean heart, etc. And for the Understanding and
Mind, so often as it is called a Wise and Understanding heart, a Foolish heart,
a Blind heart, etc. Here therefore, the heart is taken for the Mind or
Understanding.

Ver. 22. Professing themselves to be wise they became fools] Some understand
(...), And here, q. d. And professing themselves to be wise; Or, and although
they professed themselves to be wise, yet they became fools.

There were Seven, which were called (...), or Wisemen of Greece: For so they
did call themselves, and so were they called by others. But Pythagoras, as
though this were too great a Title, called himself not (...), a Wiseman; but
(...), a Lover of Wisdom; and after him, almost all others, which gave
themselves to know the Nature of things, in what kind soever, called themselves
(...), or Lovers of Wisdom. But though they changed the name, they changed not
the thing; but thought themselves (...), as wise as the other, and did in some
way or other, proclaim themselves Professors and Teachers of Wisdom.

Among the Epyptians also, there were those which professed themselves wise,
Isa. 19.11. yea, there were those, which professed themselves wise in all
Nations.

These Wisemen became Fools, in that they gave Divine honor to Idols and
Images, and not to him to whom it is due: And for those to play the fools,
which profess wisdom, is the greatest folly in the world.

Note, that in these Phrases, They became vain in their imaginations; Their
foolish heart was darkened; Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools;
Not the Punishment, but the Sin of these men is intended.

Ver. 23. And changed the glory of the uncorruptible God, into an Image, made
like to corruptible Man] And is put here for, For, by an Hebraism as, John
3.13. and 7.28. Acts 26.10. Col. 3 25. And by the glory of the incorruptible
God, is here meant the incorruptible God himself, who is glorious and worthy,
and ought to be glorified: And Into, signifies here as much as With or For.
The sense therefore of this place is this, For they have changed the
incorruptible God, who is a glorious God, and ought to be glorified above all
things, with or for an Image made like to corruptible Man, etc. Thus he which
leaves the Service of one Master for the Service of another, is said to change
his Master, or to change Master for Master.

That And, is sometimes put for, For, I have showed, and that the glory of God,
may be put for God, who is glorious by a Metonymie, will appear by Isaiah,
40.5. And that to change a thing into, is as much as to change a thing with or
for, will appear, by confronting the Latin, with our English Translation,
Levit. 27.10.

They are said to have changed the incorruptible God, who is glorious and ought
to be glorified, into an Image made like to corruptible Man, because they took
not him for their God, but they took Stocks and Stones for their Gods, and did
not glorify and worship the incorruptible God, to whom glory and worship was
due, but glorified and worshipped Idols in his stead, as though not he, but
they were gods indeed: For to change the glory of God into some other thing, is
to embrace some other thing, in the room of the glorious God

And of Birds and four-footed Beasts, and Creeping things] That which the
Apostle speaks here, he speaks chiefly in regard of the Egyptians, who though
they esteemed themselves Wisemen, yet worshipped Birds, as the Ibis; Beasts, as
Crocodiles, Wolves, Lions, Dogs, Cats, etc. Creeping things, as Serpents. etc.
And yet the Romans were not free from this kind of Idolatry, for they learned
it from the Egyptians.

Note, that by Birds and four-footed Beasts and creeping things, may be
understood not only Birds, and fourfooted Beasts and creeping things
themselves, but also their Images and Representations, for the Images, and
Representations, were called of Idolaters by the names of the things
themselves, which they did represent. So the Image of Jupiter, is called by the
name of Jupiter, Act. 14.13.

Ver. 24. Wherefore God gave them up also to uncleanness] This word, also,
seems here to be a note of comparison, or similitude and likeness, and to
intimate a Retaliation: the sense therefore of this Place, is this: As they did
deal reproachfully with God, in that they honored not him, but base things
instead of him: so did God deal reproachfully with them in punishing them, by
giving them up to uncleanness, which was ignominions, and reproachful to them.

Where note, that this comparison, or similitude, or retaliation consists in
generals, not in particulars.

God gave them up to uncleanness] What this uncleanness was he tells. ver. 26, 27

God is said here to give these men up to uncleanness, as he is said to give a
man up to his enemies hands, And he is said to give a man up into his Enemies
hands, while he does not restrain his enemies, but that they may use their
whole power against him, and if any thing is like to hinder these his enemies,
that they c^nnot use their power; he sees to it that it be removed, that it may
not hinder them.

Through the lusts of their own hearts] This is that, by which God gave up
these men to uncleanness, to wit, the lusts which arose in their hearts, which
lusts not withstanding, God stirred not up in them, James 1.14. But suffered
them there to arise and suppressed them not, and withdrew that, that should
hinder them, and suppress them, to wit, his Grace.

To dishonor their own Bodies between themselves] These words between
themselves signify the mutual uncleanness, which was among Men, and the mutual
uncleanness, which was among Women.

This uncleanness, was a great dishonor to their bodies (and so to them
themselves) for if he that commits simple Fornication sins against his
body and dishonors it, 1 Cor. 6.18. Much more do they sin against it, and
dishonor it, which change the natural use of it, into that which is against
nature

Note, that as this is called a dishonor of the body; so on the contrary the
chastity of the body is called the honor thereof, 1 These. 4.4.

By these words the Apostle suts forth the Effect and the End of that
encleanness, which he spoke of, and which God looked upon, when he gave them up
to that uncleanness. The sense therefore of the words is this, q. d. He gave
them up to uncleanness, that they might dishonor their own bodies between
themselves. And this dishonor is a Retaliation of that dishonor, which they
did to God.

Ver. 25. Who changed the truth of God into a lie] q. d. Because they changed
the true God, with that which was not a true God.

Many things are here to be observed: As 1. That when he says, who changed the
truth of God: It is, as if he should say, Because they changed the true God,
etc. For this is to be underctood (...), that is, as containing or repeating
the cause of that which went immediately before. 2. That the truth of God is
put here by a Metonimy for the true God himself, as the Glory of the
incorruptible God, was put for the uncorruptible God, who was Glorious: 3. That
by a Lie is meant That whatsoever it was, which Idolaters worshipped instead of
God, and was not God: And so is the word taken, Isa. 44.20. And it is therefore
so called, because as a Lie though it has oftentimes the show of truth, yet it
is far from truth, and has no conformity with the thing which the words of a
Lie signify; So an Idol or whatsoever is worshipped by Idolaters instead of
God; though it looks like a God in the eye of an Idolater, yet it is far from
being a God, and has no conformity with the Godhead. 4. That to change the
truth of God into a lie, signifies to embrace, in the stead of the true God,
that which is not true God. Of which Phrase See ver. 23.

And served the Creature more than the Creator] These words need no
interpretation; if we suppose that these Idolaters did worship God at all: But
because the Apostle does not say, that they gave God any worship, therefore
know, that this word More, must be taken here in the full sense of the word
(...) in the original, which signifies among other things a passing by: The
sense therefore of this place must be this, q d. And served the Creature
passing by the Creator, yea if we should so render the words out of the
Original; it might seem the better Rendition.

Although the Apostle had said: And worshipped, which includes all religious
worship, yet, he adds And served: And that he does for this reason, That he
might by name express that worship, which consists in outward works, as in
building of Temples, offering of Sacrifices, Burning of Incense making and
setting up of Images, etc.

Who is blessed for ever] i. e. Who is to be blessed, That is, to be praised,
and worshipped, and adored for ever more.

This the Apostle adds, to show, that worship, and praise, and thanksgiving
is due to God, and to be given to God (though these men neglected it) and to
him only, and that not for a time, but for ever and ever. As also to signify,
that notwithstanding these men did dishonor God, by giving that worship, which
was due to God to the Creatures, yet his honor was not diminished by what they
did; They could cast no soil upon his Splendor.

Amen] This word is an Hebrew word, used sometimes in the beginning, sometimes
in the end of a Speech or Sentence: If it be used in the beginning of a Speech
or Sentence, it has simply the power of affirming, and is as much to say as,
Verily or Truly. But if it be used in the end of a Speech or Sentence, as it is
here; then it has the power of approving what was said before, and signifies
as much as, So it is; and in a Precative sense, So be it.

Ver. 26 For this cause God gave them up] Here is an Epanalepsis, or
Resumption, or Repetition of that which he said, v. 24. Wherefore these words
are here to be understood, viz. I say; q d. For this cause (I say) God gave
them up.

To vile affections] That is, to such affections and lusts, as drove a man to
vile Things, and things full of disgrace and ignominy; such as was this vile
and ignominious lying together of men with men, and women with women, which
here he speaks of.

That the Heathen Philosophers and the Learned among them (of whom, as I said,
the Apostle seems here to speak directly and chiefly) were carried away with
vile affections; and all, or most of them, were Buggerers or maintainers of
Buggery, as will appear, as by others, so by Diogenes Laertius, who writes
their Lives.

For even their women did change the natural use (supple of their Bodies) into
that which is against nature] The natural use of our Bodies (of which the
Apostle here speaks) is, that conjunction to which Nature inclines, or from
which generation is apt to follow: And this is only of the Male with the
Female, and with those members and parts of the Body, which Nature has depu^ed
to that Office: All venereal use therefore of those members, which is differing
from this, is against Nature: And that not only as we are Men, but as we are
Animals. Wherefore this kind of Lust, of which the Apostle here speaks of, is
more than Beastly.

Object. When he speaks here (as it seems) of the Heathen Philosophers, and
such as were Learned among the Heathen, how comes he to talk or speak of women?

Answ. There were Women who were Learned among the Heathen, as well as Men, as
Sappho by name, and they were carried away with evil affections, as well as
Men, etc. Again, the sins of Men staid not in themselves, but did redound by
their filthy communication, to Women also.

Ver. 27. Men with men working that which is unseemly] The Apostle here does
modestly signify by that which is unseemly that more than Beastly lying of Man
with Man.

Of these manner of sins, which the Apostle here speaks of, both Greek and
Roman Histories are full. (...).

Which is unseemly] He uses a (...) here, when he calls this, but that which
is unseemly; of which figure, See verse 28.

And receiving in themselves that recompense of their error which was meet]
That is, And so receiving in their Bodies, by these their doings, that
recompense of their sin, which was meet for them, and agreeable to that their
sin.

In themselves] i e. In their Bodies. See verse 24. The Greek is (...) which we
may render, through their own selves; themselves being the Instruments, or
Contrivers of their own punishment. (...) may be also rendered, between or among
themselves.

That recompense of their Error, etc.] By their error he here means not any
light error, but a most wicked and grievous error, and an error contracted by
their own fault, to wit, That they thinking not that the Creator was to be
worshipped and glorified, thought that worship and glory was to be given to the
Creature, and did accordingly give worship to it.

The word in the Original, which is here expounded (Error) is not (...), for
then we might think that it were a sin of Imprudence: But (...), which is an
Erring from the right way, in some by-ways: And every Sin (the greatest as
well as the least) may be called (...); for the Law of God is compared in
Scripture to a straight way leading to some place; and Sin is compared to the
wandering or erring out of that way, which wandering or erring is called (as I
said) in the Greek (...), here error; and so may it be called, whether we err
further off, or not so far from that way.

If these men had truly known God, as they ought to have done, and had
worshipped him when they knew him, they had never fallen into so vile
affections, and beastly lusts, especially so far as to wallow in them, without
shame; for God surely would have restrained them; but after that they did
dishonor him, by leaving him and worshipping Idols; He left them, and withheld
his Grace from them, that being inflamed with this fire of Lust, they should
surpass the very Beasts in filthiness, and because they would not behave
themselves as Men, they should be Metamorphosed into more than Beasts. And thus
did he punish the dishonor which they did to him, by the dishonor which they
did unto themselves.

V^r. 28 A^^^^^n as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God
gave them over, etc.] Here understand the Particle, So, q. d. And Moreover,
even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, So God gave them
over to a Reprobate mind: For here also is intimated a Congruency of the
Punishment, with the Sin here punished.

They did not like] i. e. They did not account it worth the while, and
therefore they were not pleased to retain God in their mind.

The words in the Original, are (...): And (...), signifies to try Gold, or
other precious Metal, or Coin, either with a touchstone, or in the fire,
whether the Gold, or Metal, or Coin be good or no: And then (by taking the
Antecedent for the Consequent) it signifies further, to make choice of, and to
make much of that, which we find upon trial to be the true Gold, and good Coin,
and to have an high esteem of it. Hence this word here signifies by a
Metaphor, to make choice of, and highly to esteem; and (...) signifies not to
make choice of, but to disrespect, as Dross, or Reprobate, and Counterfeit
Gold, or Coin.

By this you may see then, what the meaning of these words are, They did not
like to retain God in their knowledge; the meaning is, that, They did not value
or prize, but disrespect and disesteem the knowledge of God, and accounted it
not worth any thing; as a man disrespecteth and disesteems Dross, and
Counterfeit Gold, and Coin, and accounts it nothing worth.

To retain God in their knowledge] i. e. To keep in their minds the knowledge,
which they had of God, by the things which are made, as they should have done,
by meditating daily on him, and his works, which would have (if they had done
it) brought them to glorify him, and worship him.

To retain God in their knowledge, may therefore be put for to glorify God, by
putting the Antecedent for the Consequent, as the Hebrews often do.

The words in the Original are (...); and (...) signifies also Agnitionem, an
Acknowledgment: They may be rendered therefore, To acknowledge God: And
therefore might these men be said not to acknowledge God, because they did not
give him that Glory, Honor, and Respect, which was due to God, but they gave
it to Idols. But the sense will fall out to be the same, with the former sense.

This is the Sin which he charged them with, in the 21. and 25. verse of this
Chapter, which he repeats over and over again, though in diverse words, that men
might take the more notice of it, and of those many sins with which it was
punished.

God gave them over to a Reprobate mind] That is called a Reprobate mind in
this place, which does judge perversely of human actions, and deemeth those to be
honest which are dishonest, and pure which are impure, or at least, which does
not see the dishonesty and turpitude and impurity which are in them, or if they
do see it, yet notwithstanding, they do no more refrain from them, than if they
saw it not.

The words in the Original are (...), where note, that the word (...), is
spoken most usually of such Metal, or Coin, as is found naught upon trial, or
of such, as will not (as we say) abide the trial; and therefore is disrespected
and disesteemed.

By a Reprobate mind therefore, we must not understand here, a Mind which is
out of all hope of grace and favor with God, as that which God has cast off
by an eternal decree of Reprobation, in which sense the Elect are opposed to
Reprobates: But a base and a vile mind, or a mind no more to be valued or
accounted of, than base, refuse, reprobate Metal, or Coin, which is found
naught upon trial, and therefore no man regards it.

Note, that there is an elegant (...) and Antithesis in the words of the
Original, between (...) and (...) such as shows the Taliation or Congruency,
of the punishment, with the sin punished: and such as our language cannot
express: But to come as near to it as we can, we may from the Latin word
Approbat, coin or frame, an English word Approbate, in the same manner as the
English word Vindicate is derived from the Latin Vindicat. And then their will
be a (...) and Antithesis in the English, as well as in the Greek this. And
even, as they did not Approbate, to retain God in their knowledge, so God gave
them over to a reprobate mind.

God is said to give these men over to a reprobate mind, because when they had
such a base reprobate mind in themselves, He permitted and suffered it to be in
them, and would not deliver them from it.

To do those things, which are not convenient] i. e. To do those things, which
are not seemly for a man to do, and which have a manifest turpitude in them,
and by doing of which a man does defile, and disgrace himself, yea make himself
guilty of eternal death.

There is, therefore a (...) in these words; for more is to be understood by
them, than is spoken: A figure, which the Hebrews often use, by which they do
strongly affirm the contrary, of that which they deny: by things not convenient
therefore they understand things most unconvenient, and unseemly.

Note, that we must not so understand these words, as though these men had done
none of these things before God gave them over to a reprobate mind, but that
they did them not so generally, nor so shamelesly, nor were they so full of
these deeds, as they were afterward.

V. 29. Being filled with all unrighteousness] The sins here mentioned from
this place to the end of the Chapter are the effects of that reprobate mind to
which God gave these men over, wherefore I conceive, that the participle in the
Original, viz. (...) should be resolved into an infinitive mood with (...) q.
d. (...). i. e. So that they were filled with all unrighteousness. See the
like, Chap. 3. ver. 24.

Being filled with all unrighteousness] This word unrighteousness is either of
a General; or of a special signification. In a general signification every sin
with which our Neighbor is wronged is called unrighteousness. In a special
signification, that sin is called unrighteousness. which consists in not
giving to every one, what is his own: Or, when we make that which is another
man's our own by any unlawful ways.

Now unrighteousness here may be taken either in the special signification of
the word, and so it is a sin distinct from all that follow. Or it may be taken
in a General signification, and so it may comprehend the following sins, as the
Genus does its Species.

Being filled with all unrighteousness] He says being filled, or, so that they
were filled with all unrighteousness, to show that they were not petite sinners
and such, as did but taste, as it were of sin now and then: but were great
sinners, and did daily sin with a kind of greediness, and glut themselves
therewith.

Fornication] Fornication may be taken here in a large sense, and may include
not only simple fornicatoin, which is the unlawful lying of an unmarried man,
with an unmarried woman: But Adultery also, which is the unlawful lying of a
man with a woman, when one or both of the parties are married: In which large
sense Fornication may be described to be, the unlawful lying of a man and a
woman together.

In this large sense is it taken, Matthew. 5.32. and 19.9. and 1 Timothy 1.10. etc.
Yea, it may extend to all unlawful commixture whatsoever.

Wickedness, Covetousness, Maliciousness] We must distinguish here betwixt
wickedness, and maliciousness: and we may so distinguish, that we may take
wicknedess, for the actual hurting or injuring of another man: Maliciousness,
for a mind, or desire to hurt another man. For some there are, which upon an
occasion offered; or, which being injured by another, doubt not presently to
injure him again; yet do they not seek an occasion; or, cherish a mind, to hurt
when they have no present occasion offered; such may be called (...), wicked
men. Others again there, be which desire and meditate upon hurt, and seek after
occasions, when no occasion is offered to hurt, or wrong another man: and such
may be called (...) malicious men.

Covetousness] Covetousness is an immoderate desire of riches:

This immoderate desire, is seen; partly in immoderate getting, partly in
immoderate keeping Riches, when they are gotten.

Full of Envy] i. e. And were full of Envy, etc.

Envy is a sadness, or grief of mind, arising from the honor and prosperity of
another man.

He says, full of envy, etc. To show again, that they were not lightly touched
with these vices, but, as it were, wholly possessed of them.

Murder] Murder is a voluntary killing, or taking away the life of a man, by
him who has no power to take it away.

Debate] Debate is a fight or contention of words proceeding either from wrath,
or vainglory, or some other immoderate affection; as when one man is so
pertinacious, as that he will not yield to another, but will maintain his
opinion tooth and nail, though it be false, or though it be evil, or though it
be a matter of nothing; which produces heat; and heat, anger; and anger,
reproachful speeches.

Deceit] Deceit is the circumvention of another man after a cunning and crafty
manner by fine and specious shows.

Malignity] Malignity, though it may signify all vicious and corrupt manners
in general, yet here it is to be taken for some certain special sin. And in
particular it may be taken for that sin, by which a man does take, whatsoever
is said or done by another in evil part, and by which one man does detract
from that praise which is due to another; and when he undertakes to praise him,
he does it so coldly, as that he may seem rather that he would depress him,
than extol him, etc.

Ver 30. Whisperers] i. e. And were Whisperers.

A Whisperer is he, which tells a tale privately of one man to another, that he
might thereby hurt his good name, or bring him out of the good opinion of that
man, to whom he tells it; so that he, of whom the tale is told, not knowing
what is spoken of him, cannot defend himself, or comes to defend himself too
late, because his defense meets with prejudice before conceived, by the
whisperers tale.

Backbiters] Backbiters are they which speak evil of a man, behind his back
openly.

Haters of God] They seem to be called Haters of God here, who professed
themselves to be enemies of God, and of all godliness; and who made a mock at
Religion, and speak blasphemously of God, and as the Psalmist speaks; Set their
mouth against the Heavens, Psalm. 73.9. Such were they, who upon any cross which
befell them, accused God, and denied his Providence: yea, who accused their own
gods.

Despightful] They are despightful which do a man a mischief, on a spite
though they themselves do neither receive, nor can hope to receive any good
thereby.

But the word in the Original is (...), which carries reproach with it, and
signifies such, as being not content to do man a bare injury, do it with a
great deal of petulancy, contempt, and disdain, as Julian the Apostate did,
when he gave the Christians a box on the ear in reproach.

Proud] They are called Proud here, which contemn others in respect of
themselves: A vice (as one says) familiar to men of high birth.

Boasters] They are Boasters, which boast of that they have not; but would seem
to have.

Inventers of evil things] He calls them Inventers of evil things, who find
out new sins, and new pleasures, and new fuel, and provocations to sins, as
also new traps, engines, and devices, to catch and hurt others, which are
innocent.

Disobedient to Parents] i. e. Not giving honor to their Parents, whose honor
consists first in obedience to their commands, so long as they are not
contrary to the commands of God: Secondly, in succouring them, if they stand in
need of succor. And thirdly, in yielding to them the outward signs of
reverence.

Ver. 31. Without understanding] That is men inconsiderate in their actions,
considering, neither the circumstances of things, nor of Persons: Not thinking
how they carry themselves to other men, nor that they may expect to have the
same measure, which they mete to others, met to them again, by which many have
ruined themselves, their Families, yea, and endangered the Commonwealth in
which they live.

That which is rendered here, without Understanding, is in the Greek now extant
(...), and so is the word usually rendered, as coming from (...), Intelligo, to
Understand. But because the Apostle speaks not here of the faults of the
Understanding, but of the sins and vices of the Will, some would not give this
word a place here, but conceive that it has crept in by the fault of the
writers, who of one word, to wit, (...), diversely written, have made two. I had
rather say, that (...) is derived from (...) or (...), Coeo, and render it by a
word which A. Gellius uses, to wit, Incoibiles, that is, such as will not come
together. to wit, into the Band of Society, with other men, that is, Insosiable.

Covenant-breakers] i. e. Such as will not stand to the Covenants and Bargains
which they have made.

Without natural affection] They are said here to be without natural affection,
who have put off their nature, and have quenched that fire, or sparks at least,
of love and affection, which nature had kindled in their hearts, toward those
which were near in blood or alliance to them, so as that they show no more love
and kindness, Son to Father, Father to Son, Brother to Sister, Sister to
Brother, Husband to Wife, Wife to Husband, etc. than they do to mere strangers,
which is little enough.

Implacable] They are said to be Implacable, which being once offended, will
never be reconciled.

Vnmerciful] They are called Unmerciful, who are not touched with the feeling
of other men's misery, so as to relieve them, when they stand in need of relief,
but are more ready to bring new miseries upon them, and be hard-hearted toward
them.

Ver. 32. Who knowing the Judgment of God] That is, And such, who knowing the
Sentence of God, as of a Judge, that He has Judged such Men worthy of Death.

This Sentence, or Judgment of God, to wit, That they which do such things are
worthy of Death; These men knew, partly, by the Dictamen, or Light of Nature,
which God set up in the heart of every man, whereby he might know, what ought
to be done, and what left undone, and what actions are worthy of punishment,
and what not: partly, by Tradition from better times.

That they which Commit such things, are worthy of Death] Note, that the
Conjunction (That) is to be taken here (...), and that it specifies in
particular what the Judgment or Sentence of God here spoken of is; and shows it
to be this, to wit, that they which do such things are worthy of Death.

That there are such sins, as that Nature by her own light judges worthy of
death, or at least are known by Tradition to be such, will appear, by Acts
13.28. and 23.29. and 25. v. 11, 25. and 26.31. and 28.18.

Not only do the same] This is enough to make these men inexcusable, and most
worthy of death.

But have pleasure in them that do them] i. e. But take pleasure and delight to
see men do them.

This makes a man far more inexcusable and far more worthy of death. For it is
far worse, for a man to take pleasure and delight in seeing another man sin,
than it is for him to sin himself: For a man may be carried away with his
lusts, and allured by the allurements of sin, to commit sin himself: But what
is it but the height of wickedness, which will make him take delight to see
another man sin, where he neither enjoys the pleasure of the sin, nor reapeth
any profit by it.

Whereas the Apostle undertook to show of the Gentiles in General that they
were sinners; he speaks here only of the Philosophers, and the Wisemen, which
were among them: But he leaves us to gather; that if the Philosophers, and
Wisemen amongst the Gentiles were such sinners; then the meaner sort could not
be without sin: For if they which excel others in Wisdom and Knowledge, and
from whom righteousness and virtue was to be expected, were unrighteous and
vicious, who could expect virtue and entire righteousness from them, who
neither minded Wisdom nor Knowledge.

CHAP. II.
1. THerefore thou art inexcusable, O Man, whosoever thou art, that judge:
for wherein thou judge another thou condemnest thy self; for thou that
judge do the same things.

1. And now that I may turn my speech to thee, O Jew, Thou hold the truth in
unrighteousness, as well as the Gentile, and yet thou take upon thee to
censure the Gentile, and condemn him for doing such things (which I reckoned up
in the last part of the foregoing Chapter) as worthy of death. Thou therefore
art inexcusable, O thou Jew, whosoever thou art, that thus condemnest the
Gentile, for these things; for with the same sentence, wherewith thou
condemnest him, thou condemnest thy self; for thou thy self do the same
things, for hainousness, as the Gentile does.

3. But we are sure that the judgment of God is according to truth, against
them which commit such things.

2. But me thinks, I hear thee say, that though thou condemnest the Gentile,
yet thou do and may acquit thy self, because the Gentile is of an unclean
race, but thou art a Jew, and of the holy seed of Abraham: And thou art expert
in the Law, which God gave to the Jew, but not to the Gentile; and thou art
circumcised with that cirrumcision, which God appointed, as a sign of that
Covenant which God made with Abraham, whereas the Gentile is uncircumcised and
ignorant of the Law of God.

But though thou judge thus, with respect of persons to thy self, yet we are
sure, that the judgment of God is according to truth, and without respect of
persons, against them which do such things, be they Jews, o^ be they Gentiles.

3. And think thou this, O man, that judge them, which do such things, and
do the same, that thou shall escape the judgment of God.

3, But tell me in good earnest, O thou Jew, do thou that condemnest them
which do such things, and do thy self the same, do thou, I say, think
this, that thou shall escape the judgment of God.

4. Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and
long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to repentance?

4. Or presuming that God is well pleased with thee, because he does not
execute some signal judgment upon thee, but is good, and patient, and
long-suffering toward thee, do thou despise him and fear him not,
because of this his goodness and forbearance, and long-suffering toward thee,
not knowing that the end of Gods goodness is to lead thee to repentance,

5. But after thy hardness, and impenitent heart, treasurest up unto thy self
wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of
God.

5. But thou through the Blindness, and hardness, and impenitency of heart,
which thou contractest to thy self by these means, thou, I say, do augment
the weight of those punishments, and encreasest the number of those torments,
which shall be poured out upon thee, by reason of thy sins, in the day of Gods
wrath, when he shall execute his righteous judgments in the sight of all the
world.

6. Who will render to every man according to his deeds:

6. Who will then render to every man a reward according to his deeds.

7. To them who by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for glory, and,
honor and immortality; eternal life,

7. To them, who, by patient continuance in well doing, seek, according to the
Gospel, for glory, and honor, and immortality; eternal life.

8. But unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the truth but obey
unrighteousness, indignation, and wrath.

8. But unto them which obey not the Gospel, which is the word of truth, but
are contentious against it, and against the Ministers thereof, and obey lies,
indignation, and wrath.

9 Tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that does evil, of the Jew
first, and also of the Gentile.

9. Yea tribulation, and anguish shall fall upon the soul of every man, that
does evil (if he repents not) of the Jew first, and then of the Gentile.

10. But glory, honor, and peace to every man that works good, to the Jew
first, and also to the Gentile.

10. But glory, honor, and peace shall be to every man that works good, to
the Jew first, and then to the Gentile.

11. For there is no respect of persons with God.

11. I say to the Jew first, and then to the Gentile; including the Jew as well
as the Gentile, in the punishment which I speak of, for there is no respect of
persons with God.

12. For as many as have sinned without law, shall also perish without law: and
as many as have sinned in the law, shall be judged by the law.

12. For as for the Gentiles, who have not received the written law, they, as
many of them, as have sinned shall be condemned, Though not by that law because
they received it not: and as for the Jews, who have received the written law,
as many of them as have sinned under that law, shall be judged by that law.

16. In the day, when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ,
according to my Gospel.

16. In the day wherein God shall judge even the secrets of men, by Jesus
Christ, whom he has appointed to be judge both of the quick and dead,
according to the Gospel, which I have preached.

13. For not the hearers of the law are just before God, but the doers of the
law shall be justified.

13. I say, as for the Jews, who have received the written law, they, as many
of them as have sinned under that law, shall be judged by that law, for if we
think of obtaining justification by the law, not the hearers of the law, and
the Learned in the law, are justified before God, but the doers of the law,
that is to say, they which do and have done the works of the law, so exactly,
as the law requires, and have never broke the least title thereof at any time;
they, and they only, shall be justified by the law in Gods sight.

14. For when the Gentiles, which have not the law, do by nature the things
contained in the law; these having not the law are a law unto themselves.

14. But because I said of the Gentiles, who have not received the written law,
that as many of them as have sinned, shall be condemned though not by that law,
because they received it not; I would not have any think, that the Gentiles
were quite without law (for then indeed they could never sin, and never be
condemned for sin, for sin is the breach of a law) But though they had not a
written law, that is, a law visibly written, in Tables of Stone, as the Jews
had, yet are they not without a law. For when the Gentiles, which have not the
law (that written law which was written in Tables of Stone, and given by Moses)
do by the light, and instinct of Nature, the things which are contained in the
written law of Moses, these, though they have not that law, yet they are as a
law unto them selves.

15. Which show the work of the Law written in their hearts, their conscience
also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing, or else
excusing one another)

15. For they show, that that which the Law of Moses enjoyneth, is written
(though invisibly) in their hearts, when as they make public Laws, and give
private Precepts, conform thereunto, etc. And their conscience also bears
witness to this, that is to say, their thoughts, which accuse, or else excuse
them, by course; excuse them when they do well, and accuse them when they do
ill, which they could never do, if they had not a Rule, that is, a Law to judge
them by, a Law which tells what is good, and ought to be done; and what is
evil, and to be eschued.

17. Behold, thou art called a Jew, and restest in the Law, and make thy
boast of God;

17. But whereas thou think, O Jew, that thou shall escape the judgment of
God, because thou art a Jew, and because thou have deep knowledge in the Law of
God, etc. I tell thee, that thou art so far from escaping the judgment of God,
because of these things, as that they make the guilty of the deeper
condemnation. Behold then, thou art called a Jew, (a Jew by Birth, and a Jew by
Profession) and delightest in the Law, and boastest of God, that he is thy God.

18. And know his will, and approvest the things that are more excellent,
being instructed out of the Law.

18. And know (thou say) his will, and by thy industry have found out most
excellent Divine documents, and approvest of them, as of Gold, which is pure
and precious, being instructed from a Child, out of the Law.

19. And art confident that thou thy self art a guide of the blind, a light of
them which are in darkness.

19. And thou boastest, that thou thy self art a guide to them that are blind,
as concerning knowledge, and art able to direct them in the right way; and that
thou art as a light to them, which are in the darkness of ignorance.

20. An instructor of the foolish, a teacher of babes, which have the form of
knowledge, and of the truth in the Law.

20. And that thou, by thy Wisdom, art an Instructor of such as are foolish;
and a teacher of those, which are but babes for knowledge in respect of thee.
For thou have (thou say) a Model, or Series, or Idea of those truths which
are in the Law, orderly imprinted in thy mind, whereby thou perfectly know
them thy self, and can more speedily and easily teach them others.

21. Thou therefore which teach another, teach thou not thy self? thou
that preachest a man should not steal, do thou steal?

21. Thou therefore which teach another to know, teach thou not thy self
to do? Thou that preachest a man should not steal, do thou steal?

22. Thou that say a man should not commit adultery, do thou commit
adultery? Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit sacrilege?

22. Thou that say a man should not commit adultery, do thou commit
adultery? Thou that abhorrest Idols, because they rob God of his honor, do
thou commit sacrilege, which is a robbing of God too?

23. Thou that make thy boast of the Law, through breaking the Law
dishonourest thou God?

23. Thou that make thy boast of the Law, that thou art perfectly skilled in
it, and that thou delightest in it, as being the Law of God, do thou break
the Law, and so dishonor God, which gave it?

24 For the name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles, through you, as it is
written.

24. For the name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you Jews, by
your sins, as it is written, and as it was foretold by Isaiah, (Isa. 52.5.)
that so it would be.

25. For circumcision verily profits, if thou keep the Law: but if thou be a
breaker of the Law, thy circumcision is made uncircumcision.

25. But thou will say, That thou art circumcised, and that by the benefit of
circumcision (so infallible a sign it is of Gods favor) thou shall escape the
judgment of God, and be freed from all the mischief of sin, and be received
into Gods favor. But be not mistaken; for circumcision indeed will profit thee
in this kind, if thou keep the Law punctually and exactly: But if thou be a
breaker of the Law in any part thereof, thy circumcision is become as
uncircumcision, and thou will have no more benefit thereby, than if thou had
never been circumcised.

26. Therefore if the uncircumcision keep the righteousness of the Law, shall
not his uncircumcision be counted for circumcision?

26. Wherefore being it is so, if the uncircumcised Gentile does perform that
righteousness, and do those things which the Law commands, shall not his
uncircumcision be counted as good as circumcision; and shall not he be
justified, as well as if he had been circumcised?

27. And shall not uncircumcision which is by nature, if it fulfill the Law,
Judge thee, who by the letter and circumcision do transgress the Law?

27. And shall not the Gentile which is uncircumcised, as having no right to
circumcision by his birth, or by his stock, as thou have, if he fulfill the
Law, condemn thee by his example; who having both the Law and circumcision,
do transgress the Law?

28. For he is not a Jew, which is one outwardly, neither is that circumcision,
which is outward in the flesh:

28. But thou will say, But for all this, I am a Jew, and I am sure that a Jew
is a favorite of God, and one whom God will free from wrath to come, because he
is a Son of Abraham. And I am circumcised, and I am sure that circumcision will
free us from damnation. But be not mistaken; for he is not such a Jew, whom God
makes his favorite, and whom he will free from the wrath to come, who is only a
Jew outwardly, that is, who is only a Jew by his carnal descent from Abraham,
and by his Genealogy from him derived; Neither is that the circumcision which
will free a man from damnation, and which God respects, which is outward, in
the flesh of the privy members, whereby the foreskin thereof is cut off.

29. But he is a Jew, which is one inwardly; and circumcision is that of the
heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter, whose praise is not of men, but of
God.

29. But he is the Jew, which God makes his favorite, and which he will free
from the wrath to come, who is a Jew inwardly, by reason of the faith which he
has in his heart, whereby he imitates Abraham, and is a Child of Abraham, as
Abraham is the Father of the Faithful: And that is the circumcision, which will
free us from damnation, and which God respects, which is the circumcision of
the heart, whereby infidelity and unbelief are cut off; The circumcision which
is taught and performed by the Gospel; not that circumcision, which is
commanded in the Law; The circumcision whose praise is not of men, who see only
outward things, and things obvious to the bodily eyes; But of God, who sees
and searches the Heart, and the Reins, where this circumcision is seated.

CHAP. II.
Verse 1. Therefore thou art inexcusable, O Man, etc.] Note, that whereas the
Apostle did in the eighteenth verse of the first Chapter, say, That the wrath
of God was revealed from heaven, against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of
men, who held the truth in unrighteousness, thereby showing, that all men had
sinned; and whereas he intended to make that his saying good by a Partition,
that is, by showing it to be true both of Jew and Gentile; and showed it of the
Gentile, from the nineteenth verse to the end of that Chapter, he begins here
to show it to be true of the Jew also: and though this is a main drift of his,
yet he slides to it, as it were to a matter only by the bie, as his manner is.

Therefore thou art inexcusable, O Man, whosoever thou art that judge, for
wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self, etc.] These words
depend (as I intimated) upon the eighteenth verse of the first Chapter, and are
an Illation from thence: yet have they some reflection upon that latter part of
the first Chapter also, which mentions and sets forth the sins of the
Gentiles, For whereas the Apostle did there reckon up many sins of the
Gentiles, and showed that they were by the judgment of God worthy of death: We
must conceive, that the Jew hearing this, did approve the Sentence of God, and
proudly condemn the Gentiles, as worthy of death for these their sins whereupon
the Apostle takes an occasion to condemn the Jew out of his own mouth, seeing
that he held the truth in unrighteousness, as well as the Gentile, and did the
same things as the Gentiles did, whom he condemned.

Thou art inexcusable] i. e. Thou can not be excused nor defended, from being
worthy of the same death, as the Gentile is worthy of,

O Man] That is, O thou Jew: For he turns his speech here to the Jew, that he
might show him, in particular, that he has held the truth of God in
unrighteousness, as well as the Gentiles, according to what he said Chap. 1.
ver. 18.

Whosoever thou art that judgest] i. e. Whosoever thou art which judge the
Gentile to be worthy of death, because of the sins, which he has committed.

The Apostle supposes here, that the Jews had judged the Gentiles to be worthy
of death, by reason of their sins: And this supposition, was not avain
supposition. For the Jews were a censorious People, ready upon all occasions to
condemn the Gentiles, and to justify themselves.

Wherein thou judge another, etc.] i. e. With the same judgment, or with the
same sentence, with which thou condemnest the Gentile, and judge him worthy
of death, thou condemnest thy self, and judge thy self.

Wherein] i. e. Wherewith, or by which, Supple, judgment,

Note, that the Praeposition In (according to the Hebrew manner) may be taken
for with or by.

Thou judgest] The Apostle speaks not here of Public judgment, whereby a
Public Judge does by his Authority condemn a Malefactor, that is brought
before him: But of private censure and judgment whereby a Private man takes
upon him to censure or judge another.

Another] By this other understand the Gentile.

For thou that judge do the same things] i. e. Thou which judge the
Gentile, to be worthy of death for his sins, do the same things, and
committest the same sins thy self, for which thou judge and condemnest the
Gentile.

He that condemns a man, and judges him worthy of death, for committing such
or such a sin, if he himself has committed the like, he condemns himself,
though not in words, yet in deeds, by condemning him.

Do the same things] These words are not so precisely to be understood, as
though the Apostles meaning were, that every Jew, which judged a Gentile worthy
of death for his sins, were always guilty of the same special sins, for which
he did condemn the Jew, (though it fell out oftentimes even so to be) But the
words are generally to be understood: As if he should say, For thou which
judge another worthy of death, for such and such sins, Thou thy self do
the same, though not in Specie, yet in Genere, and committest sins of as
heinous a nature, as those are of, which he commits.

He that condemns a man for Adultery, though he himself has not committed
Adultery, yet if he has committed Murder, or a sin which deserves as great a
punishment as Adultery does, he condemns himself and judges himself, to be
as worthy of punishment, as he which committed Adultery.

Ver. 2. But we are sure that the judgment of God is according to truth,
against them which commit such things] Between this and the foregoing verse, we
must understand, that the Jew hearing the Apostle say, that he (to wit) the Jew
condemned himself, in that wherein he judged the Gentile, because he did the
same things, grew hot and angry with the Apostle, for that the Apostle made no
difference between a Gentile and him which was a Jew; and broke out into these
or the like words, But what, if I condemn the Gentile, for doing those unseemly
things, which you reckoned up, must I therefore condemn my self? Is there no
difference between a Gentile and me? A Gentile, he is of an unclean Stock; he
is blind and ignorant, and uncircumcised by nature, but I am a Jew by Birth,
and therefore one of that holy People, which the Lord the God chose to be a
special People to himself, Deuteronomy. 7.6. And I am skilled in the Laws and
Statutes, which God gave to us, but not to the Gentiles, Psalm 147.19. And I am
circumcised with that circumcision, which is a token of the Covenant, made
between God and the Children of Abraham, Genesis 17.11. I may therefore condemn a
Gentile, and yet not condemn my self, though I had committed the same things,
which the Gentile had.

And to this Objection of the Jew, does the Apostle here answer, q. d. Thou O
Jew art partial in passing thy Sentence: For though thou condemnest the Gentile
for the sins, which he commits: yet thou will not give judgment against thy
self, (though thou thy self do the same things, which the Gentile does) But
yet, we are sure, that the judgment of God is according to truth, against all
them which commit such things: And therefore, it is as well against thee, who
art a Jew, and art instructed in the Law, and art circumcised, as it is against
a Gentile.

Note here, that it is the Apostles usual manner of teaching, to teach by
answering tacit, Objections and Questions.

The chief Scope of the Apostle, in the first part of this his Epistle is, to
show, That Justification is not by the works of the Moral Law: Yet because the
Jew thought that he might be justified (though he had not observed the Moral
Law,) by being a Jew, (that is, by being a Child of Abraham) Matthew. 3.9. And by
the knowledge and skill, that he had in the Law: And by his circumcision, the
Apostle does by the bie, as he has occasion, confute this conceit also: That
he might show that a man is justified by Faith only.

We are sure] i. e. We who have the Spirt of the Lord: or we who have the true
knowledge of Gods word, and the right understanding thereof, we are sure.

According to truth] i. e. According to the true doings of men, without any
respect to their persons. And therefore this, that thou art a Jew, and
instructed in the Law, and Circumcised, shall profit thee nothing, if thou have
sinned.

Ver. 3. And think thou this, O Man, etc.] q. d. But tell me seriously, O
thou Jew, which judge the Gentiles worthy of death, which do such things, and
do the same thy self, do thou think in thy conscience, that thou shall
escape the judgment of God, only because thou art a Jew and art circumcised,
and learned in the law?

Such things] i. e. Such sins as are mentioned from Chap. 1. ver. 29. to the
end of that chapter.

Shall escape the judgment of God] To wit, that judgment, which he will
execute upon all sinners at the last day.

Ver. 4. Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and
long-suffering] Or presuming, that thou art without fault, and flattering thy
self, that thou art holy, because God does not pour down some extraordinay
judgment upon thee, but is long suffering, and patient toward thee. Despisest
thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering, not
knowing, or Considering, that the goodness, and forbearance, and
long-suffering, of God, endeavor to lead thee to Repentance, because thou
can not be saved from the wrath to come, except thou repentest.

Despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and long
suffering] The Jew is said to despise, the goodness, and forbearance, and
long-suffering of God, in that he did not make good use of them, but reject
them, as to that end, to which they induced, to wit, Repentance, yea in that,
that because God was abundant in goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering
toward him, He did reproach God, and dishonor him with his sins, abusing
therein Gods goodness, as an encouragement to sin, whereas it should have been
an inducement to Repentance.

Whereas the Apostle says Despisest thou the riches of his goodness, etc, Some
conceive, that he alludeth to Birds, which are affrighted at a Scare crow, when
they see it move: But if they perceive it quiet and still, they are not afraid
of it, but dare at length to sit and play, yea to mute upon it. For so, evil
men be afraid of God, when he is moved with anger toward them, that is, they
are afraid of his wrath; but are not afraid when he is patient, and good to
them, but harden their hearts, and reproach him with their sin, in which they
continue, which is, to despise his goodness.

The Riches of his goodness, etc.] That is, the Abundance of his goodness, etc.

The word Riches, is put here for Abundance, or Plentifulness, as Chap. 9.23.
Ephesians. 1.18. Colos. 1.27.

This is the difference between the goodness, and forbearance, and
longsuffering of God here, viz. that the goodness of God was seen in the
blessings, and good things which he bestowed upon the Jew. His forbearance was
seen in his withholding his punishments from them. His long-suffering, in his
Patience and enduring of his sins.

Not knowing] i. e. Not considering.

That the goodness of God] The goodness of God here includes the forbearance,
and long-suffering, which he mentioned just before, in this verse, as well as
the goodness of God.

Leads thee to repentance] i. e. Endeavors to bring thee to repentance, or
intends to lead thee to repentance, (as aiming at that end) and not to
encourage thee to sin.

The Apostle speaks not here of the Event, but of the Intent, and Counsel of
God, in being rich in goodness toward sinners. And this his Intent and Counsel
God did manifest to the Jews, in those Sacred Oracles, which he committed to
them, though they considered it not: but did so interpret the goodness of God;
as if God were therefore good unto them, because he was well-pleased with them,
and did see nothing in them, for which he could destroy them: Which
interpretation of theirs, encouraged them to continue in their old course of
living, and to reproach God, and dishonor his holy Name, with their sins, and
wicked conversation.

Ver. 5. But after thy hardness and impenitent heart] The Apostle does break
out here into a kind of holy passion, chiding the Jew, ^r that he knew not, or
considered not the end, why God was so good unto him, and for that, that the
goodness of God did not work upon him to repentance.

After thy hardness] i. e. Through thy hardness.

The Preposition in the Original is (...), which here is a sign of the Cause,
as chap. 4. v. 4 16. chap. 11.5. Ephesians. 1. v. 5, 7, 9. Tit. 3.5. 1 Pet. 1.3.

Thy hardness] i. e. The Insensibleness, Imperceivableness, or
Inconsiderateness of thy mind, which is such, as that thou perceivest not, nor
do thou consider, that the goodness of God (is no encouragement for thee to
sin, but) a Guide to lead thee, or an Inducement to draw thee to repentance.

The hardness here spoken of, is contracted by custom in sin: and by the proud
conceits, which they have of themselves. And as for the word it self, it is
Metaphorical, taken from that Brawniness or Hardness which uses to be in man's
hand, who is accustomed to hard labor, and from thence transferred to the
mind; for as such an hardness in the skin of a man's hand dulls, or deads his
feeling and makes it insensible, so that he cannot feel things as they do,
which have not such hardness or brawniness: So does this hardness of the mind
make the mind as it were insensible, that it cannot perceive and consider of
Divine things as it ought to do: Or else it is taken from the hardness of the
Tunicles of the eye, which through age, or by some other accident grow dry, and
so hard, and so cause blindness.

There are many Creatures, as Beetles, and the like, which are (...) hard eyd,
and so but dim of sight, it may be that the Apostle alludes to such.

I understand this hardness of the imperceivableness, and inconsiderateness of
the Mind; yet many understand it of the Impenitency of the heart, and make the
subsequent words an Exposition of this, q d. And by thy hardness, that is, by
thy impenitent heart, etc.

And Impenitent heart] i e. And by thy heart, which is not, and will not be
moved to repentance by the riches of Gods goodness toward thee.

This impenitent heart of the Jew, might cause him also not to consider aright,
of the goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering of God.

Treasurest up to thy self] i e. Thou treasurest up to thy self

Note, that the Apostle does not continue here his questioning of the Jew, but
breaks out (as I said) into chiding him: therefore we must put in here the
pronoun (Thou) though our Translation has it not,

Thou) Treasurest up to thy self] wrath] i e. Thou do heap up for thy self
by little and little torments and punishments, which will be sure to take hold
upon thee at the last day.

The word [Treasurest] is a Metaphorical word taken from a treasure, which is
heaped up, and increased by little and little, while there is something added
to it every day, and which is safely kept, till at length it is brought out,
and made use of.

To thy self] For thy self, but to thine own woe and misery.

Wrath] Wrath is put here (per Metonymiam efficientis) for Punishments and
Torments proceeding from Wrath, to wit, the wrath of God.

They treasure up unto themselves wrath, that is, Punishments and Torments, who
break not off their sins by repentance, but go on in sin, adding sin, to sin:
for every sin meriteth or purchases a new Torment, or a new degree of
Punishment and Torment: As it is written, How much she has glorified herself
and lived deliciously so much torment give her, Rev. 18.7.

Against the day of wrath] i. e. Against that day in which God has appointed
to execute his wrath, and to punish all those which have offended.

In that day that Treasure of wrath, which every one has heaped to himself,
shall be brought forth, and poured out upon him.

And Revelation of the righteous judgment of God] i. e. And against the day of
the revelation of the righteous judgment of God, that is against the day in
which God will openly pass his righteous judgment upon all men.

The Revelation of a thing is sometimes taken for the open Existence or Being of
a thing, as Chap. 1.18. and so is it to be taken here.

By this day is meant the day of the general judgment of God, which shall be
in the end of the world, ver. 16.

Ver 6. Who will render to every man according to his deeds] God will render
rewards to every one, not only to this man, or that man, or to this Nation, or
that Nation. but to every one of every Nation; and he will render them
according to their deeds; To them who have done well, he will render good
things, as Honor, Immortality, and Life eternal, ver, 7. And to them which
have done evil, evil things, as Tribulation and anguish, v. 9. And to those,
which have done better, than other good men, will he give a greater measure of
good things; and to those who have done worse than other evil men. He will
give a greater measure of evil things. Thus will he give to every man
according to his deeds: And thus must we interpret this his retribution, not,
as though he were said so to render to every one according to his works, so as
that the Godly man, or man that did well, should have no more than he deserved,
for his reward shall infinitely exceed his works.

Who will render to every one according to his deeds] It may be asked (by way
of Objection.) That if God should render to every man according to his deeds;
and there is no man but has sinned, Chap. 1.18. Chap. 3.10. And every man
which has sinned is cursed, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Galat. 3.10. How could any one look
for honor, and immortality, and receive eternal life?

I answer, that if we speak of good works, and should measure them according to
the Strict Rule of the Law, No man could be saved, or ever receive eternal life
by virtue of his deeds.

And according to this Rule Repentance would do him little good, because he had
once sinned, and so continued not in all things, which are written in the Book
of the Law to do them, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Galat. 3.10 But this, is not the Rule, by
which all men shall be judged at the last day: For they which believe the
Gospel, shall be judged by the Gospel, which (through Christ, and for his
merits sake applied to us) is a merciful Rule, and accepts of repentance, and
pardons sins, upon repentance, and takes off the curse of the Law, and
promises eternal life to them that walk according to the Gospel.

And therefore he that walks according to the Rule of the Gospel, and performs
his part in the New Covenant, which is a Gracious Covenant, may through Christ,
hope for Glory, and Honor, and Immortality, by those his deeds though he has
sinned, and that not in vain. For he shall be crowned at length with eternal
life, (though he could not be saved if his deeds were to be examined strictly
and he judged according to the strict rigor of the Law) For God, who is the
only Lawgiver, who has power to save and to destroy, James 4.12. He has
cancelled the rigid Law, as to Believers, and set them the Gospel, to be the
only Rule, for them to walk by now, and to be judged by at the last day,
through the merits of Christ

A Question more here may be asked; for one may say, the Judgment which the
Lord will execute at the last day toward all men, is (...), a just and
righteous Judgment, v. 5. How therefore can that Judgment, by which he shall
adjudge Believers to eternal life, be called a just or righteous Judgment,
whereas there is no Believer but has sinned, and therefore deserved
everlasting death.

I answer, though the Judgment by which God shall adjudge the Believers to
Eternal life, cannot be said to be just in that sense, as that the Believer
does deserve eternal life, by the worth of his works, and that God would be
unjust, if he did not so reward him: Yet it may be said to be just, in respect
of the promise of eternal life, which God has graciously made to all
Believers, for the merits of Christ, in the Gospel. For there is Justice in
keeping of promises: and a promise gives a right to that, where without a
promise no right could be claimed. Moreover, in this case, the merits of Christ
supply the defect of man: and for his sake he may be accounted worthy of
eternal life, who is not worthy thereof for his own. Again, there is a (...) in
the Judgment passed according to the Gospel, upon those, which are under the
Gospel.

Ver. 7. By patient continuance in well doing] That is, by patient continuance
or perseverance in well doing.

By patient continuance, or perseverance in well doing, is meant, such
continuance, or perseverance in doing well, as no cross, or persecution, or
discouragement can break off.

And by well doing, is meant, not that strict observance of the Law, which the
Law requires: for who can do that? but such well doing, as the faithful, and
believers perform, which desire and endeavor to walk in all pleasing to God,
though they sometimes stumble, and fall: That is, such well doing as is
required of them, and they perform, which believe the Gospel.

Seek for Glory] By Glory, is here meant, a glorious and illustrious Estate,
such as is described, Mat. 13.43. which Estate can be sought only by them,
which believe, and that by faith in Christ. See more of this soon after.

And Honour] Honor, as it is commonly defined is, a sign whereby men express
that Excellency, which they conceive to be in another.

The Honor here spoken of consists in that, that God, by that which he will
do to such as are here spoken of, will make it appear, how highly he does
esteem of them, and in what account he has them.

Eternal life] i. e. He will render Eternal life. For these words, He will
render, are to be repeated from verse 6.

Note here, from this place, that in Eternal life, these three things are
comprehended Glory, Honor, and immortality.

Note also, that the Apostle speaks here of such as believed the Gospel, for
none but such could seek as they should for glory, and honor, and immortality,
being it was our Savior Christ Jesus, which brought life and immortality to
light through the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10. And none but such can so seek, as to
obtain.

And he speaks of them, and their reward here, to encourage those that believe,
in their holy faith, and to induce others to the same, which yet blieved not.

Ver. 8. Unto them that are contentious] i e. Unto them, who having heard the
truth, that is, the Gospel of Christ, and are contentious, and fight against it.

By them that are contentious, he seems to understand, such as did
obstinately resist the Truth, that is, the Gospel, when it was preached, and
did strive against it, wherefore he adds, and d^ not obey the truth.

Of such as resisted, and strove against the truth, that is, the Gospel we have
examples, Acts Chap. 14.2. and 17.5. and 19 9

And obey not the truth] By the truth understand the Gospel here, which is the
word of God, and therefore truth: and which in respect of eminency of the
subject of it, may be called the truth (...). Thus is the Gospel called the
word of Truth, Ephesians. 1.13.

The Gospel may be also called the Truth in opposition to those figments and
lies, which are in the Theology of the Heathen, and to those fancies, which Men
of their own heads set up against the Gospel.

They are said not to obey the truth, who when it is preached to them refuse to
assent to it, and to receive it.

He seems to speak of truth here, as of a Person, yea, as of a Lady or
Mistress, which is to be obeyed, by a Prosopopaeia.

This he speaks chiefly by reason of those Jews, which when the Gospel was
preached to them, received it not, but opposed it with all contention: And he
speaks it to the end, that he might deterr the Jews from so doing, by
consideration of the Judgments, which should befall them for it.

Note, that when the Apostle speaks of not believing, or not obeying the
Gospel, he speaks, for the most part, of them, to whom the Gospel was preached,
and by them rejected!

But obey unrighteousness] Unrighteousness is taken sometimes for Falsehood, as
it is taken, John 7.18 It may be happily so taken here, and signify any false
Doctrine, contrary to, or dissonant from the Doctrine of the Gospel, and
especially that which teaches a way to Justification, contrary to, or
dissonant from that which the Gospel teaches, which is by Faith.

He seems to speak of unrighteousness here as of a Person, as he did of truth
before.

Indignation and wrath] Supple, shall be rendered

He changes here his manner of speaking.

Indignation and wrath, are put here, Per Metonymiam Efficientis, for
punishment, yea, grievous punishment, proceeding from indignation and wrath, to
wit, the indigantion and wrath of God.

V. 9. Tribulation and anguish] q. d. That is, Tribulation and anguish shall be
upon every man that does evil.

What he called indignation and wrath immediately before, he calls
tribulation and anguish here.

Upon every soul of man] i. e. Shall be, or shall fall upon every man.

Put an Emphasis upon the word Every,

The Soul of man, is put here, by a Synechdoche, for Man himself: A part, for
the whole.

Yet we may take the Soul here properly, as if the Apostle, intending to speak
of the greatness of the Punishment of these men, should say; that it should
reach, not to the Body only, but to the Soul also.

The Apostle, in the former verse, spoke only of those in particular, who
received not the Gospel, when it was preached to them, but opposed it; here he
seems to speak of all evil men in general, whether they had heard of the Gospel
and resisted it, or no. q. d. Yea, tribulation and anguish shall be upon every
Soul of man that does evil, whether he has heard of the Gospel and resisted
it, or no.

And this he does, least any one should think, that all other wicked men should
escape punishment, if so be they were not contentious against the Gospel, and
disobeyed it not, which might be, if they never heard of it.

That does evil] Note, that he says not, That have done evil, for then who
would be saved? But that does evil, that is, which continues and persevereth
in doing evil, not breaking off his evil course of life, by true and hearty
repentance

Of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile] i. e. Upon the Soul of the Jew
firist, and then of the Gentile.

See of this Phrase, Chap 1.16.

He does yet more fully show, that none that does evil shall escape, by saying,
that neither Jew nor Gentile shall escape.

He says here, that this punishment shall fall first upon the Jew, and the
reason is, because the Jew was before the Gentile in the blessing of God, and
in the means of holiness; and as his sin is greatest, who has the greater
means of holiness, and is not holy, so shall his punishment be the greater.

Ver. 10. But glory, and honor, and peace, to every man that works good] i
e. But as I said verse 7. glory, honor, and peace, to every one that works
good.

The Apostle repeateth what he said verse 7. the more to enforce what he said
there.

And Peace] By Peace is understood (according to the Hebrew Phrase) Felicity
and Happiness, yea, a Congeries of all good things. By Gl^ry, Honor, and
Peace, are meant here, that which he called Eternal life, v. 7.

To every man] That is, shall be to every man.

That works good] See verse 7.

To the Jew first, and also to the Gentile] i e. To the Jew first, then to the
Gentile.

Ver. 11. For there is no respect of Persons with God] i. e. For God will
respect neither the Jew as he is a Jew, nor the Gentile as he is a Gentile; But
if a m^n do evil, he will pun^sh him for his evil, though he be a Jew, and if
he works good, he will reward him for so working, though he be a Gentile.

The Apostle prevents a tacit Objection here, for whereas he had joined the
Gentile with the Jew, both in the reward and in the punishment, and so had made
them in those things alike; A Jew might Object and say, How is it Paul, that
thou make us like to the Gentiles, or the Gentiles like to us? Are not we the
Children of Abraham? etc. How is it therefore that thou say, that we shall
be punished like to the Gentiles, or that the Gentiles shall be rewarded like
unto us? for we Jews are of a more holy Stock, than that we should be ranked
with the Gentiles. To this the Apostle answers, even from Deuteronomy 10 17. with God
there is no respect of Persons, q. d. In that Judgment which God will pass upon
all men, he will not have any respect to the Stock or Parentage of any man, or
to any such like thing, so as to accept of a wicked man for his Stock sake, or
to reject a good man because of his Parentage; but he will reward them, every
man according to his works, which he has done.

Respect of Persons, (or rather respect of Faces, for this is judged to be the
better interpretation of the Original word ((...)) is, When respect is had in
judgment, not to the deeds and actions of a man, which only should be scanned
there; but to other things, as Beauty, Honor, Parentage, Riches, and the like,
which have nothing to do, or have no Relation to the things, which are to be
judged,

But it may be objected here, that God will reward the Jew, which works good,
before the Gentile, which works good; and therefore God is a Respecter of
Persons in judgment.

Answ. Caeteris Paribus: Or if other things are alike in both, God will indeed
give the prerogative of order to the Jew, before he will to the Gentile: But
not when the Gentile excels the Jew. But to give the praerogative of order,
for a man's stock or parentage sake, is not against justice, nor liable to that,
which is called respect of persons, much less when God had before promised,
such a favor to the children of Abraham: For in those things, which are of
mere favor, there is not respect of persons: and in all things whatsoever
there must an order be observed.

Ver. 12 As many as have sinned without the Law, shall perish also without the
Law] By the Law is here meant the Law, which is so called (...), that is the
written Law, which was given by Moses.

And the meaning of these words is this, that, as many as have not received the
Law, which was given by Moses (as it was by him given) and yet have sinned,
shall perish or be damned; (though they do not perish or are damned, by that
Law of Moses) to wit, if they do not repent, nor lay hold of Christ and his
Gospel.

Without the Law] i. e. Having not received that written Law, which was given
by Moses.

By these he understands the Gentiles.

Shall also perish without the Law] i. e. That is shall also be damned, though
they be not damned or condemned by the written Law of Moses.

If you ask by what Law then they shall be damned or condemned (for none shall
be damned or condemned, but for sin, and there is no sin, but is against a
Law)? I answer, They shall be damned or condemned by the Law of Nature, which
was written in their hearts.

As many as have sinned in the Law] i. e. As many as have sinned, having
received the Law, to wit, the written Law of Moses, and are under that.

By these he means the Jews.

Shall be judged by the Law] i. e. Shall be judged by that Law, whether they
have sinned or no, and being found sinners by that, shall be by that condemned;
to wit, if they lay not hold of Christ, and repent.

Ver. 13. For not the Hearers of the Law are just before God.] i. e. For they
which are not Doers, but Hearers only of the Law, they are not such, as shall
be justified or acquitted in judgment before God.

We must understand here the word Only.

And by Hearers we may understand, not any ordinary Hearers only, but such
also; as have been diligent in hearing, the Law read and expounded, and have so
far profited thereby, as that they rest therein, and know Gods will, and
approve the things that are excellent, and are able to be instructors, and
Teachers of others and are such as we read of, Verse 17, 18, 19, 20.

And by being just before God, is meant, being justified, as the next Sentence
shows.

Note, that the Jews, who sought for justification by the Law, were so
conceited of their diligent hearing of the Law, and the knowledge, which they
got by hearing, as that they thought themselves so highly beloved of God for
that alone, as that God would not by reason of that condemn them, or cast them
off, though they broke the Law: The Apostle therefore to take away this vain
conceit of theirs, Add to prevent any Objection, which they might raise against
that which he had said, says, That not the Hearers of the Law are just before
God, but the Doers of the Law shall be justified.

The Doers of the Law shall be justified] By the Doers of the Law, are meant,
such as so do the Law as the Law requires, that is, such as so do the Law, as
that they never fall, or fail, at any time in performing whatsoever the Law
commands; for he that continues not in all things, which are written in the
Book of the Law to do them, is so far from being accounted just, or from being
justified by the Law, as that he is cursed, Galath. 3.10. Deuteronomy 27.26.

Note, That the Apostle does not affirm here or say, that there are any such as
have so perfectly observed the Law, or have been such Doers thereof as the Law
requires: But he does only teach, what is required to legal Justification,
and what they must do, who would be justified by the Law. They must not be bare
Hearers of the Law, as the Jews would have it, but exact doers of it.

Shall be justified] i. e. Shall not come into condemnation, but shall be
acquitted in judgment, and freed from punishment.

Ver. 14. For when the Gentiles, which have not the Law] i. e. When the
Gentiles, which have not the written Law of Moses, nor ever had it, etc.

By the Law, understand here the written Law of Moses.

Note, That these words relate not to that which went immediately before, but
to those words of the twelfth verse, As many as have sinned without the Law,
shall also perish without the Law. After which words we must understand these
or the like, to wit, Yet you must not think that the Gentiles, were altogether
without a Law. As if he should say, As many as have sinned without the Law
shall also perish without the Law; yet you must not think, that the Gentiles
are altogether without a Law, for when the Gentiles, which have not the Law, do
by nature the things contained in the Law, these having not the Law are a Law
unto themselves. For,

The Apostle does here, either prevent, or answer an objection, which might
rise from these words, ver. 12. As many as have sinned without the Law, shall
also perish without the Law; For a man when he hears this may say; If they
were without a Law, how could they sin, for sin is the deviation from a Law:
and if they have not sinned, how can they justly be punished or condemned. To
which the Apostle answers in effect thus, Though I said (speaking of the
Gentiles) that As many as have sinned without the Law, shall also perish
without the Law, yet ye must not think, that the Gentiles were altogether
without a Law: for when the Gentilss, which have not the Law, do by nature the
things contained in the Law, these though they have not the Law, yet are as a
Law unto themselves.

Do by nature the things contained in the Law] i. e. Do by the light of nature
such things, as are contained in the moral Law of Moses, and are prescribed or
commanded to be done thereby.

By the Law understand the Law of Mosos, and that not the Ceremonial, but the
Moral Law by him given.

He says, that the Gentiles did such things as are contained in the Law, not
because they performed or kept the Law, which the Jews broke; or that they did
fully answer, that knowledge, which they had of the truth, but because they did
many things, which the Law prescribed, for in making public Laws, and in
giving private precepts, they did praescribe, and give in precepts, honest
things, and forbid things dishonest, even as the Law of Moses it self did,

These having not the Law] i. e These, though they have not the written Law of
Moses given them in Tables of stone or outward writings, as the Jews had.

Are a Law unto themselves] That is, Are as a Law, or instead of a written Law
unto themselves.

The Particle, As, is here (as often it is elsewhere) to be understood.

Therefore; they are as a Law unto themselves, because they can by the light of
Nature, which is in them, tell themselves, what is honest, and what dishonest,
and what is to be done, and what to be left undone.

V. 15. Which show the work of the Law written in their hearts] This relative
Pronoun, which, includes here and intimates the cause, as also it did chap.
1.25. q. d. For they show, Supple, by doing by nature the things contained in
the Law, that the work of the Law is written in their heart; And therefore they
are as a Law unto themselves.

They show the work of the Law to be written in their hearts, because they do
those things, which are contained in the Law, verse 14

The work of the Law] By the work of the Law some understand the Law it self,
which is the Work, to wit, the Work of that great Lawmakers, the Lord of Heaven
and Earth; and as for the manner of speech, the Law is called the Work of the
Law, as Circumcision is called the sign of Circumcision, Romans 4.3.

Others take the Work of the Law, for the effect of the Law, to wit, the
written Law of Moses, that is, for the knowledge of good and evil: for one
effect of the Law is, to show, what is good, and to be followed, what is evil
and to be shunned, q. d. For what the written Law does work in the Jews, to
wit, the knowledge of good and evil, that do they show written in their
hearts, which is an argument, that They are a Law unto themselves.

Written in their hearts] He opposes, the writing in their hearts, to the
writing in Tables of Stone, after which manner, the Law was written, which was
given by Moses.

Their conscience also bearing witness] q. d. They not only by showing the
works of the Law, written in their hearts, testifying that they are a Law unto
themselves; but their Conscience also testifying the same thing, to wit, That
they are as a Law unto themselves.

This therefore is another argument to prove, That the Gentiles are a Law unto
themselves.

The Conscience is an operative Quality, or Faculty, or Action, (as some will)
of the mind, which applies our deeds to the Principles, or Rules, or Law of
right Actions, and thereby shows what is done, as it ought to be, and what is
not done, as it should be done

Or it is a Practique Syllogism, (as some call it) which by the light of
nature, or of Grace, judges and concludes, what is honest, what dishonest,
what is commanded, what forbiden, what shall be rewarded, what punished.

In this Syllogism, the Major Proposition is; either from the light of Nature,
or from the Scriptures: As for example, he which sheds man's blood, by man shall
his blood be shed, Genesis 9.6.

This is the Major Proposition, which the Conscience takes notice of.

In the Minor Proposition; the Conscience of the Murderer assumeth, saying;
thou have shed man's blood.

Then does the Conscience conclude aagainst her own Master, Therefore must thy
blood be shed by man.

The Conscience, therefore in whom soever it is, has knowledge of the
Principles, or Rules, or Law of Actions: and in the Gentiles, which have no
written Law given them from God, as the Jews had. she has this knowledge from
what is imprinted by Nature, in their hearts. Therefore well might the Apostle
say, that their Conscience testifies, that they are a Law unto themselves.

And their thoughts the mean while accusing or else excusing one another] q. d.
That is, their thoughts (in the mean time that they are working, or doing any
thing) either accusing, or excusing them respectively, that is, as they do
either evil, or good: For if they do evil, their thoughts will accuse them; if
they do good, their thoughts will excuse them, though men accuse them.

This, I take to be the sense of this place, as it is here rendered, where To,
in the mean time, signifies the mean time that they are working; and One
another, is as much as them respectively: For I understand this, not of the
thoughts, but of the Men in whom these thoughts are.

But if you take it as though their thoughts accused or else excused one
another; So that the Accusers and Excusers were thoughts; and the Accused or
Excused were thoughts, understand it not so as that the thoughts did this
Reciprocally, That is, as if the same thoughts did accuse the same thoughts,
which accused them, etc. But so, as that when evil thoughts arose in a man,
other thoughts arose in him and did accuse those evil thoughts of sin and evil:
and when those thoughts arose in a man, which might seem evil, and were not so,
other thoughts arose, and did Apologize for, and defend these thoughts. For the
word in the Original is (...), which does not always signify a Reciprocation,
as will appear by Ephesians. 5.21. (...). Being subject one to another in the fear
of God, where the Apostle would have Subjects to be subject to their Princes,
Servants to their Masters, Children to their Parents; but not Princes again to
their Subjects, Masters to their Servants, nor Parents to their Children. And
according to this interpretation and exposition, To, in the mean while, must
either be redundant, or signify, while they are Practically busied in
examining what they have done.

Yet this place is most commonly rendered by other Interpreters thus (though
the sense be in a manner still the same) and their thoughts by turns accusing
or else excusing them: The sense whereof is this, q. d. That is, their thoughts
by turns either accusing them, as when they do ill, or excusing them, as when
they do well.

Note, that the Conjunction, And, is put here, as a Note of Declaration, and is
as much to say, as That is, for the thoughts accusing or the thoughts excusing
are as two Species or Parts of the Conscience, and declare what the Apostle
meant by Conscience.

The thoughts of men cannot accuse men except they have a Rule or Law to judge
their actions by, from which Rule or Law, they see their actions swerving: Nor
can they excuse them, except they have a Rule or Law, to judge their actions
by, agreeable to which Rule they find their actions: Therefore these thoughts of
men accusing or excusing them, show that the Gentiles have a Law written in
their hearts, and so, that they are as a Law unto themselves.

Ver. 16. In the day when God shall judge the secrets of Man] i. e. In that day
when God shall judge, even the secrets of men.

These words relate to the twelfth verse, by an Hyperbaton, so that whatsoever
comes between, is to be read with a Parenthesis

The Day or Time here mentioned, is the Day, or Time of the General Judgment.

God is said to judge the secrets of men in this day, not because he will not
judge those works which are open and manifest: But because he will not judge
them only, but also the very secret counsels and deeds of men.

But the Apostle mentions here only secrets, to show, that this judgment
shall be different from the judgment of men, who can judge only those things
which are apparent, and to signify, that they which commit sin, though never
so secretly; shall not escape judgment.

According to my G spel] i. e. According to my preaching, or, according to that
which I teach, and preach to all people. For in preaching the Gospel, I preach
that God will judge the world by Jesus Christ.

The Gospel is to be taken here for the preaching of the Gospel, (by a
Metonymie) as it is taken 1 Cor. 9.14. in the latter word Gospel: and 2 Cor.
8.18. and Gal. 2.7. and Phil. 4.15.

He calls it his Gospel, as it was ministered, or preached by him.

He mentions his preaching of the Gospel here, because it could not be known
by natural reason, that the world was to be judged by Jesus Christ. As also,
because God commanded the Apostles to preach unto the people, and to testify,
that it is he, to wit, Jesus Christ, which was ordained of God to judge the
Quick and the Dead, Acts. 10.42.

V. 17. Behold thou art called a Jew] In that tacit Objection, which the Jew
is to be understood to make between the first and second verse of this Chapter,
and which the Apostle answers in the second verse, etc.

The Jew relied upon many Praerogatives and Excellencies which he conceived
himself to have, and of which he boasted; As, ex. gra. that he was a Jew by
Nature, and so a Child of Abraham. And that he was learned in the Law of God,
Circumcised, etc. for which he thought he was so far in the favor of God, as
that he should not be condemned, or judged for his sins as the Gentile should:
which vain conceits, and thoughts of his, the Apostle confuted before at verse
the second, etc.

Now, here from this place to the end of the Chapter the Apostle shows, that
the Jew was so far from being in the favor of God (so as that he should not be
condemned, or judged for his sins, by reason of those Privileges, and
Excellencies which he relied upon, and which he boasted of) as that (being his
life was vicious) those Prerogatives and Excellencies, should make his sins the
greater, and so tend to his greater judgment, and condemnation: For where men
have the greater inducements, and cause or means to be pious and holy: if they
are not pious and holy, according to those inducements, and cause, or means;
there their sin is the greater, and their condemnation or judgment the heavier

Behold] By this word the Apostle rouseth up the careless Jew (who through the
vain conceits of the Prerogatives and Excellencies which he conceived himself
to have, snorted in his sins) to consider and behold his sins, and the
judgments due unto him for them

Thou art called a Jew] The Children of Abraham were commonly called
Israelites, from Jacob the Grandchild of Abraham, who was also named Israel,
until the Ten Tribes were carried away Captive into Assyria, and their
Commonwealth destroyed: But after that, the Kingdom of Judah remaining, (of
which the Tribe of Benjamin was a part) they were called Judaei, that is, Jews,
from the chiefest Tribe of that Kingdom, which was the Tribe of Judah.

Thou art called a Jew] A Jew was descended from Abraham, of which descent he
was very proud, and thought it enough for him to say, I have Abraham for my
Father, Mat. 3.9.

Upon this account that they have Abraham for their ^ather, the Jewish Doctors
doubt not to reckon, that all Israel is to have a share in the world to come.
Talmud. in Sanhedr. per. 10. 1.

And Justin Martyr says of the Jewish Rabbius, that they suppose, (...), i e.
That the everlasting Kingdom shall be surely given to those that are of the
Seed of Abraham according to the flesh, although they are sinners and
disobedient to God.

Note, that the Apostle says not, Behold thou art a Jew, but behold thou art
called a Jew: And this he says, either in allusion to that, that they were
very well pleased, and delighted to be called Jews: Or because they were Jews
rather in name than in truth, as will appear, v 28, 29. where he confutes this
vain glorying of the Jew, because he is a Jew.

And restest in the Law] i. e. And moreover, thou take delight in the Law of
God, as in that, which is most perfect, and than which there can be nothing
perfecter.

Or, putting the Law (per Metonymiam Subjecti) for the reading of the Law,
thus, Thou restest in the reading of the Law, and desire to read or know
nothing else.

When we attain to the top of our desires, so that we can go no further, or
desire nothing more of any thing (especially the thing not affording it) then
do we rest in that, which we have attained to and delight our selves in it.

And make thy boast of God] To wit, that God is thy God, and that he has
made a Covenant with thee, and promised to be thy God, Genesis 17. And has given
thee his Law and his Statutes, Psalm. 147.19.

V. 18 And know his will] Supple, Though thou do it not.

And approvest the things, which are more excellent] That is, and thou by
examination having found out what those things are, which are most excellent in
the sight of God, thou likest them and approvest them, That is, thou praisest
them and assentest to them, as such, (though thou do not practice them)

That word (...), which is here rendered Approvest, may signify both examining
and approving, or, liking upon examination; wherefore here I interpret it,
liking, or approving, or assenting to, or praising after examination.

Being instructed out of the Law] i e. As being instructed out of the Law from
a Child, whereby thou know the will of God, and whereby thou art able to
examine, and judge of those things, which are most excellent.

He shows the cause here, or the means, by which he a Jew came to know the
will of God, and to be able to judge of those things, which are most excellent
in Gods sight.

Ver. 19 And art confident that thou thy self art a guide of the blind] i. e.
And boastest that thou art such a guide, as that thou can lead those that are
blind, and bring them into the right way.

And art confident] i. e. And boastest.

Note, that Confidence is put sometimes for Boasting, by a Metonymie; because
boasting proceeds of confidence: so 2 Cor. 10 7. If any one trust to himself,
or, is confident of himself, that he is Christ's, is put for, If any one
boasts that he is Christ's; and trust or confidence is put for glorying, 2
Cor. 3.4.

A Guide] That is a Teacher: A Metaphor, from a Guide in the way.

Of the Blind] i. e. Of the ignorant.

By the Blind are here meant literally, such as want their bodily sight, but by
a metaphor the Ignorant.

And the ignorance of God, and of his Will, is every where in Scripture, called
blindness, by a metaphor: as John 9. ver. 39, 40, 41. Matthew. 15.14. and 23.
ver. 16, 17, 19, 24, 26. where our Savior reproves the blindness, that is,
the ignorance of the Pharisees.

By the blind or ignorant he means the Gentiles particularly; yet he may mean
also some of the more ignorant parts of the common people of the Jews, for the
Apostle seems to speak here chiefly of the Scribes and Pharisees, who were
puffed up with a great opinion of their own wisdom, and knowledge in the Law:
Though the meanest of the Jews also, thought himself able enough to teach a
Gentile.

A light of them, which are in darkness] This is a Repetition of what he said
before.

Light is taken here for one that gives light, by a metonymy, to wit, the
light of Knowledge.

Ver. 20. An instructor of the foolish] By the Foolish, he means those that
are altogether without true Wisdom and Knowledge.

A teacher of Babes] i. e. A Teacher of those which have no knowledge, for of
such is the name of Babes used (by a metaphor) 1 Cor. 14.20 Heb. 5.13

This is also a Repetition of what he said before: where note, that the Apostle
does repeat the same things, and use an heap of the like expressions here, the
more to set out the boasting of these men, whereby they boasted of their
knowledge.

Which have the form of knowledge, and of the truth in the Law] i. e. Because
thou art such a one, as have the form of Knowledge, etc.

He sets down the cause here of their aforesaid confidence and boasting; they
were therefore confident, and did therefore boast as they did, because they had
the form of Knowledge and of the Truth in the Law.

What we know, we know by the Species, or Images of the things known, which are
printed in our minds: These Images, or Species, or the congeries thereof,
orderly placed or marshalled, are called here the form of Knowledge and of the
Truth. By which he signifies, that whatsoever is written in the Law, the Jew
said that he had the Image of it exactly and orderly imprinted in his mind, by
which he presently knew the things themselves.

Or by the form of Knowledge, he may mean, the true Method of teaching
knowledge, where by every particular, which is to be known, is put in due
form, place, and order, which helps the memory both of the Master, and of the
Scholar.

Of knowledge, and of the truth in the Law] Knowledge, and Truth here signify
one, and the same thing, to wit, the Knowledge and Doctrine of those things,
which appertain to Religion and Godliness; which things are contained in the
Law, and which God would have us know.

Some think, that there is an (...), a figure so called, in these words Of
knowledge and of the Truth. And that of Knowledge and of the Truth, are put
for, Knowledge of the Truth, or of the true Knowledge.

In the Law] i. e. Of the Law, for In, may be a note of the Object here, or
matter of Knowledge. Or In, may be taken here for By, and so In the Law, may be
interpreted by the Law, that is, by the benefit of the Law. It may also be
taken, as it is usually taken, and the Truth may be taken for the truth of
things contained in the Law.

Note, that these Prerogatives and gifts, or endowments which the Apostle has
from ver. 17. hitherto ascribed to the Jews, may be ascribed unto them, out of
the opinion, which they had of themselves, not that they were so, as he
describes them to be, indeed, for see what our Savior says of such men,
Matthew 23.16.

Ver. 21. Thou therefore, which teach another, teach thou not thy self]
The Apostle does here show, that the Knowledge, which the Jew boasted of, was
so far from excusing him from sin, and exempting him from judgment, as that it
made his sin the greater, and so his judgment the more grievous.

These men taught others in that they gave them Orall Precepts, what they
should do: but they taught not themselves, because they did not practice
themselves, what they gave in praecept to others.

Note, that the Apostle uses Interrogatoies here, the more to show the
indignity of these men's doings.

Thou that preachest, a man should not steal do thou steal?] The Apostle
does not bring proofs, of these particulars of which he here accuses the Jews:
Neither need he, so well known at that time, were these things, which he
accuses them of.

Ver. 22. Thou that abhorr^st Idols do thou commit sacrilege?] St. Hierom
observes, That the Jews after the Babylonish Captivity, never worshipped
Idols, at least publicly, as they did before that time: and so does the
Targum Hierosolomytanum report of those Jews, which returned out of the
Captivity to their own Land and lived there. But as for those which were
dispersed among the Gentiles, they were not free from Idolatry, as appears 1
Peter 4.3.

Do thou commit sacrilege?] Sacrilege is a sin by which an holy thing is
violated. And it is committed, when that which is holy is stolen, or unlawfully
taken out of an holy Place, or, when that which is not holy is stolen, or
unlawfully taken out of a Place that is holy, or, when that which is holy is
stolen, or unlawfully taken out of a Place which is not holy.

The Sacrilege here imputed to the Jews, is likely to have consisted in that,
That some did defraud the Priests and Levites of their Tithes, and such things
as were due unto them by the Law: and others did take those things, which were
Dedicated to the use of the Temple, and convert them to their own private use.

It may be asked here, why Saint Paul said, Thou that abhorrest Idols, do
thou commit Sacrilege? whereas he said before, thou that preachest a man
should not steal, do thou steal? thou that say a man should not commit
adultery, do thou commit adultery? For are Idolatry and Sacrilege the same
things?

Answ. Idolatry is a spiritual kind of Sacrilege, for it takes away from God
the honor which is holy to him. Therefore might the Apostle say, Thou that
abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege? As if he should say, Thou that
abhorrest Sacrilege in one kind, do thou commit it in another.

Again, the reason, why the Jews abhorred Idols, was, because Idols were
injurious to the Glory and Majesty of God: and as Idolatry is injurious to Gods
Glory and Majesty; so is Sacrilege too; (Read Malach. 1.) When therefore the
Apostle says: Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege? It is
as if he should say; Thou that abhorrest Idols because they are injurious to
the Glory and Majesty of God, do thou commit Sacrilege, which is injurious
to the same Glory and Majesty?

Ver. 23. Thou that make thy boast of the Law] i. e. Thou that make thy
boast, that God has given thee his Law, and so honored thee above the
Gentiles, Psalm 147.19. Or, thou that make thy boast of the knowledge, which
thou have in the Law, etc.

It was no contemptible Privilege, which God gave to the Jew above the
Gentile, in giving him the Law, (Read Deuteronomy. 4. v. 6, 8. and Psalm 147. v. 19,
20) Therefore no wonder, that the Jew boasts of it, and of his knowledge
therein.

By breaking the Law dishonourest thou God?] i. e. Do thou break the Law,
which thou boastest of, and so dishonourest God the giver of it? q. d. Do
thou turn that, in which thou gloriest, to the dishonor of him, which is the
Author thereof, and should receive Glory thereby?

As God is honored by our obedience to his Law: So is he dishonored by the
disobedience which is thereto offered: For the breach of a Law, turns to the
contumely and reproach of the Lawmakers: And it makes unbelievers to speak ill
of him, who gives the Law, when they to whom he gave it thus break it; For
they think, that either he did delight in, or connive at wickedness, and forbid
it only in a kind of formality, or that he did not see it, or that he was not
able to punish it, if he saw it, and the like.

The Apostle after that he has instanced in some particular sins of the Jews,
contrary to their Doctrine and Profession (whereby they were made more liable
to judgment, than otherwise they would be) wraps up the rest in this General,
Thou that make thy boast of the Law, by breaking of the Law dishonourest thou
God?

Ver. 24. For the name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you] i.
e. For God is evil spoken of among the Gentiles, and ye are the cause that he
is evil spoken of.

Blasphemy is commonly taken in the Scripture, and in Ecclesiastical writers,
for evil speaking of, or against God. And they which profess God to be their
God, do make the Heathen, which know not God, to speak evil of God, or against
God, when they sin, contrary to the commandment of God. For the Heathen, when
they see them sin, and commit those things which are evil, they say, that that
God whom they worship does either delight in evil, or, sees not, nor can see
their evil deeds, or, if he does see them, and take notice of them, yet he is
not able to punish them, or is willing to connive at them; all which are evil
speakings of God.

As it i^ writtten] To wit, Isaiah 52.5. My Name continually every day is
blasphemed, (and according to the reading of the Septuagint, there is added)
amongst the Gentil^s.

How these words are applied by the Apostle to his present purpose, may be
asked.

Most Interpreters think, that they are applied only by Accommodation, which
is, when words are only used for the present purpose, without any relation to
the matter which is handled in that place, from whence the words are taken: As
if the Apostle should say, Through breaking the Law dishono^rest thou God? For
what is written by the Prophet Isaiah, (Chap 52.5.) may be said of you, viz.
The Name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you.

But yet the Apostle may allege that place of Isaiah as a real proof, to
prove that the Name of God was blasphemed, that is, dishonored and evil spoken
of among the Gentiles by reason of the sins of the Jews.

The blasphemy which the Prophet Isaiah speaks of, was that, by which the
Babylonians and other Gentiles, bordering upon them, or living among them, did
blaspheme the true God. But this blasphemy was occasioned, partly by the fault
of the Jews, which were then in Captivity to the Babylonians; for many of the
Jews, which were in Babylon, lived not so strictly as their Religion required;
and when God sent his Prophets to tell them in his Name, that he would deliver
them out of the hands of the Babylonians, they considering the great Power of
the Babylonians, (who lay heavy upon them) more than they did the Omnipotency
of God, would not believe the word of the Lord; which made the Babylonians to
think and say, that the God of Israel was a wicked God, because his Servants
were wicked. And that he was a poor weak God in respect of them, because he was
not able to deliver his Servants out of their hands, neither did his Servants
think him able to do it.

This then was spoken by the Prophet of the Babylonians, and other Gentiles,
who were moved to blaspheme God, by the evil carriage of the Jews, which lived
in the time of the Babylonish Captivity.

But those Jews which lived in the time of the Babylonish Captivity, might be
in respect of their evil carriage, a Type of those Jews, which lived in the
time of the Gospel; and so what is literally or historically spoken by the
Prophet Isaiah touching them of that time, might be Prophetically spoken by him
of those which lived in the time of the Gospel: And so our Apostle may take it.

For proof of this, that the Jews of one time, may be Types of the Jews of
another time, observe, that the Prophet Isaiah, speaking of the Jews of his
time wherein he lived, says in the Person of God, This people draws near me
with their mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but have removed their heart
far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the Precepts of men, Isa.
29.13. Now what the Prophet says there, is plain that he says literally or
historically of the Jews of the time in which he lived. Yet because (as it
seems) these Jews were a Type of those Jews which lived in our Saviors time,
these words of Isaiah are taken not only as an Historical narration, of those
Jews which lived in Isaiah's days, but also as a Prophecy concerning those
Jews which lived in the days of our Savior, for thus says our Savior to
them, Mat. 15.7. Well did Isaiah prophecy of you, saying; This People draws
nigh unto me with their mouth, and honors me with their lips, but their
heart is far from me. But in vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines
the Commandments of men.

Ver. 25 For Circumcision verily profits, if thou keep the Law] Between this
and the foregoing verse, we must understand these, or the like words, Neither
boast thou ^f this, that thou art Circumcised, q. d. Neither boast thou of
this, that thou art Circumcised; for Circumcision verily profi^eth thee, if
thou keep the Law, but if thou be a breaker of the Law, thy Circumcision is
ma^e as uncircumcision, and so cannot profit thee at all, etc.

Note, that the Jews thought highly of themselves because of their
Circumcision, insomuch that they deemed that they were beloved of God (how
wicked soever their lives were) for this very reason, because they were
Circumcised, and that God would not pour down his wrath upon them; though he
would revenge himself upon the uncircumcised Gentiles. And upon this high
conceit of themselves, by reason of their Circumcision, is the tacit Objection
built, which the Apostle here answers.

Ci^cumcision profits if thou keep the Law] A Question may here be asked,
viz. How does Circumcision profit the Jew for avoiding of Gods Judgments, if
he keep the Law?

I answer, the keeping of the Law is profitable to Justification, for the doers
of the Law shall be justified, v. 13. And if for Justification, then for
avoiding the Judgments of God: Now, for keeping of the Law, it is profitable to
have the Law plainly written, and explained, and to have it backed with
promises, and rewards to them which keep it: and this they have which are
Circumcised, by virtue of the^r Circumcision, for unto them which were
Circumcised were committed the Oracles of God, Chap. 3.2. and 9 4. and Psalm
147.10. But if a man keep not the Law, it will be no profit to him to know the
Law, and so no profit to be Circumcised, yea, It is better for a man not to
have known the way of Righteousness, than after he has known it, to turn from
the holy Commandment delivered to him, 2 Pet. 2.21. This answer is countenanced
by what our Apostle says, verse 27. Shall not uncircumcision, which is by
nature, if it fulfill the Law Judge thee, who by the Letter and Circumcision
do transgress the Law?

Ad to this, That if upon a supposition, He that is Circumcised should keep the
Law, and he that is uncircumcised should also keep the Law, yet the
Circumcised, shall at least in order, be preferred before the uncircumcised, by
reason of his Circumcision, which is some profit.

Another Question may here be asked, and it is this; Being that the Ceremonial
Law was abrogated, when the Apostle wrote this, and Circumcision was a
Ceremony, how can Saint Paul say to the Jew as he does here, Circumcision
verily profits, if thou keep the Law?

Answ. We may say that what Saint Paul speaks here, he speaks by a (...) or
Concession only, granting to the Jew for Argument sake, that as true, which was
not true, viz. That Circumcision was in force; that he might convince the Jew
of that which he most boasted of, and wring that Weapon out of his hand, in
which he most trusted, with the more vigor or greater might.

Or, Secondly, we may say, That Saint Paul in this his discourse against the
Jews in this Chapter, though he may seem to tax, only the Jews of his own time,
yet he taxes all those Jews also, which lived under the Law, which thought
they should be saved through Circumcision, and when he speaks to the Jew, he
speaks by a Prosopopoeia or Syllepsis to them all, both dead and living,
collective: The far greatest part thereof, being that they lived when the Law
and Circumcision was in force, he may say to them in general, Circumcision
verily profits, if thou keep the Law.

If thou be a breaker of the Law] i. e. If thou keep not the Law in every
point.

Thy Circumcision is made uncircumcision] i. e. Thy Circumcision is become as
uncircumcision, and thou shall get no more benefit thereby, than if thou had
never been circumcised.

Ver. 26 Therefore if the uncircumcision keep the righteousness of the Law,
shall not his uncircumcision be counted for circumcision] q. d. Being therefore
it is so, that if thou, who art a Circumcised Jew, breakest the Law, thy
Circumcision is become as uncircumcision, shall it not be so, that, if an
uncircumcised Gentile keep the Law, his uncircumcision shall become as
Circumcision. That is, If it be so that thou notwithstanding thy Circumcision
shall perish if thou breakest the Law, shall it not be so, that a Gentile,
shall be justified, if he keep the Law, notwithstanding his uncircumcision.

The Apostle that he might pull down the pride of the Jew, by which he always
exalted himself against the Gentile, and that he might equal the Gentile with
the Jew, (over whom he boasted) in the reward due to Righteousness, whom he
ranked before with the Jew, in the punishment due to unrighteousness, he draws
this conclusion of which he speaks here, out of that which he said, v. 25.

Note, that Saint Paul does not affirm here, that any uncircumcised person did
ever keep the righteousness of the Law, so as the Law requires, but he only
shows, that if there were any such, how God would deal with him.

If the uncircumcision] i. e. If an uncircumcised person.

He puts here uncircumcision, for him that is uncircumcised, the Abstract for
the Concrete, Per Metonymiam Adjuncti.

Keep the righteousness of the Law] i. e. Keep the righteous Precepts and
Commandments of the Law, as the Law requires

Shall not his uncircumcision be counted for circumcision?] i. e. Shall not he
be accepted before God, and justified in his sight (though he be uncircumcised)
as well as if he were circumcised?

Ver. 27. And shall not uncircumcision, which is by nature] i. e. And shall not
he, which is uncircumcised by Nature, that is, by his Stock, or by his Kin or
Ancestry.

He puts uncircumcision, for him, which is uncircumcised, as he did in the
beginning of the 26 verse, and he opposes him, that is uncircumcised by
Nature, to a Jew (which is circumcised) by nature as the Apostle calls him,
Galat. 2.15.

If he fulfill the Law] i. e. If he does all things at all times, as exactly as
the Law requires.

Judge thee] i. e. Condemn thee, O thou Jew.

But how shall the uncircumcised person, if he fulfill the Law judge the Jew,
that transgresses the Law? Answ. He shall do it, not by judging him, as a
Judge; but by accusing him, as an Accuser, of his transgression: for an Accuser
is said to condemn a man, when he does so convince him in his arraignment, and
bring such evidence against him: as that he is condemned through his
accusation, and evidence. And he shall accuse him and condemn him, not by
words, but by his example, because he kept the Law, being uncircumcised,
whereas the Jew, which was circumcised, and had the Law, written before his
eyes, transgressed the Law: And in this sense it is said that the Men of
Nineveh and the Queen of Sheba should rise up in judgment against those Jews,
which our Savior there reprehends, and condemn them, Mat. 12.41.

Or, the uncircumcised, if he fulfill the Law may be said to judge the Jew,
which breaks the Law, because he shall move God to condemn him, for he shall
give just occasion to God, the judge of all, to condemn him, being that he kept
the Law, though he had it not written, but the Jew, though he had it written,
broke it.

Who by the Letter and circumcision] i. e. Who having received, that is, who
though thou have received both the written Law and circumcision.

Note, that By, is taken here for With, (...) for (...), as chap 4.11 So that
this is as if he should say, Who with the Letter and circumcision, that is, Who
having the Letter and circumcision, or who though thou have both the Letter,
and circumcision, etc.

By the Letter is meant the Law written in Letters.

Ver. 28. For he is not a Jew, which is one outwardly, etc.] The Apostle
prevents an Objection here. For whereas he showed from ver. 17. to ver. 24 That
a Jew, which had the knowledge of the Law, being that he sinned; his sin was
greater than his, who was not a Jew, and had not the knowledge of the Law. And
whereas he told the Jew ver. 25. That if he kept not the Law, but was a breaker
of the Law, his circumcision (which he so much trusted in) was made
uncircumcision. And again, ver. 26, 27. That the uncircumcised Gentile, if he
keep the Righteousness of the Law, his uncircumcision should be counted for
circumcision; yea, He should judge the Jew, who having both circumcision and
the Law did transgress the Law. A Jew might object saying, But how can this be
Paul, that the case of a Jew, can be so bad as thou make it, though he does
sin? Or how can it be that his circumcision, should become uncircumcision, if
he keep not the Law? And how should the uncircumcision of the Gentiles, if they
keep the Righteousness of the Law, be counted for circumcision? And how should
an uncircumcised Gentile, which fulfilleth the Law, judge a Jew, which has the
Law and circumcision, if he transgresses the Law? For know not thou, that a
Jew is in high respect and favor with God, as being a Child of Abraham the
friend of God? and that circumcision is highly respected and favored of God,
as being given to Abraham, as a sign of his favor, and a Seal of the covenant,
which he made with him and with his seed, whose seed the Jews are?

This objection, I say, the Apostle prevents, by granting that which a carnal
Jew might object concerning a Jew; and concerning circumcision, but
distinguishing between a Jew, and a Jew, and between circumcision, and
circumcision, q. d. For though I grant you, that a Jew is in high favor with
God, and that circumcision is highly respected of him; yet, He is not a Jew,
which is one outwardly, neither is that circumcision, which is outward in the
flesh, but he is a Jew, which is one inwardly, and circumcision is that of the
Heart, etc.

For he is not a Jew, which is one outwardly] q. d. For though a Jew be highly
favored of God, and circumcision be highly respected by him, yet he which is a
Jew outwardly only, Supple, he is not the Jew, which God so highly favors.
Ellipsis.

The Jew did therefore think himself highly favored by God, and so free from
judgment, because he was of the Seed of Abraham, (for every Jew is a Son of
Abraham according to the flesh) but see what was said ver. 17. concerning the
Jew.)

He is said to be a Jew outwardly, who is a Son of Abraham only, according to
the flesh, and appears to be so by his Genealogy, and by enjoying the outward
Privileges of such as were children of Abraham carnally.

Neither is that circumcision, which is outward in the Flesh] i, e. Neither is
that circumcision, which is outward, to wit, in the Flesh, Supple, that
circumcision, which God so highly respects. Ellipsis.

Ver. 29. But he is a Jew, which is one inwardly] q. d. But he is the Jew,
which God so highly favors, and which shall escape the wrath, and judgment of
God, which is a Jew inwardly.

By a Jew (as I intimated) is understood a Child of Abraham, and he is a Child
of Abraham inwardly, who is like unto Abraham in the inward gifts and graces of
the Soul, as in Faith and the like: For they which are of faith, the same are
the Children of Abraham, Galat. 3.7. And if ye were Abraham's children, ye
would do the works of Abraham, says our Savior, John 8.39. And they which are
so the Children of Abraham, or, thus Jews, they shall find respect and favor
with God, and shall escape the wrath and judgment of God: For they have peace
with God, and rejoice in the hope of his Glory, Romans chap. 5. ver. 1, 2.

And circumcision is that of the Heart] i. e And the circumcision, which
finds respect and favor with God (and so profits to escaping the wrath and
judgment of God) is that circumcision, which is of the heart, Ellipsis.

That of the heart] i. e. That whereby the Heart is circumcised from sins and
dead works, as from unbelief and the like, and that only, etc.

The circumcision of the heart, is that whereby infidelity, and all superfluity
of naughtiness is, as it were cut off, from the heart, and cast away: And this
was signified, as a duty to be done, by the outward circumcision of the
foreskin of the yard or flesh, See Deuteronomy. 10. ver. 16. and Acts 7. ver. 51.

In the Spirit not in the Letter] That is, that which is delivered, and
commended in the Gospel, not that which is commanded, and expressed in the Law:
Thus Some-Where note, that the Spirit, is taken sometimes for the Gospel and
the Letter for the Law, as 2 Cor. 3.6.

But others had rather take the Spirit here, for that principal part of man, to
wit, the Soul, which is a Spirit, and the Letter, for that part of the Body in
which circumcision was to be made by the Praescript of the Letter. that is, by
the Praescript of the Law, (by a Metonymie) which Prescript appointed the
Praeputium, or foreskin to be circumcised, Genesis 17.11. Levit. 12.3. So that the
sense of this place is this, q. d. Which circumcision is in the Soul, not in
the Body, or any part thereof.

Whose praise is not of Men but of God] i. e. Which Circumcision is
prais-worthy, yet God only can give it its due praise, and not Man.

God only can give this Circumcision its due praise, because being it is in the
Heart or Soul, God only can see whether it be true or no; for he only is the
searcher of the Reins and Heart, Revel. 2.23. Heb. 4.13. And therefore he can
only see whether it be worthy of praise or not.

By what the Apostle speaks here in these two last verses, he would draw off
the Jew from those vain conceits which he had, to embrace the faith, and
therein to show himself a true Jew, that is, a true Son of Abraham indeed; and
a man circumcised with that Circumcision, which God respects indeed.

CHAP. III.
1. WHat advantage then has the Jew? or what profit is there of circumcision?

1. But now Paul (may the Jew say) if he is not the Jew, which is the favorite
of God, and which he will free from the wrath to come, which is a Jew
outwardly; and if that be not the circumcision, which will free a Jew from
damnation, which is outward in the flesh, what advantage, or privilege has
the Jew, which is a Jew outwardly, above the Gentile? Or what profit is there
of the circumcision of the flesh, more than if a man were never circumcised?

2. Much every way: chiefly, because that unto them were committed the Oracles
of God.

2. To this I answer, that even such a Jew has very much advantage, and a very
great privilege above the Gentile: and that there is very much profit of such
a circumcision; but chiefly, because the Oracles of God, that is, the word of
God, comprehended in the Books of the Old Testament, and all the gracious
promises therein contained, were committed to such Jews, so circumcised. And
committed to them, not as many things are committed to the hands of Trustees,
which have no benefit, but only trust or trouble thereby, but committed to them
as their own treasure, and so, as that they may have the full and entire
benefit thereof.

3. For what if some did not believe? shall their unbelief make the faith of
God without effect?

3. But me thinks I hear a Novice Christian rise up against this, and say, yea
but now God will not perform the promises contained in the Oracles of God, that
is, in the word of God, which is comprehended in the Books of the Old
Testament, to those Jews, which are Jews outwardly, and those which are
circumcised with the outward circumcision; because they have not believed those
promises; which unbelief of theirs appears plainly by this, that they have
rejected the Messiah Christ Jesus, who was the substance of all the promises,
and will not believe in him. But to meet with this Novice Christian, let me
say, that he is deceived, in saying, that God will not perform the promises
aforesaid, to those Jews which are Jews outwardly, and which are circumcised
with the outward circumcision; for what if some of the Jews did not believe
those promises, shall their unbelief make the fidelity and truth of God void,
and without effect, and make him not so good as his word?

4. God forbid: yea, let God be true, but every man a liar, as it is written,
That thou might be justified in thy sayings, and might overcome when thou
art judged.

4 God forbid; yea, rather let God manifestly appear by this their unbelief to
be true in his promises, and not a breaker of his word; but let every man that
says, that God is not true in his promises, and as good as his word, appear by
this, to be a liar, that according to that which is written, Psalm 51.4. God
may be declared and pronounced to be just in his sayings, and might overcome
when he is Judged, and Sentence is to pass upon him, whether he be true in his
words, and faithful in his promises, or not.

5. But if our unrighteousness commend the righteousness of God, what shall we
say? Is God unrighteous who takes vengeance? (I speak as a man)

5. But now because I said, let every man be a liar, that God may be justified
in his sayings, and might overcome when he is judged. Many men which hate us
Christians, would argue from thence, that we Christians taught that a man
might, yea, must do evil that good may come thereon, and glory to God. That
therefore you may understand their Argumentation, I will put on the person of
such a man and argue, as one of them, who yet would mimically imitate us, as
though we so argued? I say then in the person of such a man; But if our
unrighteousness thus commend the righteousness of God, and makes that the more
illustrious, (but now what shall I Paul say next, I tremble to speak such
blasphemous words) Is not God unrighteous for taking vengeance upon us, for our
unrighteousness? (Beloved, take notice here that I speak not these words, as I
am what I am, or in the person of a Christian; but I speak them as a man, or in
the person of a man, which is an enemy to Christianity; not as (I said) as I am
that I am, or as I am a Christian; for as I am a Christian, I say to those
words,)

6. God forbid: for then how shall God judge the World?

6. God forbid, God forbid I say, that God should be unrighteous, who takes
vengeance; for then how shall God judge the World, who is the judge thereof?

7. For if the truth of God has more abounded through my lie unto his glory,
why yet am I also judged as a sinner.

7. But I go on in the person of an unchristianly man, mimically imitating a
Christian, as he conceives a Christian (though falsely) to be, and say; Surely
God would be unrighteous, if he takes vengeance in such a case, for if the
truth of God, and his faithfulness appears the more evident, and the more
illustrious, and so brings the more glory to God, through my lie, or the lie
which I tell of him; why am I also, by whom he is thus glorified, judged and
condemned as a sinner, (such a sinner as obscures and oppugnes his glory) as
other sinners are?

8. And not rather, as we be slanderously reported, and as some affirm that we
say, Let us do evil, that good may come? whose damnation is just.

8. And why rather, do I not evil, that good may come thereon: Which (that I
may now lay down the person of an unchristianly man, and speak as a Christian)
some affirm to be our Doctrine, and that we Christians teach and practice it.
But they shall be damned one day, which father such an abominable Doctrine upon
us, and so shall they which practice it, and there damnation is just: And thus,
having showed my just detestation to this Doctrine, which is fathered upon us,
and the doom, which shall fall upon them that father it upon us, and practice
it, I think their argument worth no better answer, and therefore I say no more
to it, but proceed.

9. What then? are we better than they? No, in no wise: for we have before
proved both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under sin.

9. I said verse 2. That this was the advantage, or privilege of a Jew, which
is one outwardly, above a Gentile; and this was the benefit of circumcision in
the flesh, that to such Jews, so circumcised, were committed the Oracles of
God. But what then? Are we Jews, in our inward estate, and in respect of
justification before God, better than the Gentiles because of this? No in no
wise: for we have before accused and charged (and that justly too) both Jews
and Gentiles, (I speak of such as are out of Christ) that they are all under
the guilt of sin, and so subject to damnation.

10. As it is written, There is none righteous, no not one.

10. For that all are under the guilt of sin, and so subject to damnation, Jews
as well as Gentiles; I shall (besides what I have already said to this) prove
even out of the Scriptures of the Old Testament: For it is written, Psalm 14.
verse. 1, 2, 3. There is none righteous, no not one.

11. There is none that understands, there is none that seeks after God.

11 There is none that understands what the will of the Lord is, that he may
yield obedience thereunto: There is none that seeks after God, that he might
be instructed by him, and do as he would have him.

12. They are all gone out of the way, they are together become unprofitable,
there is none that does good, no, not one.

12. They are all gone out of the way of Gods commandments, which they should
walk in; they are altogether become unprofitable, and not fit for any holy
service: There is none that does good, no, not one.

13. Their throat is an open sepulcher, with their tongues, they have used
deceit, the poison of Asps is under their lips.

13. And Psalm. 5.9. Their throat is as an open sepulcher, out of which not
only soul and filthy words do proceed, as filthy and noisome smells proceed out
of an open sepulcher, wherein dead carcasses have been buried: But also as an
open Sepulcher is laid open to receive a dead body, that it may consume it, and
bring it to dust? So are their throats opened to utter words, whereby they may
destroy them, whom they speak against. With their tongues they have used
deceit, while they speak fair, but think foul, and would entrap men, and bring
them into danger, and ruin, by their flattering speeches. Their words are as
hurtful, as is the poison of an Aspe to the body that is tainted therewith. So
that there is (as it were) the poison of Asps under their lips, poisoning and
invenoming their words, that they may even kill them of whom, or to whom they
speak.

14. Whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness:

14. And Psalm. 10.7. Their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness.

15. Their feet are swift to shed blood.

15. And Isa. 59.7, 8. They are ready to run upon all occasions to shed
innocent blood.

16. Destruction and misery are in their ways:

16. Which way soever they go, they destroy and work misery, as a destroying
plague.

17. And the way of peace have they not known.

17. They are Strangers to the way of peace, neither can they live peaceably
with other men.

18. There is no fear of God before their eyes.

18. And Psalm. 36.1. (though the fear of God be the only curb to keep in and
refrain us from evil, yet) there is no fear of God before their eyes.

19. Now we know, that what things soever the law says, it says, to them who
are under the law: that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may
become guilty before God.

19. But thou will object, O thou Jew, against these testimonies of Scripture,
and say, that these testimonies appertain not unto thee, they concern only the
wicked Gentiles. But thou art under the Law, O thou Jew, in that thou art a
disciple of whatsoever is delivered in the Old Testament (for by the Law here,
I mean whatsoever doctrine or writing is contained in the Old Testament) and we
know, that whatsoever the law says, it says to them, who are under the Law,
and therefore these testimonies concern thee. So that every mouth is stopped.
No man whatsoever can glory in his righteousness before God; yea, which is yet
less, no man can excuse himself from unrighteousness: So that all the men in
the world having (nothing to say for themselves) are become apparently guilty
of condemnation before God, the Judge of all.

20. Therefore by the deeds of the law, there shall no flesh be justified in
his sight: for by the law is the knowledge of sin.

20. Therefore by what I have said from the beginning of this Epistle hitherto,
it appears, that no man is justified in the sight of God, by the deeds, which
he has done of the law; and yet let no man say, that the law is needless, for
by the law is the knowledge of sin, and by that we may know, what we should do,
though we do it not.

21. But now the righteousness of God without the law, is manif^sted, being
witnessed by the law, and the prophets.

21. But thou will say, if by the deeds of the law, no flesh, shall be
justified in the sight of God, then is the condition of man most miserable, for
how can any one be saved? Now therefore (to raise all drooping Spirits) the
righteousness or justification of God, that is the righteousness or
justification of which God is the Author, and which will justify them even
before God, which attain to it: a righteousness, or justification attainable
without the works of the Moral law, is manifested by the Gospel? and (to
vindicate it from all novelty, or phansy of man, as the Author of it) it is
witnessed by the Law, and the Prophets.

22. Even the righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all,
and upon all them that believe: for there is no difference:

22. Even the righteousness of God (who is the Author, and Approver thereof)
which righteousness comes by the Faith of Jesus Christ, that is, by the faith
of the Gospel of Jesus Christ unto all, and only to all, them that believe the
Gospel. For in the matter of righteousness or justification, there is no
differenre in the way, or means of attaining to it.

23. For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God.

23. For all have sinned and come short of the praise of, that is, of being
praised of him, for doing their duty, or for keeping the law, and doing the
works thereof, as exactly as the law requires.

24. Being justified freely by his grace, through the Redemption, that is in
Jesus Christ:

24. So that as many, as are justified, are justified freely by his grace and
favor, through that righteousness or justification, that Christ Jesus has
merited for us.

25. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith, in his blood,
to declare his righteousness, for the remission of sins, that are past, through
the forbearance of God.

25. Whom God has given, setforth and proclaimed, by his Ministers to be the
Appeasour of his wrath and displeasure, and to be enjoyed and made ours as
such, by the faith which we repose in his death; and for this end has he given
him, and set him forth, to be the Appeasour of his wrath and displeasure, that
he might declare his righteousness, that is, that he might declare his
fidelity, and his mercy, by the remission of those sins, which were committed
before the Gospel was proclaimed, and which went unpunished at that time: and
went unpunished not for any other reason, than because God would forbear to
punish them.

26. To declare, I say, at this time his righteousness: that he might be just,
and the justifier of him, which helieveth in Jesus.

26. Thus he might declare, I say, at this time (the time of the Gospel) his
righteousness, that is, his faithfulness and his mercy; his faithfulness, that
he may appear to all to be just, and faithful in performing his promise of
remission of sins to the Jews if they do believe: And his mercy, that he may
appear to all, to be the justifier of him, which believes in Jesus, though he
made no such promise to him, as he did to the Jew, that is, that he may appear
to be the justifier of the believing Gentile, who may thank God for this his
mercy.

27. Where is boasting then? It is excluded. By what law, of works? Nay but by
the law of faith.

27. Where is boasting then, (O thou Jew) which so much boastest of thy
justification? It is excluded by what law, or by what doctrine, or lesson, is
it excluded? Is it excluded by that Law, or Doctrine, or Lesson, which teaches
that a man may be, yea is, justified by the works of the law? Nay; for if a man
could be justified by the works of the law, he had whereof to glory even before
God. But it is excluded, by the law, doctrine, or lesson, which teaches, that
a man is justified by faith, for he that is justified by faith has nothing to
boast, or to glory of.

28. Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by faith, without the deeds
of the law.

28. Therefore we conclude out of what we have said from the beginning
hitherto, that a Man is justified by faith and not by the deeds of the law.

29. Is he the God of the Jews only, is he not also of the Gentiles? yes, of
the Gentiles also.

29. Now after this our discourse let me ask thee, (O Jew) which wilt not
suffer the Gentile to have a part with thee in the favor of God: Is God the
God of the Jews only, is he not the God of the Gentiles also? Yes, he is the
God not of the Jews only but of the Gentiles also.

30. Seeing it is one God, which shall justify the circumcision by faith, and
uncircumcision through faith.

30. Seeing that God is one and the same to both, for that he justifies them,
both by one, and the same means, the circumcised Jew by faith, and the
uncircumcised Gentile by faith likewise.

31. Do we then make void the law through faith? God forbid: yea, we establish
the law.

31. Do we now make the law void, and of none effect, by that, which we have
said of Faith? God forbid: yea, we establish the Law and confirm it, in its
right use; for though we deny the law to be the means or cause of our
justification, yet we allow it to be the director of our lives, and manners,
even after our justification, and we teach that by faith we have that strength
to perform, the precepts of the law, which the law it self could not give.

CHAP. III.
Ver. 1. What advantage then has the Jew? or what profit is there of
circumcision] i. e. What privilege then has the Jew by birth above the
Gentile, or what profit has he by being circumcised, in the foreskin of his
flesh?

The Apostle taught in the former Chapter, that a Jew, which was only a Jew
outwardly, could not by being a Jew escape the wrath and judgment of God,
neither had he the imediate benefit of Justification by being outwardly
circumcised: whereupon it might be asked what advantage then has the Jew,
which is a Jew by birth? or what profit is there of outward circumcision? which
question the Apostle here moves, the better to clear what he had said of the
Jew, and of circumcision and that he might make way to some other doctrines
which he would teach.

Ver. 2. Much every way] Note, that these words every way, are so to be taken,
as that they have no other efficacy, than to make a strong asseveration or
affirmation, as if he should say, very much.

Chiefly because unto them were committed the Oracles of God] i. e. Chiefly
because the Oracles of God were committed to them, which were Jews by birth,
and which were circumci^ed.

By the Oracles of God, understand the Word of God, written in the Books of the
Old Testament, but especially the promises (therein contained) of the M^ssias
and of justification, and other benefits, and blessings, which occur by him, in
which the Jews excelled the Gentiles.

Of other Privileges than these, that the Jews had, we read, Romans 9. v. 4, 5.
but this the Apostle makes the chiefest.

These Oracles are said to have been committed to the Jews, not as a pledge, or
thing in trust, to the use and benefit only of others, but as their own proper
goods, and as a Treasure to serve them, and enrich them: So that whatsoever was
therein contained, appertained to the Jews, Promises and all.

Ver. 3. For what if some did not believe, shall their unbelief, etc] Between
this, and the foregoing verse, we must understand an Objection made by a
Gentile, which had newly received the Gospel of Christ, to this effect: q. d.
Yea, but the circumcised Jews have no such Prerogative now: For though God
committed unto them his Oracles, and made the promises, which are therein
contained, of the Messiah, and of the Redemption, which should be by him, to
them, yet now they have deprived themselves of that Prerogative, and they have
deprived themselves of the benefit, which they might have had by those
promises, because they have not believed them: And God because of their
unbelief, has utterly cast off all the Jews.

To this the Apostle here answers, q. d. True it is indeed that some of the
Jews have not believed, but shall their unbelief make the faith of God of none
effect, so that he shall no longer keep the promises, made unto the Fathers,
concerning the Jews, but cast off that whole People?

What if some did not believe?] What if some of the circumcised Jews have not
believed the promises of God made to them, or to their Fathers, concerning the
Messiah, and the Redemption, which should come by him, contained in the
Oracles, that is, in the Word of God, which was committed to them, etc.

The words in the Original are, (...), which I have rendered, But what if some
have not believed.

The Jews were very incredulous and unbelieving at all times, and we find them
often taxed for this sin of unbelief, as Deuteronomy. 1.32. and 9 23. 2 Kings 17.14.
Psalm 78.32 Psalm 106.24. and (which makes in its mystical sense greatly to
this place) Isa. 53.1. And (which is to our purpose) when Christ came into the
world, he was generally rejected of the Jews, John 1.11. which argued that they
believed not the promises of the Messiah, and of the Redemption to come by him:
Hence that of our Savior, John 5.46. Had ye believed Moses, ye would have
believed me, for he wrote of me.

The Jews at this day, though they reject Jesus Christ and all his benefits,
yet they say, that they receive the Oracles of God, and believe the promises
therein, made to their Fathers, concerning the Messiah, for they look for a
Messiah to come, though they reject Jesus Christ, and acknowledge him not to be
the Messiah.

But being that Jesus Christ was the promised Messiah, and the promises made to
their Fathers, were fulfilled in him; though they say, they believe the
promises, they believe them not, but believe only their own phansies. For they
which believe the promises which God made, otherwise than God meant them,
believe not what God promised, but believe only their own conceits.

They which rejected Christ, and so believed not the promises of God, were the
far greater part of the Jews, yet, as though they had been but a very small
part, the Apostle says, What if some have not believed? But note that in this
place this word Some, is not opposed to Many, as usually it is, but to All, and
so to be here taken: And so is it taken, Chap. 11 17. where the Apostle
speaking of the unbelieving Jews, which were the far greatest part of that
Nation, says: If some of the branches be broken off: and Heb. 3.16. we read
that Some when they had heard did provoke: Howbeit not all that came out of
Egypt by Moses: Where you see that Some is opposed not to Many, but to All.
Saint Paul therefore uses a (...) here, that he might bear up the Jew, against
the too much heavy load, which the Novice Gentile-Christian was ready to lay
upon him.

Shall their unbelief make the Faith of God of none effect?] i. e. Shall they
because they do not believe the promises of God, which were contained in the
Oracles committed to them, and so do impiously detract from his truth, make God
not to be so good as his word, or provoke him, not to keep his promises with
the whole people of the Jews?

By the Faith of God is here meant, the Truth and Fidelity of God in keeping
promise, which faith is said to be of none effect, when the thing promised, is
not performed according to the pr^mise made.

Ver. 4. God forbid] These words show a detestation of the very thought of that
which is here spoken of, to wit, that their unbelief should make the faith of
God of none effect, That is, that the unbelief of some of the Jews, should
provoke God to break his promise, which he made to all the rest.

That wherein the unbelief of the Jews was seen, was that, that they believed
not the promises of God made to them, or to their Fathers: And that wherein the
faith of God was seen, is this, that God, notwithstanding their unbelief, was
as good as his word, and performed to them, what he promised, either to them,
or to their Fathers.

What therefore were the promises that God made to the Jews, or to their
Fathers? He promised to their Fathers and so to them, that He would be a God to
them and their Seed after them, Gen 17.7. And in order to this, (among many
other things which he did) He promised them a Redemer (which was the Messiah)
Isa. 59.20. and performed it, Rom 15.8.

He promised that he would take away their sins, Jerem. 31.34 Romans 11.27. But
this was a Conditional promise, and the condition was, If they would believe;
and as many as did believe had their sins forgiven. The unbelief of the
greatest part of the Jews, did not make God to break promise with those which
did believe, but they which believed, though they were but a Remnant, were
saved from their sins, Chap. 11. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. Yea, the unbelieving
Jews, which persisted not in their unbelief, but embraced the faith, were
admitted to Gods favor, and had their sins forgiven them, notwithstanding
their former unbelief: And so shall they which persist in unbelief be admitted
to Gods favor, Romans 11.23. and have their sins forgiven, if they will believe
and repent at the last.

He promised that He would not cast them away, neither would he abhor them to
destroy them utterly, Levit. 26.44. And notwithstanding the unbelief of the
greatest part of the Jews, God will not so wholly cast them off, and so wholly
be angry with them as to shut up the way of Salvation against them all

He promised that there should come out of Sion a Deliverer, which should turn
away ungodliness from Jacob, Isa. 59.20. Rom 11.26. And notwithstanding their
unbelief, God shall make this his promise good; For blindness in part is
happened to Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in: And so all
Israel shall be saved, Romans 11. verse. 25, 26.

The unbelief therefore of some, yea of the greatest part of the Jews, shall
not make God to fail in these his promises toward that people, and so shall
not make his promise without effect.

Yea, let God be true] i. e. Yea rather, let God manifestly appear by this
their unbelief, to be true in his promises, and not a breaker of his word, and
let this use be made of their unbelief.

The words in the Original are (...). Where note, that the Particle (...), yea,
is put for (...), yea rather. And (...), sit, Let God be, is put for Appareat,
Let him appear: For the word (...) does sometimes signify the manifest
appearance, of the thing, which is spoken of, and not merely the existency
thereof, so we read, verse. 26. (...), That is, that he might be just, and the
justifier of him, which believes in Jesus. For, That he might appear or be
known to be just, and the justifier of him, which believes in Jesus.

The greater their demerits and unworthiness is, to whom God performs what he
has promised, and the more they provoke him with their sins, the greater does
the truth of God and his Fidelity appear, in keeping promise, if he keeps his
promise with them.

But every man a liar] i. e. But let every man ( Supple, which shall say, that
God is not true in his promises) appear by this their unbelief, to be a liar.

As God will appear the more manifestly to be true, by the unbelief of the
Jews; if he keeps promise with them notwithstand their unbelief: So will they
which any way accuse him of unfaithfulness in his promises, appear more
manifestly by this, to be liars.

Every man a liar] The words in the Original are, (...). The same words which
the Prophet David has (according to the Septuagint) Psalm 116.11. To which
place the Apostle may seem to allude, and which words he may make use of here
from thence, by an Accommodation, and so apply them to his present purpose,
leaving the generality of the words themselves, to be restrained by the
circumstances of the place, in which he uses them.

As it is written, That thou might be justified in thy sayings, and might
overcome when thou art judged] i. e. q. d. That by their lie, as by an evident
Testimony of Gods truth, God may (according to that which is written of him,
Psalm 51.4.) be justified in his sayings, and overcome when he is judged, and
questioned, as it were, in a Court of Justice, by these liars, concerning the
truth of his promises, and the fidelity of his sayings.

This is the sense of these words, as they are here used, and this is the
connection of them, as will appear by that Objection verse 7. If the truth of
God has more abounded through my lie to his glory, why yet am I also judged as
a sinner? which Objection is raised from these words, which we have in hand.

When a man is accused by liars and especially such, as are found and known
before hand to be liars, in that very thing whereof they accuse him: There is
no doubt, but that he which is accused shall be justified, that is, shall be
acquitted, and shall overcome in judgment; and that his Righteousness shall
appear the more, and be more taken notice of, than if he had never been
questioned, or accused by such men.

It may be Objected here and said, that I have interpreted those words, viz.
[That thou might be justified in thy sayings, and might overcome when
thou art judged] in the Third Person, whereas it is plain, that they are of the
Second Person, and therefore my Interpretation may seem faulty.

To this I answer, that those words, viz. [That thou might be justified in
thy sayings, and might overcome when thou art juged] are of the Second
Person, and directed to God; yet may they be interpreted here in the Third
Person, as spoken not to, but of God: For note, that these words are cited out
of Psalm 51. v. 4. Where they are used in the Second Person, and therefore are
here cited in the Second Person: But though they are here cited in the Second
Person, yet may they be interpreted as if they were spoken in the Third: For
the Apostle, when he brings any testimony out of Scripture he cites it, for the
most part, as it lies in the text from which he brings it, not regarding the
Grammatical Syntax of the place where he uses it; but he leaves that to be
understood of his Reader.

These words, viz. [That thou might be justified in thy sayings, and
might overcome when thou art judged] are the words of the Prophet David
written by him, Ps. 51.2. and they are used here by our Apostle by an
Accommodation, and yet there is more than an Accommodation in them; for though
they do not particularly show in that Psalm, that God may be justified in his
sayings, and overcome when he is judged, and so be glorified by the lie of a
liar, yet they show, that God may be justified in his sayings, and overcome
when he is judged, and so be glorified by the sin of a sinner.

And this will appear by the words as they lie in the Psalm it self, which
words we come now to handle as they lie there.

That thou might be justified in thy sayings, and might overcome when
thou art judged] These words, as I said, are taken out of the 51. Psalm. v. 4
which is a Poenitential Psalm where in David confesses the sin, which he
committed in going into Bathsheba the Wife of Vriah, and slaying Vriah her
husband with the Sword of the Ammonites, and pleads for pardon for this his
sin. And among many other Motives, which there he uses to move God to pardon
him; this is one.

That whereas God had promised him, to wit, David, That he would establish his
seed for ever: And build up his Throne to all Generations, Psalm. 89.4. And
David had now sinned, whereby God might be provoked to cut him and his seed
off, and to cast his Throne down to the ground, yet if God would be pleased to
pardon his sin, and not cut off him and his seed, nor cast his Throne down to
the ground, by reason of that his sin; his sin would the more set out the
veracity, and truth of God in his promises, and from his sin this fruit would
redound to God (who can bring Light out of Darkness) that thereby God would
appear and be pronounced just in his sayings, or promises, and would overcome
whenever any one should accuse him of falsehood in his word: For, if any one
should say unto the Lord; Thou art not just in thy sayings; He may say, look
then upon David, to whom I performed my promises, though he provoked me by his
sins, to cut him and his Posterity off, and to cast his Throne down to the
ground.

For the further understanding of these words, take in the whole fourth verse
of Psalm 51. which runs thus, according to the Septuagint: [Against thee only
have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight, that thou might be justified
in thy sayings, and might overcome when thou art juged; which Paraphrase
thus: Against thee, thee only O Lord, have I sinned and done this evil (in
lying with Bathsheba and killing Vriah the Hittite her Husband) but yet, O
Lord, whereas thou have been pleased to promise, that thou will prosper me, and
establish my seed for ever, and build up my Throne to all Generations; if thou will not be provoked, to repent thee of this thy promise, by this my sin, but
wilt pardon my sin, and go on with thy promise, notwithstanding that I have
thus sinned against the, then will it fall out, that by this my sin, thou will
be clearly pronounced, and acknowledged to be just in thy sayings, and thou will clearly overcome, when any one shall contend with thee, and say, Thou art
not just and true in thy promises; and thus get glory, by this my sin.

That thou might be justified] That is, That thou may be pronounced, or
declared, or acknowledged to be just, and may be acquitted from the
accusation of those, which falsely accuse thee of Infidelity in thy word.

And might overcome] He is said here to overcome, which has the better of
the cause, which is pleaded before a Judge.

When thou art judged] i. e. When thou art sued, as it were, in a Court of
Justice, and accused of a breach of promise before a Judge, and Sentence is to
pass upon thee.

In these words there is an Allusion to what is done in a Court of Justice,
wherein God is (as we call it) a Defendant, sued and accused, as a breaker of
his promise.

Ver. 5. But if our unrighteousness commend the righteousness of God] The
Christians in Saint Paul's time were reported to hold; That they might do any
evil for a good end: as appears v. 8. of this Chapter; which being a most
abominable doctrine, Paul takes an occasion here, to clear Christians from that
so foul an aspersion, and to show, that that is a most damnable assertion: To
say, That a man may do evil, that good may come thereof. And he takes occasion
to do this, by raising an object^on in the Person of one, which was an Enemy to
Christianity.

If our unrighteousness commend the righteousness of God: -- Is not God
unrighteous, who takes vengeance?] This argumentation is occasioned by those
words [Yea, let God be true, and every man a liar, That thou might be
justified in thy sayings; and might overcome, when thou art judged] which
words signify, that the sins of men do illustrate, and set out the truth and
veracity of God.

From which and other the like kind of sayings, wicked men thought, that
Christians did gather, That a man might lawfully do any thing, which does make
Gods glory to appear the brighter; and did argue thus by a (...), in the person
of Christians: If our unrighteousness commend the righteousness of God, then is
God unrighteous, because he takes vengeance of us, for our unrighteousness. As
though Christians held such wicked Principles, from which such wicked
conclusions might be drawn, and did draw such conclusions; as these are,
accordingly.

Commend the righteousness of God] i. e Makes the Righteousness of God, to be
seen, and known, and to be more Illustrious.

That which does any way set out the goodness and virtue of a thing, does
commend it.

What shall we say] These words show, that Paul was loath to speak the words,
which follow, and to defile his mouth, or his pen with them, because of their
blasphemy, and that he did, as it were stick at them. But the necessity of the
matter in hand, forced him to bring them out.

These words may be read as with a Parenthesis.

Is God unrighteous who takes vengeance] The words in the original are these
(...), the which we may render thus; Is not God unrighteous, which takes
vengeance?

And this Rendition I prefer before the other, for so Saint Paul has more
reason to say, as he does; what shall we say? And again, I speak as a man: And
to excuse himself for speaking thus blasphemously of God; For there is
blasphemy in these words; Is not God unrighteous, who takes vengeance? But
there is none in these, Is God unrighteous, who takes vengeance? Again in the
seventh verse, he gives a reason, why he says here (...), etc. And the reason
there shows, that he said, That God was unjust here.

It is true, that that Greek particle (...) does in Interrogatories and
Questions signify, for the most part no otherwise than the Latin particle
Number: But yet it sometimes signifies as much, as Nonne too, as John 4.29. (...),
which our Interpreters render Is not this the Christ?

Who takes vengeance.] i. e. Because he takes vengeance of me for my sins.

Note, that that Particle (...), or, who, intimates, or is a sign here of the
cause.

I speak as a man] i. e. I speak this not as from my self, but I speak it in
the Person of a wicked heathen man, who understands not the things of God, who
yet personates a Christian (...), as though Christians drew such wicked
Consequences and Conclusions, from such principles as these are.

This Saint Paul interposeth by a Parenthesis, to show, how far he was of
himself from entertaining any such thought of God as this was, and from drawing
any such deduction, from such principles as this is.

Ver. 6. God forbid] Supple, That God should be unrighteous or unjust. Or, God
forbid, Supple, That it should follow, that God were unrighteous, for taking
vengeance, from that. That our unrighteousness commends the Righteousness of
God.

This the Apostle speaks in his own person.

The Argument comprehended in the former verse, being drawn forth, runs thus.

If our unrighteousness commends the Righteousness of God, then is God
unrighteous, for taking vengeance of our sins.

But our unrighteousness commends the righteousness of God.

Therefore is God unrighteous, for taking vengeance of us for our sins.

Now therefore when the Apostle says God fo^bid, he may be so understood,
either as i^ he did deny the conclusion of this argument: Or so, as if he did
deny the Consequence thereof.

For then how shall God judge the world?] q. d. For if this Conclusion be good,
viz God is unrighteous, who takes vengeance: Or if this Consequence be good;
If our unrighteousness commend the righteousness of God, then God would be
unjust, who takes vengeance: how shall God (who shall most certainly be Judge
of all) judge the world? For he, that is the Judge of the world, must be just
and righteous.

The Apostle speaks here, as immediately before in his own person, and
alludeth to those words of Abraham, Genesis 18.25. Shall not the judge of all the
World do right? And he takes it for granted here, that God shall judge the
World: For he showed it, Chap 2. ver 6, 16. And these very words of the
Objection: If our unrighteousn^ss commend the righteousness of God, is not God
unrighteous, who takes vengeance, do purporte as much.

Note that these words [God forbid, for then how shall God judge the world?] do
interrupt the Argument which was begun, ver. 5. which we must conceive to
proceed from Saint Paul's indignation to hear, that God should be said to be
unrighteous, who takes vengeance. In which indignation it is no wonder to
hear, that he should deny the conclusion of an Argument, which the Schools
account an absurd thing.

Ver. 7. For if the truth of God has more abounded through my lie unto his
Glory] These words have their immediate c^nnexion with those of the fifth verse
[If our unrighteousn^ss commend the righteousness of God, is not God
unrighteous, who tak^th vengeance?] And are brought to prove the consequence
thereof; The intervening words being spoken by St Paul in his own person, out
of Indignation (as I said) to hear, that God should be said to be unrighteous,
who takes vengeance of wicked men.

For if the truth of God has more abounded through my lie unto his Glory] q.
d. For (to instance in the particular mentioned ver 4.) If the truth of God
appears more plain, and more illustrious, and so brings, more Glory to God
through my Lie, etc.

He seems to put a Praeterfect tense here, for a Present, as Psalm. 1.1.

To abound to the glory of God, signifies, to make Gods Glory appear the
greater. So to abound to the riches of their Liberality signifies to make
their liberality appear the more rich or abundant, that is, the greater, 2
Cor. 8.2.

Where he says, If the truth of God has more abounded through my Lie: He
alludes, to what he said ver 4. from whence this Objection sprung, as we there
noted.

Why yet am I also judged as a Sinner] i. e. With what right, or with what
justice, can I be punished as a sinner, Supple, whereas I advance, the Glory of
God by my Lie, or by my Sin?

Why yet am I also] Note, that this word Also, is either redundant or else so
to be understood, as if he should say; Why yet are not only others; whose sins
dishonor God, but I also, who bring Glory to God by my Lie, judged as a
Sinner, and still ly under judgment.

Ver. 8. And not rather (as we be slanderously reported, and as some affirm,
that we say) let us do evil that good may come] Here are these or the like
words left to be understood, viz. Encouraged by God to say, q d. And why am not
I (and such as I am) rather encouraged to say (as we Christians be slanderously
reported, and as some affirm that we say) Let us do evil that good may come
thereof. Or else (leaving out those words a while, which are here brought in by
a Parenthesis, to wit, As we be slanderously reported, and as some affirm that
we say,) we may thus expound the other words, q. d. And not rather do evil
that good may come, that is, And why rather do I not evil, (with the praise
and approbation of God) that good may come thereof.

Where note, that these words, let us do evil that good may come, being that
they were the words which others had, or were said to have often in their
mouths, may be cited by Saint Paul, as they spoke them, or were said to speak
them, and they may be used by him without consideration of the Syntax of the
place in which he uses them, leaving that to the judgment of his Readers: See
what I said before, ver. 4. in the like matter.

As we be slanderously reported, and as some affirm that we say] Saint Paul
speaks this in the person of all Christians (who were calumniated by the
Heathen, as though they taught, that it was lawful for a man to do evil, if
good could come thereof, and as though they encouraged one another to evil
with these words, Let us do evil, that good may come) whereas the words
immediately going before, were spoken in the person of a wicked Heathen, yet
imitating a Christian, as I said ver. 5.

These words therefore are to be read with a Parenthesis

Whose damnation is just] Note that this relative, whose, is to be referred to
that pronoun, or antecedent Some, in those words, And as some affirm, as we
say, and the sense of the words is this, q, d. Who are already damned for this
their thus slandering us: and thus affirming that we say, Let us do evil, that
good may come; and their damnation is just.

Their damnation is just, because they thus slandered Christians, who would not
have deserved damnation, for saying this of Christians, if Christians had
taught or held any such thing.

Note, that because the absurdity of the Objectors Argument was plain, and
manifest, yea, plain and manifest even to those, that brought that slanderous
report, upon Christians, to wit, that Christians said among themselves, Let us
do evil, that good may come, as though they taught, that a man might lawfully
do evil, if good could accrue thereby: The Apostle does not think this Argument
of the Objector worth a direct answer: But being contented with the rejection
and detestation of that, which it did conclude, does only pronounce them, that
brought up that slanderous report upon Christians and affirmed, that they said;
Let us do evil that good may come thereon, worthy of damnation.

A good Disputant, as he will answer directly, to those things which deserve a
direct answer: So he will contemn and slight those things which are manifestly
absurd, and not worth an Answer, and so does the Apostle here.

But if any one should desire a formal answer to this Argument, the Answer may
be this, though the truth of God does more abound to his Glory by a man's Lie:
yet ought not man for this end to do any kind of evil, or to tell lies: But if
he does so, he may be justly judged of God, as a Sinner: for the lies, which
man tells, and the evil which he does are not the Genuine cause, but occasions
only of illustrating and setting forth the truth and Glory of God: so that if
God be glorified, either, by the Lie, or by any sin of a Sinner; it is not out
of the nature of his sins, but by accident altogether, that God came to be
thereby glorified; and therefore though God be glorified by them the Sinner is,
and may be justly judged for them.

Ver. 9. What then are we better than they] These words, are to be referred to
the second verse of this Chapter, as having their immediate connection with
that; for that, which comes between, comes in, as it were by the by, by
reason of Objections arising.

What then] q. d But what shall we gather from hence, or what shall we say by
reason of that, That the Oracles of God were committed to the circumcised Jews.

Are we better than they] q. d, shall we Jews, who have been circumcised,
gather from hence, That we are better than they, that is, that we are better
than the uncircumcised Gentiles?

The betterness here spoken of, is to be understood in respect of Justification
before God; And in this respect the circumcised Jews, which had not the Faith
of the Gospel, though they had the Oracles of God committed to them, and though
they did surpass the Gentiles in other outward Praerogatives, were not better
than the Gentiles, for they had sinned as well as the Gentiles.

Saint Paul does make himself here (by a (...)) one of the number of those
Jews, whose condition was no better than the Gentiles, that he might give no
offense, to the Jews, which were his flesh.

For we have before proved both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under sin]
q. d. For we have upon good grounds, and good evidence, charged both Jews and
Gentiles, that they are all of them guilty of sin: The Gentiles we charged in
the first chapter, the Jews in the second: And if they are all guilty of sin,
than is not one better than another in matter of Justification, until he
receives the Gospel of Ghrist by Faith, that he might be thereby justified.

We have before proved] The word in the Original is (...), which is a Law
term. And (...), is usually said of those, which are Accusers, who accuse or
charge the Defendant, with what they have to say against him.

Well does Saint Paul use a Law term here, in this his Treatise, or Dispute of
Justification, when as the word Justification it self is a Law term; and there
is in it an allusion to the custom and practice of courts of Justice; and
whereas he does appeal both Jew and Gentile at Gods Tribunal.

Note, that the Apostle speaks here of himself, in the plural number, as he
did, cap. 1. v. 5.

That they are all under sin] That is, that they are all under the guilt of
sin, and so subject to damnation: see ver. 19.

Sin is put here not for sin it self, but for guilt, which is the necessary
consequent or effect of sin: per Metonymiam efficientis.

Ver. 10. As it is written, there is none righteous, no, not one] That which
the Apostle asserted in the foregoing verse, viz. that all (both Jews and
Gentiles were under sin) and that which he had proved by manifest arguments in
the two former chapters, he proves here by Scripture, and that especially
against the Jews, and for the Jews sake, because they flattered themselves with
an opinion of their own righteousness; and he does it by Scripture, that he
might convince the Jews, by that whereof they so much gloried, to wit, The Law,
that is, the Word of God which was committed to them v. 2.

As it is written, etc.] These Testimonies, which the Apostle here produces,
are not all taken out of one and the same place, of holy Scriptures, but some
out of one place, some out of another: yet, what is here alleged in this, and
the two following verses, is taken out of the fourteenth Psalm, And some,
because they imagined, that the Apostle cited all these Testimonies even to the
eighteenth verse out of one place, have inserted all these Testimonies into
that Psalm, as will appear, by the Greek, and Latin, and Arabique, and
Aethiopique Translations.

There is none righteous, no, not one] This is taken out of Psalm. 14. ver. 1.
But note, that the Apostle cites not the very words of the Psalmist but only
the Sense. The words of the Psalm are these; There is none that does good: But
the words of the Apostle are these, there is none righteous, no, not one: Now
if there be none that does good, there is none, which is righteous; and if he,
which says, there is none that does good, excepteth none no not one (as he
does not except any, as it appears from ver. 3. of that Psalm) Then is there
none righteous no not one.

There is none righteous] i. e. He is called Righteous here, which follows
after virtue or Holiness, and gives his mind to it, or he is called Righteous
here, which lives uprightly according to the Law of God.

Ver. 11. There is none that understands and seeks after God] This is also
taken out of the fourteenth Psalm, yet not word for word: For it is not word
for word said there, There is none that understands, and seeks after God:
But yet there we read, That the Lord looked down from Heaven upon the children
of Men, to see if there were any, that did understand and seek God: But they
are all (says the Psalmist) gone aside they are altogether become filthy, etc.

There is none that understandeth] Supple, What the will of the Lord is, that
he may yield obedience thereunto.

And seeks after God] To seek after God is to seek after his favor by well
doing, (...) after his will to do it: Or, to seek after God, is to regard God,
and to care for him, and his Will: For note, that to seek in the Hebrew phrase,
signifies to regard or care for, as well as to seek.

Ver. 12. They are all gone out of the way] That is, they are all gone out of
the p^in of Gods commandments, which they should walk in.

They are altogether become unprofitable] The word, here rendered unprofitable,
in the Hebrew signifies putrified, and stinking; and it is Metaphorically
taken from putrified and stinking meats, which are not fit to be eaten: and as
such meats are putrified and stinking: so are wicked men corrupted and even
stinking in the nostrils of God. And as such meats, are not fit for the use of
man; so these wicked men are not fit for any holy use, or fit Instruments of
Gods praise, or service.

There is none that does good] i. e. There is none Righteous, as the Apostle
speaks, Verse 10.

It may be asked here of whom the Psalmist speaks all these words: and of
whom the fourteenth Psalm (from whence these words are taken) is to be
understood? and how the Apostle applies them to his purpose?

For Answer, Many think that the Psalmist speaks of all s^^h men of his time in
General, as were ^ot renewed by the Spirit of God, whatsoever they were: and
that the Apostle may therefore well infer from thence, that all men even of his
time also, were such, as they were in the Psalmists time, because the same
natural corruption was in both: and where their corruption, as the Tree is
alike, there their sins, as the fruit of that Tree must be alike too, until
they are born again through faith.

Others think, that the Psalmist speaks only of such people, as were at actual
enmity with the people of Israel, which were the people of God, though they
cannot determinately say what people they were, whether Philistines,
Midianites, Ammonites, Moabites, or the like, and they prove, that the
fourteenth Psalm is to be understood of such, because in the fourth verse of
that Psalm, God says of them, that they eat up his people as if they would eat
bread. And in the fifth verse, they are spoken of, as men which were against
the Generation of the Righteous: And verse seventh, the Psalmist wishes for the
Salvation of Israel, to save Israel from these his enemies.

Others conceive, That the Psalmist speaks here determinately of Absalom and
those that took part with him against David his Father: And that David made
this fourteenth Psalm, when he was pursued by Absalom. But yet one thing is
against this, to wit, that it is said, verse. 7. When the Lord brings back the
Captivity of his people, which cannot be said of David, and those that fled
with him from Absalom, and his Conspiritors; wherefore to take away this
Objection, instead of these words; When the Lord brings back the Captivity of
his people; they read, Cum reduxerit Deus reducem populum suum, i. e. When the
Lord shall bring back his people again, q. d. When the Lord shall bring us back
again to Jerusalem, which have been fain to fly because of Absalom. But
whether the words of the Hebrew will bear this Translation, let the Learned in
that Language judge.

But now the Question remains, how the Apostle can with sound reason, bring
these Testimonies which he does, out of the fourteenth Psalm, according to
these two last expositions thereof, to prove, that all (which have not received
Christ and his Gospel) both Jews and Gentiles, are under sin.

Answ. Besides that which has been said in answer to this Question, according
to the first exposition given of the fourteenth Psalm, which may have place
here also, for further answer it is said, that as many other places of
Scripture, so does this Psalm carry a double sense with it, one Literal, or
Historical, another Mystical, one concerning the enemies of fleshly Israel,
which were the people of God: or, concerning the enemies of David, and those
which were estranged from him, which is the Literal sense: And another
concerning all such as were Aliens from Spiritual Israel, to wit, the faithful,
and were as it were enemies unto them: or, concerning such as were strangers
from Christ, and were not with him, and therefore against him, (as it is said,
Mat. 12.30.) which is the Mystical sense: Now the Apostle, producing these
Testimonies, according to the Mystical sense of the words, to prove, that all
(which have not received Christ, both Jews and Gentiles) are under sin, And he
may effectually prove by them, that all, both Jews and Gen^iles, (which are
Aliens from Christ and strangers to his people) are under sin, because they are
all really intended, and spoke of here in the Mystical sense. For as the
Israelites according to the flesh, were a People which God had chosen to
himself, Deuteronomy. 14.2. So were they a Type of the faithful in Christ Jesus, whom
God has taken to be to himself, as Children by Adoption: and as God had made
choice of David, to be his King and his anointed: so did he ordain, that David
should be an eminent Type of Christ, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. And
as the Israelites according to the flesh, were a Type, of the faithful in Jesus
Christ: so were their enemies a Type of those, which were enemies of the faith,
or of the faithful, and of such as were not in communion with them: and as
David was a Type of Christ, so were the enemies of David, and those which were
estranged in affection from him, a Type of the enemies of Christ and those
which were strangers from him. So that the Holy Ghost when he does describe the
Manners of those which were the enemies of Israel and of David and strangers
from them and either of them, in the Historical or Literal sense: he describes
the Manners of them also which are enemies o^ the faithful and of Christ, and
strangers from them, or either of them, in the Mystical sense.

Note here, that from these, and such like Allegations as these are, (which
Saint Paul often uses in his Epistles) it does appear, that the Jews did allow
of such Mystical senses of the Scriptures as these are, although they did err
in the Persons, or Application; and neither acknowledged that Jesus was the
Christ, nor applied such passages of the Scriptures as these are, to themselves.

Ver. 13. Their throat is an open Sepulcher, with their tongues they have used
deceit, the poison of Aspes is under their lips, whose mouth is full of cursing
and bitterness: their feet are swift to shed blood] These are other Testimonies
of Scripture, brought to prove, that all, both Jews and Gentiles, are under
sin: and whereas the former Testimony proved for the most part, that they did
not do those things which they ought to have done: So these Testimonies prove,
that they did do those things which they ought not to have done.

But note here, that whereas the Ap^stle does reckon up here, in these
Testimonies which he brings, many sins, we must not understand him so, as that
his meaning were that all these sins which here he reckons up, were actually
in every man whether Jew or Gentile, but that some of them were in some, others
in others, yet so as some sin or other was in every one, and every one had gone
aside and become filthy. q. d. The throat of some of them is an open Sepulcher,
others have used deceit with their tongues, and the poison of Aspes is under
their lips: The mouth of others is full of cursing and bitterness; the feet of
others is swift to shed blood, etc.

Neither must we understand the Apostle so, as if his meaning were, that these
which he here reckons up, were the only sins which were in these men, but
that there were other sins also in them: and that if any of these were not in
some few of them (which yet we can scarcely say) yet there were others in them
as bad as these; or if not as bad, yet such as were enough to expose them to
Gods wrath, and to damn them.

Their throat is an open Sepulcher, with their tongues they have used deceit]
Those words are taken out of the fifth Psalm, verse 9. and are agreeable to the
Septuagint, whereas according to the Hebrew, the words, run thu^, Their throat
is an open Sepulcher, they flatter with their tongue.

Where note, that the Apostle uses to follow the Septuagint, where it little
or nothing varies from the Hebrew.

Their throat is an open Sepulchre] That is, their throat is, As an open
Sepulcher; for as out of an Open Sepulcher in which a dead body has been long
buried, when it is opened, there comes out filthy loathsome stinks and smells:
So out of their mouth or throat do proceed foul filthy words.

Note, that the note of similtude, As, is often left to be understood, after
the Hebrew manner, and so it is here.

This sense will these words bear, and yet they will yield another sense too,
and that's this: q. d. Their throat is as an open Sepulcher, because, as a
Sepulcher is opened, that it might receive the dead body to consume it, or
destroy it: so are their throats opened, that they may destroy them, whom they
speak against with their wicked words.

And this sense is most agreeable to the sense of the Place. For the fifth Psalm
was penned by David either when he fled from the face of Saul, or when he was
fain to fly, because of Absalom, at which times respectively there were not
wanting those which advised both Saul and Absalom to cut off David's life if
they could.

The Prophet Jeremy says of the Babylonians, that their Quiver is an open
Sepulcher, Jerem. 5.16. And therefore does he say that their Quiver is an open
Sepulcher, because as a Sepulcher opens its mouth, that it may receive and so
consume the dead: So their Quiver was opened, that it might (by the Arrows
drawn from thence) destroy the living. And thus is the Throat said to be an
open Sepulcher, because the words proceeding from them, are destroying words,
words brought forth to take away a man's life.

With their tongue they have used deceit] i. e. They speak deceitfully and
guilefully with their tongues; for their words are fair, but their heart is
foul, they speak fair with their mouth, but bear mischief in their heart, and
would entrap the Innocent to destroy him.

The Hebrew translated word for word, is, They flatter with their tongue; but
being they flattered for this end, that they might entrap with their tongue,
They (as the Septuagint renders it) have used deceit.

Thus did many deal with David to engratiate themselves with Saul and with
Absalom. They did speak him fair and flatter with him, that they might know his
secrets and then reveal them to Saul and Absalom, that they might take him and
so kill him

The Poison of Asps is under their lips] They which hurt others with their
speech, are said to have poison under, or in their lips. Of such Saint James
says, That their tongue is full of deadly poison, James 3.8.

The poison of Asps] an Aspe is a little Creature, frequent in Africa, whose
poison is very venomous: Aristotle in his Historiae Animalium, lib. 8.29. Says
that the venom of this Serpent is, (...), that is, incureable.

Is under their Lips] He may say under their Lips, to signify, that it was not
to be seen or perceived; And signify by that again, that these were men of
flattering tongues, but of most bloody hearts or thoughts. But others take
under their lips, barely for In their lips.

These words are taken out of Psalm. 140.4 Which Psalm was wrote by David,
against Doeg, and the Ziphites, who did maliciously accuse him and speak all
evil against him to Saul, and by these words, the Prophet shows, how these
his enemies dealt with him; but being the enemies of David, who was a Type of
Christ, prefigured the enemies of Christ, that is, such as believed not in
Christ: The words may be applied to them also in the Mystical Sense.

Ver. 14. Whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness] This is taken from
Psalm. 10 7. and cited according to the Septuagint, whereas according to the
Hebrew Text it is, thus, his mouth is full of cursing and deceit. Where it
seems (as it is observed by many) That the Septuagint did read Vmireroth; and
amaritudinibus, i. e. and bitternesses, for Vmirmoth, and fraudibus, i. e. and
deceits: yet as these latter words are not much unlike, no more is the Sense:
For wicked men are wont to speak all manner of evil against the Godly, with all
bitterness; but yet falsely, and therefore deceitfully: For it is false, which
they speak, though they would have men believe, that it is true, so deceiving
them, See Matthew Chap. 5. ver. 11.44.

By this also does David describe the nature of his enemies as he did before,
but by describing them, he describes such also, as should be enemies to Christ,
that is, to the Faith.

He says here, whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness. Whereas the
Order of his speech requires, that he should have said, their mouth, etc. But
it is not unusual to confound Subjunctive Articles or Pronouns with
Praepositives: An example whereof we may have in that great Master of Rhetoric
Cicero Philip 1. Eas leges quas ipse vobis inspectantibus recitavit,
pronunciavit, tulit, quibus latis gloriabatur, iisque legibus Rempublicam
contineri putabat, de Provinciis, de Judiciis, eas inquam Caesaris leges, nos
qui defendimus acta Caesaris, evertendas putabimus? Where iis and quibus are
mixed together.

Again, in the tenth Psalm 7. verse, as it is read according to the Septuagint
whom St. Paul follows, It is not a Praepositive, but a Subjunctive Article,
and the Apostle uses for the most part, when he cites any Testimony to cite
it, as it lies in the Text out of which he takes it, and not to regard the
Syntax, where he uses it.

Ver. 15. Their feet are swift to shed blood, destruction, and misery are in
their ways, and the way of peace they have not known] These Testimonies are
taken out of Isaiah Chap. 59. v 7, 8. but not according to the strict words,
yet according to the Sense, as they, which take view of the place may easily
perceive. And they are spoken there of the Jews of that time; But those Jews
were Types of these Jews, which lived in Paul's time, for Jews of one time, are
Types of Jews of another time (See notes Chap. 2. ver. 24,) And therefore well
may Saint Paul apply what was said of the Jews of that time, to the Jews of his
time. Add to this, that, the Jews of which the Prophet Isaiah speaks, were
such, as were at that time in Captivity under the Babylonians. Now the
captivity of the Jews under the Babylonians was a Type of the captivity of Man
under sin and the Devil: while therefore the Prophet Isaiah describes the
manners of those Jews which were in captivity under the Babylonians, in the
Literal or Historical sense. He describes with all the manners of the Jews
(yea and of the Gentiles too) which were captive under sin, and the Devil, in
the mystical sense.

Their feet are swift to shed blood] i e. They are bloody minded, ready upon
all occasions to run, and shed innocent blood.

Note, that the feet are put here by a Synecdoche for the whole man; and
therefore the feet, because we post from place to place with them, when we have
any thing to do.

Ver. 16. Destruction and misery are in their ways] i. e. Which way soever they
go they bring misery, and destruction upon men, like a common plague.

Destruction and misery are to be understood here, not as suffered by these
men, but as wrought by them, and that without any respect of Persons at all.

Ver. 17 And the way of peace have they not known] i. e. They have not known
how to live quietly and friendly with men: Or they have not walked in peaceable
ways, but are strangers to them as if they knew, them not.

Note, that ways and paths are often put for the actions of Men, by a Metaphor.

Some observe here, that the Hebrew say of him that does not care for, or,
regard a thing, that he does not so much as know it: as Jerem. 4 22.

Ver. 18. There is no fear of God before their eyes] i e. They do not consider
with the eyes of their mind that God is present, to see and behold their
doings, even that God, which they ought to stand in fear of, as being a severe
punisher of all wickedness.

Men use to be curbed and bridled in that they run not headlong into sin, by
the fear of God the just Judge: Where therefore this fear is not, men even rush
into all manner of wickedness, as an Horse into the Battle.

This Testimony is taken out of Psalm 36 1. And these words David (who was a
Type of Christ) speaks of his Enemies (who were Types of the enemies of Christ,
that is, of the unfaithful) as will appear by verse. 11, 12. of that Psalm: So
that they may be well applied by the Apostle, as they are to all unbelievers,
which are enemies of Christ, and his Servants, as spoken of them in the
Mystical sense.

Ver. 19. Now we know, that whatsoever the Law says, it says to them which
are under the Law] The Apostle prevents an Objection here; For, whereas the
Apostle had alleged many Testimonies, out of the Old Testament, to prove that
Jews and Gentiles are both under sin: The Jew might object and say; But what do
these Testimonies which thou have alleged, concern us? These Testimonies
concern not us Jews, neither are they spoken of us; but they concern only the
Gentiles, and are spoken only of them. To this the Apostle answers. Now we
know, that whatsoever the Law, that is, the writings of the Old Testament say,
they say to them which are under the Law, and they are Jews.

Whatsoever is spoken in the Law, must be understood as spoken to them which
are under the Law: And nothing of all the Law, that is, of all the writings of
the Old Testament must be excepted, as not spoken of them, but only such things
as are openly and by name spoken of the Gentiles; of which nature (if any be
yet) all the Testimonies here cited are not. But as for other Passages where
there is not express mention of the Gentiles, they must be understood of the
Jews, whether the Jews be named or no For what is more consonant to Reason than
this: That whatsoever the Law speaks indefinitely, it should speak to them
which are under the Law, though not all passages of all that are under the Law,
but some of some, and others of others.

Yea, where a passage in the Old Testament is spoken of the Gentiles plainly
and in direct terms, it may concern the Jew, and be spoken of him as well as
of the Gentil^, though not in the first or literal sense, yet in the second or
mystical: And this they know which are skilled in the Scriptures.

We know] i. e. We who are skilled in the Scriptures, whether Jews or Gentiles,
we know: or we, i. e. We Jews, even we know.

He speaks of this, as of a thing confessed even among the Jews, and so may it
be, because it is so consonant to reason, as we have said, and agreeable to the
custom of the Scriptures.

Whatsoever the Law saith] The word, Law here signifies, All the writings of
the Old Testament, and that it does in relation to the Hebrew word, Torah,
which as it signifies the Law, so sometimes it signifies not the Law only
precisely, but any Doctrine in general.

Or, because all other parts of the Old Testament are referred to the Law, and
depend on that in some wise or other; the Law which is but a part (but yet a
Principal part) is put by a Synechdoche, for the whole Old Testament.

To them which are under the Law] By the word Law, here some understand all the
writings of the Old Testament, as the word is taken just before: But others
take the word more strictly here, viz. for the Law which was given by Moses.
And therefore, whatsoever the writings of the Old Testament speak, they speak
to them which are under the Law, (that is, under the Law of Moses) because all
other the writings of the Old Testament do in some kind or other relate to
that, and depend upon it, either by explaining it, or inculcating it, or the
like: As also because the other writings of the Old Testament were given to the
same people, to whom the Law was given, they being also the Oracles of God

Which are under the Law] They are said to be under the Law in this place
(which of the two ways soever we take the Law here) to whom the Law was given,
For to whom the Law was given, to them it was as a Schoolmaster to teach them
and direct them; and Scholars are said to be under their Schoolmasters, and
Schoolmasters over their Scholars.

By those which are under the Law, are meant the Jews, for to them, and them
only was the Law given, Romans 9.4. Psalm 146.19. And the Law was our
Schoolmaster: says our Apostle, Galat. 3.24.

That every mouth may be stopped] q. d, Wherefore no man can glory of his
Righteousness, nor excuse himself from being unrighteous before God, being so
convicted of sin, as that he is compelled to stand mute before Gods Tribunal,
as having nothing to say in defense of himself.

The mouth of man is then said to be stopped, when all excuse is taken away
from him, and all occasion of glorying in his own righteousness, before God, so
that he has not a word to say for himself.

Note, that the Particle [That] is not a sign of the cause here, but a note of
an Illation or inference: and what is here inferred, is not inferred from what
went immediately before, but from that which went some distance before, to wit,
from those Testimonies cited in this chapter, which showed, that the Jews had
sinned, as well as the Gentiles, yea rather from all which, the Apostle had
said concerning this matter, from the beginning of this Epistle hitherto.

And all the world may become guilty before God.] i. e. And all the men of the
world, whether they be Jews, or whether they be Gentiles (having nothing to say
for themselves are become apparently guilty of condemnation before God, the
Judge of all.

The World is taken here by a Synecdoche for the men of the world: all which
are guilty of condemnation before God, till they are justified by faith in
Christ.

Ver. 20. Therefore by the deeds of the Law there shall no flesh be justified
in his sight] i e. Therefore shall no man be justified in the sight of God, by
the works of the Law that he has done, or for that, that he has kept the Law
as he ought to do.

The deeds of the Law are to be taken here, for the performance of what the law
commands, or for the deeds of the Law, as they are performed by us, and not
simply for deeds enjoined by the Law, q. d No man shall be justified by the
deeds of the Law, which he has done, etc. And therefore no man can be
justified by the deeds of the Law, which he has done; because no man has
strictly kept, what the Law commands; and the least breach of the Law makes a
man guily of damnati-

The word, Law, is taken here for the Moral Law, which was given by Moses,
which was the same with the Law of Nature, but written in a fairer character by
Moses, whereas it was blurd, and waxen dim, and much defaced by s^n in the
hearts of Men.

This is, as it were an Epiphonema, of all the former discourse; for this is
the scope of all, that has been said from Chap. 1. ver. 18. hitherto, to wit,
to show, that righteousness is not to be expected by the Law.

No flesh] That is no Man, for flesh is put here by a Synecdoche very common
with the Hebrews for Man; so it is put, Matthew. 24. ver. 22.

In his sight] i e. In the Sight of God.

It may be that some are justified by the deeds of the Law, which they have
done, in the sight or judgment of Man, and that he judges, that they have
exactly kept the Law, yet no man shall be justified by the deeds of the Law, in
the sight or judgment of God: for Man beholds only the outward face of
things, and that at sometimes only, but God pierces deeper and searches the
heart, and the reins, and spies out all men's doings, be they never so secret,
and that at all times. And in the heart, and in secret such things are done,
which the eye of Man cannot see.

For by the Law is the knowledge of Sin] i. e For by the Law is only the
knowledge of sin: So some understanding the word, only, here, q. d. For by the
Law we only come to know, what sin is, that is, all that the Law can do, it can
teach us what sin is indeed, but it cannot enable us, or give us strength to
avoid sin, that so we may be justified.

This then is an Answer to an Objection, which some might make, saying, Why?
Some men (as the Jews for example) have the written Law, and cannot that enable
them, to do the deeds of the Law, so that they may be justified thereby? To
this the Apostle answers, (confirming what he had said) No; for by the Law is
only the knowledge of sin.

Others make this an Answer to an Objection too, but thus; whereas the Apostle
said, That no flesh shall be justified by the deeds of the Law: A Jew might
object and say, to what purpose then is the Law, if a man cannot be justified
thereby? then was the Law given in vain. To this the Apostle answers, q. d. Yet
it was not for no purpose or in vain, that the Law was given (though a man
cannot be justified thereby) for by the Law, we come to know, what sin is.

Others take this as a Reason brought by the Apostle to confirm, what he had
said, to wit, That no flesh should be justified in the sight of God. And his
reason is, because every man knows by the Law, that he has sinned. For whereas
the Law tells every man his duty, and his conscience tells him, that he has not
done according to the Law, what remains, but that by the Law, he knows, that he
has sinned.

Others take this also as a Reason brought by the Apostle to confirm what he
had said, to wit, That no flesh should be justified in the sight of God. But
they take the word Law in a larger manner, than the former did. For they take
it for the whole word of God contained in the Old Testament. And by the Law so
taken it is known, that All have sinned, because there be many passages in the
word of God, which show that all have sinned.

Ver. 21. But now the righteousness of God without the Law is manifested, being
witnessed by the Law and the Prophets] i e. But yet the righteousness of God
without the Law is manifested, etc,

The Apostle prevents an Objection here. For whereas he said ver. 20. That by
the deeds of the Law no flesh shall be justified in the sight of God, etc. A
man might object and say, if it be so that No flesh can be justified in the
sight of God by the deeds of the Law, miserable is man's condition, For how can
a man be justified, if not by the Law? This Objection, I say, the Apostle
prevents saying. But yet the righteousness of God, without the Law is
manifested, -- Even the righteousness of God, which is by faith, etc. By which
he shows, that a man may be justified by Faith without the Law, that is
without the strict observation of the Law.

But now] This Particle, now, is not here an Adverbe of Time, but being joined
with But, signifies as much as, But yet, and so it signifies also Hebrews 11.
ver. 16. In these words But now they desire a better Country, That is, an
Heavenly.

The Righteousness of God] Righteousness is taken here for justification (as
cap. 1.17.) and it is called The Righteousness of God, because it justifies
before God, and God is the Author of it.

Without the Law] That is, without the deeds of the Law, or without the strict
observation of the Law.

These words answer to those of the twentieth verse, viz. By the deeds of the
Law, And are answered again, by those of the two and twentieth verse, viz. By
the faith of Jesus Christ.

Is manifested] i. e Is plainly and explicitly made known, by the preaching of
the Gospel.

Being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets] By the Law is here meant
especially the Books of Moses in which the Law is written and by the Prophets,
he means the books and writings of the Prophets, among which the Books of the
Psalms is to be reckoned, though sometimes they are distinguished one from
another, as Luke 24.44.

Justification by Faith, and so without the Law, is attested as out of other
places, so out of the books of Moses in the History of Abraham Romans 4.3. And
out of the books of the Prophets, as out of Habakkuk, Hab. 2.4. cited, Romans
1.17. And out of the Psalms Psalm. 32.1. cited Romans 4.6. and out of Isaiah, Isa.
28 16. cited Romans 9.33. and 10.11, etc. The Ceremonies also of the Law
witnessed this by the blood of their sacrifices, and by their washings, and by
the covering of the Arc, etc.

The Apostle adds this, Being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets, to show,
that what he taught was no sigment of his own, but that which the holy
Scriptures did acknowledge and teach.

Ver. 22. Even the righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ] q.
d. I say the righteousness of God which is by faith of Jesus Christ.

The Apostle resumes here the words, which he used in the former verse, that he
might explain himself, what Righteousness of God it was, which he said was now
manifested: For in the former verse, he did set it out only Negatively, and
show only that it was a Righteousness without works: Now therefore he shows
what it is affirmatively, while he shows that it is a Righteousness, which is
to be obtained by Faith, and that the Faith of Jesus Christ.

By the Faith of Jesus Christ] i. e. By the faith of the Gospel, whereof Jesus
Christ, is the Chief and Principal Subject, and of which he was the Preacher.

This Genitive case therefore is Genitivus objecti and efficientis. The Object
of our Faith is the Gospel of Christ, chap. 1.16. And Jesus Christ himself is,
as the Preacher, so the Principal Subject of that Gospel; Jesus Christ
therefore is put here for the Gospel of Jesus Christ, Per Synechdochen Partis:
for think it not enough to justification, to believe that Jesus Christ is come
into the world: No, nor that God has raised him from the dead, as Chap. 10 9.
But when it is said, that we shall be justified by the faith of Jesus, or, that
we shall be saved, if we believe that God has raised him from the dead: A part
of the Object which we must believe for our justification, is put for the whole.

Unto all] i. e. Which Righteousness is offered to all, whether Jews or
Gentiles.

And upon all them which believe] i. e. And which righteousness is actually
bestowed upon all, and only upon all them which believe, whether they be Jews
or Gentiles

Note here, that there is a Total Ellipsis of the Verbs in the Greek, which
are supplied by some, in this manner as I have spoken, and they do interpret
these words, as if by these words, Unto all, were intended the offer of
righteousness, or justification: And as if by these words, Upon all, were
signified the actual bestowing thereof.

But others take these words, Upon all, to be but a repetition of those words,
Unto all, and conceive, that they were iterated or repeated, the more to
inculcate the Doctrine of Justification by Faith, and the more to comfort and
hearten those which believed, q.d. which comes unto all them, and upon all
them which believe, whether they be Jews or Gentiles.

Yet we must understand the word Only here (which is often left to be
understood) For the Apostle would show here, that they whom God justifies, do
not attain to justification by several ways; as, the Jews by the Law, and the
Gentiles by Faith: But that both Jews and Gentiles obtain it by one and the
same way, namely, by Faith: Wherefore when he says unto all and upon all them
which believe, it is as if he should say, Unto all them and only upon all them
which believe.

For there is no difference] Supple, between Nations, or Persons, in respect of
the way or manner of justification: For all, whether they be Jews or Gentiles,
circumcised or uncircumcised, or whatsoever they be which are justified, are
justified after one, and the same way or manner, to wit, by Faith.

He shows the Reason here, why he said, unto all, and only upon all them
which believe.

Ver. 23. For all have sinned] He gives a Reason here, why there is no
difference in the way of justification; and the reason is, because all have
sinned.

Had not all sinned, but some sinned, and others lived and continued without
sin, then had there been a difference in the way of justification: For they
that had not sinned, would have been justified by the works of the Law, and
they that had sinned would have been justified (if they had been justified at
all) by Faith: But being that all have sinned, and God has appointed no other
way, for the justification of sinners, but by Faith; all that are justified
must be justified by Faith, and so after one and the same way or manner of
justification.

And come short of the glory of God] That is, and come short of fulfilling of
the Law, or, and come short of the praise of God for fulfilling the Law, or,
for their Innocence.

And come short of the glory of God] The words in the Original are (...), where
note that (...) is to be taken here for the praise of God, that praise,
wherewith he praises and commends men for their well-doing, as it is also
taken John 12.43. Yea, for that praise, wherewith he praises or commends men
for their innocence, or for that, that they have perfectly done their duty, and
failed in nothing at all.

So that (...), of God, is not here Genitivus Objecti, but Genitivus
Efficientis, as Grammarians speak.

And (...) is a word which may be rendered Non assequuntur, i. e. They attain
not to, q. d. All have sinned and none has attained to the praise of God, or
to that, that God should praise him for his innocence, or for so doing the Law,
as that he has failed in nothing thereof.

In Courts of Justice, where a man is accused of some grievous crime, against
the Law, and he is found innocent, and clear of the crime whereof he is
accused, the Judge uses to commend the party accused and found clear, for his
innocence and integrity, that he may encourage him to persevere and keep
himself innocent from the breach of the Law: Hence that Romans 13.3. Do that
which is good, and thou shall have praise of the same. To this usage does the
Apostle seem here to allude, who in the Treaty of Justification (which is the
main Subject of this his Epistle) borrows many Metaphors from the Courts of
Justice.

Some conceive that the word (...) when it is properly taken, is spoken of
such, as running with others in a Race, are cast behind through weariness and
faintness, or some other accident, or disability, so that they come not to the
Goal, so as to have any reward, or fruit of their pains and labor, and to
attain the prize: So that by putting the Antecedent for the Consequent (...)
signifies, Not to attain to.

The Apostle therefore according to these, uses a Metaphor here, not from the
Courts of Justice, but from a Race, in which Metaphor, Man is as the runner in
a Race; the Race is the Commandments of God: The End of the Race is the perfect
keeping of the Commandments; the Agonotheta is God himself: The (...), or
Reward which he propounds, is his Praise and Approbation. The like Metaphor
they observe, Heb. 4 1.

Ver. 24. Being justified freely by his Grace] i e. That they may be justified
freely by his Grace (Supple) As many as are justified.

Being justified] The word in the Original is (...), and that is a participle,
which is as much here as (...), so that they are justified: So the Participle
(...), being filled, is as much as (...), so that they are filled, chap. 1.29.

Freely by his grace] i. e. Freely by his Favor, and so not of Debt, or of
Merit.

He says both freely, and by his grace doubling as it were the same word, that
he might the more exclude Debt and Merit.

Through the Redemption, which is in Jesus Christ] That is, By the
justification, which is by Christ Jesus,

Note, that the word Redemption (at it is here taken) and justification,
signify both one and the same thing, to wit, a freedom or delivery from the
guilt and punishment of sin; only the Metaphor is diverse: For Justification is
a Metaphor taken from Courts of Justice, where a man is said to be justified
when he is acquitted, or absolved from that crime, of which he was accused. And
Redemption is a Metaphor taken from Captives, which are redeemed with a price,
out of the hands of those to whom they were in Captivity, and who had power to
kill them.

This Justification or Redemption is said to be by Christ Jesus, because we are
justified by his merits, and we are redeemed by his Blood, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.

That is in Christ Jesus] i. e. That is, by Christ Jesus, or through Christ
Jesus, as the meritorious cause thereof.

Note, that (...), In, answers to the Hebrew Prefix Beth, and therefore may
be taken for By, or Through, yea, for almost any Preposition whatsoever.

Ver. 25. Whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation] i. e. Whom God has
given, set forth, and proclaimed to be a means to appease his displeasure.

God may be said to give, set forth, and proclaim Christ as a means to appease
his displeasure, because as he has appointed and ordained him to be our
Propitiator: So he gave him, and he made it known to all, that he had given him
to be such, by the Preaching of the Gospel: See 1 Pet. 1. v. 20, 21, 22.

A Propitiation] A Propitiation is put here for a Propitiator, or one that does
appease the displeasure of God, The Act for the Cause or the Author thereof, by
a Metalepsis.

That which is rendered a Propitiation, is in the Original, (...) (which some
render Propitiatorem, taking (...) for (...) in the Masculine Gender, as (...):
But most take (...) in the Neuter Gender; And (...) in the Neuter Gender (which
in Latin is rendered Propitiatorium, the Propitiatory) is used by the Greek
Interpreters of the Old Testament most commonly for the Cover of the Ark of the
Covenant, upon which God sat between the wings of the Cherubims, as appears,
Exodus 25. v. 17, 18, 19, 20, 22, and 31. v. 7. and 35. v. 12. Levit 16.2. Numb.
7.89. etc.

Now the Cover of the Ark did, as it were, keep from the eyes of God (who sat
between the Wings of the Cherubims, upon that Cover, Exodus 25 22. Numb. 7.89)
whatsoever was in the Ark of the Covenant, which was covered therewith: And in
the Ark of the Covenant, there were the Tables of the Covenant (that is, of the
Law) Heb. 9.4.

This Cover therefore by keeing the Tables of the Covenant, or the Law, from
the eyes of God, did in a manner keep the sins of Men from his eyes, which were
Transgressions, of that Covenant or of that Law; for what is Sin but (...), i.
e. The Transgression of the Law, 1 John 3.4. And what were those Tables of the
Covenant, but the Tables, in which the Law was written? And if the Law were
kept from his eyes, then must the Transgression of the Law be also kept from
them: For who can see the Transgressions of the Law, which sees, not the Law
it self? Rectum est Index sui, and obliqui.

For this reason was that Cover called in Hebrew Capporet, a word which is
derived from a verb, which has the signification of Expiating and
Propitiating; and for this reason did the Greek Interpre^ers call it (...), a
Verbal, derived from a Verb of the like signification? And for this reason was
this Cover a Type of Christ, whom God had decreed from all eternity to send,
and (in his appointed time) did send forth, to purchase forgiveness, for the
sins of his People; which forgiveness is often signified by the name of
Covering: for blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins
are covered says the Psalmist quoted by our Apostle, Romans 4.7, etc.

In Allusion to this Cover of the Ark, and to this use thereof, which we have
spoken of, is our Savior called here (...).

Note, that the Apostle does in these, and in the following words set forth all
the causes of Man's justification, which he does therefore, because
justification is the chief Scope of his Epistle; and the main Controversy
between him, and the Jews. The chief and principal cause therefore of our
Justification is God himself, the Meritorious cause is Christ Jesus, his merit
is his blood that is his Death and Passion. The Material cause or Subject of
justification is Man, the Formal cause is the Remission of sins: The Condition
required on man's part is Faith, the final cause or End, why God did justify
Man is his own Glory, for he did it that he might be known to be Just in his
promise of justification, which shows his truth, and that he might be known
to be the justifier of him that believes in Jesus which shows his mercy and
goodness.

Through Faith] q. d. To be enjoyed or made ours through Faith, That is, to be
enjoyed by us and made ours if we believe. Here is an (...).

By this he excludes Works again.

We are taught by this, that God, though he did so love the world, as that he
gave Jesus Christ to be a Propitiation for the sins thereof, yet
notwithstanding he requires a condition of them, that are to be justified,
before they shall be justified, and have their sins forgiven; and that is
Faith. Or, that they must use Faith as an Instrument to apply this Grace, which
I account as the same.

In his blood] Some refer these words to those, whom God has set forth to be a
Propitiation; And then, this Praeposition, In, is to be taken for through, as
it is taken, ver. 24. And the sense is to be this; Whom God has set forth to
be a propitiation, through his blood to be enjoyed or made our Propitiation
through Faith.

In the words so construed, there must be a Trajection or an Hyberbaton, which
yet is a figure, not unusual with our Apostle, who sometimes uses yea often,
through the ardency of his Spirit, to go to a second thing, before he has done
with the first, and then to return to the first again.

These words, so conjoined show, how Christ was to be, and is, our
Propitiation, or Propitiator, or Propitiatory, to wit, by dying for us, and
shedding his blood for our sins.

This Exposition is favored by that, that in the Original (as most Expositors
read it) it is not (...), but (...) not (...) with a Tenuis, but (...) with an
Asperate

But it may be asked what has (...) (if it be either taken for the Cover of
the Arc, or alludeth thereunto) to do with blood.

Answ. I have showed how that Cover of the Ark was a Propitiatory, and why it
was called (...), and how it was a Type of Christ, and indeed as it was called
(...), or the Propitiatory, and as it was a Type of Christ, it had nothing
significant of blood, it did only signify that Christ should be our
Propitiator, or Propitiation; but did not signify how he should be so, for
Types are for the most part imperfect. But what that Type signified not, other
Types did signify: For the Legal remission of sins, which was through the
blood of the Beast, which was slain for a Sacrifice did Praefigure the Real and
Evangelical remission of sins through the blood of Christ, who was to be slain
for us. In that therefore that with the mention of the (...), there is mention
of blood there is a double allusion; an allusion to the Cover of the Ark, which
was called (...) or the Propriatory; and an allusion to the Sacrifices of the
Law, wherein was blood, by which was a Legal remission of sins. And such a
mixture of Types and Senses in speech, is not unusual.

But as some refer these words, By his blood, by an Hyperbaton to those more
remote words, Whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation: So others refer
them to the words, which they immediately follow, namely to those, Through
Faith. For my self, I take these words as actully referred to the words going
next before them, to wit, to these, Through faith, but as Potentially relating
to the former words also, q. d. Whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation
through his blood, and to be enjoyed and made ours, through faith in that his
blood: So that by what is expressed in the latter sentence, we are to
understand what is defective in the former: Yea, these words, By his blood may
relate actually both to those words, Whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation, and to those, By faith. See the like, chap 9. v. 12.

In these words, By his blood, there is (as we said) an allusion to the
Sacrifices of the Law, which were but Types of Christ the substance: Yet here,
and in other places also, where there is mention of the blood of Christ, by the
blood of Christ is to be understood, by a Synechdoche, whatsoever Christ did or
suffered for us, from the first time of his taking our Flesh upon him.

Through faith in his blood] Note here, that Faith, when it is joined with In,
as here it is, signifies for the most part, Trust and Confidence or Relying
upon a thing: And here it signifies, Trust or Confidence or Relying upon the
blood of Christ; And truly, he that does believe the Gospel, and the Death of
Christ therein recorded, as he ought to do, cannot but trust and confide, in
the death or blood of Christ, and rely upon it; Hence it is, that such kind of
phrases as these: The faith of, and Faith from, are often confounded in
Scripture, and taken for one and the same thing.

To declare his Righteousness] The word Righteousness, signifies here both the
Fidelity or Truth, and the Goodness or Mercy of God, as will appear by the
following verse, where it is repeated. And it is frequent, for one word thus to
carry with it two significations; but more of this in the next verse.

Note, that these words [To declare his Righteousness] depend on those [Whom he
has set forth] and show the final cause, or end of that, That God set forth a
Propitiator, which was to show that he was righteous, for, or, by remitting of
sins.

For the remission of sins which are past] i. e. For that he remitteth the sins
which are past. The words in the Original are these (...), where some interpret
the Preposition (...), Propter, that is, For; others Per, By or Through.

According therefore to the interpretation of the first, the words must run
thus, For the remission of sins which are past, and then they are to be
referred to those words, Whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation, and
there must be a Comma between these, and the words which go immediately before
them, for they signify a more special end, why God did set forth Christ to be
a Propitiation, He did it for the remission of sins.

According to the Second interpretation, the words must run thus, Through the
remission of sins which are past, and then they are to be referred to the words
immediately going before, and show how God was declared to be Righteous: He was
declared to be Righteous, by the remission of sins which are past; or, In
remitting of sins which were past: For remission of sins declare God to be
Righteous, that is, to be merciful, for it is mercy in God to forgive sins,
whereas he might punish the sinner with eternal death: and remission of sins,
declare God to be righteous, that is, True and Faithful, because, whereas God
did say, and promise, That he would forgive sins; by the remission of sins, he
did show himself to be as good as his word.

For the remission of sins that are past] i. e. For the remission of sins which
were committed in the Time of the Law, which is now past.

He mentions only those sins which were committed under the Law, not because
God gave a Propitiation for remission of those sins only, and not for the
remission of the sins committed under the Gospel: But that he might show, the
weakness of the Old Law, of which the Jews (with whom he has to do, for a
great part in this his Epistle) did glory: And that he might declare, that
those Expiations or Purgations, which appertained to the Law, were not true
Purgations and Expiations indeed, but only shadows of true Purgations and
Expiations: For it is not possible that the blood of Bulls and Goats should
take away sin, Heb. 10.4.

And as the Apostle does here, so does he also Heb. 9.15. mention the
redemption only of the Transgressions that were under the Old Testament,
saying; And for this cause, he is the Mediator of the New T^stament, that by
the means of death for the redemption of the Transgressions, which were under
the first Testament, they which are called, might receive the promise of
eternal Inheritance.

But by the remission of sins that are past, and by the redemption of the
transgressions, which were under the first Testament, we must understand in
both places all other sins too. And that not without reason, for if the blood
of Christ was able to deliver men from their sins, committed before it was
shed; much more is it able to deliver men from their sins which have been
committed, since the shedding thereof.

Yet note, that some understand The sins that are past, not of the sins
commi^ted under the Law, as so, but of the sins committed by a man before his
conversion, whether under the Law or not. And they say, that the Apostle
mentions only the remission of sins committed before a man's conversion, to
signify (not that sins committed after conversion were unpardonable, as
Novatus is said by some to hold, but) that they which were justified had no
license given them to sin, by reason of that grace. For this is the manner of
the Gospel to threaten woe to him that shall sin, and yet to ^ff^r pardon and
mercy upon repentance, to him that has sinned. But I embrace the former
exposition before this.

Through the forbearance of God] i. e. And which God has not punished with any
dreadful punishment (not by reason of that that they did not deserve dreadful
punishment, nor by reason of that, that they were expiated and purged by other
means than by the blood of Christ, but) through his forbearance and
long-suffering.

And therefore did God forbear to punish the sins of men, committed under the
Law, according to their desert because he had determined, to set forth a
Propitiation for those their sins in his good time, to wit, the Time of the
Gospel: A Propitiation which should reach even to sins committed under the Law.

In these words therefore there is an Ellipsis, and these words contain a
prevention of an Objection which a Jew might make. For a Jew might say, That
either they Jews had not committed any such sin as deserved dreadful
punishment, or that if they had committed such sins, they were expiated and
purged by the Rites and Expiations of the Law, otherwise God would have taken
vengeance of their sins long before this.

To this therefore the Apostle answers, That it was not because they had not
committed such sins, nor because their sins were expiated and purged by the
Law, that God had not punished them in any grievous manner, but it was because
of his forbearance, and long suffering. Note, that Christ was not a
Propitiation for all sins, which were past; but only for the sins past of such
as repented; whose sins God punished not, so soon as they were committed, and
for Gods forbearance to them, others which repented not did fare the better, in
that God did forbear them, and the sins of them which repented he punished in
Christ.

Ver. 26. To declare, I say, at this time his Righteousnes] The Apostle resumes
here, what he spoke in the former verse, the better to explain himself.

This word Righteousness, is to be taken here, both for the Fidelity or Truth,
and for the Goodness or Mercy of God, as I said before: For what he means by
Declaring the Righteousness of God, he expounds by those words [that he might
be just and the justifier of him, which believes in Jesus] Where, to be just,
signifies the Fidelity and Truth of God in keeping his word; To be the
justifier of him which believes in Jesus, shows the Goodness and Mercy of
God.

Of that, that the word Righteousness is sometimes taken for Fidelity and
Truth, we have an example verse 5. Of that, that the word Righteousness is
taken for Goodness and Mercy, we have an example, 2 Cor. 9.9.

It may be that the Apostle says of God, That he granted remission of sins,
that he might appear just, in respect of the Jews, because of the promise of
God made to their Fathers, that he would (upon their says and repentance) give
them remission of sins.

And that he says, that he granted remission of sins, that he might appear the
justifier of him which believes in Jesus, in respect especially of the
Gentile, who had no such promise made to him by God of his justification, as
the Jew had, yet may rejoice in that, that God has freely justified him.

At this time] By this time, he means here the Time of the Gospel, and it is
opposed to the time of the Law, or the time before Christ, signified by or
intimated in those words of the former verse, to wit, sins that are past.

That he might be just] q. d That is to say, That he might appear to be just:
That is, that he might appear to be True and Faithful in his word.

These words, That is to say, are here to be understood, and to be is to be
taken for To appear to be, as ver. 4. And Just is to be taken here for True and
Faithful in word, as it is also taken 1 John 1.9.

And God is said here to be True and Faithful, because he did say and promise
in the Law, and in the Prophets, that he would give remission of sins unto his
People, and so justify them, and as he said and promised, so he did to as many
as believed.

And the Justifi r of him, which believes in Jesus] q. d. And that he might
appear to be the Justifier of him, which believes in Jesus

To justify is to fo^g^ve sins, and to absolve from punishment due unto sins,
and this is an effect of the great mercy and goodness of God.

Ver 27. Were is boasting then] q. d. Being therefore That all have sinned and
come short of the Glory of God, and that as many as are justified are justified
freely by his Grace, through the redemption, that is in Christ Jesus, etc.
Where is Boasting, i. e. Where is any just cause of Boasting.

This is a Corollary drawn from what he said from ver. 20. hitherto and the
Apostle draws it to repress the vain boasting of the Jews, and to make men
seek after Justification not by the Law but by Faith: And it is spoken after a
kind of insulting manner, the Apostle insulting thereby as it were over the
Jews, who were great boasters.

Where is boasting] Note, that the Apostle speaks not here of an unlawful or
unjust or causless boasting, or, of boasting only before Men (for so any man
might boast, and so did the Jews boast) But he speaks of a lawful, just, and
well grounded boasting, and a boasting before God, such a boasting where
nothing is to be imputed to the grace and favor of God, but all to a man's own
self: And that not in the appearance of man only, but in the strict eye and
view of God. Such a boasting as this is the Apostle demonstratively has proved
cannot have place in a justified Man.

It is excluded] q. d. It has no place at all in a man, which is actually
justified, but is excluded from his justification.

By what Law] The word Law is to be taken here in a more Lax, and General
signification than commonly it is taken. For here are two Species of the Law
(as it is here used) mentioned in this place; The Law of works and the Law of
faith, whereof the Law of works is properly and most usually called the Law,
and is ordinarily opposed to the Gospel; and the other is the Gospel, as it is
opposed to the Law, so strictly taken.

The word Law therefore is to be taken here for Doctrine, q. d. But by what
doctrine is boasting excluded?

That. which is here (...), A Law, is that which is usual in the Hebrew, Torah;
and Torah signifies not only the Law in special, but any doctrine in
general, as I said before ver. 19. from whence the Greek word (...), and our
English word Law does often signify the like, as the Hebrew Torah does in
analogy to that.

Of Works] i. e. By the Law of works?

The word Law is here to be understood, from that which went before.

By the Law of Works is meant, that doctrine, which teaches that a Man, which
is actually Justified, is justified by the works of the Law, and that he that
would be justified must be thereby justified, which cannot be, except a man
has most exactly kept the whole Law, and never failed in any Tittle thereof,
at any time.

Nay] The Apostle shows here, that boasting is not excluded by the Law of
Works,

And indeed it implies a contradiction to say, that a justified man, or a man,
that is actually justified according to the Law of Works, is excluded from
boasting, by the Law of Works: For he that is justified according to the Law of
Works (with Reverence be it spoken) is not beholding to God for his
justification, for he has perfectly observed the Law in every Apex, Tittle,
and Jot of it, so that God (who is just in his judgment) when he is brought
before his Tribunal as a Transgressour of the Law, must needs justify him,
that is, must needs acquit him and pronounce him guiltless: and God would be
unjust if he did not so. Such a man therefore, as is justified, according to
the Law of Works, has good cause of boasting even before God, Chapter 4.2.

But by the Law of Faith] That Law, that is, that doctrine which teaches, that
a man is justified by Faith, does exclude boasting, and takes away the cause or
ground of boasting, from a justified man: For it teaches, that he that is
justified according to that, has sinned, and therefore, if he be justified, he
is justified by Grace, that is, by the mere favor and mercy of God, which
cannot stand with boasting.

It teaches, I say, that every man has sinned, and so that every man is under
the Curse, for cursed is every one, that continues not in all things, which
are written in the Book of the Law to do them, Deuteronomy 27.25. Galat. 3.10. And
being now cursed, he cannot get out from under that curse without the favor
and mercy of God: For having broken the Law, he cannot be justified by the Law,
for that implies a Contradiction. And therefore, if he be justified, he must be
justified by Faith, and so by the mere grace and favor of God, with which
boasting cannot consist.

The Apostles scope in this verse, is (as I said) as to repress the vain
boasting of the Jews, so to take men off, from seeking after justification by
works, or by the works of the Law, and to bring them to seek after
justification by Faith: and his Argument is valid to this purpose, upon
supposition (which yet he has proved to be a most certain Truth) that all have
sinned.

For if all men have sinned (which is an undeniable truth, and which the
doctrine of Faith teaches) then no man can boast before God, for whosoever
has sinned, has need of the grace and favor of God: And whosoever receives
any thing of the grace and favor of God, cannot boast, 1 Cor. 4.7.

Now, if thou can not boast, thou seek in vain to be justified by the
works of the Law; for no man can be justified by the works of the Law, but he
which keeps the Law, and has always kept it in every point: And he, that
keeps it so, may boast.

Therefore being thou can not boast, seek not for justification by the works
of the Law, which makes them boast, which are justified thereby; but seek for
it by faith. For though thou can not boast, and so can not be justified by
the works of the Law, yet thou may be justified by Faith.

It is not unlikely, but that among the Jews (which were blinded by reason of
their unbelief, Chap. 11. ver. 7.) There were some, who (though they were
convinced, that they could not boast, yet) did seek for justification by the
Law, not perceiving how incompatible these two things are, Not to boast, or not
to have matter of boasting, and to be justified by the Law.

But by the Law of Faith] Note, that whereas the Apostle might have said thus;
Where is boasting then? It is excluded: By what? By Works? Nay, but by Faith.
He says, Where is boasting then? It is excluded. By what Law? of works? Nay,
but by the Law of Faith.

And this he does by a Mimesis mentioning, and repeating the word Law, that he
might in a slighting manner imitate the Jews, who did crack of the Law, and had
the Law always in their mouths, though they kept it not; intimating thereby,
that if they gloried in the word Law, he could say, that they, which were
Justified, were justified by a Law too; but not by the Law, which they cracked
of, to wit, the Law of Works; but by a Law differing from that, to wit, the Law
of Faith.

Ver. 28. We conclude therefore, that a man is justified by faith] This
conclusion, the Apostle draws, not from the verse immediately going before, but
from his whole discourse, which he has had from the 17. verse of the first
Chapter of this Epistle hitherto, and especially from that, which he taught,
and discoursed of Chap. 3. ver. 23, 24, 25, 26.

A Man] i. e. Any, or, Every man, that is justified.

The word Man is to be taken here indefinitely, q. d. We conclude therefore,
that a man, be he Jew, or be he Gentile, or whatsoever he is, that is
justified, is justified by Faith, without the Works of the Law

Without the Works of the Law] i. e. Though he be without the Works of the Law,
that is, though he be, without that, that he has perfectly observed, and kept
the Law.

Without the Works of the Law, is the same here, as Not by the Works of the
Law, Gal. 2.16.

By the Works of the Law are meant Works done exactly according to the
Praescript of the Law, so that if a man has at any time transgressed the Law,
either positively or privatively, he cannot be said to have the works of the
Law, in the Apostles sense here.

Ver. 29. Is he the God of the Jews only?]

For God to be the God of any one, does sometimes signify, that God is held as
a God, and worshipped and obeyed as a God of him, whose God he is said to be:
In this sense Jacob said, that the Lord should be his God, Genesis 28.21.
Sometimes again, (and that most frequently) for God to be the God of any one,
signifies, that God is an Egregious Benefactor of him, whose God he is said to
be: In which sense it is said, Blessed is the Nation whose God is the Lord,
Psalm 33.12 And in which sense God is said to be the God of Abraham, and the
God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, Exodus 3.6. And in which sense God says,
that he would be a God to Abraham and to his Seed after him, Genesis 17.7. Now of
these two senses; the latter is that in which God is said here to be a God of
the Jews, and not of the Jews only, but of the Gentiles also: For God is a
Benefactor to them both, not only in Temporal blessings, but in Spiritual
blessings also, and in such as concern Eternal Salvation.

The Apostle speaks by an Interrogative here, first to signify, that the
thing which he speaks of is so plain, as that it cannot be denied: Secondly, to
take up the Jews a little, who entertained a base esteem of the Gentiles.

Is he not of the Gentiles also?] i e. Is he not the God of the Gentiles also,
and does he not wish and do well to them also, that they may be saved?

Yea of the Gentiles also] q. d. Yea he is the God of the Gentiles also, and
wishes and does well to them, that they may be saved, and will be a Benefactor
to them, in those things which concern their Eternal welfare, if they believe.

As for the Connection of this verse with what went before, It is this; The
Apostle had said, verse. 28. That a Man is justified by faith without the deeds
of the Law, where he took the word Man indefinitely, for men of any Nation, by
reason therefore of that word, he had a good opportunity given him to speak to
the Jew, of the good will of God toward the Gentiles; from that therefore he
infers this Corollary, Is he the God of the Jews only, etc. As if he should
say, and now, O thou Jew, is God the God of the Jews only, is he not the God of
the Gentiles also; Yes, he is the God of the Gentiles also, seeing it is one
God, which shall justify the Circumcision by Faith, and the uncircumcision
through Faith.

And this, or the like opportunity he takes often to declare the good will and
favor of God toward the Gentiles, because the Jews counted the Gentiles but
as brute Beasts, to whom God had no respect in comparison of themselves.

Ver. 30. Seeing it is one God which shall justifie] It would have been better
rendered thus; Seeing God is one, who justifies, etc. That is, Seeing God is
one and the same God, which justifies the Circumcision by Faith, and the
uncircumcision through Faith.

God is called One here, not in respect of his Essence, or in opposition to a
multitude of gods, but in respect of his carrying himself to all alike whether
Jews or Gentiles, q. d. Seeing God is one and the same toward all, who shall
justify, etc.

Which shall justify the circumcision by faith] Note, that the Circumcision is
taken here for the Circumcised, that is, for the Jews who were Circumcised, by
a Metonymie, and that shall justify is put here for, does justify; A Future
for a Present tense after the manner of the Hebrews, which use so to do,
especially when they would signify a continued Act.

And the uncircumcision through faith] By the uncircumcision are here meant the
Gentiles, who used not Circumcision as the Jews did (who were enjoined by God
to it) but were uncircumcised.

And yet we read, of some Gentiles which were Circumcised, as the people of
Colchis, Egypt, and Aethiopia, as Herodotus relates in his Euterpe, yet they
come under the name of uncircumcision here, because the Circumcision which they
received, they received from among themselves, the use thereof was not enjoined
to them of God, as that Circumcision which the Jews used was to them, Genesis 17.
v. 10, 11, etc.

Note, that these Phrases, By faith, and Through faith, signify one and the
same thing, and that there is no difference in the sense of the Phrases, though
there be in the words.

In that God justifies both Jew and Gentile after the same manner, it shows
him to be the same in his love and affection to both.

Ver. 31. Do we then make void the Law through faith?] q. d. Do we then say,
that the Law is useless, and as an idle thing, and a thing of no effect, by
those things which we have said of faith.

To make void, is put here for, to say that it is void, by a Metalepsis.

Note, that the Apostle does prevent an Objection here, for because he said, v.
28. We conclude that a Man is justified by faith, without the deeds of the Law;
And again v. 30. It is one God, or God is One which shall justify the
Circumcision by faith, and the uncircumcision through faith; A Jew might object
and say, If it be so, that a man is justified by faith, without the deeds of
the Law, and God does justify the Circumcision by faith, and the
uncircumcision throuh faith, then is the Law void, for to what end should it
stand, if it did not justify a man? To this the Apostle answers; That
notwithstanding that which he had said concerning faith, the Law does stand,
yea, what he said concerning faith does establish the Law. For though the Law
does not justify a man, yet the Doctrine of faith, does enjoin those which
believe, to lead a pious, godly, and religious life, according to the
Praescript of the Law, and to follow those things which the Law commands: And
by faith we attain to more ability for the performance of the Law, than the Law
it self can give.

Note, that what is here spoken must be understood of the Moral Law.

Through faith] i. e. Throuh the Doctrine of faith, or, through those things
which we have said of faith.

We establish the Law] i. e. We maintain the Law in its standing, and keep it
up, That is, we take not the Law away, but let it stand in its due place, and
give it its due honor.

How Saint Paul established the Law by faith, we showed a little before, in the
Exposition of this verse; He establishes it, by making it, or teaching, that
it is a Rule of our Lives, though he denies to be the means of justification.
And that we attain more ability to the keeping of the Law, through faith, than
the Law it self could give us.

CHAP. IV.
1. WHat shall we say then, that Abraham our Father, as pertaining to the
flesh, has found?

1. We have taught hitherto, that the man that is justified, is not justified
by the works of the Law, but by faith: And let us now enquire in particular,
concerning Abraham's justific^tion, to wit, how he was justified. How shall we
say then, that Abraham (who is our Father as concerning the flesh) attained to
justification? Shall we say that Abraham attained to justification by works? No
in no wise.

2. For if Abraham were justified by works, he has whereof to glory, but not
before God.

2. For if Abraham were justified by works, he has whereof to glory or boast,
even before God; but he has not whereof to glory or to boast before God;
therefore he is not justified by works.

3. For what says the Scripture? Abraham believed God, and it was counted unto
him for righteousness.

3. Now that Abraham has not whereof to glory or boast before God, is
apparent, for what says the Scripture? It says, that Abraham believed God,
and that, that was set down upon his account to him, to receive righteousness
or justification for it, that is, in fewer words, it says, That Abraham
believed God, and for that he was justified, Genesis 15.5.

4. Now to him that works, is the reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt.

4. Now to him that works the works of the Law, so punctually and so exactly,
as that he never fails at any time in performing the least title of the Law,
to him indeed the reward, that is, righteousness or justification is set down
upon account, to be paid him, as a thing not of grace and favor, but of debt,
for (with reverence be it spoken) God would be unjust, if he should not
justify him, that is, if he should not acquit him, but condemn him for a
sinner, who had never sinned; So that he indeed has whereof to glory or boast,
even before God.

5. But to him that works not, but believes on him that justifies the
ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness.

5. But to him that works not the works of the Law, so punctually and so
exactly, as the Law requires, but believes on God, who justifies sinners, his
faith is set down upon account to him for him to receive righteousness or
justification for it, that is, he is justified by his faith: So that he has
not whereof to glory or boast before God, in the matter of his justification.

6. Even as David also describes the blessedness of the man, unto whom God
imputes righteousness without works,

6. But methinks I hear a Jew cavil here and say, but what Paul, can he be
justified that works not? that is, which does not do the works of the Law, so
punctually and exactly as the Law requires? Can the ungodly and sinner be
justified? To whom I answer, that they may, for even David also (as well as the
Ministers of the Gospel) give us a description of the blessedness, that is, of
the justification of a man, to whom God imputes righteousness, though he never
performed the will of the Lord, according to the strict Prescript of the Law,
saying Psalm 32.1, 2.

7. Saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are
covered.

7. They are blessed (and therefore blessed because justified) whose iniquities
are forgiven and whose sins are covered.

8. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin.

8. Blessed is the man (and therefore blessed because justified) to whom the
Lord imputes no sin.

9. Comes this blessedness then upon the circumcision only, or upon the
uncircumcision also? for we say that faith was reckoned to Abraham for
righteousness.

9. Comes this blessedness, that is, comes this justification then upon
those, who are circumcised only, or upon those that are not circumcised also?
That is, Comes this justification only upon the Jews, or comes it upon the
Gentiles also? I move this question upon occasion of that which I said verse 3.
That faith was reckoned to Abraham for righteousness.

10. How was it then reckoned? When he was in circumcision, or in
uncircumcision? not in circumcision, but in uncircumcision.

10. When was it then reckoned? (for by the answer to this question we shall
know how to answer the former) was it reckoned, when he was in circumcision,
that is, after he was circumcised; or was it reckoned when he was in
uncircumcision, that is, before he was circumcised? It was reckoned to him not
when he was in circumcision, but when he was in uncircumcision, that is, not
after, but before he was circumcised.

11. And he received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of
the faith, which he had yet being uncircumcised: that he might be the Father of
all them that believe, though they be not circumcised; that righteousness might
be imputed unto them also:

11. And after that, that it was reckoned to him for righteousness or
justification, he received circumcision (which is a sign of that Covenant which
God made with him and his seed; and which is a sign of distinction, whereby he
and his posterity are distinguished from all other people) he received
circumcision, I say, as a seal of the righteousness or justification, which he
had by faith, while he yet was uncircumcised, to testify and assure him
thereby, from God, that God had even then justified him for his faith: And it
was so ordered by the providence of God, that he should be justified by his
faith, before he was circumcised, and should afterward receive circumcision,
as a seal to confirm, or assure him of that his justification; that he might be
a Father of all them which believe in the time, or state of uncircumcision,
that it might appear (by the example of Abraham, who was justified while he was
yet uncircumcised) that righteousness or justification should be imputed to
them also.

12. And the Father of circumcision, to them who are not of the circumcision
only, but also walk in the steps of that faith of our father Abraham, which he
had, being yet uncircumcised.

12. And that he might be the Father of those, which are circumcised also, yet,
so as that they are not circumcised only, as Abraham was, but also imitate the
faith of Abraham, treading in his steps, and following him in that faith, which
he had when he was as yet uncircumcised: And now, by what I have said we may
answer to that question, which I propounded verse 9. Comes this blessedness,
that is, comes this justification, upon those, which are circumcised only, or
comes it upon them which are uncircumcised also? For it comes not upon the
circumcised only, but upon them also, which are uncircumcised.

13. For the promise, that he should be the heir of the World, was not to
Abraham, or to his seed through the Law, but through the Righteousness of Faith.

13. But because I denied, that Abraham was justified by works verse 2. Thou will here object against me, that the Land of Canaan was a Type of
Justification, and that Abraham had that promised to him and his seed through
the Law; therefore he was justified by the works of the Law; but this I deny:
For the promise that he should be the Owner or Possessor of the Land of Canaan
was not made to Abraham or to his seed through the Law, or through that, that
they performed or should perform, what the Law exacted, but it was made to them
through faith which justifies a Believer. And now as the promise, that he
should be the Owner or Possessor of the Land of Canaan, was not made to Abraham
or his carnal seed through the Law, or through that, that they performed, or
should perform what the Law exacted; but it was made to them through faith: so
the mystical promise of Justification, was not made to Abraham, or to his
spiritual seed, through the Law or the works thereof, but through Faith which
justifies those, which believe.

14. For if they which are of the law be heirs; Faith is made void, and the
promise made of none effect.

14. For if they be heirs and Enjoyers of Justification, and shall inherit
that, who are the Children of the Law, and under that; and that by virtue of
the Law exactly kept by them; then is the way of obtaining just fication by
faith void, and the promise it self of Justification is of none effect.

15: Because the Law works wrath: for where no Law is, there is no
Transgression.

15. For the Law is so far from making those which are her children acceptable
to God, and such as may be justified before him, as that she occasioneth them
to sin the more, and so stirs up the greater wrath of God, against them. For
where there is no Law their is no Transgression, nor sin so frequently, or so
often committed, and with so high an hand, as where their is a law.

16. Therefore it is of Faith, that it might be by grace; to the end the
promise might be sure to all the seed, not to that only which is of the Law,
but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham, who is the Father of us all.

16. Therefore the promise of Justification, was through faith, so that it is
of Grace, for this end, that it might be sure (by reason of the possibility of
the condition required) to all the spiritual seed of Abraham, that is, to all
the faithful; not only to that, which is of the Law, and under that, as the
Jews are, but to that also which follows the Faith of Abraham (though they be
not under the law) as the believing Gentiles do; which Abraham is the Father
of us all which believe, whether we are Jews or Gentiles, and under the Law, or
without the Law.

17. (As it is written, I have made thee a Father of many Nations) before him
whom he believed, even God who quickens the dead and calls those things
which be not, as though they were;

17. (As it is written of him Genesis 17.5. I have made thee a Father of many
Nations) I say, which Abraham is the Father of us all, before him, whom he
believed, even God, who quickens those, which are dead in unbelief, with the
life of Faith, and makes those, which are not faithful, as they which are, so
raising up spiritual seed to Abraham,

18. Who against hope, believed in hope, that he might become the father of
many Nations; according to that which was spoken, So shall thy seed be.

18. Who against all hope, which he could conceive by the course of nature of
having a child, believed in hope, which he grounded upon the truth and power
of God, That he should become the Father of many nations, according to that
which is written of him, Genesis 15.5. As the Stars of the Heavens for number, so
shall thy seed be.

19. And being not weak in faith, he considered not his own body now dead, when
he was about an hundred year old neither yet the deadness of Saras womb:

19. And being not weak in faith, he considered not his own body now old and
feeble and unfit for generation, and as it were dead in respect of that, when
he was now about an hundred years old; nor did he consider the barrenness of
Sarahs womb, and the indisposition and inability thereof to conception, so as
to doubt or despair by reason of them, of the promise of God.

20. He staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief: but was strong in
faith giving glory to God:

20. He staggered not at the word of God, through unbelief; But was strong in
faith, giving glory to God by relying upon his word:

21. And being fully persuaded, that what he had promised, he was able also to
perform.

21. And being fully persuaded, that what he had promised, he was also able to
perform.

22. And therefore it was imputed to him for righteousness.

22. And therefore it is written to his immortal praise that this his Faith was
imputed to him for righteousness.

23. Now it was not written for his sake alone, that it was imputed to him:

23. But now it was not written for his sake alone, that he might thereby be
praised, that it was imputed to him.

24. But for us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on him, that
raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead.

24. But it was written for our sakes also, to assure us that our belief also
shall be imputed to us for righteousness, if we believe on God, who, raised up
Jesus our Lord from the Dead.

25. Who was delivered for our offenses, and was raised again for our
justification.

25. Who was both delivered to death and raised again from the dead, for our
Justification, that is, that we might be thereby justified.

CHAP. IV.
Verse 1. What shall we say then] i. e. How, or by what way, or after what
manner, shall we say then?

What is to be taken here for How, or after what manner, for the Apostle
speaks here not so much of Justification it self, as of the way or manner of
attaining it.

And so the word What, is sometimes taken elsewhere. For whereas it is said,
Mark 4.23. Take heed what you hear? It is said Luke 8.18. Take heed how you
hear?

That Abraham our father as pertaining to the Flesh] i. e. That Abraham, who is
the Father of all us Jews, after the flesh, i. e. by carnal Propagation,
whether we be of the Law, or whether we be of the Faith.

Abraham was a Father two manner of ways, to wit, according to the Flesh, and
according to the Spirit; according to the flesh, Abraham was a Father of all
Jews, whether they believed or no. But according to the spirit, he was the
Father only of Such Jews, as did believe and imitate his Faith, verse 12.

The Apostle calls Abraham his Father (as other Jews also did) to show, that he
did esteem of Abraham as his Father, as well as they; and therefore, what he was
to say of Abraham, he would not say out of desire he had of diminishing
Abraham's glory, but out of mere love which he bore to the Truth

Has found] i. e. Has obtained, or attained to, Supple, Justification.

Note. that to find. is put here for to obtain, or to attain to: as Prove. 8.35.
and 17.20. and so it is taken so often, as one is, said to find grace in the
sight of another: a phrase, which the Scripture often uses, as Genesis
18.3.30.27. Numb. 11.11. Deuteronomy. 24.1, 2. S^m. 15, 25 etc.

Note also, that here is somewhat to be understood, to wit, Justification, for
it is not to be doubted, but that the Apostle speaks here, of Justification,
for this is the subject of all his discourse, in this place.

Our Apostle does suppose here that Abraham was justified, and does enquire
only how he was justified, I say, he does suppose that he was justified, which
he might well suppose, for none of the Jews (with whom he has here to do) did
ever doubt of that, or deny it.

Ver. 2. For if Abraham were justified by works] Between this and the former
verse, we must understand these words, to wit, by Works? No surely: q. d. How
then or by what means, shall we say, that Abraham who is the Father of us all
after the Flesh, has obtained Justification? by works? No surely. For if
Abraham were justified by works, he has whereof to glory before God, in the
matter of justification^: But he has not whereof to glory before God, in the
matter of justification.

Therefore he is not justified by works.

He is said in our Apostles sense, to be justified by works, which has so
strictly observed the Law, by which he should walk, and walked so strictly
according to it, as that he never offended in the least manner, that is, either
in thought, word, or deed: For whosoever has offended against that Law, in
never so small a matter, cannot be said to be justified by morks.

He has whereof to glory] Supple, even before God.

By glorying is not meant here any Thrasonicall vaunting, or any unjust
glorying, but such a glorying, which he might both justly and seemly use, which
had perfectly kept the Law, and never offended against it in the least point;
which glorying, is nothing else but the attributing of his justification, or
that, that he is not condemned, but acquitted, when he is judged, modestly to
his own innocence, not to the pardon, or favor, or indulgence of the Judge,
when he is asked, How he came to be acquitted in Judgment? For otherwise to
vaunt and glory would savor of Pride, and so be it self sin, for which he
would come into condemnation, and so could not be justified: which is against
the Apostles supposition.

A man may glory of his innocence before men, who has not perfectly, and
sincerely kept the Law, but kept it only in outward appearance? for when man
cannot see to the Heart, and to the thoughts and Intentions, but only to the
outward appearance of Actions, he cannot condemn him, who in outward appearance
has kept the Law, though inwardly he has broke it in every point; but he that
can justly glory before God, must perfectly and sincerely keep the Law, as well
in his inward heart and thoughts, as in his outward words, and deeds. And he
that has done so, may glory in that sense, which we have spoken of: For our
Apostle faith it here, and Chap 3 ver. 27. He says that boasting, that is,
that Glorying (for the Greek words in both places are as one, being derived
from the same fountain) (...) in the one (...) in the other) is not excluded by
works.

Note that the Apostle does prove in this verse, that Negative answer, which we
must suppose him to give to the Question, made in the former verse, that is,
That Abraham did not obtain justification by works. And this he does, by this
Syllogism.

If Abraham where justified by works, then he has whereof to glory even before
God.

But Abraham has not whereof to glory before God.

Therefore Abraham is not justified by Works.

The Major and Minor Proposition of this Syllogism, the Apostle has here set
down in this verse, but not so, but that we must understand something of the
Major Proposition from the Minor, and something of the Minor Proposition from
the Major. The Conclusion is totally left to be understood,

If Abraham were justified by works, he has whereof to glory; this is the
Major Proposition, which I spoke of, and this is defective in its words, and
the defect is to be made up from that, which we have in this verse; of the
Minor Proposition, namely from that, But not before God, from which words we
make the Major Proposition entire thus.

If Abraham were justified by works he had whereof to Glory even before God.

But not before God] This is the Minor Proposition (or Assumption) which we
spoke of; which is also defective in its words, and to be made up from the
Major Proposition, as the Major was from this. This Minor Proposition (or
Assumption) therefore entire, is thus, viz. But Abraham has not whereof to
glory before God.

This Minor Proposition or Assumption the Apostle proves in the verses
following.

Ver. 3. For what says the Scripture] Supple, Genesis 15.6.

Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness] q. d.
Abraham believed God, and that, that he believed God, was that, which God
counted or reckoned to him for justification. Supple, Therefore being that,
that, that Abraham believed God, was counted to him for justification; Abraham
had not whereof to glory.

Abraham believed God] We read Genesis 15, 5. That God brought Abraham forth
abroad, and said, Look now toward Heaven and tell the Stars, if thou art able
to number them: And he said to him, so shall thy seed be. Then follows that
which is here quoted by the Apostle, viz. He believed in, the Lord, and he
counted it to him for righteousness. That therefore for which Abraham was
justified of God here, was this, and this only, that Abraham believed God, when
he promised him that his Seed should be as the Stars of heaven for multitude.
See more of this v. 18. of this Chapter.

And it was counted unto him for righteousness] i. e. And it was accounted to
Abraham (to wit, by God, Genesis 15.6.) at such a rate, as that God did set down
upon his accounts to Abraham, that he would repay, or requite him, for that his
belief only, with justification.

The meaning of this whole verse is this, That Abraham did believe God, and God
did so value and respect this, that Abraham did believe him, as that he was
pleased in his Grace, and Favor, to recompense this faith of Abraham (though
it were but for this) with justification; that is, to justify Abraham, from
all his sins, and to deal with him as with a just man, which had never
transgressed the Law in any point, only because he had thus believed him.

Note, if God did justify Abraham only for this, that he did thus believe him,
Abraham had not whereof to glory before God in matter of justification: For he
could not claim justification by debt; and he which cannot claim justification
of debt, but has it of grace and favor, he cannot glory of his justification
before God.

The Law requires exact obedience, whether it be the Law of Nature, or the
written Law of Moses, so that he is cursed which continues not in all things
which the Law commands, and therefore he which has broken the Law, in the
least tittle thereof, is cursed, and being now cursed, he cannot be justified,
but by grace and favor. If God therefore accept of our faith, for, or, to
justification, so that he justifies us, because we believe, it is the mere
Grace and Favor of God, and of such justification we cannot glory, as we might
do (in our Apostles sense) if we had so kept the Law, as that we had never
broke the least Apex of it.

Note, that this Phrase, It was counted to him for righteousness, is
Metaphorical, and it is drawn from Merchants or Tradesmen, or the like, where
one accounts with the other, for what he has received of him; and in his
accounts enters or sets down, that for such or such a parcel of Wares, or in
consideration of such or such a thing done from him, he is indebted to him, and
will willingly repay him such or such a sum of money, in lieu thereof, or
requite him after such or such a way: For the word (...) in the original,
comes from (...) which among other things signifies, Alicujus rationibus
infer, that is, to bring or enter such or such a thing, upon the accounts of
such or such a man.

But let no man mistake here, as though because this phrase is drawn from this
Metaphor, it would thence follow that Abraham's faith was equivalent to his
justification, and of as great value as that; For even in such accounts, as we
have spoken of, men will often when they are well pleased, set down more for
themselves to pay, than the thing which they have received, or which was due
from them, is worth: However, this is to be remembered, that Similitudes run not
(as they say) upon four feet; nor do Metaphors agree in every particular, with
the things from which they are borrowed.

For Righteousness] i. e. For Justification, Supple, to be paid, or allowed to
him, in consideration of that his faith.

Note, that the Hebrew Text, which our Apostle relates to Genesis 15.6. being
translated word for word, is thus; And he believed in the Lord, and he (to wit,
the Lord) counted it to him for righteousness. But our Apostle followed the
Septuagint, which was then commonly received among the Jews, which speaks thus;
(...). But which way soever we take these words, whether according to the
Hebrew, or according to the Septuagint, the sense is one and the same. For it
is all one to say, It was counted, to wit, by God; and God did count it. And
these phrases, To believe God, and To believe in God, are often confounded, and
taken one for the other in Scripture (although to believe God properly
signifies, to give assent to the words of God: And to believe in God,
signifies properly to put our hope, and affiance in God) because when God
promises any thing to any one, he that truly believes his promise, cannot but
put his trust and affiance in him, for performance of that his promise.

Note, that (as we have said before) the Apostle proves here the Min^r
Proposition mentioned in the foregoing verse, to wit, that Abraham had not (in
the matter of justification) whereof to glory before God: And he proves it by
this; that Abraham's faith was counted to him for righteousness, that is, that
Abraham was justified by his faith: And they that are justified by faith,
cannot glory before God of that their justification, because justification is
not due to them of debt, but is bestowed upon them upon grace: and where it is
of grace, glorying is excluded.

Ver. 4. Now to him that works is the reward not reckoned of grace, but of
debt] q. d. Now to him indeed that fulfilleth the works of the Law, as the Law
commands them to be done, justification is reckoned, not of grace and favor,
but of debt and merit. Supple, therefore he indeed may glory before God, in the
matter of justific^tion.

He grants that here to him that works, which he denies in the next verse to
him which believes.

To him that worketh] By him that works, is meant here he which does
perfectly perform the Law of God, and continue in it, for to such a one only
does justification appertain as a debt: Not to him that does a good work now
and then, no nor to him that has but once sinned, if any such were.

Is the Reward, etc.] By the Reward is here meant justification: For though
justification, that is, Remission of Sins, or, To be absolved or acquitted from
the punishment due to sins, is not the whole reward, which God gives to him
whom he justifies, yet it is the whole Reward, which such a man, which has
kept the Law, can challenge of debt: And this, to wit, Justification, that is,
an absolution or immunity from punishment, is that, and that only which the
Apostle speaks of, and treats of in this place By the reward therefore is here
meant Justification, and Justification only by a Synechdoche integri.

Ver. 5 But to him that worketh] i. e. But to him which does not perform the
works of the Law, as the Law requires, etc

What is meant by him that works not, we may understand by him that works,
ver. 4.

But believes on him that justifies the ungodly] i. e. But only believes
God; or, only believes in God: (for these phrases are all one, as we said ver
3.) which justifies him, who works not, that is, which justifies him, which
has not kept the Law, as Abraham had not.

The ungodly] By the ungodly, he means here him that works not, that is,
him, which has not kept or persevered in keeping of the Law, as he should; For
even such a one may go under the name of an ungodly man, especially before he
is justified.

His faith is counted for Righteousness] This his Faith only, to wit, without
works, is counted to him, for Righteousness, and therefore being that he is
justified (not by works, but) only by faith, his justification, is not of debt,
or merit, but of mere Grace and favor (See ver. 16.) And being that it is not
of debt or merit, but of mere Grace, and Favor, he has not whereof to glory,
in that matter.

The Apostle, you see, is curt here in his expression, and leaves much to be
understood, yet that which may be easily understood, by a judicious Reader, and
which is necessarily implied, in what he has said.

His Faith] i. e. His faith only, to wit, without works.

This word only is often left to be understood.

Ver. 6. Even as David also describes the blessedness of the man unto whom God
imputes Righteousness without works] For the connection of this verse, with the
former, thus it is; in the former verse the Apostle said, That righteousness
was imputed to him, that works not, yea, to the ungodly. Now a Jew (who
sought righteousness by the works of the Law, chap. 9 32.) might object against
this, and speak thus: But what is it that thou say Paul? Say thou that
Righteousness may be imputed to him, that works not, and to him, that is
ungodly, To this the Apostle answers (though concisely) to this effect. Yea,
I say that Righteousness may be imputed to him that works not and is ungodly,
even as David also, describes the blessedness or righteousness of the man unto
whom God imputes Righteousness without works, etc.

Even as David also describeth] i. e. Even as David also, in the Psalms
describes, etc.

The Psalm which the Apostle alluds to, is, Psalm 32. ver. 1, 2,

The blessedness of the man] Or, the blessedness of a man, that is, The
justification of a sinner.

Blessedness is to be taken here for justification, as will plainly appear,
both by what went before, and by what is said ver. 9. Where the Apostle calls
that blessedness in the former part of the verse, which he calls Righteousness,
that is justification in the latter part thereof.

The word Blessedness in its Latitude, includes Glorification as well as
justification, when therefore it is taken for justification barely, it is so
taken, Per Synechdochen integri.

Unto whom God imputes Righteousness] i. e. Unto whom God does, as it were,
set down Righteousness or Justification upon his Accounts, which he obliges
himself thereby, to give or pay to him.

The word here rendered imputes is, (...) which signifies, to set down on a
Man's account, See, ver. 3.

By these words, it is most evident that the Apostle takes righteousness and
Remission, or not imputing of sins, for one and the same thing, for that which
he calls Righteousness here, he calls the forgiveness of iniquities and
Covering of sins, and not imputing of sin, or setting down of sin upon
accounts, in the verses next following.

Without Works] i. e. Without the strict observing of the Law, or, though he
has not observed the Law, as he ought to do, and as the Law requires.

Ver. 7. Blessed are th^y] That is, Just are they; or, rather they are
Justified See the notes on that word Blessedness, ver. 5.

Whose Inquities are forgiven] Then are Iniquities said to be forgiven, when
God does pardon him that commits them, and punishes him not for them,
according to his desert.

And Iniquities are here likened to a debt, which the Creditor forgiveth and
sets not down upon Accounts.

And whose sins are covered.] These words are the same for sense with those,
Whose iniquities are forgiven.

When God is said, not to behold; or, not to see iniquity in sinful men, he
does forgive them Numb. 23.21. The contrary whereof is, when he is said, to set
men's iniquities in His sight as Psalm. 90.8. Now because when a thing is
covered, a man cannot see it; therefore when our sins are said to be covered,
they are forgiven. So when Hezekiah said, Thou have cast all my sins behind
thy back, Isai. 38.17. It is as if he should say, Thou have forgiven me my
sins; for we see not those things, which are behind our back: So when David
says, Hide thy face from my sins, Psalm. 51.9 It is as if he should say, Pardon
my sins; for we see not those things, from which we turn our face.

V. 8. To whom the Lord will not impute sin.] i e. Upon whose account the Lord
will not set down sin, as a debt for him to pay or satisfy, by punishment: For
that the word (...) signifies most properly, to wit, to set down upon account
as a debt.

That sins are often called debts, we may learn, Matthew. 6.12. and as of such,
does the Apostle speak of them, here.

V. 9. Comes this blessedness then upon the Circumcision only or upon the
uncircumcision also.] q. d Comes then this justification, which is by faith
upon those only that are circumcised, or upon those also, which are not
circumcised.

This blessedness] By Blessedness is here meant Righteousness or justification,
for he calls that Blessedness here, which he calls Righteousness, in the last
word of this verse, See ver. 6.

Upon the Circumcision.] By the Circumcision are here meant the Jews, which
were circumcised, Per Metonymiam Adjuncti, as Chap. 2.27.

Upon the uncircumcision.] By the uncircumcision are meant the Gentiles, which
were not circumcised (by the same figure) as Chap. 3.30.

Note, that the Jews even they which were converted to Christianity, could not
be persuaded that the uncircumcised, that is, the Gentiles (whom they held as
unclean) could have any benefit of the Messiah, which is Christ, but held and
maintained the contrary: Therefore Saint Paul as often as he has occasion, in
this his Epistle; does confute this their erroneous Tenet and Persuasion. And
it stood him upon so to do: For whereas he wrote to the Romans, which were
Gentiles (but among whom many Jews of this judgment and persuasion lived) to
convert some to, and confirm others in Christianity; his labor might have
proved in vain, if he had not confuted those Jews, and made it appear that the
believing Gentiles, though they were not circumcised, had as great benefit in
matter of justification, as the Jews had, which were circumcised.

For we say that faith was reckoned to Abraham for Righteousness:] That which
he says, concerning this. That faith was reckoned to Abraham for
Righteousness, he says ver. 3. from thence therefore does the Apostle take an
occasion, to show here, that the uncircumcised Gentiles, were through their
faith, accepted of God for Righteousness, as well as the circumcised Jews (For
here by these words, which we have in hand. He declares, upon what occasion he
moves the Question, which he moved, in the former part of the verse.) And to
the third verse, does that which he here says, relate. Only he makes use of
the word blessedness for justification, by occasion of the word so used, ver. 6.

For Righteousness.] i. e. For justification.

This is that which he called Blessedness in the former part of this verse.

V. 10. How was it then reckoned?] i. e. When was this faith then reckoned to
Abraham for Righteousness?

How is put here, for when.

Reckoned.] i. e. Counted, The Greek word is the same here, as ver. 3.

When he was in Circumcision, or, in uncircumcision.] i. e. Was faith, then
first reckoned to Abraham for Righteousness, when he was in Circumcision, that
is, when he was circumcised, or, was it reckoned to him, when he was in
uncircumcision; That is, before he was circumcised.

The Apostle moves this question, to resolve that question which he made ver.
9. to wit, Comes this blessedness then upon the circumcision only, or upon the
uncircumcision also? For by the Answer, which he will give to this Question, it
will appear for resolution of the first Question, That this Blessedness comes
as well upon the uncircumcision, which believes, as upon the Circumcision.

Not in Circumcision but in uncircumcision.] i. e. Faith was then first
reckoned to Abraham, when he was in uncircumcision, that is, before he was
circumcised.

The truth of this Answer will appear out of the History of Abraham, and of his
Circumcision, which we read of Genesis 15.16, 17. And by this Answer it is
evident, that if a Man, which is uncircumcised, believes God, his
uncircumcision shall not hinder his faith from being imputed to him for
Righteousness.

V. 11. And he received the Sign of circumcision a seal of the Righteousness
which he had yet being uncircumcised.] i. e. And he was circumcised, not
before, but after that he had believed; And after that, that God had imputed
this his belief unto him for Righteousness. And this his Circumcision, was a
seal or testimony to confirm unto him from God, that God had accepted that
belief of his (which he had of his promises in the time of his uncircumcision)
for Righteousness, and that he had justified him for that.

The Sign of uncircumcision] That is, circumcision which is a Sign.
Circumcision is the cutting off of the Foreskin which covers the head or nut
of a man's yard, Genesis 17.11.

And Circumcision is here called a Sign, First, because it was a Sign between
God on the one part^ and Abraham and his children on the other part of that
Covenant, which God made with Abraham and his seed, Genesis 17.11. Secondly,
because it was a Sign of distinction, whereby the seed of Abraham, were
distinguished from other People.

Thirdly, it is called a Sign here because it was a Sign that God did accept of
the faith of Abraham for Righteousness.

A seal of the Righteousness of Faith, etc.] That is, as a seal or testimony to
confirm or assure to Abraham, that God did accept of that faith which he had,
while he was yet uncricumcised, for Righteousness.

Among diverse uses of a Seal, this is one, to confirm and ratify that to which
it is put; Abraham therefore is said to have received Circumcision as a Seal of
the Righteousness of the faith which he had, being yet uncircumsed, because God
did ratify and confirm to him by that, that he did justify him, for that his
faith, which he had before his Circumcision. For though Abraham did circumcise
himself, yet it was at Gods Command, and God calls Circumcision, his
Covenant, that is, his Sign or Seal of the Covenant, that Covenant which was
between him, and Abraham, Genesis 17.13.

That he might be the Father of all them that believe though they be not
circumcised, etc.] q. d. And this was so ordered, by the Providence and
Government of God, (to wit, that Abraham should believe, and that his belief,
should be imputed to him for Righteousness, while he was yet uncircumcised: And
that after this Abraham should receive Circumcision as a Testimony of that
Righteousness which was accounted or reckoned to him, for that his faith,) That
Abraham might be by this, Father both of the uncircumcised Gentile which
believed, and the circumcised Jew which believed: Of the uncircumcised Gentile,
which believed, inasmuch as he believed, and that his belief was reckoned unto
him for Righteousness before he was circumcised: And of the circumcised Jew,
which believed, inasmuch as he received Circumcision, as a Seal or Testimony of
the Righteousness, which he received through faith, before he was circumcised.

That he might be a Father of all them that believed though they be not
circumcised.] i. e. That being that faith was reckoned to Abraham, while he was
(not in Circumcision but) in uncircumcision, he might be the Father of all the
uncircumcised Gentiles, which believe, though they be not circumcised; That is,
That he might be a Pattern, or President, or Example to all the uncircumcised
Gentiles which believe, though they be not circumcised; And such a Pattern,
President, or Example, as that God himself did set forth, to be such, and by
whose example they might be assured, that they should be justified.

By these words [All them] we must understand the uncircumcised Gentiles: And
note, that the words in the Original, viz. (...), may be rendered thus, All that
believe in the State of uncircumcision: For (...) may be taken for (...).

That he might be a Father of All, etc.] The word Father is to be taken here,
not in a common literal sense, as it is verse 1. but in a Mystical sense, in
which sense he is said to be a Father, which is as a President, or Pattern, or
Example to another in any kind.

Abraham therefore is said to be the Father of all them that are uncircumcised,
and believe, that righteousness might be imputed to them also; because he was a
President, or Pattern, or Example (and that of Gods setting out) which the
uncircumcised Gentiles might look upon, and see in him, that if they believed,
they might be justified, though they were uncircumcised, because he was
justified through faith, when was yet uncircumcised: And which the circumcised
Jews might also look upon, and see in him, that if they did believe, as well as
they were circumcised, they might be justified through their faith, in as much
as he was therefore circumcised, that his circumcision might be a Seal or
Testimony of the righteousness of the faith which he had, being yet
uncircumcised.

That righteousness might be imputed to them also] i. e. That it might appear
by the Example of Abraham, to whom righteousness was imputed, by reason of the
faith which he had, being yet uncircumcised, that to them also righteousness
should be imputed, by reason of their faith (as well as it was to Abraham)
though they be not circumcised.

That righteousness might be imputed, etc] That righteousness might be imputed,
is put here, for That righteousness might appear to be imputed, or, That it
might appear that righteousness should be imputed: As that God may be just, is
put for, that God may appear to be just, Chap. 3. v. 26. For words, signifying
the existency of a thing, are sometimes put to signify, the manifestation or
appearance of that thing it self which does exist.

To them also] i. e. To them as it was to Abraham.

Note here, that it is all one to say, Faith is imputed, or entered upon account
to a man for righteousness: and to say, Righteousness is imputed or entered upon
accounts to a man, to be paid, as it were, to him for his faith.

The word^ in the Greek are (...) and (...), is a word drawn Metaphorically
from Merchants or Accountants, as I observed before.

Ver. 12. And the Father of Circumcision] And that by reason of his
circumcision, which he received after his faith, and in Testimony thereof, he
might be a Father to them who are of the circumcision, but so, as that they are
not of the circumcision only, but also walk in the steps of the faith of our
Father Abraham, etc.

Where note, that in the Original the word (...); i. e. By reason of; is to be
understood, which is often left so to be understood in the Greek Language.

Whereas there is a twofold circumcision; one outward, and the other inward:
One of the flesh, whereby the foreskin of the Yard was cut off: The other of
the heart or spirit, whereby the vices or sins of the heart are, as it were,
cut off, and cast away, such as are infidelity, or unbelief, and the like: This
is to be understood of the outward circumcision, if not solely, yet
principally, as appears, ver. 11.

But nevertheless the word (...), Of Circumcision, may be here taken, for those
which be circumcised, as it is taken Chap. 3. v. 30. even without a Prepositive
Article: and then the sense may be this, q.d. And that he might be the Father
of those which are circumcised, but yet, though they are circumcised, do also
walk in the steps of our Father Abraham, that is, which imitate his faith which
he had, while he was yet uncircumcised.

Of Circumcision, therefore is put for Of those which are Circumcised; and when
he says in the next words, To them which are not of the Circumcision only; I
conceive, that he explains, or limits, or corrects his former words, and tells
what he means when he says, of Circumcision, yet the case varieth, in the
limitation, or explanation, or correction from what went before, which yet is
no absurdity in Grammar.

To them who are not of the Circumcision only, but also walk in the steps of
the Faith of our Father Abraham, which he had, being yet uncircumcised] i. e.
To those which are circumcised, yet so circumcised, as that they are not only
circumcised (as though that were enough to make them Abraham's Children) but do
also imitate Abraham in that his faith, which he had, while he was yet
uncircumcised

Who are not of the Circumcision only] i. e. Who are the Children of
circumcision, yet though they are the Children of the circumcision, that is,
who though they are circumcised, yet are not only Children of the circumcision,
that is, are not only circumcised, but also, etc.

Of the Circumcision] To be of the circumcision, is as much to say, as to be
children of the circumcision: and to be Children of the circumcision, is as
much to say, as to be circumcised, by an Hebrew kind of phrase or speech, which
we meet with often in Saint Paul's Epistles.

But also in the steps of that faith of our Father Abraham, which he had being
yet uncircumcised] i e. But also imitate our Father Abraham, and follow his
example, in so believing, as he believed, while he was yet uncircumcised.

This Phrase, To walk in the steps is Metaphorical, taken from one, which
following another close, steppeth in the steps of him which went before, and it
signifies, to imitate.

Note, that those words [that righteousness might be imputed to them also]
which are expressed in the latter end of the eleventh verse, are to be repeated
or understood here, in the latter end of this verse also.

The Apostle, because there were such of the circumcision, that is, such of the
circumcised Jews as were circumcised, and did not believe: And others which
were both circumcised and did believe also, does show here, to which of these
two Abraham was to be accounted a Father: He was to be accounted a Father, not
to those which were only circumcised, but to those which were circumcised and
did believe too.

Ver. 13. For the promise that he should be the heir of the world, was not to
Abraham, or to his Seed, through the Law, but through the righteousness of
faith] i. e. For the promise which was made to Abraham or to his Seed, to wit,
That he should be Lord or Owner of the Land of Canaan, was not made to Abraham,
or to his Seed, through the Law, which was given by Moses, or for that, that he
or they kept the Law of Moses fully and exactly as the Law requires, but
through faith, that is, for that, that he or they believed God.

This is another Argument by which the Apostle proves, that Abraham was not
justified by works: And it has its immediate relation to the second verse
(that which comes in between, coming in by the current of his speech, and that
which he gathers out of it.) For whereas he says in the second verse, that if
Abraham were justified by works he had whereof to glory, etc. A Jew might say,
but how could he otherwise be justified than by works, when as the promise that
he and his Seed should be heirs of the world (which was a Type of their
justification) was through the Law of Moses. To this the Apostle here answers,
by denying that the promise was to Abraham and his Seed through the Law, and by
affirming, that it was through the righteousness of faith: For the promise,
that he should be heir of the world, says he, was not to Abraham or his Seed
through the Law, etc.

That he should be the heir] By He, is meant Abraham, and by an Heir, is meant
the Lord here, that is, the Owner or Possessor of a thing: For both the
Hebrews, and also the ancient Latins called Lords, Haeredes, Heirs. And
according to this, a Possession is called an Inheritance, Psalm 2. v. 8. Where
it is said, Ask of me and I will give thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance,
that is, for thy Possession.

Of the world] By the World is meant here the Land of Canaan, which was but a
part, yea a little part (though once a fruitful part, and containing in it many
petty Kingdoms) of this Transitory World, by a Synechdoche.

Was not to Abraham or his Seed] That is, was not made to Abraham, or to his
Children to wit, Isaac, and Jocob, etc.

The promise of the Land of Canaan, was made to Abraham and his Children, Isaac
and Jacob. And not for their own righteousness, but for the promise made to
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, their forefathers, did the Israelites afterward
possess that Land Deuteronomy. 9.5.

Through the Law] i e. Through the works of the Law, or because they had kept
the Law which was given by Moses, strictly and exactly, as it ought to be kept.

Nor Abraham, nor Isaac, nor Jacob could be said to keep the Law which was
given by Moses; for it was not given till a long time after their death: and
that the promise of the Land of Canaan, was made to them before the giving of
the Law; it was a Type, that justification which was typified by the Land of
Canaan, should not be by the Law, or to them which were under the Law, as such.

The Land of Canaan was a Type of all Spiritual and Heavenly Happiness, and
therefore a Type not of justification only, but of glorification also; but it
is here put only as a Type of justification, by a kind of Synechdoche.

But through the righteousness of faith] That is, but through faith which
justifies a man.

The Righteousness of Faith, is put here Per Metonymiam effectus, for Faith it
self, which conferreth or procures Righteousness or Justification.

Note, that that which the Apostle has said, in this verse, is the literal or
Historical sense of what he says; out of which he leaves us to gather the
Spiritual or Mystical sense, which is this Now as the Promise, that he should
be heir of the Land of Canaan, was not made to Abraham, or to his carnal seed,
through the Law, but through the righteousness of faith: So the Spiritual or
Mystical promise of Justification was not made to Abraham, or his Spiritual
seed, through the Law, or with respect to that, no not when the Law should
come: but through faith, and with respect only to that, which should not fail
to justify those that believed.

Ver. 14. For if they which are of the Law be heirs] i. e. For if they shall be
the Heirs, to wit, of justification (which was typified by the Land of Canaan)
and shall inherit that, who are the Children of the Law, and under that, and
that by virtue of the Law, etc.

These Words have their dependence upon the verse going next before, but not as
it is taken in the Literal sense, but in the Mystical sense, which we gave of
it. For the Apostle leaving the literal sense of what he said there, comes here
to the Mystical sense.

Faith is made void] The way of obtaining Justification by Faith, which was the
way by which Abraham was justified, and by which God promised to justify his
children, is made void. And therefore is it made void, because God has
appointed but one way for justification, for there is no difference of ways,
as to that, Chap 3. ver. 22 And Faith, and the Law are so different, as that
they cannot stand together, for faith supposes sin in him, that is to be
justified, but the Law excludes all sin. So that he that is justified by the
Law, is supposed never to have sinned. Read Chapter 10. from ver. 5 to ver. 12.

And the promise made of none effect] i e. And the promise of Justification,
which God made to Abraham and to his children, is become of none effect; the
condition thereunto required, being changed, from faith, or believing, to the
exact fulfilling of the Law.

That the condition required to justification, being changed from faith, or
believing, to the exact fulfilling of the Law; the promise it self of
justification is made of none effect, the Apostle shows in the next words.

Justification if it be by the Law, cannot be properly called a Promise, Gal.
3.18. yet he calls it so here, materialiter, as not knowing well, how to call
it otherwise in this his discourse.

Ver. 15. Because the Law works wrath] i e. Because the Law is so far from
making them, acceptable to God, which are of, or under the Law, that they may
be justified by him, and so receive the promise of justification, which he
promised to Abraham and his children; as that it stirs up Gods anger against
them.

The Law stirs up Gods anger against them, that are under it, not only in that
the Law calls for punishment against them, which transgress it; but also
because it is an occasion to them which are under it to sin more, and more, and
more grievously, than otherwise they would do. For I was a live without the Law
once, says the Apostle, but when the Commandment came sin revived and I died,
Romans 7 9. And again ver. 8. Sin taking occasion by the commandment wrought in
me all manner of Concupiscence. But now that this fell out thus by the Law, the
fault was not in the Law, but in the vitiousness of those which were under it,
or to whom it was given, See those places, Romans 7

For where there is no Law, there is no transgression] When he says; Where
there is no Law, there is no transgression; he leaves us togather, that where
there is a Law, there is transgression, and that frequent transgression too.

(...) or a Transgression signifies here, not every sin, which is committed by
a Man, but such a sin as he commits against a Law plainly given, either by word
of mouth, or by handwriting.

(...), that is Transgression being a sin committed against a Law plainly and
distinctly given, and that either by word of mouth, or by hand writing, is
Caeteris paribus, a more heinous and grievous sin, than that which is committed
against a Law, which is not so given and redounds more to the dishonor of the
Lawgiver.

The Apostle, by that which he says here, proves that which he said
immediately before, to wit, that the Law works wrath. For if where the Law
is, there are transgressions: and there be no such sins as transgressions,
where the Law is not; it is evident, that the Law is the occasion thereof,
though not by its own fault, yet by the fault of the man, to whom it is given:
And therefore the Law works wrath, in that it does not only multiply sins
occasionally, but elevate those sins to an higher nature, and makes them
Transgressions, as I showed before.

Ver 16. Therefore it is of Faith] Therefore the promise of Justification,
which God made to Abraham, and to his children, is of faith, that is, is to be
attained by faith.

There is no way of obtaining justification (which is the promise which God
made to Abraham, and to his children) but either by the Law, or by faith. Being
therefore that the Apostle, has proved, that it cannot be obtained by the Law,
he may well conclude, that it is to be obtained by Faith, which is that, which
he says, when he says, Therefore it is of Faith.

That it might be by grace] If it had been by the Law, it would not have been
of Grace, but of debt, ver. 4.

To the end the promise might be sure] i. e. To the end that the promise of
justification, which God made to Abraham, and to his children or his seed,
might be sure.

Sure] The Greek word is (...), firm.

He says, that the Promise, which he speaks off, may be (...), that is, sure
or firm, in the regard of the condition required to the obtaining of it; for
the condition of it, being of Faith is such as may be performed and so the
promise obtained, and sure; whereas if it had been of the Law, it would not
have been so.

He opposes here (...) the sure or firm promise to (...), or the promise made
of none effect, verse 14. though not in words, yet in sense.

To all the Seed] By Seed he means not the bodily seed, or the children born
of Abraham's body, as he did ver. 13. But he means the spiritual seed, or
spiritual children of Abraham, that is all such as believe the word of God, as
Abraham did, and imitate his faith, I say, he means all such whether they be
Jews or Gentiles, under the Law, or without the Law.

Not to that only which is of the Law] i e. Not to that only which are the
children of the Law, that is, which are under the Law, or to which the Law is
given. By this he means the Jews.

Note, that this Phrase, which is of the Law, is the same for substance with
that which we read ver. 14. But yet there is this difference, that there is
meant by such as are of the Law, such as being under the Law, sought for
justification by the Law. Here are meant such, as though they were under the
Law, yet sought not for justification by the Law, but by Faith in Christ.

But to that also which is of the faith of Abraham] i. e. But to that also,
which only believes, as Abraham did. Supple, though they are not of or under
the Law; or, though they never had the Law given them, as the Jews had.

By these he means the Gentiles.

Who is the Father of us all] Who is the Father of us all, which believe,
whether we be of the Law, or not of the Law, that is, whether we be Jews or
Gentiles.

He speaks not of Abraham, neither does he call him the Father of us all in the
like sense here, as he did ver. 1. For there he spoke of him in the vulgar
manner, as he was the Father of all the Jews according to the flesh: and called
him the Father of all the Jews, whether they did believe or no. Here he speaks
of him, as he was a Father in a Mystical sense, That is, as he was the
spiritual father of all which believed, whether they were Jews or Gentiles,
under the Law, or without the Law.

V. 17. As it is written] To wit Genesis 17.5.

I have made thee a Father of many Nations.] i. e. I will surely make thee a
Father of many Nations.

A Praeterpersect tense is put here for a Future to show the certainty of the
Event, of that of which he speaks of.

Those words as they lie in Genesis carry a double sense with them, to wit, a
Literal or Historical sense, and a Mystical or Sublim sense. According to the
Literal or Historical sense, they are to be understood of such Nations as
descended from Abraham by carnal Propagation. (And many Nations descended from
him that way, as the Israelites, Ishmalites, Edomites, Amalekites, etc.)
According to the Mystical or Sublim sense, they are to be taken of such, as did
imitate the faith of Abraham, and were like to him in that: And in this sense
Abraham was called a Father of many Nations, because he was set out by God, as
a President or Example to them, that they might be moved to believe God and so
be justified by their faith, as Abraham, believed God, and was justified by his
faith.

And many Nations have become Children of Abraham this way.

If you ask now in which sense these words are to be understood here, I say in
the Mystical or Sublime sense.

Before him whom he believed] i. e. In sight of him whom he believed.

By him whom he believed is meant God (as appears by the next words) whom He,
to wit, Abraham believed, when He, to wit, God promised to give him a Son in
his old age, and to multiply his seed as the Stars of Heaven.

These words before him, whom he believed are to be referred to those, Who is
the Father of us all, q. d. Who is the Father of us all, before him, or in the
sight of him whom he believed.

And these words Before God, or, in the Sight of God, use to show the truth or
reality of a thing, as Gen 6.11. Eccles. 2 26. Luke 1 6, etc. The Apostle
therefore to show that Abraham, was the Father of us all not in word, but in
deed: Not in the Opinion of Men, but in the Judgment and Constitution and
Approbation of God, says not only that he was the Father of us all (in the
Mystical and Sublime sense before mentioned) but also adds, Before him whom he
believed, even God.

Even God who quick'neth the Dead] i. e. Even God, who raises up those to
life, which were dead.

And oalleth those things which be not, as though they were] The words in the
Original are (...), which may be rendered thus: And who calls those things
which be not, as things which be. And the sense is thus: Which gives a being
to those things, which be not, as he has done to those things which be, that
is, Which makes those things which yet be not, to be.

To call is taken here for To make, after the Hebrew manner of Speech So it is
said, Cap. 9.25. I will call them my People, which were not my People, and Her
Beloved, which was not my beloved, for, I will make them my people, which were
not my people, and her beloved, which was not my Beloved.

To call as it signifies To make seems to be spoken, if not only yet
principally of God; And that to show the Greatness of his power, who by his
word can produce what he pleases, as he did Genes. 1.

To call therefore things, which are not, as things which are, is as if he
should call things that are not, and say unto them, O ye things which are not,
come out of your nothing, and be ye something, as things which are, and they
should obey.

Man calls only things which are, as a Master his Servant to come to him: But
God calls even things which are not, and they come at his call.

Note, that some understand these words, That quickneth the dead, and calls
the things which are not, as those that be, in relation to the carnal seed, or
to the children of Abraham according to the flesh, of which the Apostle speaks in
the following part of this chapter: And then these words must be understood of
Gods enabling Abraham to beget, and Sarah to conceive, when in respect of
Generation, Abraham; and in respect of Conception Sarah were now as dead, being
that they were both decreped, and unfit by nature, the one to beget, the other
to conceive and bear Children.

By the Dead in this Sense, we must understand such as are unfit for Generation
and Conception, by a Metaphor: And by making such alive, is meant giving power
to such to beget, and conceive with child respectively, by the like Metaphor:
And by things which are not, are meant (not things which are absolutely without
a being, but) things which are without a certain kind of being, as Abraham
without the natural power of begetting, and Sarah without the natural power of
conceiving seed.

But others understand these words, That quickneth the dead and calls the
things which be not as those that be; as spoken in relation to the Spiritual
seed of Abraham, such as be Abraham's children by faith; And then the meaning of
this which quickneth the dead is this, which quickneth those which were dead in
trespasses and sins, by bringing them to a lively faith. See for this Ephesians.
2.1. And the meaning of those words, And calls those things which be not, as
those that be, is this, and making those believe, which did not believe before.

Now if it be asked, which of these two senses are to be preferred before
which; I conceive the Later, before the former; The sense, which interprets
these words of the Spiritual seed, before the sense which interprets those
words of the Carnal seed.

For whereas the Apostle said of Abraham, That he is the Father of us all
before him whom he believed even God, signifying thereby, that Abraham was the
Spiritual Father of us All, not in word, but in deed; not in the opinion of
Men, but in the Judgment and Approbation and Constitution of God; He goes on
to to prove that Abraham was such a Father.

And because to the being of such a Father two things are requisite: First that
Abraham should be himself a man of a sound and a strong faith: Secondly, that
there should be other men like him in his faith: He shows both these in this
latter part of the Chapter; For he shows that Abraham was strong in faith,
verse. 18, 19, 20, etc. And he shows, That God raises up daily faithful men,
out of such as were not so, in the words which we have in hand.

V. 18. Who against hope believed in hope] This is spoken of Abraham, whom he
made mention of ver. 16.

It is a great Trajection or Hyperbaton to refer this to the Sixteenth verse; I
conceive it therefore not amiss for the better Coherence of the Text, to
understand here these or the like words, between this and the former verse,
viz. That he may raise up seed unto Abraham. q. d. Who is the Father of us all
before him whom he believed even God, who quickneth the dead and calls those
things which be not, as though they were, that he may thereby raise up seed to
Abraham, who against hope believed in hope, that he might become the Father of
many Nations, etc.

The Coherence of the Text by this supplement is smooth, and who knows not,
that in the Scripture, greater supplements than this, are left to be made up?

Who against hope] i. e. Against all hope, which he could conceive, by the
course of nature, of having a child.

By the course of Nature, there was no ground of hope, either in Abraham, that
he should be a Father being that he was now old, his seed cold and without
spirits: Or in Sarah that she should be a Mother having been all her time
barren, and being now stricken in years, and it having long before this, ceased
to be with her after the manner of women, as the Scripture speaks, Genesis 18.11.

Believed in hope] i. e. Believed God promising him children, which should
multiply as the Stars of Heaven for number, and did so believe; as that he
hoped, through the power of God, that he should become the Father of so
numerous an Offspring.

The hope here spoken of, was founded upon the Omnipotent power of God, and his
Veracity or Truth apprehended by Faith.

That he might become the Father of many Nations] i. e. To wit, That he should
be the Father of many Nations.

This word That is to be taken here (...) as specifying the Object or Thing,
which Abraham believed.

According to that which is spoken] To wit, Genes. 15.5.

So shall thy seed be] i. e. Thy seed shall be as the Stars of heaven, which
cannot be numbered.

These words contain the promise of God which Abraham believed, and they are
taken out of Genes. 15.5. where it is written, that the Lord brought Abraham
forth abroad and said; Look now toward heaven and tell the Stars if thou be
able to number them: And he said unto him, so shall thy seed be.

V. 19. And being not weak in faith] The Apostle commends here the faith of
Abraham, and he does it (after the manner of the Hebrews) by denying the
contrary of that, which he would strongly affirm which kind of figure the
Grammarians call (...).

He is said to be weak in faith, which doubts of any thing: See Chap. 14.1.
And compare it with 1 Cor. 8. v 7, 12.

He considered not his own body now dead] i. e. He considered not that
feebleness or disability of his own body, so as by reason of that, to doubt or
despair of the promise of God.

These words are thus to be understood, and with this or the like limitation
for otherwise Abraham did consider both his own body now dead, and the deadness
of Sarah's womb, Genes. 17.17.

Now dead] i. e. Now old and feeble, and unfit for generation, and as it were
dead in respect of that, See notes, ver. 17.

The deadness of Sarah's womb] i. e. The barrenness of Sarah's womb and the
indisposition thereof to Conception.

V. 20. He staggered not at the promise of God] i. e. He doubted not of the
Promise of God.

He which doubts, is like a staggering man, for as a staggering man reeleth
now to one hand, and now to another: So does the man that doubts, lean
sometimes to one thing, and sometimes declins from it again.

There were two things considerable, here in this case of Abraham, the Power
and Veracity of God on the one side; and the deadness of his own Body and of
Sarah's Womb on the other. Though Abraham might believe the promise of God,
when he considered the Power and Truth of God: yet (if he had not been
exceeding strong in faith) he might have declined and leaned to unbelief, when
he considered, that he himself and Sarah his Wife were both dead, that is, both
unfit, he to beget and she to conceive Children, by the course of Nature.

Giving glory to God] i. e. Believing God and relying upon his promise.

He is said to give glory to God, which does, or says, or thinks any thing,
which is honorable to God, or which is suitable to his Majesty and Attributes.

Therefore because it is honorable to God to say or think, that God is true
and able to bring to pass whatsoever he will, and (in consideration and faith
thereof) to rely upon his promises; Abraham is said here to give glory to God,
when he believed God, and relied upon his word: So when Joshua would have Achan
to confess his sin, he said My Son, give, I pray thee, glory to the Lord God of
Israel, Josh. 7.19. And this he said, because by this confession, Achan would
declare, that God saw secret things, and that he was not deceived, in that he
saw Achans sin, and singled him out among all the men of Israel, as guilty of
that sin: which was a thing honorable to God.

V. 21. He was able also to perform] Promises are taken for as good as
Performances where there is no doubt, either of the will or of the power of him
which promises: Now that God had a will to perform what he promises, is easy
to believe: But not so easy to believe, that he has a power to perform what he
promises; for many wise men of the world, took God to be nothing else but
Nature, and therefore believed nothing which was promised above Nature: But
Abraham believed that which was abo ve Nature here, and therefore it is said to
his praise here, that he was fully persuaded that what God promised he was able
also to perform.

Ver. 22. And therefore it was imputed to him for righteousness] And because
Abraham was thus persuaded, and did firmly believe, that God was able to make
him the Father of a Seed, as many as the Stars of Heaven for number, therefore
was this his faith, or this, that he was thus persuaded, and that he did thus
believe, imputed or counted to him for righteousness.

This Illative Therefore does not signify, that the faith which was here
imputed or counted (rather) to Abraham for righteousness, did merit the
righteousness for which it was imputed, or counted to him; but only shows the
soundness and sincerity of his faith, or that, that God saw it to be true,
sound and sincere.

Imputed to him for righteousness] The words in the Original are (...), which
may be rendered, Was counted or set upon accounts to him for righteousness.

(...) signifies properly to Enter any thing upon the accounts of a man: And
it is a word (as I have said before) borrowed from Merchants, which upon their
Book of accounts with a man, enter the Wares which they have had of him, and
the price or goods which they are to give in exchange for them: Here faith is
as it were, the Ware, Righteousness the Price or Goods to be given for it.

The Object of this faith, which is here said to be imputed or counted rather
to Abraham for Righteousness, is this, (as plainly appears by the Context) that
God promised Abraham to make him a Father of many Nations, and to give him a
Seed as the Stars of heaven for multitude, and that out of his own Body, by
carnal Propagation; The belief of that, I say, is that, which is counted here
to Abraham for Righteousness.

Where note, that though never any man of years, was justified without says:
Nor ever any man was justified without the merits of Christ. And that whosoever
is justified now under the Gospel by faith, must have an Explicit and
particular faith of Jesus Christ: yet before the Gospel, a General faith was
sufficient to justification: For as the Gospel was but rudely drawn to them,
which lived before Christ: So was the faith required of them, but rude (as I
may say) and general; and such, as if they did believe the general promises of
God made to them, and rely upon them, and live, or resolve to live, as those
that did expect the performance of those promises, their faith should, for
Christ's sake which was to come, be counted to them for Righteousness.

Ver. 23. Now it was not written for his sake alone that it was counted to him,
etc.] Now this, that the faith or belief of Abraham, was imputed or counted
(rather) to him for Righteousness, was written indeed for Abraham's sake, Genesis
15.6. But it was not written for Abraham's sake alone, that it was imputed or
counted to him for Righteousness, but for our sakes also, etc.

That which is written Genesis 15.6. That Abraham believed in the Lord, and he
counted it to him for Righteousness was written for Abraham's sake, that
Abraham might be praised, and had in repute amongst men, for this his faith,
and accounted by them, worthy to be the Father of many Nations: But yet it was
not written for his sake alone, or for this end only, that he might be praised
and had in repute among men, and accounted by them worthy to be the Father of
many Nations: But it was written for our sakes also, to assure us, that if we
believe the Gospel as firmly as Abraham believed what God promised him, we
shall be justified by our faith, as Abraham was by his.

Ver. 24. But for us also] i. e. But for our sakes also.

To whom it shall be imputed] i. e. To whom that that we believe shall be
imputed or counted for Righteousness.

If we believe on him] i. e. If we rely on him, and trust on him for the
performance of his promises made to us.

Whom he means by Him, he shows in the next words.

If we truly believe the promises of God, we cannot but trust in God, and rely
on him for performance of those his promises: Wherefore (as I have observed
before) by reason of the near connection of these two, one with the other; To
rely on God and trust in him or believe in him is often put Per Metonymiam
Consequentis, for to believe him and his promises.

Him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead] By this Periphrasis he
means God, for God is said to have raised up Jesus having loosed the pains of
death, Acts 2.24.

He describes God here by this, That he raised up Jesus our Lord from the
dead, because it contains a notable Argument to induce us to believe in God,
as Saint Peter teaches, 1 Pet. 1.21. And because this that he raised up Christ
from the dead; is as it were a Compendium of our faith: For he that believes
this, believes that Jesus is the Christ, and that he is the Savior of the
world, who dyed and rose again for our Salvation, and that he shall be our
Judge at the last day, Acts 17.31, etc.

Again, he describes God by this, That he raised up Jesus our Lord from the
dead, in this place; because he would allude to that which Abraham believed
here, who though he saw both his own Body now dead, and the deadness of Sarah's
Womb, v. 19. yet he believed that God could raise them both, from that death or
deadness.

Ver. 25. Who was delivered] To wit, to death. Jesus Christ was delivered to
death by God the Father, Romans 8.32.

The Apostle had rather say, who was delivered, to wit, to death, than who
dyed, because the Expiation of our sins, did depend upon the good pleasure of
God, who would this way be appeased for the sins of Man.

For our offences] i. e. For the Expiation and taking away of our sins,
Metonymia Objecti.

And rose again] To wit, from the dead.

For our Justification] i. e. For the Remission of our sins.

This is, as if he should have said, who both dyed (through the appointment of
God) and rose again for our justification, or for the remission of our sins.

The Apostle therefore expresses one and the same thing here, by two several
phrases; the like to which he did, Chap. 3. verse 30.

Christ dyed that he might, as a Surety for us, pay the debt which was due from
us for our sins, to wit, death, and so deliver us from those our sins; hence
Christ is said to redeem us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for
us, Gal. 3.13. But yet the death of Christ, and his undergoing the Curse of the
Law for us, would have availed us nothing, if that Christ had always lain
under death and always lain under the Curse of the Law, as being overcome and
conquered and kept Captive thereby: For to be detained always a Prisoner in
that Prison, from whence there is no coming forth, before the payment of the
uttermost farthing, Mat. 5.26. is to be always under execution, and to evacuate
and null the Plea of the full payment of our debt, for which our Surety stood
engaged for us.

Therefore it was necessary, that Christ (that he might redeem us fully and pay
our full debt) should not only dye for us, but also rise again, and upon this
ground does our Apostle rightly conclude; that if Christ be not raised, our
faith is vain, we are yet in our sins, 1 Cor. 15.17. And hence it is, that he
says, Rom 8.34. It is Christ that dyed, yea rather that is risen again

And not only for this reason may Christ be said to rise again for our
justification, but also for that, That he when he arose from the dead, he arose
that he might ascend into Heaven, there to appear in the presence of God for
us, Heb. 9.24 Where he is at the right hand of God, and makes intercession for
us, Romans 8.38.

CHAP. V.
1. THerefore being justified by says, we have peace with God, through our
Lord Jesus Christ.

1. I have showed you hitherto, that we are not justified by works, but by
faith. And now that I have showed you, that we are justified by faith, let me
show you how many and great benefits do accrue to us, by this justification.

Therefore being justified by faith, the wrath of God is appeased toward us,
and God is at peace with us, for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake.

2. By whom also we have access by faith into this grace wherein we stand, and
rejoice in hope of the glory of God.

2. (By whom also we have access by faith, into this grace and favor of
Justification, wherein we stand) And we have hope of the glory of God, to wit,
that we shall one day enjoy it, and be made partakers of it, which hope does
even now joy and rejoice our hearts.

3. And not only so, but we glory in tribulations also, knowing, that
tribulation works patience:

3. And not only so (but least that any should say; surely God is not at peace
with us nor can we rejoice in the hope of the glory of God, because we are
afflicted and suffer more tribulations, than any kind of men in the world
besides, which may seem not to stand with the peace and friendship of God, and
not to be incident to the Heirs of eternal glory) we glory and rejoice in
tribulations also, knowing, that tribulation (though it works impatience in men
of the world, yet it) works patience in us.

4. And patience, experience: and experience, hope:

4. And patience works Experience in us of those gracious gifts and virtues,
which God out of his love has given us by the Holy Ghost; and experience of
these gracious gifts and virtues, works hope in us of eternal glory.

5. And hope makes not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our
hearts, by the holy Ghost, which is given unto us.

5. And this hope which is wrought in us by this experience, will not fail us,
and prove a vain hope, so as that we shall be ashamed at the last for missing
of what we hope for: For the sense and feeling of the love of God (who will
make all them which he thus loves, partakers of Glory and life everlasting) is
shed abroad in our hearts in a plentiful measure, by those gifts of the Holy
Ghost, which he has given unto us, which gifts are not only signs and tokens
of his love to us, but pledges also, and earnests of eternal Glory.

6. For when we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died for the
ungodly.

6. I said that being we are justified by faith, the wrath of God is appeased
toward us and that God is at peace with us for our Lord Christ Jesus sake; And
that we rejoice in hope of the Glory of God ( ver. 1, 2.) all which I now
prove, for when we had no strength to do any good, but were as yet ungodly, and
so sinners, Christ in due time died for us.

7. For scarcely for a righteous man will one die: yet peradventure for a good
man, some would even dare to die.

7. And this shows the exceeding love of God toward us, in that Christ dyed
for us, while we yet had no strength to do good, but were as yet ungodly and
sinners: for scarcely for a righteous man will one die; yet perhaps for a man
that has been good to him, some will even endure to die.

8. But God commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners,
Christ died for us.

8. But God commends his love toward us in this, that while we were yet
sinners and ungodly (and so enemies to him) Christ through his appointment,
died for us.

9. Much more then, being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from
wrath through him.

9. And now, if when we were yet sinners Christ died for us, much more then
shall we, being justified from our sins, by his blood, be saved from the wrath
to come, through him.

10. For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God, by the death of
his Son: much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life.

10. For if when we were enemies to him (as we were, when we were sinners) we
were reconciled by the death of his Son, which cost him his dearest blood to
reconcile us; Much more then, being now reconciled, shall we be saved from the
wrath of God by him, when it may be done without the loss of his life.

11 And not only so, but we also joy in God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom we have now received the atonement.

11. And we shall not only be saved from the wrath to come; but we shall also
be advanced to, and stated in everlasting glory; by reason of which we do
(through the faith and hope which we have thereof) joy even now in God, through
our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have already received the Atonement or
Reconciliation, and diverse gracious effects and fruits thereof, that is to say,
diverse gifts of the holy Ghost, which are as seals and pledges to us, of that
everlasting glory which we speak off.

12. Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin: and
so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned.

12. Wherefore, being that we are justified by faith, and reconciled to God
through our Lord Jesus Christ, and have through him peace with God, and hope of
everlasting glory, etc. Though we have lost much by Adam, yet we have gained
far more by Christ, than we lost by him. For as by one man, to wit, Adam, sin
entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for
that all have sinned, that is, for that all men have been made sinners by that
one Man.

13. For until the law sin was in the world: but sin is not imputed when there
is no law.

13. But here I must leave my Speech imperfect, (which I will take up and
perfect, ver. 18.) to answer an Objection; For because, I said, that all have
sinned, some men will say, That that cannot be, for they, which lived between
Adam and Moses, sinned not. For say they, between Adam and Moses, there was no
law given, either by word of mouth, as there was given to Adam, Genesis 7.2, 17.
Or by writing, as was given by Moses, Exodus 20. And as you taught, Paul, Chap.
4. ver. 15. Where there is no such law, there is no transgression, how
therefore can they, which lived between Adam and Moses, be said to be sinners,
or to have sinned, which had no law given them either by word of mouth or by
hand writing? But to this I answer, That being that at that time there was no
law publicly given by word of mouth (as that was, which was given to Adam) or
given in outward writing (as that was, which was afterward given by Moses)
there was not indeed any Transgression in that time; but yet it does not
follow, that though there was no Transgression in that time, there was no sin,
for though every Transgression be a sin, yet it does not follow that every sin
is a Transgression. I say therefore, that though there was no Law given by word
of mouth or by writing, from Adam, until the law was given by Moses, yet sin
was all the while in the world, though indeed sin was not imputed to any, as a
Transgression all that time.

14. Nevertheless, death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had
not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression, who is the figure of
him, that was to come:

14. Yet nevertheless, that you may know that sin was in the world, from the
days of Adam to the time that the law was given; death, which is the wages of
sin, and which never falls upon any one, but for sin, reigned over all men,
from the days of Adam to the days of Moses, though they had not sinned as Adam
had, who transgressed against a law which God gave him to keep, with his own
mouth; which Adam was a Figure of Christ, who indeed was then to come, but is
since come among us. And therefore was he a Figure of Christ, because as Christ
derived something to his children, so did Adam, before Christ came, derive
something to his; But yet if we come to particulars, that which Christ derived
to his children, was Grace, and the free gift of God; But that which Adam
derived to his, was Original sin, which I call here the Offense.

15. But not as the offense, so also is the free gift. For if through the
offense of one, many be dead; much more the grace of God, and the gift by
grace, which is by one man, Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many.

15. But yet not as the offense, which Adam derived to his Children, so also is
the free gift, which Christ derived to his, for equality; but this much exceeds
that: For if by the offense, which was caused by one, to wit, Adam, and by him
derived to his Children, many, to wit, so many as are born of him, are either
already dead, or shall surely die; In a much higher degree, and more plentiful
(though contrary) manner, has the grace of God, that is, the gift of grace,
which is by one man, Jesus Christ, abounded unto many, even to so many, as are
born of Christ, that they might live.

16. And not as it was by one that sinned, so is the gift: for the judgment was
by one to condemnation, but the free gift is of many offenses unto
justification.

16. Not, I say, as was the offense or sin which was by one, to wit, Adam: So
is the gift which is by one, to wit, Christ Jesus. For the Judgment of God
passed upon the Children of Adam, to their condemnation, by reason of that one
sin or offense, which Adam derived to them: But the free gift or pardon which
is derived by Christ to his Children, is the remission or pardon, not of that
one only offense, but of many other offenses, to their justification.

17. For if by one man's offense, death reigned by one, much more they which
receive abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness, shall reign in
life by one, Jesus Christ.

17. Again, if by that one sin or offense, death reigned by reason of one man,
to wit, Adam (who was the cause of that sin or offense, and who derived it to
his Children) over all the Children of Adam: After a far more bountiful and
glorious manner, shall life reign by one, to wit, Jesus Christ, over all the
Children of Christ, who receive by him abundance of grace, and of the gift of
righteousness, by the remission and pardon of their many sins and offenses.

18. Therefore as by the offense of one judgment came upon all men to
condemnation: even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all
men unto justification of life.

18. Therefore (that I may resume and perfect what I began to say, but left
unperfect verse 12.) As by reason of that original sin or offense, which was
caused by one, and by that one, to wit, Adam, derived to all his Children,
judgment came upon all men, which were born of Adam, whereby they were
condemned to death: Even so, by reason of that righteousness or justification,
which was purchased by one, even Jesus Christ, and by that one derived to all
his Children; the pardon or remission of sins, which was a free gift from God,
came upon all men, which are born of Jesus Christ, so that they are thereby
justified, and translated from death to life.

19. For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners: so by the
obedience of one, shall many be made righteous.

19. I said by reason of the offense, which was caused by one, to wit, Adam,
and I said by reason of the righteousness or justification which was purchased
by one, to wit, Jesus Christ, For as by the disobedience of one man, that one
man Adam, who disobeyed God by eating of the Tree concerning which God had
said, Thou shall not eat thereof, many, yea, so many as were born of Adam, were
made sinners, through the offense, which was caused by him: So by the obedience
of one, even Jesus Christ, who obeyed God unto death, even the death of the
Cross, shall many, yea, as many as are born of him, be justified from their
sins, through the righteousness which was purchased by him.

20 Moreover, the Law entered, that the offense might abound: but where sin
abounded grace did much more abound.

20. Moreover (least any one should say, that though sin was in the world
until the Law; yet surely when the Law was once entered, sin was taken away)
let me tell you, that the Law was so far from taking away sin, that sin did
abound by the entering in of the Law: But yet (to our comfort) when sin
abounded, the Grace and Mercy of God through Christ, did much more abound.

21. That as sin has reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through
righteousness unto eternal life, by Jesus Christ our Lord.

21. So that as sin has reigned unto death by Adam, even so the grace and
favor of God has reigned through justification and remission of sins unto
Eternal life, by Jesus Christ our Lord.

CHAP. V.
Verse. 1. Therefore being justified by faith we have peace with] The Apostle
having showed in the foregoing part of this Epistle, that we are justified (not
by the works of the Law, but) by faith comes here to show the fruit and
excellent effects, which follow, or come by that Justification.

Being justified, etc.] Concerning the signification of this word, See Chapter
6. ver. 7.

We have peace with God] That is, God is at peace with us, so that though we
have sinned, yet God will nor pour out his wrath upon us for our sins, as he
will upon other sinners; because we are justified by Faith.

These words are not so to be understood, as though the meaning thereof were,
that we were peaceably affected toward God: But so, as that God is peaceably
affected toward us.

And the word Peace here, is opposed to Wrath, to wit, the Wrath of God of
which he speaks ver. 9. And not God, but we are the Object of this Peace, or
they, to whom this peace is showed, and God is as the Subject; so when we say
we have favor with God, God is the Subject, we the Object to whom this favor
is showed.

Through our Lord Jesus Christ] i. e. Through the merits and mediation of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

Jesus Christ is called here our Lord, because he bought us with a Price, 1
Cor. 6.20. 2 Pet. 2.1. which Price was his own blood, with which price he
redeemed us out of the bondage of the Devil, and of sin, and of death, and
challenged us as it were, and owned, and asserted us for his peculiar Servants
before Gods Tribunal,

He may be also called our Lord, because of the Power, which God gave him over
all things, in Heaven and in Earth, Acts 10.36.

Vert 2. By whom also we have access by Faith into this Grace wherein we stand]
The Grace, which here he speaks of, and wherein, he says, we stand, is the
Grace of justification, q. d. Through whom also we have this Grace, or this
free gift, which we enjoy, to wit, That we are justified by Faith.

Though we are justified by ^aith; yet it is by the Grace and Favor of God
toward us through the merits and mediation of Christ that we are thus
justified: For what is Faith that it should justify us without Gods Favor and
without Christ's Merit and Mediation?

I conceive that these words, By whom also we have an access by faith into this
Grace, wherein we stand are best to be read with a Parenthesis.

And [we] rejoice in the hope of the Glory of God] q. d. And God has promised
to give us eternal glory by Christ, in hope of which glory, we rejoice.

Of the Glory of God] By Glory is here meant that Glorious state of Life, which
we shall with all Saints enjoy in the Kingdom of Heaven: And he calls it The
glory of God, because it is promised by God, and shall be performed by God in
his good time.

Ver. 3 And not only so, but we glory in Tribulations also] q d. And we have
not only peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, and rejoice through
him, in the hope of the Glory of God. But (that ye may not think, that we
neither have peace with God, nor can have any sound hope of the Glory of God
therein to rejoice, because we are afflicted with Tribulations, more than any
men) know, that we glory in Tribulations also.

The Apostle does with much art prevent an Objection here.

For whereas he said ver. 1. That being justified by Faith, we have peace with
God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. And ver. 2. We rejoice in hope of the Glory
of God, A man might object and say. How can you say Paul, that ye which are
justified by faith, have peace with God through the Lord Jesus Christ; and that
ye rejoice in hope of the glo- of God through him, whereas no men are more
under tribulations, than ye are, for Christ's sake, which shows that ye have
no peace with God, and that ye have no sound hope of the glory of God, through
Christ to rejoice in.

To this the Apostle answers thus, q. d. Notwithstanding these our
Tribulations, we have peace with God, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God:
For the Tribulations, which befall us for Christ's sake, are not the signs of
Gods displeasure, but of his good will to us, and thereby we come to know, that
he loves us, and therefore we rejoice in Tribulations for Christ's sake, whereas
other men groan under the Tribulations which they suffer, and are cast down,
and discontented at them.

But we glory in Tribulations also] i. e. But we rejoice also by reason of
those Tribulations which we suffer for Christ's sake.

Note, that it is the same word; to wit (...), which is rendered we rejoice in
verse 2. and we glory in, in this verse.

In tribulation] i. e. By reason of Tribulation, Supple, Which befalls us, for
Christ's sake, or for Gods sake, or for Righteousness sake.

And in such Tribulations do Christians rejoice, as in some great good: so did
the Apostles rejoice, because they were counted worthy to suffer shame for
Christ's sake, Acts 5.41. And hence is that admonition of Saint James: My
Brethren count it all joy, when ye fall into diverse t^mptations, that is, into
diverse Tribulations, James 1.2.

Knowing that Tribulation works Patience] By Patience understand patient
bearing of evils. q. d. Knowing that Tribulation works Patience in us, and
makes us to suffer those Evils, Patiently, which we suffer for Christ's sake,
etc.

Tribulati^ns in their own nature are apt to breed impatience rather than
patience in men: But yet in the faithful and such as are justified by faith,
they bring forth patience for such, in their tribulations, and by reason of
their tribulations, meditate on this that tribulations befall them, by the will
and dispensation of God; and on this, that by them God would have them like
unto his own Son, and their own Head and eldest Brother Christ Jesus: And on
this, that God will never leave them nor forsake them, Heb. 13.5. And on this,
that our light afflictions or tribulations work for us a far more exceeding
weight of Glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. By which means they, through the operation of
Gods spirit, learn patience, and patiently endure, whatsoever tribulation does
befall them.

Ver. 4. And patience experience] Experience of what? (For it is not here
expressed.)

Answ. Experience of those Gifts and Graces, which God has given us by his
Spirit (as we may gather from what we read in the latter part of the fifth
verse) as, the sincerity of our faith.) Our trust and confidence in God: Our
ardency in prayer: our love even to our enemies: Our contempt of worldly
things, etc. All which do accompany our patience and patient bearing of
tribulations, and do then most evidently show themselves, when we are patient
in tribulations.

And experience, hope] i. e. And the experience, or experimental knowledge of
those gifts and graces, which God has given us by his Spirit, works or
produces in us hope, that is to say, hope of the Glory of God.

But why should the experience, or experimental knowledge of those gifts and
graces, which God has given us by his Spirit, work, or produce in us hope of
the Glory of God.

Answ. Because they are tokens of the love of God to us in Christ (as it
follows in the next verse) and for those whom God loves in Christ, he has
prepared eternal glory. And of this Glory, those gifts and graces are also
Pledges.

Ver. 5. And hope makes not ashamed] q. d. And hope, that is, And this our
hope of eternal Glory, or of the Glory of God shall not fall or prove a vain
hope; but we shall enjoy that which we hope for in due season.

Because men, which entertain great hopes of a thing, are ashamed, when those
their great hopes fail them, hence hope is said to make a man ashamed, when it
fails him, and he attains not to what he hopes for. By a Metonymy.

Because the Love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, by the Holy Ghost which
is given us] By the love of God we must understand here, not the love with
which we love God, but the love with which God loves us.

Is shed abroad etc.] To be shed abroad is the same, as to be poured out, for
the word in the Greek is (...). And that is said to be poured out, which is
abundantly bestowed, and given with a liberal hand, as Act. 2. v. 17, 18, 33.
Act. 10. ver. 45. Tit. 3. ver. 6.

When the Apostle says, The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the
Holy Ghost, he is so to be understood, as if he had said, that the love of God
is sensibly shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, so that our hearts do
thereby palpably as it were feel or perceive that love. So that their is a
Metonymy here, which some place in the noun love, q.d. The sense of the love of
God, etc. Others in the verb shed abroad, q.d. The love of God is sensibly shed
abroad, so that we may feel it, and palpably perceive it, etc.

By the Holy Ghost] The Holy Ghost is taken here by a Metonymie for the Gifts
and Graces of the Holy Ghost, to wit, those gifts and graces, which we have
experience of, by our patience in tribulations, and of which we spoke a little
before.

The gifts and graces of the Holy Ghost are as the Effects, so Signs also of
Gods love: And not only so, but they are as Earnests also of everlasting Glory,
2 Cor. 1. v. 21, 22. Ephesians. 1. v. 14

The Apostle does in these words [Because the love of God is shed abroad in our
hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us] prove what he said
immediately before, to wit, that the hope which they had of Eternal Glory,
makes not ashamed: And he proves it by this; that their hope is known to their
hearts by the gifts of the Holy Ghost, which are given to them, which gifts are
not only the Effects and Signs of the Law of God, but also Pledges and Earnests
of everlasting Glory.

Ver. 6. For when we were yet without strength] i. e. For when we were yet
ungodly and sinners.

Note, that whom the Apostle calls (...), or men weak, and without strength
here, he calls ungodly in this verse and sinners, verse 8. So that to be (...)
or without strength and to be ungodly and sinners are here all one and the same
thing.

He calls the ungodly and sinners, (...) or men weak and without strength,
because the ungodly and sinners are as sick men, sick in their soul with sin;
In which sense our Savior calls himself a Physician of such as were sick, Mat
9.12. And they which are so sick, are weak and of none or small strength to
serve God.

The Apostle did verse 3, 4, 5. answer an Objection, which might be made
against the truth of those two Propositions which he laid down, verse 1. and 2.
to wit, that being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through our Lord
Jesus Christ, and we rejoice in the hope of the Glory of God, which objection
being answered, he goes about here to confirm the truth of those Propositions,
against which the Objection was raised, to wit, That being justified by faith,
we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ; notwithstanding (which
some object against it) our many tribulations: And that notwithstanding our
many tribulations, we can truly and upon good ground rejoice in the hope of the
Glory of God; for (says he) when we were yet without strength, etc.

But though this causal, For, relates to those two Propositions which we spoke
of, and which are laid down in the first and second verses; yet it may serve
also to show a reason of that which went immediately before in the fifth verse:
for such is the Apostles Art, that while he goes about to give a reason of what
went some distance before, he does give with that a reason also of that which
went immediately before: But the chief relation, is to the two Propositions
aforesaid.

In due time Christ died for the ungodly] i. e. In due time Christ died for us,
which were without strength, that is, which were ungodly.

I observed before, that he took them which were without strength, and those
which were ungodly for the same men.

In due t^me] God had appointed a certain time for the death and passion of our
Savior, in which he should die, for our sins. Hence it is, that our Savior
often makes mention of his hour, as Mat. 26.45. Luke 22.53. John 7.30. and
8.20. And of his time as Mat. 26.18. etc. And this the Apostle calls here The
due time.

Christ died for the ungodly] i. e. Christ died for the sins of us which were
ungodly, that they might be remitted, and we our selves reconciled to God, and
saved from his wrath.

Ver. 7. For scarcely for a righteous man will one die] Between this and the
former verse, we must understand these or the like words And that Christ died
for us which were ungodly: It is a great Argument of the love of God to us:
Then follow these words; For scarcely for a righteous man will one die, etc.

Scarcely for a righteous man will one die, yet peradventure for a good man
some would even dare to die] Some take a righteous and a good man here for one
and the same man. As if he should say, There is scarce any to be found, which
would dare to die for a good man, yet perhaps there may be some such found
which would die for a good man, but God, etc.

Others make a difference here between a righteous man and a good man: For why
else, say they, should the Apostle change the word, if he intended the same man
of kind of man.

But note by the way, that the Apostle delights sometime to change his words,
whiles he speaks of the same things as Chap. 3.30. Chap. 4.25. and here Chap.
5.19.

By a righteous man therefore these understand a man which does no wrong or
injury to another: and by a good man, they mean such a one, as is or has been
beneficial to another and liberal to him, and has deserved well at his hands:
For in this sense is the word Good sometimes taken, as Prove. 22.9 He that has
a good eye (according as it is read in the Hebrew) is translated, He that has
a bountiful eye: And 1 Samuel 25.15. it is said; These men have been very good to
us, that is, These men have been very beneficial and friendly to us, and
deserved well of us. And Psalm 73.1. Truly God is good unto Israel, that is,
truly God has been Beneficial and bountiful to Israel, etc. The sense
therefore of these words according to these men, is this, viz. Scarcely for a
righteous or plain dealing man will one die, yet peradventure for a man that
has been beneficial to him, and deserved well at his hands some would even
dare to die. But God commends his love, etc.

Would even dare to die] The Greek is (...); where (...) sign^fieth not Audere,
to Dare: But Sustinere, to Abide, or Endure rather. Or, Even to dare to die,
may be simply rendered, to die.

Ver. 8. But God commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet
sinners, etc.] i e. But God makes his love toward us commendable, and shows
it to be great in this, That while we were yet sinners, etc.

While we were yet sinners] Supple, And therefore far from being good, And
therefore while we were yet his enemies, etc.

Note, That this Particle Yet as well here in this place, as v. 6. does rather
signify the State of every man in his sin, than any certain particular time:
For as men neither had nor have all of them their being at one and the same
time, so they neither were, nor are all without strength, and sinners at one
and the same time.

A Question may be here asked, whether after that that we are reconciled to
God, we are any longer sinners?

Answ. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no
truth in us, 1 John 1.8. Yet after our Reconciliation, we go not under the name
of sinners, as the name is here used, because our sins are forgiven us, and
because sin does not reign in us. Wherefore by sinners not any sinners are here
meant, but such as are profane sinners, who give themselves over, as it were to
sin and the lusts thereof, to be led by them, as Luke 7.34. John 9.31. But now
we, after we are reconciled to God, are not such, and therefore we are not
sinners in our Apostles sense here, though we are not without sin.

Christ died for us] Christ died for us, that he might gain pardon for our
sins, that so we might be justified before God, and received through
reconciliation into his favor, and so escape the wrath of God.

But how does this, that Christ died for us commend the love of God?

Answ. Because it was God which delivered Christ to death for our sakes, Romans
8.31. And that according to his own appointment and determinate counsel, Acts.
4.28.

Ver. 9. Much more then being now justified by his blood] Between this and the
former verse understand these or the like words; If then while we were yet
sinners Christ died for us, that we might be justified, q. d. If then while we
are yet sinners Christ died for us, to wit, That we might be justified, much
more being now justified by his blood, shall we be saved from wrath through him.

Much more] Those words show, That the Illation or Consquence of the thing
which he infers, is more credible, than that from which he does infer it.

Being now justified] Supple, And therefore now not in the Account of Sinners,
but acquitted before God of our Sins and reconciled to God.

By his Blood] By his blood he means his blood shed, or the shedding of his
blood and so by consequence his death.

We shall be saved from wrath through him] i. e. We shall be saved from the
wrath of God (which he will pour out upon sinners in the day of wrath) through
him.

If the anger of God toward us, is so appeased, as that we shall be saved from
the wrath of God through Christ; then have we peace with God through our Lord
Jesus Christ as the Apostle said, ver. 1. And as here he proves. For this
wrath is opposed to that peace, and the taking away of this, establishes that.

Ver. 10. For if when we were enemies, etc.] The Apostle proves here the
Consequence of that Hypothetical Proposition which he gave us partly to
understand, and partly expressed in the former verses, To wit, that if then,
while we were yet sinners Christ died for us: Much more now being justified by
his blood, shall we be saved from wrath through him.

When we were enemies] This enmity is not so much to be accounted on Gods part
toward us, (For God is said even then to have loved us when we were sinners and
so enemies to him, ver. 8) as on our part toward God, who by our sins did as
it were wage war against God: For they which are called enemies here, are
called Sinners, ver. 8. And without strength, verse. 6. and are opposed to those
which are justified.

All wicked men are the enemies of God, Jam 4.4. Neither do they love God, 1
John chap. 4. ver. 20

We were reconciled to God] i. e. We were made friends of God, who was angry
with us before, and were brought into his favor, which we little deserved,
because of our enmity against him.

If we are reconciled to God, then are we justified in his sight, yea and made
his Sons by Adoption, for these things are comprehended under the name of
reconciliation with God or to God.

The words in the Original are (...). which signify we were restored into Gods
favor, God being pacified with us. Or we were brought into that state or
Condition, as that God was reconciled to us. And this is the Sense of these
words too, viz. of these, We were reconciled to God, as they are here used.

He is properly said to be reconciled, (...), which was justly offended, if we
look to the common acception of the word, and as the word (...) is used among
ordinary Greek Authors, in which sense man is not pr^perly said to be
reconciled to God, but God to Man. But the words, you see, are otherwise used
here, and used in the sense which we gave of them. And the Syriack interprets
(...). God was reconciled to us.

By the death of his son] We are said to be reconciled to God by the death of
his Son, because he by his death satisfied the Justice of his Father and
appeased his wrath, and purchased our Peace, and Reconciliation with God.

We shall be saved] To wit, from wrath. See ver. 9.

By his life] By the life of Christ, understand here that life of Christ by
which he lives unto God, Chap. 6.10.

Christ is said to save us by his life, in that he being now passed into
heaven, Heb. 4.14. He ever lives to make intercession for us, Hebr 7.25. And
needs not to die now, to save us.

Note, here that the Apostle opposes us as Enemies, to our selves as
reconciled: And the death of Christ to the life of Christ: And intimates here,
that, Though it was requisite for Christ to die, that he might reconcile us to
God when we were enemies: Yet he need not die (having once died) to save us
from wrath when we are reconciled: And therefore more credible it is (as the
Apostle argues) that God will save us from his wrath, being now reconciled to
him, by the life of his Son: Then it was that he would reconcile us to himself
when we were enemies, by his death. For in reason, a man would do more for a
friend than he will for an Enemy, and be more willing that a child of his
should do good when there is no loss of his life, than when his life must be
laid down, that he may do good.

He that would satisfy the justice of God for the sins of a sinner by his
death, must needs be himself of infinite worth, and his death of infinite
value, and so must needs be God. And being God he need not to die twice or
thrice, that by one death he may justify a sinner; by another death, save him
from wrath to come; by another death bring him to everlasting Glory: But One
death is sufficient for All. Therefore he which is justified by the death of
such a one (and Christ is such a one) may be saved by his life, that is, may be
saved by him though he dies not a second time.

From the sixth verse hitherto inclusive, the Apostle has proved that which he
asserted, ver. 1. viz. That being justified by faith we have peace with God
through our Lord Jesus Christ. Now in the next verse following, he will prove
that which he asserted, ver. 2. to wit, That we may rejoice in the hope of the
glory of God.

Ver. 11. And not only so but we also joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ]
q d. And we shall not only be saved from wrath through his life, but we shall
also be made partakers of eternal Glory; by reason of which we do even now joy
in God, the giver thereof, through Jesus Christ.

Though it be a great mercy and blessing of God, that he delivers the ungodly
from wrath, yet does not his mercy and blessing stay there, but it brings him
to everlasting glory.

And not only so] i. e. And we shall not only be saved from wrath to come by
his life.

But we also joy] i. e. But we do also even now rejoice.

In God] That is, in hope of the glory of God, as it is expressed, ver. 2. Or,
in God as the giver of Glory, in that we are assured he will bring us to Glory.

By whom we have now received the Atonement] i. e. By whom we have already
reconciliation with God; And precious fruits also of that Reconciliation, which
are to us as pledges of everlasting glory.

(...), nunc, now, is put here, for jam nunc, i. e even now already.

The Atonement] (...). The Reconciliation, or Reconciliation, to wit, with God,
and precious fruits or effects thereof.

Take the Atonement or Reconciliation here not barely for the Atonement or
Reconciliation it self, but for the effects thereof also, by a Metonymical
Syllepsis, that is, for the holy Ghost, that is, for the gifts of the holy
Ghost, which God gives to those, to whom he is reconciled; which gifts are the
effects of our Atonement and Reconciliation with God, for those to whom God is
reconciled, He sanctifies also: For our Reconciliation and Justification are
never without Sanctification.

And yet the gifts of the holy Ghost, which are given to those which are
reconciled to God (or to whom God is reconciled) are not only effects or signs
of the Atonement or Reconciliation: but they are also as an Earnest of the
glory of God, as we are taught, 2 Cor. 1.22. and 2 Cor. 5.5. and Ephesians. 1.14.
(And as we said before.) And so they confirm our hope of the glory of God, from
whence springs the Joy and Rejoicing here spoken of.

Ver. 12. Wherefore, as by one man, etc.] q. d. Wherefore being that we are
justified by faith, and reconciled to God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, and
have peace with God, through him, and have hope of the glory of God, having
even now already received the atonement; though we have lost much by Adam, we
have gained as much, yea, far more by Christ, than we lost by him: For as by one
man (to wit, by Adam) sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death
passed upon all men, for that all have sinned, etc.

The Apostle takes an occasion here to show the misery which befell us by Adams
sin; that so he might take occasion again from thence, to illustrate and
magnify the love and benefit of Christ to us.

By one man] By this one man is meant Adam.

Sin entered into the world] i. e. Sin entered into all mankind. The world is
taken here for all mankind by a Synechdoche, otherwise sin entered before this
into the world when the Angels first sinned.

He speaks of sin as of a person, when he says sin entered.

This sin entered by Adam who was then the head of all mankind.

Entered into the world] By the world is meant, all Mankind, that is, all men
which are carnally, and by the common law of generation, descended from Adam,
for so the Apostle expounds himself, when he says, And death passed upon all
men.

He speaks of sin as of a person, when he says sin entered.

To the Traduction of this (which is commonly called Original sin) nothing is
required, but that a man be descended from Adam, by true natural generation, as
being in his loins when he sinned.

And therefore is Original sin derived from Adam by natural propagation to
all, which were in his loins, when he sinned, because that at the time in which
he sinned, he was the head of all Mankind; so that if he had kept the
commandment which God gave him, of not eating of the tree of knowledge of good
and evil, they had been pure and clean of this Original sin, and free from the
subsequent miseries thereof: But being that he broke it, they were corrupted by
it, (through want of those gifts and graces which were given him, for them
as well as for himself,) and so do partake of his miseries, as of the punishment
thereof.

And death by sin] i. e. And death by reason of sin.

By death, understand by a Syllepsis not only death, but all miseries and
diseases which bring to death.

And so death passed upon all men] i. e. And so all men died.

For that all have sinned] i. e. For that all men have been made sinners, by
that one man, as our Apostle speaks, verse. 19. This sin by which all men are
made sinners formally, and from whence they are so called, is not any actual
sin, but that which is commonly caled Original sin, which is an effect of that
actual disobedience of Adam, by which he transgressed, in eating the forbidden
fruit.

Note, that the Apostle leaves this speech, here imperfect, and abrupt, and
without the sentence which should answer it, by reason of other matter
intervening, until the eighteenth verse, where he taks up his speech again,
though in other words, and makes it perfect and complete.

That this supplement (to wit) by that one Man: must be made up here; See the
eighteenth and nineteenth verses of this Chapter.

The Greek word which is here rendered have sinned, is (...). And (...) does
properly signify a missing or er^ing from a mark which should have been hit:
And not only the Archer, but the Arrow, which missed of the mark, by the
unskilfulness of the Archer, may be said (...).

So a Limner which misseth and erreth of the copy, by which he should have
drawn a picture, may be said (...); and not the Limner only but the Picture
also, which through the unskilfulness of the Limner, is drawn unlike the copy.
And as the arrow and the picture; so may we be said (...), which through Adams
sin, do miss, and come short of that Image in which Adam was made, when he was
endued with those gifts and graces which he had, when he was in his best
estate, to which we should have been conform.

(...) therefore, which is rendered here Peccare, to sin, is not spoken of us by
reason of any sinful Act, which we our selves have done, in our own persons,
but by reason of that we have formally missed, and come short of that
Righteousness, that is, of those gifts and graces, which were given to Adam for
us as well, as for himself, and which we miss, and come short off, by reason of
Adams disobedience.

Ver. 13. For until the law sin was in the the world] The Apostle prevents a
tacit Objection here, for whereas he said immediately before, that all had
sinned: A man might object and say, But how can thou say (Paul) that all have
sinned, whereas there was no sin in the world for two thousand and four hundred
years together, that is, from the time that Adam fell, until the time that the
Law was given by Moses, for thou thy self say, Chap. 4.15. Where there is no
Law there is no transgression; And there was no Law in all that time.

This objection the Apostle prevents here, saying, For until the Law sin was in
the world: But sin is not imputed (to wit for a transgression) where there is
no Law, etc. q. d. I acknowledge where there is no Law, there is no
Transgression, but yet it follows not that where there is no Transgression,
there is no Sin: for though every transgression be a Sin; yet every Sin is not
a transgression: Though therefore there was no transgression in the world from
Adams time until the Law, yet it follows not, but that there might be Sin, yea
and there was Sin in the world before the Law.

What a transgression, is in the Apostles language, See Notes Cap. 4. ver. 15.

By the Law is here meant the Law which was given by Moses.

The Apostle, when he said, that all had sinned spoke, as I said, not of
Actual, but Original sin. Yet the man in whose person, the Apostle raises this
tacit Objection, which he here preventeth or answers, takes it, as though
he spoke of actual sins. For of such sins is the Apostle to be understood, as
well as of Original sin, when he says, For until the Law sin was in the world,
etc. Where note, that the Apostle does not always raise objections in the
person of one kind of men, but sometimes in the person of one kind of men,
Sometimes in the person of another; And here he raises the Objection, which he
here prevents, or answers, in the person of such a one, as mistook the
meaning of his words, when he said, All have sinned, as though he spoke of
Actual sins, when he spoke only of Original sin. So when he says Chap. 6.14.
Ye are not under the Law but under Grace. Some utterly mistaking the sense of
these words, as though they were now absolutely freed from the Law in every
respect, and nothing but favor was to be showed, lived they never so
dissolutely, concluded from thence, that now in this their estate of
Christianity, they might freely sin; whom our Apostle meets with, there when he
says; What then? shall we sin because, we are not under the Law, but under
Grace? God forbid: And our Apostle raises or praeventeth even such objections,
because there may be some so weak, as to raise them; and because in his answer
to them, He can bring in such matter, as he would not have them, to whom he
writes, ignorant of. And here he raises this Objection, that by his answer he
might show, how sin abounded, that having showed how sin abounded, he might
show, that when sin abounded, grace did much more abound, ver 20.

But sin is not imputed) To wit, as a transgression.

Thus to limit this imputation, we have a hint, from the following words.

When there is no Law] i. e When there is no Law openly and sensiibly given,
either by word of mouth (as that which was given to Adam) or by writing (as
that which was given by Moses.)

Ver. 14. Nevertheless death reigned from Adam to Moses, ever over them, that
had not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression] q d. Though sin be
not imputed, as a transgression, when there is no Law openly, or sensibly
given, yet nevertheless (to show that sin was in the world before the Law was
given by Moses) death (which is the wages of sin) reigned, and exercised her
power even over them, that had not transgressed against any Law, openly or
sensibly given, as Adam had.

Death reigned] i. e. Death showed, or exercised her power or tyranny rather,
over them etc. By slaying them, for they dyed.

From Adam to Moses] i. e. From the fall of Adam, to the time in which the Law
was given by Moses, which was above two thousand and four hundred years.

That had not sinned after the Similitude of Adams transgression] i. e. Who had
not sinned like unto Adam, who sinned against a Law given him openly and
sensibly by Gods mouth, Genesis 2.17. and therefore sinned by transgression.

Adams transgression] i. e. Adams sin, which was committed against a Law openly
and sensibly given: for such a sin, does the word Transgression signify, in
our Apostles language, as was said, Cap 4.15.

Who is the figure of him that is to come] i. e. Who is the figure of Christ,
the second Adam, who though he be now come into the world, yet was he not come
then, but to come when death reigned from Adam to Moses.

Adam was a Figure or type of Christ only in a general manner, to wit, because
as Adam conveyed or derived something to his children, or to his branches, so
did Christ to his. But if we descend to particulars, Adam could not be the Type
or Figure of Christ, but by a contrary comparison: For Adam conveyed and
derived sin and death to his children, or to his branches; but Christ conveyed
or derived Grace, that is, the pardon of sin (whereby they are justified) and
life, to his.

Ver. 15. But not as the offense, so also is the free gift] q. d But yet the
free gift (supple) which comes by Christ, upon his branches, or upon his
children; Is not so (supple) for equality as the offense is (supple) which
comes by Adam upon his branches, or upon his children, but much exceeds it. Or
thus: But yet not so mean as the offense is, which comes by Adam upon his
branches, or upon his children in its kind; is the free gift, which comes by
Christ upon his branches, or upon his children, in its kind.

The Apostle shows here that Christ in his kind, as he was a Savior to his
branches, or to his children, did far exceed Adam in his kind, as he was a
destroyer to his branches, or to his children; And that he did confer more good
to them, which were his branches, or his children; than Adam did evil to those,
which were his, so that though Adam may be said to be a type of Christ by a
contrary comparison, yet in that comparison, there is an excess of contrariety
on Christ's part.

Not as the offence] He speaks of that sin, and means that here (even Original
sin) which Adam transmitted or derived to all mankind, and which he called
(...), ver. 12. He means not that sin of actual disobedience, whereby Adam
disobeyed God in eating the forbidden fruit, Genesis 3 6. Though that actual
disobedience of his was that, which brought this Original sin upon his
posterity, to wit, such as were born of him, by natural generation.

For note, that that Actual disobedience of Adam, is opposed to the actual
obedience of Christ, as plainly appears, ver. 19. But the offense here, is
opposed to the free gift which came upon the Children or branches of Christ
through his obedience. Wherefore as the free gift signifies something here,
which came upon the children or branches of Christ, by reason of Christ's
obedience? so does the offense (which is opposed to the free gift) signify
something here, which came upon the children or branches of Adam, through his
disobedience.

The free gift] The free gift here spoken of, is that gift, which God does
freely bestow upon those, which are ingrafted into Christ by faith, and which
he calls the gift by grace, in this very verse.

If through the offense of one] i. e. If by sin, which was caused by one man,
to wit, Adam, and by him brought upon or derived to his children or his
branches. This Genitive case of one, is Genitivus Efficientis.

Note. that this particle, If, does not here intimate any uncertainty of the
thing with which it is joined: But as often elsewhere so here, it shows the
certainty of it rather, and signifies, as much as though.

And note, that the Subject of the offense here spoken of, is not Adam or Adam
alone, but Adams children also, though the efficient (or deficient) cause
thereof, was Adam.

Many be dead] This is that which he said ver. 12. to wit, Death passed upon
all men, that is, Death has or shall pass upon all men.

But how does he say only Many be dead here, when he says Death passed upon
all men ver. 12.

We may answer with Saint Augustine, that it may so fall out sometimes, as that
by all, a very few may be be understood, as when few are all. To show therefore
that the (All) here, are very many: He says Many be dead, yet excluding none
of all the Sons or Daughters of Adam, born of him by natural generation.

Again, because he was to say in this verse, that the grace of God and the gift
by grace, which is by one man Jesus Christ has abounded unto many (which he
will say, because it abounds not absolutely to all men) he might use the word
many here in the sense aforesaid, that there might be conformity between the
former and latter member of his speech, in matter of words.

Much more the grace of God, and the gifts by grace, which is by one Man, Jesus
Christ, has abounded unto many] i. e. In a much higher degree and more
plentiful (though contrary) manner, has the grace, that is, the gift of grace,
which is by one man Jesus Christ, abounded unto many (Supple) that they may
live.

Note, that the words much more, seem to import an Argumentation a minori as
Logicians speak, that is from that which is less credible, to that which is
more credible, as it is ver. 9. But though they may seem so to do, yet they do
not indeed. For he that will be attentive here to what the Apostle writes, he
shall find, that the Apostles words import not any such thing; but do only
show the dissimilitude, which is between Adam and Christ (by comparing some
particulars, in which they disagree) and how much Christ in his kind excells
Adam in his.

The reason why Christ in his kind excells Adam in his, and why Christ derives
greater gifts in his kind, to his branches, or his children than Adam did in
his kind, to his branches or his children, is, because the merits of Christ are
greater, than were the demerits of Adam.

The grace of God] By the Grace of God is meant the favor of God: But the
grace or favor of God is to be taken here by a Metonymy for the gift
proceeding from Gods favor as the Apostle expounds himself in the next words.

And the gift by Grace] q. d. That is to say, the gift which is by grace, or by
the favor of God; or that, which God out of his grace and favor bestows,
etc.

The Conjunction And is a Note of declaration here.

The gift by Grace does include and comprehend here, both the free and gracious
pardon of our sins, or the gracious sentence of Absolution, by which we are
absolved from our sins, (which the Apostle speaks of, ver. 16.) And also the
gift of a life of Glory, which we shall enjoy in heaven, or the reign in that
life (of which he speaks, verse 17.) For what he speaks of in gross here, he
divides and speaks of in particular, or in parts in those two verses.

Which is by one man Jesus Christ] i. e. Which grace is showed for one man's
sake (to wit) Jesus Christ, and purchased by him.

Has abounded] Supple, above what the offense and death did abound to those,
which were the branches or Children of Adam by natural propagation.

Unto many] Supple, Even those many which are the Branches or Children of
Christ by faith.

Through Adams eating the forbidden fruit, did the offense, that is, sin enter
upon many, yea, so many as were born of Adam, the Consequent of which offense
or sin, as the penalty thereof, was death: But through the obedience of Christ,
there came (by the favor and grace of God) pardon of all sins, not Original
only, but Actual also, whereby as many as believed, were justified, the
Consequent of which is, through the gift of God, Eternal life.

Here is therefore an opposition of pardon of sins, by which we are justified,
to the offense or sin, by which we are condemned: And of eternal life to death:
which being weighed one against the other, the pardon of Sins (by which we are
justified) against the offense and Sin (by which we are condemned) and life
eternal against death, the pardon of Sins (by which we are justified will out
weigh the offense by which, we are condemned and, Life eternal will outweigh
death: For the offense or Sin is but One, but the Sins which are pardoned are
many: And eternal life is accompanied with an unspeakable weight of glory far
surpassing death, and the miseries of death, which followed upon Adams sin, and
the Sins, which we our selves have of our selves committed.

This is that which the Apostle speaks in gross in this verse, and now goes
about to divide, and lay out in particulars in the two following verses.

Ver. 16. And not as it was by one that Sinned so was the gift] The
Conjunction, And, is a note of Resumption ot repetition here, and the since of
the words (which are Ellipticall) is this, q. d. And not, I say, as is the
offense, which was by one that sinned, to wit, Adam; so is the gift, Supple,
which is by one, Jesus Christ, but this much exceeds that.

Note that, whereas it is here read, By one that sinned, and in the Greek
(...), the word (...), is to be understood, in the Greek, from the former
verses, and so must the word offense in the English. So that the words in the
Greek (which are Ellipticall) must be made up thus (...); In the English, thus.
And not as the offense which was by one that sinned.

This is a Repetition of that which the Apostle said, v. 15. to wit, of that,
Not as the offense, so is also the free gift, which the Apostle here resumes or
repeats, that he may explain, or lay out by particulars, or parts, that which
he said there in general and in gross, to wit, that If through the offense of
one, many be dead, much more the Grace of God and the gift of Grace, which is
by one man Jesus Christ has abounded unto many.

The judgment was by one to condemnation] i. e. The Judgment, or Sentence of
God passed upon all men to their condemnation by reason of one sin, or one
offense. That is, God by his just Judgment, or Sentence which he passed upon
all men, which were born of Adam, did condemn them all to death, by reason of
that one only sin, which they drew from him.

By one] i. e. By one offense, or by reason of one only offense.

That by one he means here, not one Person, but one Offense is plain, because
he opposes it to many offenses.

This offense, is that, which is commonly called Original sin, as I said
before, and it is said to be one, because though it be in every particular man,
yet it is but one sin in every one, and of one nature in all.

To condemnation] He speaks here of that general condemnation which passed upon
all mankind, by reason of that one Original sin which they drew from Adam, not
of the particular condemnation of particular Persons for their Actual sins.

But the free gift is of many offenses to justification] But the free gift,
Supple, by which we are absolved from our sins, or have them pardoned, is not
only of that one sin or offense, but of many offenses (yea so many, as they
which believe are, or were guilty of) that they may thereby be justified.

(...), The free gift, is put here by a Metaphorical Synechdoche, to signify,
the free and gracious pardon of sins, or, the gracious sentence of Absolution,
pronounced, as it were, in open Court, by which we are, out of mere Grace,
absolved from sins: For the Apostle speaks here in allusion to a Court of
Justice, where the Judgment or Sentence passes upon some offenders, according
to their demerits: And a pardon of grace, or a gracious sentence of absolution
from the offenses, with which they were charged upon others, above their
deserts.

The word (...), which the Apostle uses in this verse, signifies a Judgment
or Sentence given upon men accused, according to their true desert and the
merit of their cause; but because the Sentence which passed upon those which
are inserted into Christ by faith, is not such a Sentence, but a Sentence (in
respect of them) of grace and of the favor of God through Christ; the Apostle,
when he speaks of the Sentence which shall or does pass upon them calls it not
(...) but (...) which word sounds grace and favor.

Of many, etc.] This Particle Of, is a Preposition, for the Greek is (...)
which we may render De, which signifies the matter of this gift, or pardon, or
absolution.

Unto Justification] i. e. That as many as God bestowed this free gift upon may
be justified.

The word justification is to be taken here in a passive sense.

Ver. 17. For if by one man's offense death reigned] This is to be referred to
those words of the sixteenth verse, Not as it was by one that sinned, so is the
gift: As a second Reason, to show the truth of that proposition or assertion.

But though there be a second Reason to prove that proposition or assertion,
yet may this Particle, For, be taken here for Moreover (as it seems sometimes
to be taken) and so the current of the Text may be the smoother.

If by one man's offence] i. e. If by the offense caused by that one man Adam,
and which came by him upon all his Children.

Whereas it is read vulgarly in the Greek (...), etc. which is rendered here, If
by one man's offense death reigned, etc Some Greek Copies read, (...), which may
be rendered, as it is in the Margin of our Bibles, If by one offense death
reigned: which I conceive, by the scope of the place, and by looking upon the
latter part of this verse, to be the best reading.

Death reigned] i. e. Death showed her power upon all which were condemned to
die, by reason of the offense of that one man, by slaying them.

By one] i. e. By one man, to wit, Adam.

It was Adam's eating the forbidden Fruit which brought that which is here
called the offense upon himself; and by Propagation from him, upon his Children
too. For by the offense is here meant, that which he calls sin, ver. 12. that
is, Original sin, which is in every natural Child of Adam, and which is the
cause of death, in all the Chilern of Adam.

Much more they which receive abundance of Grace, and of the gift of
Righteousness, shall reign in life, by one Jesus Christ] i. e. After a far more
bountiful and glorious manner, shall they which are delivered and justified
from the many sins, of which they are guilty, reign like Kings, in a life of
glory, by one Jesus Christ.

Much more] These words show that the life which they that are justified by
grace from their many sins which are pardoned, to them, through Christ, do
receive, does far exceed in its kind, that death which came upon the Children
of Adam by his sin, in its kind.

Abundance of Grace and of the gift of Righteousness] q. d. Abundance of Grace,
that is, of the gift of Righteousness.

What he means by Grace, he explains by those words, The gift of
Righteousness, wherefore, And, is to be taken here as a Note of Declaration.

Of Righteousness] Of Justification, or Remission of sins. See Chap. 1. verse
17.

They which receive abundance of Grace, and of the gift of Righteousness] This
grace, that is to say, this gift of Righteousness, is said to be abundant, in
regard of the many sins, which are thereby remitted, or from which, they which
believe, are justified. And they are said to receive abundance of Grace, that
is, of the gift of Righteousness, which are delivered, or justified from
abundance of sins or offenses, or who have abundance of sins pardoned. For the
Apostle relates, or alludes here to what he said, ver. 16. Viz. The free gift
is of many offenses.

Shall reign in life] i. e. Shall reign in Life everlasting in the Kingdom of
Heaven.

Whomsoever God justifies (if he retains his state) he glorifieth, for he does
not only deliver him from punishment due to his sins; But sets a Crown of Life
upon his head.

He opposes the life here, to the death, which he speaks of a little before.

By one Jesus Christ] Jesus Christ has merited for us, not only remission of
sins, or pardon thereof, but also glory and life everlasting, which although it
be merit, in regard, of him, yet in regard of us, it is mere grace and favor.

Note here, that whereas the Apostle said, If by one man's offense death reigned
by one, he should have said in congruence of speech; Much more shall life reign
by Righteousness by one Jesus Christ, but he said not so, but says, Much more
they which receive abundance of grace and of the gift of Righteousness shall
reign in Life by one Jesus Christ, And this he does, because it sounds more
pleasantly to say; That men themselves shall reign in life, than that life
shall reign in men; (the Scriptures also, having promised them a knigdome,
Matthew. 25.34.) And because he would by so speaking intimate, a certain
dissimilitude or unlikeness, which is between Death and Life; for death so
reigns over men, as that it destroys those over whom it reigns: But life
does so reign in us, as that it makes us Kings, that is, partakers of the
heavenly Kingdom by Christ.

V. 18. Therefore as by the offense of one, judgment came upon all men to
condemnation, even so, etc.] The Apostle resumes here (though in other words)
that which he left unperfect, ver. 12. viz. Wherefore as by one man sin entered
into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for that
all have sinned. And this he does, that he may complete and perfect that here,
which he left imperfect there.

Yet such is his Artifice, as that this may seem a Corollary or Conclusion
drawn out of that which he said immediately before, in the former verses.

By the offense of one, etc.] i. e. By the offense, which was caused by one.

This is that which he said, ver. 12. As by one man sin entered into the world.

The offence] By the offense is here meant, that which is commonly called
Orignal sin; See ver. 15.

This offense therefore is not that Actual disobedience of Adam, whereby he did
eat of the forbidden fruit, but an effect of that disobedience, and that by
which we are made formally sinners, And by reason of which we are called
Sinners.

Of one] This one, is Adam.

Note, that this Genitive, is Genitivus causae efficientis.

Judgment came upon all men to condemnation] i e. q. d. Gods judgment or
sentence passed upon all which were born of Adam by natural Generation, whereby
they were condemned, Supple, to death, which was to follow upon their
condemnation.

To condemnation] To wit, of death.

By the righteousness of one] i. e. By the righteousness of one, or by reason
of that righteousness which proceeds from one, or which is purchased by one, to
be conferred by him upon his children, which are the faithful.

This one is, Christ Jesus, and the righteousness here spoken of, is that which
he spoke of, ver. 17. to wit, Remission of sins or Absolution from all
offenses, which remission of sins or absolution, was purchased by Christ Jesus,
with his blood. And it is here opposed to the offense of one, as that which
blots out, or takes away the guilt of that offense (yea and of all other
offenses too) is opposed to the offense, or blot it self.

Of one] This one is Christ Jesus, and note, that this Genitive is Genitivus
Efficientis.

The free gift came upon all men to justification of life] i. e. The free gift
came upon all men, that they might be justified, and that with such a
justification, as is followed, or attended with life everlasting.

The free gift] The free gift is to be taken here in the very same sense as it
is, ver. 16. That is, for the free pardon or absolution by which we are
pardoned or absolved from our sins, by Christ.

Upon all men] Supple, that are born of Christ, and so are his children; or
which are ingraff^d into Christ by faith, and so are his branches.

Note here, that the abundance of the grace and gifts of Christ consists not in
this, that all they which died in Adam whatsoever they were shall be saved by
Christ; for then there would be but an equality by that, not an abundance in
the benefits and graces which are by Christ: But it consists in that, that
Christ is the Author of far greater good, to his chidren and branches, than
Adam of evil, to his.

Unto justification of life] i. e. So that they are justified thereby, which
justification (through the grace and favor of God) produces or brings after
it life everlasting.

Life is put here by a Synechdoche, for life everlasting: And this Genitive
case is Genitivus Effecti.

V. 19. For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the
obedience of one, shall many be made righteous] He gives a reason here, why he
said, in the former verse, By the offense of one, and why he said there, By the
righteousness of one. He said by the offense of one (that is, by the sin, which
was derived by one) because by one man's, to wit, Adams disobedience, many were
made sinners: And he said by the righteousness of one, because by the obedience
of one, many shall be made righteous.

Note here, that whereas the Apostle said; All and All, ver. 18. and says Many
and Many here, ver. 19. he means in both places, one and the same men and
number of men: But why he says Many here, and not All as he did, ver. 18. you
may find a reason given, ver. 15.

By one man's disobedience] i. e. By the disobedience of one man, to wit Adam,
who disobeyed God, and did eat of the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil,
concerning which God said; Thou shall not eat thereof, Genesis 2.17.

Many were made sinners] That is, so many as were born of Adam by natural
generation, were made Sinners, Supple, by the offense or sin, viz. Original
Sin, which that his disobedience caused in them. And because they were made
Sinners; therefore the judgment of God, came upon them to condemnation, ver.
18.

By the obedience of one] This one, is Christ Jesus, and this his obedience is
that which we read Philip. 2.8. whereby he was obedient unto death, even the
death of the Cross.

Shall many be made righteous] i. e. Shall many be justified

The Greek is (...), which is as much as (...), that is, shall be justified; So
also is the word (...) taken Chap. 2.13.

The righteousness here spoken of, is that Righteousness which is called also
justification, and which consists in the pardon of or absolution from Sins, and
it is the effect of the obedience of that One, that is, of Christ Jesus.

This righteousness did Jesus Christ purchase for us by this his obedience, and
conferreth on all them which believe in him.

By the disobedience therefore of Adam were many made Sinners, in that by his
disobedience the offense, that is. Original Sin came upon them: And by the
obedience of Christ were many made righteous, in that by his obedience; they
attained to that righteousness or justification by which they are freed,
acquitted and absolved from all, both Original and Actual Sins.

Ver. 20. Moreover the Law entered that the offense might abound] i. e.
Moreover, when the Law entered, the offense did abound.

Note, that the particle, that, is a sign here not of the intent, but of the
event, so that the sense of this place is this, q. d. The Law which forbids
Sin entered into the world (in the middle time between Adam and Christ) yet the
event or issue of that, was only this, That Sin did abound.

He speaks here of the Law which was given by Moses, and prevents an objection;
for whereas it was tacitly objected between the 12 and 13 verses; That Sin was
not in the world before the Law; which objection the Apostle answered in the 13
and 14 verses; It might be thus objected upon the Apostles answer: But if we
grant Sin to have been in the world before the Law, yet surely when the Law
came Sin was then no more in the world; for the Law is a perfect remedy against
Sin; To this the Apostle here answers, that though the Law entered, yet when
it had entered, it was so far from being a remedy against Sin as that Sin did
abound and became more abundant by the Law, than it was before.

I have said that these words are an answer to a tacit objection springing from
the Apostles answer to a former objection, supposed to arise between the 12 and
13 verses.

But some make them an answer to an objection, supposed to arise out of the
last words of the 19 verse, viz. By the obedience of one man many were made
righteous. For a man may object from those words and say; But why do thou
(Paul) say, that by the obedience of One shall many be made righteous, that is,
many shall be justified: For there is no need of the obedience of another that
any should be made righteous, or, that any should be justified, since the Law
was given; for the Law is enough to make men righteous, and is sufficient it
self to preserve them from Sin. To this the Apostle answers q. d. The Law is
so far from making men righteous and from preserving them from Sin, as that the
Law since it entered, has been an occasion, that Sin has much more abounded,
than it did before.

But which way soever of the two we conceive this objection to be raised, or
whether both ways, it skills not much, the matter tending still to the same
purpose.

The Law entered that the offense might abound] i. e. The Law entered, that Sin
might abound; And therefore did Sin abound when the Law entered; Because the Law
works wrath, for where there is no Law, there is no Transgression as our
Apostle speaks, Chap. 4.15.

By the offense he means Actual Sin or Sins. And that which he calls, (...),
the offense; here, he calls (...), Sin in the following words.

But where Sin abounded] i. e. But when sin abounded.

Where, is put here, for, When, an Adverb of place, for an Adverb of time.

That which he calls (...) before, he calls (...) here as was there observed.

Grace did much more abound] By Grace understand here the grace and favor of
God, which is said here to abound, by reason of its effects (to wit) Remission
of Sins, or Justification, whereby the Sinner which believes is justified from
all his sins; or has all his Sins forgiven him.

By how much the more and greater the Sins of a Sinner are: By so much the
greater and more abundant is the grace and favor of him, which forgiveth them:
And by how much the greater Sinner a man acknowledges himself to have been, so
much the greater grace and favor and mercy does he confess, that he has
received, by the remission and forgiveness of his sins, as we may learn by the
example of the woman which was a Sinner, Luke 7. ver 38, etc. And by the
example of the Apostle himself; 1 Timothy 1.12.

He says of the offense, or of Sin, that it did abound, and of grace, that it
did much more abound (Supple than Sin did.) And this he does, because the grace
and mercy of God did prevail above the Sins of men (though they did very much
prevail) and was more powerful than they. For the grace and mercy of God did
take away the guilt of all sins, in the believer, and therefore was more
powerful in him to justify him, than all his Sins were, to condemn him.

V. 21. That as sin has reigned unto death] i e. That as Sin has showed her
power (which was as the power of Queen) over men, by b^inging them to death and
destruction, through her guilt.

Even so might grace reign through Righteousness unto eternal life] i. e. Even
so might the grace or favor of God toward men, like a Queen, show her power
in them which believe in bringing them through the remission of their Sins, and
of the guilt thereof to eternal life.

By Righteousness is here meant Justification or Remission of sins, See verses
17, and 18.

And grace is said to bring men to eternal life through Righteousness that is
by Remission of Sins or Justification: Because, God glorifieth none whom he
does not Justify; And because he does not only vouchsafe to justify Sinners
from their sins, if they believe: But does also bring them (when he has
Justified them) to life eternal if they persist in their faith.

Note, here that when the Apostle says, that grace reigns through
righteousness unto everlasting life, his meaning is not, that grace exempteth
us so from death, as that we shall never die; but his meaning is, that grace
does confer life so unto us and so exempt us from death as that death shall not
always have dominion over us, but shall be destroyed at the last, by the power
of Christ, at the General Resurrection, when we shall be so raised to life, as
that we shall die no more.

Note, that the Apostle uses a Prosopopaeia here, when he says, that Sin has
reigned, and, that grace reigns, and speaks of them as of Queens.

By Jesus Christ our Lord] Supple, who has merited this for us by his
obedience, and will work it for us by his power.

CHAP. VI.
1. WHat shall we say then? shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound.

1. But now, because I said, That when sin abounded, Grace did much more
abound; Shall we therefore continue in sin, that Grace may abound?

2. God forbid: how shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer therein?

2. God forbid, For with what face shall we Christians, which profess our
selves to be dead unto sin? Or, how shall we which are dead to sin indeed (as
we are, if we answer our profession) live any longer in sin?

3. Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were
baptized into his death?

3. Know ye not that so many of us as have by baptism entered our selves into
the number of Christ Jesus his Disciples, were in our baptism baptized into the
likeness of Christ's death, and that by being so baptized we did promise and
profess that we would die unto sin.

4. Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death: that like as Christ
was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should
walk in newness of life.

4. Now for this end, were we baptized into the likeness of the death of
Christ, and did by that profess and promise that we would die unto sin (which
was figured to us by the death of Christ,) That we might thereby profess and
signify that like as Christ when he was buried, was raised from the dead by
the power of God the Father: even so we also (which was signified by our rising
out of the waters, when we were dipped over head and ears) would rise from the
death of sin, to a new and more pure kind of life.

5. For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death: we shall
be also in the likeness of his resurrection:

5. For if we like a grain of Corn that is planted in the earth, have been
planted in the waters of B^ptism (when we were baptized) as Christ was planted
in the earth (when he was buried in the Grave) so, that like as the grain of
corn that dies in the ground, we be also dead to sin, (as Christ also was dead
to this bodily life:) Then we like corn which springs up out of the ground
after it is dead shall rise (as Christ also did out of the grave, and as we our
selves did out of the waters of Baptism) and spring up to a new and spiritual
life.

6. Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin
might, be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin.

6. Knowing this, that we died to sin, that sin might be destroyed, so that,
that from henceforth we should not serve sin.

7. For he that is dead, is freed from sin.

7. For as a servant, or a slave when he dies, is freed from the servitude and
service of his Master; So that his Master now has no power over him; Even so
he, that is dead to sin, is freed from sin, so that sin has no power over him
to make him her Servant, and to serve her.

8 Now if we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall also live with him:

8. And now (that we may go on) if we be dead to sin, as Christ was dead to
this natural or bodily life; we believe and are persuaded, that we shall not
remain in this estate, but that we shall also live the life of righteousness,
as He lives now the life of glory.

9. Knowing that Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more; death has
no more dominion over him.

9. For least any one should think it strange, that Christ which was once dead,
should be so revived, and raised up from the dead again, as that he should be
still alive; we know, that Christ, being raised from the dead, nor died, nor
shall die any more, and that death has no more dominion over him.

10. For in that he died he died unto sin once: but in that he lives, he
lives unto God.

10. For in that he died, he died but once, and that for this end, that he
might take away sin: But that he is revived and lives, he lives, and shall
live for ever, for this end that God may be honored, and glorified, by that
his life.

11. Likewise reckon ye also your selves to be dead indeed unto sin; but alive
unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

11. Now then that Christ, whom ye ought to imitate, is alive, who was once
dead; reckon ye your selves to be dead indeed unto sin: But alive unto God
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

12. Let not sin reign therefore in your mortal body, that ye should obey it
in the lusts thereof,

12. Let not sin reign therefore in your mortal bodies that ye should obey her
in her lust and temptations, Though she stirs up lusts and Temptations in you.

13. Neither yield ye your members, as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin:
but yield your selves unto God, as those that are alive from the dead, and your
members as instruments of righteousness unto God.

13. Neither yield ye your members unto sin, as Instruments, for her to work
unrighteousness by them: But yield ye yourselves unto God (as it becomes and
behooves those to do, which are raised from the death of sin) and yield ye your
members unto him, to be Instruments, by which he may work righteousness in you.

14. For sin shall not have dominon over you: for ye are not under the law, but
under grace.

14. For let no faint hearted Christian say, nay, but I cannot but obey sin,
when she stirs up her lusts in me, and tempts me to naughtiness; for sin
shall not have dominion over you (as she has had heretofore) to make you do
what she pleases; for ye are now not under the Law (which commanded you to do
that which is good, and forbad you to do that which is evil; but gave you
little or no power toward the doing of them) But ye are under the Gospel, the
Gospel of Grace, which as it commands that which is good, and forbids that
which is evil, so it gives power to perform, that which she commands, for the
Gospel is the power of God to salvation.

15. What then? shall we sin because we are not under the law, but under grace?
God forbid.

15. But now because the Law, as she commands (but gives little or no power to
fulfill her commands) So she is severe in punishing every the least
transgression, which is committed against her precepts: And because the Gospel
as it commands, and gives power to fulfill her commands: so is it ready to
pardon sin and iniquities: Some when they hear me say, that ye are not under
the Law, but under grace, are ready to take from hence encouragement and
liberty to sin; But what if I said, ye are not under the Law, but under Grace,
shall we therefore take liberty to sin? God forbid.

16. Know ye not, that to whom ye yield your selves servants to obey, his
servants ye are to whom ye obey: whether of sin unto death, or of obedience
unto righteousness?

16. Know ye not that to whom ye yield yourselves servants to obey, his
Servants ye are to whom ye obey, whether ye yield your selves servants to sin
to obey her, and so become the Servants of sin, which brings men unto death; or
whether ye yield your selves unto the Gospel (which is the doctrine of
obedience) to obey her and so become the Servants of the Gospel) which brings
to righteousness or justification.

17. But God be thanked that ye were the servants of sin: but ye have obeyed
from the heart that form of doctrine, which was delivered to you.

17. But God be thanked, that though ye were sometimes the servants of sin; yet
ye have now obeyed the Gospel, that form of doctrine which was delivered to you.

18. Being then made free from sin, ye became the servants of righteousness.

18. Being therefore made free from sin, and her service, ye are become the
servants of the Gospel, which teaches and commands righteousness.

19. I speak after the manner of men, because of the infirmity of your flesh:
for as ye have yielded your members servants to uncleanness and to iniquity,
unto iniquity: even so now yield your members servants to righteousness unto
holiness.

19. (I speak (in speaking as I do of sin and of the Gospel, under Metaphors,
taken and used amongst vulgar men) as a vulgar man, which is not acquainted
with divine matters; and that, because of the weakness of your understanding;
being ye are not yet able to apprehend and bear the high and deep things of
God.) Wherefore as while ye were the servants of sin, ye yielded your members
to sin, as servants, to work her work, to wit, iniquity; Even so now, being
that ye are the servants of the Gospel, which teaches righteousness; yield ye
your members as servants to the Gospel, to do her work, to wit, holiness.

20. For when ye were the servants of sin, ye were free from righteousness.

20. For when ye were servants to sin, ye were as men free from the Gospel,
which teaches and commands righteousness; and so carried your selves, and
did no work at all for her: As therefore when ye were the servants of sin, ye
were as men free from the Gospel, and so carried your selves, and did no work
for her; So being that ye are now the servants of the Gospel; be ye as men free
from sin, and so carry your selves, and do no work for her.

21. What fruit had ye then in those things, whereof ye are now ashamed? for
the end of those things is death.

21. But what fruit had ye then, when ye were the servants of sin, in those
things whereof ye are now ashamed? for the end of those things which ye did,
while ye were servants to sin, is everlasting death.

22. But now being made free from sin, and become servants to God, ye have your
fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life.

22. But now being that ye are made free from sin, and become the servants of
the Gospel, and so by consequence, the Saints of God, who is the Author of the
Gospel, ye have your fruit, even holiness, and the end of your doings, will be
everlasting life.

23. For the wages of sin is death: but the gift of God is eternal life,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

23. For the wages which sin gives to her servants, which do her work, is
everlasting death; but the gift which God bestows upon his servants, which do
his work, is eternal life, which he bestows upon them, for Jesus Christ our
Lords sake.

CHAP. VI.
Ver. 1. What shall we say then?] In the twentieth verse of the former chapter,
the Apostle said, that where sin abounded, grace did much more abound: Lest any
therefore should think, that he might continue in sin, for this end, that grace
might abound; And because Christians were defamed with the tenancy of such an
opinion, as appears Chap. 3. v. 8. The Apostle shows here the detestation
even of such a thought, as this is, that Christians might continue in Sin, that
the grace of God might abound; and that it is against the very Profession of
Christianity

Shall we continue in Sin, etc.] i e. Shall we continue in our old course of
sinning, by adding Sin to Sin.

Note, that the Apostle speaks here of such who had lived in Sin before their
conversion to Christianity.

That grace may abound] That is, that the grace and favor of God may abound in
pardoning our Sins, or that God may have the more abundant occasion, to show
his grace and favor to sinners.

Ver. 2. God forbid] These words are words of abhorring and detesting, as Chap.
3.4.6.31.

How shall we that are dead unto Sin, live any longer therein?] The Apostle
calls those dead to Sin, which are dead in respect of Sin: That is, which have
renounced, and cast off the Service of sin, and the obedience, which they were
wont to yield to her; and as the dead have no commerce with the living, have no
commerce with Sin, as they were wont to have. Or rather, as Servants, which are
now dead are freed from their Masters by death; so that their Masters have no
command over them, neither do they serve them: So are they; which are dead to
Sin, so freed from sin, as that she has no power to command them, nor do they
obey, or serve her.

All which profess Christianity are dead to Sin by profession and by promise,
for in their very entrance and admission into the Church of Christ, they
promise and profess that they will renounce sin with her lusts. And they which
are Christians as well in truth as in profession are dead to sin, not in
promise and profession only: But in truth and reality too; for they are so
mortified to sin, as that they obey her not, neither have they their wonted
commerce with her.

If therefore we be dead to sin, if it be but by promise and profession only,
how can we with any face live any longer to sin? or in the obedience and
service of sin? But if we are dead to sin, not only in promise and profession,
but also in truth and in reality too; how can we possibly live to sin, or in
the service and obedience of sin, while we are dead to her?

Thus are Christians, two manner of ways said to be dead to sin; First by
promise and profession: Secondly, in truth and in reality. And being any of
these ways dead to sin, they cannot live any longer therein, For if they be
dead to sin, but in promise and profession only, they cannot (to wit) with any
face live to sin. For who can (with any face) live to that which he has
promised, and professed he has nothing to do with, and which he has
renounced. And if they be dead to sin, not in promise and profession only, but
in truth and reality also: How can they possibly live to sin? For it implies a
contradiction, to be truly and really dead, and yet to live to the same thing,
to wit, at the same time.

When therefore Christians may be said to be dead to sin, these two manner of
ways, I conceive that the Apostle argues here, in this part of the Chapter,
from both these ways, that is, from the promise and profession, which they
make in their entrance, and admission into the Church of Christ, that they
renounce sin, and will die unto it, (which he prosecutes in the third and
fourth verses,) And from that, that (if they be true Christians) they are dead
to sin in truth and reality, (which he prosecutes in the verses following.)

We that are dead to sin] We may take notice here of the difference of these
two Phrases (to wit) to be dead to sin, which is the Phrase the Apostle here
uses: And to be dead in sin, which is a Phrase the Apostle uses, Ephesians. 2. ver.
1.5 etc. he is said to be dead to sin, which obeys not sin, nor follows the
lusts thereof. He is said to be dead in sin, which is so under sins dominion,
as that he can get no more out of it, in a manner, than a dead man can get out
of the Grave.

Therein] The Greek is (...), which may be rendered Thereto.

Ver. 3. Know ye not, that as many of us as are baptized into Christ Jesus, are
baptized into his death?] i. e. Know ye not, that so many of us as by baptism
have entered our selves into the number of Christ Jesus his disciples, and have
by the Susception of baptism obliged our selves to follow him, and his
doctrine: that we, I say, did by that our baptism, and the susception thereof,
and the ceremonies therein used, profess and promise that we would renounce
sin; and die to her (which death was typified, as it were and figured in the
death of Christ, and the death of Christ figured in our baptism) that is (in
plainer and sh^rter terms) have not as many of us, as have been baptized,
professed, and promised by, or, in our baptism, that we would renounce sin and
die, or become dead unto her? As Christ once died to this natural life?

Note, that whereas the Apostle said, ver. 2. How shall we that are dead to
sin, live any longer therein? he does here illustrate, and show the truth of
that his saying: First, by showing that we Christians are dead to sin, in
promise and profession at the least. And this he does in this verse. And
Secondly, by showing, that we are therefore dead to sin (not that we should
live again to her, but) that we should live a new life, to wit, a life to
righteousness, and this he does in the next verse.

As were baptized into Jesus Christ] To be baptized into Jesus Christ, is by
the susception of Baptism, or by the promise therein made to subject ourselves
to Christ, and to acknowledge him to be our Master, whom we will readily
follow, and whose Gospel and Doctrine we will readily embrace, and whose
commands we will receive and keep without dispute, See Acts 19.5. 1 Cor. 1.14.

The Baptism by which we are baptized into Jesus Christ is not different from
that Baptism by which we are baptized, in the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost: yea, we are baptized into Jesus Christ by being
baptized in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and
while we subject ourselvs to them, we subject ourselves to Jesus Christ, for
they are all one their commands one, their doctrine one.

Were baptized into his death] i. e. Were baptized into the similitude and
likeness of his death (for so the Apostle seems to explicate and express
himself, ver 5.) And by consequence into a death to Sin, which was typified,
both by the ceremony of being dipped over head and ears in baptism, as also by
Christ's Death.

They were baptized into the similitude of Christ's death, which were dipp^d
over head and ears in the waters at their Baptism: for by being dipped over
head and ears in the waters at their Baptism: they were as it were buried in
the waters; which burial represented the burial of Christ in the bowels of the
earth, and by consequence Ch^^sts death.

This burial in the waters at their Baptism as it did figure and represent
Christ's death; So it did figure and represent the death of those which were
baptized, unto Sin, which the Apostle here intimates, and we are to take notice
of: And as it did figure and represent the death of those, which were baptized
unto sin; so it was a kind of profession, that they did renounce sin, and would
die thereunto.

Where note, that at this Baptism, the party to be baptized did by word of
mouth promise and profess that he would renounce sin. And what he did promise
and profess by word of mouth, he did promise and profess by the ceremonies, to
which he submitted himself in baptism: For whether he were sprinkled with
water, or whether he were dipped over head and ears, he did by those ceremonies
and either of them promise and profess, that he had, or would renounce sin, and
have nothing to do with the foul pollutions of her unclean motions and lusts:
For by being sprinkled with water, he showed that, he had or would cleanse
himself and as it were wash himself from sin: And by being dipped over head and
ears, and so by being as it were buried in the water, he showed, that he would
die, or was dead to sin, for none but dead men use to be buried.

Into his death] i. e. Into the similitude or likeness of the death of Christ,
which death of Christ was a figure or representation of our death to sin. And
by being baptized into that, we, did profess, that we would renounce sin, and
die to her.

Note, therefore that the death of Christ was not only a cause of our death
unto sin: But was also a figure and certain Typical representation thereof: For
it signified or figured our death to sin: And did Typically and Figuratively
teach, us what we should do, that is, that we should die to sin as Christ died,
to this mortal life. And this is evident by certain passages of the former
part of this Chapter.

And not only the death of Christ, but his Resurrection and his Ascension into
heaven, did figure and typically set forth, what we should do, who have been
baptized into Christ: For as Christ was raised from the dead so should we rise
to a new life, ver. 3. And as Christ is ascended into heaven, so should we have
our conversation in heaven, and place our affections there, Coloss. 3. ver. 1,
2, 3, etc.

Ver. 4. Therefore are we buried with him by Baptism unto death, that like as
Christ was raised from the dead, etc] I take this Conjunction, Therefore, to be
here in this place, not as a note of Illation, inferring any thing from what
went before: But as a note of demonstration, showing or pointing, at the end of
that which was there said, and is here repeated or assumed, to show that end,
q. d. Now for this end or for this cause were we baptized into the death, that
is into the similitude of the death of Christ, and so by consequence into the
death of sin, to profess and signify that as Christ was raised from the dead,
we also should walk in newness of life.

We are buried with him by baptism into death] This is that which he said ver.
3. We were baptized into his death. Which words he repeateth or assumeth again
here to set forth the end thereof.

But note, that whereas he said only, We were baptized into his death in the
third verse, here he says, We are (or were rather) buried with him by Baptism
to death, where he expresses our being baptized with the Ceremony which was
then used in baptism, which was such as that the parties baptized were dipped
over head and ears and so buried as it were in the water as Christ was buried
in the bowels of the earth. So that these words We are (or were buried with him
by baptism into death) do speak explicitly and at large, what he said in fewer
words when he said, We were baptized into his death. And what he said
implicitly and in fewer words when he said, (We were baptized into his death)
He says more explicitly and at large, when he says, We are buried with him
by baptism into death.

We are buried with him by Baptism into death] i. e. We are or were baptized,
into the similitude of Christ's death.

Buried with him by Baptism] i. e. Buried in the waters by being dipped over
head and ears therein at our baptism, as he was buried in the bowels of the
earth: and so by consequence baptized into the similitude of the death of
Christ, and representing his death, at or in our baptism.

The Apostle (as I said) expresses here being baptized, by being buried by
baptism which was a Ceremony used in those days in baptism. For whereas we
sprinkle or pour water upon those which we baptize, they of old dipped them
over head and ears, and so buried them as it were in the waters, whom they
baptized.

And the Apostle may seem thus to express their being baptized, and to make
mention of this Ceremony here, because it did more plainly represent the
burial, of Christ (to which this Ceremony does allude) and by consequence the
death of Christ to the natural life which he lived before his Passion; and so
by consequence our death to sin, which they which were baptized did profess by
submitting themselves to that Ceremony, and suffering themselves to be dipped
over head and ears in the waters, at their baptism.

Note, here that those which the Apostle here speaks of, were men of ripe years
and understanding; and such, when they were baptized, were wont, for the most
part, to be dipped over head and ears and buried as it were in the waters, when
they were baptized.

But this dipping over head and ears, and burying as it were in the waters, was
not essential to baptism. For the use of water in baptism, is and was to
signify outwardly, the inward cleansing of the soul from sin, which water does
as well by sprinkling, as it does by our being dipped and overwhelmed therein.

And it is more than probable, that though they of the primitive times used to
dip over head and ears in baptism, yet they used sprinkling also (especially
when the parties to be baptized were either Infants or sick or weak of body)
For whereas we read, Act. 2.41. that in one day (and that not an whole day
neither) three thousand souls were baptized by the Apostles, and that at
Jerusalem, where there was no great Rivers, fit for such baptism or dipping: It
is not likely that they did it, or could do it, by dipping them every one, whom
they did baptize, over head and ears, and burying them, as it were in the
waters, in so short a time; but that they did it by sprinkling or pouring water
upon them. And in the time of Cyprian Bishop of Carthage (who was promoted to
that his Bishopric Anno 250) that sprinkling was used as well as dipping in
baptism, and that not as a new thing, will appear, by his 76. Epistle, the
ninth Paragraph, which begins Quaesisti, etc.

That the Ceremony of dipping or burying, as it were, in Baptism, was of
ancient use and long continuance in the Church of Christ, cannot be denied,
though now the pouring on of water, or sprinkling, is in a manner altogether
used: But when dipping and burying, as it were in the water, was so frequently
used, they which were baptized, were for the most part men of stronger years
converted from other Religions to Christianity, But when Christianity had
extended it self almost to all parts of the known earth; and few men of years
were now baptized (who could better endure dipping, than Children and Infants
could.) And when most, that were now to be baptized, were Infants, to whose
tender bodies dipping might be offensive for their health; pouring on of water,
or sprinkling came to be in a manner altogether used in the place of dipping.

With him] i. e. Like unto him, or like as he was buried.

Note that the preposition With is to be taken here, for a note of similitude,
and is as much as to say, Like as, and so it is to be taken, ver. 5, 6, 8.

Into death] This is that which he said, ver. 3. Into his death, the exposition
of which words, see there.

That like as Christ was raised from the dead, etc.] i. e. To signify and
profess thereby, that like as Christ, when he was dead, was raised from the
dead by the glory of the father, even so we also shall or should rise again to
a new life, and walk therein.

By the glory of the Father] i. e. By the glorious power of God the Father.

The power of God is called a glorious power, Coloss. 1.11. And it is glorified
and often commended for raising up Jesus from the dead, as Ephesians. 1. v. 19, 20,
etc.

We may take the glory of the Father also by a Metonymy, for the Father
himself, who is glorious.

Even so we also should walk in newness of life] Even so we also should or
would, rise from the death of sin, to a new life, and live therein, and if we
do so, we can no longer live, either in, or to sin.

There is an Hebraism in these words (viz) Newness of life, which are put for a
new life, or a new kind of life.

That he calls newness of life, or a new life, or a new kind of life here, which
consists in other gates manners, than they formerly used, while they were yet
unregenerate, and without Christ.

Note, that this word walk, is frequently in Scripture taken, as a word of
morality, by which is Metaphorically signified, the life and conversation of a
Man, and his manner of living; who practices, or exercises act after act, or
deed after deed: taking thereby as it were step after step, one step after
another. And it is a word of an indifferent signification, taken sometimes in a
good sense, as here, sometimes in a bad, as John 12.35. etc.

Because we should not only rise to a new life, but also continue therein, the
Apostle had rather say, even so we also should walk in newness of life; than,
even so also we should rise to a new life; For walking presupposes rising, but
rising does not infer walking.

Ver. 5. For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we
shall be also in the likeness of his Resurrection] The Apostle prevents or
answers a tac^te Objection here. For whereas he said, ver. 4 Therefore we are
buried with him by Baptism into death, that like as Christ was raised from the
dead, to the glory of the Father; even so we also should walk in newness of
life. A man may object and say, whereas thou say (Paul) That we are buried
with him by baptism into death, that like as Christ was raised from the dead,
even so we also should walk in newness of life, thou inferrest more from the
premises, than the premises will allow thee, for though thou may infer from
these premises, viz. we are buried with him by baptism into death, that we are
therefore so buried that we may not live unto sin; yet thou can not infer
from thence, that we are therefore buried with him in baptism into death, that
like as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we
also should walk in newness of life. To this objection, I say, the Apostle here
answers, or this objection the Apostle here prevents: saying, for if we are
planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness
of his resurrection: q. d. For I may infer from those words (viz.) We are
buried with him by baptism into death, that like as Christ was raised from the
dead by the glory of the Father, we should also walk in newness of life; as
well as that, That we should not live unto sin. For one of those do infer the
other, so that if we shall not live unto sin, we shall live unto newness of
life.

If we have been planted together with him in the likeness of his death, etc.]
q. d. If we have been planted in the waters of baptism, like as Christ was
planted in the earth (at his burial) so that we be thereby truly and actually
dead to sin, as Christ was dead to this natural life: We shall truly, actually,
and undoubtedly spring up to a new life, as Christ did at his resurrection, to
a life of glory.

Observe that the word (...) him, or with him, that is, with Christ, is to be
here understood, which is expressed both in the Syriac and Arabique
Translations.

Observe also, that what the Apostle meant by being buried, ver. 4. He means
by being Planted here, But changes the word buried, into a more emphatical
word planted the more to set out the efficacy of baptism, which here he speaks
of. And in both these words he alludes to the burial of Christ, when he was
laid in the Sepulcher.

As Christ therefore, when he was laid in the Sepulcher, under the ground, was
said to be buried, so were they said to be buried, who were in baptism so
dipped, as that they were under the waters.

But because Christ was not to continue under the earth, when he was buried:
Christ may better be said to be planted in the earth, than buried: For things
which are buried in the earth, may never rise up again: But things which are
planted or sown in the earth, do naturally rise and spring up again after their
Plantation. And for this reason does Saint Paul liken the bodies of men (which
are to have a resurrection) when they are buried, to grain which is sown or
planted in the earth, which is not quickened except it die, 1 Cor. 5.36. And for
this reason does our Savior himself (in allusion to his death, and burial, and
rising again) liken himself to a Corn of wheat which falls into the ground
and dies, John 12.24.

As Christ therefore when he was laid into the ground being he was to rise
again, might better be said to be planted, than to be buried. So they which
were baptized, being that they were dipped into the waters, and therewith
covered, but not there to lie, but to be lifted out, or rise out of the waters
again, with which they were covered, may be said to be Sown or Planted in those
waters, better than buried. Especially when they are so dipped, or covered with
the waters of baptism, as that by the Grace of God (the inward operation of his
Spirit, going along with the outward work of the Sacrament) they are therein
mortified to sin. For such as are mortified in baptism to sin, will rise from
the death of sin, or from sin to which they are dead, to a new life, viz. a
life of righteousness: As they rise out of the waters again, in which they are,
as it were, buried or planted, which are baptized. And as Christ rose out of
the earth, in which he was planted or buried.

Together] Supple, with him, that is, like to him, that is, like to Christ.

Note, that the Preposition (...), with, is here a note of Similitude, as I
said before.

In the likeness of his death] That is, so that we die, as he died, we to sin,
as he to this natural life.

As the Grain which is sowed or planted in the earth, is not quickened except it
dies, 1 Cor. 15.36. So they which are planted in the waters of baptism, do not
rise or spring up to a new life, or life of righteousness, except they first
die to sin: But if they first die to sin: then they do undoubtedly rise and
spring up to a new life, or life of righteousness; as the corn or grain rises,
sprouteth and springs up, and as they which are buried in the waters, rise
out of them again.

We shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection] The words with their
Supplement (for they are defective) had been better rendered thus, We truly
shall also spring up together with him in the likeness of his resurrection. The
sense of which words is this, We truly shall also spring up as he did; we to a
new life of righteousness, as he sprang up to a life of glory, and so be like
to him in his resurrection.

Note therefore, that the first words of this verse in the Original are these,
(...), Supple, (...). The latter words (which are the words we have now in
hand) are these, (...), which words are defective, and must be made up out of
the first words thus, (...).

The whole verse supplied and made up, runs thus, (...)] Which we interpret
thus. For if we have been planted together with him, in the likeness, or to the
likeness of his death, truly we shall also spring up with him, in the likeness,
or to the likeness of his resurrection.

Where note, that the word (...), is twice here used; but in different
significations, for in the first place, it signifies planted with: In the
second place, it signifies, springing up with.

Of the signification of the word, as it is used in the first place, I presume
there will be no doubt. But some perhaps may doubt of the signification, which
is given to it in the second place.

Know therefore that (...) signifies as well to spring up with, as to be
planted with, for Saint Luke uses the participle (...) in this sense Luke 8.7.
where we read (...). That is, And other fell among thorns, and (the thorns)
springing up with it, choked it.

But some may Object and say, that (...) is a word of a Passive form, but I
have given it a Neuter or Middle signification.

I answer, such words, though they are of a Passive form, yet may they be of a
Neuter and Middle signification, as (...), Chap. 2. ver. 5. and the Participle
(...) Luke 8.7. is of a Passive form, but not of a Passive, but Middle
signification.

Note, that in these words, We shall be also in the likeness of his
resurrection, there is a tacit allusion, to the lifting up or rising up of
those out of the waters, which were dipped over head and ears, and so buried,
as it were, or (as he here says) planted therein, at their baptism; by which
as Christ's rising from the dead was figured; so our rising from the death of
sin, to a new course of life, was represented and professed

Ver 6. Knowing that our old man is crucified with him] The Apostle prevents an
Objection here; for whereas he said verse 5. That if we be planted together
with Christ in the likeness of his death, we shall spring up with him in the
likeness of his resurrection. A man might object and say, Paul, thou speak
here thou know not what, for do you know what you say, when you say, that If
ye be planted with Christ in the likeness of his death, ye shall spring up with
him in the likeness of his resurrection? This Objection I say, the Apostle here
prevents, when he says, Knowing that our old man is crucified with him, that
the body of sin might be destroyed, etc. q d. And when I say, If we are planted
together with him in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the
likeness of his resurrection; I know well enough what I say, for I know that
our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, etc.

Knowing this, that our old man is crucified] i. e. Knowing this, that our
former kind of life is mortified, or left.

Or rather, Knowing that our old nature, or custom of living is abolished.

He spoke of this, which he calls here Our old man, as of a Person, by a
Prosopopoeia.

If we should look to the order or series of speech, the Apostles speech is
somewhat incongruous, for he should rather have said here, We are crucified to
the old man, than have said, Our old man is crucified. For he said verse 5. If
we have been planted together in the likeness of his death. And in the seventh
verse he says: He that is dead is freed from sin. And verse 8. If we be dead
with Christ, etc. to which these words should be conform

But as I have observed, the Apostle looks more to the sense, than to the form
or manner of his speech, as he does Chap. 7.4. and in many other places. For
which reason, it may be it is, that he says of himself, Though I be rude in
speech, yet not in knowledge, 2 Cor. 11.6.

Our old man is crucified] He alludes here to the death by which Christ dyed,
and therefore says is crucified, whereas otherwise, he would have said is
mortified, or the like.

It is by Baptism, that our old man is said here to be crucified, or mortified,
which is when the party Baptized is so disposed as he ought to be, and when God
accompani th the outward work of baptism, with the inward opperation of his
Spirit and grace.

With him] i. e. With Christ, that is, like as Christ was crucified.

The preposition with, is used here also, as a Note of Similitude.

That the body of sin might be destroyed] By the Body of sin may be meant those
many sins, in which unregenerate men were wont to live, before their
Regeneration by Baptism, as covetousness, drunkenness, fornication, etc. which
he may call a Body, as a Flock, a People, a City, an Army, a Legion is called a
Body of which body, every particular sin is a member, See Coloss. 3.5.

That henceforth we should not serve sin] i. e. That we should from this time
forward serve sin no more, nor be any more at sins beck or command: or that Sin
should not any more have such power over us, as to make us her slaves and
Servants to do, what she would have us to do, as she had before.

He speaks of sin, here as of a Queen, Lady, or Mistress.

He is said to serve sin, which obeys the motions and lusts of sin, which are
as it were her commands; that is, who when sin stirs up any motion in him to
evil, presently gives his ascent to it, and puts it in execution.

Ver. 7. For he that is dead is freed from sin] For he that is dead to sin is,
freed from her, so that she has no power over him.

He speaks not here of a natural death, but (as he did before) of a moral or
spiritual death, to wit, a death to sin.

And when he says, that he that is dead is freed from sin, he alludes to a
Servant, or a Slave, which by his death is freed from the Law or bonds of his
Master, so that his Master has now no power over him: For such is the
condition of the dead, as that they are civily subject to no humane power at
all.

Note here, that for a man to be dead to sin is the same in the Apostles
phrase, as for sin, or the old man to be crucified in him. And the Apostle
uses them promiscuously.

He proves here that the Old man is crucified in us, that we should not serve
sin, and he proves it by an Allegorical argument drawn from the Servants of
Men, who are freed by death from their Masters Service. And from that, that
they which are free from the Service of men, do not, as though they were their
Servants, still yield them any further Service.

Ver. 8. Now if we be dead with Christ, we believe, that we shall also live
with him] I said ver. 6. that the Apostle prevented an Objection there, and so
he undertook to declare, that he knew well enough what he said, when he said,
If we have been planted together with him in the likeness of his death, we
shall also in the likeness of his Resurrection, ver. 5.

But hitherto he has declared only, that he knew, that they which were Planted
together with Christ in the likeness of his death, that is, that they which
were crucified, or dead to sin with Christ, were therefore so planted or so
dead, that they should serve sin no more. He has not as yet declared, that he
knew, that they which were so planted, and so dead should rise or spring up to
a new life: for it is not enough to show, that a man does good, to show, that
he abstains from evil.

I said moreover that the Apostle spoke somewhat incongruously (if we did look
not to the sense) but to the manner of his Speaking) in the sixth verse.
Therefore the Apostle does here correct, as it were what he said there, when he
says, But if we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall also live with
him. And also makes that out to the full which he undertook.

(...), etc. But if we be dead with Christ we believe, that we shall also live
with him] q. d. But (that I may correct my speech and speak more congruously,
and bring up that to the full, which I undertook) If we be dead with Christ, we
believe that we shall also live with him.

If we be dead with Christ] i. e. If we be dead to sin, as Christ was dead to
this natural life.

The preposition With, is a note of similitude here also.

We believe that we shall also live with him] i. e. We believe or are
persuaded, that we shall also live the life of grace to God, or to
Righteousness, as Christ now lives a life of Glory, to the glory of God.

With him] i. e. As he does.

Ver. 9. Knowing this that Christ being raised from the dead, etc.] Whereas the
Apostle said in the former verse, If we be dead with Christ, we believe that we
shall also live with him, that is, that we shall live the life of grace, and of
righteousness, as he lives the life of Glory.

Some man may say, but how can thou, say, Paul, that we shall live with
Christ? For art thou sure that Christ is now alive? That thou can not be, for
though Christ was raised from the dead, yet he may be now dead again, for many
which were raised from the dead dyed, again, after they were raised.

This doubt or this objection the Apostle here prevents, saying, Knowing this,
that Christ being raised from the dead dies no more, etc. q d. I say we shall
also live with him, for we know this, that Christ is now alive: For Christ
being raised from the dead, dies no more, death has no more dominion over him.

Knowing this, that Christ being raised from; etc.] This he might know, being
informed thereof by the Spirit of God, which knows all things, and cannot
lie; but Christ appeared to Paul alive, after a glorious manner, 1 Cor. 15 8.
By which he might certainly know, that Christ was now living.

Death has no more dominion over him] i. e. Death neither has, nor shall have
any more dominion over him. A Syllepsis as before.

He speaks of death, as of a Person, by a Prosopopoeia.

Death had dominion over Christ after a certain manner, when it severed his
Soul from his Body upon the Cross, and brought him down to the grave: But
Christ soon cast off this dominion of death, and has so far conquered death,
as that death shall never have any power of him again: Nay, death never had had
any dominion over him at all, had not he himself willingly (for man's
redemption) submitted himself thereto.

V. 10. He died unto sin] i. e. He died to, or for this end, that he migh
abolish and destroy sin in us.

The word Sin, is of the Dative Case, and therefore, to die to sin, is as much
as, Mori propter peccatum, vel ad peccatum in nobis mortificandum and
abolendum: i. e. To die for sin, or to die, that he might mortify and abolish
sin in us. For this efficacy, or virtue has Lamed with a Dative Case with the
Hebrews, whose Idiotismes Paul often uses.

Note, that Christ and we are both said to die to sin, but not both after one
and the same manner; for we are said to die to sin, because we cease to yield
to the motions of sin which are in us; and after this manner Christ is not said
to die to sin, for there is no sin in Christ, nor did he ever yield to any such
motions, thereby to be said to have ceased from yielding to the motions of sin;
but Christ is said to die to sin, because he died to put away sin, and abolish
that sin which is in us, and after this manner we cannot be said to die to sin,
for none can put away sin, or abolish sin by his death, but he that is both
without sin himself, and is a Person infinite.

Once] i. e. Once and but once. For such was the worth and value of Christ's
death, as that he needed not to die more than once for the abolishing of sin,
Heb. 9. ver. 25, 26.

But in that he liveth] i. e. But in that he is raised again from death to life.

He lives unto God] i. e. He lives, and that an immortal life, to the glory
of God, who has exalted him to that life, and is thereby glorified, in that he
has so exalted him.

He liveth] i. e. He lives an immortal life. Synechdoche Integri.

Unto God] i. e. Unto Gods glory.

Ver. 11. Likewise reckon ye also your selves to be dead indeed unto sin] q. d.
Being therefore ye hear that Christ was dead, but is raised from the dead, and
being raised lives, and shall live for ever: And being that Christ by his
death, and resurrection, and life, is a Type, and Figure, to teach us what we
should do, and should be. Now as Christ was dead, but was raised again, and
lives a life immortal: So likewise reckon ye your selves, to be dead indeed
unto sin, but yet alive unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord, and so alive,
as always to continue in that life.

To be dead indeed unto sin] What it is to be dead unto sin, See verse 2.

Alive unto God] To live, or to be alive unto God, is so to live, as that we
please God, and observe and do his will.

Through Jesus Christ our Lord] This he says, because it is by the merits of
Jesus Christ, and his efficacy, that we are brought from the death of sin, to
the life of God.

The Apostle, as you see, makes an exhortatory conclusion here, by which, he
applies to his present purpose, what he said of the death and life of Christ.

Ver. 12. Let not sin reign therefore in your mortal Body] He speaks of sin
here, as of a Mistress, a Lady, or Queen by a Prosopopoeia.

Sin is then said to reign in us, when she stirs up naughty motions in us,
suitable to our own corruptness, and we follow them, and obey them as commands,
by consenting to them and putting them in execution.

This corollary or conclusion, which the Apostle here uses may be gathered,
either in particular from the foregoing verse, or in general from what he has
said from the third verse, hitherto.

In your m^rtal Body] i. e. The Body is to be taken here by a Synechdoche, for
the whole man, for sin where she reigns, reigns not only in the body, but
also in the soul, and her works are not wrought only in the body, but also in
the powers and facul^ies of the soul, for her works are not only Adultery,
Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, and the like, but also Emulation,
Wrath, Strife Seditions, Heresies, Gal. 5. ver. 19 20.

The sense therefore of these words, Let not sin reign in your mortal body, is
this, Let not sin reign in you, while you are in this mortal life.

He says, Let not sin reign in your body, (using a Synechdoche here) because
the effects of sin are most seen in the body, and he adds the Epithet Mortal,
to admonish us, of the evil which sin brings; for it was sin which made our
bod^es mortal, and subject to death, which had it not been for sin, had not
died. As also to put us in mind of our mortality here, that we might not defer
the seeking of that immortality, which shall be hereafter; as also to put us
upon the watch, because lust (which War against the soul) are prone to rise in
our bodies, while we are here in this mortal life, clothed with these mortal
bodies of ours.

That ye should obey it, in the lusts thereof] i. e. Note that the word
Thereof, is to be referred, not to the word sin, but to the word body, as will
easily appear by the Greek, where the word Sin, and the word Body are of diverse
Genders; Sin of the Foeminine, and Body of the Neuter.

The same lusts are called the lusts of sin, and the lusts of the body. And
they are called the lusts of sin, because sin stirs them up, or because they
proceed from sin, as from the first mover: And the lusts of the body, because
they are stirred up and received in the body.

To obey sin in her lusts, or in the lusts of the body, is all one, with
obeying sin or obeying the lusts of sin. As it is all one to obey a King in his
commands, or to obey a King, or to obey a Kings commands.

By lusts understand here motions to evil, as to Adultery, Murder, Theft,
Drunkeness, and the like, proceeding from sin while she tempts us to these and
the like evils.

These we are said to obey, when we assent to them and readily fulfill them.

Ver. 13. Neither yield your members as instruments of unrighteousness] q. d
Neither yield ye the members of your bodies, to be as instruments of sin, for
her to work unrighteousness, or wickedness thereby.

He speaks of Sin, as of a Person or Lady, by a Prosopopoeia.

Your members] By the members are here meant the members of the body, which are
ordained as instruments of the body to work or act by. And by a Synechdoche,
the faculties or virtues of the soul too (which are as the instruments, by
which the soul performs her operations.)

Sin will, if she can make use of all the instruments of man, for her work, and
will be ready to command them, and call for them all to serve her, if we will
be ready to obey, and yield them up to her Service.

He expresses the members of the body here, because he mentioned the body
before, ver. 12. But as the body was taken there by a Synechdoche, for the soul
also, yea for the whole man: so must the members of the body be taken here (as
I said) by a Senechdoche, for the faculties of the soul too, that is, for the
Instruments of the whole man.

Of unrighteousness] Unrighteousness is to be taken here generally (as cap.
1.18.) for all or any manner of wickedness, or wicked actions.

The Genitive case therefore of unrighteousness, is Genitivus effecti.

Unto sin] i. e. Unto sin, as to your Queen, or Mistress, for her to dispose of
them.

Yield yourselves unto God] To wit, as obedient Servants or Subjects to be
ruled, and commanded by him, and him only.

As those that are alive from the dead] i. e. As behooves or becomes those,
which are alive from the dead.

It was God which raised us from death to life; it behooves therefore and
becomes us, being that we are quickened by him, to live to him. For therefore
did he quicken us, that henceforth we should not live to ourselves, or sin, but
to him that quickens us. See 2 Cor. 5.15.

As alive from the dead] By the dead are here meant, such as are dead in sin.
And what these are, and how these differ from those, which are dead to sin, See
Notes ver. 2.

By the living or those which are alive, are here meant such as live the life
of righteousness, that is, such as are enabled by God, to work righteousness,
and walk uprightly.

And your Members] What is meant by our Members, I said a little before.

Of Righteousness] Righteousness is to be taken here for all manner of
holiness, or good and holy actions; and it is of equal latitude with
unrighteousness (mentioned a little before) to which it is opposed.

This Genitive of Righteousness is Genitivus Effecti, as the former Genitive of
Unrighteousness was.

Unto God] To wit, as to your King to whom ye must yield obdience, in all
things what he calls for.

Ver. 14. For sin shall not have dominion over you] i. e. For sin, though she
has had dominion over you heretofore (when ye were not as yet under grace) and
drew you by her power to give the consent of your wills, to her motions, and
with the members of your body to fulfill her lusts, so that ye yielded not your
selves and your members as Instruments unto God, yet now she shall not have
such dominion over you.

Then sin is said to have dominion over us, when she can by her power and
strong motions and lusts, draw us to consent to those her motions, and with our
members and faculties to fulfill those her lusts, so that we yield our selves to
her, and not to God.

He speaks of sin, as of a Queen or Lady or Mistress by a Prosopopaeia.

The Apostle having exhorted those to whom he wrote a little before Not to let
sin reign in their mortal body, etc. least any should show himself
faint-hearted, and because before the time of his belief, (while he was under
the Law, he was continually drawn by sin to consent to her motions, and fulfill
her lusts, and so to yield himself her Servant) should say that he was not able
to withstand the power of sin, but must needs yield to her, as to her which
has dominion over him; for so strong was sin in him, as that the Law could not
strengthen him sufficiently against her motions. He prevents him here, with a
word of comfort, and encouragement, saying, For sin shall not have dominion
over you, for ye are not under the Law but under grace.

For ye are not under the Law but under Grace] i. e. For ye are none of you
under the Law (which gave you little or no assistance against sin) but you are
under the Gospel, which gives you strength to resist sin, and work
righteousness.

He gives a reason here why sin should not have dominion over them.

Note, that the Apostle directs this his speech to the believing Jews, in a
particular manner.

Note also, that by the Law, is here meant the Law of Moses, as it was given by
Moses, and as it is in it self precisely considered; in which regard it had but
little power to keep a sinner from yielding to the motions of sin. And indeed
when the word Law is put absolutely in opposition to grace, it always so
signifies. So that the sense of these words may be this q. d. For ye are not
under the Law, which had not power enough to keep you from the dominion of sin:
But ye are under grace, which gives you strength to free your selves from sin,
that she domineer not over you.

Ye are not under the Law] To be under the Law signifies two things, to wit,
to be under the obligation of the Law: And to be under the imperfection of the
Law; that is, to be under the Law as it was given by Moses and as it is
precisely considered without the grace of the Gospel; In which last sense the
Law though it did impose commands upon men, it did not either of it self or by
any thing joined with it, afford strength enough to a sinner to resist sin, and
to perform those her commands. For the Law was given by Moses, but Grace and
Truth came by Jesus Christ, John 1.17.

Now to be under the Law, signifies here, not only to be under the obligation
of the Law, so that a man is bound to do what the Law requires; But also and
that especially, to be under the imperfection of the Law, as it commands men
to do these and these things, but does not help them as the Gospel does, to
perform those her commands.

It is not to be doubted, but that in the time of the Law, that is, in the time
of the Old Testament, there were many Jews which were free from the dominion of
sin, through faith: These though they were under the obligation of the Law of
Moses, because they were bound to do all the commands thereof, yet they were
not under the imperfection of the Law; for through faith they obtained that
strength by Christ, to resist sin, which the Law could not afford: for Christ
was the same yesterday and to day, and for ever, Heb. 13.8. But now the
believing Jews, are free not only from the imperfection, but also from the
obligation of the Law of Moses, to wit, as the Law was given by Moses, the Law
being quite abrogated, as it was by him given, So that they are not bound to
keep the Moral Law, as it was given by Moses, but as it is the Law of Nature,
and that which Christ would have men observe by his Gospel, and to the
observation of which, he gives them strength and ability.

But under Grace] By Grace understand the Gospel, here.

The Gospel may be called Grace, by a Metonymie, because it is the word of
grace, Acts 14.3. And it is called the grace of God, Acts 13.43. And 1 Pet. 5
12. because the grace of God, is joined with it.

They are said to be under the Gospel, who have received the Gospel, and
believed it, or do obey it. And over such, sin has no dominion. For the Gospel
contains most heavenly and unspeakable promises, which being embraced by
faith do animate the believer to stop his ears against sin; And it conferreth
the gifts of the holy Ghost upon the believer, by which he mortifies sin in his
members (which has her full sway in other men) and by which he is enabled to
work the works of Righteousness.

The Gospel is the power of God to salvation, as the Apostle speaks, Chap.
1.16. No wonder therefore, that he should say here, that sin shall have no
dominion ov^r them which are under Grace, that is, which are under the Gospel.

V. 15. What then shall we sin because we are not under the Law but under
Grace] q. d. What then? shall we take to our selves a liberty to sin, as though
(because I said we are not under the Law of Moses) we were not under any law at
all? Or shall we take to our selves a liberty to sin (because I said we are
under Grace) as though (because we were under Grace) God would wink at our
sins; though we sinned never so freely, and never so greedily?

This objection which the Apostle here prevents arises out of a
miss-understanding of the words which he used in the former verse, viz. ye are
not under the Law, but under Grace; through the ambiguity thereof.

And he therefore prevents this objection, that weak Christians might not take
occasion from hence, to think that Christianity gave liberty to sin (as many
which were not friends to Christians, would make the world believe it did and
that Christians so taught, as appears, Chap. 3.8.

Ver. 16. Know ye not that to whom ye yield your selves servants to obey, his
servants ye are to whom ye obey, whether of sin unto death, or of obedience
unto Righteousness?] These words thus rendered, are for the latter part of them
defective, which defect is thus made up, q. d. Know ye not that to whom ye
yield your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey,
whether ye yield your selves servants to sin, to obey her. And so become the
Servants of sin, which brings men unto death. Or, whether ye yield your selves
Servants unto the Law, or doctrine of obedience, to obey that, and so ye become
the Servants of the Law or doctrine of obedience, which brings to
righteousness, the end whereof is everlasting life?

The words in the Greek are these (...). Now some take the particle (...) which
is here repeated twice, after the manner of a Latin Ablative, and construe it
not Cui, to whom as most do but render it Hoc ipso quod, that is, in as much
as. And then are these words without that defect, aforesaid, which otherwise
they suffer.

The words then ((...), being thus taken) may be thus translated. Know ye not
that in as much as ye yield your selves servants to obey, ye are servants in as
much as ye do obey and that either of sin, which brings to death; or of the Law
or doctrine of obedience, which leads to righteousness?

The Apostle argues, here and in the verses following against the foresaid
Objection, which some might by a miss-construction of his words raise out of
the former verse, as though by those words he gave there a freedom to sin.

And in his arguing he uses this method.

First he lays this for a ground, that Christians (they at least to whom he
wrote) were the Servants of Righteousness, and not of sin.

Secondly, he builds this upon that, or infers this from that, That being they
were the servants of Righteousness and not of sin, they ought to obey
Righteousness, and not sin.

That which he lays for his ground, he lays and makes good, in the 16, 17, and
18, verses.

That which he builds upon that, and infers from that he does in the 19 verse;
but yet he does it not in Categorical terms, but winds it up in an Exhortation,
as his manner sometimes is.

The ground, to wit, That they were the servants of Righteousness and not of
sin, he makes good by a Syllogism thus.

To whom ye yield your selves servants to obey his servants ye are to whom ye
obey whatsoever he be. And this he lays down, ver. 16.

But ye have yielded your selves servants to righteousness to obey her, and not
to sin, to obey her. And this he lays down, ver 17.

Therefore ye are the servants of Righteousness and not of sin. This he lays
down, ver. 18.

The Major proposition of this Syllogism, needed not any proof, it is clear;
they themselves knew it, therefore he says, Know ye not that to whom ye yield
your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey, ver. 16.

The Minor proposition, he proves first by removing that which might be
objected, in the behalf of sin against it; Secondly by showing, that which
would make for Righteousness, by matter of fact, and both of these he does,
ver. 17.

Of sin] He speaks of Sin still as of a Person, yea a Queen, to whom to obey is
to sin.

Unto death] That is, which brings unto death, yea death eternal.

Of obedience] Obedience is to be taken here for the Law, or Doctrine of
obedience by a Metonymie, as is plain by the next ensuing verse.

The Gospel may be called the Law or doctrine of obedience; because it teaches
men to follow, not their own sense, and the motions of sin, but to obey God,
who only is to be obeyed; and not only teaches them, but enableth them also to
obey him, which may be called an inward teaching.

The Apostle speaks of obedience, that is of the Gospel, which is the Law or
Doctrine of obedience, as of a person yea as a Queen by a Prosopopoeia.

Unto Righteousness] i. e. Which leads unto Righteousness, the end whereof is
everlasting life.

Ver. 17. But God be thanked that ye were the servants of sin, but ye have
obeyed from the heart, that form of doctrine delivered to you] The sense of
these words is this, q. d. But (for which ye have cause to thank God) whereas
ye had been the servants of sin, and obeyed her, ye have now at length, obeyed,
from the heart, that form of Doctrine which was delivered you.

Note, that the Apostle does not give God thanks here for that they were
sometimes the slaves or servants of sin, as though that had been the gift or
blessing of God to them, for which they ought to give thanks (for that would be
absurd) but he gives thanks to God for that, that they had obeyed from the
heart that form of doctrine which was delivered them, whereas they had in
foretime been the servants and slaves of sin.

This giving of thanks therefore must be referred to the latter sentence, not
to the former: And for such progress of the Gospel, we ought, to give God
thanks, as well as for the Gospel it self, See Chap. 1.8.

This phrase, ye were the servants of sin, is as much as, whereas ye have been
the Servants of sin.

Like phrase to this we meet with in many places, See one, Luke 15. ver. 23,
24. In these words, Let us eat and be merry, for this my son was dead, and is
alive again, he was lost, and is found.

Ye have obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine, etc.] By this Doctrine,
he means the Gospel, with its precepts and commands: And by obeying, is meant
believing and doing according to it.

He speaks of this doctrine as of a Queen or Lady or Mystress by a Prosopopoeia.

This is that which he gives God thanks for, to wit, that they obeyed the
Gospel, by which giving of thanks we are admonished: First, that to obey the
Gospel is the gift of God. Secondly, we are admonished, that to obey the
Gospel, is a great blessing, and so to be esteemed.

From the heart] i. e. Not only in show and outward appearance, but also in
truth and in inward sincerity, as your holy conversation will testify.

That form of doctrine] By the doctrine here mentioned is meant the Gospel,
which is also called the doctrine of Christ, 2 John 9.

This doctrine he calls a form or mould, and says the form or mould of
Doctrine, by a Metaphor taken from a form or mould, which Goldsmiths or some
such Crafts-men use to cast an Image, or thing in that they would form, into
any shape. For as that Silver or Gold or whatsoever metal else it is, which is
cast in such a form or mould, is made like unto it: So should they, which
believe the Gospel, conform themselves and their lives, unto the Gospel, that
they may represent it and carry the likeness of it, in their lives and actions.

Ver. 18. Being then made free from Sin, ye became, etc] q. d therefore being
made free from sin, ye became etc.

This is the conclusion of the Syllogism, which we spoke of.

Being made free from Sin ye became the servants of Righteousness]
Righteousness, is to be taken here (by a Metonymy) for the Gospel, which
contains precepts and prescripts of Righteousness, or for the Laws prescripts
and precepts of Righteousness therein contained.

He speaks both of Sin and Righteousness, as of Ladies, Queens, or Mistresses,
by a Prosopopoeia.

Being then made free from Sin] When a Man is so weak, and so unable (by his
custom in sin, or otherwise) to resist the motions and temptations of Sin, as
that he is overcome with every little temptation; this his ^state the Apostle
calls an estate of servitude, and thus to yield to every little temptation of
sin, he calls to serve Sin by a Metaphor.

When therefore we receive grace from Christ, and strength and ability to
withstand the motions and lusts of Sin, we are, by a Metaphor said to be freed
from sin, as Servants from their Lord and Master.

And then do we receive grace from Christ, and strength and ability to
withstand the motions and lusts of sin, when we believe the Gospel of Christ
and obey it.

For so soon as ever we believe the Gospel as we ought, Christ does justify us
from all our sins: And when he justifies us, he sanctifies us too, and pours
his grace into our hearts, whereby we are enabled to walk according to the
Gospel.

Ye became the servants of Righteousness] That grace, which strengthens us
against sin, and enableth us to withstand the motions, and lusts of sin,
enableth us to work the works of righteousness. Or at least, when we receive
one, we receive the other. And when we receive strength and ability to work the
works of righteousness, we are called the servants of Righteousness, by a
Metaphor.

When the Apostle speaks in this treatise of freedom and servitude, he alludeth
to civil freedom and servitude used among men, and especially the Romans (to
whom he writes) where some were Masters, some Servants, some Lords, some
Slaves, and where there were diverse Laws concerning these Relations,

The Apostle speaks, ver. 13. of yielding ourselves servants unto God. And ver
16. of being the servants of obedience. And ver. 17. of obeying (as Servants)
the form of doctrine which was delivered. And verse eighteen of being servants
of Righteousness. A man cannot serve two Masters (says our Savior) Matthew.
6.24 much less can he serve many: How is it therefore that the Apostle would
have us servants to so many Lords or Masters as these are.

I answer: That these are not diverse Lords or Masters, but all one, one in
their end, and one in the object of our obedience, and when we obey one of
these, we obey all the rest. For as it is one and the same thing for a man to
obey a King, and his Laws, a Master and his commands: So it is one and the same
thing to obey God, and to obey the Law or doctrine of obedience, to obey the
doctrine delivered, and to obey righteousness, and serve them For this,
obedience, Doctrine and Righteousness, are no other thing nor command, any
other thing, than the will of God

Ver. 19. I speak after the manner of men] The Apostle seems to intend no
other thing by this form of speech, than to signify, that though he
discourses of heavenly and divine matters; yet he is willing (that he might
condescend to their capacities) to make use of vulgar similitudes, and
similitudes of things well known among earthly men, and to draw arguments from
them.

I speak after the manner of men] By men he means by a Synechdoche such men
as are not acquainted with divine and heavenly things. But such, which as in
their discourses and disputations they discourse and dispute altogether of
earthly things; so do they fetch their similitudes, and draw their Arguments
only from earthly things, and go no higher.

The Subject of the Apostles disco^rse, are spiritual and heavenly things; But
the form of his discourse, is humane or after the manner of men, which are
acquainted only with earthly things; and that because they to whom he writes,
are by reason of the slowness of their understanding, more apt to apprehend
spiritual things by vulgar and common similitudes, and Arguments, drawn from
earthly things; than to understand spiritual things by spiritual, and by such
Arguments, as they in their own nature will afford.

Because of the infirmity of your flesh] i. e. Because of the slowness or
weakness of your understanding in conceiving of spiritual things.

He takes Infirmity here, for the weakness, to wit, of their understanding in
apprehend ng spiritual things, as it is also taken 1 Cor. 8.7. And he takes
flesh for the understanding it self, and calls it Flesh, because it was
accustomed to, or acquainted only with fleshly, that is, to or with Earthly
things.

For as ye yielded, etc.] This particle, For, cannot be taken for a Causal
here. For so taken it will not cohere with that which went before, I take it
therefore for a Note of Illation, that is for, Therefore, q. d. Therefore, as
ye have yielded your members. Servants of uncleanness, etc.

The Apostle should here make a Superstructure upon that groundwork which he
laid, ver. 16, 17, and 18. and bring an Illation from thence in Categorical
terms to this or the like sense, Viz

Therefore being that ye are freed from sin, ye ought not to serve sin, or ye
ought not to sin (which was that which he said, and undertook to prove, ver.
15.) But being become the Servants of Righteousness, ye should obey
righteousness and live in all holy and righteous conversation.

This is that, I say, which the order of speech required: But this the Apostle
wrapped up, in an Exhortation, as he uses sometimes to do, where he brings an
Exhortation instead of a conclusion; or a conclusion wrapped up in an
Exhortation, instead of a Categoricall conclusion.

As ye have yielded your members servants] Concerning these words or this
Phrase, See ver. 13.

As ye have yielded your members servants to uncleanness and iniquity] By
uncleanness are commonly meant such unclean sins, as Drunkenness,
Lasciviousness, Wantonness, Luxury, etc.

And to iniquity] By Iniquity, are here meant such sins as tend to the wrong of
our Neighbor, as Murder, Theft, False accusation, etc.

Note, that the word, Iniquity, is to be taken here in a more strict sense,
than it is taken in the words following.

Unto iniquity] i. e. To do more iniquity; or so as that you have gone on, from
iniquity to iniquity, and from one degree thereof to another.

Note, that iniquity is to be taken here, for the work or effect done, at the
command, as it were, of that which he calls both uncleanness and Iniquity
before; so that the word Iniquity is of large extent, and relates to more sins,
than the same word was of, and did relate to, immediately before. For it has
relation not to Iniquity only, but both to uncleanness and Iniquity before
mentioned.

To Righteousness] This word is to be taken here, as it was taken ver. 18.

Unto Holiness] i. e. To do or perform daily more and more, that which is holy
as the Gospel prescribes.

It is but common reason which the Apostle here requires, to wit, That if we
are freed from, and made the servants of righteousness, that is, of God; we
should abandon sin, and serve righteousness, that is, Serve God: For is it any
more than reason, that he should serve his King, and that truly and faithfully
too, who is freed by him, out of the hands of his cruel enemies.

Ver. 20. For when ye were the Servants of Sin, ye were free from
Righteousness] Between this and the former verse, we must understand these or
the like words, And to Righteousness and not at all to sin. And between this
and the following verse, we must understand these words, Wherefore being that
ye are now the servants of righteousness, ye ought to be free from sin. q. d.
Yield your members servants to righteousness, and wholly and only to
Righteousness, not at all to sin For when ye were servants of sin ye were free
from Righteousness; wherefore being that ye are now the servants of
Righteousness, ye ought to be free from sin.

Ye were free from Righteousness] i. e. Ye did not the works which
Righteousness commands, but ye showed or carried yourselves, as if ye were
free from being commanded by her, or from being subject to her, by slighting
and not regarding what she would have done.

Or thus, ye were free from Righteousness, that is, ye did not the works of
Righteousness; where to be free from Righteousness, is put per Metonymiam
causae, for not to do the works of Righteousness. For a man that is free, will
not ordinarily do the work of him, from whom he is free.

Were free] He alludes here to Civil freedom, as he did before, by a Metaphor.

From Righteousness] He takes Righteousness here, and speaks of it, as he did
ver. 18.

When he says, ye were free from Righteousness, it is not to be understood,
that they were free de jure, but only de facto: for they were bound to do
righteousness at all times, though then when the Apostle says here, that they
were free from Righteousness, they had cast off her yoke and would not obey
her; but carried themselves to her, as if they owned her no subjection.

Note here, that the Apostle shows in this his discourse, by their obedience
past and present, or by that they have obeyed, and do obey righteousness; that
they are servants of righteousness: And by that that they are the Servants of
righteousness he shows again that they ought to obey righteousness for the
future: For these two, do one infer the other.

Ver. 21. What fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are now ashamed?] q
d. But what benefit had ye, or were ye like to have, in those sins which ye are
now ashamed even to think of?

The Apostle uses arguments here to persuade them never to return at all to
the service of sin again, but to continue wholly in the service of
righteousness.

What fruit] i. e. What benefit. A Metaphor from Trees, or the like.

What fruit had ye] i. e. What fruit had ye, or were ye like to have? Syllepsis.

In those things whereof ye are now ashamed?] It is not likely that the Romans,
before their conversion, and regeneration, were better than the Corinthians, of
whom Saint Paul says, 1 Cor 3.6, 9. that they, or some of them were
Fornicators, Idolaters, Adulterers, Effoeminate, Abusers of themselves with
mankind, Thieves, Covetous, Drunkards, Revilers, Extortioners; which sins
(especially those of uncleanness, which he seems especially to aim at here)
would make a regenerate man to blush at the very mention or thought of them.

This is the fruit of these and the like sins, viz. Shame here, and Eternal
death hereafter, if they be not broke off, and washed away in the blood of
Christ.

The end of those things is death] viz. Death Eternal. And therefore they were
not like to bring any pleasant fruit in the end

Being made free from sin] See verse 18.

And become the Servants of God] He calls them the Servants of God here, whom
he called the Servants of Righteousness, ver. 18.

Ver. 22. Ye have your fruit unto Holiness] q. d. Ye have your fruit, or your
reward, to wit, Holiness.

Unto Holiness] The Greek is (...), where note that this Preposition (...),
Unto, seems to be put here (...), as Grammarians speak, and to signify as
much as, to wit, q. d. Ye have your fruit, to wit, Holiness: So does the
Preposition (...), seem to be taken, Romans 4.8. in those words, (...), which I
render thus, Who against hope believed in hope, to wit, that he should be the
Father of many Nations.

Holiness] By Holiness is not here meant mere holiness, for they were holy
before, but further holiness, or increase of holiness.

He opposes holiness here to shame caused by their unclean and evil doings:
and so he may well do, if we take holiness with its effect, which effect is
contrary to shame, for it emboldeneth a man, with an holy boldness.

Ver. 23. The wages of Sin is death] i e. The wages which Sin pays to her
Servants, is death.

He speaks of sin as of a Person, yea, as a Queen or Lady, by a Prosopopoeia.

This of paying wages is a Metaphor, taken from Soldiers pay: For that which
is here rendered Wages, is in the Greek (...), which is a Military word.

These words, For the wages of sin is death, relate to those of the 21. verse
viz. The end of these things is death.

The gift of God] i. e. The gift which God gives to his Servants, and such as
obey him.

Note here, that what sin gives to her Servants is Wages; for she gives that
which they deserve, to wit, Death: But that which God gives his Servants, is a
free Gift, such as they deserve not, to wit, Eternal Life, which is above all
their deserts; And therefore he says not, The wages of God is Eternal Life,
but, The gift of God is Eternal Life.

These words relate to those of the 22. verse, The end Everlasting Life.

As (...), which is rendered here Wages, is observed to be a Military word; so
would some have (...), which is here rendered a Gift, to be a Military word too.
(...), signifies such Wages, as Kings were wont to give to their Soldiers for
their daily pay. And (...), say they, was a Donative, which Kings were wont to
give to such Soldiers as they pleased, above their due pay, as some piece of
Money, or some Crown, or some Badge, or Ensign of honor or other; And to this
which Kings were wont to do to their Soldiers, does the Apostle (say they)
here allude.

CHAP. VII.
1. KNow ye not, Brethren, (for I speak to them, that know the law) how that
the law has dominion over a man, as long as he lives.

1. I said, Chap 5.14. that ye are not under the law, but under grace; or under
the Gospel: Now for your better understanding (O my Brethren the Jews) of what
I said there, I will amplify, and enlarge here a little, and illustrate what I
said, by the Metaphor of an husband and a wife, resembling the Law to an
husband, and you which were under the Law to a wife.

Know ye not therefore (Brethren) (for I speak to you Jews, which know and are
acquainted with the writings of the Old Testament) how that the Law, which was
given by Moses, has dominion over the man, which is under it, so that he
cannot free himself from the obligation thereof, so long as it lives; that is,
so long, as it stands in force, and is not abrogated? Surely you do.

For the case between them which were under the law, and the law it self, is as
the case, which is between a woman and her husband.

2. For the woman which has an husband, is bound by the law to her husband so
long as he lives: but if the husband be dead, she is loosed from the law of
the husband.

2. Now then as the woman, which has an husband, is bound by the Law to her
husband, to cleave to him, and to take him only for her husband so long as he
lives; but if her husband be dead, she is free from the Law, by which she was
bound to her husband, to have him only, and may now lawfully be married to
another man.

So the man which is under the Law of Moses is bound to that Law, so that he
cannot free himself from the obligation thereof, and betake himself to any
other praescript of Religion, so long as that Law (which is, as it were, an
husband to him) lives and is in force (but if the Law, which is as his
husband) be dead and out of force, he may betake h^mself to another praescript
of Religion, without offense.

3. So then if while her husband lives, she be married to another man, she
shall be called an Adulteress: but if her husband be dead, she is free from
that law, so that she is no adulteress, though she be married to another man.

3. So then, as if while her husband lives, the wife be married to another
man, she is an adulteress: But if her husband be dead, she is free from the
Law that bound her to that her husband only, and she is now no adulteress,
though she be married to another man. Even so a man which is under the Law (as
a wife under her husband) if while the Law lives and is in force, he betakes
himself to another manner of Religion, is a kind of adulteress and may suffer
punishment for so doing: But if the Law be dead and out of force, he is now
free from the Law, and is no adulteress, though he betake himself, and is
married to another praescript of Religion.

4. Wherefore my Brethren, ye also are become dead to the law by the body of
Christ, that ye should be married to another, even to him who is raised from
the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God.

4. Wherefore Brethren, that ye may not be accounted, as spiritual whores, or
adulteresses, by being married to another husband, because ye were once under
the Law of Moses, and married, as it were to that, as to an husband) The Law is
become dead being mortified by the body of Christ upon the Cross that ye
should be lawfully married to another, even to Christ (the Author and Subject
of the Gospel, which is a prescript of Religion, different from that of the
Law) who though he was dead, yet is raised from the dead again, that we should
bring forth good works, as Children to him, who though he was Man, yet was God
also.

5. For when ye were in the flesh, the motions of sins, which were by the law
did work in our members, to bring forth fruit unto death.

5. And this that we should bring forth good works, as children to him, is but
just and aequal: for when we were under the law in a carnal and fleshly
condition, the motions of sin, which were occasioned by the law, did work so in
our members, as that they brought forth evil works, as children unto the law,
as the law is the ministration of death.

6. But now we are delivered from the law, that being dead wherein we were
held, that we should serve in newness of spirit, and not in the oldness of the
letter.

6. But now we are delivered from the Law (the Law being dead, under which we
were held) that we should serve God and his Christ, in that new kind of life,
which the Gospel works, and not live in that old course of sin, which was
occasioned by the law.

7. What shall we say then? Is the law sin? God forbid. Nay, I had not known
sin, but by the law: for I had not known lust, except the law had said thou
shall not covet.

7. But because, I said, we were delivered from the Law, and that we should not
live in that old course of sin, which was by the law; what shall we conclude
from thence? Shall we conclude from thence, that the law is a genuine cause of
sin? God forbid. Nay (to confute that) I had not known sin, at least, so well
as now I do, but by the law. For I had not known sin to have been sin in the
inward motions and desires thereof (though they broke not out into outvvard
act) except the law had said (as it says in the tenth Commandment) thou shall
not covet.

8. But sin taking occasion by the Commandment, wrought in me all manner of
concupiscence. For without the Law sin was dead.

8. But yet Sin taking occasion by that Commandment of the law (viz.) Thou
shall not covet, wrought in me all manner of lust and concupiscence; for
before the law entered, sin lay, as it were a sleep, yea and was dead in
comparison of what she was, after the Law came in.

9. For I was alive without the law once, but when the commandment came, sin
revived, and I died.

9. For (that I might here feign such a Person, as had lived both before the
law, and under the law, and put on such a Person, the better to teach what I am
about to teach) I lived an innocent life once, before the law was given by
Moses, in comparison of what I lived afterward: But when the law was given by
Moses, and that commandment of the law, viz. Thou shall not covet, came to my
knowledge, sin showed her strength and power, by stirring up all manner of
lusts in me, and I died to innocence, so that I was not so innocent and
unblamable now, as I was before.

10. And the commandment which was ordained to life, I found to be unto death.

10. And that commandment (viz. Thou shall not covet) which was given and
ordained of God, as a means to bring men to an holy and righteous life, and
which rewarded them with life that kept it; I found by experience to be an
occasion to bring me to death, the death to innocence first, and after that, to
death everlasting.

11. For sin taking occasion by the commandment, deceived me, and by it slew me.

11 For sin taking occasion by that commandment, allured me with the baits of
pleasure, and honor, and profit, and the like, which she pretended to me, to
follow her motions, contrary to the Commandment: and so I following her, she
deceived me, and by it slew me, by depriving me of that innocence, which
otherwise I should have retained, and making me guilty of eternal death.

12. Wherefore the law is holy, and the commandment holy, and just, and good.

12. Wherefore notwithstanding what I said of the law, and notwithstanding what
perverse men would draw from thence, the whole law is holy; and that
commandment of the law, to wit, Thou shall not covet is holy, and just, and
good: holy, in that it forbids that which is injurious to God: just, in that it
forbids that which is injurious to our neighbors: and good in that it forbids
that which is injurious to, and unbeseeming our own selves.

13. Was then that which is good, made death unto me? God forbid. But sin, that
it might appear sin, working death in me by that which is good: that sin by the
commandment might become exceeding sinful.

13. Was then the law, or was then that commandment of the law, which is holy,
and just, and good, made to me a genuine cause, or author of the spiritual
death, by which I died to innocence; and of that by which I am become guilty of
eternal death? God forbid. But sin was the cause thereof: so that sin did
appear to be sin indeed, in that that it wrought in me a death to innocence,
and a guilt of everlasting death, by the commandment which is good: So that
sin, by the abuse of the commandment, became, and showed her self to be what
she was indeed, exceeding sinful.

14. For we know that the law is spiritual: but I am carnal, sold under sin.

14. Far be it therefore from us, to think that the law is the cause of our
sins; for we know that the law is spiritual, commanding spiritual things, and
ordering to a spiritual life, and is approved of God; who is a pure spirit; But
I being under the law, am at my best estate carnal, and as very a slave to sin,
as he which is sold in a Market, is a slave to him which bought him.

15. For that which I do, I allow not: for what I would, that do I not; but
what I hate, that do I.

15. For that you may know that I am as very a slave to sin, as he which is
sold in a Market is a slave to him that bought him; that which I do, I like
not, nor do I approve of it: For whereas I would do that which the law
commands, I do it not; but what I hate, and would not do, because the law
forbids it, that do I.

16. If then I do that which I would not, I consent unto the law, that it is
good.

16. And now, if I thus do that which I would not, I consent to the law that it
is good, and spiritual, for my will and the law concur in the same things.

17. Now then, it is no more I that do it: but sin that dwells in me,

17. And now also if it be so that I do that which I would not, it is not I
that do it (as I am instructed by the law) but sin which dwells in me.

18 For I know, that in me, (that is, in my flesh) dwells no good thing. For
to will is present with me: but how to perform that which is good, I find not.

18. For I know by experience that there dwells no spiritual good in me,
(that is in my flesh) to quell sin; For to will that good which I speak of, is
present with me; and that I can do, after a weak manner: But yet how to perform
that good, which I would, I find not, so predominant is sin in me.

19. For the good that I would, I do not: but the evil which I would not, that
I do

19. For (as I said before) the good that I would do because the law commands
it, I do not, but the evil which I would not do, because the law forbids it,
that do I.

20. Now if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but sin that
dwells in me.

20. Now then, I say again, if I do that which I would not, it is not I that do
it, as I am instructed by the law, but it is sin that dwells and reigns in
me which does it.

21. I find then a law, that when I would do good, evil is present with me.

21. Yea, I find by Experience, not only, that no such spiritual good as I
speak of dwells in me. But I find a law, that is, I find, that when I would
do good, evil is present with me, thwarting that my will to do good.

22. For I delight in the law of God, after the inward-man.

22. For I delight in the Law of God (after a weak manner) according to the
dictates of that Inward man, to wit, my mind.

23. But I see another law in my members, warring against the law of my mind,
and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin which is in my members.

23. But I find evil affections in my body, as another law, warring against the
law or dictates in my mind, and overcoming me, and taking me as a Prisoner, and
bringing me Captive to sin, which dwells and rules in me.

24. O wretched man that I am: who shall deliver me from the body of this death?

24. O wretched and miserable man as I am, who shall deliver me from this
Company of deadly enemies, which do thus war against me and make me a Captive
to sin.

25. I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. So then, with the mind I my
self serve the law of God: but with the flesh, the law of sin.

25. I Paul (that I may speak this in my own person, as I am a Servant of
Christ) thank God that he has delivered me from these deadly Enemies, by
Christ Jesus. So then (that I may bring up what I have said from the fourteenth
verse hitherto, to a conclusion, and speak in the person of one which is under
the Law, but has attained to the highest degree of goodness in that estate (as
I spoke before) I my self, though I am carnal and sold under sin, I serve the
law of God with my mind, in that I approve of with my mind, what the law
commands; and do propound her commands to my will, to be followed by her, and
so I proclaim and acknowledge that the law is spiritual, but yet with my flesh,
that is, with the other faculties and powers of my soul, I serve sin; And
thereby acknowledge and proclaim my self, to be carnal, and as very a slave to
sin, as he which is sold in a Market, is a slave to him which bought him (which
was the Position which I laid down, ver. 14.)

CHAP. VII.
Ver. 1. Know ye not brethren (for I speak to them which know the law) how that
the law, etc.] The Apostle said Chap. 6. ver. 14. ye are not under the law but
under Grace. And he spoke that, as I said, particularly to the believing Jews:
for many Jews lived at Rome, as will appear, Act. 28.

Now because the Jews, though they believed were zealous of the Law, Act.
21.20. and therefore might doubt of what S. Paul said Chap. 6.14. of their not
being under the law but under grace. He shows here tha the Jew might lawfully
take himself to be free from the law, and under the Gospel.

Brethren] The Apostle speaks here particulary to the Jews, as appears by
the subsequent words, for not the Gentiles, but the Jews only, know the Law, as
being trained up in it from their youth.

He may call these Jews, Brethren, not only for that, that they embraced the
same faith of Christ with him, but for that also, that they were of the stock
of Abraham, as he was.

I speak to them which know the Law] Take the Law here for the whole word of
God as it is contained in the Old Testament, as it was also taken, Cap. 3.19.

By this the Apostle describes the Jews, whom he speaks to in this language,
because none better knew that, whereof he was about to speak, than they: For
none better knew that it was unlawful for a Jew, which was under the Law of
Moses to depart from that Law, than the Jew did, nor did any know better what
the Law of marriage was than they did, for those things where no where plainer
and better set down, than in the Law, that is, in the Old Testament, which was
committed to the Jews.

It was the custom of the Jews, especially such as did not live in extreme want
(for such were fain for the most part to work early and late, and to set their
children to work too, to earn victuals for the belly) to instruct, and train up
their children in the reading and knowledge of the Law. Therefore the Apostle
may well say, when he speaks to the Jews, that he speaks to them, which know
the Law.

How that the Law has dominion over man so long as he liveth] i. e. How that
the Law of Moses has dominion over a man, which is under it, that is over a
Jew, so that he cannot leave or forsake the Law, so long as the Law stands in
force, and is not abrogated, but is to stick to the Law, and observe it during
that time.

The Law is to be taken here for the whole Law of Moses, as it was given by
Moses, as it is also taken Chap. 6.14, which place see.

And the Dominion here spoken of is, such a dominion or power as an husband
has over a wife, which is such, as that a wife must obey her husband and stick
to him, and not depart from him, and marry another man (as not being her own,
but her husbands) so long as her husband lives. And this dominion is here
Metaphorically attributed to the Law. For the Apostle, while he speaks here of
the Law, and those which are under it, speaks of them under a Metaphor or
Allegory of an husband and a wife, where he compares the Law, to an husband
and those which are under the Law to a wife.

And these words, As he lives, must be referred not to the word Man, but to
the word Law, q. d. so long as the Law lives. And note here, that he speaks of
the Law, as of a Person, yea, an husband by a Prosopopoeia, and therefore says
of it, sometimes that it lives as here: Sometimes that it is dead, as ver. 6.
when he means only the standing of the Law in force, or the abr^gation or
cessation thereof.

That the Law has dominion over a man so long as he liveth] The Apostle grants
here to the believing Jew, that he was indeed sometime under the Law, and that
he could not free himself from being under the Law, which was so long as the
Law lived, And this he does, that he might the better persuade him, that though
he was once under the law, and that the Law had once dominion over him, viz.
While it lived: Yet now he was not under the Law, and that the Law was dead to
him, and that he was married to another, even to Christ.

As concerning the dominion, which the Law had over a man so long as it lived
read Deuteronomy Chap. 17. ver. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. and compare it with Heb. Chap. 10. v 28.

Ver. 2. For the woman which has an husband, etc.] He proves here that which
he said in the foregoing verse, viz. that the Law has dominion over man so
long, as it lives. And he proves it from that, that the woman which has an
husband is bound (by the Law) to her husband, so long as he lives; which is an
Allegorical argument, and therefore brought, because (as I said before) he
speaks of the Law, by a Metaphor or Allegory, as of an husband, and of the
man which is under the Law, as of a wife.

The woman which has an husband is bound by the Law, to her husband, so long
as he liveth] i. e The woman which has an husband is so bound by the Law to
her husband, as that she cannot free herself from him and marry another man,
but must perform the office of a wife to him, so long as he lives.

The Law, which he here speaks of, is in special, the Law of Matrimony, which
we read of in the Old Testament and particularly, Genesis 2.24. where it is
written that a man shall leave his father and mother and cleave to his wife and
they shall be one flesh. Which words show the Indissolubility of Matromony, as
our Savior himself teaches, Mat. 19.5.

But it may be objected that by the Law of Moses a man might give his wife a
Bill of divorcement and put her away, Deuteronomy. 24.1. How then may one say, is the
bond of Matrimony in dissoluble, or how then is the woman, which has an
husband, bound to her husband so long as he lives.

Answ. This objection the Pharisees made in this matter to our Savior: And he
answers it Matthew 19.7, 8. The sum of which answer is this, that what Moses
did concerning the Bill of divorce, he did rather by permission than
approbation, and that by reason of the hardness of heart, which was in the
Jews, so that notwithstanding that, the Primitive Law of Marriage recorded,
Genesis 2.24. stood in full force, and God would have it so to stand.

But if her husband be dead, she is loosed from the law of her husband] i. e.
But if her husband be dead, she is loosed from the power or dominion, which the
husband has over her by the Law of Marriage: or she is loosed from that bond,
by which she was tied to her husband, by that Law.

The Law of the husband, is to be taken here (by a Metonymy) for the power and
dominion, which a man has over his wife by the Law of Marriage: Or it is taken
for the bond by which a wife is bound to her husband by that Law.

Ver. 3. If while her husband lives she be married to another man she shall be
called an Adulteress] i. e. She shall be, an Adulteress.

And as a woman, which has an husband if while her husband lives. she be
married to another man becomes an Adulteress: So they which are under the Law,
and so married to the Law, as to an Husband; if while the Law lives, that is,
if while the Law is enforce, and not abrogated, they do despise the Law, and
betake themselves to some new form of religion, and are married as it were, to
that they become Spiritual whores and adulteresses.

She shall be called an Adulteress] i. e. She shall be an Adulteress, and may
justly be caled an Adulteress, and suffer punishment as an Adulteress.

The Hebrews, use the words, To be called, oftentimes for (...) To be, as
Isaiah 1.26. Thou shall be called the City of Righteosness, for, Thou shall be
a City of Righteousness. And Isaiah 9.6. His name shall be called wonderful,
etc. For, He shall be wonderful.

She is free from that Law] i. e. She is free from that power or dominion,
which her husband had over her by that Law, to wit, the Law of Marriage: or she
is free from the bond by which she was bound to her husband, by that Law, See
ver. 2.

Ver. 4. Wherefore my Brethren] q. d. Wherefore my Brethren, Supple, that ye
may not be accounted as spiritual whores, or adulteresses by being married to
another husband, because ye were once under the Law, and married as it were to
that, as to an husband, etc.

Note, that the Apostle speaks here peculiarly to the Jews, as I observed, ver.
1.

Ye also are become dead to the Law] q. d. Ye also are become dead, to the Law,
as well as the Gentiles, are thereto dead.

This particle Also, speaks, that some other were dead to the Law, as well as
the Jews, and they are the Gentiles. And indeed the Gentiles were dead to the
Law, yea, rather they were never alive to it, or the Law to them (I speak as
the Apostle here does, of the Law of Moses, or of the Law as it was given by
Moses) for they were never alive to the Law, nor the Law to them, to whom the
Law was never given; Now the Law of Moses was never given to the Gentiles by
Moses, for it is written Psalm. 147.19. He showed his Word unto Jacob, his
Statutes and his Judgments unto Israel: He has not dealt so with any Nation,
and as for his judgments they have not known them. The Law that was given by
Moses was given to those which God brought out of the Land of Egypt, out of the
house of bondage, Exodus 20.2. And by those the Israelites are only meant. And
Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord, and thou shall love the Lord with
all thine heart, etc. says he, Deuteronomy. 6. ver. 4.

By the Law is here meant the whole Law of Moses, which was abrogated, or
expired by the death of Christ, and thereby ceased to be in force, as our Ap
stle shows here in this verse.

Note here, that this phrase ye are become dead to the law, is the same with
that, The Law is become dead to you. For these kinds of figurative phrases are
Recipr^cal; So our Old man is crucified, is the same with this, We are
crucified to the old man, so for us to be dead to sin, is the same with for sin
to be dead to us, etc.

Note also, that by order of speech the Apostle should rather have said, The
Law is become dead to you, than to have said, ye are become dead to the Law:
But being the sense is the same, he had rather say as he does, than offend the
Jews (which were zealous of the Law) by saying, The Law is dead to you, which
nevertheless he says covertly, ver. 6.

By the body of Christ] By the body of Christ crucified: That is, by the death
of Christ, which he suffered, in his body, upon the Cross.

As the Apostle says here; We are become dead to the Law by the body of
Christ. So he says Ephesians. 2.15. Having abolished in his flesh the enmity,
where both his body and his flesh must be understood as crucified on the Cross.

That ye should be married to another, even to him that is raised from the
dead] i. e. That (not only ye may, but also that) ye should be lawfully married
to another, even Christ.

The Church is the Spouse of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.2 Ephesians. 5.29.

In ordinary marriages, if the husband be dead, the wife is so at liberty, as
that she may marry again if she will, or not marry if she please; and if she be
pleased to marry, she may marry, whom she will: But in the marriage between a
man and the Law, if the Law be dead, the man is inded freed from the Law, but
yet he is not left at liberty to marry, or not to marry, but he must marry: And
yet, he must not marry whom he will, but he must marry Christ; so that in this
similitude (as it is commonly) there is some dissimilitude not to be urged.

If we are married to Christ, then must we be under his rule and dominion, and
willingly submit ourselves to be governed by him, and his word, as the wife
does to the husband,

Even to him, who is raised from the dead] By him that is raised from the dead
is meant Christ. And well does he describe Christ by this here, because he
mentioned Christ's death immediately before, when he said, Ye also are become
dead to the Law by the body of Christ. For if he had not showed, that Christ,
who was dead, had been raised again from the dead, he might have left a doubt,
how any could be married to Christ when he was dead, being that the Law of
Marriage is void by the death of the husband, ver. 2. He describes him also by
this, to teach us, that we should imitate Christ in his Resurrection, that is,
as Christ was raised from the dead, so we should rise to a new kind of life.

But being, that many more besides Christ were raised from the dead, as he
which revived at the touch of Elisha's bones, 2 Kings 13.21. and the Shunamites
child, 2 Kings 4.25. and Lazarus John 11.43. The widow of Naims son Luke 7.15.
and many of the Saints, whose bodies arose Matthew. 27.52. How can this, that he
was raised from the dead, be the proper Character of Christ?

Answ. Though many were raised from the dead, yet where they not so raised from
the dead, as not to die again, as Christ was raised: For it is conceived by
some, that there was none of all those, that were raised from the dead, but
died again, except only Christ Jesus yet if we grant that some were so raised,
as that they died not again (as many conceive of those, who were raised at our
Saviors Resurrection, Matthew. 27.52.) yet was there a difference between their
resurrection, and the Resurrection of Christ. For Christ was raised by his own
power, John 2.19. but they were raised up by the power of another even of
Christ.

That we should bring forth fruit unto God] The end of marriage is the
procreation of children, which are called in Scripture The fruit of the womb,
Psalm. 127.3. And are the fruit of the marriage bed. The Apostle therefore
continues his Allegory of marriage or wedlock, when he says, That we may
bring forth fruit unto God.

The sense therefore of these words is, q. d That being married to him, that
is, raised up from the dead, we should by the seed of his grace conceive, and
bring forth fruit unto him, who also is God.

Note, that the Apostle changes the person here, from the third to the first,
which he does for modesty sake, that he may comprehend himself in this his
speech.

The fruit or children here spoken of or meant are good works.

Unto God] That is, unto Christ who was raised from the dead, who though he was
true man, yet was he true God also.

Wives bring forth children to their own husbands not to others; by God
therefore is meant Christ here.

Note, that the Apostle proves here, that the believing Jews were delivered not
only from the imperfection of the Law, but also from the obligation of it, to
wit, as it was given by Moses: though it had been sufficient for his purpose,
to show that they were delivered from the Imperfection of the Law only.

Ver. 5. When we were in the flesh] That is, When we were Carnal, or in a
Carnal estate addicted to the profits and pleasures of this life, etc.

There were few under the Law, which were spiritual and minded spiritual
things, but they were for the most part carnal and minded carnal things; And
they which were spiritual and minded spiritual things, were not so, nor did
they so, by the sole power of the Law, so that being that all, which were under
the law, that is, under the imperfection of the Law, and which had no help but
what the Law afforded, were Carnal and minded Carnal things; The Apostle takes
those which were in the flesh (while he speaks of the Jews, which were under
the Law.) And those which were under the Law, that is, which were under the
Imperfection of the Law, for the same. For the deliverance from this estate,
which he here speaks of, he calls, the Deliverance from the Law, ver. 6.

The motions of Sins] i. e. The motions of sins which we felt in our selves
provoking moving or enticing us to commit sin, or produce sin, or to follow
them.

Note, that this Genitive of sins is Genitivus Causae. And that Sins raise
motions in us sub ratione causae finalis, while we apprehend them, as some
pleasant or profitable things.

Which were by the Law] That is, which were occasioned by the law Supple, as by
our husband. For he speaks of the law still, in allusion to an husband as he
did before.

These motions are said to have been by the law because sin being refrained and
curbd in by the Law, does the more she is refrained and curbd in the more break
out and show her self, in these her motions, in sinful men; and so will do in
sinful men, till grace be poured into their hearts, whereby they restrein sin
and hold her in.

Nitimur in vetitum semper, cupimusque negata. This is the manner of sinful
nature and such as are accustomed to sin, always to endeavor for that, which
is forbidden, and to desire that, which is most denied.

The law does in a manner speak only to the outward ear and that is not of
power alone, to turn the hearts of carnal men from their carnal ways: yea it
makes them the worse by her speaking to them. But yet the fault is not in the
Law but in them. The Law is only the occasion of evil motions, not the true
Genuine natural cause thereof. And that which is good, yea very good, may be
the occasion of that which is evil, yea very evil.

Did work in our members] That is, q. d. did play their part in our members
where they were not idle but very active.

In our members] i. e. In the members of our Body, See Notes, Chap. 6. ver. 13.

To bring forth fruit unto death] q. d. So that we did bring forth fruit or
children, and such fruit or children, as death did delight, and take pleasure
in.

By death, he means eternal death and he speaks of it here, as of a Person by
a Prosopopoeia.

The fruit or children here spoken of or meant, are evil works or actual Sins,
which are therefore pleasing unto death, and such as death delights in, because
they make them which commit them, food for her. For as the temporal death feeds
upon the bodies of some, in the Grave, Psalm. 49.14. So does eternal death feed
upon the souls of others in Hell.

Note, that the particle, To, signifies here not the intent only, but the
event also.

A question may be here asked, why the Apostle did not say, to bring forth
fruit unto the Law, as he said, ver. 4. That we should bring forth fruit unto
God, that is, to Christ, when as he is treating here of the opposition between
the Law and Christ.

Answ. Because Sins may not be said to be the fruit of the Law, because they
are both forbidden and punished by the law. But they may be said to be the
fruit of death, because they make men children of death, as the Hebrews speak,
that is, worthy of death. Thus some.

But yet, I conceive (under correction) that by death, the Law may be here
meant, which is called the ministration of death and the ministration of
condemnation, 2 Cor. 3. ver. 7. and 9. And therefore may be called death by a
Metonymie. And it is no absurdity to give the effects which are attributed to
death, to the Law, when we give them and attribute them to the Law, not as to
the cause but only as to the occasion thereof. For it is written, ver. 10 And
the Commandment which was ordained to life: I found to be unto death: And thus
the Antithesis here in hand, will well hold out.

The Apostle seems to mention this and to show how it was with them while
they were under the Law, in the flesh: That now being they were delivered from
the Law, and from the flesh, they might be more careful and more diligent to do
those things which were pleasing to God in newness of Spirit, abandoning the
oldness of the Letter.

V. 6. But now we are delivered from the law, that being dead wherein we held]
i. e. But now (as the Wife is loosed from her Husband if he be dead, ver. 2.)
so are we (who were as a Wife to the Law) delivered from the law, which is or
was our husband, by the death of the Law.

The Law is to be taken here as it was, Chap. 6.14. and Chap. 7. ver. 1, viz.
For the whole Law of Moses as it was given by Moses; and so precisely given
without the grace of the Gospel: And in this sense to be delivered from the Law
and to be delivered from the flesh will signify both one and the same thing.

That being dead wherein we were held] i. e. The Law under which we were held
bound (as a Wife under her Husband, so long as he lives) being dead.

By the death of the Law he means the abrogation or expiration thereof; but he
speaks of the Law as of an Husband by an Allegory, therefore says rather, That
being dead wherein we were held, than That being abrogated or expired wherein
we were held.

Wherein we were held] The particle In, in Wherein, is to be taken here for
under. So is the Greek preposition (...) (which is the word in the Greek here)
interpreted under, Matthew. 7.6. In those words (...), which our Translatours
render, under their feet.

That we should serve] i. e. That being now married unto Christ, and so
strengthened by his Grace in the inward man, we should serve Christ or we should
serve God

We should serve] Supple God or serve Christ.

The Apostle seems here to leave his Allegory of an Husband and Wife and
Children, and to speak more plainly and literally than he did before: For
whereas he says here, That we should serve, he said in the same sense before,
That we should bring forth fruit, ver 4.

In newness] By newness understand here Newness of life, or a new kind or
course of life rather (by an Hebraism) a kind or course of life different from
that which we led before, while we were under the Law and in the flesh, In
newness therefore is, by a new life.

Before they led a sinful and ungodly life: Now he would have them to lead a
Righteous and a Godly life.

Of Spirit] i e. Which the Spirit, that is, which the Gospel works or is able
to work, under which ye are brought. For the Spirit is opposed here to the
letter, that is, to the Law, and what is more usually opposed to the Law than
the Gospel? So is it opposed, and so is the word taken, 2 Cor. 3.6.

The Gospel is called the Spirit because of the Spirit of God which goes along
with it, whereby man is brought to believe the Gospel, and is renewed, and
strengthened to walk according to the Gospel, by reason of which Spirit
accompanying it, it is also called the power of God unto salvation, Chap. 1.16.

To serve God therefore in newness of Spirit is to serve God by a new course of
life, such a course of life as the Gospel does not only require of us, but
enable us also to lead: For they which are under the Gospel are both required,
and enabled by the Gospel to lead a new life.

And not in the oldness of the letter] i. e. And not with our old manner of
living, or with our old course of life, which we led while we were under the
Law, and which was occasioned by the Law.

This the Apostle adds, and speaks with a kind of Sarcasm, because many Jews
were so addicted to the Law, as that they would hardly here of the abrogation
or expiration of the Law, as though that life which they lead under the Law,
before they were engrafted into Christ or had received his Gospel, or his
Grace, was a life pleasing unto God.

And not in the oldness] Oldness is to be taken here by an Hebraism, for our
old course and manner of living, which was a course of life led in sin
occasioned by the Law.

In is to be taken here for With after the Hebrew manner.

Of the Letter] The letter is to be taken here for the Law of Moses, that is,
for the Law as it was given by Moses and as it is precisely considered without
the grace of the Gospel, as it was taken, Chap. 6 14, etc.

He calls the Law as it was given by Moses, and as it is precisely considered
without grace, the Letter, because it was described by Letters, that is,
because it was written or given in writing, and because it was in a manner, but
as a bare Letter or bare writing only, which had no more or little more power
to make a man good, than by telling him what was good and commanding him to do
it.

And being the Law was but a bare letter and did in a manner tell a man only
what was good, and command him to do it, it did by Accident when he was bad
make him worse, for except a Carnal man, has grace given him, to keep the
commandments he runs contrary to the commandments, and grows the worse by being
commanded.

When therefore the Apostle says, And not in the oldness of the Letter we must
not understand the words so, as if he meant only thereby, their old course of
life, led under the Letter, that is, under the Law: But we must also understand
them so, as that he meant thereby, that that course of life was occasioned, at
least in part, by the Letter, that is, by the Law, while they were under it; as
will appear by the Objection following, and by the eighth verse.

So that these Genitives of the Spirit and of the Letter may be taken for
Genitivi Efficientis.

Ver. 7. What shall we say then?] i. e. What shall we conclude then, from that
which we said, viz. From that, The Law is dead by the body of Christ. And from
that that we called, Our former oldness, The oldness of the Letter?

Is the Law sin?] q. d. Shall we conclude that the Law is a true and Genuine
cause of sin?

Sin is to be taken here by a Metonymie for the cause of sin, and the Law is to
be taken here as it was taken, Chap. 6.14. and Chap. 7. ver. 1. and 4. And as
it signifies the same with the Letter, ver. 6.

God forbid] By these words (as he did before) the Apostle detesteth and
puts from himself the thought of such a thing or such a conclusion as this
is, that the Law is a true and genuine cause of sin.

Nay I had not known sin] i. e. Nay so far is the Law from being a true and
genuine cause of sin, as that I had not known sin at least so well as now I do,
etc.

But by the Law] i e. But by the Law which was given in writing by Moses, which
did forbid sin.

If the written Law did forbid Sin and make it at least more known to be Sin
than otherwise it would be, by forbidding it, surely the Law was not the
genuine cause of Sin, nor did it prompt or move thereunto.

For I had not known Lust] Supple, to be a Sin. That is, For I had not known
that the inward lust and inward desire only of that which is evil (though it
did not break out into any outward Act) was Sin, at least so well as now I do.

Thou shall not covet] This is the tenth Commandment of the Decalogue the
Apostle omits here the object which is mentioned by Moses in that commandment,
viz. Thy neighbors house thy neighbors wife, etc. for brevities sake; But
though in that commandment at large there is no other object named but that,
which is the object of the Sixth and that which is the object of the seventh
Commandment yet the object of this Commandment seems to me, to be as large as
the object of all the other nine. For how else should Sin take occasion by this
Commandment to work in him all manner of concupiscence?

Ver. 8. But Sin taking occasion by the Commandment wrought in me all manner of
concupiscence] i. e. But yet (though the Law is not sin, and that I had not
known sin but by the Law) sin which dwells in me, ver. 20, taking occasion by
that Commandment. Thou shall not covet wrought in me all manner of
concupiscence, that is all manner of lusts, which at length broke out into open
sins.

How sin taking occasion by the commandment wrought all manner of Concupiscence
in the man, whom Paul personates, is diversely set out by diverse men Some say
that sin took occasion by (that, to wit) the tenth Commandment, to work all
manner of concupiscence in that man, because there was no penalty annexed to
that commandment, as there was to others. And Magna est peeccandi illecebra
impunitatis spes, as the Orator speaks, the hope of going unpunished is a great
allurement to sin: Other say that sin took occasion by the tenth Commandment to
work all manner of concupiscence, in him, because that Commandment bound a man
most strictly from sin, and the more a man is restrained and kept in by a Law,
the more sin stirs him up to break that Law. Quod non licet acrius urget. That
which is forbidden does the more stir up a man to do it: And Quicquid licet
minus desideratur: Ergo e contrario, quicquid non licet, fomentum accipit
desiderii, says, Hier. tom. 1. ep 151. 1. That which we may lawfully do, we
less desire to do: therefore on the contrary, whatsoever is forbidden, proves
as fuel to our lust. Other say that sin taking occasion by the Commandment
wrought in him all manner of Concupiscence, because when the Commandment was
given to him written in fair Letters, he thought that it was enough for him to
know it, and neglected the more, the keeping of it, see Chapter 2.13.

We may join all these together in this matter and say that they whom Saint
Paul personates, here, some by one, some by another of these ways, took
occasion by the Law to sin, and perhaps it will not be amiss to mention here
the Rebellion, stubbornness, and stiff neckedness of the Jews (which were under
under the Law, and whom Saint Paul here Personates) for they were a stiff
necked people, Deuteronomy. 9.6.9.7. I know thy rebellion and thy stiff neck: Behold
while I am yet alive with you this day, ye have been rebellious against the
Lord, and how much more after my death? says Moses to them, Deuteronomy. 31.27. Ye
stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist the Holy
Ghost; as your fathers did, so do ye, who received the Law by disposition of
Angels, and have not kept it, says Saint Stephen to the Jews, Acts. 7. ver.
51, 52, 53.

Wrought in me all manner of concupiscence] i. e. Wrought in me all manner of
lust and evil desires, as lust to whoredom, lust to adultery lust to luxury,
lust to Drunkenness, lust to Envy, etc. Which being retained in the breast,
with delight, grew at length so strong, as that they broke out into outward
Acts.

For without the Law sin was dead] i. e. For before the Law was given by Moses
sin was in a manner dead, and not so active nor vivacious in me, as she was
after the giving of the Law.

He speaks of sin, as of one that had life by a Prosopopoeia.

Sin is said to live, when she stirs up lusts and motions to evil in us, and
the more and greater her life is, the more and greater lusts she stirs up in
us.

Sin was not absolutely dead before the Law came, for she stirred up lusts to
evil, even then: but she was not so vigorous, and so vivacious in stirring up
lusts in carnal men before the Law came, as she was afterward. So then she was
said to be dead before the Law Comparate, that is in comparison of what she
was; when the law was given though she lived, even before the Law.

Ver. 9. For I was alive without the Law once] i. e. For I was alive to
innocence once, to wit, when I was without the Law, or before the Law was
given; Supple, incomparison of what I was, when the Law came.

Note, that the word (...), I was alive, must be interpreted here of an
inn^cent life or a life to innocence, and so must carry a moral signification:
And must be so understood, not as though he (or rather he whom he personates)
did live then an absolute innocent life; but that he lived a life, which was
innocent in comparison of that life, which he lived, after the Law came.

But when the Commandment came sin revived, and I died] But when the Law and
commandment was given by Moses, sin got life and lived strongly and vigorously
in me; and I died to innocence daily, growing every day worse and worse.

Sin revived] The word, which is rendered here Revived is in the Greek (...),
which comes from (...). Now (...) is compounded of the preposition (...) and
(...), vivo, to live, and note, that this preposition (...), though it does for
the most part change the signification of the word, before which it is prefixea
in composition, yet it does not always so, but it is sometimes redundant, as in
(...), which signifies the same as the simple (...), solvo, to loose; sometime
it augments the signification, as (...), clamo to cry, (...), Exclam^, to cry
aloud (See Hen. Steph. Thesaur, vocab. (...)) according to this we may say,
that (...), signifies here simply to live, or else to live a strong and
vigorous life.

But yet when the Apostle said of sin, in the former verse that she was dead
(...) may be taken here, as it is most usually taken for revived: for what is
the passage from death, to life but a reviving.

And I died] To wit, daily to Innocence.

This dying is opposed to that living, which he said he lived in the former
part of the verse.

Note here, that it is not unusual with the Apostle. (...), as he himself
speaks 1. Cor. 4.6. that is in a figure to transfer that to himself; which
has been acted by other persons, you may see Examples thereof 1 Cor. 6.12. And
1 Cor. 10. ver. 23, 29, 30 And 1 Corinthians 13.2. And Galat. 2.18.

Now therefore (under correction) I conceive, that the Apostle does here (...),
also and speak that in his own person which was acted in the persons of others;
that is that the Apostle personates here the people of Israel both which lived
b fore the Law, and which lived under the Law, which was given by Moses, and so
personates them, as if they were but one single person.

Theophylact. and Saint Chrysostom before him interpret this place by such a
figure.

This figure (...), or of personating others, the Apostle does especially use,
when he speaks of things which would not be so pleasing to them, to whom they
truly be long; and he does it. First for modesty sake, and secondly, that he
might give the less offense to them.

Ver. 10. And the Commandment, which was ordained to life] and the Commandment,
which was ordained of God for this end, that they to whom it was given might
lead an innocent, holy, and just life; And by so living, might attain to an
happp and blessed life, as a reward thereof,

I found to be unto death] i. e. I found to be, an occasion to bring me to
death, viz. a death to innocence, and holiness and righteousness first, and
then to the guilt of aeternal death, as a reward or punishment of that former
death.

Ver. 11. For sin taking occasion by the Commandment, etc.] Note here, that the
Law did not (if we speak properly) so much as give an occasion to sin, to stir
us up to evil. But sin took an occasion by the Law.

He speaks of sin as of a Person.

Deceived me] He says deceived me, because sin guilds over her baits, and her
evil mot ons with the appearance of some good: which though they are
apprehended as good, appear at last in their own colors, even evil as they
are, so that the Sinner at length sees, that he was deceived by them.

And by it slew me] It slew him, by taking away his life of innocence first;
And then making him guilty of aeternall death.

Ver. 12. Wherefore the Law is holy] i. e. Wherefore the Law is separate f om
all evil, that is, Wherefore the Law is good, notwithstanding that which has
been obj^cted against it.

To be holy signifies properly to be separate from other things, by way of
eminency, and in a part^cular manner, that is said to be holy which is separate
from all manner of naughtiness.

This conclusion or inference is drawn chiefly from those words, Viz. I had not
known Sin but by the Law, etc.

And the Commandment holy, and just, and good] By the Commandment is meant, the
tenth Commandment, as before.

This Commandment may be sa^d to be holy because it forbids those lusts and
desires, which tend to the immediate dishonor of God: And just, in that it
forbids those lusts and desires, which tend to the immediate hurt of our
Neigbour; and good in that it forbids those lusts and desires, which tend to
the immediate hurt of our selves.

There is a difference between a Law and a Commandment; for a Law is a body of
commands or commandments given by a Lawgiver, As when we say, The Law of Moses
or the Law of Christ, each of which contains many particular commands: But a
Commandment is but a particular mandat, or praecept, or branch of a Law, which
commands or forbids some particular or special thing to be done, or left undone.

Ver. 13. Was then that which is good made death unto me?] i. e. Was then the
Commandment, which is in it self good, the cause of death to me? Or was the
Commandment, which was in it self good, the cause why I died to Innocence
first, and then through that, became guilty of eternal death?

That which is good] By that which is good, he means the Commandment, of
which he spoke in the foregoing verse: And under the name of good he
comprehends here, that which he called Holy, and Just, and Good before.

God forbid] See ver. 7.

But sin] Supple, was made the cause of death to me.

That it might appear sin] i. e. So that it did appear to be sin indeed, sin in
her own colors, by those effects which she wrought in me.

Note, that the particle That, is here a note or sign of the Event.

Working death in me by that which is good] i e. By working death, or because
she wrought death in me, by the Commandment which was good

The death here spoken of, may be understood, not only of death to Innocence,
but also of Eternal death of which the death to Innocence, makes the nocent man
guilty.

That Sin by the Commandment might become exceedingly sinful] i. e. So that Sin
taking occasion by the Commandment (and by that working all manner of
Concupiscence in me) did show her self exceedingly Sinful.

He speaks of Sin as of a Person by a Prosopopoeia, and therefore calls Her,
sinful.

Ver. 14. For we know that the Law is spiritual] i. e. For we all very well
know, that the Law is Spiritual, and commands spiritual things.

The Law is spiritual] The Law is said to be spiritual because it commands
spiritual things, and orders, of it self, to a spiritual life: And now if the
Law be such it cannot be made death, or, be the cause of death in it self to
any one.

By this he proves, what he said first, in the former verse, viz. that that
which is good, that is, That the Law was not made death unto him.

But I am carnal sold under Sin] But I at my best estate am carnal being
addicted to the affections and lusts of the flesh (which move me contrary to
the Law) and am carried away with them, yea I am as very a servant or slave to
Sin as he which is bought or sold in a market, is a slave or servant to him
which bought him.

By this he proves, that which he said last in the former verse, viz. That it
was Sin, which was made death unto him.

Note, here that the Apostle speaks in the person of one which was under the
Law, yet which had attained to the highest degree in that Estate, that a man
could attain to, which was not yet in Christ: For every one which was under the
Law, had not such a mind, as he here speaks of in the latter part of this
Chapter: And there were diverse degrees of them which were under the Law.
Suppose therefore that the Apostle speaks here of such an one as that Scribe
was, which our Savior speaks of Mark 12.34. of whom he says, that he was not
far from the Kingdom of God.

Sold under Sin] i. e. As very a servant or slave to sin, as he which is bought
or sold in a Market, is a servant or slave to him that buys him.

He alludes here to servants or slaves which are bought and sold in a Market to
be under the power or command of the Buyer, so that to be sold under Sin, is as
it were to be sold to Sin, to be under her and her command.

As he alludes here to a servant or slave which is bought or sold in a Market:
So he alludes to a servant or slave which is taken in the wars, ver. 23.

When S. Paul says here, that he is carnal, sold under Sin: And when he says,
ver. 23. I see another Law in my members warring against the Law of my mind and
bringing me into captivity to the Law of Sin. It seems to be most probable
(under correction) that S. Paul speaks not here, either in his own person, or
in the person of a Regenerate man: For the Law of the Spirit of life has made
me free from the Law of Sin and of death says, S. Paul, while he speaks in the
person of a Regenerate man, Chap. 8.2. And Chap. 8. ver. 9. speaking to those
which are in Christ Jesus, he says ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit
(that is, ye are not carnal, but spiritual) if so be that the Spirit of God
dwells in you. Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of
his: And Chap. 8.13. If ye live after the flesh ye shall die, but if through
the Spirit, ye mortify the deeds of the flesh ye shall live. S. Paul therefore
speaks not here, in his own person, nor in the person of a Regenerate man, but
in the person of a man that is under the Law, and unregenerate and as yet
without Christ, but yet not far from the Kingdom of God, as I said before.

Ver. 15. For that which I do I allow not, etc.] In this verse he proves that
which he said in the latter part of the former verse: To wit, that he was sold
under Sin. That is, that he was as very a servant or slave to sin, as he which
is bought in a Market, is to him which buys him. For a servant or slave which
is so bought, is not at his own disposal, or under his own power, to do any
thing, which he himself likes, or would do, but is at the disposal of his Lord
and Master which bought him; and is under his power to do whatsoever he would
have him to do.

That which I do I allow not] i. e. That which I do, I approve not of, in my
mind as of a thing well done.

Note, that these words, I do, extend further than to positive doing, for they
extend as well to what he did not as to what he did, as will appear by the
subsequent words where that which is here spoken in general, and in gross, is
divided into particulars.

For what I would that I do not] q d. For whereas I have at sometimes some
light desire and will, to do that which is good, and which is c^mmanded by the
Law of God, I do it not, but am drawn away from it, by contrary lusts and
affections of Sin.

He speaks here of a light and inefficacious will to do good; He proves also
here, that he was sold under Sin.

But what I hate that do I] But whereas I am unwillng many times, to do that
which the Law forbids, yet I do it, being drawn by contrary lusts and
affections of Sin to do it.

The hate here spoken of, is not to be understood of a perfect hatred, but of
some light unwillingness, neither is this unwillingness to be thought to be in
him at all times, when he sins against a Negative Law or Command, but at
sometimes only.

And as this hatred is but a light unwillingness to do that which he does: So
is that willingness to do that which he does not, a light and in efficacious
willingness, and such as takes him only at sometimes.

The word rendered, I hate, is in the Greek (...), which does not always
signify a perfect hatred, as may be seen, Genesis 29 31. Mat. 10 37. John 12. 25,
etc.

Video, meliora proboque,

Deteriora sequor. Says Medea in the Poet.

I see better things and allow of them in my judgment, but I follow and do
those which are worse.

Such an affection as is in the Poets Medea is in the man which the Apostle
here personates, or somewhat better.

Ver. 16. I do that which I would not] These words are the same for sense and
Latitude with those words of the former verse, viz. That which I allow not. And
the Inference or Conclusion mentioned or collected here in this verse, is drawn
from thence.

If then I do that which I would not, I consent unto the Law that it is good]
The Consequence of what the Apostle here says depends upon that (which yet is a
true) supposition) that what he would not do, he would not do, because it was
forbidden by the Law.

Note, that from the discourse immediately foregoing, the Apostle draws a
double conclusion, one contained in this verse, whereby he proves that the law
was good, and therefore Spiritual, in relation to what he said, ver. 14, viz.
For we know that the law is Spiritual. The other in relation to what he said in
the same verse, viz. But I am carnal sold under sin, which conclusion is
contained or set down in the verse following, in those words. Now then it is no
more I that do, but Sin which dwells in me.

Ver. 17. Now then it is no more I that do it but Sin that dwells in me] This
conclusion is drawn, not from the Sixteenth, but the fifteenth verse of this
Chapter, and relates thither, q. d. Now then if I do, that which I allow not of
according to my mind, it is no more I that do it (to wit, as I am under the law
and taught and directed thereby) but Sin that dwells in me, and so by
Consequence, I am (as I said I was verse 14.) Carnal, sold under Sin.

It is no more I that do it] i. e. It is not I that do it, viz. as I am taught
and directed by the Law. Or, he may say, that he did it not, but Sin which
dwells in, to show, that sin swayed him to do what, he did, when he would not
do it. For when two causes concur to one effect, the effect is oftentimes
attributed to the prime and principal cause, and denied to that which is less
principal, though that did act also. So S. Paul says, that he labored more
than all the other Apostles, yet not he, but the Grace of God which was with
him, 1 Cor. 15.10. Where he attributes his labor to the Grace of God, which
was the Principal cause of that his labor, and denies himself to be cause
thereof, because (though he did labor himself) himself was the less principal
cause of that his labor.

No more] The Greek is (...), and (...) does sometimes redound, and become
superfluous in a sentence.

But Sin that dwells in me] By Sin he means here; that Sin or those Sins to
which he was accustomed and which reigned in him or had dominion over him,
which Sins are said to dwell, and may be said to reign in him, by reason of
those habits which they through custom, and often repetition had produced in
him. And as Sin is said to dwell in a man, by reason of that vicious habit
which she produced in him; So on the contrary is the holy Ghost, said to dwell
in us, by reason of the gifts which it infuseth into us, 1 Cor. 3.16.

Note, that the Apostle speaks here, of such as had lived long in sin (yea from
their Infancy) as will appear (as by many passages of the Text) from the Sixth
Chapter hitherto; so from those words, viz. Not in the Oldness of the Letter,
ver. 6. which occasioned the discourse, which follows from thence, to the end
of this Chapter.

The Apostle speaks of Sin, as of a Person: and as he speaks of Sin as of a
Person, so he speaks of himself as of an house, in which this Person dwells.
And by that, that he says, that Sin dwells in him, he shows, that she
reigned in him, and bore rule and swaid there, as the Master of a family does
in his own dwelling house, for to this the Apostle seems to allude.

To dwell signifies sometimes to be as a Lord or Master in an house. As Psalm.
84.12. I had rather be a Doorkeeper in the house of my God, than to dwell
(that is) than to be a Lord or Master, in the tents of wickedness.

Ver. 18. For I know that in me that is in my flesh dwells no good thing] i
e. He proves by this that Sin dwells in him, For by that which is good, he
means a spiritual good, and such a spiritual good, as with which reigning Sin
cannot consist. For the good which he here speaks of, is as opposite to Sin
mentioned in the former verse (which is reigning sin) as light to darkness, or
heat to cold: So that if this good dwelt in him, that Sin would not dwell in
him, and that Sin will dwell in him, till this good takes possession in him.
When therefore he says, I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no
good thing, There is a Synechdoche Generis in the word good: And he alludes to
a Master or Mistress of an house, in the word dwells, as he did by the same
word, in the former verse.

I know] To wit, by Experience.

That in me] Those words the Apostle corrects or limits by the words following,
viz. by those, That is in my Flesh, that he might exempt his mind from that
which he says of his other parts or faculties, in this verse: For in them he
says there dwells no good, but in his mind there dwells some good; in that
the mind knows the Law of God and assents to it as good, and propounds it as
good to the will, and so serves the Law of God, as he speaks, ver. 25.

In my flesh] He opposes the flesh, here to the mind which he speaks of ver.
23. and 25. And which he calls the Inward Man, ver 22. And whatsoever is not
the Mind, he comprehends under the name of Flesh, the will it self not
excepted, by reason of the corruption, and vitiousness which is in it. For the
Apostle calls Idolatry Witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulation, strife,
seditions (which are the Acts of a vicious Will) the works of the Flesh, Gal.
5.19. yet though the Will be vicious and corrupt in such a man, he may have
sometimes a light and inefficacious Will or desire to do that which is Good.

For to Will is present with me] i. e. For I can, yea often do will that which
is good and according to the Law, and have a light desire to do it.

This will or desire which he speaks of, is a weak and inefficacious will and
desire.

But how to perform that which is good I find not] i. e. But I find not any
thing to help me or assist me to do or perform that good efficaciously which I
would do.

Ver. 19. For the good that I would I do not] See this verse expounded, ver 15.

This was brought as an Argument ( ver. 15.) to prove that it was Sin that made
him do what he did: Here it is brought as an Argument to prove, that he had no
spiritual good dwelling in his Flesh, or to bear rule there, and to reign over
sin.

Ver. 20. Now if I do what I would not, it is not I that do it but Sin that
dwells in me] See ver. 17.

Ver. 21. I find then a Law that when I would do good evil is present with me]
The word rendered then is in the Greek (...), which may be rendered Immo, Vtique
Profecto, yea, truly, verily. I render it therefore thus, Yea I find a Law,
that is I find that when I would do good, there is that in my flesh, which
stirs me up to do that which is evil, q. d. I know, that in me (that is in my
flesh) dwells no good thing, yea I find, that when I would do good, there is
that in me (that is in my flesh) which stirs me up to that which is evil and
naught, and which I would not do.

I find a Law that when I would do good, evil is present with me.] There is an
Ellypsis in these words, leaving therefore their liberties to other, I conceive
that the whole Sentence must run thus: I find a Law, that is, I find that when
I would do good, evil is present with me.

The Apostle breaks off therefore, when he had said, I find a Law, and leaving
that abrupt, assumes, a speech aequivalent to that which he would have said,
which is this, I find, that when I would do good, evil is present with me.

A Law] The Apostle takes the word, Law, by a Catachresis sometime, for that
which is a motive or incentive to that which is good, as ver. 23. Where he
mentions the Law of his mind: And sometimes again for that which is a motive
or incentive to that which is evil as ver. 23. when he says, I see another Law
in my members warring, etc. And this he does, because a Law properly taken does
move, and incite those to whom it is given, by her promise of rewards, to do
those things which she commands: Here he takes it for a motive or incentive to
evil.

Evil is present with me] By evil he means that which incites him and stirs him
up, to that which is evil, by a Metonymy.

In particular by evil he means here the carnal concupiscence, or carnal
appetite, or carnal desires and affections, which are in him, and which stir
him up to embrace and follow those things, which are naught, and sinful for him
to do.

That which he calls (...), or Evil here, he calls (...) or a Law in his
members, ver. 23.

Ver. 22. For I delight in the Law of God after the inner man] i. e. For I
delight in the Law of God (or some commands thereof) according to what my
inward man, that is, my mind or understanding propounds to me.

The delight, which he here speaks of, is but a short and imperfect, and an
inefficacious delight, and such a delight, may be in an unregenerate man, for
our Savior tells of one, who hears the word, and anon with joy receives it,
but has no root in himself, etc. Mat. 13.20, 21. And surely such a one is not
a regenerate man.

This delight is in his will, as we may gather from those words ver. 15. What I
would do not. And from those words ver. 18. To will is present with me.

In the Law of God] By the Law of God he means the Law which was given by
Moses: and yet perhaps his delight might be not the whole Law, but only in some
particular commands thereof, when he says I delight in the Law of God after
the inward man, etc.

After the inward man] The Greek is (...), i. e, according to the inward man:
where the preposition (...) signifies a conformity to a thing, as (...) Xenoph.
Non facium secundum Regis literas, i. e. They will not do according to the
Kings Letters, or as the Kings Letters direct them, or would have them to do.

Note, that the inward man, or the mind, that is not the subject here of this
delight here spoken of, but the will rather, or the reasonable appetite, is the
subject thereof; for the mind is not properly said to rejoice, or delight in
any thing; but the mind propounds the Law of God to the will, as a thing
delectable and persuades her to delight in it, and to practice it, and the
Will does take some small delight in it, or in somethings, which it commands,
and would practice them according to what the mind propounds to her, and
persuades her to do, but her willingness is imperfect, and in efficacious.

By the inward man he means the mind, as appears, ver, 25. which be calls a
Man, per Senechdochen integri, and the inward man, because the mind and the
operations thereof are remote from the senses of other men, so that they cannot
perceive them in themselves.

Note that whereas the Apostle does elsewhere make mention of the old man, and
the new man, these are not the same with the outward man, and the inward man
here; for the old man, and the new man are so called, per Metonymiam subjecti,
by reason of the diverse qualities in man: But the outward man, and the inward
man, are so called per Senechdochen by reason of the parts of a man

Ver. 23. But I see another Law in my members] i. e. But I find or perceive
another mover or actor in my body.

I see] That is, I find, or perceive by experience.

He speaks here after the manner of the Hebrews, which call all sensations and
perceptions, by the name of seeing.

Another Law] What he means here by a Law in a general sense, see Notes ver.
21. In particular he calls the motions of the carnal appetite (which some call
also concupiscence) a Law here

In my members] i. e. In my body, Synechdoche.

Warring against the Law of my mind] i. e. Warring against my mind, which is as
a Law Or, warring against the dictates of my mind, which are as a Law, See
Notes ver. 21.

His carnal appetite and concupiscence, or his carnal affections are said to
war against his mind, or the dictates of his mind, by a Metaphor taken from
wars because the carnal affections and desires, which flow from his carnal
appetite or concupiscence, are contrary to the dictates of his mind, for they
incite to that which is contrary to the Law of Moses; but the dictates of the
mind speak well of the Law, and say, it should be kept.

And bringing me into captivity to the Law of sin] i. e. And overcoming me, and
taking me, as it were, a Prisoner, and making me a Captive, and delivering me
up as a slave to sin.

He persists in his Metaphor taken from the wars; where they, which are
overcome by them, which serve the Conqueror in his wars are delivered up to the
Conqueror, to be made Servants, and Slaves at his will.

To the Law of sin] i. e. To sin, which is as a Law, or to the motions of sin,
which are as a Law.

Why sin or the motions of sin are said here to be a Law, See Notes ver. 21.

When the mind or understanding of such a man, as the Apostle here personates,
propounds to his will the Law of God, as a thing delectable, and to be kept, as
a thing honest and good and uses motives, and persuasions thereunto: the will
does sometimes incline to it, and produce an act of delight, and willingness,
that way: But then the carnal appetite or concupiscence or carnal affections
arise in him, with their pretenses of some apparent good, and tempts the will
from that real good, which the mind propounded to her, to follow them: And they
being stronger than the mind, the Will and the whole man is carried after them,
and so become guilty of a new sin, and are made daily more and more prone to
sin, than they were before. And this is that which the Apostle here says,
under the Metaphor of warring and taking Captive.

Which is in my members] i. e. Which is, or which dwells in me, or in my body
Synechdoche.

Ver. 24. O wretched man that I am who shall deliver me from the body of this
death?] Better (as it is rendered in the margin of our Bibles) Who shall deliver
me from this body of death? That is, who shall deliver me from these my deadly
enemies, Viz. From my carnal affections, and from Sin, etc.

He whom Saint Paul personates, cries out here in the sense of his sins, and
the torture of his conscience, which is tortured therewith: For the wicked'st
men that are, do sometimes feel the torture and horror of their conscience,
for their sins, when they seriously think of the Law of God, and their own
doings.

It will be no wonder that a man under the Law, should cry out, O wretched man
that I am who shall deliver me from this body of death. When that young m^n in
the Gospel who was under the Law, (For we cannot say, That he was under grace)
said unto Christ, Good Master, What good thing shall I do that I may have
^ternal life, Mat. 19. v. 16.

From this body of d^ath] That is, from this deadly body, that is, ^^om these
my deadly enemies, which will destroy me, and bring me to everlasting death, at
last.

He calls his deadly Enemies, to wit, sin and her lusts and d^sires. And the
Flesh, and his carnal affections. A Body (by a Metaphor drawn from Wars, which
Metaphor he holds hitherto) for an Army is ordinarily called a Body, and a
Company of Horsemen or Footmen are called a Body of Horse and Foot; And by the
like kind of Metaphor, particular Sins are called the Body of sin, Chap. 6.
ver. 6. Our Apostle calls sins, also, the Body of Sins, Coloss. 2.11. though by
another Metaphor.

Of death] That is, deadly: (...), of death, for (...) or (...), Deadly, where
a Substantive of the Genitive case, is put after the Hebrew manner for an
Adjective.

Ver. 25. I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord] For what he thanks God, is
not here expressed; for there is an Ellipsis in these words, The words
therefore may be made up thus, q. d. I thank God, that he has delivered me
from this deadly body, that is, from this company of deadly enemies, through
our Lord Jesus Christ.

If we take these words in this sense, then we must say that the Apostle speaks
these words, in his own person, as he was regenerated, and delivered from the
Law: and then they are to be read, as it were with a Parenthesis.

He that sees the misery of other men, how grievious it is, and was in the same
misery once himself, or liable thereunto, and is delivered from it, will break
out in thanks to God, for his great goodness in delivering him, upon sense of
that mercy.

The aforesaid words of the Apostle, may also be made up thus; q. d. I thank
God, that he has showed me a way how to be delivered from this deadly body, or
from this body of deadly enemies, For he has made away to deliverance by Jesus
Christ our Lord.

And this may he speak, which is under the Law, and yet has so well profited,
as that seeing no hope of salvation by the Law, sees salvation in Christ,
though he be not as yet engrafted into Christ, for the Law was a Schoolmaster
to bring us to Christ, that we may be justified by faith, says our Apostle,
Gal. 3.24.

Such a one though he be yet under the Law, I account not to be altogether
under the imperfection of the Law, though he be not yet engrafted into Christ,
and Regenerate.

So then with my mind, I my self serve the Law of God:] q. d So then I my self,
though I am carnal, do with my mind serve the Law of God, and by so doing, do
acknowledge that the Law of God is spiritual.

This has its immediate connection with the 21 or 23 verses. And he speaks it
in the person of such a man, as I told of, v. 14.

He says that he serves the Law of God with his mind, because he approves of
the Law of God as good, with his mind, and propounds it with his mind to his
will to be embraced and followed by her, as a real good; which is the duty of
the mind to do, and in which the mind by so doing, is subservient to the Law of
God, whose duty is to teach men what they should do, and to stir them up to the
doing of it.

But with the flesh the Law of sin] What is meant here by flesh, See ver. 18.

By the Law of sin he means sin it self, which he calls the Law of sin, that it
may answer those words The Law of God. And because it does as a Law incite men
to follow her lusts, which are as it were her commands, See ver. 21.

They serve sin, which follow the lusts, and desires of sin, and put those
things in practice, which she allureth or inciteth to.

By saying, But with the flesh I serve the Law of sin, he acknowledges that he
is Carnal, and sold under sin. So that in this last verse he brings up his
Conclusion (which he draws from his discourse from the 14. verse hitherto) to
that, which he said in the 14 verse, viz. We know that the Law is spiritual,
but I am carnal sold under sin.

CHAP. VIII.
1. THere is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus,
who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit.

1. I said Chap. 5. ver. 20, 21. That when sin abounded grace did much more
abound; so that as sin has reigned unto death, even so grace might reign
through righteousness, unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord; Wherefore,
that being so, there is now no Condemnation to them, which are engrafted by
faith into Christ Jesus, who are such, as walk not after their sensual and
carnal appetite and affections; but walk after the spirit to wit, the spirit of
Regeneration, with which we are endued, and follow her inclinations, and so
serve not sin.

2. For the Law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from
the law of sin and death.

2. And let not any one which is in Christ Jesus, say, nay but I cannot but
serve sin: For the spirit of Regeneration, which gives life, the spirit which
we have received by Christ, has made us free from sin, which brings unto
death, so that sin has now no power or dominion over us, whereby to make us to
obey her will.

3. For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God
sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin
in the flesh.

3. I say that the spirit of Regeneration that spirit which gives life and
which we received by Christ; I say not, that the Law, has made us free from
sin: For by reason of the impotency of the Law, in that it was weak in
comparison of sin, which dwelt and reigned in us, God sending his own Son, in
the likeness of sinful man and for this end, that he might destory sin, has
destroyed sin by his body, which was crucified for us; by which also he
purchased and gave us the Spirit of Regeneration.

4. That the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not
after the flesh, but after the spirit.

4. That (by the spirit of Regeneration which he purchased for us, and which he
has given us) the Righteousness which the Law prescribes, should be fulfilled
in us, which are justified, and are engrafted into Christ, by faith, who are
such, as walk not after our carnal or sensual appetite and affections: But such
as walk after the spirit of Regeneration, with which we are endued and follow
her inclinations.

5 For they that are after the flesh, do mind the things of the flesh: but they
that are after the Spirit, the things of the Spirit.

5. I say who are such, who walk not after our sensual or carnal appetite or
affection, but such as do walk after the spirit of Regeneration, with which we
are endued, and follow her inclinations: For though they which are carnal love
and follow after their sensual and carnal appetite and affections, they that
are spiritual do love, follow after and delight themselves in these things to
which the spirit which is in them, inclines them to.

6. For to be carnally minded is death: but to be spiritually minded, is life
and peace:

6. And not without cause, for to love, follow and delight in those things
which the sensual or carnal appetite or affection moves to, will certainly
bring everlasting death; But to love, follow and delight in those things which
the spirit of Regeneration inclines, is that, which brings everlasting life
and peace.

7. Because the carnal mind is enmity againsh God: for it is not subject to the
Law of God, neither indeed can be.

7. For the man which loves, follows after, and delights in those things to
which his sensual or carnal appetite and affections tempt him to, is an enemy
to God: For he is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can he be, so
long as he is such, and does so.

8. So then, they that are in the flesh, cannot please God.

8. So then I grant you (that say, nay, but we cannot but walk after our
sensual or carnal appetite and affections) I grant you I say, that they which
are carnal cannot please God, nor can they do otherwise then walk after their
sensual or carnal appetite and affections.

9 But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of
God dwell in you. Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of
his.

9. But ye are not carnal, but Spiritual, in that the Spirit of God, by which
ye are Regenerate, dwells in you: for if any man has not the spirit of
Regeneration which Christ has purchased for us, he is none of Christ's.

10. And if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin: but the spirit
is life because of righteousness.

10. And now being that the spirit of Regeneration, which Christ has
purchased, is in you; your body indeed is subject to death, and shall one day
die, by reason of original sin; or the sin of Adam which was derived to you:
But yet your souls shall live, and never see death, by reason of that Spirit of
Regeneration (which is also called the Spirit of Righteousness) with which ye
are endued.

11. But if the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in you:
he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies
by his spirit that dwells in you.

11. But yet (that you may know that your bodies shall not so die, as their
bodies do, which are Carnal) being that the Spirit of Regeneration is in you:
God the Father (who raised up Jesus from the dead) shall after death, quicken
and enliven your mortal bodies, with an everlasting life, by reason of that
Spirit of his, which dwells in you?

12 Therefore brethren, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live after the
flesh.

12. Therefore Brethren being it is so, we ought not (if we have any love at
all to our selves) to be servants to our sensual or carnal appetite or
affections, to follow their motions: But we ought to be servants to the Spirit,
that Spirit of Regeneration which is in us, and to follow her inclinations.

13. For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if ye through the
spirit, do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.

13. For if we live after our sensual and carnal appetite and affections, and
follow them, we shall die eternally: But if we, through the power which we have
by the Spirit of Regeneration which is in us, do mortify and destroy the
deeds, to which our sensual and carnal Appetite (which is in our body) tempt us
to, we shall live an everlasting life.

14. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God.

14. For as many as are lead by the Spirit of Regeneration, which God has
given us, and follow her motions; so many are the Sons of God, and by
consequence heirs of life everlasting.

15. For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear: but ye have
received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba, Father.

15. I say so many are the sons of God: for they which have received the Spirit
of Regeneration, have not received a servile spirit, whereby they should like
slaves and servants, fear and be afraid to approach and come near to God, such
a spirit as we Jews had at the giving of the Law in Mount Sinai: But we have
received a filial and Son-like spirit, whereby we are bold to approach to God,
and to speak confidently to him, and to call him (as Sons) Abba Father.

16. The spirit it self bears witness with our spirit, that we are the
children of God.

16. The spirit ^t self, by begetting in us a filial affection and Son like
disposition toward God, bears witness to our souls, that we are the children
of God.

17. And if children, then heirs, heirs of God, and joynt-heirs with Christ: if
so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together.

17. And if we are the children of God then are we heirs, even the heirs of God
and coheirs with Christ, of everlasting Glory: And this inheritance of
everlasting Glory, shall we inherit with Christ, if that we suffer as Christ
did: And indeed let us suffer as Christ did, that we may be also glorified
together with Christ.

18. For I reckon, that the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to
be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us.

18. For (that now I may arm you against sufferings) I have weighed as it were
in a balance, our sufferings on the one side, and our rewards on the other,
and have cast up, as it were the sum of both of them, and I reckon or conclude,
that the sufferings of this present life, are so small in comparison of the
reward, as that they are not worthy to be compared with the Glory, that shall
be openly given and bestowed upon us hereafter, who suffer for Christ sake.

19. For the earnest expectation of the creature, waits for the manifestation
of the sons of God.

19. I say, that shall be openly given and bestowed upon us hereafter, and I
speak of it as a thing which shall most certainly be: For the Creature (whose
expectation shall not be frustrate) does with earnest expectation wait for the
manifestation of this Glory, in the Sons of God.

20. For the creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by reason
of him, who has subjected the same in hope:

20. I say, that it does with earnest expectation, wait for this; for the
Creature, when it was made subject to vanity, was not made subject thereunto
willingly, but only in obedience to God, who would and did subject the same to
vanity, with hope notwithstanding in the creature, that it should one day be
delivered from that vanity.

21. Because the creature it self also shall be delivered from the bondage of
curruption, into the glorious liberty of the children of God.

21. I say, with hope notwithstanding in the creature, that it should be one
day delivered from that vanity; for (which is the ground of this its hope) the
irrational creature it self also, as well as man, shall be delivered from this
bondage of corruption and vanity, when the glorious liberty of the Sons of God
(whereby they shall be totally freed from their miseries and be estated in
glory) shall appear.

22. For we know that the whole creation groaneth, and travelleth in pain
together, until now.

22. For we know, that the whole company of the Creatures, from the time; that
man fell, until now, groan, and travil, as it were a woman, which is in pain,
and would fain be delivered, desiring to be delivered from this their bondage.

23. And not only they, but our selves also, which have the first fruits of the
Spirit, even we our selves groan within our selves, waiting for the adoption,
to wit, the redemption of our body.

23. And not only they, but we also, we I mean, which are regenerate, in that
we have (though not the full harvest, yet) the first fruits of the Spirit, even
we ourselves groan within ourselves (as being sensible of the miseries and
vexations, which we are subject to, and, feel, while we are in the body)
waiting for the full effect of our Adoption, to wit, the redemption of our
bodies from these miseries and vexations.

24. For we are saved by hope: but hope that is seen is not hope for what a man
sees, why does he yet hope for?

24. For though we are saved from these things, yet we are saved as yet, but
only in hope; But the thing, that is hoped for, if it be enjoyed, is not now
hoped for; for what a man enjoys, why does he still hope for?

25 But if we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience, wait for it.

25. But if we hope for that which we enjoy not, then do we with patience wait
for it, and so do we with patience expect and hope, for the fruit of our
Adoption, to wit the redemption of our bodies.

26. Likewise the spirit also helps our i^firmities: for we know not what we
should pray for, as we ought: but the spirit it self makes intercession for us
with groanings, which cannot be uttered.

26. Again that I may arm you yet further against sufferings; the Spirit does
not only witness to our souls, that we are the childr^n of God, as I said ver.
16. But because we in our selves are weak, and not able to bear the sufferings,
that may befall us, it helps also our infirmities and strengthens us, and
makes us able to bear our sufferings, and that it does by enabling us so to
pray to God for strength to bear them, as that God will hear our prayers and
grant our requests: for we know not of our selves, how we should pray for any
thing as we ought: But the Spirit it self teaches us whilst (as a
Schoolmaster, which teaches his Scholars, what he would have them do, by his
doing the same before their face) it makes intercession for us (as it were
before our face, that we may learn thereby) with groanings, which cannot be
uttered.

27. And he that searches the hearts, knows what is the mind of the spirit,
because he makes intercession for the saints, according to the will of God.

27. And God which knows the hearts, knows and approves of the desires and
prayers of the spirit, and grants them in the behalf of us the Saints, because
he makes intercession for the Saints, according to the will of God.

28. And we know that all things work together for good, to them that love God,
to them who are the called according to his purpose.

28. Again we know that all things (and sufferings as well as any other thing)
work together for good to them, that love God, that is, to them who are
effectu^lly called of God to the grace of the Gospel, with a purpose in God to
make them like the pattern of his Son in sufferings.

29. For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate, to be conformed to the
image of his Son, that he might be the first born amongst many brethren.

29. For (that ye might not be startled at this) them, whom God did decree from
all eternity so to love, as to justify them through faith, and so to endue
them with his holy spirit of Regeneration, even then did he also from all
eternity destinate and appoint, in his purpose and resolution, to be conformed
and made like in sufferings, to the pattern and copy of his Son Christ Jesus,
yet so as that he should be the chief, among all suffering brethren, and suffer
more than any of them all

30. Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called: and whom he
called, them he also justified: and whom he justified, them he also glorified.

30. And whom he did from all eternity destinate and appoint to this, them also
he called to it: And whom he called to it (because they, which afflict and
persecute them, think and say of them, that they are the most wicked men in all
the world, and so do they which see them, so afflicted and persecuted) them
will he justify from all evil speeches and censures, which are cast upon them:
And whom he will thus justify, them he will also glorify, even because they
thus suffer.

31. What shall we then say to these things? If God be for us, who can be
against us?

31. What shall we then say more? If God be for us, and as an advocate will
plead our cause, who can be against us, so as to hurt us.

32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up, for us all: How
shall he not with him also freely give us all things?

32. He that so pittieth us, as that he spared not his own Son, but delivered
him up to death for our sakes, that he might save us, how can he stick to g ve
us freely. and most liberally all things, which we stand in need of, or may be
any way beneficial to us, when as in comparison of his Son, all these things
are as nothing.

33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that
justifies.

33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods beloved, to those I say whom
God has elected to justification, so that they should be thereby condemned?
Surely none, no, not one: For it is God himself who justifies them from all
their offenses.

34. Who is he that condemns, it is Christ that died, yea rather that is
risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession
for us.

34. Who is he that can by his Oratory, or the power, which he has with God
prevail with God to condemn us? Surely none, not any one. For it is Christ that
died for us, that he might redeem us from the wrath to come; yea, rather it is
he that is risen again, to show that he has paid the full price of our
redemption, who is even at the right hand of God (and so in the greatest favor
and power with him) who also makes intercession to God for us.

35. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or
distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword?

35. Though it be so that many accidents, and adversity especially, may
separate us from the love of man; yet what shall separate us from the love
which God bears to us, for Christ's sake? Shall tribulation or persecution, or
famine or nakedness, or peril, or sword.

36 (As it is written, For thy sake we are killed all the day long, we are
accounted, as sheep for the slaughter.)

36. I say sword, for think it not strange my brethren, that the sword should
be drawn to kill us, for this is our portion of old, as it is written, Psalm.
44.22. for thy sake, O Lord, are we (which are thy servants and fear thy great
Name) killed one after another all the day long, we are accounted of, no
o^herwise, than of sheep appointed to be slain, so little esteem is made of our
blood.

37. Nay, in all these things, we are more than conquerors, through him that
loved us.

37. But shall any of these things, I say separate us, from the love which God
shows us for Christ's sake? No, for even in the midst of these things does God
so continue, and show his love to us, as that we are through the effects of his
love, and by the assistance and aid, that he out of his love gives us not only
Conquerors over all these things, but more than Conquerors.

38. For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come

38. Wherefore I am persuaded, that nothing which we can suffer either in our
life or at our death; no nor whatsoever all the devils of Hell, whether they be
Angels, or Principalities, or Powers can lay upon us; Nor the afflictions,
which we suffer at the present, nor the afflictions, which are threatened
against us for the future.

39. Nor Height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate
us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

39. Nor any creature which is in heaven above, or any creature which is in
earth beneath, or any other creature whatsoever (if they should all combine
themselves against us to afflict us to the utter most) shall be able to
separate us from the love of God, which he shows to us, for the merits of
Christ Jesus our Lord.

CHAP. VIII.
Ver. 1. There is therefore now no condemnation to them, which are in Christ
Jesus] This Conclusion or Corollary is drawn from that which the Apostle
taught, in the fifth Chapter of this Epistle, and especially in the eighth,
ninth, tenth, eleventh verses, and so forward. Not from that which went
immediately, before in the precedent Chapter: For the sixth and seventh Chapter
the Apostle spends in answering objections, which rose (one after another) from
the latter end of the fifth Chapter hitherto, so that they two chapters come
between this, and the first Chapter as it were by the By.

No Condemnation] This is part of the happiness of him, which is justified by
Faith.

To them which are in Christ Jesus] i. e. To them which believe in Christ
Jesus, and so are made members of his body and inserted into him by says, as
Branches into the vine, That is to them which are justified by Faith, as he
speaks Chap. 5. ver. 1.

Who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit] i. e. Which follow not
their sensual or carnal appetite and affections, in whatsoever they move them
to.

Who walk not after the flesh] The flesh is to be taken here for the sensual or
carnal appetite and affections. And to walk after the flesh, is to follow that
sensual or carnal appetite and affections, and to be carried away with them,
which way soever they move, which cannot be done without sin.

The Speech is Metaphorical.

But after the Spirit] i. e. But after the motions and inclinations of the Holy
Ghost, which dwells in them, (as our Apostle speaks, 2 Timoth. 1.14.)

The Apostle adds this, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit not
as a note of distinction, as though there were some in Christ Jesus, or some
which were justified by faith, which did or might walk after the Flesh; and
others, which did or might walk after the Spirit; but he adds it as a note of
declaration, to declare, what all those are and ought to be for conversation of
life, which are in Christ Jesus, or which are justified by faith. They are
such, or ought to be such, as walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit.

And this he adds least that any one, when he hears that there is no
condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus should think, that now, that he
is in Christ Jesus, he may securely live in sin, or live as he lists, and so
bring a scandal on Christian Religion.

Ver. 2. For the Law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made me free
from the Law, of sin and of death] The Apostle praevents an objection, here
somewhat like to that objection, which he prevented Cap. 7. ver. 14. For a weak
and faint-hearted Christian might object here and say, you require (Paul) of
all that are in Christ Jesus that they would walk not after the Flesh but after
the Spirit. But I hope, that I am in Christ Jesus, and yet having been a slave
to sin, and walked so long as I have done after the Flesh: I am afraid, that I
have been so long a slave to sin, and so long walked after the Flesh, that I
cannot be but as a slave to them still, and follow them still; for how shall I
be freed from following sin, or from walking after the Flesh, who have been so
long, as a slave to them. This objection (I say) the Apostle does here prevent,
saying, For the law of the spirit of life in Christ has made me free from the
Law of sin and of death.

The Law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the Law
of sin and of death] i. e. The power and Efficacy of the Holy Ghost (which
dwells in me through Christ Jesus, and which brings those to eternal life
which follow it, has made me free from my custom of sin or sining (and so by
consequence) from walking after the flesh, as I was wont to walk, which
whosoever walks after, whethersoever she leads them, shall die everlastingly.

That the Apostle is frequent in raising, and answering, or preventing
objections, and uses that as one way of teaching the Truths, which he has to
teach, I observed before.

The law of the spirit of life] By the Law of the spirit of life, is meant here
the efficacy of the Holy Ghost, which dwells in them which are in Christ
Jesus: For the Holy Ghost is said to dwell in them which are in Christ Jesus,
by reason of those gifts with which the Holy Ghost endueth them, and by which
they are also sanctified.

In Christ Jesus] i. e. Which is by Christ Jesus. That is, which is given to me
by and for the merits of Christ Jesus.

In is put here for By, after the Hebrew manner.

Has made me free from the Law of sin and of death] That is, has enabled me
to resist or turn away from following my carnal and sensual appetite, or my
carnal and sensual affections, so that they cannot draw me after them which way
soever they will, as they were wont to do.

Note, that the Apostle might have said, only, The Spirit of life in Christ
Jesus has made me free from sin and death: But he says, the Law of the Spirit
of life, and the Law of sin, for the like reason, as he said the Law of works,
and the Law of faith, Chap. 3. ver. 27, and as he says the Law of
righteousness, Chap. 9.31.

Note also, that when he says The Law of the Spirit of life, has made me free
from the Law of sin and of death, he uses a Metaphor drawn from men
Enfranchesing slaves, and freeing them from that slavery, which before time
they underwent.

Note thirdly, that the Apostle speaks here in the person of such as were
justied by faith, and were ingraffed into Christ Jesus, as living branches into
the living Vine.

Ver. 3. For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh,
God sending his own Son, in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin,
condemned sin in the flesh] i. e. For what the Law could not do, in that it was
weak, in comparison of the flesh, that God did, who sending his own Son, in the
likeness of a sinful man (though he was without sin) and for the destruction of
sin, destroyed sin which reigned in us, by his Flesh, that is, by his Body,
which was Crucified for us.

There is an Ellipsis in these words of the Apostle as they are here translated.

But the words in the Original are these, (...), etc. which may be thus
interpreted For by reason of the weakness and imbecility of the Law, in that
it was weak, in comparison of the flesh, God sending his own Son, etc.

The Apostle prevents an Objection here, For whereas he said ver. 2. The Law of
the spririt of life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the Law of sin and
of death: a man might object and say, But what needst thou (Paul) to say, The
Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the Law of
sin and of death, when as the Law which was given by Moses can do this. To this
the Apostle answers after this manner: q. d. I said that the Law of the Spirit
of life, which is by Christ Jesus, has made me free from the Law of sin and of
death; I said not, that the Law which was given by Moses has done this;
because the Law which was given by Moses, was weak, in comparison of the flesh,
and not so able to draw men after it, as the flesh was after it, and therefore
by reason of the impotency and imbecility of the Law of Moses, in that it was
weak in comparison of the flesh, God sending forth his own Son in the likeness
of sinful flesh, and for this end, that he might be a Sacrifice for sin, and
destroy sin, has destroyed sin by his flesh, that is, by his Body which was
made a Scrifice for us.

For what the Law could not do] That which is said of the Law here, that it
could not do, is this, viz. That it could not destroy sin.

The words in the Original are (...), where first we may understand the
Preposition (...), propter, then take (...) for (...) or (...), impotentiam, or
imbecillitatem, and then interpret (...) of the Law of Moses thus, For by
reason of the impotency and weakness of the Law of Moses, etc.

(...) does not only signify Impossibilis, Impossible, but Impotens, and
Imbecillis also, Imperfect, and Weak, and in the Neuter gender with a
Prepositive Article, Impotentia, and Imbecillitas, Impotencie, and Weakness.

For that it was weak through the Flesh] The words in the Original are (...).
Where the Preposition (...) which is here rendered Through, is to be taken in a
sense of Comparison (as I conceive) q. d. In that it was weak in comparison of
the flesh.

And the Law of Moses was weak in comparison of the flesh, in that the flesh
had more power, to draw men after it from the Law: than the Law had to draw men
after it from following the flesh.

Through the flesh] By Flesh understand here, the fleshly, that is the carnal
appetite of a man

God sending his own Son] Supple, into the World

This sets forth the love of God, in that he would send a Son, and that his own
Son, into the World for such a purpose.

In the likeness of sinful flesh] Flesh is to be taken here (by a Synechdoche)
for the Body; that other part of Man; and that again by a further Synechdoche
for the whole man. q d. In the likeness of sinful man.

Note, that the word Likeness, does not relate here to the word Flesh, but to
the word Sinful: For Christ Jesus was true and real Flesh, that is, true and
real Man, but yet not truly and really sinful man, he was only like such a man,
for he himself was without sin.

Christ was made like to sinful man, in that he was made subject to infirmities
and miseries as sinful man was for his sin.

Condemned sin] i. e. Destroyed or slew sin.

To Condemn, is taken here for to Kill, Per metonymiam Antecedentis or Causae.
For those Malefactors which are condemned to die, are put to death, after the
Sentence of Condemnation is passed on them, to which the Apostle here alludes.

One way by which Christ is said to kill or slay sin; is by purchasing and
procuring for us, by his death and sacrifice the Holy Ghost or such spiritual
gifts, by which we are able to crucify or slay sin which reigned in us; and
after this way, may the Apostle seem to be particularly understood in this
place, if we consider what he says of the Law of the Spirit of life, in the
foregoing verse.

In the flesh] i. e. By his Flesh that is by his Body which was made a
sacrifice for us.

In is put here for By; and the Flesh is taken here for his Body (by a
Metonymie) and that as sacrificed, and offered upon the Cross as Chap. 7.4.
Ephesians. 2.5.

Ver. 4. That the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us] i. e. That
we might perform those righteous Commandments which are contained in the Moral
Law, which was given by Moses, so far forth at the least, and in such manner,
as they are necessary to Salvation, to which a most exact and a most perfect
keeping of the Commandments, is not required.

In us] To wit which are in Christ Jesus.

Who walk not after the flesh but after the spirit] See verse 1.

This the Apostle repeats here, that he may show the truth of it, and press it
home upon them to whom he wrote.

Ver. 5. For they that are after the Flesh do mind the things of the Flesh, but
they that are after the spirit the things of the spirit] q. d. I say, who walk
not after the Flesh, but after the spirit, for they indeed who are after the
Flesh, do mind the things of the Flesh, but they that are after the spirit (as
they are which are in Christ Jesus) do mind the things of the spirit.

He grants that of those which are after the Flesh, which he denies of those
which are after the spirit to wit, that they mind the things of the Flesh.

By them which are after the Flesh, he means those that are Carnal. The Greek
is (...) and the Preposition (...) joined with a noun substantive, turns it to
the nature sometimes of an adjective, and sometime of a participle.

Do mind the things of the flesh] i. e. Do mind those things, which the sensual
or carnal appetite and affections move them to, and delight in them, and follow
after them.

Do mind] (...) is the Greek word here and though (...) is properly spoken of
the mind or understanding, yet here it is spoken of the Will.

But they that are after the spirit, do mind the things of the spirit] By the
Spirit, he means that. which he calls the Law of the Spirit of life, ver.
2. And by such as are after the spirit, he means such as are spiritual, and
such are they, which are in Christ Jesus, ver. 9.

The things of the spirit] i. e. The things to which the spirit inclines or
moves them to.

Ver. 6 For to be carnally minded is death] Betwixt this and the foregoing
verse we may understand these or the like words, and it is no wonder, or, and
not without reason, q. d. And it is no wonder, or, it is not without reason,
that they, that are after the spirit do mind the things of the Spirit; for to
be carnally minded is death, etc.

He proves here, that which he said ver. 5. That they which are after the
spirit do mind the things of the spirit.

To be carnally minded] That is, to mind the things of the flesh, as ver. 5.
That is, to think of, follow, and delight in the things, to which the sensual
or carnal appetite, and affections move to.

Is death] i. e. Is deadly. or, that which will certainly bring everlasting
death, Metonymia effecti.

He proves here ( not that they which are after the Flesh, do mind the things
of the Flesh but) that they which are after the Spirit do mind the things of
the Spirit.

He that is after the flesh, does not consider, that it is death to be carnally
minded, therefore he minds the things of the flesh, But he that is after the
Spirit he knows it, and considers it, therefore he minds not the things of the
Flesh, but of the Spirit.

To be spiritually minded] That is, to mind the things of the Spirit as he
spoke, ver. 5.

Is life and peace] i. e. Is that which will bring life and peace, through the
goodness, and mercy of God. For as the wages of sin is death, so the gift of
God to those that follow his Spirit, is eternal life through Jesus Christ our
Lord Chap. 6.23.

Is life] By life understand eternal life, and take it Metonymically, for the
cause, or, for that which will procure or bring after it, such a life.

And peace] By peace understand first (after the Hebrew manner) the heap or
plenty or plentiful return of all good things, and then take it Metonymically,
for that which will procure or bring after it such an heap, or plenty, or
plentiful return.

Ver. 7. Because the carnal mind is emnity against God] i. e. Because he that
is carnally minded, is an enemy to God.

The carnal mind, is put here by a Metonymy for the man that has a carnal
mind, or for the man that is carnally minded, or which minds the things of
the Flesh And enmity is put here for an enemy: An Abstract for a Concrete.

What it is to be carnally minded, or, to mind the things of the Flesh, See
verse 5.

He proves here, that which he said, ver. 6. To wit, that to be carnally minded
is death. And certainly if to be carnally minded will make us enemies to God,
it will bring death upon us, for all the enemies of God shall be destroyed.

For it is not subject to the Law of God] He proves here that the carnal
minded man is an enemy to God, and he proves it by this, that such a man as is
carnally minded does not obey the Law of God, and do as God would have him do,
and as he is bound to do. See Saint James Chap. 4. ver. 4.

Neither indeed can it be] That is neither indeed can he be Subject to the Law
of God, or obey it, to wit, so long as he is such.

Ver. 8. So then they that are in the flesh cannot please God] q. d. So then
they indeed, that are in the Flesh, etc. By those which are in the Flesh, he
means such as he said were after the Flesh, that is, such as were carnal.

Cannot please God] i. e. Cannot but walk after the Flesh, which is a thing
displeasing to God.

He takes here that, that they cannot please God, for that, that they walk
after the Flesh, or that, that they cannot but walk after the Flesh, by putting
the Consequent for the antecedent. This phrase therefore, Viz. They cannot
please God, is the same for the sense, with that viz. Who walk after the Flesh,
and it is occasioned from an objection starting from the first verse, though
this Corollary or Conclusion be drawn from that which went immediately before,

If you ask therefore to what end the Apostle draws this Conclusion and
Corollary here, for it seems, that it might have been well spared, as not
being to the purpose of what he had in hand.

I answer, The Apostle prevented, as I said, an Objection in the second verse,
an Objection made against that which he said, ver. 1. Who walk not after the
Flesh, but after the spirit: for a weak and faint-hearted Christian, though he
were in Christ Jesus, yet might say in opposition to that, yea, but I cannot
but walk after the Flesh; now therefore the Apostle says here in reference to
that, That it is true indeed (and it would appear out of what he had said) That
they which were in the Flesh, cannot but walk after the Flesh: But yet though
they cannot but walk after the Flesh, yet they which were in Christ Jesus might
do otherwise than walk after the Flesh, for they which are in Christ Jesus, are
not in the Flesh but in the Spirit, and so may walk not after the Flesh, but
after the Spirit. The Apostle therefore does draw this Conclusion here, that he
might grant so much to the Objection, that by granting so much he may the
better induce him to yield to that, viz. That they that are in the Spirit, or,
They that are in Christ Jesus walk after the Spirit.

Cannot please God] That is, cannot (while they are such) but walk after the
Flesh (which is displeasing to God.)

He takes here that, viz. That they cannot please God, for that, v^z. That they
walk after the Flesh, or that, viz. That they cannot but walk after the Flesh;
by putting the Consequent for the Antecedent.

This phrase therefore viz. They cannot please God. is the same for sense with
that, viz. Who walk after the Flesh.

And it is occasioned from a tacit objection arising from the first verse,
though the Corollary or Conclusion, which the Apostle draws here, is drawn from
that, which went immediately before.

Ver. 9 But ye are not in the Flesh] i. e. But ye which are in Christ Jesus,
ye, I say, are not carnal, that ye should say, yea, but we cannot but walk
after the Flesh.

But in the Spirit] i. e. But ye are spiritual, so that ye may renounce the
Flesh, and walk after the Spirit.

If so be that the Spirit of God dwells in you] i. e. Being that the Spirit
of God dwells in you, to wit, by those gifts and graces which he has given
you.

The conjunction, If, is not dubitantis, but affirmantis, not a note of
doubting, but of affirming: and for this reason does he affirm without
doubting, that the Spirit of God dwells in them, because he takes them to be
such as were truly in Christ Jesus, ver. 1.

Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his] This seems
to to be an Argument to prove that these Romans had the Spirit of Christ in
them, upon this supposition, that they were in Christ Jesus, for (says he) If
any one has not the Spirit of Christ he is none of his, but if he be his, that
is if he be Christ's (as ye are) he has the spirit of Christ in him.

He that has not the Spirit of Christ is not Christ's, that is, is not in
Christ, as a living member in the body, or as a fruitful, or living branch in
the vine, and therefore shall be cast out or cut off at length.

The Spirit of Christ] That which he called The Spirit of God immediately
before, he calls the Spirit of Christ here, because it is given and conferred
of God through the merits of Christ, who also himself is true God.

He is none of his] i. e. None of his true and living members. Or true and
living branches.

Ver. 10. And if Christ be in you the body is dead because of sin, but the
spirit is life because of Righteousness] i. e. And if the Spirit of Christ be
in you, your body indeed is mortal, and shall die by reason of the sin of
Adam: But your soul shall live and never see death, because of the Spirit of
God and of Christ, that is, because of the Spirit of Righteousness, which
dwells in it.

The Apostle does here show, the blessed fruit, which they shall enjoy, which
have the Spirit of God and of Christ, viz. That they shall not come into
condemnation, as he is said ver. 1. And he does withal answer an Objection,
which might arise from those words ver. 6. To be spiritually minded is life.

For being that the Apostle said there, That to be spiritually minded is life,
a man might object and say: but how is it life to be spiritually minded, when
as they that have the Spirit of God, and of Christ, and so are spiritually
minded, die, as well as they which are in the Flesh, and so are carnally minded.

To this the Apostle answers here, that they that have the Spirit of God and
of Christ, and so are spiritually minded, die indeed the death of the body, as
they do which cre carnally minded, and that because of Original sin, or the sin
of Adam: but they do not die the death of the soul as the carnal minded men, do
because of that Spirit of God, and of Christ, which dwells in them.

If Christ be in you, etc.] By Christ is here to be understood the Spirit of
Christ, as he called it, ver 10. and that per Metonymiam efficientis

And the Apostle would rather say Christ here than the Spirit of Christ, to
avoid confusion of terms, for soon after by the Spirit he means the Soul of
man.

The body is dead] That is, the Body indeed is subject to death, and shall one
day die.

He says the body is dead, because it is not only such as may die, but such as
tends continually to death, and shall at length certainly die.

Because of sin] By sin here understand the sin of Adam or Original sin: for
death entered into the world by Adam 's sin, and so death passed upon all men,
for that all have sinned through him: Chap. 5.12. And in Adam all die, says
the Apostle again 1 Cor. 15.22.

But the Spirit is life] i. e. But the Soul shall live and never see death.

The Spirit] By the Spirit, understand here the Soul, that better part of man
which is a Spirit.

Is life] That is, lives and shall live for ever.

The Apostle when he says Is life, for lives, uses a Metonymie of the
Adjunct.

Because of righteousness] i e. Because of the Spirit of God and of Christ
which is in it.

By Righteousness is here to be understood, The Spirit of life, as he called it
ver. 2. and which he called the Spirit of God, and the Spirit of Christ ver. 9.
And which he called Christ in a few words before, and this Spirit he calls
Righteousness. Per Metonymiam Effecti, because it inclines to Righteousness and
works Righteousness in us.

That Soul which is endued with the Spirit of God or with the Spirit of
Righteousness (call it which you please) while it is in this life, so soon as
it is parted from the body, is carried into the presence of Christ, there to
enjoy him, who is life, and to live after its manner.

Ver. 11. But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in
you] i. e. But yet if the Spirit of God dwells in you, q. d. But though the
b^dy is dead because of sin yet if the Spirit of God dwells in you, etc.

He means by this spirit that which he called righteousness ver. 10. and the
Spirit of Christ verse. 9. and the Spirit of life ver. 2.

By him which raised up Jesus from the dead he means God; whom he describes
by this Act, because he is to say, That he will quicken your mortal bodies: Of
which that, That God raised up Jesus from the dead was a pattern and a pledge,
and showed that God was able, yea, and willing to do it.

He that raised up Christ from the dead] That is, God.

Shall also quicken your mortal bodies] That is, Shall also raise up your
mortal bodies after death, at the last Day, as he raised up Christ from death,
when he had been dead.

By his spirit that dwells in you] That is, because of his spirit, or by
reason of his spirit which dwells in you.

By reason of his spirit, are our bodies become Temples of the Holy Ghost, 1
Cor. chap 6.19. And therefore our bodies shall be thought worthy of the honor
of a glorious and happy resurrection at the last Day, because they were Temples
of the Holy Ghost in this life.

The spirit is called the Earnest, to wit, of our resurrection, 2 Cor. 5.5.

That which he says here in this verse, is a Comfort against that which he
said ver. 10. viz. The body is dead because of sin. And an Explication of that
which he said ver. 6. To be spiritually minded is life.

Though death seize upon the bodies of the faithful and regenerate, yet it
shall not always keep their bodies under her power, as death Eternal shall the
bodies of those which are carnally minded. For at the last Day, Christ shall
raise up their bodies to a life of glory, of which the spirit of God and of
Christ which is in them, is a sure pledge and earnest.

Ver. 12. Therefore Brethren we are debtors not to the Flesh to live after the
Flesh] Supple, But to the spirit to live after the spirit.

Note that these words, But to the spirit, to live after the spirit are here to
be understood, and the Apostle leaves them to us to understand, out of those
opposite words, viz. Not to the Flesh to live after the Flesh.

He takes Flesh here for our sensual or carnal appetite or affections: And the
spirit (which he here leaves to be understood) must we take for that spirit
which he called the spirit of life, and the spirit of God, and of Christ, and
righteousness a little before, of both which he speaks as of Persons, yea
Mistresses, by a Prosopopoeia:

That which the Apostle here gathers, he gathers especially from the sixth
verse (To be carnally minded is death, but to be spiritually minded is life and
peace) as will appear by what he says ver. 13. where he does repeat as it
were, and amplify what he there said.

The Apostle in this Corrollary or Conclusion does dehort the Romans from
following the Flesh, and exhort them to follow the spirit, and shows them
that they ought so to do. And this he does so often as occasion serves, that
Novices in Christianity, may not take to themselves a liberty to sin; and that
those which are enemies to Christianity, might not have any cause, to asperse
Christians with so foul a thing as this is, viz. That they taught or held, that
they might walk securely, after the Flesh.

We are debtors not to the Flesh to live after the Flesh, Supple, but to the
spirit to live after the spirit] q. d. We ought in wisdom and in love to our
selves, not to live after the Flesh, but to live after the spirit.

The word (...), rendered here Debtors is not to be taken here for Debtors in
the strict sense of the words, but more loosely for such as are any way bound,
whether in gratitude or in wisdom or in love to themselves to do any thing, so
that they which ought, or whom it behooves to do any thing, upon any account,
may be called (...), that is, Debtors in the Apostles sense here.

The verb (...), (from whence (...) comes) has such a kind of signification
with it; and Euripides uses the Foeminine (...) after the same manner.

But note, that though I say, that the word (...) is not to be taken here in
the strict sense of the word, I say it (not because we are not bound in the
strictest sense to forsake the Flesh, and follow the spirit) but because that
that is all, which can be gathered from what Saint Paul has here said.
Wherefore what Saint Paul says here, is as if he should say, Wherefore being
that to be carnally minded is death, and to be spiritually minded is life and
peace. If ye be wise, and have any love to your own selves, ye ought not to
live after the Flesh, but after the spirit.

To live after the Flesh] To live after the Flesh is, to live after the will of
the Flesh, that is, to embrace and follow the motions of the Flesh, that is, of
our sensual or carnal appetite and affections.

Ver. 13. Ye shall die] Supple, Eternally.

Note, the Enallage of the Person here, how he changes the first into the
second Person.

If ye through the spirit do mortify the deeds of the body] i. e. If ye
through the spirit that is in you, and which does enable you to mortify the
deeds of the body; I say, if ye through that spirit do mortify the deeds of
the body, according to that that the spirit shall enable you thereunto.

Do mortify the deeds of the body] By the deeds of the body, are not here to
be understood all those actions, which are exercised by the body, for Chap. 6.
ver. 13. He would have us to yield our members as instruments of Righteousness
unto God, but such deeds are to be understood by the deeds of the body here,
which he calls the works of the flesh, Galat. chap. 5. ver. 19.

We are then said to mortify the deeds of the body by the spirit, when by the
help of the spirit and the power thereof, we do not consent to, but resist the
evil motions of the body or of the flesh, that is, of our carnal affections,
when they incite us to evil deeds: which the more we resist, the more shall we
find their strength to die in us, and the less power shall they have over us.

Ye shall live] i. e. Ye shall live a life happy and eternal, and that not only
in your souls which shall never die, but also in your bodies which though they
die, yet shall be raised up to an immortal life at the last Day.

Ver. 14. For as many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of
God] The Apostle proves here what he said ver. 13. viz. That if they through
the spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, they shall live: For they, which
through the spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, are such as are led by
the spirit of God, and they which are led by the spirit of God, they are the
sons of God by Adoption, and they which are the sons of God by doption are the
Heirs of God, ver. 17. Heirs to the inheritance of Eternal life.

As many as are led by the spirit of God] i e. As many as follow the leading of
the spirit of God.

This is the same spirit which he spoke of before ver. 2.

He speaks of this spirit as of a Person, by a Prosopopoeia.

And men are said to be led by the spirit of God, when they follow the motions
and inclinations thereof.

As many as are led by the spirit of God, do give no consent to the motions of
the flesh, but they resist them and walk another way; for the motions and
inclinations of the Flesh, and of the Spirit, are contrary one to the other: As
many therefore as are led by the spirit of God, so many do by that spirit
mortify the deeds of the body; and therefore whereas the Apostle said verse
13. If ye through the spirit do mortify the deeds of the body; he says here,
As many as are led by the spirit of God, making these two phrases, viz. these,
Through the spirit to mortify the deeds of the body: and To be led by the
spirit of God, equipollent.

They are the sons of God] To wit, by Adoption, and so Heirs of Everlasting
life.

Ver. 15. For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear.] i e.
For ye (which have received the spirit of God or the spirit of Christ, have not
thereby received a Spirit which produces servile or slavish affections in you
( such as ye had at the giving of the Law) by reason of which ye were afraid to
appear before God, and by which ye were like slaves and bondmen or servants at
the best, which abide not for ever in their Masters house) John 8 35, etc.

He seems to speak here to the Jews in particular which lived at Rome.

He proves here in this verse, that they are the sons of God, first Negatively
by that, that they have not received a servile spirit, and so they are not
slaves and servants; then Affirmatively by that that they have received a
filial spirit which shows them to be children.

The spirit of Bondage.] That is, a spirit which makes you as slaves or as
servants in your affections.

This Genitive case, to wit, of bondage seems to be Genitivus Effecti.

The Apostle seems here to allude more especially to the affection of the Jews
with which they were affected at the giving of the Law, when Moses himself
feared and quaked exceedingly, Heb. 12.21. And when the people at the sight of
the thunders and lightnings, and the noise of the tempest, and the Mountain, on
which God stood, smoking; removed and stood a far off and said unto Moses;
speak thou unto us, and we will hear, but let not God speak unto us least we
die. Exodus 20. ver. 8, 9.

Read (for it seems to me to illustrate what is spoken in this, and the
following verses) what the Apostle writes, Heb. 12. ver. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22,
23, 24

To fear] I conceive as I said that the Apostle alludes here to that servile
fear whereby at the giving of the Law, the people drew away from the presence
of God, and stood farther off from him, as being afraid of him: To fear
therefore is to fear God after a servile manner and so to be afraid of him as
not to dare to approach to him.

But ye have received the spirit of Adoption] i. e. But ye have received a
Spirit which makes you like sons in your affections, and so not to be afraid
to draw nigh to God, or to appear in his sight (as slaves and Servants are
afraid to appear in the sight of their Lords and Masters) but to be bold
toward him, and to desire to appear before him as Children before their
parents.

The spirit of Adoption.] i. e. A spirit which works a son-like affection in
you toward God, and by which ye are adopted into the number of his Children.

This Genitive is Genitivus Effecti.

He says rather the spirit of adoption than the spirit of filiation or
sonship because he spoke of them before as slaves or servants and as having
the spirit of bondage, and such cannot be made natural sons but adoptive they
may: For though they were servants and slaves before, yet they may be made of
servants not only free, but stated also in the state or place of natural sons,
which kind of sons are called sons by adoption.

He alludes here to the custom of men, in adopting children.

This spirit of adoption which he here speaks of is no other than the spirit,
which he has so often spoke of in this chapter, to wit, the spirit of life and
of God and of Christ.

Whereby we cry Abba Father] q d. Whereby we are affected toward God as
Children are toward their Parents.

Note, here the Enallage of the Person, which he changes from the second to
^he first.

Children when they would have or ask any thing of their Father, they call him
by that relative name of Father which argues the natural love which they have
toward him, and the apprehension which they have of the natural (...) which he
has toward them.

To cry, Abba, Father is put therefore here per Metonymiam Effecti, for to be
sonlike affected toward God, and to apprehend him fatherly affected toward us.

We cry] To wit, to God.

He says, to cry, that is, to speak and call aloud to God, because loud
speaking in this case, argues confidence, whereas Low speaking, would argue
fear.

Abba] Abba is a Syriack word signifying as much as Father.

Father] This seems to be added, to explain the Syriack word, Abba, we have
the like, Mark 14. ver. 36.

Ver. 16. The spirit it self bears witness with our spirit that we are the
children of God] Some had rather read it thus, the spirit it self bears
witness to our spirit, etc than as it is here translated. For the compound
(...) is put sometimes for the simple (...). And the Vulgar translation renders
it testimonium reddit, I prefer the taking of (...) for the simple (...); And
follow their translation, who render it, The spirit it self bears witness to
our spirit, that we are the children of God rather than the other, viz. The
spirit it self bears witness with our spirit.

But now what is here meant, by the spirit, or what spirit is it which is said
here, to bear witness to our spirit.

Some say that by the spirit is here meant, the same spirit which he has so
often spoken of before, in this chapter. q d. The spirit it self which we have
received witnesses to our spirit that we are the children of God. And whereas
it is read commonly, (...), spiritus ipse, The spirit it self, some read it
(...), Idem spiritus, the same spirit.

If we take the spirit in this sense, to wit for the spirit so often spoken of
before in this Chapter, then the Apostle uses a Prosopopoeia here in speaking
of that spirit as of a Person.

The spirit to which the witness is given is our spirit, that is, our soul,
that is, the understanding or conscience of every one of us, or by a
Synechdoche, we our selves.

That which is witnessed to our soul, conscience, understanding or spirit, or
to us our selves, is, That we are the Children of God.

But how now, is, the spirit aforesaid, said to witness to our spirits that we
are the children of God.

Answ. It was said that the Apostle speaks of that spirit as of a Person by a
Prosopopoeia, though it is indeed but an habit or Quality in the soul;
Therefore we must not think, that it, gives testimony to us or to our spirits
as a true Person uses to do; but therefore is it said to bear witness to our
spirit that we are the sons of God, because it produces in us a love toward
God, and a Godly desire and inclination to approach near to him; which our
spirit taking notice of, or reflecting upon, from thence concludes that we are
Gods children.

But now others reading (...), the spirit it self and considering the Energy of
the words, and that they signify an Eminency in the Spirit which they speak
of, take them of the holy Ghost it self.

But then the Question will be, how the holy Ghost witnesses to our spirit,
That we are the children of God.

I answer, not by speaking to our spirit as it did to the spirit of the
Prophets, when it informed them of the will of God: But by those effects which
it produces in the soul, as sanctification and a loving and truly filial
affection toward God, flowing from thence, and the like, which the soul
perceiving and taking notice of, from thence, concludes, and persuades it self,
or us, that we are the children of God.

So that the manner of witnessing, is not much unlike, whether we take the
spirit for the holy Ghost or whether we take it for the spirit which is the
gift of the holy Ghost so often before mentioned.

Ver. 17. And if Children then heirs] Every child of man is not an heir: But
every child of God is an heir, an heir even of Heaven and life eternal.

An heir is he which has right to an Inheritance, and the Inheritance which
the children of God have right to, is not such an Inheritance in which the
children use to succeed their deceased parents, (as it is with men) but such an
inheritance, which they shall enjoy with their Father, and both children and
Father, live everlastingly to enjoy it.

Heirs of God and joynt-heirs with Christ] He explaineth here the meaning of
the word heirs: heirs we are of God as of our Father: And coheirs with Christ
as with our elder brother. And the Inheritance which we shall come to, by being
heirs of God and coheirs of Christ, is the kingdom of heaven and life
everlasting. So that they which mortify the deeds of the flesh, shall live
eternally, because they are Gods children.

If so be that we suffer with him] I conceive that something is to be
understood between these and the former words, as those or the like words; And
we shall undoubtedly enjoy and be made actual partakers of the Inheritance of
God and of Christ with Christ our elder Brother, q. d. And if Children then
heirs, heirs of God and Coheirs with Christ, and we shall undoubtedly enjoy
and be made actual partakers of the Inheritance of God and of Christ with
Christ our elder brother, if so be that we suffer the afflictions and crosses
of this world, patiently and courageously as he did.

That we suffer] Supple, afflictions and crosses patiently and courageously.

With him] That is, as he did. Note, that this Preposition, With is a note of
similitude here, and is as much, to say as, As.

That we may be also Glorified together.] Between this and the former words I
conceive that the Apostle leaves an Exhortation, to suffering, to be
understood, which he enforces with many Arguments following, q. d. And indeed
let us suffer the Afflictions and Crosses of this world patiently and
courageously as Christ suffered them, That as Christ is glorified for
suffering, so are also may be glorified together with him or as he is glorified.

That Christ was glorified for his suffering See Phil. 2. v. 8, 9.

Ver. 18. For I reckon that the sufferings of this present life, are not worthy
to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us] q. d. For I reckon
that those sufferings which we here suffer, in this present life, are no whit
to be compared either for Quality or Quantity, or for Duration, to the glory
which shall be revealed in us.

He brings an Argument here to persuade us to suffer with Christ, that we may
be glorified with him: And his Argument is brought from comparing our present
sufferings and future glory together, and pronouncing that our future glory,
will far excel our present sufferings.

I reckon] q. d. Upon comparing and weighing these two together, viz. Our
present sufferings, and future glory, I do rekon or account.

Of this present time] i. e. Of this present life, which we live in this world.

Which shall be revealed in us] i. e. Which shall be openly given or bestowed
upon us.

That is said in the Scripture phrase to be revealed which is done openly and
in the sight of all (as this shall be at the Day of Judgment) See Isa. 40.5.
and 2 These. 1.7.

Ver. 19. For the earnest ^xpectation of the Creature, waits for the
manifestation of the sons of God] i e. For the Creature with earnest
expectation waits for that, That the sons of God should be manifested, to be
the sons of God; or That the sons of God should be manifested that they are the
sons of God, to wit, by the glory which God shall confer upon them.

Note, that there is an Hypallage or Metonymie in these words, for for the
expectation of the Creature, is put for, for the Creature through expectation.

The Apostle proves here, that one day there shall be glory revealed in us;
and this he does, least any one should doubt of this, that there shall be such
glory revealed in us, as he spoke of ver. 18. Between this therefore and the
former verse, understand these or the like words, For there shall be glory
revealed in us. q. d. For there shall be glory revealed in us; For the earnest
expectation of the Creature, waits for the manifestation of the glory of the
sons of God: And this their expectation is not in vain, neither shall it be
frustrate.

The earnest expectation of the Creature] i. e. The Creature with earnest
expectation. Hypallage or Metonymia.

But it may be asked, what is meant by the Creature here.

I answer, that by the Creature is meant here, The whole Universe of irrational
Creatures, as it comprehends the Heavens, Elements, and such irrational and
corporeal Creatures, as are compounded and made of the Elements. But especially
the Elements, and the Creatures compounded thereof in comparison of which the
Heavens are not subject to vanity.

Being therefore, that by the Creature is here meant the Universe of irrational
Creatures, it is to be observed, that the Apostle uses a Prosopopoeia here,
and speaks of the irrational Creature, though it be irrational, as if it had
reason and understanding.

For the manifestation of the sons of God] i. e. For the time in which the
glory of the sons of God shall be openly conferred upon them, and by which they
shall be known to be the sons of God.

The word Manifestation is in the Greek (...), i. e. The Revelation, and is of
the same Original with (...) used in the foregoing verse, we may therefore
understand (...) from thence, i e. Of the glory, q d. for the earnest
expectation of the Creature, waits for the revelation or manifestation of the
glory of the sons of God

Ver. 20. For the Creature was made subject to vanity The Apostle gives a
reason in these, and the words following, why the earnest expectation of the
Creature waits for the manifestation of the Sons of God.

The creature was made subject to vanity] Man by his fall became a vain thing,
yea, as vanity it self. Hence the Psalmist says of man, That man in his best
estate is altogether vanity, Psalm 39.5.

By vanity therefore we may understand Man, since his fall, and especially
wicked men, which are most vain of all: being vain, as in other things, so in
their Imaginations, and conversation.

And the Apostle may use this word vanity in the abstract as he does the word
Corruption, ver. 21) of man, that he might the more abase man, to whom the
Creature is in subjection, and thereby make the subjection of the creature more
grievous, and the Creature more desirous to be freed of this subjection.

The Creature was made subject to vanity, that is, to man, yea to sinful, and
wicked men, in that God gave men though they were wicked, the use of all his
irrational creatures for God makes his sun to arise as well on the evil as
the good, and sends rain as well on the unjust, as on the just, Matthew. 5.45.
So that the very celestial bodies are by their influences subject to men in
some sort.

Not willingly] He speaks here of the irrational Creatures. as of a Person or
reasonble Creature by a Prosopopoeia.

And he says, that the irrational Creature was made subject to vanity, that
is, to Man after his fall, yea even to wicked men, not willingly, because, if
these irrational Creatures had reason, and understanding, and liberty of will,
they would not (if they could choose) be subject to such men

But why would they not be subject to such men?

Answ. Because they abuse them, for they abuse the light of the sun and of the
moon to their wicked doings, which they act by those lights, they abuse the
fruits of the earth to gluttony and drunkenness, yea they abuse all the
Creatures to some vice or other; by which means the Creatures are made
Instruments of Gods dishonor; who would, if they might choose, be Instruments
only of his praises; And by which the Creatures for a great part are corrupted
(being spent and perishing in the use of them) more than otherwise they would
be, whereas naturally they love their own Being and preservation.

But by reason of him, who has subjected the same in hope] i. e. But only
because God would have them to be subject to Man, and used by him, after his
fall, yea even by wicked men and they were willing to obey God therein, and be
subject to men, yea, wicked men because God would have it so: Who nevertheless
did subject them to men, yea wicked men, with a promise that he would one day
deliver them from that subjection, by reason of which promise, they are in hope
one day to be delivered, which shall be at the last Day, when God shall glorify
his children, and put them unto such a condition, as that they shall have no
more need of corruptible things, for whose sake the use of corruptible things,
are granted also even to the wicked.

By the Promise which I speak of, understand only the Decree and determination
of God to free the Creature. And therefore take it not for a promise properly
taken, but Metaphorically.

In hope] i. e. q. d. Who yet subjected the same in hope, Viz in hope that they
should be one day delivered from this miserable bondage of wicked men.

He uses a Prosopopoeia still.

Ver. 21. Because the Creature it self] q. d. I say in hope, because the
creature it self shall be delivered from the bondage of Corruption.

Or the word (...), which is here rendered because, may be taken (...) or
specifically to signify or point at the object of the said hope spoken of ver.
20. q. d. For the Creature wis made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by
reason of him, who subjected the same in hope, that the Creature it self also
shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, etc.

The Creature it self] i. e. The irrational Creature it self, etc. For what is
meant by the Creature, See ver. 19.

Also] That is as well as the Sons of God.

Shall be delivered from the bondage of Corruption] i e. Shall be freed and
delivered from the bondage of men, wicked men under which they groan.

Of Corruption] All men by Adams fall were made subject to death, and so mortal
and so corruptible But by corruption may be meant also, such as had by sin
corrupted their ways.

By corruption therefore he may mean here corruptible, yea and wicked men, and
put an abstract for a concrete, the more to set out the baseness of man, as I
said, ver. 20.

The vanity spoken of ver. 20. And the corruption spoken of here, are both
spoken of one, and the same thing, to wit, of Man, wickedman, as I have
hitherto interpreted them.

God will deliver the Creature from the bondage of corruption at the last day,
either by utterly annihilating it, or by putting it into a glorious and
incorruptible state or condition.

But if God will deliver the Creature, or any of the creatures from the bondage
of corruption by annihilating it, why should the Creature so much desire this,
or that day in which this shall be done?

Answ. Because if the Creature had reason and liberty of will, and might have
its own choice, it would choose rather not to be at all, than to be subject to
such base and unworthy usage as this is, with which wicked men abuse it: For
this is a miserable condition for the Creature, and it is better not to be,
than to be always miserable: For they that are in misery long for death, they
dig for it more than for hid treasures, they rejoice exceedingly, and are glad,
when they find the Grave. Job. 3. ver. 20, 21, 22 And because of the miseries
of this world: The Preacher praises the dead, which are already dead, more
than the living, which are yet alive, yea better is he (says he) than both
they, which has not yet been, who has not seen the evil work, that is done
under the Sun Ecclesiast. 4. ver. 2, 3.

Into the glorious liberty of the children of God] i. e. Then when the children
of God shall be freed from the misery and baseness, which they lie under by
reason of their bodies.

This he calls a glorious freedom, or liberty, because the children of God
shall not only be freed from the misery and baseness under which they lie, or,
to which they are subject, but be endowed with an exceeding weight of Glory.

Into] The Greek word is (...) which signifies here, not the intrinsecal term
of the mutation into which the creature should be changed, but the extrinsicall
term of time, when it shall be changed or delivered from the body of
Corruption. q. d. At the Glorious liberty, i. e. At the time of the glorious
Liberty of the Sons of God.

Ver. 22 For we know] i. e. For we (who have the knowledge of God, and of his
Truth) know.

The whole creation] The whole universe of the Creatures.

The word Creation is put by a Metonymy, here for the Creature. Yet know that
it is the same word, to wit, (...) here which is used ver. 19, 20, 21 And that
it might have been as well rendered Creature here as there.

Groaneth] A Metaphor from women groaning in their travaill, because of their
pain, and desiring to be delivered of it.

And travaileth in pain together] A Metaphor from women still, who in their
travail are in great pain, and desiring to be delivered of that pain. And then
desire shall not be frustrate.

He speaks here of the Creation or the irrational Creatures, as if they had
reason, and were every one a person, by a Prosopopoeia. And he says, They
groan and travail in pain, because that, that which they suffer from wicked
men, is grievious to them, that is, is such as if they had sense and feeling,
would prove grievious to them, and insufferable. as being contrary to their
nature, and the end of their Creation, and such as they would desire to be
delivered from: And intimates, that this their desire shall not be frustrate
being grounded upon Gods promise: that is upon Gods decree to deliver them

Together] This relates to the Members of the Creation, that is, to the
several Creatures of the world all of which groan and travail in pain.

The Apostle says indeed not, all the Creatures, but (...), the whole creation
groaneth together, and uses a noun of the Singular number; but yet because
this noun is Nomen collectivum (as the word world, and the word people is)
which contains many particulars of many kinds in it, the Apostle may say of
it (...), in relation to those several species of things, which it contains,
though he relates not to any other things.

Until now] i, e. To this very time, from the time, that man first sinned.

These words, For we know, that the whole crea^ion groaneth and travaileth in
pain together until now, may relate to those words of the 20. verse, For the
Creature was made subject to vanity not willingly, and be as a confirmation of
them. Or they may relate to those words of the 21 verse, The bondage of
Corruption, as proving that the Creature is under such a bondage by its
groaning, and so groaning as that it desires to be delivered from it.

I have taken the word vanity, ver. 20. and the word Corruption ver. 21.
hitherto for men, wicked men, or sinners, as some others have done before me.

But we may take the word vanity ver. 20, and the word Corruption, ver 21. for
mutability or a change to the worse, yea, a substantial change as well as
accidental.

To Vanity and Corruption this way taken, was the Creature, especially the
Sublunary Creatures, (which we must now either solely or chiefly understand
here by the Creatures) made subject, either wholly or in its parts, for the sin
of man; for as God cursed the earth for Man's sake, when he had eaten of the
forbidden fruit, Genesis 3.17. So no doubt did he the rest of the Elements and
Elementary compounds, by which they became more impure than they were before,
and more subject to corruption, and were more often corrupted (and that in a
baser manner) than otherwise they would have been. I say, than otherwise they
would have been; for though Man had never sinned, yet there would have been a
Corruption of the Elements in their parts, being that there would have been a
Generation of herbs and trees and other things.

But yet not such a corruption as has been since man's fall, since which the
earth brings forth such store of Thorns and Thistles, and such like weeds, and
the Air is pestered with so many unwholesome fogs, and vapors and the like,
etc. And the Corn is vexed with blasting mildews and the like; besides that,
that wicked men abuse these Creatures, and corrupt and wast them in their abuse.

If we take these words Vanity and Corruption in this sense, we must say that
the Apostle speaks of them as of Lords or Ladies by a Prosopopoeia; and
interpret this whole discourse from the nineteenth verse hitherto in Analogy to
the sense of those words so taken, which is easy to do by what I have already
said.

Which of those interpretations he will prefer before which, I leave to my
Reader.

Ver. 23. And not only they] Or, not only It, to wit, the whole Irrational
Creature or Creation.

But our selves also which have the first fruits of the Spirit] i. e. But we
men also (we, I mean, which have the first fruits of the Spirit) we I say,
groan within our selves, etc.

Which have the first fruits of the spirit] By this he describes Regenerate
men, who have all of them the first fruits of the Spirit of God, or of the holy
Ghost, but none of them the full harvest thereof here in this life: And
distinguishes them from those which are Irregenerate.

The first fruits of the spirit are opposed here, to the full harvest and that
abundance of the spirit, which we shall have in the world to come:

In saying the first fruits of the spirit, he alludes to the first fruits of
the Corn or the like used in the Law, of which we may read, Levit. 23.10. and
Deuteronomy. 26.2. which first fruits the People of Israel did offer by the command of
God, partly that they might acknowledge their thankfulness to God for the
fruits of the earth, Deuteronomy. 26. ver. 1, 2, 3, etc. But partly that the other
Corn or fruit might be thereby sanctified, Levit. 23.14. and Romans 11.16. As
therefore the Israelites by offering the first fruits to God were confident of
enjoying the rest of the Corn or Harvest in due time: So do Regenerate men out
of the sense and feeling which they have of the first fruits of the spirit
which they enjoy here in this world, conceive hope of enjoying the full measure
of the Spirit in Glory, in their due time, in the world to come.

Well does the Apostle here say, We which have the first fruits of the spirit,
and distinguishes himself and such as he from the Irregenerate: For they which
have none of the spirit nor any fruits thereof, they though they may groan for
pain, yet they cannot wait and hope for the Redemption of their bodies, at the
last day, for they have no grounds of any such hope.

Groan within our selves] That is, groan truly and in heart and not outwardly
and from the Lips as we use to say.

They groan as being sensible of the miseries and vexations which they are
subject to and which they suffer in their bodies; And as desiring to be
delivered from them. For where is great sense of miseries, there are groans.

Waiting for the Adoption] That is, looking and longing for our Adoption.

What he means by Adoption here, he declares in the next words when he says,
The Redemption of our bodies.

The word Adoption therefore is to be taken here by a Metonymie, for the full
effect or fruit or benefit of our Adoption, which is in part the Redemption of
our bodies, which we shall enjoy, at the last day.

The Redemption of our Bodies] 1. The Redemption or deliverance of our bodies
from miseries and vexations, to which they are subject, and which they suffer.

This our groaning within our selves and waiting for our Adoption, to wit, the
Redemption of our bodies, shall not be in vain: Wherefore we shall one day
attain to it.

Ver. 24. For we are saved by hope] q. d. For we are not yet completely saved
and completely happy (as having yet but the first fruits of the Spirit) but we
are only so in hope.

The word only as it is often elsewhere, so is it here to be understood.

He speaks here of complete and perfect salvation and which extends as well to
the body as to the soul, otherways we are said to be saved already, that is, to
be saved already (in part) Ephesians. 2.5. Titus 3.5.

But hope that is seen is not hope] q. d. Now the thing that was hoped for, if
it is enjoyed, it is not now hoped for.

Hope is to be taken here, by a Metonymie for the thing hoped for.

We hope only for things which we enjoy not, but are likely and desirous to
enjoy, for when we come to enjoy them, our hope for them, is turned into a
delight in them.

That is seen] i. e. That is, enjoyed.

What man s^eth] i. e. What a man enjoys.

Ver. 25. But if we hope for that which we see not] i. e. But yet if we hope
for that which we enjoy not, as I said we hoped for the salvation and
redemption of our Bodies, when I said we are saved by hope.

Then do we with patience wait for it] Supple, As being assured that we shall
one day enjoy it.

Ver. 26. Likewise the spirit also helps our Infirmities] This is a new
Argument to persuade to the suff^ri^g of Afflictions, and it is an Argument of
comfort preventing any one that should say, th^^ he was not able to bear the
burden of Afflictions, because of their weight. For if any one should say, yea
but for all this, I am weak, and am not abl^ to bear Afflictions, for they are
above my strength: The Apostle has here an answer ready saying; The spirit
helps our Infirmities and so makes the weight of our Afflictions light and
easy to be born, wherefore no man has reason to complain that Afflictions are
too heavy for him to bear.

The spirit helps our Infirmities in that it teaches us so to pray for aid
and assistance in our Afflictions in that manner as is pleasing to God (as will
appear by the words following.) And God will not fail to aid us and assist us,
upon our prayers, if we so pray.

The spirit] The Spirit is to be taken here, as it is taken, ver. 16.

Helps our Infirmities] i. e. Helps our Infirmities, whereby we shall be
able to bear all Afflictions manfully.

We may take Infirmities here by a Metonymie for us our selves which are Infirm
and not able of our selves to bear the burden of Afflictions.

That which is here helped, is, that which bears, not that which is born (as
some will have it) as will easily appear to him that weighs the words of the
Original.

The Apostle says here (according to our Translation) Likewise the spirit also
helps our Infirmities. Now a great question there is, why the Apostle says,
Likewise the spirit also helps our Infirmities when as it does not easily
appear, That he mentioned any thing before of the spirit like to this.

But to omit what is else said to this, we may say, That the Apostle when he
says, Likewise the spirit also helps our Infirmities, has an eye to what he
said, ver. 16, viz. to that, The spirit it self bears witness to our spirit
that we are the children of God, q. d. The spirit it self bears witness to
our spirit, That we are the children of God: And as the spirit it self bears
witness to our spirit, that we are the children of God, so likewise the spirit
also helps our Infirmities.

But that which is here rendered Likewise is in the Greek (...) which answering
to the Hebrew word jah had which signifies Praeterea as well as Pariter may be
rendered Praeterea too. So that this may be the English of these words (...).
Besides, the spirit (does not only witness to our Spirits that we are the
Children of God, but it) helps also our infirmities. And this interpretation
will take away the former question

For we know not what we should pray for as we ought] i. e. For indeed we know
not how to pray as we ought.

Although such is our blindness, as that we know not for the most part what is
expedient for us, and so we know not what to pray for as we ought; yet I
conceive (under correction) that the Apostle speaks here rather of the manner,
than of the matter of our prayers, q. d. For we know not how to pray as we
ought, and the knowledge which he here speaks of is not a Speculative but a
Practical knowledge; whereby a man actually does that which he is said to know,
so the prophet says, ye that know Righteousness, Isa. 51.7. Where they are
said to know Righteousness not so much which have the speculative knowledge of
it, as which practice it or exercise it

Where note that (...), what, is put here for (...), How. And so we, shall find
it also put Mark 24.24. in those words (...), Take heed what you hear; For
whereas S. Mark says there (...), take heed what you hear, S. Luke says
(...), Take heed how you hear, Luke 8.18. See also Romans 4.1.

They which would pray as they ought, must pray in faith, in sincerity, with
zeal, earnestness, and fervency of spirit, which no man can do without the
Spirit of God: But with that Spirit he may do it.

But the Spirit it self makes intercession for us] This is (as if he should
say) But the Spirit it self teaches us what, that is, how we stould pray as we
ought.

The Holy Ghost the third Person in the Trinity is not (if we speak properly)
our Advocate, or Intercessour, neither is he any were so called in the
Scripture, much less is any gift of the Holy Ghost, which is poured into our
hearts, such, yea, Christ is our only Mediator or Intercessour, 1 Timothy 2.5.

We must therefore take this which is here said of the Spirit or of the Holy
Ghost figuratively: I conceive therefore that the Apostle speaks of the Holy
Ghost here Metaphorically, alluding therein to a Teacher, which when he
teaches a thing, does the thing himself in the sight of his Scholar, that his
Scholar may learn from him what he would have him do, by seeing him his Master
or Teacher do it before him; so that while the Master acts or does such or
such a thing, he is said to teach it.

And according to this Metaphor when the spirit it self, is said here to make
intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered, it is, as if it
should be said of the Spirit, that it did teach us to pray practically for our
selves, with groanings which cannot be uttered.

The teaching of us to pray as we ought, with groanings which cannot ^e uttered
is in the truth and reality of the thing, or in plain terms, the enabling of us
so to pray: So when God enabled David to the battle, he said, He teaches my
hands to War, so that a Bow of Steel is broken by mine Arm, Psalm 18.34.

Before I leave these words, I cannot but give notice, that some say that the
Apostle in these words, Makes nitercession for us, uses an Hebraism, whereby
the Hebrew Conjugation Call is put for the Hebrew Conjunction Hiphil, to make
intercession, for, To make us to make intercession. q. d. But the Spirit it
self, makes us to make inte^cession for our selves, etc.

With groanings which cannot be uttered]

The Greek is, (...) which some render with groans even without words,
signifying thereby the earnest but inward affections of the heart.

Though the Jews thought no prayers available, but such as were formed into
vocal words and sounds; yet Christians know, that prayere conceived in the
heart, are available and acceptable to God.

But rendering the word (...) as our Translatours render it, which cannot be
uttered, the question will be, how these groanings are said to be unutterable?

Answ. They are said to be unutterable, because no man is able to express with
his tongue the manner of them, how they proceed from the Holy Ghost, and how
they are wrought in us, and work in us, nor with what fervency and devotion
they are joined, but only he that feels them.

Ver. 27. And h^ that searches the hearts]

This is an Attribute of God, often given to him in Scripture, and given him
here, to show, that though the groanings of the spirit were (...), that is, not
uttered by voice or external sound, but pent in in the Spirit, or not utterable
but ineffable, yet God understood them, heard them, and knew them well enough.

Knows what the mind of the Spirit is] i. e. Does know (and so know as that
he does approve of) that which the Spirit conceives and acts in the heart,
and therefore knows and approves of the gr^anings of the Spirit though they
are (...), not uttered, by voice or sound, nor utterable.

Note first, that the Apostle speaks here of the Spirit or Holy Ghost, as of a
man, by an Anthropopathia.

Secondly, that to know signifies here, not barely to know, but also to approve
and like of, yea to be affected with.

Thirdly, That the word (...) is to be taken here for the internal acts of the
heart, or whatsoever is acted there, and it extends and relates to those
(...) or unutterable groanings, which are spoken of v. 26. which are not
without the mind of the Spirit.

Because he makes intercession for the Saints] i. e. Because he makes
intercession for the Saints, and so teaches them to make intercession for
themselves.

For the Saints] By the Saints he means here those which are justified by
faith, for of such is his discourse from Chap. 5. v. 1. hitherto.

According to the will of God] And being that he makes intercession according
to the will of God, he obtains what he desires at the hands of God: and so
do they whom he teaches so to pray.

Ver. 28. And we know that all things work together for the good, of them which
love God] Now if all things work together for the good of them which love God,
then do afflictions also work together for their good, and so there is no
reason, why we should be afraid of afflictions, and shrink from under them.

This is another argument to persuade to the sufferance of afflictions.

Work together] i. e. Work all of them together (not together with them which
love God) but together among themselves for the good of them which love God

To them which love God] And such are all they which are justified by faith,
and which are by faith ingraffed into Jesus Christ.

To them who are called] i. e. To them which have been called or invited to the
grace or hope of the Gospel, by the preaching thereof, and have not only been
called or invited thereto, but have (by the grace of God) obeyed and accepted
the call, and invitation, and so believe.

This is the meaning of the word Called, in this, and most other places of the
New Testament: So that the word does not imply a bare calling, but such an
effectual calling, whereby they that are called do obey, or accept of the call,
and so believe.

And in this sense does our Apostle say, Ye see your calling, Brethren; how
that not many Wise after the flesh, not many Mighty, not many Noble are called,
1 Cor. 1.16.

Now to what they are called, is not here specified; but from other places we
may understand what it is, for Saint Paul says to the Thessalonians, That God
had called them to his Kingdom and Glory, 1 These. 2.12. And Saint Peter says,
God called us unto his Eternal Glory, 1 Pet. 5.10. This I call the grace or
hope of the Gospel, because it is therein contained, and thereby promised: And
so often as we are said by our Apostle to be called, we must understand, that
this is the object of our calling, except the circumstances of the place points
at another Object.

To this we are called by the preaching of the Gospel, and then we obey this
call, and accept of this invitation when we obey or believe the Gospel.

These words, To them who are called, are a connection of those v^z. To them
which love God, to show that God loved them, before they loved God.

According to his purpose] i. e. With a purpose to have them conformed to the
Image of his Son; or, according to the purpose which he had in himself, that
they which he called, should be conformed to the Image of his Son.

What the Object of this purpose of God was, is not here expressed, but may be
gathered from those words of the verse next following, He did predestinate to
be conformed to the Image of his Son.

Ver. 29. Whom he did foreknow] i. e. Whom he did determine with himself from
all Eternity to love, and so to love, as to call them effectually to the grace
and hope of the Gospel, and so to give them to believe, that they might be
justified by faith, and ingraffed into Christ.

Note, that to know, according to the Hebrew phrase or kind of speaking, is
often referred to the will and affections, and so signifies to love. Examples
of this are obvious, as Psalm 1.6. The Lord knows the way of the righteous,
that is, the Lord likes and approves and loves the way of the righteous. And
John 10.14. I am the good Shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of mine,
that is, I am the good Shepherd and love my sheep; and am beloved of mine. and
2 Timothy 2.19 The Lord knows them that are his, that is, the Lord loves those
which are his; and after this manner, to know is to be taken here, for to love;
and yet not to love in any kind, but so to love, as to call effectually to the
grace, or hope of the Gospel, etc. And that by a Synechdoche Generis, where
love in general, is put for a special kind of love.

Now as to know signifies to love; so to foreknow signifies to fore-love,
that is, to love a thing before it is, that is, to determine and resolve before
a thing is, to love it when it is.

The sense therefore of these word, Whom he did foreknow, is this, viz. Whom he
determined and resolved from all Eternity to love; when they should be in time,
and so to love as to call them effectually to the hope and grace of the Gospel,
so as that he would give them to believe, that they might be justified, etc.

This Preposition (...) in (...), and Fore in Foreknow when they are spoken of
God, intimate that to be from Eternity, which they speak of. And they answer to
to the Latin Preposition Prae.

Them also he did predestinate to be conformed to the Image of his Son] i. e.
Those he did also from Eternity in his purpose and resolution destinate and
appoint, to be conformed to the Image of his Son.

He did predestinate] The Greek is (...), from (...), definire, destinare,
statuere; and the Preposition (...) (as also Prae in predestinate) does
signify that what God did define, destinate and appoint, he did define,
destinate and appoint before all time. As the Preposition (...) in (...) did
show, that what God is said there to know, he knew from all Eternity.

This word Predestinate, does signify only the Act of Predestination, but who
it is, which does predestinate, and who they are which are predestined, and
to what: These things must be gathered from the circumstances of the place: He
therefore that does predestinate here is God, they which are predestined are
they whom he foreknew; That to which they are predestined is, to be conformed
to the Image of his Son.

To be conformed to the Image of his Son] That is, to be conformed like to the
Pattern, Copy, Example, or President, of his Son Christ Jesus, who is the
eternal Son of God.

To the image of his Son] By the Image is here meant a Pattern, Example, Copy,
or President to be followed or imitated. And therefore, because God would have
those, which he loves, to imitate his Son Christ Jesus, as their Pattern,
Example, Copy, or President, he says, not barely to be conformed to his Son,
but to be conformed to the Image of his Son.

In many things may we be conformed and made like to Christ, as in working
miracles, in glory, in sufferings, etc. but here he seems to speak only of our
conformity to him in sufferings and being afflicted. De cruce and rebus
adversis locus est Apostoli perspicuus. And again, De cruce loquitur in qua
Electos omnes ab aeterno voluit similes fieri filio suo unigeni into Jesu
Christo, says Zanchy, de Natura Dei, lib. 3. cap. 4 quaest. 8. page 247. id
est, The place of the Apostle Romans 8.29. is plainly concerning the cross and
adverse things. And again he speaks of the Cross, in which God would have all
those, which are elected from eternity to be made like unto his only begotten
Son Jesus Christ.

It is written, Christ ought to have suffered and so to have entered into his
Glory Luke 24.26. And as it was decreed of God, that Christ should enter into
his glory by sufferings. So was it decreed of God, that he that will be
Christ's, and partaker of his glory should deny himself take up his Cross and
follow him, as our Savior speaks, Matthew 16.24.

That he might be the first born among many brethren] i. e. that he might have
many suffering brethren, among whom he might be chief in sufferings.

The first born may be taken here for the Chief, or him that is Chief (in
allusion to that, that by the Law, the First born was chief among his brethren)
And so is the word taken Isaiah chap. 14.30. In those words, And the First born
of the poor shall feed.

And by Brethren he means such brethren as suffered as Christ suffered, which
he calls many, not to exclude any, but to show that they are not a few for
number.

By this, viz. That he might be the First born among many brethren, is
signified, that the Conformity here spoken of redounds to the glory of Christ:
For by that, there does acrue a certain dignity and Prerogative to Christ, in
that he should be the First born among many.

Yet these words (...), may carry this sense with them also, Viz. yet so as
that he shall be the first born amongst many brethren, that is, yet so, as that
he shall far exceed all, who are his Brethren in Sufferings.

Christ was the chief of all the Sons of God in suffering, because he was to be
the Pattern of all the rest, for suffering.

In this Verse, besides such as are contained in the verse next following,
there are diverse Arguments persuading to suffer affliction, couched. First in
that, That they which suffer are not otherwise dealt with, than God deals with
them, whom he foreknew. Secondly in that, That they are not otherwise dealt
with, than God deals with his own natural Son: Thirdly, in that, That they are
not so hardly dealt with, as concerning sufferings, as God dealt with his own
Son. For Christ Jesus did not only suffer, but suffer so as none the like;
hence he cries out, by reason of his sufferings Eli, Eli, Lamasabacthany, My
God, My God, why have thou forsaken me, Matthew. 28.46. And is it nothing to you
all ye that pass by? Behold and see, if there be any sorrow like unto my
sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day
of his fierce wrath, Lam. 1.12. For that also do the Fathers in a second sense
interpret of Christ, etc. See Bishop Andrews's sermon upon that Text, being his
Second Sermon of the Passion.

V. 30. Whom he did predestinate] To wit, to be conformed to the image of his
Son in sufferings.

Them also he called] To wit, to that, to which they were predestined, that
is, to be conformed, or to be made like to the image of his Son, that is, to
suffer, whereby they might be made conform, and like to Christ: Or, to put on
the image or likeness of Christ in suff^rings.

Hereunto are we called, to wit, to suffer says Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 2.21.
using the same word, which Saint Paul uses here, in the same sense; as he
does. And yourselves know, that we are appointed, to wit, to afflictions says
Saint Paul, in the like sense 1 These. 3.3.

And wh^m he called] q. d. But whom he called, to wit, to be conformed, or, to
be made like to the image of his Son, that is, to suffer, etc.

Them he also justified] i. e. Them (because they are accounted by the world,
as the Chief of sinners by reason of their sufferings; And because the world
thinks that their sufferings befall them by reason of some enormous wickedness
in them) will God justify and clear from the h^rd and unjust censure of the
world. And he will clear them from this, That he called them to suffer because
they were the worst of men.

And whom he justified.] To wit, from the hard and unjust censure of the world.

Them he also glorified] Them will he also glorify; And so glorify, that the
greater their afflictions and sufferings are here, the greater shall their
glory be, hereafter.

Our light afflictions, which are but for a moment work for us a far more
exceeding weight of Glory, says our Apostle, 2 Cor. 4.17.

Note, that he puts here a Praeterperfect tense for a future, to show, that
what he speaks of, shall as surely come to pass, as if it were already done.

Ver. 31. What shall we then say to these things?] i e. What shall I say more
(or what shall I add) to these things, which I have already said, that is, What
shall I say more in this case, q d. I need not say more, yet will I add what
follows in way of triumph.

If God be for us, who can be against us] i, e. Seeing; that God is for us, who
can be against us, to wit, so as to hurt us?

Note, that the Conjunction, If, is not put doubtingly here, but affirmingly,
and is as much to say as Seeing that.

Who can be against us] i. e. Who can be against us, so as to do us any hurt?
for otherwise the faithful have many Adversaries.

In these words, If God be for us, who can be against us. The Apostle seems
to allude to an Advocate in a Court of Justice, who faithfully pleads the
cause of his Client.

Ver. 32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all] i.
e. He that did not pity his own Son, for the love, which he bore to us, but
delivered him up to death, for the good of us all.

That spared not] God is said not to have spared his own Son, not because he
saw in him, that which was worthy to be punished, but because he delivered him
to death, though in himself most innocent, for our sakes.

His own Son] There is an Emphasis in these words, His own Son, for by these he
signifies not a common Son, as they are, which are his Sons by adoption, or,
which are called his Sons in Scripture, by reason of some Praerogative bestowed
upon them, but his Peculiar Son, which is his natural Son.

But delivered him up] God is said to have delivered his Son up, to wit, to
death, because he having decreed from all eternity, that he should die, for our
sins, did by his Providence so order it, that he should, and did die by the
hands of wicked men.

How shall he not freely with him give us all things] q. d. How can he stick to
give us (and that most freely and most liberally too) all things which we stand
in need of, or which may be any way beneficial to us, when he has given to us
his own Son, in comparison of whom, all things else are as nothing?

Ver. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect?] i. e. Who shall
accuse or lay to the charge of those, whom God has elected, and made choice of
to Justification, any crime whatsoever it be whether they have committed or not
committed it, so that thereby they shall be condemned for it?

Of Gods Elect] He seems to speak here of such, as are actually elected, not
such as are elected only in the decree and purpose of God; and the immediate
object of this election seems to me, to be Justification: For our Apostles
scope from the beginning of the fifth chapter hitherto, is to show the
Privileges and happiness of those which are justified by faith.

Note, that the words el^ct, and electon do not in themselves signify the
Object to which the Election tends, nor do they signify or specify the
Persons elected, what they are, nor the Author of the election who he is: These
things must be gathered from the circumstances of the place: When therefore the
Apostle treats here of such as are justified by faith, the Author of this
election is God; the Parties elected are Believers; the Object, or that to
which they are immediately elected, is Justification, See Chap. 11. ver. 5.

Three sorts of People we read of in this Epistle, which look and stand (as I
may say) for Justification: First, some Jews pretending the works of the Law.
Secondly, Other Jews, as they are the Sons of Abraham or Isra^lites by birth:
And thirdly, the faithful Believers: God may confer Justification upon every
one of these, or deny it to every one, if he pleases. But omitting the other
two, he makes choice only of the faithful believer, that he may justify him,
therefore may be well be called the Elect of God.

In those words Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect. The
Apostle alludes to the manner of Courts of Justice, and the pleadings and
impeachings there used.

It is God that justifieth] Supple, Them, that is, It is God which absolveth
them, from all which is laid to their charge, whether it be true or salfe.

That it is God, which justifies them, which believe, or those that are
justified by faith, the Apostle teaches Chap. 5. ver 2, 6. And being it is
God, which justifies them, or absolves them from all accusations, which are
laid against them, all the charges and accusations of their adversaries, can do
them no harm; For there is no power like to the power of God.

He speaks here of God as of a Judge, yea, as of supreme King and Judge,
alluding notwithstanding to Courts of Justice.

Ver. 34. Who is he that condemns?] i. e. Who is he that can condemn us
either by his Oratory, or, by the power, which he has with God the Judge of
All. That is, Who is he, which by the power, which he has with God, or by his
Oratory can prevail with God to condemn us?

He puts an indicative mood here after the Hebrew manner for a Potential, for
the Hebrews have no Potential mood.

He may be said to condemn by a Metonymy, who is any way the occasion of a man's
condemnation.

It often comes to pass among men, that where the bare charging of a man with
crimes has not been able to do him hurt, the Oratory of his Adversary, and the
power, which he has with the Judge, and his instant pressing and instigating
the Judge against him, have caused him to be condemned: But none of these
(says our Apostle) shall provoke or make God to condemn us.

It is Christ that died] To wit, for us, for these words are here also to be
understood, and borrowed from the latter part of the 31, and 32 verse.

Christ died for us: that is, for the abolishing, and taking away of our sins;
One drop of whose blood, was of infinite value, and therefore able to expiate
o^r sins, though never so great, and never so much aggravated by reason of
circumstances, and so able to free us from condemnation.

Yea rather that is risen again] To wit, for our Justification, and the
Remission of our sins.

This he adds because Christ's death had been little availeable to us, if he had
been overcome thereof, and always layen under it. See what we said on Chap. 4
ver. 25.

Who is at the right hand of God] These words signify the great power and
esteem that Christ, even as man, has with God; where we must not think that
God has any right hand, for that were to make God corporeal, which far be from
us to do. But the Apostle alludes by this to the manner of great Princes, who
reserving to themselves the chiefest and middle seat, do place those next to
them on their right hand, whom they make next in power and dignity to
themselves.

Who also makes intercession for us] We must not conceive of this intercession
of Christ after an earthly manner; for we must not think, that Christ does
supplicate and beseech his Father for us, with bended knees and lifted up
hands, as he did in the days of his Mortality and Humiliation: For the Father
suffers not his Son, being received up into glory, so to abase or humble
himself any more for our sakes. But because he appears in the presence of his
Father in that Body, in which he died and rose again for our sins (which
appearance is instead of an intercession, and which is as effectual or
efficacious as any v^call prayer, to reconcile his Father, and to make him
propitious to us) therefore (and that worthily too) is he said to make
intercession for us. And thus does the Apostle expound himself, when he says
Christ is entered into heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God for
us, Heb. 9. v. 24.

Ver. 35. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ, shall tribulation or
distress?]

The Apostle asks not what, but who? and answers, Shall tribulation or
distress? etc. speaking of tribulation and distress, etc. as of Persons endued
with Reason, by a Prosopopoeia, a Figure which our Apostle often uses.

Who shall separate us from the love of Christ] i. e. Who or what shall
separate us from the love wherewith Christ loves us, or rather, from the love
where with God loves us in Christ, or for Christ's sake, as the Apostle
expounds himself, v. 39.

So fickle and inconstant is the love of one man to another as that from him
whom he loves while he is in Prosperity, he withdraws his love in Adversity:
The Apostle therefore shows, that God is not like to man, in this, when he
says, Who shall separate us from the love of Christ.

From the love of Christ] That is, from the love wherewith Christ loved us, or
rather from the love wherewith God loves us for Christ's sake, for so the
Apostle does expound himself, v. 39. When he says Nothing shall be able to
separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord: The love of
Christ therefore is to be taken Metonymically, for the love caused by Christ:
And of Christ, is, Genitivus, not Objecti, or Subjecti, but Efficientis.

That we are not the Subject, but the Object of this love here spoken of, will
appear by v. 39. where it is said, In all those things we are more than
Conquerors, through him that loved us.

Shall tribulation or distress?] The words in the Greek are the same with those
Chap. 2. v. 9. Tribulation and Anguish.

Or Persecution] The word Persecution is to be taken here not actively, but
passively, not for the persecution with which we persecute others, but for the
persecution with which others persecute us.

Or Famine] i. e. Or want of food.

Or Nakedness] i. e. Or want of clothes.

Or Peril] Supple, by which we are in continual danger of our lives.

Or Sword] By the sword we may understand here the sword of the Civil
Magistrate, because many Christians were slain therewith in the Primitive
times, as James the brother of John, Acts 12.2. etc. And by the sword, the
slaughter wrought by the sword; by a Metonymie and Prosopopoeia.

Ver. 36. As it is written, for thy sake are we killed all the day long] q. d.
For this is our portion, according to that which is written of us, Psalm 44.32.
For thy sake are we killed all the day long.

These words are to be read with a Parenthesis, and the Apostle brings them
here, to show the Romans, that it is no new or strange thing, to hear that the
things which he here speaks of, should befall the faithful. And this he does
that they should not be dismayed at them, as when new and strange things
happen; to this sense is that of Saint Peter, Beloved, think it not strange
concerning the fiery trial which is to try you, as though some strange thing
happened unto you, etc. 1 Pet. 4.12.

As it is written] viz. Psalm 44.22.

For thy sake] i. e. For this, that we worship thee, and acknowledge thee to be
our God, and believe in thee.

We are killed] We which are thy people, are put to death, now one and then
another.

All the day long] That is, continually as Psalm 32.3. or evermore, as Psalm.
44.8. or daily day by day, as Psalm. 71. v. 8 and 15. Isa. 65.2

Look not here to the use of these words, as the English use them, but how the
Hebrews use them.

We are accounted as sheep to the slaughter] We are accounted no otherwise of,
than as sheep appointed to be slain.

The forty fourth Psalm out of which this Testimony is taken, is most probably
thought to have been composed by some holy man in the Babylonish Captivity,
when the Jews the people of God, were most cruelly afflicted: And the Apostle
brings this testimony here, out of that Psalm to show that Afflictions even to
death where no new things to Gods people. But though in the first and
Historical sense, they are spoken of the Jews, yet in a second and Prophetical
sense (in as much as the Jews, the then people of God, were as a Type of those,
whom God would afterward take to be his people, to wit, the b^lieving
Christians) they may be spoken of the faithful in Christ Jesus, and so used
here; And that will not seem strange or new, which was prophesied of so long
before: And being considered, as that which was prophesied of so long before, it
will somewhat ease the burden of Afflictions.

That which the Apostle here speaks, is chiefly to be understood of the
Primitive Christians which were indeed under continual Persecutions; though
where the enemies of Christian Religion do prevail, the true believer suffers
at all times, and often to blood too.

Ver. 37. Nay] i. e. No, none of these things shall separate us from the love
of Christ.

In all things we are more than Conquerours through him that loved us] i. e.
For in all these things, we are more than Conquerours through the Assistance
and Grace of God, who for the love which he has to us, will not withdraw
himself from us, but stand by us even then, when all these things befall us,
and assist us, and give us strength and grace, not only to overcome them, but
also to glory in them.

If God so loves us, as in the midst of our Afflictions to be with us and
assist us, so as to make us more than Conquerours therein, then cannot those
Afflictions here spoken of (or any else) separate us from the love of Christ.

In all these things] i. e. In all these things before rehearsed, viz.
Tribulation, distresses, etc.

We are more than Conquerours] We are Conquerours, in that we suffer these
things patiently; We are more than Conquerours in that we do not only suffer
these things patiently, but also glory in them, as Chap. 5. ver. 3.

This seems a Paradox to flesh and blood, that they which are oppressed and
slain should be accounted more than Conquerours: But though it may seem a
Paradox to them, yet it is no Paradox indeed, for we must not judge of these
conquests and victories, as men use to judge of conquests and victories,
proceeding from battles fought between earthly Powers; For then indeed the
oppressed and slain would be accounted as conquered, and the oppressor and
slayer the Conqueror; but we must judge of this Conquest and victory, by the
spiritual good or evil which we receive by our Enemies in this Conflict, so
that if we are made worse thereby, as to deny God or Christ, or to blaspheme,
or lie, or the like, we are to be accounted as conquered, though we escape
death: But we are to be accounted as Conquerours, if we are made better
thereby, or if our patience, and humility and meekness and confessing the name
of God is thereby increased, though we die for it. In a word we are
Conquerours, if our faith be not overcome but we hold still our faith and
affiance in Christ (notwithstanding all our sufferings) though our bodies be
torn, in pieces, or stoned, and we slain: And we shall be crowned as
Conquerours for this at the last day. And if we glory in this, we are more than
Conquerours and shall receive more than an ordinary Crown.

Through him that loved us] i. e. Through God, who though we are weak of our
selves, yet (because he loves us) gives us Grace and strength, whereby we do
more than conquer all these things.

Ver. 38. For I am perswaded] Wherefore I am persuaded.

For, is put here for, Wherefore as Chap. 6. ver. 19. And is not a Causal, but
an Illative. And that which the Apostle here infers, He infers from that, that
we are more then Conquerours in all things (spoken of verse 35.) through God
that loved us.

Neither death nor life] i. e. Neither death threatened and executed by a
Persecutour: nor yet life promised by him if we will forsake Christ.

Or, by death and life understand by a Metonymie whatsoever we shall suffer, or
whatsoever shall happen to us in our life or at our death.

He speaks of death and life and whatsoever is meant thereby as of a Person by
a Prosopopoeia.

The words Nor death nor life are used Proverbially, 2 Samuel 15.21. where Ittai
the Gittite answered King David and said as the Lord lives, and as the Lord my
King lives, surely in what place my Lord the King shall be, whether in death
or in life, even there also will thy servant be. And as they are there, so may
they be taken Proverbially here, and so may these which follow, Nor Angels, nor
Principalities nor Powers. And these, Nor things present nor things to come:
And these, Nor height, nor depth, by all which is signified, That nothing
whatsoever shall separate us from the love of God: And all these Proverbs may
he heap together, to show the fullness of persuasion which he has of the truth
of the thing which he speaks of.

Nor Angels, nor Principalities nor Powers] These names, if they are spoken of
good Spirits, are to be understood Hypothetically, that is, upon supposition,
that good Spirits would prove to be such, as would go about to afflict us or
torment us; And of such an Hypothesis or supposition we have an Example, Galat.
1. ver 8, 9. Otherways they must be understood of evil Spirits, for they are
called by the name of Angels, 1 Cor. 6.3 and 2 Pet. 2.4. And of Principalities
and Powers, Ephesians. 6. ver. 12.

As the more eminent Angels of Light are called Principalities and Powers,
Ephesians. 1.21. Coloss 1.16 So are the greater Angels in the Kingdom of Satan,
Ephesians. 6.12. And these are Metaphorical names borrowed from the Persian Rulers
under whom the Hebrews sometimes lived.

Nor principalities nor powers] These words Principalities and Powers are
abstract words, but are used for Concretes, that is, for such as are in, and
have any Principality or Power. And it is the use of all Eastern people, to use
abstract voices or words, for Concretes.

Nor things present nor things to come.] i. e. Nor those afflictions which are
all ready befaln us, or greater afflictions which are threatened to us, or,
which hang over our head.

Ver. 39 Nor height] Nor men in honor in the world, and in high places there.
Where note that an Abstract is put for a Concrete.

Some by height understand an high-place, as an high-tower or the like, from
which they were wont to fling down those whom they would kill as Malefactors.

Nor depth] i. e. Nor men of Low degree, and in low and base places, for even
such as are often cruel against the righteous: Where note that an Abstract is
put again for a Concrete. And that thus by height and depth, that is by men of
high and men of low degree, may be understood all men, of what degree soever.

Some by depth understand the Sea wherein they were wont to drown those which
were accounted Malefactors and were persons condemned to die.

Others by height, understand heaven, by depth, hell.

And by those, again, such as were in heaven and in hell, q. d. Nor can heaven,
nor hell, that is, nor can any in heaven or in hell (if they should set
themselves against us) be able to separate us, etc.

Nor any other Creature] i. e. Nor any other thing whatsoever.

From the Love of God] i. e. From the love which God shows us.

Which is in Christ Jesus] i. e. Which love he shows to, or toward us for
Christ Jesus our Lords sake.

The Preposition In, is taken here after the Hebrew manner for, For the sake
of; For the Hebrews take this Preposition In, for almost any Preposition
whatsoever.

CHAP. IX.
1. I Say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also bearing me witness
in the holy Ghost.

1. I have hitherto plainly and undeniably showed that Justification, is not by
works, but by faith: And I have declared the rich blessings and mercies which
God bestows on them which are Justified by faith, wherefore I say the truth
in the sight of Christ, my conscience also bearing me witness before the holy
Ghost, (who knows my heart and will require it of me, If I say false.

2. That I have great heaviness, and continual sorrow in my heart.

2. That I have great heaviness and continual sorrow in my heart.

3. For I could wish that my self were accursed from Christ, for my brethren my
kinsmen according to the flesh:

3. For my brethren the Jews, who are my kinsmen according to the flesh, for I
could wish, (if yet I might lawfully wish it) that I were accursed and
everlastingly separated from Christ for them.

4 Who are Israelites to whom pertains the adoption, and the glory, and the
covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the promises:

4. Who are (so great privileges and prerogatives have they above all people)
the children of Israel, (which was the friend of God) by true lineal descent of
blood; and to whom pertains the Adoption, by which they are made Sons of God;
And the glory, which appertains to them, which are Gods people; and the
Moral Law, which was given by Moses in Tables of Stone; And the Judicial Law,
which was given them, for the maintenance of Civil Society among themselves;
and the Ceremonial Law, which taught them the manner of Gods service and
worship: and all the promises contained in the books of the Old Testament.

5. Whose are the fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh, Christ came,
who is over all, God blessed for ever. Amen.

5. Whose are the Fathers (those Ancient Patriarchs Abraham, Isaac and Jacob)
and of whom Christ was born (as he was Man) even Christ, who is Lord over all,
and God as well as Man, yea God blessed for evemore. Amen.

6. Not as though the word of God has taken none effect. For they are not all
Israel which are of Israel:

6. But here before I can finish my sentence and speak out my mind (which I
will do, Chap. 10. ver. 1, 2, 3.) I must prevent an Objection, which here
arises. For whereas my Brethren the Jews know that I exclude them all from
Justification, which seek not after it by faith; They will be ready to tell me,
that whereas I said that the promises appertain to them, I make the promises of
God of none effect except I grant them to be justified, for among the promises
of God, there is a promise made to the Israelites (which they say they are)
that he will cleanse them from all their iniquity, and pardon all their sins,
Jer. 31. ver. 31, 34. Jer. 33.4. Micah 7.18.

But (for an answer to this) though I say, that the promises appertain to them,
and do acknowledge such a promise, as they make mention of, yet let no man
think, that I have so spoken, as that it may be gathered from my words; that
the promise of God is of none effect, because I will not grant them to be
justified, for though that prom^se of God be made to all Israel, and so to
them, upon condition; yet if we speak of that promise absolutely; All they
which are descended from Israel by lineal succession of blood, are not that
Israel, or those sons of Israel to whom that promise of Righteousness or
Justification does absolutely belong.

7. Neither because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all children: but in
Isaac shall thy seed be called.

7. For neither are they which are of Abraham upon that mere account, that they
are descended from Abraham by carnal Generation, to be accounted that seed, and
those children of Abraham, to whom the Spiritual promise of justification does
absolutely belong: For the seed or children of Abraham to whom the promise of
the Land of Canaan did appertain, were not that seed, or, those children of
Abraham which were in the loins of Ishmael (which yet came our of the loins of
Abraham) but that seed, or those chidren of Abraham which were in the loins of
Isaac, according to that which was said to Abraham by the Angel, Genesis 21.12.
But in Isaac shall thy seed be, to wit, that seed of thine which shall inherit
the Land of Canaan, which I have promised to thee, and to thy children.

8. That is, they which are the children of the flesh: these are no^ the
children of God: but the children of the promise are counted for the seed:

8. That is, according to the Mystical meaning of the words (for not the
literal but the Mystical sense, is that which makes for my purpose; and that
for which I allege these words) they which are the children of Abraham
according to the flesh (which children were typified in Ishmael) these are not
the children of Abraham, to which God promised that spiritual gift of
justification, which was typified by the Land of Canaan: But those spiritual
children which God promised to Abraham in a Mystical sense, Genes. 17.5. When
he said, I have made thee a Father of many Nations, that is, the faithful, or,
they which are of faith (whether they be Jews or whether they be Gentiles by
birth, and which were typified by Isaac, they and they only, are to be
accounted that seed of Abraham, to which the promise of justification does
absolutely belong.

9 For this is the word of promise, At this time will I come, and Sara shall
have a son.

9. I say which were typified by Isaac, for I^aac was a son of promise, that
is, Isaac was born to Abraham by virtue of Gods promise, whereby he, said by
his Angel to him, at this time the next year will I come unto thee; And then
Sara thy wife shall have a son, (whom thou shall call Isaac) Genesis 18.10. And
because Isaac was a son of promise, or because he was born of Abraham's body by
virtue of Gods promise made to Abraham his Father: He was a type of that
spiritual seed, to wit, the faithful, which God also promised to the same
Abraham, and which are called the children of promise.

10 And not only this, but when Rebecca also had conceived by one, even by our
father Isaac,

10 But some will perchance object and say. But grant that the promise of
justification does not absolutely apper^ain unto the children of Israel
according to the flesh, and that they are not justified by reason of their
carnal descent from Israel: yet surely they shall be j^stified as they are
under the Law, and seek justification by works. But to this I answer; As the
children of Israel according to the flesh, shall not be justifi^d for this,
that they are children of Israel according to the flesh; so shall they not be
justified neither, for th^s, that they seek Justification by works. For when
Rebecca her self had conceived by one, even by our father Isaac, and had two
twins in her womb, it was even then said unto her, that Esau the El er (who was
a type of the Isra^li^es according to the flesh) should serve Jacob the
younger, who was a type of the faithful, and ^uch as should believe. And in
that this was said unto her, concerni^g Esau at that time when she had
conceived, It is an argument to prove, that the Israelites according to the
flesh, should not be justified, for or by their works.

11. (For the children being not yet born, neither having done any good or
evil, that the purpose of God according to election might stand, not of works,
but of him that calls.)

11. For therefore did God say to Rebecca concerning Esau (who as, I said, was
a type of the Isra^lites according to the fl^s^) the Elder shall serve the
younger, at that time when she had conceived, and when the children of which
she conceived, were not yet born, neither had done either good o^ evil, to
signify in a type, or in a myst^ry, that his purpose concern^ng the E^^ction
of men to just fication, was and should immutably be, to elect them thereunto,
whom he would elect, not for their works sake, but for his own mercies sake,
who calls us to the grace and promises of the Gospel, by the preaching
thereof, that we might believe, and believing might be justified.

12 It was said unto her, The elder shall serve the younger.

Ver. 12. And with that which was said to Rebecca when she had conceived
concerning Esau and Jacob, to wit, the elder shall serve the younger, Accords
that,

13. As it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated.

13. Which was afterward written, Malacht 1.2, 3. Jacob have I loved, but Esau
have I hated, if we look into the Mystical meaning of the words.

14 What shall we say then? Is there unrigteousness with God? God forbid.

14. But now because I have said, that they which are the children of Abraham
according to the flesh, they as such are not those children of Abraham to which
God has made the promise of justification; absolutely, no not though they seek
justification by works, but that spiritual seed, to wit, the faithful which God
promised to Abraham, they whether they be Jews or whether they be Gentiles,
they I say and they only are the children or seed of Abraham, whom God has
absolutely promised, that he will justify: Some will conclude from hence, that
if this be so, then shall I make God to be unjust; for by this he w^ll have no
account at all of the pure and holy seed of Abraham which are flesh of his
flesh, and bone of his bone, though they seek justification by works, if they
believe not: and will prefer before them in the matter of justification, the
unclean and unholy seed of the Gentiles, if they do but believe.

But what if God does prefer the Gentiles, if they believe, before the Jews who
are children of Abraham according to the flesh, and seek justific^tion by works
in the matter of justification, if hey bel^eve not? and accepts of them, and
rejects these? Is there therefore unrighteousness with God, for so doing? God
forbid.

15. For he says to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I
will have compassion on whom I will have compassion.

15. There is no unrighteousness in God, if he accepts them to j^st fication
who believe, no, though they be Gentiles; for the Lord said unto Mo es (against
whose words ye cannot except) when the people of Israel made a Calf and
committed Idolatry, and had therefore deserved to be destroyed all of them; I
will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I
have a mind to have compassion, Exodus 33.19.

16 So then it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God
that shows mercy.

16. Where by the way, take ye notice of this (O ye Jews, which go about to
establish your own way of Justification, but have not submitted to that way of
Justification, which God has prescribed) that to attain to Justification, is
not of him which wills, or inventeth, or chooses to himself a way of
Justification, nor to him, who travelleth or runs in that way, which he will
and he has invented and chosen, and is zealous therein: but it is of God, who
shows mercy, to whom he pleases, and justifies whom he will.

17. For the Scripture says unto Pharaoh, Even for this same purpose have I
raised thee up, that I might show my power in thee, and that my Name might be
declared throughout all the earth.

17. But to return to the matter in hand; as there is no unrighteousness in
God, if he accepts of them to Justification, who believe, no though they be
Gentiles: So there is no unrighteousness in him, if he rejects them from
Justification, which will not believe, no, though they be Jews lineally
descended from Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, according to the flesh, and seek
Justification by works. For whereas God might have justly dealt with others, as
he did with Pharaoh, and have destroyed them with as great a destruction, as he
did him; yet he did not so, but said of Pharaoh Exodus 9, 16.

Even for this same purpose have I hardened thine heart, and so stirred and
raised thee up against my people, that I might show my power in thee, and that
my name might be declared throughout all the earth, by thy destruction:

18. Therefore has he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will, he
hardneth,

18. Therefore he shows mercy to whom he will show mercy, without violation
of of his justice: and whom he will harden, he justly hardens.

19. Thou will say then unto me; Why does he yet find fault? For who has
resisted his will?

19. But thou will say unto me, O Jew, that if he hardens whom he will, why
does he yet find fault with us Jews, for the hardness of our heart? for who
has resisted his will, so that he is not hardened, if He whill harden him.

20. Nay, but O man, who art thou, that reply against God? shall the thing
formed say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus.

20. Nay, but (that I may reply) O man, who art thou that reply against God,
and choppest Logic with him? Shall the thing formed, if it likes not its shape
say to him which formed it, Why have thou made me thus?

21, Has not the potter power over the clay, of the same lump to make one
vessel unto honor, and another unto dishonor.

21. Has not the Potter power of the clay (out of which he makes his pots and
dishes) of the same lump of clay, to make one pot or dish for an honorable
use, to wit, to hold wine or meat for the Table, or the like? And another to
abase and dishonorable use; as to receive the excrements of the belly, or the
urine, or the like? Now then if the potter have this power over the clay; Much
more, has God power over the mass of sinful men, who are all sinners, and
none of them deserve to be justified. to make one as a vessel of Honor by
justifying him; and another as a vessel of dishonor, by hardening him.

22. What if God willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known endur^d
with much long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction.

22. But what if God willing to show his anger, and to make his power known in
their destruction, has hardened (by enduring them with a great deal of patience
and long suffering) the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction; I mean those,
who do not obey or believe the the truth, but obey unrighteousness or believe a
falsehood whose portion is indignation and wrath? What, I say, if God has
hardened them? what unrighteousness can thou find in God for so doing?

23. And that he might make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of
mercy, which he had before prepared unto glory?

23. And what if God, that he might make known the abundance of his goodness on
the vessels of mercy, whom he decreed from all aeternity to fit and prepare for
Glory by justifying them; has justified them and so fitted and prepared them
for Glory, as he has decreed? What unrighteousness is there in God for this?

24. Even us whom he has called, not only of the Jews, but also of the
Gentiles.

24. Which vessels of mercy we are, Whom God has effectually called to the
grace of the Gospel, so that we do truly believe; We, I say, not of the Jews
only, but also of the Gentiles.

25. As he says also in Osee, I will call them my people, which were not my
people: and her beloved, which was not beloved.

25. For whatsoever some persuade themselves to the contrary, God has
effectually called the Gentiles, and foretold long ago, that he would make them
his people, as he says in Osee Osee 1.23. speaking of them, I will make them
my people, which are not my people, and her beloved, which was not beloved.

26. And it shall come to pass, that in the place where it was said unto them,
ye are not my people: there shall they be called the children of the living God.

26. And ( ver. 10) It shall come to pass that in the place, were it was said
unto them; ye are not my people, there shall they be called, the Children of
the living God.

27. Esaias also cries concerning Israel, Though the number of the children of
Israel be as the sand of the Sea, a remnant shall be saved.

27. But as for the Jews, Esaias (which pierces my heart for grief to think
of) cries concerning them Chap. 10 ver. 22.. Though the number of the children
of Israel, be as the sand of the Sea, for multitude, yet a very few of them,
and a remnant only shall be saved from their sins.

28. For he will finish the work, and cut it short in righteousness: because a
short work will the Lord make upon the earth.

28. For the Lord will finish the work, which he intends with them, and will
cut it short in rigor, yea a short work will the Lord make with them, upon the
earth.

29. And as Esaias said before, Except the Lord of sabbath had left us a seed,
we had been as Sodoma, and been made like unto Gomorrah.

29. And ( Esaias also said before he said this, to wit, Chap. 1. ver. 9.)
Except the Lord of hosts had left us a seed (which is but little in respect of
the whole harvest) we the people of Israel, had been as Sodom was, utterly
consumed, and we had been made like unto Gommorrah, an utter desolation.

30. What shall we say then? That the Gentiles, which followed not after
righteousness, have attained to righteousness, even the righteousness, which is
of faith.

30. What shall we say then or what shall we collect out of these Scriptures?
we collect this, to wit, That the Gentiles, which followed not after
Justification in fore time, have now attained to Justification, if you ask what
Justification? I answer even the Justification, which is of Faith.

31. But Israel which followed after the law of righteousness, has not
attained to the law of righteousness.

31. But the Jews, which followed and sought after Justification all this
while, have not attained to Justification.

32. Wherefore? because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by the
works of the law: for they stumbled, at that stumbling stone,

32. And wherefore have they not attained to it? because they sought it not by
faith, but by the works of the Law. And therefore sought they it nor by faith,
because they stumbled at the stumbling block, that is, they were offended at
Christ, and believed not in him, who is the object of our belief, for Christ
was a stumdling block to the Jews,

33. As it is written, behold, I lay in Sion a stumbling stone, and rock of
offense: and whosoever believes on him shall not be ashamed.

33. As it is written of him, Isaiah 28.16. Behold I lay in Sion a stumbling
block, and rock of offense; yet notwithstanding that, that he was a stumbling
block to the Jews (for a great part of them) whosoever believes and relies on
him for Justification: shall not be dispointed of it.

CHAP. IX.
Ver. 1. I say the truth in Christ, etc.] The Apostle having showed in the
beginning of this Epistle; That Justification is not to be attained by works,
but by faith only, and having set out from the beginning of the fifth Chapter
hitherto, the great benefits, and happiness, which accrue to them, which are
justified by faith; breaks out here into a Patheticall expression of exceeding
great grief, which he has for his brethren and Kinsmen the Jews, to think,
that their is no way to attain to Justification but by Faith, and that yet they
have not submitted themselves to this way, nor will embrace it And he shows
this his exceeding great grief, that he might thereby induce the Jews to
consider how miserable and deplorable their condition is, that they might at
length turn into the true and right way of Justification In a like case Saint
Augustine says to Donatus, that he might win him to the truth, Si posses
videre dolorem cordis mei and sollicitudinem pro solute tua, fortassis
miseriaris animae tuae, placens Deo in audiendo verbo, non nostro sed ipsius,
Tom. 2. Epist. 204. in initio. If thou could but see (says he) the grief of
mine heart, and my ca^e or pensiveness for thy salvation, thou would happily
have pity upon thine own soul, pleasing God by hearkening not to our, but to
his word.

I say the truth in Christ] i. e. I speak nothing, but that which is true.
Christ is my witness.

In Christ] i. e. By Christ, or before Christ, who hears me and will require
it of me, if I speak any thing but truth.

The Praeposition, In, the Apostle makes answerable to the Hebrew Praefix Beth
and Beth is sometimes used in swearing, as Gen 22.16. Josh 2.12. etc. And hence
this Preposition, In, is used sometimes in swearing also.

My Conscience also bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost] i e. My Conscience
also as well as my word, or saying, bearing me witness, By the holy Ghost.

Or we may say that the word (...), bearing witness also, is put for the simple
(...) bearing witness, as (...) is taken for (...) Cap. 8.16

In the holy Ghost] In the holy Ghost is put here for By the Holy Ghost, as
before, In Christ, for by Christ.

He swears by the Holy Ghost, when he mentions his Conscience, and so
calls him or that to witness, what is done there; Because it is the
Appropriate office of the Holy Ghost, as to plant truth and sincerity in the
heart contrary to deceit and hypocrisy; so to be privy to the secrets and to
take notice of the motions of the heart: Hence when Ananias had denied, that he
had sold his possession, for what he had sold it for, Peter tells him, that he
did lie to the Holy Ghost: Act. 5.3.

Ver 2. That I have great heaviness and continual sorrow in my heart] To wit,
for my Brethren the Jews.

He grieveth thus for the Jews, because that they being ignorant of Gods
Righteousness and going about to establish their own righteousness and
zealously and eagerly running after that, they did not submit themselves to the
Righteousness of God (as he speaks Cap. 10.3.) By reason of which they were in
a desperate condition, and such as could not be saved so long as they so
continued.

This, I say, is the cause of the Apostles grief here, yet he expresses it not
here but leaves his speech unperfect as to this, until he comes to the first
verse of the 10 Chapter (and that by reason of an Objection, which he prevents
ver. 6. and another ver. 14. and yet another ver. 19) and there he resumes, or
takes up (though in other terms) what he left here unperfect, and yet there he
brings it in so, as that it may seem to depend upon the latter part of this
Chapter. Thus (that this, which I here say may not seem strange) does the
Apostle leave what he had in hand Chap. 5. v. 13. unperfect by reason of
emergent objections, which he prevents in the mean time, till he comes to the
18. verse of that chapter, where he resumes in other words and perfects that
which he left there imperfect, and brings it in so, as that it has dependence
on that, which went immediately before.

Ver. 3. For I could wish that my self were accursed from Christ, for my
Brethren, my Kinsmen according to the flesh, etc.] That which he says, he
could wish here to befall himself for his Brethren, must be understood with
this supposition, to wit, If it were lawful for him so to wish, and if it were
possible so to be done.

I could wish that my self were accursed from Christ] i. e. To be accursed from
Christ, signifies here to be separated from him, and to be destined to death,
yea eternal death.

The words in the Original are (...), that is, To be an (...). Now an (...) in
holy writ, signifies, that which is to be separated from the use of men, not
as an holy thing, but as a thing execrable and to be abominated, and so to be
utterly destroyed, in which sense Jericho was to be an (...), Josh. 6.17.

And to this the Apostle here alludes: But being the Apostle says, That he
could wish himself accursed from Christ, it is to be understood, that he could
wish himself not only to be wholly rid out of this life, but to be destined
also to everlasting destruction for the Jews sake, that he might save them.

It is taught by some that when a son of Israel would express his Brotherly
kindness toward any one of, or toward all the children of his people) he
entitled himself by a kind of devotion to all the mischance, and evil that
should befall his Brother, wishing the whole patience or suffering thereof to
fall upon his own head; And that, not without reference or allusion to this
form of devotion, is the Apostles wish here, that he might discharge the
unhappy condition of his Brethren all upon himself, when he says, (...). I
could wish my self, an Anathema from Christ, for my Brethren

Note, that this wish of the Apostle here includes a Tacit limitation or
condition, as I said before, to wit, if it were lawful; And so that dispute
which many raise here whether this wish of the Apostle be lawful or unlawful,
comes to nothing.

That my self] These words have their Emphasis, and are as if he should say, I
who am compelled to pronounce such hard things of my Brethren as I do, even I
my self, could wish that my self were accursed from Christ, etc.

For my Brethren] That is, for the Jews sake, who are my Brethren, that is, my
kinsmen according to the flesh; to wit, that they may be saved by my
destruction or by my being an (...), For them.

By his brethren he means the Jews, here, and these he calls his brethren in a
large sense (after the manner of the Hebrews who call all them brethren, who
are descended from one common Father, though by many descents:) because he and
they came all out of the loins of one man Abraham or Isaac or Jacob, who was
also called Israel.

My kinsmen according to the flesh] q. d. That is, My kinsmen according to
blood.

He expounds the word brethren here, and declares what he meant by it; He meant
such as are of the same blood or the same kin or stock with himself.

According to the flesh] That is, As we use to say, by blood.

He seems by these words tacitly to oppose the kindred which is by blood, to
the Spiritual kindred which is by faith, by which all the faithful of all
Nations are of one kin and brethren after a Spiritual manner.

Ver. 4. Who are Israelites] That is, who are descended from Isrrel, That is,
from Jacob and are his children, which Jacob or Israel was a man beloved of
God, and who had this name Israel given him, in way of honor, by God himself,
Genes. 32.28.

The Apostle sets out here in this and the next verse, the honor privileges
and Pre-eminences of these, which he called his brethren and Kinsmen according
to the flesh; To signify, that he had cause enough thus to grieve as he does,
when he considered, that they which were so near allied to him, and which had
such honor privileges and preeminences from God, should be at last cast off,
and be rej^cted by him, and left in such an estate, (through their own faults)
as is accompanied or attended with eternal damnation.

To whom pertains the Adoption] He speaks not here of that Adoption which he
spoke of in the former chapter, by which they that are adopted are made heirs
of everlasting Glory; that Adoption belongs to Christians, such as are
justified by faith, not to natural Jews: But he speaks here of that Adoption
whereby God passing by all other people made choice of the Jews or Israelites
to be to him a peculiar people or Treasure above all people else, by reason of
which he cherished them and used them as sons and b^stowed many blessings upon
them: For Israel is my son even my firstborn says the Lord, Exodus, 4.22. And
again, I am a father to Israel, Jer. 31.9.

And the Glory] The Ark of the Covenant is called the Glory, 1 Samuel 4.21, 22.
by a Metonymie, because it was a token of the presence of the Glorious God, who
sat thereupon, and gave his Oracles from it: And therefore many think that the
Apostle means the Ark of God, when he says, the Glory.

But others, By the Glory, understand the glory which accrued to the people of
Israel by that, That they were chosen by God to be a peculiar people to him,
and to be his sons which was indeed a great glory to them, and by reason of
which God did many glorious things for them and among them: For since thou have
been precious in my sight thou have been honorable says the Lord to the
people of the Jews, Isaiah 43.4.

And the Covenants] By the Covenants is meant the Moral Law written in two
Tables of stone by reason of which writing those Tables were called also the
tables of the Covenant, Deuteronomy. 9.11.

That Law was called the Covenant, because God made a covenant with the people
of Israel concerning keeping of that: and that was the matter and subject of
the Covenant, as it was to be performed on Isreal's part.

The word in the Greek is (...), A word of the Plural number, which is here
rendered Covenants, but it might be as well rendered the Covenant in the Singular
number: for (...) though it be it self a word of the Plural number, yet it is
often put to signify one single Testament, (And the Covenant and Testament is
all one in the Apostles sense here) See Budaeus in his Commentary, page 507.
and H Steph. in his Thesaurus in the word (...).

Yet some say that the Apostle uses a word of the plural number here, viz.
(...), Covenants, because there were two Tables of the Covenant, though the
Covenant it self were but One.

And the giving of the Law] By the giving of the Law, understand, The Law which
was given, to wit, to the Israelites by God: by a Metonymie.

And by that, understand again the Judicial Law, per Synechdochen Generis, that
is, that Law which was given to the people of Israel for maintenance of Civil
Society among them.

And the service of God] By the service of God understand here the Ceremonial
Law, which prescribed the manner of Gods Service, or how he would be served and
worshipped; by a Metonymie.

And the promises] To wit, All the promises contained in the Old Testament,
that is, all the promises contained both in the books of the Law and of the
Prophets.

Ver. 5. Whose are the Fathers] That is, whose Progenitors were Abraham, and
Isaac, and Jacob, Those most honorable Persons and friends of God.

The Scripture uses to call those Holy Patriarks, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
The Fathers, per Antonomasiam.

And of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came] Christ came of the Israelites
as concerning the flesh, That is, As he was Man, in that he took his flesh,
that is, his body of the Virgin Mary, who was of the stock of Israel.

This was a Glory to the Israelites, that the Messiah was born of them, And
therefore Simeon calls Christ the Glory of the people Israel, Luke 2.32.

Who is over all] i. e. Which Christ is over all things and all men, as their
King and Lord.

The Apostle, in this latter part of the verse, sets out the dignity of Christ's
Person, the more to set out the Honor, preeminencies and Privileges which the
Jews had.

God blessed for ever Amen] See chap. 1. ver. 25.

Ver. 6. Not as though the word of God had taken none effect] Here the Apostle
should have given the reason why he was so grieved for the Jews, but he gives
it not by reason of this Obj^ction which he prevents; but by reason of this and
other Objections, He defers it to, Chap. 10. ver. 1. as I said before.

Not as though the word of God had taken none effect] q. d. But when I say
theirs are the promises (though I know, that they have not attained to
Righteousness, or Justification, but are yet in their sins, unpardoned, and
unjustified) I do not make the promise, which God made of pardoning the sins of
the Israelites, and remembering their iniquities, no more, a void promise, and a
Promise of none effect, or a Promise in which God is not as good as his word,
etc.

For the understanding of this place know, That among the many Promises which
were made to the People of Israel in the old Testament, there were some
concerning the Remission of sins, that is, concerning Justification, for the
Lord says Jer. 31. ver. 31, 34. Behold the days come, says the Lord, that I
will make a New Covenant with the House of Israel, and with the House of Judah,
etc. For I will forgive their iniquity and remember their sin no more And
Jerem. 33. v 4. and 8 Thus says the Lord, the Lord the God of Israel, I will
cleanse them from all their iniquities whereby they have sinnned against me,
and I will pardon all their iniquities, whereby they have sinned against me,
and trespass against me. And Micah 7.18. Who is a God like thee, that
pardons iniqaity, and passes by the transgression of the remnant of his
heritage?

Now God having made this gracious promise to the Israelites of their
Justification, a Jew might object against Paul and say, Paul, Thou accountest
of us Jews, as of men far from Righteousness, that is* as of men far from
Justification and Remission of sins; yet thou say that ours are the
promises; If therefore we are far from Righteousness or Justification, that is,
if we are far from Remission of sins* and yet (thou say) the Promises are
ours, Then must thou say, that the word of God has taken none effect, that is,
That the Promise of God made to Israel concerning Remission of sins, that is,
concerning Justification, is a void promise, and that God is not in that his
promise as good as his word, for God has promised to remit the sins of Israel.

This objection the Apostle here preventeth, when he says, Not as though the
word of God has taken none ^ffect.

The word of God] That is, The promise of God, to wit, Of pardoning the sins of
the Israelites.

The word of God is often put by a Synechdoche Generis, for the promise of God,
as Psalm. 12.6. The words of the Lord are pure words, etc. Isaiah 4.8. The word
of the Lord shall be for ever, etc.

Has taken none effect] i. e. Is a void word; or an empty word, without
performance.

For they are not all Israel which are of Israel] For all they which are born
of Israel (and so are called Israel or Israelites by reason of their natural
descent from him) are not that Israel, or, those Israelites, to which the
Promise of Remission of sins, that is, of Justification does absolutely and
immediately belong.

He gives a reason here, why the word of God has taken none effect, That is,
why the word of God is true, notwithstanding that the Jews are far from
Righteousness or Justification.

Note here that this Promise of Remission of sins or Justification was made to
all the Sons of Israel, that is to all the Israelites conditionally, that is,
upon this condition if they would believe in Christ; for the promise is to you
and to your children says Saint Peter to the Jews Acts 2.32. But the absolute
and immediate promise of Remission of sins, that is, of Justification
appertains only to Believers that is to such as believe in Christ, which are
Israelites in that, that they imitate the Faith of Israel, and so it
appertains not to unbelieving Jews, though they are Israelites in that, that
they descend by true natural Propagation from the Patriarch Jacob who was
called also Israel.

Now our Apostle when he says, Not as though the word of God has taken none
effect, He speaks of the word of God, that is, of the promise of God
concerning Justification or Remission of sin, as it is an absolute and
immediate promise: and so it belongs only to the faithful, which are the
spiritual Israel, though while it was conditional it belonged even to the
Israelites, which was or is Israel after the flesh.

They are not all Israel] i. e. They are not all, those Israelites, or that
People, or those Sons of Israel, to wit, to whom the absolute and immediate
promise of Remisssion of sins that is, of Justification does belong.

Israel, is put here for the Israelites, the Father for the Children, per
metonymiam efficientis.

Of Israel] Israel is taken here in the second place, for the Patriarch Jacob
himself, who was also called Israel.

It is our Apostles manner (as we have observed before) to teach truths, and
confute errors by raising objections, and answering them, and this has he done
especially in this Epistle. Now because many of the Jews were conceited; that
it was enough for them, that they should be justified from all their sins
(whereas the Gentiles should be damned for theirs) that they were of the stock
of Abraham, or Abraham's children according to the Flesh: the Apostle confutes
this their error, taking occasion from an Objection, which he here makes by
the by, and answers, I say, by the by. For that which the Apostle intended in
the beginning of this chapter, was (as I said a little before) to draw the Jews
from that error, which was most general among them, to wit, that Justification
was to be sought by works, and not by faith, which way most of them taking,
missed of what they sought for.

That there was an opinion among the Jews that it was enough for a Jew to be of
the seed of Abraham, that he might be justified appears by what John Baptist
said to those which came to his Baptism; Think not to say within your selves,
we have Abraham for our father, Matthew. 3.9 But see further, what I said on
those words, Chap. 2. v. 17. Thou art called a Jew.

The Jews therefore for the greatest part, did think to obtain Justification by
works, but some thought it enough for Justification, that they were Abraham's or
Jacobs childring according to the flesh, Or, if this was a General opinion
among them (as some say it was) then the Jews thought, that they had two
strings to their bow, or, two titles to Justification, though neither of them
was good, as the Apostle shows.

Ver. 7. Neither because they are the seed of Abraham are they all Children] i.
e. Neither are all they, which are the seed of Abraham, children of Abraham,
because they are the seed of Abraham: that is, neither are all they, which are
born of Abraham, and come out of his loins, the children of Abraham, to wit,
those children to which the promises of Justificatlon or remission of sins
belonged, though they were born of Abraham according to the flesh, and came out
of his loins.

Because they are the seed of Abraham] That is, because they are sprung out of
the loins or seed of Abraham by natural generation, as children spring out of
the loins or seed of their Fathers.

In the word seed, there is Metonymia materiae

Are they all children] Supple, Of Abraham, to wit, such children as to whom
the promise of Remission of sins, or Justification does immediately and
absolutely belong.

They must needs be the Children of Abraham in some regard or other, which are
the seed of Abraham, that is which came out of Abraham's loins: therefore the
Apostle does not absolutely deny here, that they, which are of Abraham, are all
Children, but only in some certain respect, that is, in regard of the Promise
of Justification, and Remission of sins, made to Abraham, and to his seed.

But in Isaac shall thy seed be called] The Apostle after he had said, they are
not all Israel, which are of Israel, says neither because they are the seed of
Abraham are they all children, that he might thereby bring an Argument which
they call a minori, to prove that all are not Israel, which are of Israel. For
if they which are of Abraham's seed are not all the Children of Abraham, much
less are all they Israel, which are of Israel: for the promise was first made
to Abraham, and to his seed, and it was made to Israel only, as Israel was of
the seed of Abraham.

But in Isaac shall thy seed be called] That is, but they which were once in
the loins of Isaac, and so descended from him, that is, but they which are the
Sons, or the seed of Abraham by Isaac his Son; they, and only they, are and
shall be called and esteemed, as the seed or children of Abraham: to whom the
promises of the Land of Canaan belongs.

The Apostle proves here, that which he said immediately before, viz. That
because they are the seed of Abraham they are not all Children. And his proof
is to this effect, viz. Because neither Ishmael (though he came out of the
loins of Abraham nor his Posterity (though they had truly the same descent)
had to do with the promise of the Land of Canaan, which the Lord promised to
Abraham and his seed; And therefore they were not Abraham's seed or Children in
respect of that; but in respect of that, Isaac only and his Posterity were
children of Abraham and so called.

Note here, that the Land of Canaan (which was a Land flowing with milk and
honey, and into which Joshua the Son of Nun (a type of our Jesus) brought the
Israelites) was a type of all those Graces and spiritual blessings, which we
receive by Christ Jesus. This Land of Canaan did God promise to give to Abraham
and to his seed, Genesis 12.7. and Genesis 13.15, And yet not to him and to all or
any of his seed; but only to him and his Son Isaac, and to those, which should
come of him, for when Sarah cried out to Abraham concerning Hagar, and her Son
Ishmael, which she had by Abraham, Cast out the Bond woman and her Son for the
son of the Bond woman, shall not be heir with my son, even with Isaac. And the
thing was very grievous in Abraham's sight, because of his son Ishmael, God said
unto Abraham, Let it not be grievous in thy sight, because of the Lad Ishmael,
and because of thy Bondwoman Hagar, but in all that Sarah has said unto thee,
hearken unto her voice; For in Isaac shall thy seed, (to wit, that seed which
shall inherit the Land of Canaan which I promised thee) be called, Genesis 21.
ver. 10, 11, 12. And therefore Abraham at his death, gave all that he had to
Isaac, but unto the sons of the Concubines which he had, He gave gifts and sent
them away from Isaac his son, while he yet lived, Eastward, into the East
Country, Genesis 25. ver. 5, 6.

Now as the promise of the Land of Canaan which God made to Abraham and his
seed appertained not to all the sons of Abraham (though they were his sons or
children by carnal generation and came out of his Loins) but only to Isaac: So
do the promises of the spiritual blessings, (As of justification and remission
of sins, etc. which were typified by the Land of Canaan) which were made to
Abraham and his seed, appertain, not to those which were typified by Ishmael,
but only to those which were typified by his son Isaac; and who those were the
Apostle opens, in the next verse following.

The land of Canaan was (as I said) A type of all the Spiritual blessings which
we receive by Christ Jesus as justification, and glorification, etc. But here
by a kind of Synechdoche it is to be taken particularly, as a type of
justification.

But in Isaac shall thy seed be called] q. d. For it is written, that not that
seed of Abraham which was in the loins of Ishmael, But only that seed of his
which is, or shall be in the loins of Isaac shall be indeed, and accounted as
the seed of Abraham, to wit, that seed of his, which shall be heir of the
promised Land of Canaan.

This is the sense of this place, which to make up, we have borrowed somewhat
from the History, as it is recorded, Genesis 21. ver. 10, 11.

Note here, that the Syntax requires that the Apostle should have said thus;
Neither because they are the seed of Abraham are they all Children, but only in
Isaac shall his seed be called: But the Apostle says not, in Isaac shall his
seed be called, but in Isaac shall thy seed be called, using not the third, but
the second person, not his but thy; Where it is to be observed, that the
Apostle uses the words here, as they lie in the story, Genesis 21.12. where,
because God speaks to Abraham; He says, In Isaac shall thy seed be called;
And because they lie so in the story, therefore does the Apostle rehearse them
so here; for so is his manner, for the most part, when he quoteth any testimony
out of the Old Testament, to quote the words, as they are found there, without
any alteration of the Person or Syntax; leaving the Person and the Syntax to be
understood, or, ordered to his Readers; The like we have, Romans 3.4, etc. And by
reason of this, must we also understand these words, in a Preterperfect tense,
though they were spoken in the story, in the future.

In Isaac shall thy seed be called] That is, the seed which is, or shall be in
Isaac thy son and in his loins, and that only shall be called, or, That only
shall be thy seed, that is, That seed of thine, to which I promised the Land of
Canaan, and which shall inherit it.

Note here by the way, that from this limitation of Abraham's seed to Isaac, the
Jews do reckon none for Abraham's children, but the Israelites: As in their
Canons they say, that who so voweth concerning Abraham's seed, he is free from
Ishmaels and Esaus sons, and is not bound, but touching Isreal's, Maimon. Treat.
of Vows, Chap. 9. Sect. 1.

In the Hebrew manner of speech, To be, called signifies truly to be and with
the limitation aforesaid, None of the seed of Abraham, but only they which
descended from Isaac, were to be the children of Abraham, that is to say, Those
children of Abraham, to whom the Land of Canaan was promised, and of which they
should be heirs.

But you will say, what is this to the purpose, that God said to Abraham, That
in Isaac only shall thy seed be called, that is, that that seed only which
shall come from Isaac is that seed, to which I have promised the Land of Canaan.

Answ. It is little to the purpose, if we look only upon the Literal or
Historical sense of the words, but it is altogether t^ the purpose, if we look
upon the Mystical sense: Therefore the Apostle expounds the Mystical meaning of
them in the next verse.

Ver. 8. That is, they which are the children of the Flesh, these are not the
children of God; But the children of the promise are counted for the seed] q.
d. That is, (by interpretation of the Type) or, That is, (that I may interpret
that which I spoke of Isaac and the seed which was in him according to the
mystical or spiritual meaning thereof,) They which are the children of Abraham
only according to that, that they descended from Abraham by natural Generation,
and so were flesh of his flesh; these are not those children of Abraham, to
whom God made the Promise of Justification, which were figured by the Land of
Canaan: But those spiritual children which God promised to Abraham, that is,
the faithful, those which are like to Abraham in faith, and which are typified
in Isaac, who was a child of promise, they and they only, are to be counted,
and are indeed the seed of Abraham, to which God made that spiritual promise of
Justification.

That is] q. d. That is to say, by Interpretation.

They which are the children of the Flesh] i. e They which are the children of
Abraham descended of the flesh of Abraham; Or (taking a Substantive of the
Genitive case, after the Hebrew manner, for an Adjective) they which are the
Fleshly and Bodily children of Abraham and sprung out of Abraham's loins by
bodily or fleshly Generation, as such.

Such children as these were, which were children of Abraham only because they
descended out of the loins of Abraham, were typified by Ishmael, whom Abraham
begot by the ordinary course of nature, while nature was strong in him, and he
needed not any extraordinary renewing of his strength from God, as he needed,
when he begat Isaac.

These are not the children of God] i. e. These are not the children of Abraham
whom God promised to bless with the Spiritual blessing of Justification which
was typified by the Land of Canaan.

But the children of the promise] i. e. But the spiritual children which God
promised to Abraham, that is, the faithful, they are they to whom God promised
the blessing of justification.

In these word, to wit, the Children of the Promise, these words, viz. of the
promise are put for promised after the manner of the Hebrews who put a
Substantive of the Genitive case often, for an Adjective or Participle.

You will ask, who or what are these children of Abraham which are called here
the children of the promise? I answer; They which are of the faith of Abraham
(that is, the faithful and such as believe) they are the children of Abraham,
which are called here, The children of promise whether they be Jews, or whether
they be Gentiles: See for this, Romans 4.16. Gal. 3.7. where it is said, that
they which are of Faith, the same are the children of Abraham.

You will ask again, Why they are called the children of promise? I answer,
because they are not such as were born of Abraham by carnal Propagation; But
such as God gave him by promise, and called his Children only, because they
imitated his virtues, but principally his faith.

You will ask yet again, where God promised these or such children as these are
to Abraham? I answer, He promised them, Genesis 17.5. Where he says to Abraham I
will make thee a Father of many Nations: for proof of this read Romans 4. verse
16, 17.

These children were typified in Isaac; and Isaac, in that he was promised to
Abraham, before he was born, when Abraham's body and Sarahs womb were now both
dead, Genesis 18.10. Romans 4.19. might be in particular a Type of that Spiritual
seed, which God promis^d to Abraham, that is, of the Faithful.

Ver. 9. For this is the word of promise, at this time will I come and Sara
shall have a Son] q. d. For Isaac was a Son of Promise as appears by that
word of promise, which we read, Genesis 18. ver. 8, 10. where God or an Angel in
the person or behalf of God, said to Abraham and to Sarah his wife, At this
time the next year, I will come, and Sarah shall have a son, which son was
Isaac*

As Isaac was a son of promise, so are they which are typified in Isaac) the
children of promise. And therefore, as not any other sons of Abraham, but only
Isaac who was born by Virtue of Gods promise and the seed in him, had the
promise of the Land of Canaan; So they only which are the children of the
promise; (that is, the faithful which were typified in Isaac) have the
spiritual promises of justification, which was typified by the Land of Canaan.

Ver. 10. And not only this, but when Rebecca also had conceived, etc.] The
Apostle in this and the Verses next Following, prevents and answers an
objection.

For whereas he had showed in the foregoing verses that the promise of
justification belonged not to the Jews, or to the Israelites, as they were
Israel according to the Flesh; It might be objected, that though it were
granted that the promise of justification belonged not to them merely as they
were the children of Israel according to the Flesh, yet surely it belonged to
them, and they would be justified, as They sought justification by their works

This objection, I say, The Apostle here prevents, and answers after this
manner, q. d. But as the promise of justification did not belong to the Jews or
children of Israel according to the Flesh as such; So neither shall they be
justified, though they seek justification by their works. For when Rebecca her
self, who was the wife of Isaac had conceived, by our Father Isaac her husband;
It was said unto her, when she had co^ceived, and while two twins were in her
womb, The elder (which was Esau, who was a type of the J^ws, or Israelites
according to the Flesh) shall serve the younger which was Jacob (who was a type
of the faithful) with which sayings both shall accord which was written
afterward, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated.

Now in that, it was then said to Rebecca, The elder shall serve the younger,
when she had conceived; It is an Argument to prove, that the Jews or Israelites
according to the Flesh, should not be justified by their works, Though they
sought justification thereby. For it was therefore said unto Rebecca, by the
word of God, the elder shall serve the younger, at that time when she had
conceived, and when the children of which she conceived were not yet born,
neither had done either good or evil; To signify in a type or mystery, that
the purpose of God concerning the election, of men to justification was (and
always should be) to elect them, not for their works sake, but for his own
mercy and good pleasure sake, who calls us to the Grace, and promises of the
Gospel that we might believe by the preaching thereof, and so be justified by
his mercy.

But when Rebecca also had conceived by one, etc.] Rebecca was the wife of
Isaac, who conceived at this time, by Isaac her husband, and conceived of two
children, which children between the time of her conception and their birth,
kept a great struggling and striving in her womb, at which Rebecca was much
troubled, and desiring to know what it meant, she went to enquire of the Lord,
and the Lord said unto her, Two Nations, that is, the heads of two Nations, are
in thy womb, and two manner of people, that is, And two twins, from whom two
manner of people shall proceed, shall come out of thy bowels, and the one
people shall be stronger than the other; And the elder, (that is, they which
shall be born of the elder Twin) shall serve the younger (that is, shall serve
those, which shall be born of the younger Twin) Genes. 25. verse 22, 23.

Had conceived by one] These words, viz. by one, are emphatically put; That the
more notice might be taken of the fruit of this Matrimonial Act of Isaac which
was double, to wit, Twins, and to signify, that though these twins had both
one and the same father, and one and the same mother, and were begot at one and
the same time, yet their destinies and the destinies of their children were not
one and the same, but various.

Note, that where it is said when Rebecca had conceived, It is not to be
understood that presently upon her conception, this happened, which befell her,
but after she had conceived, in the time which was between her conception and
her bringing forth.

Our father Isaac] The Apostle says, Our father Isaac, because he also was an
Israelite, and of the seed of Abraham, by Isaac, as well as other Jews.

The Apostle suspendeth the accomplishment of this sentence, till the twelfth
verse (by reason of that which he interposeth by way of Parenthesis in the
eleventh verse,) And there he makes it up: And from thence must we make this
up, which he says here, q d. But when Rebecca also had conceived by One even
by our father Isaac, it was said unto her, the elder shall serve the younger;
As it is written, Jacob have I loved, Esau have I hated And this, that it was
thus said unto her, when she had conceived is a Typical argument to prove that
the Israelites according to the Flesh, should not attain to justification by
their works nor was the promise of justification made to them upon that account.

Ver. 11. For the children being not yet born, etc.] This particle, for relates
to those words, when Rebecca had conceived and here he shows by way of
exposition, what he means by those words, had conceived. And also unfolds the
Argument against justification of Israel, according to the flesh by works,
which lay veiled over in the latter words of the tenth Verse,

That which he says therefore is this, that when Rebecca had conceived by her
husband, between that time and the birth of the children which she had
conceived, that is, when the children were not yet born nor had done either
good or evil, it was said unto her the Elder shall serve the younger: And that
those words were said to her at that time, to show, that justification is not
of works.

That which was said unto Rebecca, ver. 12. was not said unto her, so soon as
ever she had conceived, nor was it said unto her after the children were born;
But it was said unto her, while the children were yet in her womb, and so
strong, as to struggle there, Genesis 25. ver. 22, 23. But yet before they had
done or could do any good or evil: And this the Apostle takes punctual notice
of, that he might show from thence that the purpose of God concerning election
to Justification does stand, not of works, but of him that calls.

Neither having done any good or evil] He speaks of doing good or evil in a
moral sense, which they could not do until they had the use of reason; which
they had not, while they were in the womb; yet was not that their struggling
which the History speaks of, Genesis 25.22. without reason or counsel, but the
counsel not of them, but of God, to whom not only rational creatures, which
want the Actual use of reason, but also Irrational, and Inanimate Creatures are
in an Obediential power.

That the purpose of God according to Election might stand not of works but of
him that calleth] i. e. To signify that the purpose of God concerning
Election, was (and should immutably be) not of works or for works sake, but of,
for and from the mercy and the good pleasure of him, who calls us to the
Grace, and promises contained in the Gospel, that we might believe by the
preaching thereof, and so be justified.

That the purpose of God according to Election might stand] i. e. To signify
that the purpose of God concerning Election, was, and should immutably be.

Note here, that verbs which import the being of a thing, are sometimes taken
for verbs signifying that being: and so to stand, is taken here for to signify
that it should stand or firmly be without any alteration: See what I said to
this purpose, Chap. 3.4. and Chap. 4.16.

According to Election] i. e. Concerning Election, to wit, Election to
Justification.

The Greek is (...), rendered here According to Election, but it would be better
rendered Concerning Election; For the Preposition (...) is to be taken as a
Sign of the Subject as it is also taken, 2 Cor. 11. ver. 21. where the Apostle
says (...), for, (...). I speak (not according to reproach, but I speak)
concerning reproach.

The Election here spoken of, is, as I conceive, (under correction) to be taken
for Election to Justification, of which I spoke something, Chap. 8. ver. 33.
For the word it self signifies only the Act of electing or choosing, But the
Agent or Efficient cause, the Subject or material cause, the Object and final
cause are left to be gathered from the Circumstances of the place; And to me it
appears more than probable; by the circumstances of the place, that Man's
Justification is the immediate Object of the Election here mentioned; For
justification has been the Apostles main Subject hitherto, which he seems
yet to pursue and to follow as the main Subject of the Doctrinal part of this
his Epistle; this he intended to persuade the Jews to, in the beginning of this
present chapter: this is the Conclusion of this Chapter verse 30, 31. This is
that which he resumes, Chap. 10. ver. 1, 2, 3, etc. and which he continues to
Chap. 12. And the Election which he speaks of, Chap. 11.5. (as it seems to me)
cannot be meant of an Election to any other immediate Object, than that of
Justification, for the reason which I shall there give.

Might stand] i. e. To signify that it was, and should be, without change or
alteration.

Not of works] i. e. Not of, or for the works sake which men do as though there
were any desert in them.

A Question may here be asked, viz. How S. Paul can draw an Argument from this,
That it was said to Rebecca (while her children were yet in her womb, before
they had done any good or evil) the elder shall serve the younger, to prove
that the purpose of God concerning Election, was and should immutably be,
without consideration, or regard of the works of the Elected; For though a man
cannot work before he is born, yet might God foresee what works he would do
after he was born, and deal with him in his Election, accordingly.

I answ. That if S. Paul should have gone about to draw an Argument from hence
Ex natura rei or ex vi terminorum, or by necessary consequence to show that the
Election of God was not of works, or for works; because it was said to Rebecca,
while her two children were in her womb, the Elder, shall serve the younger;
his Argument would not have been solid; because God might foresee what works
a man would do after his birth, even before he was born. But it was not the
Apostles intent to draw such an argument from hence, but only to use
argumentum a typo, or Argumentum a signo, which consists only in the setting
out, or declaring of Gods intent, Viz. That intent, which he had in giving that
Answer to Rebecca, to wit, that the Elder shall serve the younger before the
children were born; whose intent was, to signify, or typifie thereby, that his
purpose concerning election of man to justification, was, and should so remain
to be to elect, not for man's work sake, but for his own good will and pleasures
sake.

But whereas we said that the Apostle means here, by Election, Election to
justification, and whereas, where he speaks of Justificati n, he says every
where, that that is of faith not of works: it may be objected, that by Election
the Apostle cannot mean here, Election to justification, because he never
excludes faith, when he speaks of justification, but includes it, and asserts
it rather: But here, when it is said, that the Children being not yet born, not
having done any good or evil, it was said the Elder shall serve the younger.
Faith is excluded from the El ction here mentioned, as well as works; For as a
child cannot work before he is born (the consideration whereof seems to be
that, that made the Apostle to infer here, that Election was not of works) so
can he not believe, before he is born.

Answ. I said, that the Argument which the Apostle here uses is not Argumentum
a natura rei, or ex vi terminorum, or an argument of necessary consquence, when
he proves, that the purpose of God concerning Election, was not of Works,
because it was said unto Rebecca, while the children were yet in her womb,
before they had done any good or evil, the Elder shall serve the Younger. But
it was only Argumentum a Typo, or Argumentum a Signo, An Argument from a Type
(for there are verbal types, as well as real) or an argument from a sign. Now
to a Type or Sign, there are two things required; First the Aptitude of the
thing, which is to be a Sign or Type, to signify or represent the thing to be
typified or signified: And secondly the actual application by God of that sign
or type to signify or typifie that thing, if either of these be wanting, it is
not a type or sign; and this is plain to reason: for were all the things in the
world, which might have been types or Signs; types or signs indeed? Surely no,
and what is the reason? Not because all things wanted aptitude to typifie or
signify which were not actual signs or types; but because they were not
actually applied thereunto: Now this that God said to Rebecca the Elder shall
serve the Younger before the Children were yet born, and before they had done
any good or evil, has indeed an aptitude to signify the exclusion of Faith,
from the purpose of God concerning Election, as well as of works; but yet
because they are not actually applied by God so to do they may not do it, but
exclude works only, and not faith.

But of him that calleth] i. e. But of, for, and from the mercy, and the good
pleasure of God, who calls us to the grace of the Gospel, that we might
believe through the preaching of it, and believing it, might be justified.

That to which this call is, is the grace of the gospel, and the precious
promises therein contained. This is most frequently taken for the objest of
Gods call in our Apostles writings, if the circumstance of the place hold not
out another object.

In these words but of him that calls, it is intimated that God had respect
to faith in this Election to justification: For God does therefore call men to
the grace of the Gospel and the promises therein contained, that they might
believe them, and believing might be justified.

Ver. 12. It was said unto her, the elder shall serve the Younger] These words
have a double or twofold relation, for they relate to the tenth verse, and they
relate to the eleventh verse. The manner how is this, q. d. When Rebecca had
conceived by one, even by our Father Isaac it was said unto her the Elder shall
serve the Younger, I say, when she had conceived, for it was said unto her, the
Elder shall serve the Younger, when she had conceived* that is, while the
children being in her womb, were not yet born, neither had done any gord or
evil: And that to signify that the purpose of God concerning election should
stand not of works, but of him that calls.

It was said unto her] Viz. By God, Genesis 25.23. The children being not yet
born, neither having done either good or evil.

The Elder shall serve the Younger] i. e. Esau in his Posterity shall serve
Jacob in his.

This which is here said of the Elder serving the Younger is to be understood
of Esau and Jacob, but not of Esau and Jacob in their persons, but in their
posterities: For if we consider Jacob in his person, Jacob might be said to
serve Esau rather, than Esau Jacob, for he termed himself Esau's servant, Genesis
32.18. And he called Esau his Lord, Genesis 33. v. 13, 14. And he did him homage
bowing himself down to the ground many times before him, Genesis 33.3. And where
the words cited by the Apostle, are read Gen 25.23. It is plain, that they
extend rather to the Nations, that should come from Jacob and Esau, than that
they are tied up to Esau and Jacob themselves.

Though therefore Esau in his person, served not Jacob in his person, yet the
posterity of Esau served the Posterity of Jacob in David's time, when the
Idumaeans or Edomites, which were of the Posterity of Esau, were subdued by the
Israelites, which were the Posterity of Jacob, and brought under their
Subjection and made servants to them 2 Samuel 8.14.

Esau and his posterity; as they were descended from Isaac according to the
Flesh (to whom the promise of the Land of Canaan was made as well as to
Abraham) do signify or typifie here the children of the flesh as Ishmael did,
in the Story before. And Jacob signifies or typifieth the spiritual seed or
the faithful, which were called the Children of Promise ver. 8. As did his
Father Isaac in the former story.

And by Esaus servitude is meant or typified the continuing of such as were
typified by Esau, that is, of the children according to the flesh, under sin,
as under a Tyrant, as under a Lord, without deliverance from (either the
dominion, or) Guilt of it. And by Jacob's being a Lord (and so free) is meant
the freedom of those from the guilt and punishment of sin (and the dominion
thereof) which were typified by Jacob, that is, of the faithful, called the
Children of the Promise, v. 8.

Note that Esau may be taken here to signify, a Child of the flesh, because he
was the Elder brother: And men must have a being according to the Flesh, before
they can be children according to the Spirit, that is, before they can believe,
for Nature is before Grace, and Jacob may be taken to signify a child
according to the Spirit, that is, a believer, because he was the younger
brother: For men come to be children according to the Spirit, that is, men come
to believe, after they are children according to the flesh: So that generally
the children of the flesh are elder than the children of the Promise, and the
children of the Promise younger than the Children of the flesh.

Note again, that servitude under an enemy, a Lord, a Master, or a tyrant, is
frequently taken in Scripture, as a type of Captivity under sin, and the guilt
and punishment thereof: And that the freedom from such an enemy Lord, Master,
or Tyrant is frequently taken as a Type of deliverance from sin, and that so
frequently as that we need say no more of it.

Ver. 13. As it is written Jacob have I loved but Esau have I hated] i e. Which
prophecy, or saying accords with that which is written by Malachy, Mal. 1.2.
Jacob have I loved, Esau have I hated; At least in a general way.

That which the Prophet Malachy says concerning Esau and Jacob, did in the
History concern only the bodily or wordly estate of those two Brethren, or
rather of their posterity, respectively: but we must lift it up to the mystical
and spiritual sense, wherein God shows his love, to those, which were
typified by Jacob and his Sons in remitting their sins, and justifying them
from their offenses: and his hatred in those which are typified in Esau and his
Posterity in letting them lie in the guilt of their sins without remission.

Ver. 14. What shall we say then? is there unrighteousness with God?] That is,
what shall we infer, from what I have said; shall we infer from what I have
said, that there is unrighteousness with God, because he passes by so many of
the Children of Abraham, which are flesh of his flesh, yea, though they sought
justification by their works: And pardons those which are the Children of
promise, or Children according to the Spirit, that is those which believe,
though they be Gentiles, and not of the Stock of Abraham, only because they
believe? God forbid.

The Apostle prevents an objection here, for whereas he concluded in his last
discourse, that they which are the children of Abraham, or Isaac, or Jacob
according to the flesh, these are not these children, which God promised to
justify; no, nor yet as they were under the Law and sought justification by
works; But the Children of the promise, that is, the faithful (whether they be
of the Stock of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, or whether they be of a Gentile
race) these are the only children of Abraham, to which God made that spiritual
promise of justification, and which he would justify. A Jew might say, Paul,
if this be so, then by thy doctrine God rejects those, which are of the holy
seed of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, yea though they seek justification by
the works of the Law, which God has given them, if they do not believe; and
justifies not only those, which are of the holy Stock of Abraham, if they
believe, but also such as are of the unclean Race of the Gentiles But if God
shall do so indeed, as thou teach by this thy doctrine, then would God be
unjust; for it would be injustice or unrighteousness in God, thus to reject the
holy seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, only for not believing; and thus to
accept of the unclean Race of the Gentiles, only because they believe. This
objection, I say, the Appostle prevents here, saying, What shall we then say?
is there unrighteousness in God? God forbid.

What shall we say then?] i. e What shall we infer then, or what shall we
gather then from that which I have said?

Is there unrighteousness with God?] i. e. Shall we infer from thence that God
is unjust in these his dealings and dispensasations?

God forbid] i. e. No by no means, See Cap. 3.4.

Ver. 15. For he says to Moses I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy,
etc.] He gives a reason here, why; God is not unjust in passing by so many of
the children of Abraham or Jacob, which were their children only according to
the flesh, and not justifying them, yea though they sought Justification by
their works, and in justifying all those, which were the children of the
promise, or, children according to the Spirit, though they were Gentiles, and
descended not from Abraham or Jacob by lineal Propagation.

He says to Moses] To wit, Exodus 33.19.

I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy and I will have compassion on whom
I will have compassion] These words were spoken by God Exodus 33.19. And they
were spoken by occasion of that, that the Children of Israel had in the absence
of Moses made them a molten Calf, and worshipped it saying These are thy Gods,
O Israel, which brought thee up, out of the land of Egypt. At which the Lord
was exceeding angry, and would have destroyed them all had not Moses entreated
the Lord earnestly to pardon this their sin, But the Lord would not pardon them
all, but some only, saying, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, etc.

By these words, God shows, that he is, free and restrained by no Law from
showing mercy and exercising compassion, where he pleases: And therefore he is
not unjust or unrighteous in justifying those, that are the children of the
Promise, yea though they be Gentiles, most of them.

Ver. 16. So then it is not of him that wills, nor him that runs, but of
God that shows mercy] This conclusion does most naturally arise out of what
the Apostle alleged out of Exodus 33.19. in the foregoing verse, but yet it is
not that, which he was to prove (but that, which he was to prove, he inferrs
from hence, and sets down ver. 18) But it is a conclusion (as it seems) by the
by.

A Question therefore it is, and well may be, to what end, the Apostle makes
mention of this Conclusion and why he draws it out and alleges it here?

Answ. This Conclusion is (as I said) drawn by the by, out of the 15. verse,
and the Apostle often draws conclusions and arguments, after this manner, as I
have observed before. ver. 11. chap. 7.16: etc. But then it is indeed, for the
most part, for the proof of some subject, which he had treated of before: But
he has not as yet directly treated of such a Subject as this conclusion is,
hitherto: To what end thererefore does he draw this conclusion?

To speak therefore (under correction) what I conceive: The cause of the grief
and sorrow, which the Apostle expresses, ( ver. 2, 3, etc. of this chapter)
was because that the Jews being ignorant of Gods righteousness and going about
to establish their own righteousness, and zealously and eagerly running after
that, had not submitted themselves to the righteousness of God, etc. This was
the true ground of this grief, which though he expressed not here, in this
Chapter by reason of some Objections, which he was to prevent, yet he intimated
it here, and expresses it Cap. 10. ver. 2, 3. This their error and their zeal
the Jews were ready to their power to maintain, and the Apostle as ready to
confute having there such an opportune occasion to gather a conclusion or
argument, in confutation of that their error here, he omits it not (though he
had their error but little more than in his serious and grieved thoughts as
yet, and expressed not so fully and plainly as he intended to do, and as he
afterward does, Chap 10. ver. 2, 3.) Though he does it, but by the by

It is not of him that willeth] i e. Righteousness or Justification is not of
him who will have his own Righteousness, that is, his own way to Righ^eousness.

Nor of him that runneth] i. e. Nor of him that zealously and earnestly runs
in that his own way.

But of God that shows mercy] But it is of God, who shows mercy, by
remitting sin, to whom he pleases, and to what way he pleases

Ver. 17. For the Scripture saith] i. e. For God says in the Scripture.

The Scripture is put here for God speaking in the Scripture, so Gal. 3.22. we
read that the Scripture has concluded all under sin; where the Scripture is
put for God speaking in the Scripture, per Metonymiam.

This Causal Particle, For, does not relate to that which goes immediately
before, viz. In the 16 verse, but to those words of the 14 verse, viz. Is there
then unrighteousness with God? God forbid: For here he shows in this verse,
that there is not unrighteousness with God in dealing with the Children of the
flesh as he does, that is, in denying the participation of his spiritual
promise of justification to the Children of Abraham according to the flesh,
though they be Abraham's children, if they be his children only according to the
Flesh, or though they seek justification by their works.

Or we may take the Particle, For, for the Conjunction, And, (as it seems
sometimes to be taken) and then it may have its immediate conjunction with the
fifteenth verse, q. d. For he says to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will
have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will have compassion: And he
says unto Pharaoh, Even for this same purpose have I raised thee up, that I
might show my power in thee and that my name may be declared throughout all the
earth.

The Scripture says unto Pharaoh,] viz. Exodus (Chap. 9. ver. 16) Where you may
read the whole story which in brief is this.

The Children of Israel being at this time in Eygpt, Pharaoh King of Egypt did
mightily oppress them, in setting them to make bricks and putting cruel
taskmasters over them, insomuch that the children of Israel sighed mightily
and cried to the Lord to be delivered from that oppression; whereupon the Lord
made choice of Moses to bring them out of Egypt, and sent him to Pharaoh King
of Egypt in his name, to bid Pharaoh let his people go; but Pharaoh hearkened
not to Moses, but despised the Lord, who sent him, though Moses showed by many
miracles that he came from God; whereupon the Lord bid Moses tell Pharaoh, at
length, of his stubborness, and that except he would let his people go to serve
him, he would stretch out his hand to cut him off from the earth, and bid him
tell him moreover that in very deed for this cause he had raised him up, or
stirred him up; for to show his power in him and that his name might be
declared throughout all the Earth.

Even for this same purpose] To wit, that I might show my power in thee, and
that my Name might be declared throughout all the earth, Supple, By thy
destruction, and the destruction of thy people which I will work.

Have I raised thee up] The Greek is, (...), that is, have I stirred thee up,
to wit, to oppose my commands and not to let my people, the people of Israel go.

This God did by hardening Pharaohs heart, Exodus 4.21. and 9.12.

If we look upon, Exodus 9.16. the Hebrew word there is Heyemadticha which is
rendered by the Interlineary stare te feci. I have made thee to stand. By the
Septuagint (...). Thou have been preserved; By the Arabique, Te reservavi, I
have reserved thee: By the Samaritane, Subsistere te feci, I have made thee
subsist, by the Chaldee sustinui te, I have sustained thee. As their several
Interpreters render them: By all which Interpretations it may seem very
probable, which some say, that there is an Allusion there, to some general
Plague or Pestilence from which God preserved Pharaoh that he died not therein.

But being that our Apostle says here (...), I have raised thee up, or I have
stirred thee up.

Though the word Heyemadticha be rendered, Stare te feci, I have made thee
stand, or, (...) as the Septuagint, Thou have been preserved, or, to that sense
by other Interpreters, yet I conceive that yet our Apostle looks further here
than to the preservation of Pharaohs life in a common destruction or Plague and
that he looked also to the hardening of Pharaohs heart by the Lord, and
therefore used not the word of the Septuagint (...) whom he usually follows,
but a word of his own, viz. (...) i. e. I have raised thee up, or I have
stirred thee up, and so hardened thee to resist my will. And this I rather
conceive, because it seems to me more for his present purpose; And because he
draws from hence, that Conclusion, viz. Whom he will he hardneth, verse 18.

God Hardneth man many ways, but in particular God stirred up Pharaoh and so
hardened his heart to resist his will, here first by suffering the Devil to work
the like miracles in appearance, by the Magicians, as he himself wrought in
Reality, by his Servant Moses by which Pharaoh came to despise not only Moses,
but God himself. Secondly, by permitting the Devil to suggest Arguments into
the Tyrannical and Coveteous mind of Pharaoh, showing that he would, if he
should let Israel go, suffer loss in his power by the loss of so great a
people: and loss in his profit, by letting so many go, whom he employed as
slaves for his profit in his work.

That I might show my power in thee] i. e. That I might show my power in thee,
by those strange plagues which I will bring upon thee and thy people: And by
overwhelming thee at the length in the Red Sea: Because thou will not let my
people Israel go, as I would have thee.

And that my Name may be declared] i. e. And that I may be spoken of all abroad
to the praise and glory of my power, which power I intend to show upon thee for
thy refractoriness to my Commands.

My Name, that is, I, Metonymia Adjuncti.

No doubt but that God might have justly dealt with others after the manner,
and as severely as he did with Pharaoh, and have destroyed them with as great a
destruction, with whom yet he did not so deal, though they had deserved it at
Gods hands, as well as Pharaoh had.

Ver. 18. Therefore has he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will
he hardneth] i. e. Therefore has he justly without any the least
unrighteousness at all, mercy on those on whom he will have mercy: And again,
on whom He will not have that mercy, He justly does deny it, to them, and
without the least unrighteousness, hardneth them.

These words justly, or, without unrighteousness are here to be understood,
That the Conclusion may come up to answer the Objection made or couched in the
fourteenth verse.

And this Conclusion thus understood is no more than the premises will bear;
For Nature it self will tell you, that what God does, he does justly: And you
cannot conceive God, but you must conceive him to be just, For he that is
unjust, cannot be God.

Therefore he has mercy on whom he will have mercy] This Conclusion is drawn
from that which was said in the fifteenth verse, and is to be applied to the
Remission of sins, or justification, which God freely* bestows on such as are
the Children of Promise, because he will bestow it on them, q. d. Therefore he
has mercy justly on whom he will have mercy, And if he has mercy justly on
whom he will have mercy; He may have mercy on the Children of Promise and
justify them without any injustice or unrighteousness in himself at all, for
so doing.

Whom he will he hardneth] This Conclusion is drawn from what is said in the
seventeenth verse. And is to be applied to the Children of the flesh mentioned
ver. 8. to whom God denies remission of sins, Notwithstanding that, that they
are the children of Abraham according to the flesh, and notwithstanding that,
that they seek justification by works, and whose heart he hardneth even because
he will not pardon them for their sins and because he will harden them.

Whom God will, He justly hardneth; And if he justly hardneth whom he will, he
may deny remission of sins to the Children of Israel according to the flesh and
harden them if he will, or because he will, (yea though they seek justification
by works) without any injustice or unrighteousness in himself at all, for doing
so.

He hardeneth] This is, opposed to the mercy which he speaks of in the former
part of the verse, which mercy consisted in Remission of sins and
Justification: And therefore is it opposed to that, Because where God does not
remit the sins of unbelievers and justify them (I speak especially in the case
of positive unbelief (as I may so call it) that is, where men have the Gospel
or word of God preached to them, and they will not believe it, but put it from
them, which is that which the Apostle chiefly speaks of, and against, in this
Epistle.) He does not only, not remit their sins, but does also harden their
hearts for a kind of punishment of their Unbelief, See for this, Matthew. 13.
verse 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.

But note, that though God hardneth the heart of unbelievers he does it not by
any positive operation upon their souls or hearts so as to be the Author of
sin thereby, but by Privative and Permissive ways, As by withholding his Grace
or with holding the means by which the soul might be mollified, and by
permitting Satan to nourish and foster that hardness; which Satan may do many
ways, and by suggesting diverse Arguments to them, and by stirring up evil lusts
and affections in them, etc. He does it sometimes also in that he punishes not
offenders, according to their off^nces, so soon as they offend, but patiently
bears with them a while.

Ver. 19. Thou will say then unto me why does he yet find fault?] The Apostle
makes an Objection here in the person of an unbelieving Jew, by occasion of
that which he said, v. 18, viz. whom he will he hardneth: For as though the
Apostle had said, that God does positively harden whom he will (which yet he
does not say) an unbelieving Jew might say. If God hardneth whom he will, why
does he yet find fault with us, for our hardness of heart: For it is (you say)
his will and his work to harden us, and that we are hardened still, it is from
him, why does he then find fault?

God does every where complain of the Jews for their blindness and hardness of
heart, as Isaiah 48.4, 8. Ezekiel. 3.7. Ezekiel. 2.4. Isaiah 29. ver 9, 11, 12. Psalm.
95.8. Acts 28. ver. 25, 26, etc.

For who has resisted his will] q. d. For if he will harden us, who can help
it? For who is able to resist his will, or to hinder him, in what he will have
done?

Ver. 20. Nay but O man who art thou that reply against God?] q. d. Nay, but
O man why answerest thou again, or why disputest thou thus against God?

This Particle, Nay, does enliven or quicken the whole speech, and reprehends
the Objector.

The Apostle might have taken away this Objection by saying, that God does not
positively harden any man, but only Privatively by not punishing him, so soon
as he offends, according to his desert, but patiently suffering his sins; by
withholding his Grace, or withholding those means which he is not bound to
give, and that he does not this neither, until man has deserved it, etc. And
so have stopped the Objectors mouth, But he had rather instead of giving a
direct answer, take up the Objector for his sawciness, in that he will be so
saucy as to chop Logic with his God, whereas, when we know, that God has done
any thing, (though we know not his particular reasons, and the manner of his
working) we should with David become dumb and open not our mouths because it is
his doing, Psalm. 39.9. knowing, that God is not unjust in any of his works.

Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it why have thou made me thus]
q. d. If a Potter should make a pot of an ugly fashion for abase use, if this
pot had sense and reason, and were able to speak, would it be seemly for this
pot to say to the Potter why have thou formed me after this manner, and why
have thou made me for this use? As this would not become a Pot (if it could
speak) thus to dispute and argue with the Potter: No more does it become thee,
thus to dispute and argue with God for hardening thy heart.

The Apostle seems here to allude to that of the Prophet, Isaiah, Isa. 45.9.
Woe to him that striveth with his Maker. Let the Potsheard strive with the
Potsheard of the earth shall the clay say to him that fashioned it what mak^st
thou?

Ver. 21. Has not the Potter power over the Clay, of the same lump to make one
vessel to honor and another unto dishonor?] Supple, If therefore the Potter
has power over the clay, of the same Lump, to make one Vessel to honor and
another to dishonor, much more has God power over the corrupt mass of mankind
where none can challenge desert, to make whom he will Vessels of honor in
Justifying them, and others Vessels of dishonor in hardening them.

This, as I said, meets not directly with that Objection mentioned, ver. 19,
viz. Why does he yet find fault, for who has resisted his will? But meets with
the Core that lay at the Jews heart, from whence this Objection sprung, as the
Cause thereof; for this lay as a Core at the Jews heart, to hear that the
Children of Abraham according to the flesh would be rejected of God, and have
no interest in his spiritual promises, by reason of their parentage and of
their works: And the Children of Promise, that is, they which believe, though
they were Gentiles should be received* and entitled to those Promises; which
they could not think of, without imputing unrighteousness to God, and by reason
of which, they would often take occasion to chop Logic with God upon light
grounds.

Thus our Savior Christ, when the Sadduces had propounded a Question to him,
Matthew. 22. ver. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. endeavors to take away that error out
of the hearts of the Sadduces, which was the cause of that Question, Matthew. 22.
ver. 31, 32.

And now this that God has as much power over Mankind, as the Potter has over
the clay, will easily vindicate God from unrighteousness, in that he makes not
the promise of justification to reach to all them, which are the Children of
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, according to the Flesh, and extends it to all
the Children of Primise* that is, to all Believers and Justifies them, though
they be Gentiles most of them.

One Vessel to honour] i. e. One vessel to honorable uses, as to lay our meat
in, or hold our drink in at our Tables.

Another to dishonour] i. e. Another to base and dishonorable uses, as to be a
Chamber pot, or (that which is yet more base and dishonorable) to hold or take
away the burden of the belly.

Ver. 22. What if God willing to show his wrath and to make his power known
endured with much long suffering, the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction.

Ver. 23. And that he might make known, the Riches of his Glory on the vessel^
of mercy, which he had before pr^pared unto glory] Supple, What can thou say
against that? Or what injustice or unrighteousness is there in that?

Willing to show his wrath] To wit, against the Vessels of wrath.

And to make his power known] To wit, in the everlasting destruction or
damnation of the vessels of Wrath, for that they would not obey the Gospel and
believe: But persist in their disobedience and unbelief.

Endured with much long suffering] i. e. Hardened and yet not positively, but
privatively, that is, by suffering them for a long time together to walk on in
their pervicacious ways without punishment.

Yet the Apostle says, that the long suffering of God, leads men to
Repentance. Though they after their hardness and impenitent heart treasure up
unto themselves wrath against the day of wrath, Romans 2. ver. 4.5. So that God
in wrath remembers Mercy. Hab. 3.2.

He shows here by the way, how, and by which of the many ways of hardening
God hardneth the hearts of the unbelieving Jews, and gives the exposition, as
it were, of that word hardneth, which he used ver. 18.

The vessels of wrath] The Vessels on which he will show his wrath, or the
Vessels which deserve his wrath.

By Vessels he means Men, which he calls Vessels in allusion to Potters
vessels, of which he spoke ver. 22.

Fitted to destruction] i. e. Fit for damnation or everlasting destruction,
that is, which deserve destruction, and everlasting damnation.

He persists still in the Allusion to a Potters pot, yet think not that God did
otherwise fit, or make those men fit for destruction, than by suffering them
and permitting them, to walk in their own ways, without punishing them for it.

The Vessels of wrath fitted for destruction] I conceive, that the Apostle does
in a special manner, mean here, such as he speaks of Chap. 2.8. That is, Such
as are contentious and obey not the truth, but obey unrighteousness, for unto
them, he says there, that God will at length render indignation and wrath,
though they be children of Abraham according to the flesh, and seek
justification by their works.

They are such as believed not the Gospel, when it was preached unto them,
which the Apostle here aims at as appears by the tenor of his speech, and
among them especially the Jews, whom God rejected from justification, because
they would not believe the Gospel, when it was preached to them; And indeed the
Jews for the most part when the Gospel was preached to them, did not only not
barely believe it, but were contentious against it, and persecuted the
Preachers of it: As will appear by the History of the Acts of the Apostles.

Ver. 23. And that he might make known the Riches of his glory, etc] And what
if God, that he might make known the abundance of his goodness, to those whom
he decreed to prepare to Glory, has prepared them to glory? What can thou
say to that? or what unrighteousness, is in that?

The Apostle by the word Riches uses to signify an abundance, as Chap. 2.4.
Chap. 11.33. 2 Cor. 8.2. Ephesians. 1.7. and Chap. 2.7. and so he does here.

And by Glory he means here the goodness of God. So that by the Riches of his
glory, we may understand the abundance of his goodness, as Ephesians. 3.16.

Every attribute of God is glorious and may by a Metonymy be called his Glory.

Many Interpreters do join the 22. and 23. verses together, as though their
were nothing defective here, and that the Apostle would give us to know here,
that God endured with much long suffering the Vessels of wrath fitted to
destruction, and so hardened them, for two reasons; First, that he might show
his wrath, and make his power known in the destruction of those vessels of
wrath: And Secondly, that by his severity showed on the Vessels of Wrath: He
might make his mercy more conspicuous, and higher to be valued, which he
shows to the Vessels of Mercy, for a Contrary sets off and illustrates its
Contrary; And that which is common to many, is not so much esteemed of, as that
which appertains to few.

Yet notwithstanding I conceive, that there is an ellypsis here, to be supplied
from the foregoing verse, and that the sense of these two verses and reading,
with their Supplement, is this, q d. What if God willing to show his wrath and
to make his power known, endured with much long suffering, the vessels of wrath
fitted to destruction? What can thou say against that, or what
unrighteousness is there in that?

And what can thou say against this, or what unrighteousness is there in
this, if God That he might make known the riches of his Glory, on the vessels
of mercy, which he had before prepared unto Glory, has prepared those his
Vessels unto glory, even us, etc.

By this our Apostle answers to both parts of that unrighteousness which was
charged upon God ver. 14. That is to the unrighteousness charged upon him for
justifying the children of Promise; and the unrighteousness, which was charged
upon him, for denying Justification to the children of the flesh: And by this
he answers both parts of the Potters power mentioned ver. 21. in making out of
the same lump vessels of honor, and vessels of Dishonor.

The Riches of his Glory] The abundance of his goodness.

On the Vessels of Mercy] By Vessels of mercy, he means those, which believe
ver. 24. which he calls vessels in allusion to a Potters vessel, of which he
spoke ver. 21. And vessels of mercy, because he shows mercy to such, in
remitting their sins and justifying them from their iniquities.

Which he had before prepared unto Glory] i. e. Which he had from all eternity
purposed within himself to prepare to glory, even everlasting Glory in heaven,
that is, which he had purposed within himself and decreed from all eternity to
justify.

In the word prepared there is an allusion to a Potters work.

Which he had before prepared] The Greek is (...), and this preposition (...)
does signify that what God had prepared, he prepared before the thing was,
which preparation therefore must be understood of his purpose or decree to
prepare, See Chap. 8., ver. 29. what is said on that word (...).

Which he had before prepared to glory] i. e. Which he had from eternity
decired to justify.

To prepare to glory may signify to Justify, for Justification is a
preparation to glory: For Romans 5. ver. 20, 21. It is said, that where sin
abounded grace did much more abound, that as sin has reigned unto death, even
so might grace reign through righteousness, that is (through Justification)
unto eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, and God glorifies none, whom
he does not Justify, therefore Justification is a preparation to Glory.

Ver. 24. Even us whom he has called] These words depend upon the 23. verse,
and tell whom, and show whom he meaneh there by the Vessels of mercy, which God
had before prepared unto glory: he means those whom God has effectually called
(that is, those who believe) whether they be Jews, or whether they be Gentiles.

Whom he has called] That is, whom he has called effectually to the grace of
the Gospel, by the preaching thereof, that is, who believe the Gospel, by
harkening to the call of God by the preachers or ministers of his Gospel.

Not of the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles] i. e. Whether we be Jews, or
whether we be Gentiles.

Ver. 25. As he says also in Osee] Between this and the former verse,
understand these or the like words; For God has called the Gentiles (and so
made them his people) In Osee, to wit, Osee Chap. 2.23.

The Jews were much offended that the Apostle should preach, that salvation
should be, and was come to the Gentiles. That therefore they might know the
truth of this, and that they might not be offended, that he our Apostle and
other the Apostles of Christ, did extend Justification and other the spiritual
mercies, of God, to the Gentiles, as well as to the Jews, Our Apostle as often
as he has occasion, speaks of the calling of the Gentiles, and in particular
shows here, that by preaching this, they preached no more, than what the
Prophets of the Lord, whom they could not except against, foretold.

I will call her my people which was not my People and her belov d, which was
not beloved] i. e. I will make them my people, which were not my people, and
that Nation my beloved, which was not beloved of me.

The Apostle proves here the Calling of the Gentiles and he proves it out of
the Prophets, that the Jews might the better believe it, who were m^st against
it.

Note, that to Call signifies sometimes to Make, See Chap. 4.17

These words of the Prophet Osee, Osee 2. 23. are spoken in the Literal or
Historical sense of the Ten tribes of Israel, whom God had cast off because of
their Idolatry, and other their sins, and dispersed them amongst the Nations,
whom afterward he received again into favor; And took them for the People of
his love again: But in the Mystical sense, they are to be understood of the
Gentiles, whom God for time past neglected, suffering them to walk in their own
ways, Acts 14 16. For the Ten tribes of Israel while they were cast off by God
for their Idolatry, and dispersed among the Gentiles were a Type of the
Gentiles which worshipped Idols in former time, and which were cast off and
neglected of God; And Gods taking of the Ten tribes into favor again after
they were cast off for their Idolatry, and dispersed among the Nations, was a
Type of Gods calling the Gentiles to him, and his blessing them with his
spiritual blessings, after they had been so long neglected.

Ver. 26. And it shall come to pass that in the place where it was said unto
them, ye are not my People, there shall they be called the children of the
living God] This is taken also out of the Prophet Hosea, Hosea 1.10. And is
also in the Literal or Historical sense spoken of the Ten tribes of Israel (as
the former Testimony was) whom God had put away for their sins and said of
them, That they were not his people, yet at length he received them to favor
again; And said of them, That they were the Children of the living God: And as
there, so here, the Ten tribes were a Type of the Gentiles who were not the
People of God in times past, but were such as God cared not for; yet are now
made the Children of God Almighty, through faith. And to them do these words in
the Mystical sense appertain, and of them they may be thus expounded (...).

And it shall come to pass] i. e. And this which I now speak of, shall come to
pass, viz. etc.

That in the place where it was said unto them, ye are not my People] i. e.
That in that place, As v. g. In Greece, in Italy, in France, in England; Or, in
what place soever they dwelt, of whom God might say Ye are not my People,
because they were not beloved of him, nor worshipped him, etc.

There shall they be called the children of the living God] i. e In that very
place, (nor shall they change their dwelling for this) they shall be called the
Children of the living God and shall worship him there, as becomes his
Children.

Ver. 27. Esaias also cries concerning Israel, though the number of the
children of Israel be as the sand of the Sea a Remnant shall be saved.] This is
taken out of Isaiah, chapter 10. v. 22, 23. And in the literal or historical sense,
it is spoken of the Jews in Hezekiahs time, who though they were a People as
many as the sand of the Sea for number, yet they should for their sins be so
wasted and destroyed by the Army of Senacharib King of Assyria, as that they
which should escape and remain alive, should be but a very small number or
Remnant. But in the Mystical sense it signifies, that the Jews (the greatest
part of them) should in the time, or first time at least of the Gospel, be cut
off, by the just judgemnet of God, from being his people (which is a kind of
spiritual destruction and the highway to destruction everlasting) for their
infidelity, and that there should remain only very few of them which should
obtain mercy, the mercy of Justification at his hands.

So that the Jews in Hezekiahs time were a type of the Jews in the time of the
Gospel; And their corporeal destruction for their sins by the Army of
Senacharib; A type of their cutting off from God, and his People (which is a
spiritual destruction) by the hand of God, for their unbelief.

Crieth] i. e. Speaks audibly and plainly.

Concerning Israel] That is, Concerning the people or Children of Israel the
Jews.

Here is Metonymia Efficientis: Israel being put for the Children of Israel, to
wit, the Jews.

Be as the sand of the Sea] viz. for multitude. Hyperbole.

A Remnant] i e. Only a Remnant, or no more than a Remnant, that is, very few
of them.

The word, only, is often left to be understood by the Hebrews.

Shall be saved] Supple, from the sword of Senacharib: Thus in the Literal
sense: Or, shall be saved, Supple, from their sins. Thus in the Mystical.

A question it is, whether the Apostle brings this testimony to prove the
Calling of the Gentiles, or, to prove the rejecting of the Jews; Some say this,
some that. But our translatours translating (...). Isaiah also cries, seem to
take it, as a testimony to prove the calling of the Gentiles.

But you will ask, how this place can prove the calling of the Gentiles. I
answer; Only by consequence, viz. Because through the fall of the Jews,
Salvation was to come unto the Gentiles, Romans 11. ver. 11.

It is written Amos 9.11. After this will I return and will build again the
tabernacle of David, which is fallen down: And I will build again the ruins
thereof and will set it up. This S. James interprets of the calling of the
Gentiles, Acts 15.16. For by the Tabernacle of David is meant in the literal
sense, The habitation where David dwelt which was Sion, this City was ruined by
the Babylonians under Nebuchadnezzar, which ruins God promises ( Amos 9.11.)
to make up again, which was performed after the Babylonish Captivity. But in
this, The tabernacle of David, which was Sion, was a type of the Church of God,
which consisted in a manner only of the People of the Jews, until the coming of
our Savior, but then because they received him not, they were almost all cut
off, from being the People and the Church of God, for their unbelief. And in
their room the Gentiles were brought in, to make up the Church of God, from
which they fell and were cut off. And this is that which is meant by the
Prophet Amos in the mystical sense there: And what was meant there, the like is
meant here: And this shows that the fall of the Jews proves the calling of
the Gentiles.

But yet (as I conceive) the chief, if not the only scope of the Apostle here,
is to show the fall or casting off of the greatest part of the Jews, for their
unbelief: And so I render (and it is the most natural interpretation) (...),
(not, Isaiah also cries, but) But Isaiah cryth concerning Israel, etc. Making
^ not a Copulative, but a Disjunctive or an Adversative.

The Apostle therefore begins here to make a way to that which he says in
the beginning of the tenth chapter, where he resumes and perfects that which he
left imperfect in the beginning of this chapter, and tells the reason, why he
was so grieved for the Jews his brethren according to the flesh, as, he says,
he was.

If we take this of the rejecting of the Jews, as I conceive, it is to be
taken, we must conceive, that the Apostle speaks it with grief and sorrow of
heart, being that it is the cause of that continual grief and sorrow which he
says he had in his heart for his brethren, His kinsmen according to the flesh,
ver. 2.

Ver. 28. For he will finish the work] Supple, which he has to do, or,
intends to do with Israel, that is, with the Jews.

The word Rendered here the work, is in Greek (...), which may be rendered, the
account. And here may be a Metaphor, taken from the accounts which men take of
their receipts, and of their expenses, where when they have deducted their
expenses out of their receipts, their is but a small sum remaining.

And cut it short] Supple, So that he will not make any long work of it, Or (in
allusion to the Metaphor of Accountants, so that he will bring it to a small
sum or Remainder.

In Righteousness] i. e. In Judgment and Severity.

Righteousness is to be taken here for Judgment and Severity as it is opposed
to mercy.

Because] Refer this to the 27 verse as a proof of that, as the former part of
this verse also was. For this is but a Repetition of the foregoing sentence.

A short work will the Lord make] Supple, with the Jews in cutting them off.

That which is here rendered work, is in the Greek (...), as it was in the
former sentence, and therefore may be interpreted, as that.

Upon the earth] That is, upon the Land of Judaea. Thus in the literal sense,
the whole Earth being put for a part, by a Synecdoche.

But upon the Earth, that is, upon the whole habitable Earth: thus in the
mystical sense.

Ver. 29. And as Esaias said before] i. e And as Esaias said Cap 1. v. 9. of
h^s Prophecy, which he said before that which I last quoted out of him, for
that I quoted out of Chap. 10 33.

Read these words (As Esaias said before) as with a Parenthesis.

The Greek word, which is here rendered said before, is (...), which may be
rendered also foretold or Prophesied.

Except the Lord of Sabbath] That is, except the Lord of hosts, who is able to
restrain the fury of the sword.

Had left us a seed] i. e. Had left us Jews a very few, or a very small number,
which escaped the sword of Senacherib the Assyrian.

These few Jews in the literal sense, were those which believed the Lord, when
he promised to keep Jerusalem safe from the fury of the Assyrians, and so
escaped the fury of the Assyrians by being at that time in Jerusalem, But being
that these Jews, which escaped the fury of the Assyrians, by reason of the
belief, which they had of God, promising to save Jerusalem from the Assyrians,
were a Type of such Jews as believed in the days of the Gospel, and so were
saved from their sins (whereas they which believed not, were not saved) these
words in the Mystical sense, may be interpreted of these few Jews, which
attained; through faith to salvation, from their sins, in the days of the
Gospel, whereas the far greatest part, were not so saved, because of their
unbeli^f.

Had left us a seed] Isaiah being a Jew, speaks here of the Jews, so as that he
makes himself of their number, and though this was spoken by him, in the
literal or Historical sense; yet may we, and we must understand it here; as
spoken also in a mystical sense.

A seed] That is a small Remnant or a small parcel.

The seed which is reserved to sow the ground after harvest, is but a little,
in comparison of the Corn of the harvest. Therefore is seed taken here for a
little parcel, or Remnant, as he speaks, ver. 27.

We had been as Sodom, and been made like to Gommorrah] i. e. We had been
utterly destroyed by the sword of the Assyrians as Sodom and Gomorrah or the
People of Sodom and Gomorrah were, by fire from Heaven, thus in the litteral.

In the mystical sense thus, we had been utterly cut off, from being the People
of God by Gods Judgment, as Sodom and Gomorrah were utterly cut off (as I may
so say) by fire.

Sodom and Gomorrah were two Cities of Decapolis in the Land of Canaan, which
were destroy^d by fire and brimstone from heaven, for the wickedness of the
inhabitants thereof. The story you may read Genesis 19 24. etc.

Ver. 30 What shall we say then?] i e. What shall we then infer from that which
I have alleged out of the Prophets.

Answ. This we may inser, viz. that the Gentiles, etc.

The Gentiles which followed not after Righteousness have attained to
righteousness] i. e. The Gentiles which did not heretofore seek after
Justification, have now attained to Justification.

This that the Gentiles have attained to Justification will follow out of that,
which was alleged out of the Prophet Hosea, Hos. 2.23 quoted here ver. 25, 26.
For if the Gentiles be made the People of God, and his beloved, then certainly
they are justified.

The Gentiles which followed not after Righteousness] By following after, is
here meant seeking, so Psalm. 34.14. In these words, seek peace and pursue it,
where to pursue is the same, as to seek.

And by Righeeousness, he means here Justification, as the word signifies
almost every where in this Epistle.

The Gentiles heretofore sought not righteousness nor asked after it, when God
suffered the Nations to walk in their own ways, Act. 14.16. But now that he
has sent his Gospel among them they have attained unto righteousness, through
belief of the Gospel.

Even the righteousness, which is of faith] Thas is, even to that righteousness
or Justification, which is to be attained by Faith.

The Apostle prevents a Question or objection here, for it might be objected or
asked, how could the Gentiles, which were sinners attain to Righteousness, or
Justification? and what Righteousness or Justification is that? This the
Apostle prevents when he says. Even the Righteousness which is of Faith

And the Apostle raises this Question, or Objection, and answers it here,
that he might usher in what he had to say of the Jews in the words following.

Note, that as the Apostle might deduce or prove from that which he quotes out
of Hosea ver. 25. Viz. I will call them my people, which was not my People,
etc. That the Gentiles, which followed not after Righteousness, should attain
or had attained unto Righteousness, because the Israelites there spoken of
(whom God had rejected or sorsaken for a while, and afterward received into
favor) were a type of the Gentiles, whom God so far received into favor, as
to justify them; So might the faith of those Israelites by which they believed
the Prophets, which the Lord sent to them, to tell them, that he would receive
them again, in to his favor be a type of the faith, which the Gentiles yielded
to the Gospel, whereby they attained to righteousness, that is, whereby they
were justified.

Ver 31. But Israel which followed after the Law of Righteousness, has not
attained to the Law of Right^ousness] i e. But the Jews, which are the Children
of Israel according to the Flesh (who sought after Righteousness or
Justification) the Jews, I say, for the greatest part of them, have not
attained to Righteousness or Justification.

This inference follows out of what the Apostle alleged out of the Prophet
Isaiah ver. 27, 28. in the Mystical sense thereof.

Israel] By Israel are here meant the Jews, which were the children of Israel
(that is, of Jacob) according to the flesh, per Metonymiam Efficientis, yet by
Israel understand not all Israel, that is, all the Jews, but by a Synechdoche,
take Israel for the greatest part only of Israel, that is, of the Jews. For all
Israel, that is, all the Jews missed not of Righteousness or Justification, as
appears Chap. 11. v. 1, 2 etc.

Which followed after] To follow after is to be taken here for to seek, ver. 30.

The Law of Righteousness] That is, Righteousness or Justification, for the Law
of Righteousness or Justification is no more here than if he had barely said
Righteousness or Justification.

Note, that the Apostle, when he spoke of the Gentiles, he said barely
Righteousness: But when he speaks of the Jews, he says, The Law of
Righteousness: And thus he seems to speak, when he speaks of the
Righteousness, which the Jews so ^ ght after, by a kind of Mimesis, because the
Jews would every where mention, and crack of the Law; so the Apostle said, by
the Law of faith, Chap. 3.27. when it had been enough to say only; by Faith.

Has not attained to the Law of Righteousness] i e. That is have not attained
to Righteousness or Justification.

This is (as I said) The inference, which the Apostle draws concerning the
Jews, out of what he alleged from the Prophet, Isaiah, v 27, 28, 29.

Ver. 32. Wherefore because they sought it not, etc.] q. d. But why or
wherefore have they not attained to Righteousness or Justification? Answer,
Because they sought it not by faith, etc.

This which the Apostle says in this verse, is not part of the inference
mentioned, ver. 31. But is an objection or question, which might arise from
that which was said, ver. 31. which question, the Apostle here moves, and
answers, that he might yet more artificially usher in, what he has to say,
in the beginning of the Tenth Chapter.

Because they sought it not by faith] i. e. Because they sought it not by the
faith of Christ, or by faith in Christ, which is the only way to obtain
Justificati^n

But as it were by the works of the Law] i. e. But because they sought it by
the works of the Law, thinking thereby to obtain it, without the faith of, or
in Christ.

As it were by the works of the Law] These words, as it were, do sometimes
signify the truth and reality of a thing, as John 7.9. sometimes an appearance
of a thing only: And I conceive, that they are put here to signify an
appearance only, though the Jews might think that when they soug^t
righteousness by the Law, as they did, they sought it truly, and as they ought
to seek it.

They that truly seek Justification or Righteousness (for these two words
signify both one and the same thing) by the works of the Law, they must so
keep the Law, as that they never break it at any time, no not in the least
tittle thereof, for if they break it in the least tittle thereof, they are
cursed by the Law, Galath. 3.10. And therefore such can never be justified by
the works of the Law: Now the Jews had sinned every one of them; And now having
once sinned, they could not really and truly and according to knowledge, seek
for Justification by the works of the Law: But being that though they had
sinned, yet nevertheless they sought for Justification by the works of the Law;
the Apostle may say, not that they sought it by the works of the Law; But that
they sought it as it were by the works of the Law.

For they stumbled at the stumbling stone] i. e. For they stumbled and were
offended at Christ, who was to them as a Stumbling Block, or stone of Offense
in the way to Righteousness.

This Particle, For, relates to those words, Because they sought it not by
faith, viz. The faith of Christ, And are a Reason, why they did not seek after
Righteousness by faith.

The reason why the Jews did not seek after righteousness by faith, was that
they were offended at Christ (by the faith of whom only, Justification is to be
had) and rejected him, and evilly entreated him, to their own hurt and ruin,
by bringing a sin upon their head, and putting away from them the only means of
obtaining Remission of sins.

The reason why the Jews rejected Christ and were offended at him, was because
Christ came in such a poor and mean manner, without any wordly Pomp, being born
(according to the flesh) of poor parentage, and having not an house of his own
where to lay his head; Whereas they looked for a Pompous Messiah to come with
all worldly Glory and Luster, mistaking the prophesies concerning Christ, which
spoke gloriously of him, and interpreting them of Earthly, Outward or worldly
Glory; when they were to be taken in a Mystical sense, for Heavenly, Inward and
Spiritual Glory.

They stumbled at the stumbling stone] By this stumbling block or stumbling
stone, is meant Christ, who is here called and likened to a stumbling block or
stumbling stone, because as a man who in the way which he goes, stumbles at a
stone, or a block which lies in his way, comes to hurt: So did the Jews
stumbling as it were at Christ, while they walked after justification, get hurt
thereby, while they were offended at him and rejected him, as though he were an
Impostor and not the true Christ, or Messiah promised by God.

They stumbled at] i. e. They are said to have stumbled at Christ, because they
rejected Christ, and persecuted him, and so brought sin upon their head, which
was hurt to them, as a man takes hurt which stumbleth at a Stone, or a Block
in the way.

Ver. 33. As it is written, behold I say, etc.] Before these words, understand
these or the like words, viz. For Christ was a stumbling stone to the Jews, q.d
For Christ was a stumbling Stone to the Jews as it is written, Behold I lay in
Sion a stumbling stone and Rock of Offense.

As it is written] viz. Isaiah 28.16. But yet the Testimony here alleged is
not to be found there word for word, as it is here quoted, as they that will
compare the places may observe; For these words, a stumbling block and a Rock
of Offense are not there to be found Wherefore most Interpreters do take this
Testimony, not as a simple testimony taken out of any one place, but as a
testimony compounded of two parts, part whereof is taken out of Isaiah, Chap.
28.16. Part out of Isaiah 8.14. Where we have these words; A stone of stumbling
and a Rock of Offense.

But yet notwithstanding this we cannot find the whole testimony word for word,
in, or to be made out of those two places conjoined; Yet nevertheless we may
find the whole sense of the words, even in Isaiah 28.16. mystically expounded,
and therefore I conceive that the Apostle takes his testimony wholly from
thence, though to explain the mystical sense thereof, he may borrow some words
from Isaiah 8.14.

The words therefore as they are read in Isaiah, Chap. 28.16. are these, Behold
I the Lord lay in Sion for a foundation a stone, a tried stone, A precious
corner stone, a sure foundation; He that believes shall not make haste: Which
words in the first and literal sense are spoken of Ez^kiah King of Judah, who
when the Assyrians were in the Land of Judah wasting and destroying the Land,
yet did believe the word of the Lord; that he notwithstanding would defend and
keep Jerusalem, and so was saved, when most of the Jews which would not
b^lieve, were destroyed.

Hezekiah therefore in the literal sense, was called here a Foundation in Sion,
because he dwelt in Sion, that is, in Jerusalem, and was a Foundation, that
is, a cause of safety to them which flew thither for safety, for, for Hezekiahs
sake did God keep Jerusalem safe at that time. He might be called also a
Foundation, because he was the Chiefest of them which believed in Jerusalem,
that Jerusalem should not be destroyed by the Assyrians, but saved by the Lord
from being destroyed by them; And was by his example and counsel an inducement
also to others to believe, and to stand fast and strong in their belief: For as
a company of men knit or combined together in one, are likened sometimes to a
natural body, and the Chief of them to the head of that body: So are they
sometimes likened to an House, and the chief of them to the Foundation of that
house. And thus might Hezekiah also be likened to the Foundation of an house;
because he was the Chief of those believers which were in Jerusalem, when the
Assyrians wasted the Land of Judah, and not only so, but by his faith induced
others to believe, yea, and by his example and constancy in that his faith, he
upheld othe^s in that their faith also, as the foundation of an house, which is
firmly laid, upholds that house, that it does not wave, or sink or fall.

A Stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation: See those
expounded of Hezekiah in my Exposition of the book of Isaiah.

Whosoever believes. -- i. e. Whosoever believes, as Hezekiah that foundation
does, to wit, That the Lord will save Jerusalem from the Assyrians.

Shall not make haste. -- i. e. Shall not need to make haste, (to save himself)
into some far Country, as many which believed not, did; But may stay in
Jerusalem, and be safe there, according to that which he believes.

Thus is that of Isaiah, Chap. 28.16. to be taken in the first and literal
sense and thus to be expounded. But in the second Mystical and Sublime sense
(which is the sense here intended) it is to be taken of Christ. Who is said to
be a Foundation because he is the Chief of All the Church, which is his house,
and a tried precious and sure Foundation, because on him all the parts and
members of this house, do rely for salvation, and by him they stand, and he is
able to sustain them all, and will never fail them.

And he is said to be a foundation laid in Sion, that is, in Jerusalem,
because Sion, that is, Jerusalem was the chief City of the Jews, where Christ
was very conversant, where he was fully preached, where he suffered, that he
might be a foundation, and save his people from their sins, and from whence his
Law, that is, his Gospel did go forth.

By Sion also is the Church of Christ mystically meant, of which Sion was a
type, and of which Christ was the head and foundation.

And this was the prime end which was intended by God concerning Christ, viz.
That he should be laid in Sion as a foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a
precious corner stone, a sure foundation, to wit, that they which believed in
him might be of his Church and built upon him, and might be by him saved; But
by accident he which was laid in Sion as a Foundation, a Stone, a tried stone,
a precious corner stone, proved (because of the Jews unbelief and their offense
taken at him;) A Stumbling Stone and a Rock of Offense, that is, a Stumbling
Stone and a Rock of offense to the Jews, from whom by their unbelief and malice
against him, they received hurt, as he receives hurt which stumbles at a stone
which lies in his way, or which stumbleth at the Corner stone of a building:
And this also is couched in these words, A stone, a tried stone, a precious
Corner stone.

It is contained in the Scripture, says S. Peter, Behold I lay in Sion a chief
Corner stone, elect precious and he that believes in him shall not be
confounded, unto you therefore which believe he is precious: But to them which
be disobedient, the stone which the builders disallowed, the same is made the
head stone of the Corner and a stone of Stumbling and a Rock of Offense, even
to them which stumble at the word, being disobedient whereto also they were
appointed, 1 Pet. Chap 2 ver. 6, 7, 8.

But how can these words a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone
signify any way a stumbling stone, and a rock of Offense?

I answer, The stone, tried stone, precious corner stone, sure foundation
signify here primarily all one and the same stone in a building, to wit, the
foundation stone or Corner stone of that building; for upon the corner stones
of the foundation does the weight of a building lie, and the building is
thereby sustained, and therefore that uses to be the chiefest stone.

Now because men as they pass by are apt to stumble at the Corner or Corner
stone of a building, rather than at any part or stone else thereof; Hence does
our Apostle (speaking of what Christ was foretold would be, by accident)
instead of a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation,
say a stumbling stone, and rock of Offense.

In Sion] i. e. In Jerusalem, so literally, In the Church, so mystically.

A stumbling stone] By this stumbling stone is meant Christ, which is called a
stumbling stone, because the Jews did stumble at him, that is, were offended at
him, and took hurt by that offense, as men do at a Stone in their way, at which
they do stumble, as I said before.

And a rock of offence] This is but a Repetition of the former words.

Where Note, that that which is called commonly a stone is called a Rock with
the Hebrews. So that Stone with which Zipporah circumcised her son, is called
Petra, by the vulgar Translatour, that is, a Rock, Exodus 4 24.

A rock of offense signifies by an Hebraism a rock or stone at which one
offends, that is, at which one stumbleth or hitteth his foot.

And whosoever believes on him] i. e. But yet, whosoever believes on that
stone or rock, that is, on Christ for salvation or Justification.

And] for, But yet.

Shall not be ashamed] That is, shall obtain Salvation, or Justification by him.

Because when we hope or look for any thing and miss of it, we are ashamed,
hence not to be ashamed, is put here, for to obtain what we hope and look for
by Christ, that is, Salvation from our sins, according to our hope and
expectation.

Shall not be ashamed] These words are not read either in Isaiah 28.16. or
Isaiah 8.14. according to the Hebrew: But yet we have the sense of them in
these words, shall not make haste, Isaiah 28.16.

As they which did not believe the promise or word of God (when he promised to
defend and keep Jerusalem from the fury of the Assyrians) did not stay in
Jerusalem, but make haste out of Jerusalem, into other parts: But they which
believed staid in Jerusalem, and made not the haste which unbelievers did, were
saved by their staying, and not hastening out of it. So they which did not
believe on Christ, and look for salvation, and justification from him, staid
not on him, but hastened to some other means of salvation, or Justification, as
v. g. to the works of the Law, etc. And thereby missed of Salvation; whereas
the others, who made not haste to such means, but staid on Christ, attained to
it: And from hence not to make haste, may be put here, for, not to miss of
Salvation, or to attain to salvation by a matelepsis. And the Septuagint from
hence may render these words shall not make haste, by a matelepsis, (...), and
our Apostle following them, (...), shall not be ashamed.

And whosoever believes on him shall not be ashamed] Note that these words do
not appertain to that which the Apostle was to prove, which was that Christ was
a stumbling block to the unbelieving Jews: But because they were joined with
the same testimony, which he produced for that purpose, he does here recite
them, yet not for the purpose aforesaid, but to stir up others, to believe in
Christ, and to comfort those which did believe.

It may be objected, that these words are otherwise expounded here of Christ in
the Mystical, than they were of Hezekiah in the literal sense, and not
according to the same similitude: For though it be said in the litteral sense,
that whosoever believes, etc. yet it is not meant whosoever believes on
Hezekiah (though he were a Type of Christ) But in the Mystical sense, it is
here expounded of Christ, whosoever believes in Christ: Therefore one of the
Expositions may seem faulty, and not agreeable to the Prophets meaning.

But for answer to this, I say, That when one place carries two several
senses with it, one litteral, the other mystical, the words may, yea must be
often times otherwise construed and interpreted in the Mystical sense, than
they are or were in the litteral, which I have observed and treated of else
where: Wherefore that which is objected, is no sound argument against the
Exposition given.

CHAP. X.
1. BRethren, my hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that they might
be saved.

1. And now, that I may resume that which I left unperfect in the beginning of
the ninth chapter (though in other words) and may here perfect it: Brethren my
hearts desire and prayer for the Jews is, that they may be justified.

2. For I bear them record, that they have a zeal of God, but not according to
knowledge.

2. For though there is talk of their zeal toward God, as though such zealous
men could not but be justified, I am also ready to bear them witness, that they
have a zeal of God, yet are they not therefore justified, because their zeal is
not according to knowledge.

3. For they being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and going about to establish
their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness
of God.

3. For they being ignorant of the way of Justification, which God has
appointed and as it were scored out to us, and going about to establish, and
maintain that way of Justification, which they themselves have invented and
chosen to themselves, they have not submitted themselves to that way of
Justification, which God has appointed, to approve thereof and walk therein.

4. For Christ is the end of the Law, for righteousness to every one that
believes.

4. For whereas Christ is set forth to be the way of Justification through
faith in him, to every one that believes, and the Law it self pointed at him
for this, as its end; the Jews have rejected him, and refused to believe in him.

5 For Moses describes the righteousness which is of the Law, that the man
which does those things shall live by them.

5. But though I said, that the Law it self, pointed at Christ for this, as at
its end, let no man therefore think that the way of Justification, which the
Law prescribes, and the way of Justification, which is by Faith, and which the
Gospel holds out to us, is all one: for Moses describes the way of
Justification, which is of the Law, in this manner; saying, that the man, which
does those things exactly, and without the least failer in that, which the law
requires shall be justified by them.

6. But the righteousness which is of faith, speaks on this wise Say not in
thine heart, who shall ascend into heaven? That is to bring Christ down from
above.

6. But the Preacher of that Justification, which is by faith, says, but (that
thou may not think, that this justification, which is by the faith of Christ,
is as far from being attained, as that which is by the Law) say not in thine
heart, who shall ascend into heaven, to wit, to bring down Christ from above?

7. Or who shall descend into the deep? That is to bring Christ again from the
dead.

7. Or who shall descend into Hell to bring up Christ again from the dead? as
though it were any way necessary for us, for the attaining of justification by
faith, that Christ should be bodily present with us.

8. But what says it? The word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thine
heart, that is the word of faith, which we preach.

8. But what says the Preacher of justification by faith? thou need not to
go far to know, what he says, for the word which he speaks is nigh to thee,
for it is in thy mouth, for thou talkest of it; and it is in thy heart for thou
think of it; To be short, that is the word which the Preacher of
justification which is by faith, preaches.

9: That if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe
in thine heart, that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved.

8. This which we, which are the Apostles of Christ do preach, viz. If thou
shall confess with thy mouth, That Jesus is the Lord, and shall unfeignedly
believe, that God has raised him from the dead: Thou shall be justified.

10. For with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth
confession is made unto salvation.

10. For with the heart man believes unto Justification, and with the mouth
confession is made to salvation.

11. For the Scripture says, whosoever believes on him shall not be ashamed.

11. For the Scripture says ( Isaiah 28.16.) Whosoever believes on him, shall
be sure to obtain justification.

12. For there is no difference between the Jew, and the Greek: for the same
Lord over all, is rich unto all that call upon him.

12. I say whosoever believes on him: for there is no difference between the
Jew and the Gentile in this matter: For the same Lord being Lord over all, is
rich unto all (whatsoever they are) which call upon him for salvation.

13. For whosoever shall call upon the Name of the Lord shall be saved.

13. For whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, that he may be saved,
whether he be Jew, or whether he be Gentile; shall be saved from his sins, as
it is written, Joel 2.32.

14. How then shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? and how
shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear
without a Preacher?

14. And note here the Jews, which are so much against the Gentiles, and would
not that Preachers should be sent to them, that when the Scripture says,
whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved, It says, that
the Gentiles shall call upon the name of the Lord for salvation as well as the
Jews: But now how shall they call on him for salvation, in whom they have not
believed? And how shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? And
how shall they hear without a preacher?

15. And how shall they preach, except they be sent? As it is written: How
beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of peace, and bring glad
tidings of good things.

15. And how shall any preach except they be sent? Wherefore, preachers of the
Gospel have been sent to the Gentiles: And the Gentiles have heard them
effectually and believed: For they have received the preachers of the Gospel
joyfully, and have said of them as it is written, Isaiah 52.7. How beautiful
are the feet of them, which preach the Gospel of peace, and bring glad tidings
of good things, and how welcome are they to us?

16. But they have not all obeyed the Gospel. For Esaias says, Lord who has
believed our report?

16. But though the Gentiles have heard the preachers of the Gospel joyfully,
and believed their preaching yet the Jews have not All, yea very few of them,
have believed the Gospel, for as Isaiah said of them long since, in the person
of the preachers of the Gospel, Isaiah 53.1. Lord who among them, has believed
our report? So is it come to pass.

17. So then faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God.

17. But when the Prophet says; Lord who has believed our report? note here
by the way, that that which I treated of a little before, is plain from hence
also, to wit, That faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God
preached, so that it was needful that the word should be preached to the
Gentiles, that they might believe.

18. But I say, have they not heard? Yes verily, their sound went into all the
earth, and their words unto the ends of the world:

18. But to go on; Perhaps some will say, that if the Jews believe not, it is
because they have not heard the Gospel preached to them: But I say, have they
not heard the Gospel preached? Yes verily they have heard it; For the sound of
the Apostles, is gone into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the
world, and this could not, nor ought to have been, before the Gospel had been
fully preached to the Jews.

19. But I say, Did not Israel know? First Moses says, I will provoke you to
Jealousy by them that are no people, and by a foolish nation I will anger you.

19. But because the Jews think it strange, that the Gentiles should be called
by the preaching of the Gospel, and the Gospel should be preached to them; I
ask, did not the Jews know of the calling of the Gentiles? They must needs know
of it they could not be ignorant of it; for the Lord says in the book of Moses
called Deuteronomy: Chap. 32.21. I will provoke you, O ye sons of Israel, to
jealousy by the heathen which are now no people of mine, and by a foolish
Nation, that is, by the Gentiles, I will anger you, to wit, by making them as
near to my self as ye are.

20. But Esaias is very bold, and says, I was found of them that sought me
not: I was made manifest unto them that asked not after me.

20. Yea Esaias is very bold toward the Jews, and says to them in the person
of God, nothing fearing them at all, I was found of the Heathen that heretofore
sought me not: I was made manifest to the Gentiles, that before this time,
asked not after me.

21. But to Israel he says, All day long I have stretched forth my hands unto
a disobedient and gainsaying people.

21. But to the Jews he says of them themselves, All the day long have I
stretched out my hands and preached to a disobedient and gain saying people;
which are contentious and obey not the truth.

CHAP. X.
Ver. 1. Brethren, my hearts desire and prayer to God is, that Israel may be
saved] The Apostle by this manner of speech (As it seems to me) resumes the
speech which I said, he left imperfect in the beginning of the ninth chapter,
where he showed the great affection which he had toward the Jews, by the
sorrow which he had for them, and falls here upon that which he intended there;
but did not prosecute, by reason of Emergent objections rising by the way: And
here he shows his affection which he has to the Jews too, but it is by
manifesting his earnest desire and prayer for them that they may be saved from
their sins.

Brethren] By this he speaks to all which he wrote to, whether Jews or others:
For all Christians use to call Christians by the name of Brethren.

For Israel] i. e. For the Jews which are the children of Israel. Metonymia
Efficientis.

That they might be saved] That they might be saved (to wit) from their sins,
that is, that they might be justified.

When he says that they might be saved he signifies, that they were out of the
way of salvation.

Ver. 2. For I bear them record that they have a zeal of God, but not according
to knowledge] He preventes an objection here, for some might say; Paul by your
wishing or praying that the Jews might be saved, you signify that they are out
of the way of salvation. But can they be out of the way of salvation, who are
so zealous of Gods glory (beside that, that they are the Children of Abraham
and of Israel) and so desirous to follow his will, as they are?

To this the Apostle answers, q. d. yea, for though they have a zeal of God
(which generally is laudable) yet their zeal is not according to knowledge: And
so, that zeal of theirs which is in the general, laudable; by this their
ignorance, is become vicious and unprofitable for salvation.

I bare them Record] i. e. I confess, and am ready to bare them witness.

That they have a zeal of God] i. e. That they have an ardent desire to please
God, and to do according to his will. Zeal signifies an ardent or vehement
desire and endeavor to do a thing. And in the General, an Ardent and vehement
desire to please God, and to do according to his will, is a thing praise worthy.

But not according to knowledge] i. e. But their ardent desire to please God,
and to do according to his will, is not according to knowledge.

Though a zeal of God, and an ardent desire of pleasing him is good and praise
worthy if it be considered in the general; yet if it be considered with this
particular, viz. of not being according to knowledge, it is naught.

How their zeal was not according to knowledge, and so vicious, or naught, he
shows in the next verse.

Ver. 3. For they being ignorant of Gods righteousness] i. e. For they being
ignorant of that way, which God has appointed for obtaining Righteousness, or
justification.

Righteousness, that is, Justification, is to be taken here, by a Metonymie,
for the way to Righteousness or Justification.

The way which God appoints for obtaining Righteousness or Justification, is
by faith in Christ, which the Jews knew not, or at least would not believe, and
so were willingly ignorant of.

Going about to establish their own righteousness] i. e. Endeavoring or going
about to maintain their own way of obtaining Righteousness or Justification.

By righteousness, that is, by justification, is here meant, the way of
righteousness or justification as before.

The Jews for the greatest part of them would seek righteousness or
justification by works, Chap. 9.32 which way God approved, not, nor appointed,
Chap. 9. ver. 11. wherefore the Apostle calls that, their own way; which way
of theirs they did strive to maintain, against the way of faith.

Have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of God] i. e. Have not
submitted themselves to, and to have not followed that way of righteousness,
which God has appointed to justification; which is by faith.

He seems to speak of righteousness, or of the way of righteousness here as of
a person, which we ought to obey by a Prosopopoeia.

Ver. 4. For Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that
believes, etc.] He proves here, that the Jews have not submitted themselves
to the righteousness of God. And the proof runs after this manner. They which
have not received Christ nor believed in him, have not submitted themselves to
the righteousness of God; But the Jews, for the greatest part of them, have not
received Christ nor believed in him; therefore the Jews, for the greatest part
of them, have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of God. This whole
Syllogism the Apostle leaves to be understood, as that which may easily be
understood by what he has here said; And taking the minor for granted, he
proves the major here when he says. For Christ is the end of the Law for
righteousness to every one that believes.

For Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that
believeth] i. e. For Christ was appointed (to wit) of God, to be the Author of
righteousness or justification to every one that believes on him; And that the
Law it self testifies, because the Law it self points at Christ, and did lead
us to him for the obtaining of righteousness, or justification, by him.

Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness] Christ is said to be the end
of the Law for righteousness, that is, for justification; because the Moral Law
convincing man of sin and laying open his weakness and disability, made him to
look for righteousness, that is, for justification and remission of sins from
without himself. And the Ceremonial Law did prefigure Christ, and the cleansing
of our sins by him, by the sacrifices, and washings and other rites which it
appointed.

Or which, yet is almost the same with what I have said,

Christ may be said to be the end of the Law, that is, the final cause for
which it was given (to wit) of God by Moses, Because it was partly given to
prefigure Christ, Partly to be as a School Master to bring us to Christ, Gal.
3.24.

This is an Argument to prove that Christ was appointed of God for
Righteousness or Justification, to wit, because the Law (which was given of God
by Moses) did point at him, and lead to him, for that end.

Ver. 5. For Moses describes the Righteousness of the Law, etc.] Because the
Apostle said ver. 4. That Christ was the end of the Law for righteousness, etc.
A man might object and say, that if it be so that Christ was the end of the Law
for Righteousness, then is the Righteousness of the Law, and the righteousness
of faith all one, that is, it is one and the same way which the Law prescribes,
for Righteousness or Justification, And which the Gospel prescribes. And may
infer from thence, that if it be so; then the Jews are not ignorant of the
righteousness of God, but have submitted themselves thereunto, Which was that
which the Apostle denied, ver. 3.

The Apostle therefore prevents this Objection, and to show, that the
Righteousness of the Law, And the Righteousness of Faith is not the same, or
that it is not one and the same way which the Law prescribes for
righteousness, and which the Gospel prescribes, says, for Moses describes
the righteousness, which is of the Law, etc. q. d. Neither because I said, That
Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness, Do I say that the Righteousness
of the Law, and the Righteousness of Faith are both one, or that it is one and
the same way, which the Law prescribes for righteousness, and which the Gospel
prescribes? For Moses describes the Righteousness, which is of the Law, after
this manner. That the man which does those things shall live by them: But the
the righteousness which is of faith (or but the Preacher of the Gospel)
speaks on this wise, Viz. If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord
Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart, that God has raised him from the
dead, thou shall be saved.

Moses describes the righteousness which is of the Law, etc.] i. e. Moses (who
was publisher of the law, and by whom the Law was given) describes the way of
righteousness, which the Law sets out or appoints thus, to wit, that the man,
that does those things shall live by them.

By the righteousnest of the Law, I understand by a Metonymy, the way appointed
or scored out in the Law or by the Law, for obtaining, or attaining to
righteousness.

The man which does those things shall live by them] i. e. That man which does
fully and perfectly observe and keep all the Commandments of the Law, as fully
and exactly, as the Law requires them to be done, shall be justified by them.

This testimony is taken out of Levit. 18.5. where the whole verse runs thus.
Ye shall therefore keep my statutes and my judgments; which if a man do, he
shall live in them

Which does these things] i. e. Which does the Statutes and judgments, that is
the commandments of the Lord, and does them most exactly.

This Sentence is to be understood of exact and perfect keeping of the Law, as
appears by Deuteronomy 27.26. where a curse is denounced against all those,
which keep not all the words of the Law, See Gal 3.8. etc.

Shall live by them] i. e. Shall be justified by them.

To live signifies here to be justified, as Chap. 1. v. 17.

Ver. 6. But the righteousness which is of Faith speaks on this wise] By the
righteousness, which is of faith, I understand by a Metonymy, or Prosopopoeia
the Preacher of that Righteousness, which is of faith, and this I do to oppose
it to Moses, the Preacher or publisher of the Law and the righteousness thereof.

That which the righteousness of faith, or the Preacher of the righteousness,
which is of faith, speaks, is that which is recorded, ver. 9 viz. That if
thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine
heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. So that that
which is said, between this and that, is brought in by the way, and is to be
read, as it were with a parenthesis.

Say not in thine heart; who shall ascend into Heaven?] These words do not
depend upon the words immediately going before, but are (together with all
which is between this, and the ninth verse) to be read, as I said, as it were
with a parenthesis.

These words from this place to the ninth verse (mutatis mutandis) are taken
out of Deuteronomy. 30.12. etc. and here used by an accommodation.

The Apostle has showed before, as Cap. 4.14. etc. That Justification could
not be obtained by the Law. Now least any one should say the same of faith, he
removes here from faith, those things, which might make it seem impossible, to
obtain Justification by faith. And first (because he said that Christ is the
end of the Law for righteousness to every one that believes, least any might
think from thence, that Christ's bodily prescence were necessary, he shows in
this and the following verse. That for Christ to be bodily present is not
necessary at all to this. And because though his bodily presence is not
necessary, yet his word is requisite: and some might say, that it was no easy
matter to come to the knowledge of that his word, nor was it an easy matter to
find out where that his word was to be had. He shows, ver. 8. that his word
is not far off, but nigh at hand, and easy to be obtained by anyone.

Say not in thy heart] i. e. Say not in thy mind, or cast not about in thy
thoughts, saying.

The heart is put here for the mind or the thoughts after the Hebrew manner.

Who shall ascend into heaven? that is, to bring Christ down from above] i. e.
Who shall ascend into Heaven for us, for this end, that he might bring down
Christ from above? as though it were necessary, that Christ should be bodily
present, for thee to obta^n the righteousness, which is of faith or that thou
can not know, how to obtain that righteousness, except he should be bodily
present with thee, to show thee.

Ver. 7. Or who shall descend into the deep? that is, to bring Christ again
from the dead?] Or who will descend into Hell to bring Christ again from the
dead, for this end, as though it were necessary. that Christ should be bodily
present, for thee to obtain the righteousness, which is, of Faith, or that thou
can not know how to obtain that righteousness, except he were bodily present
with thee, to show thee.

By what the Apostle has said here, he shows that it is not needful that
Christ should be bodily present with us, that we may believe and be saved by
the righteousness which is of faith.

Being that Christ has left the Earth in h^s body, he must needs be their in
Heaven above, or among the dead beneath, therefore the Apostle says, Say not
in thine heart, who shall ascend into heaven? that is, to bring down Christ
from above? or who shall descend into the deep? that is, to bring up Christ
again from the dead? And names no more places.

Into the deep] By the deep, understand here, the place of the dead: For so
that which follows, Viz. To bring up Christ again from the dead, bids us to
interpret it.

In this Interpretation, which I have given of those two verses, I point both
the end of the seventh and eighth verses, with an Interrogatory, q. d. Say not
in thine heart, who shall descend unto Heaven? to wit, to bring down Christ
from above? Or who shall descend into the deep? to wit, to bring Christ again
from the dead? and for the so pointing of it, I have Deuteronomy, 30.12. for my
direction: And the Syriack, and Ethiopique translations for my warrant.

Ver. 8. But what says it?] That is, but what says the righteousness which is
of faith? that is, but what says the Preacher of that righteousness, which is
of faith? Metonymia.

The word is nigh thee, etc.] The Apostle prevents an objection here, for a Jew
may say; whatsoever the righteousness of faith says, the w^rd which it says,
may be far enough from me, and I may never come to hear it, or know it; or (if
I do) I must spend much labor and travail, to find it out; this objection, I
say, the Apostle prevents, when he says; the word is nigh thee, even in thy
mouth, etc.

Note that in these words the Apostle alludes to that place of Deuteronomy. 30.14. and
uses it here, by an accommodation, as I said before.

The Word] i. e. The word which the Preacher of the Righteousness, which is of
faith, says.

Even in thy mouth, and in thy heart] i. e. The word is so nigh thee, as that
thou talkest of it, with thy mouth, and meditatest upon it in thy heart, and
bear it in thy memory, for thou can not forget it.

This seems to be a proverbial kind of speech.

The Heart is taken here for the mind or memory, etc.

That is the word of Faith, which we preach] That is, the word which the
Preacher, of the Righteousness, which is of Faith preaches, which we which are
the Apostles of Christ preach, viz, etc.

Note, that faith is taken here, for the Righteousness of faith, and that again
for the Preacher of Righteousness of Faith by a Metonymy.

Ver. 9. That if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus] i. e. That
if thou shall confess with thy mouth, the Lord Jesus, Supple, to be such as the
Father has set him out to be or such, as the Gospel does describe him to be.

Some interpret the words thus, If thou shall confess with thy mouth Jesus to
be the Lord.

Jesus is called the Lord, because he has purchased us: For he has purchased
us with the price of his blood.

Note here that it is not absolutely necessary to salvation to confess the Lord
Jesus at all times with the mouth, but only then, when the case requires it;
but it is absolutely necessary to confess the Lord Jesus with the mouth in the
preparation of the heart, that is, it is absolutely necessary to be always
ready in heart to confess the Lord Jesus with the mouth, when the case shall
require it: and that is when the glory of God would suffer by us, if we should
not do it: I take therefore to confess with the mouth the Lord Jesus, here, to
be, to be ready in heart to confess the Lord Jesus with the mouth.

Note here that to confess the Lord Jesus, with the mouth, or to be ready in
heart so to confess him, is the fruit and effect of Faith. Therefore here is an
(...) or an (...), when he says, That if thou shall confess with thy mouth the
Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thy heart, that God has rais-him from the
dead. For the natural order of the words should have been this. If thou shall
believe in thy heart, that God has raised Jesus from the dead, and confess the
Lord Jesus with thy mouth, thou shall be saved.

Saving or justifying faith is a faith, which as I said, Cap. 1. ver 17. comes
up so high, as that it does set a man on work to do those things, which God by
his new covenant with him, requires of him; as the case requires, and as
opportunity serves; so that he must be ready at all times in the preparation of
his heart, to confess with his mouth the Lord Jesus, and not only that, but to
do every good work also: and this is that which the Apostle intimates here,
willing, that we should know that Justifying faith* is not a dead, barren, or
fruitless faith, but an operative faith, which will bring forth good works as
opportunity offers it self.

Wherefore, by that which he says of confession with the mouth, understand all
good works besides, as well as that: But he seems to make mention of this
only (not to exclude other good works, but) because the time in which he wrote
this, might be a time of persecution; with the Romans, or such as that they
might fear a persecution; at which time confession of Christ with the mouth,
will be most requisite; or because he said ver. 8. The word is nigh thee even
in thy mouth. Therefore he may particularly mention the confession of Christ
with the mouth. And for the same reason also he may say, and shall believe in
thy heart expressing those words in thine heart, here because he said before,
and in thine heart, verse 8.

And shall believe with the heart] i. e. And shall heartily believe.

That God has raised him from the dead.] That we may be justified, it is not
only required, that we should believe of Jesus, that God has raised him from
the dead, but we must believe also that he was made man, and crucified for us,
and that he was the Son of God, and the Redeemer of the world, etc. And many
things must we believe also concerning the Father and the Holy Ghost: Therefore
by that, that God has raised up Jesus from the dead, we must (by a
Synechdoche, or Syllepsis) understand all the mysteries of faith, and also all
that God requires of us by his new covenant with us, to be done and believed
by us.

But the Apostle may in this place make mention only of this, that God raised
up Jesus from the dead; because he mentioned the bringing up of Christ from the
dead, ver. 7. Or because the resurrection of Christ from the dead did
praesuppose most other articles of our faith; or because that Article was
always most difficult to be believed.

Thou shall be saved] To wit, from thy sins.

Ver. 10. Unto Righteousness] i. e. Unto Justification, that is, that he may be
justified, or so that he is justified thereby.

And with the mouth confession is made unto salvation] i. e. And to be always
ready prepared to confess Christ with the mouth, And when the case shall
require then to confess him actually, is that which brings Salvation.

Thus I understand this confession, of the preparation of the heart to confess
Christ with the mouth, as I did that ver. 9.

And note here, that the Apostle does not make this confession with their
mouth, as a thing plainly and really disjoined from faith, But that which
follows naturally and immediately from it, as the heat from the fire.
Therefore in the proof of what he says here (which proof he produces, ver.
11.) He mentions only Belief. And says, For the scripture says, whosoever
believes on him shall not be ashamed, which would not reach to confession of
Christ with the mouth, were it not, that that were an Effect of faith,
naturally and immediately flowing from it, and so one in a manner with it.

Ver. 11. For the scripture saith] To wit, Isaiah Cap. 28. ver. 16.

Whosoever believes on him shall not be ashamed] i. e. Whosoever believes on
Christ shall truly be justified. See what we said of this phrase and words,
Chap. 9. ver. 33.

Ver. 12. For there is no difference between the Jew and the Greek] Supple, In
that which concerns Faith and Salvation.

This the Apostle infers out of the former verse, but not out of the word
whosoever, which we read there (for that word is not read in the forenamed
place of the prophet Isaiah) but out of the Indefinite generality of the
Sentence it self, recited out of the said prophet, by which none is excluded
from salvation or Justification, whether he be Jew, or Gentile, if he do but
believe.

The Greek] i. e. The Gentile, See Romans 1.16.

For the same Lord over all, is rich unto all that call upon him]

It is very congruous to reason, that he which is Lord of all, will be the same
to all be they of what Nation or Stock they will, who believe in him; And that
he will not accept of one, and reject the other, Especially, when he is so rich
in mercy, as that he has mercy for thousands, yea mercy enough for all.

Is rich unto all] i. e. Is abundant in grace and mercy to all.

The Apostle often uses Riches for abundance, and the riches here spoken of
are riches of grace, or riches of mercy, as Ephesians: 1.7.

That call upon him] See verse 13.

Ver. 13. Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord] To call upon the name
of the Lord is (by an hebrew Periphrasis or Metonymy) to call upon the Lord.
And to call upon the Lord here, is to beseech the Lord, and to pray him, that
he would save him or deliver him, from his sins, but yet to pray in faith.

Whosoever] Whether he be Jew or Gentile.

Shall be saved] To wit, from his sins.

This which the Apostle here says, is taken out of the Prophet Joel, Joel.
2.32. And it is there spoken in the literal sense of such Jews, as should call
upon the name of the Lord for deliverance when they were oppressed by the
Assyrians, But in the mystical sense it is to be understood, of all such as
should pray unto the Lord for deliverance from sins, in faith. For the miseries
and calamities of the Jews under the Assyrians, was a Type of our miseries and
calamities under Sin; and their deliverance from the Assyrians, a Type of our
deliverance from sin.

Ver. 14. How then shall they call on him in whom they have not believed, etc.]
The Apostle proves from what he said in the former verse, viz From that, That
whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord (and the Gentile, as well as the
Jew) shall be saved.

That which the Apostle handles, Chap. 9. ver. 24, 25, 26. to wit, that God
has called the Gentiles, and did intend to call them and send Ministers to
them, he proves here as it were by Steps and degrees.

And he proves it for this end, that the Jews should not think, that what he
preached concerning the Gentiles, was from his own head, but that God spoke as
much heretofore even by his Prophets of old.

The Apostle said out of the Prophet Joel in the former verse, that whosoever
shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. That is, that whosoever,
whether he be Jew or Gentile, etc.

Now whereas that universal word whosoever, and that universal proposition
appertained both to Jew and Gentile, the Gentile has cause to look for
Salvation, as well as the Jew, if he call upon God; now if it were so, that the
Gentiles should never be in a capacity, to call upon God this would become a
vain assertion, and this would be, but an empty, and idle sound (with reverence
be it spoken) as to them) seeing therefore there is no not the least particle
of the word of God idle: the Apostle may solidely prove from hence, that the
word of faith was to be sent to the Gentiles, saying, How then shall they call
on him, in whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him, of
whom they have not heard?

How then shall they call on him, etc.] i. e. How then shall the Gentiles call
(for of them he speaks here) that is, how shall they pray for Salvation to him,
etc.

In whom they have not believed] Whom they do not believe is able and willing
to save them, and so on whom they cannot rely, upon for Salvation.

Of whom they have not heard] To wit, Effectually.

How shall they hear without a Preacher?] i. e. How shall they hear (to wit)
Effectually, except they have some body of credit to preach the Gospel unto
them; and such as they may believe came from God.

Ver. 15. And how shall they preach] And how shall the Preachers preach, to
wit, So as that they may be credited of them, to whom they preach; that that
which they preach is from God.

Except they be sent] i. e, Except they be sent from God, and so sent, as that
it may appear to them, that God sent them.

The Apostle speaks here chiefly, of such as were first sent to the Gentiles to
preach the Gospel and Remission of sins to them. Such as the Apostles were, and
therefore it is, hapily, that he uses the word (...) here, a word alluding to
the name of an Apostle. And the Scope of the Apostle, which is, to prove, that
the calling of the Gentiles, is directly from God, requires, that we should
interpret this place of them, or such as they were.

And now as for them, which first preached the Gospel to the Gentiles, it was
necessary for them, that they should be sent immediately from God, and so sent
as that it might appear to them to whom they were sent, that they came from
God; Otherwise they to whom they came had no reason to believe them, nor would
they have been blamed for not believing, John 15.24. And therefore God when he
sent his messengers, did show that they were sent with that doctrine which they
preached to them, from him, by the miracles which he wrought by them; For he
gave testimony unto the word of his grace, which they preached, and granted
signs and wonders to be done by their hands, Acts 14.3.

The doctrine which the Apostles, the first preachers, preached to the Gentiles
and confirmed by miracles, we have written by some of them, and attested by the
rest, and it is contained in the books of the New Testament: And to assure us,
that this doctrine came by them from God, and was attested and confirmed by
miracles wrought by them, we have the unanimous consent and tradition of all
Churches of Christ from time to time, since their time; So that they which
preach no other doctrine but what they taught, have no need of new miracles to
confirm their doctrine; And that man would be a miracle, or wonder rather
himself, who should now disbelieve the doctrine of the New Testament; which is
and has been received with such an universal consent from hand to hand, as
coming from God, and which has been confirmed by him by such works, as could
not be done but by a Divine power.

As it is written how beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of
peace? etc.] q. d. Wherefore the Apostles or preachers of the Gospel have been
sent to them, and they have heard them Effectually, and believed; For they have
received the preachers of the Gospel joyfully, and said of them as it is
written of them, How beautiful are the feet of them, which preach the Gospel of
peace? and bring glad tidings of good things?

These words, viz. wherefore the Apostles or Preachers of the Gospel have been
sent to them, and they have heard them Effectually, And believed, For they have
received the Preachers of the Gospel joyfully, and have said of them, etc. I
say these, or some such words as these are, are here to be understood, For that
the Apostle would show here, not only; that there were Preachers sent to the
Gentiles, But also that the Gentiles did joy fully receive them for their
message sake, and believe what they preached, is evident by what is said, verse
16, viz. But they have not all believed the Gospel; where he denies that of the
Jews, which he affirms here of the Gentiles.

And indeed the Apostle when he alleges any t^stimony of Scripture, he leaves
it often to his reader to make the conne^ion of it with the context.

As it is written] Viz. Isa. 52 7.

How beautiful are the feet of them which preach the Gospel of peace] i. e. How
welcome are they which preach the Gospel of peace, And how does the sight of
them rejoice our hearts?

The feet are put here by a Synechdoche for the whole man, And therefore the
feet rather then any other part, or member of man here, because it speaks of
coming, which is performed by the feet.

That which is beautiful is delightful to the eyes, and therefore they are said
of the Hebrews to have beautiful feet, which come with joyful news, because we
are delighted and rejoice at the coming of such messengers.

That which the Apostle here says is taken out of Isa. 52.7. where we read
thus, How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that brings good
tidings, that publishes peace that brings good tidings of good, that
publishes salvation? And they are spoken there in the person of a man or
certain men of Sion or Jerusalem (which was a Type of the Church of Christ) as
if on a sudden he or they saw a messenger hasting over the Mountains, which
were about Jerusalem, with good news of the delivery of the Jews out of the
Babylonish captivity by Cyrus.

But because the delivery of the Jews out of the Babylonish Captivity by Cyrus,
was a Type of the delivery of the faithful out of the Captivity of sin, by
Christ; and the messengers which brought good news to Jerusalem of the Jews
delivery by Cyrus, were Types of the Apostles and Ministers of the Gospel,
which were to bring good news of man's redemption from sin by Christ; And the
Jews which entertained those Messengers joyfully, because of their good news;
were Types of the faithful which received the Preachers of the word and their
word with rejoicing. Therefore these words of the Prophet Isaiah may be
understood, and are to be understood in the second and Sublime sense, of the
Apostles and Ministers of the Gospel, and the believing Gentiles, receiving
them and their doctrine with faith and joy.

The Gospel of Peace] The Gospel, is called the Gospel of peace, because it is
the good news of that peace which we have with God through Christ.

And bring glad tidings of good things] These good things are of our
justification, sanctification and hope of glorification through Christ, etc.

Ver. 16. But they have not all obeyed the Gospel] But though the Gentiles
have, yet the Jews have not all believed the Gospel.

By (...) these, he means the Jews here, of whom he denies that, here, which
he affirmed of the Gentiles just before.

Though the far greatest part of the Jews believed not, yet the Apostle speaks
as though there were but few of them which did not believe; And this he does,
that he might the less Exasperate them.

For Isaias saith] To wit, Isaiah 53.1.

Lord who has believed our report] This is spoken by the Prophet, in the first
and litteral sense, in the person of the Prophets, who preached to the Jews,
which were in the Babylonish Captivity, the good tidings of their deliverance
out of that captivity: But in the second Mystical and sublime sense, it is to
be understood, as spoken in the person of the Apostles and preachers of the
Gospel; for the deliverance of the Jews out of the Babylonish Captivity, was a
Type of man's redemption from sin, and the Prophets preaching to the Jews the
good tidings of their deliverance out of the Babylonish Captivity, were a Type
of the Apostles and preachers of the Gospel, preaching in the name of Christ
Remission of sins, or deliverance from Sin.

Who has believed? etc.] That is, who among the Jews have believed our report?

That, this is to be meant of the Jews Saint John also teaches, John 12.38.

Our report] i. e. Our report ( who are the Apostles and preachers of the word)
concerning the Remission of sins by Christ Jesus

This report was not from the Preachers and Apostles, as originally from
themselves: but it was that which they received from God, for that did they
teach and preach to the Jews, as Gods word, and that only.

Ver. 17. So then faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God] This
the Apostle gathers out of those words, ver. 16. Who has believed our report?
For the report there, is the report of remission of sins and by Christ, which
report, the Apostles and Preachers of the word brought to the Jews from God and
it was brought to them, that they might hear it, and that hearing it, they
might believe it. And this is the only means which God uses for the begetting
of faith.

This is a conclusion which the Apostle gathers here by the by, for it it not
pertinent to that business which he is now upon, to wit, to show the unbelief
of the Jews. But it Excellently shows that which he handled, ver. 14.15. To
wit, That no man can believe except he hears, and no man can hear except he
has a Preacher of the word of God, sent to him.

And here observe again that which I have observed heretofore, that the Apostle
when he has treated before of any subject, and is passed from it, yet though
he has passed from it, if any new argument arise which will prove that subject
from which he has passed, he does for the most part take notice of it, though
it be but by the by; and so does he here, to prove, what he said, ver. 14.15.

The word of God] To wit, the word of God preached, by such as are sent to
preach it.

Ver. 18. But I say, have they not heard?] i. e. But I say, have not the Jews
heard the word of God, that is, the Gospel preached unto them.

These words relate not to the 17 verse but to the 16 verse of this Chapter.
And by them the Apostle prevents an objection. For whereas he said, verse 16.
But they have not all obeyed the Gospel. For Esaias says, Lord, who has
believed our report? A man might object and say; yea but perhaps they never
heard the Gospel preached, or the report, which the prophet Isaiah speaks of.
No wonder therefore then, Paul, that they believe not; for how can they believe
in him of whom they have not heard? as you your self say verse 14.

Yes verily] Supple, they have heard.

Their sound went out into all the Earth, etc.] For their Sound (to wit, the
sound of the Apostles and Preachers of the word) is gone out into all the Earth.

Understand For here.

I had rather interpret these words (...) (...) according to our vulgar manner
of speaking, their sound is gone out into all the Earth, then their sound went
into all the Earth. For this signifies a going begun, not c^mpleated, or a
going still in fieri, whereas the other signifies a going past, or supposed to
be past, and come to its end. And my reason is, because the Apostles had not
then gone throughout the whole earth in preaching the Gospel, though they where
gone out of Judaea, and from among the the Jews, into the dwellings of the
Gentiles at this time.

The words which the Apostle here uses, are taken out of the 19. Psalm, and
the 4. verse; and the Psalmist there speaks of the heavens, which in their
manner speak the power and wisdom of God their maker through out the earth For
they are to be seen in every corner of the Earth, and wheresoever they are seen
they show forth the wisdom and power of him that made them; as a curious piece
of work, sets forth the cunning or Art of its workman: But the Apostle uses
them here (by an accommodation) of the preaching of the Apostles; and he may
the better use them so, because as in the old creation; the Heavens are the
highest of all corporeal Creatures So in the new Creation created by Christ
Jesus in which we are new Creatures, the Apostles, were the next after Christ
the highest.

These words then verily their sound is gone out into all the Earth, are to be
understood (as the Apostle here uses them) of the preaching of the Apostles q.
d. The Preaching of the Apostles is gone out (Supple) from Judaea, or from out
from among the Jews, into all the Earth, etc.

That the Apostles had gone out of Judaea, and from among the Jews to preach to
the Gentiles, at this time is manifest. This Epistle it self will manifest it,
and so will the place from whence it was written, to wit, Corinth. And now if
the Apostles were gone out of Judaea, and from among the Jews to preach the
Gospel, throughout the whole earth, to the Gentiles; then was the Gospel
preached before this to the Jews: for the Gospel was to be preached to the
Jews, before it was to be preached to the Gentiles. For it was necessary that
the word of God should first have been spoken to you; (say Paul and Barnabas to
the Jews) But seeing ye put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of
everlasting life, lo, we turn unto the Gentiles Acts 13.46. And Luke 24. ver.
46, 47. Our Savior thus speaks, Thus (says he) it is written and thus it
behoved Christ to suffer, and so rise from the dead the third day: And that
repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all
Nations, beginning (mark it) at Jerusalem.

Their sound] i. e. The voice or preaching of the Apostles, whereby they preach
the Gospel.

Went out into all the earth] i. e. Is gone out into all the earth among the
Gentiles.

And their words unto the and of the world] This is a Repetition of the former
sentence, but with an Hyperbole.

Ver. 19. But I say did not Israel know?] q. d. But (that I may return to speak
of the calling of the Gentiles) did not the Jews know, that God would call the
Gentiles and take them into favor?

Did not Israel] i. e. Did not the Jews? etc.

Israel is put here by a Metonymy, for the Jews, which are the Children of
Israel, who was Jacob.

Did not Israel know] Supple, that God would call the Gentiles, and take them
into favor. -- q. d. Yes he did know it, both by what Moses, and by what
Isaiah wrote.

First Moses saith] He says, first Moses says, because he speaks of Isaiah
afterward, who was after Moses.

Moses saith] Viz. Deuteronomy. 32.21. of which the People of Israel, cannot be
ignorant, if they heed it.

I will provoke you to jealousy by them that are not a people] i. e. I will
make so much of the Gentiles, which are not my people, and so highly favor
them with the choicest of my favors, as that I will make you, which are my
people jealous of my love

Jealousy is a sickness or illness of mind in a man proceeding from that, that
another injoyeth that, which he desires.

By them that are no people] i. e. By them which are not my people, or by them
which I took not to be my people, as I took you. O ye children of Jacob.

By these he means the Gentiles

And by a foolish People I will anger you] i. e. And I will do such things for
the Gentiles, and be so gracious toward them, as that it shall anger you to
see them so highly favored by me, as I will favor them; and make you envious
toward them.

A foolish Nation] by this he means the Gentiles, who may be called a foolish
nation, or a foolish people, as for other things, so especially for that, that
they worshipped Idols, and for this in particular are they branded for folly,
Isaiah chap. 45.20. and Isaiah chap. 44. v, 9, 10, 11, 18, 19, etc.

This testimony, is (as I said) taken out of Deuteronomy 32, 21. Where the Lord
threatens the Israelites, that if they did provoke him to jealousy by their
Sins, he would provoke them to jealousy by his love to the Gentiles. And the
Jews the children of Israel did mightily provoke him by their sins, when he
sent his only Son to them, and they would have none of him, but hated him,
persecuted him and crucified him; So far were they from believing in him.

V. 20. But Isaiah is very bold] i. e. But Isaiah is very bold, no way fearing
the anger of the Jews.

And saith] To wit, in the person of God.

I was found of them that sought me not] i. e. I was found of them (as the
Object of their worship, and faith, and as a merciful God in remitting their
sins) that sought me not in times past.

That sought me not] Supple, in times past.

By these he means the Gentiles, who in times past were ignorant of the true
God, and his way of worship.

I was made manifest unto them that asked not after me] This is a Repetition of
the former sentence.

I was made manif^st] To wit, as the true God, and justifier of them that
believe in me.

This which Isaiah is here said to say, is taken out of Isaiah 65 1. And in the
first sense it is spoken of Cyrus and the Nations which were under him, who lit
upon the will of the Lord in destroying the Babylonians, and freeing the Jews
which were under their Captivity when they sought it not; and were made
prosperous by the Lord and rewarded for this their doings: But in the second
and sublime sense it is a prophecy of the Gentiles under the Gospel, coming to
the Lord and finding him worthy of worship, and to be believed in his word, and
receiving justification at his hands; where as in former times, they knew not
the true God nor enquired after him, but lived securely in their sins. And in
this Cyrus and the Nations which warred under him, were, by what they did, a
Type of the Gentiles under the Gospel, in what they did. Where note that though
Cyrus was a type of Christ redeeming man from sin, in that he delivered the
Jews out of the Babylonish Captivity, yet he and the Nations which warred under
him, might be a type of the Gentiles getting dominion over sin, in that they
vanquished and overcame their Enemies. And these words may be understood of
either or both of them (...), though they be diversely interpreted in their
diverse applications; of which see what I said in my preface to my Exposition on
the prophecy of Isaiah.

But to Israel he saith] i. e. But to the Jews the Children of Israel he says,
by way of prophecy, concerning them themselves, in the person of the Lord.

All the day long have I stretched forth my hands unto a disobedient and
gainsaying People] i. e. I have for a long time together without ceasing
preached unto you, by the preachers of my word, the Gospel of peace, and
remission of sins; and have been ready to receive you to mercy, but ye have not
hearkened to my word, but have been disobedient to it, and spoke against it.

That which the Apostle alleges here, is taken out of Isaiah chap. 65.2.

This is spoken in the first sense, of the Jews which were Captive in Babylon,
to whom the Lord sent his servants the Prophets to reclaim them, and bring them
to repentance, promising them Redemption out of their Captivity, but they would
not hear: Which Jews were a Type of the Jews, in Christ and the Apostles time,
to whom Remission of sins was preached through Christ, but they would not
hearken, but were disobedient to the word, and strove against it.

These words therefore though they were in the first sense spoken of the Jews,
which were Captive in Babylon; yet in the second sense they are spoken of those
Jews which lived in the time of our Savior and his Apostles.

I have stretched out my hands] i. e. I have been ready to receive you in the
arms of my mercy.

He speaks of God, as of a man by an Anthropopatheia: And by the stretching out
of the hands, is meant a readiness to receive in the arms of mercy, in allusion
to a father which stretches out his hands, when he would receive his little
Child running toward him.

Or because, the stretching forth of the hand, was also a Gesture which was
wont to be used by those which preached to the people, either to raise
attention as Acts 26.1. Or to move affection, The stretching out of the hands,
may be put here for preaching. And to be understood of Gods preaching by his
Servants whom he had appointed thereunto.

Unto a disobedient and gainsaying people] By these he means the Jews, who
were always disobedient to the word of God, and contradicting it, See Acts 7.
verse 51.52.

CHAP. XI.
1. I Say then, has God cast away his people? God forbid. For I also am an
Israelite of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin.

1. But what then? shall we infer or conclude out of these Scriptures, which I
have alleged concerning the rejection of the Jews, shall we infer or conclude
I say, From thence that God has utterly cast them off? God forbid, for I also
am a Jew, of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin.

2. God has not cast away his people which he foreknew. Wot ye not what the
scripture says of Elias? how he makes intercession to God against Israel,
saying,

2. If therefore I being a Jew am not cast off, it must needs follow that God
has not utterly cast away his people the Jews, whom he decreed from all
eternity to take to be a peculiar people to himself, and so to love, as never
to cast them out of his love wholly. Know ye not what is reported in the
Scripture concerning the Prophet Elias? How he makes intercession to God
against the people of Israel saying;

3. Lord, they have killed thy prophets, and dug down thine altars and I am
left alone, and they seek my life.

3. Lord they have killed thy Prophets, and dug down thine Altars, and I am
left alone, and they seek my life also.

4. But what says the answer of God unto him? I have reserved to my self seven
thousand men, who have not bowed the knee to the image of Baal.

4. But what answer did God make to him? For all thou think that thou art
left alone, yet I have reserved to my self seven thousand men, says the Lord,
who have not bowed the knee to Baal, nor worshipped him.

5. Even so then at this present time also, the^e is a remnant according to the
election of grace.

5. As then therefore there were seven thousand Israelites, which had not
worshipped Baal, though Elias thought that he was left alone: Even so at this
present time also, there is a little company of Jews, whom God, because they
have believed, has elected to Justification through his Grace and favor,
though some perhaps may think that the Jews are totally rejected and cast off.

6. And if by grace, then it is no more of works: otherwise grace is no more
grace. But if it be of works, then is it no more grace, otherwise work is no
more work.

6. But now, if they are elected to justification by grace and favor, Take
notice of this here by the way; All ye that seek justification by works, and
say that so it ought to be sought. For if justification be by grace and favor,
then truly it is not of works: For if it were by grace and yet of works too, it
would follow that grace were not truly grace, but falsely so called: for Grace
and works in the matter of justification are so opposite one to another, as
that they cannot stand together: But if it be of works, then it is no more of
grace; for if it were of works and yet of grace too, it would follow, that
works (which essentially include merit, in this point) would not be truly
works, but works falsely so styled.

7. What then? Israel has not obtained that which he seeks for, but the
election has obtained it, and the rest were blinded.

7. But if it cannot be gathered out of the Scriptures which I have alleged,
concerning the rejection of the Jews, Chap. 9. and 10. That God has utterly
cast away his people (as I said ver. 1.) have I then alleged those Scriptures
in vain? and is nothing to be gathered from thence? Not so; But this may be
gathered from thence, viz. That the Jews for the greatest part of them, have
not obtained justification, which they seek for. But the Election, that is,
They whom God intended to make choice of (when he rejected those that sought
for justification by works) (which are the Faithful) they have obtained it, and
the rest which would not believe, were blinded.

8. According as it is written, God has given them the spirit of slumber: eyes
that they should not see, and ears that they should not bear unto this day.

8. According as it is written, Isaiah 29.10. God has given them the Spirit of
slumber, by which the faculties of their soul are so tied up, as that they
cannot understand and believe what is preached to them, Eyes of the mind so
affected, as that they cannot see with them; and ears of the understanding so
affected, as that they cannot hear with them unto this day.

9. And David says, Let their table be made a snare, and a trap, and a
stumbling block, and a recompense unto them.

9. And David says Psalm. 69.22, etc. Let the talk which they use at their
table be, as a snare, and a trap to catch them and hold them in blindness, and
a stumbling block at which they may stumble and fall into hardness of heart,
that so they may be punished and rewarded for their unbelief.

10. Let their eyes be darkened, that they may not see, and bow down their back
always.

10. Let the eyes of their understanding be darkened that they may not
understand the riches of the Gospel, and let them not be able to look to the
mysteries of salvation, so as to believe them.

11. I say then, Have they stumbled that they should fall? God forbid. But
rather through their fall, salvation is come unto the Gentiles, for to provoke
them to jealousy.

11. Being then that a great part of the Jews have stumbled, have they which
stumbled at the stumbling block Christ Jesus, so stumbled and fallen as that they
should have no hope of ever rising again? God forbid. But rather through their
stumbling and fall salvation is come to the Gentiles, for to provoke them to
jealousy; that they being jealous of Gods love to the Gentiles, may be the
more careful to please God, and to get deeper root in his affections, and
recover what they have lost.

12. Now if the fall of them be the riches of the world, and the diminishing of
them the riches of the Gentiles: how much more their fullness?

12. But now when I speak of the Jews being provoked to jealousy, ye Gentiles
will say, that this is no good news to you; For if they should be provoked
thereby, and should regain Gods love, ye Gentiles which were received into Gods
love, by reason of the fall of the Jews, should be cast out again, if the Jews
were again received. But fear not this, for if the fall and diminution of the
Jews, was the occasion that the Gentiles were enriched by faith, and
justification, and other spiritual blessings; How much more will their
recovery, and their nation being full, be the cause of such blessings.

13. For I speak to you, Gentiles, in as much as I am the Apostle of the
Gentiles, I magnify mine office.

13. But that you may not believe that the Jews stumbled, that they should
fall, without hope of ever rising again; I tell you Gentiles, in as much as I
am the Apostle of the Gentiles, That I do labor abundantly in the ministration
of my office, by preaching the Gospel to you.

14. If by any means I may provoke to emulation them which are my flesh, and
might save of them.

14. And I do it for this end, that (if by any means I can I may provoke the
Jews (which are my kinsmen according to the flesh) to emulation, that is, to
imitate the believing Gentiles in their faith, that so I might bring some of
them to salvation.

15. For if the casting away of them be the reconciling of the world: what
shall the receiving of them be, but life from the dead?

15. And think not, that if I should bring some of them to salvation, that this
would be a means to cast you off again. For if the casting away of the Jews,
was an occasion of that, that God reconciled the Gentiles to himself; What
would Gods receiving the Jews to favor again be, but a cause or means of
bringing more Gentiles yet, to the life of grace, which are as yet dead in
their sins?

16. For if the first fruit be holy, the lump is also holy: and if the root be
holy, so are the branches.

16. Again, being that Abraham, and Isaac and Jacob (which were the first of
the Nation of the Jews) were holy; it is credible that all their Posterity is
holy too, so holy as not to be utterly deprived of the means of salvation and
holiness: For Abraham, and Isaac and Jacob, were as it were the first; fruits:
and the Nations of the Jews are as it were the lump; they were also, as it were
the Root and Bulk- and the Nation of the Jews were as it were the branches, of
the Olive Tree: Now if the first-fruit be holy, the lump is also holy; and if
the Root and Bulk be holy, so also are the branches.

17. And if some of the branches be broken off, and thou being a wild olive
tree were graffed in amongst them, and with them partak^st of the root and
fatness of the olive tree.

17 But now if some of the branches be broken off, of this tree, and thou, O
Gentile, which wast as a branch or cion of the wild Olive Tree, art graffed
into this Olive Tree among those branches, which yet hold their own, and with
them partakest of the root and fatness of the Olive Tree; that is, of all the
rich promises, which were made to Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and their seed.

18. Boast not against the branches: but if thou boast: thou bear not the
root, but the root thee.

18. Boast not against the branches, that is, boast not against the Jews, which
are the children of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob: But if thou boastest
remember this, that thou bear not the Root, but the Root thee, that is,
remember this, that Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and their seed partake not
of thy blessings, but thou partakest of theirs, and this may somewhat allay thy
boasting.

19. Thou will say then the branches were broken off, that I might be graffed
in.

19. But thou will say nevertheless in a kind of pride. The branches were
broken off that I might be graffed in, that is the Jews were cast out of the
Church of God, that thou may be taken in, in their room.

20. Well: because of unbelief they were broken off, and thou stand by
faith. Be not high minded, but fear.

20. Well, be it so: because of unbelief, they were broken off from the
O^^ve-tree, that is, for their infidelity they were cast out of the Church, and
thou, because of thy faith, art grafted into that ree, that is, art received as
a member into the Church of God, and so stand; be not therefore high-minded,
and puffed up against the Jew, because of thy high calling, for that may make
thee lose thy faith, by which thou stand: but fear least God should cast
thee off again, that so thou may hold thy faith the faster.

21. For if God spared not the natural branches, take heed lest he also spare
not thee.

21. Fear, I say, for if God spared not the Jews, which were, as it were, the
natural branches take heed, lest he also spare not thee.

22. Behold therefore the goodness and severity of God: on them which fell,
severity; but toward thee, goodness, if thou continue in his goodness:
otherwise thou also shall be cut off.

22. That therefore thou may not boast against the branches, that is against
the Jews, and that thou may stand fast in the faith, which thou have
embraced; behold and look, on the one side, on the goodness and mercy? on the
otherside, on the severty of God: On the Jews, which fell and were cast out of
the Church of God, severity: but toward thee, whom God recieved in their room,
goodness and mercy, which goodness and mercy thou shall still partake of, if
thou continuest in the faith (which is also an effect of Gods goodness and
mercy) otherwise thou also shall be cast of, as the Jews were.

23. And they also, if they bide not still in unbelief, shall be graffed in:
for God is able to graffe them in again.

23. And they also even the Jews themselves, which are cast off, if they abide
not still in unbelief, shall be graffed in again, into the sweet Olive tree,
that is, they shall be received again, as members, into the Church of God: For
God is able to bring them in again.

24. For if thou were cut out of the olive tree, which is wild by nature, and
went graffed contrary to nature into a good olive tree: how much more shall
these, which be the natural branches, be graffed into their own olive tree.

24. For if thou were cut out of the Olive tree, which is wild by nature, and
were graffed contrary to nature into the good Olive Tree: how much more easily
shall these which be the natural branches be graffed in again into their own
Olive tree? that is, if thou which art taken out of on idolatrous people, whose
Ancestors always served stocks and stons, and wast contrary to thy education,
and to the Religion of thy Predecessors, inserted into the Church of God, and
made a member thereof: How much more easily shall the Jews, which were brought
up in the knowledge of God, and to whom the Oracles of God were committed, be
admitted again into Gods Church, and brought into the number of his Servants,
in which number, they once were heretofore?

25. For I would not, brethren, that ye should be ignorant of this mystery,
(lest ye should be wise in your own conceits) that blindness in part is
happened to Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in.

25. Again I would have you know, Brethren, this mystery from me (lest you
should think, that you know all things and should be wise in your own conceit,
and insult over the Jews) that blindness, and unbelief is befaln part of the
Jews, until the full number of the Gentiles, which God intends to bring to the
faith of Christ, be come in, and have received the faith.

26 And so all Israel shall be saved, as it is written, There shall come out of
Sion the deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob.

26. But when the full number is come in, then all the people of the Jews shall
be saved according to that which is written, Esaias 59.20 There shall come a
deliverer for Sion, and shall turn away from the Jews, the children of Jacob,
that blindness and those punishments, which lie upon them, by reason of their
ungodliness.

27. For this is my covenant unto them, when I shall take away the^r sins.

27. For this is my covenant with them says the Lord, and this is the promise,
that I make to them, that I will take away their sins.

28. As concerning the gospel they are enemies for your sake: but as touching
the election, they are beloved for the fathers sakes.

28. Brethren if we look upon the Gospel of Christ and consider how the Jews
have opposed that, and strived against that, they are hated of God; but by that
hatred of God toward them, you have received benefit, for by Gods hating them,
you have been admitted into Gods love, from which they fell which should make
you to pity them, but when we look upon the election, the election by which God
loved and chose them for their fathers sake, Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, to
be a peculiar people to himself, and so to regard them, as never utterly to
forsake them, they are yet beloved of God, for those their Fathers sake.

29. For the gifts and calling of God are without repentence.

29. For the gifts and calling of God, which he vouchsafed to that people, for
their fathers sake, are such, as God will never repent him of.

30. For as ye in times past have not believed God, yet have now obtained mercy
through their unbelief:

30. Again, as in times past ye have not believed God, yet now have obtained
faith, by which you stand by occasion of their unbelief.

31. Even so have these also now not believed, that through your mercy, they
also may obtain mercy.

31. Even so have they now not believed, that being provoked by your faith,
they also may come in due time to believe.

32. For God has concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon
all.

32. For God concluded all both Jews and Gentiles at times, in unbelief, that
he might by these means (which is strange to humane wisdom to conceive) have
mercy upon all.

33. O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom, and knowledge of God! how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out.

33. O the depth of the abundant knowledge and wisdom of God, how unsearchable
are his resolutions and his ways and doings past finding out.

34 For who has known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his counselor?

34. For who has known the mind of the Lord? Or, who has been a
fellow-counsellor with him in his affairs, that he should be privy to his
resolves.

35. Or who has first given to him, and it shall be recompensed unto him again?

35. Or (which is yet more unlikely) who has given counsel to him, at any time
(which were to engage God to recompense him, for that his counsel.)

36. For of him and through him, and to him are all things, to whom be glory
for ever, Amen.

36. Surely, no body, for from him, as from the first efficient cause do all
things proceed. Through him as by the preserving or conserving cause, are all
things upheld and maintained in their being; and to him as to the final cause,
or end of all things, are all things to be referred. To him therefore ascribe
all glory and praise for ever and ever, Amen.

CHAP. XI.
Ver. 1. I say then, has God cast away his people? etc.] By reason of those
testimonies, which the Apostle brought out of Moses, and Isaiah from ver. 16 of
the tenth Chapter hitherto, It might be doubted, whether God had cast off his
People the Jews yea or no, so that the Jews should be from that time, as great
Strangers to God, and his Kingdom, as the Gentiles were before the coming of
Christ, whom God suffered to walk in their own ways, Acts 14.16. Yea, it might
be doubted, whether ever God would make known to them the way of salvation; And
whether he would though they should believe. Accept of them to justification
any more. Wherefore the Apostle raises this doubt here, and answers it, so
soon as he has raised it.

Has God cast off his people] i. e. Has God cast away his ancient people the
Jews utterly, and so as that he will not show them the paths of Righteousness
or Justification, nor save them from their Sins, yea, though they should tread
in these paths.

His people] To wit, Israel, That is the Jews.

God forbid] This is a Negative answer to the question propounded.

See Cap. 3.4. concerning this Phrase or manner of speaking.

For I also am an Israelite, etc.] i. e. For I also (as many others are) am a
Jew of the Stock of Israel, who through the mercy of God have had the way of
Salvation made known unto me, and walking in the same, have obtained through
Grace, this of the Lord, that he has justified me from my sins and accepted of
me.

If Paul being a Jew and of the Stok of Israel and one of the ancient people of
God has obtained this mercy, then is it an argument that God has not cast off
his people utterly. For if God had cast off his people utterly, then Paul
(being a member of that people) would have been cast off also.

Of the seed of Abraham] i. e. Descended from Abraham according to the Flesh.

Of the Tribe of Benjamin] Benjamin was one of the Sons of Jacob, which he had
by Rachel. Genesis Cap. 35, ver. 18. And the Head of a Tribe in Israel, as other
of the Sons of Jacob were.

Ver. 2. God has not cast away his people] To wit, his people Israel, so as to
keep from them the means or way of Salvation and so as not to justify them (if
they repent and believe) that they might perish.

His People] The people of Israel are here meant, whom God elected to be a
peculiar people to himself: which people were called Jews from the chiefest
Tribe, to wit, the Tribe of Judah, after the return of that people out of the
Babylonish Captivity.

Which he foreknew] i. e. which he has heretofore showed his love to. Or
rather, (being spoken of God) whom he did decree and determine from eternity to
cast his love upon.

See what was Said Cap. 8. v. 29. Of this word: But note, that the love here
spoken of, is not such a love, as is spoken of there, but such a love only as
caused God to adopt the children of Israel, for sons unto himself with such an
Adoption, as was described Chap. 9. v 4.

These words contain an Argument to prove that God would not cast off his
people Israel, in that manner as we have spoken of, being that God promised
Abraham to be a God to him and his seed for ever, Gen 17 7. And thereupon made
choice of his seed to be his people and promised, not so to abhor them at any
time as to destroy them utterly, Levit. 26.44 Deuteronomy. 4.31.

There is therefore a Note of the cause contained in that Relative Pronoune
Which.

Wot ye not what the Scripture says of Elias?] i. e. Know ye not, etc.

The Apostle has relation here to that Story which is Recorded of Elias, 1
Kings 19.14.

How he makes intercession to God against Israel, etc.] i. e. How he being
zealously affected toward God, complains to God of the ten tribes of Israel,
as Revolters from his worship, to impiety, And prays his aid, or revenge
against them.

Ver. 3. Lord they have killed thy Prophets, etc.] That as many Prophets of the
Lord, as could be found in Israel, that is, within the Kingdom of the ten
tribes of Israel were slain at the command of Jezebel, is manifest by the
History, 1 Kings 18.4.

And dug down thine Altars] Concerning the digging down of the Altars here
mentioned, nothing is found in the story aforementioned; But yet that they were
thus dug down: The words of Elias, 1 Kings 19.14. are sufficient Testimony.

But it may be questioned here, how the Altars of the L^^d could be said to be
dug down, when a^ there was to be no Altar of the Lord for sacrifice at this
time, but in Jerusalem only.

Answ. Indeed ordinarily there could be no Altar made for sacrifice, out of
Jerusalem after that God had taken that for the place of his worship. The Lord
so commanding. But upon special occasions, the Lord again commanding it or
moving to it by his spirit there might be Altars made even out of Jerusalem,
and that for Sacrifice, as was that Altar which Eliah built, 1 Kings 18.32. But
though ordinarily there could be no Altars built but in Jerusalem only after
the building of the Temple in Jerusalem and placing of the Ark there; yet
before that, there might be, and were many Altars built by the Holymen of God,
in many other places, and many were built in the land of Israel, which stood to
this time of Elias, though they were not now used for sacrifice as at the
first; And of these or such Altars does Eliah here complain, that they were
dug down; Not that he did allow of their doings and worship which sacrificed
now upon these Altars, because men were now to sacrifice in Jerusalem only
ordinarily: But because he did detest the abominable impiety of the men of the
kingdom of the ten tribes, who would not have sacrifices to be offered any
where to the Lord (but to Baal only.) And therefore did demolish and even dig
down the Altars which were informer time built to the Lord, and on which some
of the Lords servants perhaps might by extraordinary dispensation sacrifice to
the Lord, in despite of them, or that so they might dishonor him.

And I am left alone] To wit, of all them, that truly worship thee; all others
being either slain, or having forsaken thee, and turned to Baal.

Elijah thought that there were none left that worshipped the true God, but
himself alone; But he was deceived though he was a Prophet: For the Spirit of
the Prophets was but an Assistant Spirit, Nor was it always assistant to
Prophets, to inform them, at all times, in all things; but only then and in
such things, as the Lord was pleased to reveal unto them.

And they seek my life] To wit, to destroy it.

Ver. 4. But what says the answer of the Lord] i. e. But what says the Lord
in his Answer to him.

The Answer of the Lord is put here by a Metonymie for the Lord himself, that
made Answer.

I have reserved to my self seven thousand men who have not bowed the knee, to
the Image of Baal] i e. I have reserved to my self alive, many thousand men,
which have not worshipped the Image of Baal, that Idol God; but worship me
still and continue upright, in my service.

He says seven thousand for many thousand, putting a certain for an uncertain
number, as it is often put.

And he says, have not bowed the knee to Baal for they have not worshipped
Baal, Per Metonymiam Adjuncti, or per Synechdochen.

Ver. 5. There is a Remnant according to the Election of Grace] i. e. That is
there is a Remnant of the Jews remaining, which God out of his free Grace and
mercy has elected, to wit, to justification.

The Greek is (...) Where note that the Preposition (...) joined with a new
substantive makes it often to have, the signification of an Adjective or a
Participle -- so (...) signifies (...), i. e. Carnal, Romans 8.5.

A Remnant, that is, a few.

The immediate Object of the Election here spoken of, is (under correction) not
Eternal glory, and life everlasting in Heaven (though justification tends to
glorification) But Justification, for the object of this Election, is due to
works of debt, without any grace or favor at all, as appears by the sixth
verse; That is, the object of this Election is such, as that, if a man did
perfectly keep the Law, and as exactly as the Law requires it, would be due to
him of debt, and (with Reverence be it spoken) God would be unjust, if he
should keep it from him. But now though a man (upon supposition) did perfectly
keep the Law, or had perfectly kept it, and as Exactly as the Law requires,
yet he would not thereby merit Eternal glory and life everlasting in heaven;
that would not, for all this, be due to him of debt, so that (abstracting from
the gracious promise of God, if God should have made any such promise.) God
would be unjust, if he did not give it him. And this I think all Protestant
Divines will grant and maintain, who dispute against the merit of the
Creature. But yet if a man did perfectly keep the Law, and as Exactly as the
Law requires (as suppose Adam would have done if he had continued in his
innocence) justification would be due to him of debt, so that (with reverence
be it spoken) God would be unjust if he, when he were accused as a sinner
before him, should not justify him, that is, if he should not acquit him of
sin, but condemn him as a sinner.

Of Grace] i. e. Of favor, or through the favor, to wit, the favor of God.

Ver. 6. And if by Grace] i. e. And if they are elected to Justification by
favor.

Then it is no more of works] i. e. Then truly it is not of works, that they
are justified; or, then are they not justified by works.

The Greek rendered here no more, is, (...) where (...) signifies truly not,
where the word (...) does often times elegantly abound.

And by works are to be understood works exactly done according as the Law
requires, without the least breach thereof, for so does the Apostle call works
every where almost in this Epistle, which works so done, create right to a debt.

Otherwise Grace is no more Grace] That is, Otherwise, if it were by Grace, and
yet of works too that they were justified it would follow, that Grace were not
Grace, but Grace falsely so called: For Grace and debt, are opposite one to the
other, and can never stand together.

But if it be of works] To wit, that they are justified.

Then is it no more of grace] i. e. Then is it not of Grace that they are
Justified, or then are they not elected to Justification by Grace.

Otherwise work is no more work] By work understand here the work of the Law,
exactly performed according to the Law, which work meriteth Justification of
due, and creates a right thereunto, so that men would be injured (if any such
were) who should not be justified, for this there work.

Otherwise work is no more work] q. d. Otherwise if it were by works, and yet
of grace too, it would follow, that work (which essentially includes merit)
would not be truly work, but falsely so called.

What the Apostle has said here concerning works, he said to convince the Jew
of his error who sought Justification by works.

Ver. 7. What then] i. e. What shall we say then, or what shall we gather out
of what I have said?

Israel has not obtained that which he seeks for] i. e. The Jews, for the
greatest part of them, have not obtained Righteousness or Justification which
they seek after.

By Israel are here meant the Jews which were the Children of Israel, that is,
of Jacob. And yet not all the Jews, but the greatest part of them only, by a
Synechdoche.

And by that which they seek after, is meant Righteousness, or Justification,
as appears, Chap. 9.31. and Chap. 10.3.

But the Election has obtained it] i. e. But the Remnant or those few which
God has elected to Justification, or intended or decreed to Elect (which are
the faithful, or such as are of faith) they have obtained what they sought for.

The Election is put here by an Hebraism for the Elected, or those whom God
intended or decreed to Elect, that is, for the Remnant according to the
Election of Grace, as he called them, Ver. 5. And the immediate object of this
Election, is Justification.

And the rest were blinded] i. e. And the other, which were not Elected, or
whom God intended or decreed not to elect (which were they which would not
believe the Gospel, but were rather contentious against it) were blinded.

Were blinded] Supple, so that they could not or cannot see the clear light of
the Gospel, much less believe it.

This uses to be the punishment of those which will not believe the Gospel
when it is preached to them, to wit, spiritual blindness. See Matthew. 13. ver.
13, 14, 15, etc. And this (being a punishment following unbelief) is in some
wise opposite to Justification, which Justification consists in the pardon or
remssion of his sins which believes, and so is a gracious r^ward or consequent
of faith: when as this is, a Punishment of unbelief going before.

Ver. 8 According as it is written] Viz. Isaiah. 29.10.

God has given them the spirit of slumber] Supple, by reason of which they are
in a Spiritual kind of Slumber and Sleep, by which their Senses are so tied up
as that they cannot see and perceive, that is, that they cannot understand and
believe what is preached to them.

It is usual in the Scriptures to express the inward operations of the
Reasonable soul, by the outward operation of the sensitive soul: So to see and
perceive, are put for to know and understand, Matt. 13. v. 14. yea for to
believe as will appear by, Acts 28. v. 24. And because Sleep or Slumber ties up
the outward senses, so that they cannot do their office, therefore by a
Metaphor is Slumber or the Spirit of Slumber put here for such a condition of
estate, in which whosoever is, he cannot understand and believe those things
which are preached to him, so long as he is in that Estate.

Note, that these words are in the first and Historical sense spoken of such
Jews and men of Jerusalem as would not believe the destruction of the Army of
the Assyrians which besieged Jerusalem, in the days of Hezekiah; and the
delivery of Jerusalem from that siege, though it were preached to them by the
Servants of the Lord, his Prophets: But in the second and Mystical sense, they
are spoken of such Jews, as in the days of our Savior and his Apostles, would
not believe the Gospel when it was preached to them, which contained the good
news of man's Redemption from sin, and of the destruction of sin by Christ.

Where note that the delivery of the Jews from the Assyrians, was a type of the
delivery of the faithful from their sins.

Eyes that they should not see, and Ears that they should not hear] i. e. Eyes
so affected as that they should not see with them: And ears so affected as that
they should not hear with them.

The eyes and the ears when they are properly taken, are spoken of the eyes and
ears of the body, but here they are Metaphorically to be understood, of the
mind or understanding of the Reasonable soul.

These words are taken for their sense (for the Apostle does not always tie
himself to the Letter in his citations) out of Isaiah 6.9. And they are there
spoken of the Jews of his, to wit Isaiahs time, in the first and Historical
sense; but in the second and Mystical sense, they are taken of the unbelieving
Jews in our Savior and his Apostles time, which were typified by those former.
-- See what we said immediately before on these words, God has given unto them
the spirit of slumber.

unto this day] Some refer these words to the latter part of the seventh verse
q. d. And the rest were blinded even unto this day. And the Intervening words,
they read with a Parenthesis.

But some again refer them to the words immediately going before, but say that
the Apostle takes this testimony, not out of Isaiah, but out of Deuteronomy. 29.4.
Where Moses says to Israel, The Lord has not given you an heart to perceive,
and eyes to see, and ears to hear unto this day.

Ver. 9. And David saith] To wit, of them that believed not, or were not of the
Election, Psalm. 69 ver. 22.23.

Let their table be made a snare, and a trap, and a stumbling block, etc.] The
Table is put here Metonymically. And therefore may be taken by a Metonymy,
either for the meat or dishes set upon the Table for food; or else for talk
used at the table, such as we usually call table-talk; in this place, where the
Apostle uses the words of the Prophet David in the Second or Mystical sense I
conceive; that the word Table is most fitly taken for the talk; which they use
at their table.

It is usual for men to talk of that which seems news to them, and of which
they are full, at their Tables, one to another: And so might the Jews (and
especially the chief among them, such as were the Scribes, and Priests, and
Elders) which were most troubled and vexed at the first preaching of the
Gospel, talk of the Gospel, yea and talking of it speak against it, and by
their talking and speaking against it, whet on another to oppose it, and so
become every day more blinded toward it than other, and every day more obdurate
against it, than other.

The words, which are here taken out of the Prophet David, Psalm. 69.12. The
Prophet speaks of his own enemies in the first and literal sense: But in the
Second and Mystical sense (in which the Apostle here uses them) of such as
believed not, and so were enemies to Christ.

Where note, that as David was a type of Christ; So were the Enemies of David a
type of the Enemies of Christ, such as are all they, which believe not the
Gospel preached to them: And oftentimes that which is spoken of the Enemies of
David in the first, and literal sense is spoken of the Enemies of Christ (such
as are unbeleevers) in the second and mystical sense.

If we consider these words as uttered by the Prophet David in the Psalms
against his Enemies, they may be taken, as spoken by way of Imprecation: But if
we take them, as spoken of the Enemies of Christ, they must be taken
prophetically, for the Hebrews (whom Paul imitates, even while he writes or
speaks in another language) do often put an Imperative mood, for the Future
tense q. d, Their Table shall be made a snare, and a trap, and a stumbling
block, and a recompense unto them,

A snare, and a trap, and a stumbling block] i. e. A snare, and a trape, to
catch them, and hold them in blindness, and unbelief: and a stumbling block, at
which they may stumble into unbelief and blindness.

These words contain three metaphors (but signify one and the same thing) The
first Metaphor is taken from Birds, the second from Beasts, and the third from
blocks, or stones in our way, at which men stumble or fall, and so take hurt.

And a recompense unto them] i. e. And an occasion of blindness, which may
recompense them for their unbelief. Metonymia.

Ver. 10. Let their eyes be darkned] By their eyes understand here; by a
Metaphor, their mind or understanding, which is as the eye of the Soul.

And bow down their back alway] To wit, that they may not look up, and behold,
the object, which is set before them.

By this is understood also Metaphorically (by translating the Phrase from the
body to the Soul) an inability and indisposition to believe.

He that stoopeth down, or has his back bowed down, by some force or weight
lying upon it, cannot look up and behold an object which is set before him:
Wherefore by a Metonymy, to stoop down, or to have the back bowed down may
signify not to be able to see or behold a thing, and by a further Metonymy,
not to understand or believe.

Alway] Understand this not of the duration of time, but of the generality of
persons. For though all that believed not were blinded, yet did not all die in
that their blindness, but some did through the mercy of God repent and believe
and so were saved.

Ver. 11. I say then have they stumbled, that they should fall?] I ask
therefore, whether these Jews which stumbled, have stumbled so that they should
fall without any hope of rising again?

To fall is to be taken here for to fall, so that they should never rise again,
and so is this word taken, Revel. 18.2 where it is said Babylon is fallen, is
fallen. For simple verbes do sometime signify a duration also of that which
they signify, so in these words (...) He lives unto God, Rom 6.10. (...)
signifies, he lives, signifies he lives for ever.

The stumbling and falling here is to be meant of unbelief, or blindness, which
brings hurt and danger, yea extreme danger to the unbiliever, as stumbling
does to him which Stumbleth at a stone or stumbling block, while he runs, in
his way.

The Apostle prevents an objection here which might arise from what he said out
of the Prophet Isaiah and David, just before, and out of the last words of the
seventh ver. To wit, And the rest were blinded.

Through their fall] To wit into unbelief and blindness.

He calls that a fall here, which he called a stumbling before.

Salvation is come to the Gentiles] i. e. Remission of Sins is not only
preached, but realy come to the Gentiles.

That the fall and unbelief of the Jews was an occasion of Salvation to the
Gentiles, we are taught out of the Acts of the Apostles, where the Apostles are
said to turn to the Gentiles, because the Jews would not believe. See Acts 13.
ver. 46.51, etc.

For to provoke them to jealousie] i. e. To make them Jealous of Gods love (as
though he would wholly transfer his love from them to others) that so they
might be provoked to do those things which are acceptable to God, and well
pleasing to him, that by so doing they might keep, or regain his love to them,
and so be saved.

That which is rendered here Jealousy, most render Emulation (and so it is
rendered, ver. 14.) which is when a man beholding those gifts and graces which
are in another, and finding the want thereof in himself, is grieved at himself
and stirred up to use means to attain to such gifts and graces which he sees in
an other.

Ver. 12. Now if the fall of them be the riches of the world, etc.] The Apostle
prevents an objection here. For whereas he said, v. 11. That through the fall
of the Jews (which believed not) Salvation is come to the Gentiles, to provoke
the Jews to jealousy or Emulation, that they may be saved. A Gentile may
object and say, If it be so that Salvation is come to us Gentiles, by the fall
of the Jews, to provoke the Jews to jealousy or Emulation; Then if the Jews by
that provocation come to believe and return into their former favor with God
again, it seems that we Gentiles shall be cast off: And therefore it is no good
news to us to hear, that through their fall Salvation is come unto the Gentiles
to provoke them to jeasie or Emulation: To this the Apostle answers, or this
objection the Apostle prevents in this verse, saying, Now if the fall of them
be the Riches of the world, and the diminishing of them the riches of the
Gentiles: How much more their fullness?

And yet this verse does not only contain a prevention of the objection
aforesaid, but contains also an Argument a minori to prove the Salvation of the
Jews, or that, that they fell not for that end that they should never rise
again; or fell not (the greatest part of them) that all should fall: For says
the Apostle, If the Jews by their unbelief gave an occasion to so great a
multitude of the Gentiles to be converted and brought to the faith of Christ:
Much more credible is it that the Jews, if they would all receive the faith,
would be the cause that yet more Gentiles would believe: For this is Causa per
se, the other only per accidens. But (to go on) Now if so be that God did for
the benefit of the world, that is, of the Gentiles suffer the Jews to fall into
unbelief; much more will he be willing for his part, to make up that fall, and
receive the Jews again, for the benefit of the same world, or the same Gentiles

If the fall of them] i. e. If the fall of the Jews; the greatest part of them
into unbelief.

He calls that a fall here, which he called a stumbling, ver. 11.

Be the Riches of the world] i. e. Be the cause, or occasion rather, of so many
spiritual Riches, as are come to the world, that is, to the Gentiles.

Note, first that Per metonymiam Effecti, Riches are to be taken here, for the
cause or occasion of Riches.

Secondly, Note, that by Riches, are meant Spiritual Riches, as Faith,
(according to that which is written, Has not God chosen the poor of this world
Rich in Faith? James 2.5.) Justification, etc.

Thirdly, Note, that by the world is meant here Per Synechdochen Generis, the
men which are in the world, yea, the Gentiles in contra distinction to the
Jews, by a farther Synochdoche.

The diminishing of them] i. e. The diminishing of the Jews, who are said here
to be diminished in that their number was much abated by the unbelief of the
greatest part of them, who would not receive the Gospel and therefore were
rejected of God and put out of the number of those his people, which were true
Jews indeed. That is, which were Jews inwardly as the Apostle speaks, Chap.
2.29.

The word rendered here Diminishing is in the Greek (...) which may be taken for
the part of the Jews which are cast off or rejected or as it were rent away
from the main body of the Jews, For as (...) (to which this word is opposed in
this place) is taken, Matthew. 9.16. For the piece that being put into the
Garment which is torn, makes the Garment which was before torn, whole again:
so may (...) be taken for a piece which is rent out of a garment, whereby the
Garment which was whole before is now torn and lessened; And from thence be
taken by a Metaphor transferred to this place, To signify the part of the Jews
which fell.

The Riches of the Gentiles] That is, the same with that, viz. The Riches of
the world: And this whole sentence is but a repetition of that which went
immediately before.

How much more their fullness] i. e. How much more the fullness of the Jews; or
their being made full.

By the fullness of the Jews is meant, the Jews themselves, or the multitude of
the Jews when their number is made up and completed or filled by those which
were put out of it, by reason of their unbelief, which would be if they should
repent and believe.

Or it may be that the fullness of the Jews is taken here, for the fallen Jews
which, if they would repent, and believe would make up that breach or rent in
the body of the Jews, which was made by their rejection for their unbelief. For
the word in the Greek is (...), of which, I spoke a little before in this verse.

Ver. 13. For I speak to you Gentiles] i. e. For I say to you Gentiles, or I
will tell you Gentiles, as a man would tell his friend

Or, I speak to you Gentiles, That is, I appeal to you Gentiles.

The Apostle writes in this his Epistle both to Jews and Gentiles which were at
Rome: But he directs this his speech here by an Apostraphe to the Gentiles
only, as most concerning them to take notice of it.

Note, that this dependes immediately upon the eleventh verse, but especially
upon the first part thereof (the twelfth being brought in, as it were by a
parenthesis) and it is a proof of what the Apostle said there, a proof fetched
from the Apostles own practice.

In as much as I am the Apostle of the Gentiles, I magnify mine office] q. d.
I am an Apostle of the Gentiles, and I magnify mine office, and make it
Glorious, in as much as I am their Apostle.

Then does the Apostle magnify his office as he is an Apostle of the Gentiles,
or make it glorious, when he uses all diligence in preaching the Gospel to the
Gentiles, and endeavors thereby to bring many Gentiles to the faith of Christ.

This Phrase is somewhat like to that of the Latins, Spartam quam quisque
nactus est, hanc exornet; Let every one adorn or make that task, Glorious or
beautiful, which he has got. And then does he make it glorious or beautiful
and adorn it, when he uses all diligence about it.

The Apostle both here and elsewhere calls Himself, The Apostle of the
Gentiles, Because the charge which was enjoined him was chiefly about the
Salvation of the Gentiles. Gal. 2.7. yet we must not think but that he was sent
to the Jews, to preach to them also; For He is a chosen Vessel to me, says the
Lord, to bear my name before the Gentiles, and Kings and Children of Israel,
Acts 9.15.

Ver. 14. If by any means I may provoke to emulation them which are my flesh]
i. e. That (if I can by any means) I may provoke to emulation them which are my
kinsmen according to the flesh* Ellipsis.

He would provoke the Jews (whom he calls his flesh) to an emulation of the
Gentiles by bringing the Gentiles to the faith by his preaching, and so making
them accepted of God in such a manner, as that the Jews, seeing this happy
condition of the Gentiles, might be grieved to see themselves inferior to the
Gentiles in happiness, and might strive to be as happy as they.

To Emulation] Emulation is a grief, of mind whereby we grieve for the good of
another, not because that good is in him, but because that, good, which we see
in him, is not in us.

Envy is a grief of mind, for the good of another, as well as Emulation: But
here is the difference; Envy is joined with a desire and endeavor to diminish
that good which is in an other, upon a persuasion that our excellency is
thereby obscured: But Emulation is not joined with a desire to diminish his
good, but with a desire to make our selves as good as he.

Them which are my flesh] i. e. Them which are my Kins-men according to the
flesh, as he speaks, Chap. 9.3.

They are said to be the same flesh who are made, or who spring from the same
flesh by a Metonymie.

He means the Jews here, which were all of the same flesh, with him, to wit,
The flesh of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

And might save some of them] i. e. And might bring some of them at least to
Salvation by the Gospel, which I preach, which is the power of God unto
Salvation, Cap 1.16.

Ver. 15. For if the casting away of them be the reconciling of the world] i. e
For if the casting away of the Jews, be an occasion of the reconciling of the
Gentiles unto God.

The casting away of them] i. e The rejecting of the Jews for their unbelief.

Be the reconciling of the w^rl^] i. e. Be an occasion of the reconciling the
world to God. Metonymia.

Of the world] i. e. Of the Gentiles, See ver 12.

What shall the receiving of them] Supple, To the savor of God.

Be] Supple, To the world, or to the Gentiles.

But life from the dead] i. e. But yet a further cause of a spiritual life to
righteousness from death in sin, or from among those which are dead in sins.

His meaning is, that by this means, more Gentiles would be brought to the
faith then now are brought.

By Life is here meant a Spiritual life led by the Faith of God, per
Synechdochen generis And that is put again, for the cause of such a life per
Mytonymiam effecti.

And by the dead are meant such as are dead in sins.

And this life so taken, is to be understood here, as a life coming to the
Gentiles, by the receiving of the Jews to favor. For this verse is the very
same for sense with the Twelfth verse: And prevents the like objection as that
does, and yields the like argument or proof to show, that the Jews stumbled not
that they should fall, as that also does; wherefore between this and the former
verse, we may understand these or the like words Neither need ye fear that if
the Jews should be brought to salvation ye Gentiles would be cast off again, q.
d. Neither need ye fear, that if the Jews should be brought to Salvation, the
Gentiles will be cast off again, for if the casting away of them be the
reconciling of the world, etc.

Ver. 16. For if the first fruit be holy the lump is also holy] q. d. For
seeing that the Patriarchs Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, which were as it were the
first fruits, and the Root of the people or Nation of the Jews were holy; the
people or Nation of the Jews, which spring of them, shall also be esteemed holy.

This is to be referred to the first part of the first verse, viz. I say then
has God cast away his people? God forbid. Or (which some account the same) to
the first part of the eleventh verse, viz. I say then have they stumbled that
they should fall? God forbid. And it may ^ave its immediate reference to the
fourteenth verse also, As if the Apostle would also show by this, that what he
^here said of magnifying his office, as he was the Apostle of the Gentiles, for
this end, that he might provoke the Jews to emulation, and save some of them;
was not a groundless conceit, as though there was no hope of bringing the Jews
to Salvation; But that what he did in this, he did upon good ground, being that
the whole people of the Jews, were holy as their forefathers Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob were holy, and therefore might in all probabilities be saved.

Such is the Apostles skill and artifice, that while he brings a proof to prove
a thing, which is further off; he will by the same proof often prove the thing
that went immediately before, also.

The Apostle Supposes here that the Patriarchs or forefathers of the Jews, viz
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, etc. were holy and from thence gathers or
concludes, that if they were holy, the whole people or Nat^ion of the J^ws
where holy also, and this his conclusion he proves or illustrateth rather, by
two similitudes or comparisons. The first from the first fruits, with which the
lump does agree in nature. The other from the root and the branches of a Tree,
which naturally follow the condition one of the other.

If the first fruit be holy] By the first fruit is here Metaphorically
understood the Patriarchs Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, etc. which were the
forefathers of the Jews: and the holiness here spoken of, is not the holiness
of Regeneration, or the holiness, which consists in the conformity of our
actions, with the Law of God, but that holiness, whereby God has separated the
fathers of the Jews, and (by virtue of his promise to them, G^n. 17.17.) Their
seed also after them, throughout all generations, from the common rank of men,
to be a God to them; So as not utterly to forsake them at any time and to leave
them without all means of Salvation; which is a blessing peculiar to them above
all the Nations of the world. For though God does afford m^ans of Salvation to
other people also, yet this proceeds not from the promise of God to them, or to
their Ancestors; as it does to the J^ws; neither have they any thing to the
contrary, but that God will and may forsake them utterly, if they should be
disobedient to him, as the Jews have been. But yet he w^ll never leave the
whole nation of the Jews without the mea^s of Salvation, neither will he but
save them, if ^hey embrace the means; for their unbelief shall not make the
faith of God without effect, Chap. 3.3. See Cap. 15. ver 8, 9.

Note, that Holiness signifies a Separation of some things from others, or
some persons from others, by way of Emin^ncy. And so the J^ws and their
forefathers may be called holy here, because God had separated them from all
other People by a peculiar blessing, the blessing which I have spoken of.

The first fruit] The Apostle a^ some say alludes here to the sheaf of the
first fruits, Lev. 23. ver. 9, 10, 14. where the Lord speaks thus to the poeple
of Israel. When ye come into the Land which I give unto you, and shall reap the
harvest thereof, then shall ye bring a sheaf of the first fruits of your
Harvest unto the ^riest, and he shall wave the sh^af before the Lord to be
accepted for you: ye shall eat neither bread, nor parched corn, nor green ears,
until the self same day, that ye have brought an offering to your God: It
shall be a statute for ever, throughout your generations, in all your dwellings.

Others say, that the Apostle alludes to that Cake, which we read of Numb. 15
v. 17. etc. And the Lord spoke unto Moses saying speak unto the Children of
Israel, and say unto them, when ye come into the Land, whether I bring you:
then it shall be, that when ye eat the bread of the Land, ye shall offer an
heave offering unto the Lord: Ye shall offer up a cake of the first of your
dough, for an heave ^ffering as ye do the heave-off^ring of the
threshing-floor, so shall ye heave it: Of the first of your dough, ye shall
give unto the Lord an heave offering in your Generations.

But to whichsoever of these two, we say, the Apostle relates, the Sense will
be the same.

The lump is also holy] By the Lump is here meant the people of the Jews, which
are of the stock of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, etc. which are here called a
lump, either in allusion to the harvest or crop of corn which we spoke of a
little before, out of which the sh af of the sirst fruits was to be taken Levit
29. ver 10. Or else in allusion to that Lump, or Mass of dough, out of the
first of which, the Cake was to be taken, and heaved, as an heave offering unto
the lord, Numb. 15.20. of which also we spoke a little before.

It is enough for our Apostles purpose here, that the first fruit and the lump,
be both of one kind, as the Tree and the branches of which he speaks in the
next words be both of one nature: I ^s not mat^rial to ask how the lump to
which the Apostle alludes, can be called holy: For the holiness here spoken of,
is spoken not of ^he things to which he alludes, but ^f the ^ore fathers of the
Jews, and the Jews themselv^s, of both whom he speaks under those allusions.

If the Root be h^ly* etc.] With the Root understand the bulk or trunk of the
Tree too, by a Synechdoche. And by the root and trunck of the tree understand
the same as was undestood by the first fruit, to wit, Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, etc. from whom the Jews sprang, as the branches from the tree.

So are the branches] By the branches understand the J^ws, which came of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, etc as boughs or branches from the Root and stock of
a tree.

Ver. 17. And if some of the branches be broken off] i. e But if some of the
branches be broken off. And for But.

The Apostle continues here the Metaphor of a tree and branches, which he used
ver. 16. And this he does, that he might take an occasion from thence, to
repress the contempt of the Gentiles, whereby they were ready to contemn or
despise the Jews.

If some of the branches be broken off] By the branche^ he means the Jews, as
I said before, and these he says, are some of them broken off, not because
they ceased to be Jews, and to be partakers of that holiness, which he speaks
of ver 16. Nor yet because they once stood by the faith of Christ now come and
exhibited by the preaching of the Gospel, and afterward fell, or were broken
off by unbelief: But because they were before the preaching of the Gospel true
branches or esteemed so to be, in that they were Jews, and were zealous of the
Law of Moses, and also believed implicitly, at least in Christ to come ( for
Christ is the end of the Law, for righteousness to every one that believes,
Chap. 10.4.) and enjoyed by this, the title of the Church and people of God:
But now they are deprived of that title, and broke off from the Church and
people of God, as boughs or branches are broken off from their tree, because
they would not explicitly believe in Christ now come and receive his Gospel.
For after that Christ was come and the Gospel was revealed, God would have none
to be accounted in the number of his people, but such as would explicitly
believe in Christ, and receive his Gospel.

Where note, that they which according to the form of the Old Testament were
the people of God cease to be the people of God according to the form of the
New T^stament, if they will not explicitly believe in Christ now come, and
receive his Gospel.

Note again, that the Church of God is not many, but one, yea, the same through
all ages; though the worship of God has been diverse in the diverse ages
thereof, for the manner of it. For all true Christians and all the members of
Gods Church shall sit down together at the same table with Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob in the Kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 8.11.

If some of the branches be broken off] He says If some of the branches be
broken off, as though they were but few, whereas they were indeed the far
greatest part of the Jews, which were broken off, or rejected, for their
unbelif; But he uses a (...) here, partly to avoid the offense of the Jews,
but chiefly to keep down the Gentiles, from exalting themselves over the Jews.

And thou being a wild Olive-tree] And thou (O believing Gentile) being a graft
or Cion cut off, of the wild Olive Tree.

The wild Olive Tree is put here for a graft or Cion of the wild Olive Tree
by a Synechdoche. For whole trees use not to be graffed in, but only grafts and
Cions cut off from whole trees.

The Gentiles may be called a wild Olive Tree, and be thereunto resembled in
that God did not plant them in his Orchard or Garden and dress and manure and
dig about them, as he did about his Olive Tree the Jews; That is, in that he
had not heretofore such a peculiar care of them, nor had them in the number of
his people as he had the Jews: For he showed his word unto Jacob his Statutes
and his Judgments unto Israel. He dealt not so with any Nation, Psalm. 146.
verse. 19.20. But suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways, Acts 14.16.

Were graffed in] Supple into the Olive Tree, that is, into the Church of God
whereof Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are chief Members and called the Root, v.
16.17.

Amongst them] i. e. Amongst these Branches, to wit, which remain still in that
Tree.

A Relative is used here without an express Antecedent.

And with them partakest of the fatness of the Olive-tree] i. e. And by reason
of thy being graffed into the Olive Tree art made partakers of the fatness of
the Root of the Olive Tree, that is, of the Spiritual promises which were made
to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob (the Forefathers of all the Jews, and the Root and
Stock of that Tree, out of which they, to wit, the Jews sprang.)

The Root and fatness of the Olive-tree] Here is (...), For he says the Root
and fatness: For the fatness of the Root, that fatness which flows from the
Root, and diffuseth it self into the Branches of the Olive Tree.

Well does he say the fatness of the Olive Tree for the vivifical-juyce which
is diffused from the root to the branches of the Olive Tree, is properly called
the fatness thereof. Hence the Olive Tree says, should I leave my fatness,
etc. Judge. 9.9.

By the fatness of the root of the Olive Tree is here Metaphorically meant;
those spiritual promises, which God made to Abraham the Father of the
faithful, as also to Isaac, and Jacob and their seed, For Abraham's sake, which
were many and Rich Promises.

Of the Olive-tree] He makes mention here of the Olive Tree, rather than of any
other tree, because the Olive Tree is a beautiful tree and a fruitful tree for
bearing, See Psalm. 52.8.

Note here, that the Cions of wild fruit trees, use not to be graffed into the
stocks of Garden-trees, as the Cions of Crab-trees into the stocks of Pippins,
or pearmains or the like: But the Cions of Garden-trees use to be Engraffed
into the stocks of wild Fruit Trees, as the Cions of Pippins or pearmains into
the stocks of Crab-trees: Yet the Apostle contrary to the use and practice of
husbandry, says, that the Cions of the wild Olive Tree, are graffed into the
Olive Tree. But this the Apostle does, to set forth the goodness of God to the
wild Olive Tree, in that he would do it against the custom of what men observe
in Natural trees, for her good: Howsoever it is no absurdity to borrow a
Metaphor or to take a similitude from that which is not naturally done, in that
order, as he that uses the Metaphor is pleased to apply it to his purpose.

Ver. 18. Boast not against the branches] To wit, the branches either standing
or broken off, because thou art graffed in, into the root, or stock of the
Olive Tree from which some of the Branches were broken off.

But if thou boast, etc.] i. e. But if thou boast against the branches that
either stand, or are broken off; that thou may not boast thus against them,
Remember, that thou bear not the Root, etc.

Thou bear not the Root but the Root thee] i. e. The forefathers of the
Jews were not ingraffed into thee or into thy root, and made partakers of any
good which thou had; but thou were ingraffed into them (and made one
Spiritual body with them) and so wast made partaker of their good, and the
gracious promises made to them.

Now therefore if the forefathers of the Jews were not engraffed into thee, or
into thy root, and so received no benefit from thee; But thou were engraffed
into them, and made partaker of their good and their benefits, thou should
not for their sakes, and for the good which thou receivest by them, boast
against any of their Children (though they be their children only according to
the flesh) for that is unkindly and unthankfully done, and is a kind of
reproach to them themselves.

Remember here what our Savior says John 4.22. Salvation is of the Jews. And,
Remember that the spiritual things which the Gentiles received are called the
Jews, Romans 15.27. where it is written, If the Gentiles have been made partakers
of their spiritual things, their duty is also to minister to them in carnal
things.

Ver. 19. Thou will say unto them] To wit, in a kind of boasting and insulting
manner.

Thou] i. e. Thou Gentile which believe.

Then] That is, because I said the root bears thee; verse. 18. and because I
said, If some of the branches be broken off; And thou being a wild Olive Tree
were graffed in among them, verse. 17. Intimating thereby that some of the
branches were broken off, and that thou were graffed in, in their stead.

The branches were broken off] By the branches he means those Jews which
would not believe explicitly in Christ now come, and receive his Gospel, which
how they were said to be broken off I said, verse. 17.

That I may be graffed in] Supple, And have as good privilege and Honor by
being so ingraffed, as the natural branches had themselves.

Ver. 20. Well] The Apostle grants by this that the Jews were broken off, or
rejected (those, to wit, which fell) that the Gentiles might be graffed in or
received

Because of unbelief] i. e. Because they would not believe explicitly in
Christ now come, and receive his Gospel.

They are broken off] i. e. The unbelieving Jews are broken off from their
Tree* That is, were rejected from being of the Church of God, of which their
forefathers were, yea, and they themselves were and might still have been, if
they had believed.

And thou stand by faith] And thou were graffed in by reason of thy faith
into the Olive Tree, and stand and continuest still therein, by reason of
that faith.

Be not high minded] i. e. Be not highly conceited of thy self, or be not proud
or puffed up in mind, because of this, viz. that thou stand by faith.

But fear] Supple, least at any time, thou be broken off from that Olive Tree
again, by reason of unbelief.

He intimates here that pride or high-mindedness may bring forth infidelity
(See John 5.44.) And that fear of falling may make us stand the faster.

Ver. 21. If God spared not the natural branches] Supple, but broke them off
from their Olive tree, because of unbelief.

By the Natural branches understand the Jews, but yet those Jews, which would
not explicitly believe in Christ now come and receive his Gospel.

The Jews are called the Natural branches of the Olive Tree, because they
descended from Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob (which were the Root of that tree)
according to the flesh: And were born in the church, and brought up in the
knowledge and worship of God, and because the blessing, which was promised to
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, belonged to them also, and was promised to them, if
they would believe, as they did: which blessing was not promised to the
Gentiles, though God out of his grace, and goodness made those Gentiles, which
did believe, partakers thereof.

The Jews by reason of this might expect more from the hands of God, then the
Gentiles could. Therefore if God spared not the Jews, but broke them off, and
rejected them, because they would not believe: the Gentile might justly fear,
that God would not spare him, but cut him off again, if he should fall back
into unbelief.

Take heed least he also spare not thee] Supple, But that he break thee off
again, if thou fallest back into unbelief,

Behold therefore the goodness and severity of God] q. d. That therefore thou
may not boast thy self against the branches, that is against the Jews, whom
God has rejected behold or consider the goodness and severity of God.

On them which fell] i. e. On them which fell. Supple, at that stumbling block,
to wit, Christ, Chap. 9.32. That is on them which believed not in Christ, but
were offended at him.

Severity] This severity of God consisted in that, that he would not spare the
unbelieving Jews, but presently reject them, and cast them off, from being of
his people or his Church, because they would not believe in Christ.

But toward thee] i. e. But toward thee, O Gentile, because thou believe.

Goodness,]

This goodness of God toward the believing Gentile, consisted in that, that
God did ingraft him into the Olive Tree* that is, that God did take him into
the number of his people, or into his Church by reason of his faith, and made
him partaker of the Promises, and blessings thereof, when as he might have
reprobated him, and left him still in his sins, to suffer the punishment
thereof, with other his Ancestors.

If thou continue in his goodness] i. e. If thou do that by which thou may
continue in his goodness, that is, if thou continue in the faith, which is the
means of continuing in his goodness.

The Sense of this place is this, q. d. In which goodness of his thou shall
continue, if thou do continue in the faith.

Goodness in this place is to be taken, for faith per Metonymiam Effecti. For
it is to be taken for that, for which God showed the Gentile that goodness
whereby he ingraffed him into the Olive Tree, that is, whereby he took him into
the number of his people, or into his Church: and that was faith.

Goodness therefore is taken here for faith, per Metonymiam effecti. It may be
also taken for faith Per Metonymiam causae because faith is the effect of the
goodness and mercy of God. For God gives those which believe, not only to be of
the number of his people, and branches of the Olive Tree, but to believe also.

Otherwise] Supple, If thou continu^st not in his goodness. That is, if thou
believe not, but fallest back into unbelief,

Thou shall be cut off] i. e. Thou shall be cut off again from the Olive Tree.
That is, thou shall be put out of the number of Gods people again, by whose
goodness and favor thou were graffed in among them, and made a member of the
Church.

Ver. 23. And they also] i. e. And the Branches, which are cut off also. That
is, and the unbelieving Jews also.

Shall be graffed in] Supple, again into their Olive Tree: That is shall be
received again into the number of Gods people, and made members again of his
Church.

For God is able to graffe them in again] Supple into their Olive Tree. That
is, God is able to take them again into the number of his people, and make them
again members of his Church.

When the Apostle says, for God is able to graffe them in again, he adds this
to intimate that nothing does hinder God from graffing those Jews which were
cut off, into their Olive Tree again, but unbelief. q. d. For God is able to
graff them in a gain; that therefore they are not graffed in again, it is to be
imputed wholly to their unbelief.

Ver. 24. For if thou were cut out of the Olive Tree, which is wild by nature]
He gives a reason here of that, which he said, verse 23. Viz. For God is able
to graff them in again.

If thou were cut out of the Olive Tree, which is wild by nature] i. e. If
thou being a Gentile, were taken out from among the Gentiles, which were as a
wild Olive Tree, by nature, in that God minded them not heretofore, nor gave
them his Laws and his Statuts, as he did to his own people the Jews, but
neglected them and suffered them, to walk in their own ways, and to worship
Idols, etc.

And were graffed contrary to nature into a good Olive-tree] i. e And wast by
the power of God contrary to thy Original being, ingraffed into the people of
God, as it were into a good olive tree, and made one with them, and so a member
of the Church of God.

The Apostle continues his Metaphor of an Olive Tree still.

Contrary to nature.] i. e. Contrary to thy original being, Or contrary to that
inclination, which thou had by nature, and the Education which thou had by
thy Parents.

Some interpret Contrary to nature, contrary to that which is done in nature.
That is, in natural ingraffing of trees or plants. But howsoever the Apostle
surely alludes to this, though his meaning be, as I said.

Wherefore note, that in natural ingraffings of trees or plants, the Cions of
the good Olive is to be graffed into the wild olive tree. The wild Olive Tree
or Cion thereof, is not to be graffed into the good Olive Tree (as the Cion of
the Apple Tree is to be graffed into the Crab-stock not the Cion of the
Crab-tree into the Apple-stock) But here the Olive tree, which is wild by
nature, is graffed into a good Olive tree.

Note Secondly, that in ingraffing of trees and Plants the Cion that is
ingraffed, does naturally bring forth its own fruit, that is, the fruit which
is natural to it self, not the fruit, which is natural to the Stock: As the
cion of an Apple being graffed into a Crab-stock, brings forth the fruit of the
Apple, not of the Crab. But here the cion of the wild Olive, being ingraffed
into the good Olive Tree, brings forth the fruit not of a wild Olive, but of a
good.

How much more] i. e. How much more easily, or with how much more ease.

Shall these which are the natural branches] i. e. Shall these which are the
Jews.

Why the Jews are called the natural branches, See ver. 21.

Be graffed into their own Olive tree?] That is, betaken again into the number
of the people and Church of God, which people, and which Church their
forefathers were, and of which they themselves, some of them were also.

This seems agreeable to reason, that the natural branches of a tree, which are
broken off should be more easily graffed in again into the Tree, from which
they were broken off, and become one with that; Then that the branches of a
tree, of another nature should be ingraffed into a different tree, and be one
with that. For the effect of art is the easier produced, where nature helps,
than where it helps not. Yet all things are alike easy to God.

Ver. 25. For I would not Brethren that ye should be ignorant of this mystery]
i. e. For I would have ye know, Brethren, this Mystery.

This Particle, For, is to be referred to those words of the first verse, and I
say then has God cast away his people? God forbid. To those words of the
eleventh verse I say then have they stumbled, that they should fall! God
forbid, as another Argument to prove the truth of them.

Of this Mystery] A mystery in general, is a thing kept secret, and not to be
known, but by the revelation of God.

What this mystery is in particular, he declares in the words following, viz.
That blindness in part is happened to Israel, etc.

Lest ye should be wise in your own conceits] i. e. Lest (as you are puffed up
against the Jews for other things) so you should be be puffed up against them
with a conceit or opinion of your own knowledge also, as though ye knew all the
mysteries of God, and needed not to be taught of any.

Then is a man wise in his own conceit, when he thinks his own wit or knowledge
sufficient, so that he needs not be taught of any other, when indeed he is very
ignorant himself, and this is that which will puff a man up.

That blindness in part has happened unto Israel] That is, that Infidelity or
unbelief has happened to the Jews for a while. So some.

Others thus, that Infidelity or unbelief has happened to the Jews in part, that
is, to some part of the Jews, but not to All.

Others thus, that a kind of blindness has happened to the Jews.

But the middle of these interpretations, I perfer before the Rest.

Blindness] By blindness understand Infidelity or unbelief by a Metaphor.

In part] Some refer these words to Ly happened; and understand them of the time
in which the Jews should be blinded, q. d. That blindness is happened for a while
to the Jews.

Others refer them to the word Israel, q. d. That blindness is happened to
Israel, that is, to the Jews in part; that is, to some of the Jews.

Others refer them to the word Blindness q. d. Blindness is in some measure
happened to the Jews; And any of these ways may the Apostle speak to mollify
that which would otherwise seem harsh concerning the Jews But (by what I said
before) I prefer the middle acception before the other two; as most agreeable
to what the Apostle has hitherto said.

To Israel] By Israel are here meant the Jews which were the Children of Israel
according to the Flesh Per Metonymiam Causae.

Until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in] i. e. Until the abundance of all
Nations, which the Prophets prophesied of, should according to their prophesies
come into the Church of Christ, and be made members thereof.

By the fullness of the Gentiles is here meant, such a number or multitude of
the Gentiles as should fulfill the prophesies which went of them: Wherefore by
the fullness of the Gentiles may be meant the full number of the Gentiles,
Supple, which the Prophets spoke or prophesied of: Or (as some say) which God
would have to be saved in his secret decree, and then extend his goodness to
the Jews again

Be come in] Supple, into the Church of Christ.

He uses this word according to the manner of the Scripture, which speaks of
the Congregation of the Church as of a certain place.

Ver. 26. And so all Israel shall be saved] And then all Israel (which shall be
then living) shall be saved, to wit, from their sins.

(...) sic, so, is put here for (...) tunc, then as it seems also to be put,
John 4.6.

All Israel] Some take Israel here for Spiritual Israel which the Apostle calls
the Israel of God, Gal. 6.16. That is, for the Elect which consist both of Jews
and Gentiles. As if the Apostle had said here, that all the number of the Elect
shall then be saved: But to speak of Israel in this sense, appertains not to
the Apostles purpose or scope here, because here he touches a Mystery
concerning the conversion of the Jews the Sons of Israel according to the
flesh: therefore by Israel, the people of the Jews, are so to be meant here, as
they were by Israel in the former verse, which we may call carnal Israel, or
Israel descended from Jacob by natural propagation.

All Israel shall be saved] i e. All the Jews which shall then be living, shall
be converted, and so saved from their sins.

But note, that the Apostle says here all the Jews shall be saved, not because
none of that people shall remain obstinate in their unbelief at that time; but
because the greatest part of them shall be converted and come to the faith
(yea, so many, as that all of them may be thought to be saved) as the greatest
part of them at this time did disobey the Gospel, and fall away.

As it is written] Viz. Isa. 59.20.

There shall come out of Sion the deliverer] The Hebrew being rendered word for
word is, There shall come to Sion the deliver^r. The Septuasint render it (...)
id est, propter Sion, for Sion or for Sions sake. And some think that it was so
cited by S. Paul in this place, though now it be read (...) Out of Sion. And
the reason why it is now read (...), and not (...) they conceive it to be,
because (...) was wont to be written short thus (...), for which the
Transcribers through negligence and inadvertency wrought, (...) yet (as some
think) S. Paul (because he is wont togather his testimonies from diverse places)
might take these word (...) Out of Sion not out of Isaiah 59.20. but out of
some other place, where it is promised (as it is here) in the Mystical sense,
that a Savior or deliverer shall come out of Sion, as Psalm. 14.7. Psalm. 53.6.
Psalm 110.2.

These words, as they lie in the Prophet Isaiah are in their first and low
sense spoken of Cyrus (who was a type of Christ) and his delivery of the Jews
out of the Babylonish Captivity, and of his turning away ungodliness. (That is,
the miseries and punishments which befell the Jews for their ungodliness) from
them: which was a type of the deliverance of those, which were under the power
of sin and the Devil, from that their power: But in the second and sublime
Sense (which the prophecy respected, as well, as the other) the words are to
be understood of the delivery of the Jews from the tyranny and guilt of sin by
Christ, and as they lie here, they are to be interpreted (in this sense) after
this manner, viz. There shall come out of Sion one that was of the stock of
Israel according to the Flesh, who is able, and whose office it is to deliver
from sins; And he shall deliver the Jews from their sins, and the punishment
due to them.

There shall come out of Sion the deliverer] i. e. There shall come out of the
tribe of Juda which dwells in Sion (an hill in Jerusalem) a deliverer.

This deliverer is Jesus Christ, who was the Son of David (who dwelt in Sion)
according to the flesh.

And he shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob] i. e. And he shall take away
from the Jews the children of Jacob, their sins, by pardoning them.

Ver. 27 For this is my covenant unto them] i. e. For this is the promise which
I make unto them; Or, this is that which I enter into Covenant with them to do
for them, or to them, Supple, says the Lord; For these words are spoken in the
Person of God.

When I shall take away their sins] i. e. I will take away their sins.

Whereas the former words were taken out of Isaiah 59. v. 20.24. these words
are not thence taken; but out of Isaiah 27.9. For whereas it is said, ( Isaiah
27.9) according to the Septuagint (...) and this is his blessing, it follows
(...), i. e. when I shall take away his sin: And the Apostle says here (...).
When I shall take away their sins only changing the Singular into the Plural
numbers, yet retaining the sense, for Singular numbers are often put for
Plurals, as they were there Isaiah 27.9

The order of speech required of the Apostle, that he should have said (...) I
will take away their sins, why therefore does he say, (...) When I shall take
away their sins? Why does he use the word, When, Here?

Answ. Because he cites this authority out of the Prophet Isaiah 27.9. Where it
is written (...), etc. When I shall take away his sin. And it is the Apostles
usual manner, when he cites an Authority, to cite it as he finds it, not
changing the Syntax, but leaving it to his Reader, to make up the Syntax, in
his writing, or to understand his meaning.

This taking away of sins from the Jews prophesied of by the Prophet Isaiah,
was not performed at Christ's first coming, either by his own preaching, or by
the preaching of his Apostles, (For then a Remnant only of the Jews were saved,
the rest were blinded.) It remains therefore, that it should be then effected,
when the fullness of the Gentiles are come in.

Ver. 28. As concerning the Gospel] i. e. As concerning the Gospel, when we
look upon that, and consider how the Jews have disbelieved that, and rejected
it, and refused to embrace it.

They are Enemies] i. e. They are hated indeed of God, and held of him as
Enemies.

The word Enemies is to be taken here in a Passive sense, that is, not for such
as show their enmity toward God* but for such as that God show his enmity
toward them, by punishing them, etc. For (...), Enemies, are opposed here to
(...), beloved.

For your sakes] That is, so that ye receive benefit thereby, or so as that ye
are the better for it.

The Gentiles received this benefit, from that, that the unbelieving Jews were
hated of God for their unbelief; that they were received into the number of
Gods people, in their stead.

But as touching the Election] i e. But as touching the Election, or, when we
consider that God has elected or made choice of them, for them to be his
peculiar people; And for himself to be a God to them.

The fruits which flow from that Election whereby God chose Israel, and so the
Jews, to be a peculiar people to himself, may be attributed to their Fathers,
that is, to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob: for the love which he bear to them, did
he chose their seed after them to be a peculiar people to himself, Deuteronomy. 4.37.
But I cannot see how any thing which follows from that Election by which God
has chosen certain men, yea, Jews immediately to life everlasting, can be
attributed to the Fathers, that is, to Abraham Isaac and Jacob, or by which he
has elected them immediately to Justification. Wherefore I take Election here,
for that Election whereby he chose Israel, and so the Jews, to be a peculiar
people to himself.

The Election here spoken of is not therefore an Election immediately to life
everlasting, no nor yet immediately to justification (for I cannot see how such
an election, or any thing flowing from that, can be said to be, for the fathers
sake, or to be attributed to any other, than to Christ Jesus) But this Election
is that, whereby God made choice of the seed of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob,
to be a peculiar people and treasure to himself. And this Election indeed, and
the fruit thereof may be said to be for the fathers sake and this indeed the
Scripture attribute to the fathers: but not the other.

The word Election is a word, that in it self signifies only the act of
Election: but the person electing, the subject elected, and the object to which
he is elected must be gathered from the circumstance of the place, and by the
circumstance of the place, the Election here spoken of seems to me, to be that
whereby God elected or chose the Jews to be a peculiar people to himself, above
all the people of the Earth.

They are beloved] They are beloved, and so beloved of God, as that God will
not cast them away utterly and leave them all, utterly without all means of
Salvation, as he does those which are not his people: He will not utterly leave
them and forsake them, so that they should utterly perish.

The Jews are so beloved of God, as that God will not utterly forsake them. For
it is written of them I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, Josh 1.5.

This privilege the Jews have, that though the greatest part of them sin
against God, and are contentious against his truth, the Gospel of their
Salvation, yet God will not cast them away, and leave them all utterly, without
the means of Salvation, a privilege, which no Nation under heaven has but
themselves: And this privilege, they have by reason of that Election, whereby
God chose them to be a peculiar people to himself, for their fathers sake.

For the Fathers sake] i. e. For the love, which he bear to their Fathers,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,

These, to wit, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, are meant by the Fathers, See Cap.
9. ver. 5

Because the Lord loved their Fathers, therefore he chose their seed after
them, says Moses Deuteronomy. 4.37.

Ver. 29. For the gifts and calling of God are without repentance] i. e. For
the gracious calling of God, whereby he called the Jews to be a peculiar people
to himself, and a people of his love, is without repentance. That is, God will
never repent him of the gracious calling of the Jews, whereby he called them to
be a peculiar people to himself, and a people of his love.

These words, The gifts and calling of God in Greek, (...) are put by an
hendias for the gracious calling of God.

That which the Apostle says here, he says to confirm that, which he said
ver. 28. To wit, That the Jews are beloved of God.

There be many things, of which God (to speak after the manner of men) has
repented himself. For it repented the Lord that he had made man, Gen 6.6. And
the Lord repented that he made Saul King, 1 Samuel 15.35. etc. But that he chose
Israel to be his people, he will never repent, that is, he will not so repent,
as to cast them all off utterly, because he chose them for their fathers sake,
to be a God unto them for ever.

Ver. 30. For as ye in times past have not believed God, etc.] The Apostle
brings a new argument to prove that God has not cast away his people the Jews
(as he speaks Ver. 1.) or to prove that those Jews which stumbled, have not
stumbled, that they should fall (as he speaks ver 11.) And therefore thither
must this causal particle For relate.

As ye] i. e. As ye Gentiles.

In times past] By times past he means the times before Christ's coming in
which God suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways, Acts 14.16.

Have not believed God] i. e. Have not believed God to wit, when God declared
to you by his works, that he ought to be worshipped, but ye worshipped not him,
but served other Gods.

But have obtained mercy] i. e. But have now believed through the grace and
mercy of God, and are brought into the Church of God, and justified from your
sins, by reason of your belief.

Through their unbelief] i e By reason of the unbelief of the Jews, God calling
you to the faith of the Gospel, because the Jews would not believe it.

Ver. 31. Even so have these] i. e. Even so have these, to wit, the Jews for
the greatest part of them.

Now not believed] Now for a time, not believed the Gospel, but rejected it.

That through your mercy] i. e. That by reason of the mercy, which ye have
obtained.

They also may obtain mercy] i e. They also may obtain the like mercy.

The Jews which would not believe for a while, but should afterward believe,
shall, when they believe, believe, as it is probable, through the faith of the
Gentiles, as being provoked to jealousy or emulation through their says, and
the mercies bestowed upon them by reason thereof, See ver. 11.14.

Ver. 32. For God has concluded them all in unbelief] Those words would be
better rendered thus, For God has concluded all in unbelief. Leaving out that
demonstrative pronoun them, for which there is no word to countenance it, in
the Greek.

For God has concluded all in unbelief] i. e. For God has partly heretofore,
and partly now concluded all in unbelief, both Jews and Gentiles: Gentiles
heretofore, and Jews now.

He confirms here what he said verse 30.31. And yet this may be a new argument
to prove what he said in the beginning of the first or in the beginning of the
eleventh verse, and be referred thither.

God has concluded all in unbelief] The word rendered here unbelief is in the
greek (...), which signifies a pertinacy in unbelief, whereby a man is, as it
were imperswasible, or not to be persuaded or induced to believe. And to be
concluded, signifies, to be shut up as it were in a prison.

God is said to conclude men in this unbelief and to imprison them, as it were
in it (by a Metaphor) because he does suffer them to be taken and ensnared in
it, And suffers difficulties to be laid upon them, so that they cannot easily
free themselves, and get out of this unbelief, and break as it were the bolts
and open the doors, which kept them thus shut up. But he concludes or shuts up
none after this manner, but for their sins.

Has concluded] This word by a Syllepsis signifies both time past, and
present, yea and time continuing and going on to.

All] Supple, Both Jews and Gentiles. Yet not all absolutely, but far the
greatest part of all. Hyperbole.

In unbelief] To wit, as in a prison.

That he might have mercy upon all] i. e. That he might bring all to believe,
and to the mercies, which he shows them which believe.

When he says That he might have mercy upon all; it is manifest that by this,
he cannot mean every singular man. There is therefore an other Hyperbole in the
speech.

Ver. 33. O the depth of the Riches, both of the wosdom and knowledge of God]
q. d. O how deep, and remote from humane sense, is the abundance or greatness
of the wisdom and knowledge of God!

This Admiration or Exclamation of the Apostle is occasioned especially, by
what he said, ver. 30, 31, 32. For what he says there makes him admire and
admiring, to break out into words of Admiration, of the wisdom and knowledge of
God to think, that the Gentiles, which in times past believed not, should now
believe, through the unbelief of the Jews; and that the Jews, which now believe
not, should hereafter be brought to believe, through the faith of the Gentiles
(which seem to be contrary means) and that God should in his due times conclude
both Jews and Gentiles in unbelief; that he might in his due times bring them
both to believe, which no creature could ever have dreamed of, had not God
revealed it to them.

O the depth of the Riches] i. e. O how deep lie the Riches of the wisdom and
knowledge of God.

The Riches] i. e. The abundance or greatness.

The Hebrews call all abundance and greatness, by the name of Riches, as Cap. 2
4. and Cap. 9.23. The Apostle therefore, that he might show, the Abundance and
greatness of the wisdom and knowledge of God, makes use of the word Riches
here.

O the depth of the riches, etc.] In an heap of Riches, the greater, and the
more the Riches are, the more profound and the deeper is the heap: therefore,
say some to show the abundance of the Riches, and the wisdom, and the knowledge
of God, the Apostle uses this word, (...) or depth, here.

But being that it follows, How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways
past finding out; I conceive, that the Apostle uses this word, (...) or depth,
here, to signify the unsearchableness, and difficulty, or impossibility of
finding out Gods judgments and ways; and the Apostle alludeth here to Gold,
and Silver, and other Metals, which lie deep in the bowels of the Earth, which
the deeper they lie, the more remote they are from the sight, and more
difficult to be found or lit upon.

A Philosopher said of Truth (because she was hard to be found) that she lay
deep in a pit, It is not unusual therefore to say of things difficult to be
found, that they are deep, or lie deep, to wit, in the earth, or the like.

Of the wisdom] To wit, by which God orders and disposes in his judgment,
of the things, which he makes, or has made.

And knowledge of God] i. e. And the knowledge of God, whereby he knows how
to effect what he judges fit in his wisdom to be done.

As some do put a difference between the wisdom, and knowledge of God here, by
reason of these distributive particles, Both and And: So others notwithstanding
them, take them both to signify one and the same thing, by a Synonymia
familiar to the Hebrews.

How unsearchable are his judgements] By the judgments of God, are here meant
the acts and determinations of his understanding, whereby he wisely determins
and disposes of things.

And his ways past finding out!] By ways may be here meant the means, by which
God brings to pass, what he has determined to do: Or by ways may be meant his
determinations themselves. For ways in the Scriptures, are oftentimes taken for
works and actions in a general, but Metaphorical signification.

Whereas God had a Thousand ways at hand, by which he could in a most excellent
manner show mercy to the sons of men, and that without the fall or previous sin
of any one. Yet did it please God to make use of that way, by which he
foreknew, that the Gentiles first, and the Jews afterward would fall into
unbelief, and continue in unbelief many ages, which no man could have thought
of, had not God himself revealed it to him.

Ver. 34. Who has known the mind of the Lord] i. e. Who has known the
determinations of the Lord, what he is minded, that is, what he is determined
to do.

Before God had revealed his mind and his determination, what he is determined
to do, no man does or can know, what it is: But yet God does oftentimes reveal
his mind and his determination to his servants, and then they may know it: For
1 Cor. 2.16. It is asked, Who has known the mind of the Lord, that he may
instruct him? But we have the mind of Christ. Says our Apostle there, by way
of Answer, or prevention of an objection.

Or who has been his counselor?] The The greek word rendered Counselor is,
(...), which signifies one, who is present and privy to the counsels of
another, and sits with him in counsel, as an helper or coadjutor, the sense
therefore is this, q. d Or who sat in counsel with him, and helped him therein,
So that he was privy to his counsels and determinations, when he determined,
what he would do concerning his creatures, or any of them.

The Kings of the Earth have, such Counselors, as are acquainted always with
their Counsels, and are present at their determinations, as coadjutors: But God
adusits not any one to his counsels, when be sits, as we may say in council,
and determins of things, which he will do.

This whole verse is taken out of Isaiah, Cap. 40. ver. 13. according to the
Septuagint. And is spoken of God (...).

Ver. 35. Or who has first given to him] Or (which is yet more unlikely) who
has given counsel to him, as the sole or prime Author thereof, how he should
manage his Affairs.

First] This word First, is spoken here, in relation to the recompense
following.

And it shall be recompensed to him again] i. e. That God should be beholding
to him, and be bound (in gratitude at least) to recompense him again, for that
his counsel.

It is an absurd thing to think, that God should be any way bound to his
creature: therefore is this added to show, what an absurd consequence would
follow upon that antecedent, to wit, that any should give any thing to God: And
it is added to persuade that there is no such matter.

Note, that And is put here for That.

This verse is taken out of Job, Job 41. ver. 2. according to the vulgar
translation of that place. And that which is generally spoken there, is drawn
down to a particular congruous to this place, here.

Ver. 36. For of him and through him, and to him are all things] q. d. No body
has given counsel to God. For of him, and through him, and to him are all
things; so that if all things are of God, then is counsel of him too.

Of him, and through him, and to him are all things] i. e. All things are of
God, as of the Efficient cause, for he made all things, and through him, as the
conserving cause, for he conserveth all things in their being, and to him, as
the final cause, for all things tend to his glory, and were made therefore.

It had been enough here, for the Apostle to say for of him are all things. But
the m^re to show, that none had first given to him, he sets out, that God is
the prime Efficient cause of all things, and not only the prime efficient
cause of all things, but that he is the conserving cause also, conserving every
thing in its being, and not only so, but that he is the final cause too, to
which all things tend, and to whose glory they are ordained.

To whom be glory for ever] i. e. To whom therefore let us for ever ascribe the
glory of all things.

Amen] See Cap. 1.25. and Cap. 13. ver. 33.

CHAP. XII.
1 I Bese^ch you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present
your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your
reasonable service.

1. You see, by what I have said, how many mercies God bestows upon them,
which are justified by faith; I beseech you therefore brethren by those mercies
of God, that ye present your bodies a sacrifice to God; not such a sacrifice as
those beasts were, which were slain and sacr ficed in honor of the True God,
under the Law, but a Living Sacrifice, holy, and separate from sin, and such as
with which God may be well pleased, that is, present unto him your service,
guided by reason, which is sanctified, and informed with the will of God.

2. And be not conformed to this world: but be ye transformed by the renewing
of your mind, that ye may prove what is that good, that acceptable and perfect
will of God.

2. And that ye may know, what is that good, that acceptable and perfect will
of God, which should sanctify and inform your reason; be not conformed in your
manners to worldly men, who being not acquainted with the things of God, follow
the honors, and pleasures, and riches, and other vanities of the world; but be
ye transformed and become in manners and conversation different and unlike to
them, and that not in your external actions only, but by the renewing of your
mind also (which is corrupt:) for as a sponge, which is dipped in vinegar, if
before the vinegar be wrung out of it, it be put into wine, it will not admit
or drink up any of the wine; so a mind, which is full of the vanities of this
world, cannot admit or receive in, any wholesome admonitions or virtuous
instructions* until it be free from those vanities.

3. For I say, through the grace given unto me, to every man, that is among
you, not to think of himself more highly then he ought to think, but to think
soberly according as God has dealt to every man the measure of faith.

3. Wherefore, that I may in part show you, how you should present your bodies
a pleasing sacrifice to God, and that I may show you in part, what is that good
and perfect and acceptable will of his, by which you should regulate your
service, I do by virtue of mine Apostle-ship admonish, every man among you; not
to think himself a greater gifted man than he is, or that he has more in
himself, than he has; but to think modestly of himself, so that the thoughts
of himself do not exceed the measure or bounds of those gifts, which God has
given him, but that every ones thoughts be according to those his gifts.

4. For as we have many members in one body, and all members, have not the same
office:

4. For every man is not endued with every gift; but as in our natural body, we
have many members, and all members have not the same office, but offices
several and distinct one from another, as the eye to see, the ear to hear, the
feet to walk, etc.

5. So we being many are one body in Christ, and every one members one of
another.

5. So it is in the mystical body of Christ, for we which are in ourselves many
and distinct persons one from another, are one body through and under Christ
our head; But though we are but one body, yet are we several and distinct
members, and every one members one of another, having several and distinct
gifts one from another, and suppeditating and ministering one to another, by the
different gifts, which one has and another has not.

6. Having then gifts, differing according to the grace, that is given to us,
whether prophecy, let us prophecy, according to the proportion of faith:

6. Having then gifts differing according to the grace that is given to us,
whether it be prophecy, let us exercise our prophecy according to the measure
and proportion of that gift, without pride or arrogance.

7. Or ministry, let us wait on our ministering: or he that teaches, on
teaching.

7. Or a ministry, and an office in the Church of Christ, let us carry
ourselves modestly in that our ministry and office, not exceeding the bounds
thereof, but walking according to the proportion of that gift: and so let him
that has the gift of teaching, do in teaching.

8. Or he that exhorts, on exhortation: he that gives, let him do it with
simplicity: he that rules, with diligence: he that shows mercy, with
cheerfulness.

8. And he that has the gift of exhortation, let him do the like in his
exhorting. He that has whereof to give, and has an heart to give, let him do
it in simplicity, not aiming at any by ends, but only at the glory of God and
relief of his brother: He that has the rule and government of others committed
to him, let him rule and govern those, which are committed to his charge with
all diligence. He that shows mercy to them, which stand in need of mercy, let
him do it with chearfullness, not grudgingly.

9 Let love be without dissimulation: abhor that which is evil, cleave to that
which is good.

9. Let love be without dissimulation, not pretending to love outwardly, when
your heart is far from it; But let your heart and outward actings of love go
together: And in your love abhor that which is evil, and humor not your friend
in any vicious course; but cleave to that which is good, and virtuous.

10. Be kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly love, in honor
preferring one another.

10. Yea, be kindly affected one to another with Brotherly (that is with more
than common) love, in honor preferring one another, as better deserving than
himself.

11. Not slothful in business: servent in spirit, serving the Lord:

11. Be not slothful in performing that which ye have a ready mind to do. And
befervent in your affections one toward another, so serving the Lord Jesus.

12. Rejoicing in hope, patient in tribulation, continuing instant in prayer:

12. Rejoice in hope of eternal Glory which is reserved for you: Be patient in
tribulation, whenever it befalls you; By reason of that hope. Continuing
instant in prayer to God, For that also will ease your tribulations.

13. Distributing to the necessity of saints, given to hospitality.

13. Distribute to the necessity of the Saints, as every one has need.
Entertain in your houses those which are strangers, and use hospitality toward
them.

14. Bless them which persecute you, bless, and curse not.

14. Bless them and pray for them which persecute you. Bless and pray for all,
curse and wish evil to none.

15. Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with them that weep.

15. Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with them that weep, looking
upon that which befalls others, no otherwise then if it befell you your selves.

16. Be of the same mind one toward another, Mind not high things, but
condescend to men of low estate. Be not wise in your own conceits.

16. Be like affectioned one toward another. Think not on high things as
riches and honor, and the like, which will puff him up, and make him proud
which possesses them; but casting off such thoughts, condescend to be and to
consort, even with the poorest and meanest brother: Be not wise in your own
conceits.

17. Recompense to no man evil for evil. Provide things honest in the sight of
all men.

17. Recompense to no man evil for the evil which ye have received of him: See
that whatsoever ye do be honest, not in the sight of God only (which sees the
heart, and sees what is done in secret) but in the sight of man also, that he
may not be offended at you, but have an example from you, of well-doing.

18. If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all men.

18. If it be possible (for we must not for peace sake yield to all things.) As
much as in you lies (for some when we speak of peace make themselves ready for
war) live peaceably with all men.

19. Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath:
for it is written, Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord.

19. Dearly beloved, if any one has injured you, avenge not your selves of
him; But if you find a desire of revenge coming upon you, fly from it: For it
is written, Deuteronomy. 32.35. Vengeance is mine (not yours) and I will repay it
says the Lord.

20. Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him: if he thirst, give him drink.
For in so doing thou shall heap coals of fire on his head.

20. Therefore I would have you to be so far, from revenging your selves, upon
your enemy; as that if he hunger, I would have you feed him: And if he thirst,
I would have you give him drink: For by so doing, as Refiners heap Coals of
fire upon the metals which they would refine, so to purge them the better, and
more speedily from their dross; So shall thou heap benefits upon his head;
which will be as the Refiners coals, to purge him of his enmity, and rankor
toward thee.

21. Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good.

21. Be not overcome of evil, so as by reason of any evil which is done to
thee, to think and meditate upon revenge: But overcome evil with good, so may
thou move him which injured thee, and was thine enemy, to cease his injury, and
to carry himself friendly toward thee, being provoked thereunto by thy
courtesies toward him.

CHAP. XII.
Ver. 1. I beseech you therefore brethren] The Apostle having delivered in the
former part of this Epistle the Doctrine of Faith: comes here to give precepts
of manners; And to connect or knit this to his former Subject, He infers this
as a duty arising from that; For when that his Doctrine of faith has set out
and shown many mercies of God to us; He beseeches the Romans here, in
consideration of those mercies, to show themselves thankful to God, by an holy
living and conversation of life.

I beseech you therefore, etc.] q. d. Being therefore you have received many
mercies from God, (as I have showed you in the former part of my Epistle) I
beseech you, Brethren, by those mercies, etc.

Brethren] He calls the Romans Brethren, because they were Christians, as he
was, And Christians because they have the same God for their Father, and the
same Church for their Mother, are called Brethren.

By the mercies of God] i. e. By the mercies which God has showed you.

The Apostle begins this part of his Epistle, with a vehement obsecration
and an earnest obtestation whereby he beseeches the Romans by those mercies
which he had mentioned and commended to them, in the former part of his
Epistle, and which they had received, that they would present their bodies a
living sacrifice, etc.

By the mercies of God] This is a vehement obtestation, which is a most
effectual kind of reasoning, or manner of persuading.

Like unto this is that most earnest and passionate prayer in the Letany of our
Church, viz. By thine Agony and bloody sweat by thy Cross and Passion, etc Good
Lord deliver us: which manner of praying, Some have profanely called swearing,
but you see, that the Apostle uses this same manner of speaking, and he may be
a president for it, without exception.

That you present your bodies a living sacrifice] i. e. That ye offer your
selves as a living Sacrifice to God.

Your Bodies] i e. Your selves.

By the Body is here meant, not the Body only, but the body and soul too; that
is, the whole man, by a Synechdoche.

But he seems to say your bodies rather than your selves, in some allusion to
the Jewish Sacrifices, where the bodies of the beasts which were offered for a
burnt-offering, were consumed or burnt on the Altar, to the glory of God.

A living sacrifice] i. e. As a living Holocaust or Burnt-offering, as I may so
speak.

The Apostle in this alludes to the Sacrifices of the Jews, and among them to
the Holocaust, or whole burnt-offering; where the Beast or Carcass of the
beast, which was offered or sacrificed, was wholly burnt or consumed with fire
to the glory of God. And this he does to signify that we should offer to God,
our whole selves and all our actions.

Yet he says a living sacrifice in opposition to that, That those Sacrifices
which the Jews offered were slain; But this is not required of us, that we
should slay our selves, or be slain, by being made a Sacrifice here.

Then we offer our bodies, that is, our selves a living Sacrifice to God, when
we direct all our actions, and do all which we do, to his glory; according to
the exposition which the Apostle gives of his meaning, in the last words of
this verse.

Holy] i e. An holy Sacrifice. That is, a sacrifice pure and separate from all
uncleanness; Yea, a sacrifice sanctified by the holy Ghost, as our Apostle
speaks, Chap. 15. ver. 16.

The sacrifices of the Old Law were called holy, and were so accounted. But if
they were called and accounted holy, Surely the bodies of Christians may be
called and accounted holy, much more, being that they are purified from sin by
the blood of Christ, 1 John 1.7. and sanctified by the holy Ghost, Romans 15 16.

There is an allusion therefore here to the sacrifices of the Law, and their
holiness, when he bids us, offer our bodies an Holy Sacrifice.

Acceptable unto God] i e. Such as is well-pleasing unto God, who because he is
pure, delights and is well-pleased with that only which is pure.

The Burnt sacrifice was said to be an offering of a sweet savor unto the
Lord, Levit. 1.9. In allusion to this, would the Apostle have our sacrifice
acceptable and well pleasing to God. And indeed if such sacrifices were as a
sweet savor unto God acceptable and well pleasing to him, much more may the
bodies and actions of Christians be acceptable to him, See 2 Cor. 2 15. and
Phil. 4.18

Which is your reasonable service] He interprets here what he meant by their
bodies. He means by that themselves, that is, their reasonable service. By a
Synechdochical Metonymie

Your reasonable service] By the reasonable service here spoken of, is meant
the service of the spirit or of the soul which is a reasonable soul, that is,
q. d. your spiritual service or the service of your spiritual souls. Or by the
reasonable service is meant the service of the whole man, as it is reasonable,
or guided by the reasonable soul directed by Gods word.

He opposes here this reasonable service, or service of the spirit, to that
bodily service which was used under the old Law, and which consisted (for the
most part) in slaying and sacrificing beasts and birds, etc. or rather he
opposes it to the beasts and birds themselves, which were sacrificed, which
were but brute and unreasonable creatures.

Ver. 2. And be not conformed to this world] q. d. And for this end or for this
cause, be not conformed to this world.

Be not conformed to this world] i. e. Be not conformed or be not like to the
men, which love the pleasures and profits and other vanities of this world, all
which ye have renounced in your Baptism.

To this world] By the world is here meant by a Metonymie the men which live in
the world, and then by a Synechdoche not any men which live in the world, but
such as are given to the pleasures, and profits, and other vanities of the
world.

But be ye transformed] i. e. But be ye transformed and become like to those
which are of another, yea a more heavenly carriage, and conversation.

By the renewing of your mind] This he says because their mind was corrupt,
And from thence this transformation must begin.

That ye may prove what is that good and acceptable will of God] i. e. That ye
may know, and approve of that good and acceptable will of God, by which ye are
to regulate and square your Reasonable service.

That ye may prove] i. e. That ye may know, and approve or like of, for so may
the word (...) (which is the word in the Greek) signify. By a Metaphor from
Goldsmiths which try Gold, by their touchstone, and upon trial, know it to be
true Gold, and approve of it, for such.

What is that good, that acceptable and perfect will of God] i. e. What is that
will of God (by which we should guide our Reasonable service) which is a good
will, a perfect will, and a will acceptable or pleasing to God and all good men.

This will of God is no other, then the precepts, commands, or Law of God which
if we follow, will make our sacrifice, that is our service, holy and acceptable
to him and perfect.

We can neither know, nor approve or like of this will of God (which should be
the square and rule of our reasonable service) with any good effect, if we are
not changed from the fashion of this world into a more Heavenly fashion. (...)
says, Andronicus Rhodius even of moral Virtues in his Paraphrase, in Arist.
Ethic. lib. prim cap. 12. It is impossible for him to come to the knowledge of
what is said, or treated of virtue, which is not accustomed to good actions.
And (...), says Hierocles in Carm. Pythagor.

It behooves us to order the unreasonableness which is in us, and the sloth,
and then to betake our selves to the knowledge of more Divine matters. For as
it is impossible for a sore, blear and foul eye to behold those things which
are very light and splendide: So it is for a soul not possessed with virtue or
goodness to behold the beauty of truth.

As a Sponge which is dipped in vinegar, if before the vinegar be wrung out of
it, It is put into wine, It will not admit or drink up any of the wine: So a
mind which is full of the vanities of this world, cannot admit or receive in,
any wholesome admonition, or virtuous instructions, until it be free from those
vanities, says, Ephraim Syrus Ser. De abstinenda ab omni consuetudine
pernitiosa.

What is that good that acceptable and perfect will of God] We must know what
is the good, acceptable and perfect will of God, that the sacrifice which the
Apostle exhorts to, may be good, acceptable and perfect; For that is the Rule
and square to which it must be conformed.

Christians are spiritual Levites or spiritual Priests. Now as the Priests of
the Law were to judge of the sacrifices of the Law, whether they were fit to be
offered or no by such rules as are given, Levit. 22.17, etc. So would the
Apostle have us to judge of our sacrifices. -- here, by the rule which is here
given, that is, By the good, acceptable and perfect will of God Whether they
are good, acceptable and perfect as they should be.

The Apostle when he would have them know, what is that good, that acceptable,
and perfect will of God; that they may know thereby what will be an acceptable
sacrifice; and that by regulating their service thereby, they might make their
sacrifice good, acceptable, and perfect: He seems to allude to those
attributes or qualities; which were required in the sacrifices of the old Law;
for they were called good, Levit. 27.10. And acceptable, and perfect, Levit.
22.21. Exodus 12 5.

Ver. 3. For I say through the grace given unto me, to every man that is among
you] Wherefore, I say, by virtue of my Apostleship, to every one of you, etc.

The Apostle begins here to show them by particulars, how they should present
their bodies a living sacrifice holy, and acceptable unto God, and what is that
reasonable service which he spoke of: and in so doing, he shows them more
particularly, what is the good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God, wh ch
he mentioned in the former verse.

For] For is put here for Wherefore, as Cap 8 ver. 38.

I say] He might say I command you and give you in charge; but he had rather
say, I say, than I command you and give you in charge, because it would be
better taken by the Romans, to speak in this humble, than in that imperious or
commanding manner.

Through the grace given unto me] i. e By virtue of mne Apostle-ship, or by the
authority of the office, which it pleased God to put me in.

By the grace given to him, he means the Apostle-ship, which was an office
given to him of Gods free grace and favor. See Cap. 15. ver, 15, 16.

The Apostle makes mention of his office here, intimating thereby, that he was
necessitated by his office, to do as he does; lest the Romans should think it
arrogance in him, thus to speak, and thus to write to them.

To every man that is among you] i. e. To every man, which is among you Romans,
whether he be Jew or Gentile.

Not to think of himself more highly, then he ought to think] i. e. not to
think himself a greater gifted man than he is, or not to think, that he has
more in him, than he has.

But to think soberly] i. e. But to think modestly of himself, so that the
thoughts of himself, exceed not the measure or bounds of those gifts, which God
has given him.

What it is for a man to think soberly of himself, the Apostle shows in the
next words, it is to think of himself according to the measure of the gifts,
which God has given him.

According as God has dealt to every one the measure of Faith] i. e. According
to the measure of those gifts, which God has dealt to every one.

It is not meet for him, which is a mere Grammarian, to take upon him to judge
of controversies of Religion; Nor was it meet for him, which was but a Levite,
to arrogate to himself that which did appertain to the office of a Priest, nor
for him which was but an ordinary Priest, to meddle with that which was proper
to the high Priest; yet no less unseemly do they carry themselves, which exceed
in their doings, the measure of faith, which God has given them.

According to the measure of faith] By Faith is meant that faith by which we
are Christians; but yet it is put here by a Metonymy, for those gifts, which
God gave to certain men by reason of that Faith. For God gave several gifts to
several men which embraced the faith of Christ, for the edifying and building
up of that body of Christ, which is the Church.

Or Faith may be taken here, first for trust, then by a Metonymy, for those
gifts which are committed (as a talent) to a man's trust, for him to employ
faithfully, according to his Masters will.

As for Christ Jesus, which is the head of this body the Spirit was not given
to him by measure John 3.34 But to all and every of other the members of this
body, the Spirit is given by measure: for God bestows not all gifts upon one,
but to every one a part only of his gifts, and that a greater or less part as
it seems good to him, and this the Apostle teaches and sets forth in the
following verses, by the similitude or allegory of a natural body

Ver. 4. For as we have many members in one body, etc.] q. d. I said the
measure of Faith, for as in the Natural body, we have many members in one body,
and all members have not the same office: So in the mystical body of Christ,
we being many are one body in Christ, and every one members one of another, and
therefore we have only a certain measure of gifts every one of us, none has
all.

He gives a reason, why he said, to every man the measure of faith: By which
he means only a measure or certain portion, not a deal or quantity without
measure.

As we have many members in one body] i. e. As we in these natural bodies of
ours, have many members in one body, as Eyes, Ears, Hands, Feet, etc.

And all members have not the same office] i. e. And all these members have not
the same, but diverse and different offices; as the Eyes to see, the Ears to
hear, the Hands to handle, the Feet to walk, so that one member does not all
duties, nor has all faculties, and all instruments conducing to all duties.

Ver. 5. So we being many] i. e. So we Christians, being many individual
Persons.

Are one body in Christ] i. e. Are one Mystical body under Christ our head, or
make up one Mystical body, under Christ our head.

In is put here for Under, as Chap. 7.6.

And every one members one of another] i. e. And every one of us (being none of
us is a complete body body by himself) is but a member only of others (as I of
thee, and thou of me) and therefore none of us all, has all the gifts of an
whole body given to himself; but every one has different and Several gifts,
whereby he ministers, that to another, which that other has not; and that
other does the like to him.

A member of a body may be said, to be a member, not only in relation of the
whole body, but also in relation to any or all the particular members of that
body, as being a fellow-member with it, or them: And therefore the Apostle
says. And every one members one of another.

Now if in the mystical body of Christ, we are but members, and members one of
another, and so several and distinct members, we must needs have, as the
members of the natural body have their offices, not one all gifts, but every
one several and distinct gifts: And this the Apostle would have us gather from
hence.

The Apostle should rather say: And members one of another, than members of
that one body, to teach, that every Christian should labor, not only for the
good of the whole, but also for the good of every part, that so every one may
be kindly affectioned one toward another, and not one exalt himself above, or
carry himself proudly toward another.

Ver. 6. Having then gifts differing, to wit, one from another, etc.] q. d.
Having then gifts (none of us all all gifts, but every one his particular
gifts) differing one from another, and so one wanting that gift, which another
has, let us not carry ourselves proudly and arrogantly one toward another, as
though one had all, and another none at all, or but little in comparison of him.

According to the grace given to us] i. e. As God has given to every one of
us, by his grace or favor: Or according to the grace and favor which God has
vouchsafed to us.

Here is also in this word Grace, and in the word Given arguments to repress
pride.

Whether Prophesie] i. e. Whether we have the gift of Prophecy.

By Prophecy some understand prophecy here, as it is most properly taken,
Viz. For that by which future things are foretold: Others take it for
prophecy, as prophecy is said to be a gift of interpreting and expounding
hard places of Scripture: Others include both these gifts here under this one
name.

Let us prophecy according to the proportion of faith] That is, let us
exercise that gift of prophecy soberly, according to the measure of it, not
exceeding or going beyond what we have therein.

According to the proportion of Faith] That is, according to the proportion or
measure of that gift, not running out or presuming either of other gifts, which
we have not, or of a greater measure of that, than we have.

By proportion he means the same thing here, as he did by measure, ver. 3.
And by faith is to be meant here a gift bestowed upon us by reason of our
faith, as ver. 3. But in particular by faith is meant here the gift of
prophecy spoken of in this verse.

Ver. 7. Or ministry, let us wait on our ministry; or he that teaches, on
teaching; or he that exhorts, on exhortation, etc.] This being rendered word
for word out of the Greek will run thus: Or ministry in ministry: Or he that
teaches, in teaching: or he that exhorts, in exhortation: where there is a
defect or Ellipsis to be made up; and according to the context, it seems to
me that it may be most probably made up thus: Or having a ministry, let us
carry ourselves soberly in that ministry according to the measure or
proportion of Faith; that is, according to the measure or proportion of that
gift. Or he that teaches, let him carry himself soberly in teaching according
to the measure or proportion of faith, that is, according to the measure or
proportion of that gift: Or he that exhorts, let him carry himself soberly in
exhortation, according to the measure or proportion of faith, that is,
according to the measure or proportion of that gift.

Or Ministery] i. e. Or whether Ministry.

The word (...) rendered Ministry may in it self be applied to offices and
functions in the Commonwealth, as well as in the Church. For the Magistrate is
called (...). i. e. The Minister of God, Chap. 13.4. But surely here it must be
understood of some office or function in the Church.

But what office or function is here meant, is questionable.

Some therefore take it for the office of an Evangelist, because S. Paul
reckoning up the like particulars, names Evangelists after Prophets, Ephesians.
4.11. And Evangelists might stand in as much need of this admonition, as the
Prophets did of the former.

Others take this of the particular office of a Deacon, because of the word
(...).

Others take it generally for all or any Ecclesiastical office, q. d. Or,
having the gift of any Ecclesiastical office or Ministry, as of a Bishop, a
Presbyter, or a Deacon, etc.

On our Ministery] The Greek is (...), that is, (for here is an Ellipsis as I
said) let us carry our selves soberly, in our Ministry, according to the
measure or proportion of faith, that is, according to the measure or proportion
of our gift or Ministry.

Or, he that teacheth] i. e. Or he that has the gift of teaching.

To teach signifies here, the gift to explain and deliver to others, what he
knows himself, in apt and convenient words, so that he may be plainly and
easily understood.

In teaching] i. e. Let him carry himself soberly in teaching, according to the
measure or proportion of faith; that is, according to the measure or proportion
of that his gift.

Ver. 8. Or he that Exhorteth] i. e. Or he that has the gift of exhortation.

To Exhort is for a man to move or stir up the mind of his auditors with
pleasing and insinuating speeches, to the works of piety and godliness.

In Exhortation] i. e. Let him carry himself soberly in Exhorting, according to
the measure or proportion of faith; that is, according to the measure or
proportion of this his gift of Exhortation.

These last, take not as diverse offices of the Church, but as diverse gifts or
graces, which may meet in one Subject, though they are often separate and
distinct. And note that it is the Apostles scope here, not to show what offices
shall be in the Church, but to show how men should make use of those gifts,
which God has given them for the benefit of the Church, without pride.

Many such gifts as these were conferred upon many of the Church immediately by
the holy Ghost, for the good of the Church, in the first times of the Gospel.

He that giveth] i. e. He that has wherewith to give, and God has given him
an heart to give

Let him do it in simplicity] i. e. Let him not do it for vainglory, or any
other sinister end. So some. Or, let him do it liberally or bountifully. So
others,

The word in the Greek is (...), and indeed this word (...) is rendered,
liberality, 2 Cor. 8.2. and so some would have it rendered here.

But (...) in its prime signification signifies simplicity, and it is to be
taken here, ^s I conceive, for simplicity of heart; and that is done in
simplicity or with simplicity of heart, which is done with a pure sincere and
simple intent, that is, where nothing is eyed but that which should be eyed; As
in alms, the relieving of the poor and the glory of God, not vainglory, or
obliging the poor to himself. For he that shows or pretends one thing in
his work, and thinks of another thing in his heart, Cor duplicat: as Saint
Austin speaks, he doubleth his heart, and so does not what he does, in
Simplicity.

Note, that the Apostle alters his phrase here: for he says not, he that
gives, in giving: He that rules, in ruling; He that shows mercy, in showing
mercy; As he said before, He that teaches in teaching, He that exhorts, in
exhortation, Wherefore he seems to have some other intent here, than he had
there: His intent therefore was there, to show, that men should not arrogantly
exceed the measure of their gifts: Here, that men should use those gifts well,
which they had received: the former respected the quantity (as I may so speak)
this the quality of their doings.

He that ruleth] i. e. He who has the rule and government of others committed
to him.

With diligence] That is, let him rule with diligence, this he says, because
diligence, care, and studdy, is required of all Rulers.

He that shows mercy] To wit, to such as stand in need of mercy.

With cheerfulness] i. e. Let him do it, that is, let him show mercy, with
cheerfulness.

God loves cheerfulness in all such actions.

Ver. 9. Let love be without dissimulation] Whom we love, let us love with a
sincere heart, not making an outward show of love, when our heart is far from
it, but let our heart and show go together.

Abhor that which is evil, cleave to that which is good] i e. And in your love
abhor that which is evil, and cleave to that which is good, that is, do not
that for love sake which is evil, but remember in all the ways of your love, to
cleave to that which is good.

Some love so perversely as that they will humor their friend in any thing,
which he desires, be it never so vicious. Against such does the Apostle give
this rule here.

But yet some take these words more generally and make them as the sum of the
Law, which is to eschew evil, and do good, and say that they are here alleged
as a reason why love should be without dissimulation, q. d. Let love be without
dissimulation. For dissimulation is evil; And what says the law? Abhor that
which is evil; cleave to that which is good.

Ver. 10. Be kindly affectioned one toward another with brotherly love] i. e.
Ye which are Christians and so Saints, love one another with more than an
ordinary love, yea, love one another with brotherly love.

The Apostle spoke of Love, ver. 9 and here he speaks of love again; but in the
ninth verse he spoke of that love which we show to men in general: In this
verse, he speaks of love which we ow to the Saints in particular, that is, to
the brethren, that is, to them which are of the same Christian faith, and
religion with our selves.

But if we shall take the object of love alike, or for the same in both places;
then make that which is here said, as an higher degree of love than what was
said before q. d. Yea, be kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly
love, that is, yea, let nor your love be only without dissimulation; but be
kindly affectioned one toward another, with brotherly love, etc.

In honor preferring one another] i. e. Every one honoring one another, yea,
and thinking him worthy of honor, above himself.

There is no man so perfect but that he may see some good thing in another,
which he sees not in himself; and beholding this, he may think another worthy
to be preferred in honor before himself, while he looks upon that.

The Apostle adds this in this place, because that brotherly love which he
commands here, is cherished and nourished by these means.

Ver. 11. Not slothful in business] i. e. The words in the Original are (...),
which may be rendered thus, not slow in your desire, and ready will to do good.
For among other significations which this word (...) has, It signifies a ready
will to help or do good to another. (See Hen. Stephens Thesau. Vocabulo (...).)
But howsoever, the General word (...) may be drawn here, to this sense, by the
Circumstances of the place. The sense therefore of these words here, may be
this. Be not slothful, when you have a desire, and ready will to do Good, to
perform that Good.

This precept may the Apostle give here, with Respect to those precepts which
he gave before ( viz. That, he that gives, let him do it with simplicity. And
that, he that shows mercy, let him do it with cheerfulness, Verse 8. And
that, let Love be without dissimulation, Verse 9. And that, be kindly
affectioned one toward another, with Love, etc. v. 10.) That they might do the
Duties contained in those Precepts, not in w^^d and in Tongue, but in Deed and
in Trut^, as Saint John speaks, 1 John 3.18. And that there might be a
readiness to these Duties, not of mind only, but of performance also. For there
may be a readiness of mind (at least in show) when there is a backwardness in
doing and Performing; As may be gathered from 2 Corinthians. chap. 8. verse 10, 11.

But the Apostle may say, (...) (...), not only in Relation to the precepts and
duties above mentioned, but also in Respect to that precept or duty also, which
he sets down among them, viz. He that Rules let him do it with diligence. For
the Greek is (...) and under the word (...), may be comprehended, Not only a
desire and ready will to do good to others, But also diligence in any thing.

Saint Hierome interprets these words, (...) (which are rendered by the Vulgar
Latin, Solicitudine non Pigri) thus, Not being slow in the works of Piety,
through the care of the world.

Fervent in Spirit] i. e. Having a fervent affection, viz. One toward another.

In this sense the Apostle calls the great affection which the Corinthians had
to him, their Fervent mind, 2 Corinthians. 7.7. And Saint Peter wished them to whom
he wrote to have above All things Fervent charity among themselves.

Where there is a fervent affection toward the Saints, or any other men, there
will not want a Readiness to perform any duty toward them.

Serving the Lord] This the Apostle adds, Because the duties aforesaid, are
such as the Lord requires of his Servants; therefore in performing them, we
serve the Lord Jesus.

V. 12. Rejoicing in hope] That is, Rejoice ye in hope, to wit, of that glory
which is laid up for you in heaven.

Note, that the Apostle does use here in these verses many Adjectives and
Participles, to all or most of which we must add verbs Substantives, and make
them as Verbs, But some take them in the nature of verbs, without any addition
of verbs substantives.

Patient in tribulation] i. e. Be ye patient in tribulation, to wit, by reason
of that hope.

That which works patience in tribulation, is the hope which we have of
eternal glory, as a gift of God, or reward for our sufferings, 2 Cor. 4.17. And
therefore the Apostle seems to make mention of patience in tribulation here,
because he made mention of this hope immediately before.

Continuing instant in prayer] The Apostle is very emphatical in that he
mentions instancie in prayer, and then continuance in that Instancie.

Our infirmity or weakness in suffering tribulations is strengthened by prayer,
Chap. 8. ver. 26. And therefore does the Apostle seem to add this here,
because he spoke of patience in tribulation just before.

Ver. 13. Distributing to the necessity of the Saints] i. e. Distribute ye to
the necessity of the Saints, that is, distribute ye to the Saints, that is, to
the faithful, that is, to them which are of the Church of Christ, if they stand
in need, out of that which God has given you; And distribute not alike to all,
but to every one as his necessities, are more or less urgent.

The Apostle said ver. 8. He that gives, let him do it with simplicity. How
comes he therefore to speak of giving (for distributing is giving) here again?
Answ. He does it, because there he prescribed only the manner, here he commands
the thing it self: Or he does it, because there he spoke in general of giving
to any one whosoever had need; here he speaks in particular of distributing to
the Saints, that is, to the faithful.

Given to Hospitality] i. e. Be ye given to Hospitality. That is, entertain in
your houses kindly, at your own charges such Saints of God, as are strangers
among you, driven from their own home and persecuted for conscience sake.

That hospitality which is a part of magnificency, and such as the rich show to
the rich, is not the hospitality here meant; but that hospitality is here meant
which is a part of mercy and pity, that hospitality which is shown to such as
are in distress, especially for Religion or conscience sake; of which our
Savior says, Matthew. 25.35. I was a stranger, and ye took me not in.

Ver. 14. Bless them which persecute you] i. e. Pray for them, which are a^y
ways your enemies.

To bless among many significa^^ons which it has, signifies to pray for; but
it is a signification in which this word is used only among holy writers.

To love and pray for our enemies is our Saviors command to his disciples,
Matthew. 5.44.

Bless, and curse not] i. e. Pray for them, and wish well to them, which
persecute you, but never pray against them, or wish evil to them, out of a
desire of rerevenge.

To curse is to pray against, or wish evil to, and that by way of some revenge.

It is never lawful to pray against, or to wish evil to any, out of a desire or
affection of revenge (which is that, which the Apostle here forbids) for that
is against charity. But yet it is lawful to pray or wish evil to a man, for his
good; as to pray or wish him some temporal scourge, that it might bring him
home to God. And the Prophets and Apostles have cursed and wished evil to their
enemies; but yet not as they were their own enemies, and so not out of a desire
of private revenge; but as they were the enemies of God, and as they saw by the
Spirit of prophecy, that they were incorrigeable sinners; Thus Paul says, 2 Timothy 4.14. Alexander the Copper-Smith did me much harm, the Lord reward him
according to his works; which the Apostle did not pray for, out of desire or
affection of private revenge, but out of zeal of Gods glory, and approbation of
the revenge of the justice of God, which he saw hanging over the head of that
incorrigeable sinner. And thus may we in a holy zeal curse wicked men, to wit,
in the general upon a supposition of their impiety, saying with Paul, If any
man love not the Lord Jesus, let him be accursed, 1 Cor. 16.22. But not in
particular application, unless God reveal their final obstinacy unto us, which
is not a thing now to be looked for.

Ver. 15. Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with them that weep] q.
d. Look upon that which befalls others, as though it befell your selves; whether
it be good, or whether it be evil; and be you not otherwise affected, then if
it befell yourselves, rejoicing at their good, and weeping at their miseries.

This we ought to do, because we are all members of that mystical body, whereof
Christ Jesus is the head. And in the natural body, whether one member suffer,
all the members suffer with it: or one member be honored, all the members
rejoice with it, says our Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.26. And as it is in the natural
body, so should it be in the mystical body of Christ.

Ver. 16. Be of the same mind one toward another] i. e. Be ye of the same
affection one toward another, q. d. Be ye all of one mind, or one affection.

If they were all os one mind and one affection, they would all rejoice one
with another, and condole one with another, making every ones case their own.

The mind is not to be taken here for the understanding, but for the affection.
For the Apostle does usually refer the word (...) to the affection not to the
understanding. See Chap. 15.5.

Mind not high things] i. e. Think not upon high things as Riches, Honor, and
the like; which will the more puff a man up, and make him proud the more he
thinks of them.

This is a means to make men to be of the same mind, that is, of the same
affection one toward another, to wit, for a man not to think of his Riches,
and Honor, and the like, when he excells others therein. And therefore the
Apostle seems to mention it here in this place, and to give it this order.

But condescend to men of low estate] i. e. But putting away the thought of
those high things; condescend to your Fellow Christians, to consort cordially
and lovingly with them, though they be men of low-estate, as though their
outward estates, were as good as yours.

This was spoken to such as were rich, or noble, or the like.

Be not wise in your own conceits] Then is a man said to be wise in his own
conceit; when he thinks that his own wit is sufficient; and that he needs not
to be taught of any, or when he thinks that others are not so wise, as he is;
and this puffs him up and makes him proud.

This praecept is directed to those, who were learned in any kind, and had
knowledge more than others, and it is as a means to make them to be of the same
mind with the unlearned and ignorant; and therefore is it given here.

Ver. 17. Recompense to no man evil for evil] i. e. If any man has injured
thee, revenge not thy self upon him.

This precept concerns private men: for he which is in public authority is
the minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil, Cap.
13.4. And therefore he may recompense evil for evil: The evil of punishment,
for the evil of Sin.

Provide things honest in the sight of all men] q. d. Look to your selves, and
to your lives, that all things, which ye do be so honestly and rightly done, as
that they may be approved, not only of God, but also of men, that no man be
offended thereby, but that he may rather from thence, have an example of well
doing.

Ver. 18. If it be possible, as much as in you lies live peaceably with all
men] Such is the nature of some men, as that there is no peace to be had with
them, therefore the Apostle gives that in command here, not which depends upon
other men, and is in them; but which is in our own power.

If it be possible] That is, if it be so that you offend not thereby, against
the truth, or justice, or piety, or the like. For we must not do evil, that
good may come thereon.

As Much as in you lieth] Where a man does what in him lies, to live peaceably,
and cannot because of the perverseness of other men, he has done his duty.

Ver. 19. Avenge not your selves] i. e. Revenge is not the way to procure
peace, but rather to begin endless discords; and therefore does the Apostle
here in this place command us not to avenge our selves, because he gave a
precept of ensuing peace immediately before.

The Apostle touched upon this precept before verse 17. but here he resums it
again, that he might back it with sound reasons, as being a most difficult
precept to our nature.

But rather give place unto wrath] i. e. But rather, when wrath comes toward
you, give place to her, and get away from her, that she may not take hold of
you, or be with you, to stir you up to revenge.

Where wrath is, there is desire of revenge.

The Apostle speaks here of wrath, as of a Person by a prosopopoeia

Wrath is apt to stir men up to take revenge on them which anger them,
therefore does the Apostle wish men here to give place, that is, to fly from
wrath.

For it is written] Viz. Deuteronomy 32.35.

Vengeance is mine I will repay says the Lord] This is an argument against our
revenging our selves. For by revenging our selves we entrench upon that which
is Gods peculiar: for it is written. Vengeance is mine, I will repay says the
Lord.

I will repay] i. e. I will repay or recompense vengeance, upon him which
deserves it.

There is an Emphasis in the pronoun I.

This hinders not, but that vengeance may belong to Magistrates; for they are
Gods Ministers and Revengers, Cap. 13.4 And therefore, the vengeance, which
they execute, is Gods.

Ver. 20. Therefore if thine enemy hunger feed him, if he thirst, give him
drink] q. d. Be thou therefore so far from avenging thy self, as that if thine
enemy hunger, feed him: or if he thirst, give him drink, that is, if he stand
in need of any thing that thou can do for him, do it.

This is taken out of Proverbs 25, 21.

If thine enemy] i. e. If he who hates thee.

For in so doing] That is, by feeding him when he hungreth, and by giving him
drink, wben he is thirsty, that is, by giving him freely, what he stands in
need of.

Thou shall heap coals of fire on his head] That is, thou shall heap, as it
were, coals of fire on his head, that is, thou shall purge him, to wit, of his
enmity toward thee, and make him become thy friend, whereas he was thine enemy
before.

This sense agrees with the following verse.

The Apostle seems to me to use a Metaphor here drawn from Metals, whose
dross is purged by fire, for the Refiners use not only to put coals under, but
also to heap up coals of fire upon the metal (or upon the head of the refining
pot, or crucible, wherein the metal is melted) that the metal being covered
with coals of fire, may the sooner, or the better be melted or refined, though
under ordinary seething pots, they only put coals under to make them sees.

In this Metaphor the works of Charity, in feeding and giving drink are likened
to the coals of fire, in the purifying of metals.

Fire is oftentimes used Metaphorically in the Scriptures; yet never oftener
than it is for purging, or purifying. Thus are the words of the Lord said to be
pure words even as the silver, which from the earth is tried and purified seven
times in the fire, Ps. 12.17.

Ver. 21. Be not overcome of evill] i. e. Evil is here a noun of the neuter
gender, and therefore is to be taken for malice or wickedness.

He is overcome of evil, which will sin against another, because another has
sinned against him: Or which will do hurt to another, because another has done
hurt to him.

But overcome evil with good] He overcomes evil with good: which with kindness
and works of Charity, makes him who was his enemy and did him wrong before, to
be his friend, and ready to do him good now.

This is the best means to overcome evil. For (...) -- as Sophocles speaks in
his Ajax Flagister kindness does all ways, bring forth kindness.

CHAP. XIII.
1. LEt every soul be subject unto the higher powers; for there is no power but
of God. The powers that be, are ordained of God.

1. Let every one be subject to the Supreme Powers, and to those which are
placed in the highest Seats of Authority, and that with their very soul, for
there is no power or Authority of what Nation or Country soever (I speak of
Lawful Powers) but it is of God: The Powers and Rulers that are throughout the
whole world, whether in Rome or in Greece or any other part of the earth
(though some Jews think otherwise, and account God to have ordained no Powers
or Rulers (whom they should obey, though they live under them) but in and among
themselves) are ordained of God.

2. Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God:
and they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation.

2. Whosoever therefore resists the power and takes Arms against him,
resists the Ordinance of God; And they that resist shall for that resistance,
receive to themselves damnation, Damnation temporal in this life from man's
tribunal, for that, that they resist him; And damnation eternal from the
Tribunal of the great and terrible God, in the life to come, for that that they
resist his Ordinance.

3. For rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil. Will thou then
not be afraid of the power? do that which is good, and thou shall have praise
of the same.

3. But perhaps you will say, that if ye should be subject to these powers, and
put your neck under their yoke, ye should be always in fear; For such powers
are always a terror to those which live under them. But to this I answer, that
though ye are subject to such powers, yet ye have no cause to fear if ye do
well (and if ye do ill, ye are worthy to suffer for it.) For Rulers are not a
terror to those which do well, but to those which do ill. Will thou then not
be afraid of the Ruler, do that which is good, and thou shall be so far from
having cause to be afraid of him, as that thou shall have praise and
encouragement from him.

4. For he is the minister of God to thee for good: but if thou do that which
is evil, be afraid: for he bears not the sword in vain: for he is the
minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil.

4. For he is the Minister of God to thee for good, to reward thee and defend
thee, if thou do well, but if thou do that which is evil, be afraid. For he
has a sword given him of God to cut of them which deserve death, from the face
of the earth: And he bears not his sword in vain. For he is the Minister and
servant of God, a Revenger in his stead, to execute wrath upon him that does
evil.

5. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for
conscience sake.

5. Wherefore ye must needs be subject to the Supreme powers and Rulers, not
only if you intend to avoid wrath and punishment; but also if you would keep
your conscience void of offense.

6. For, for this cause pay you tribute also: for they are Gods ministers,
attending continually upon this very thing.

6. And now being that rulers are, as I said, the Ministers of God to thee for
good, see that you pay them tribute also; for they are Gods Ministers to thee
for good, attending continually upon this very thing, to wit, that thou may
receive benefit by their Government.

7. Render, therefore to all their dues, tribute to whom tribute is due, custom
to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor.

7. Render therefore to all Rulers, of what Country or Nation soever they are
(so long as thou live under their government) that which is due to them;
Render tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom
fear, honor to whom honor.

8. Owe no man any thing, but to love one another: for he that loves another
has fulfilled the law.

8. Yea, owe not any private man any thing, but to love one another: And that
is a debt which ye must always owe, yet always pay. Love therefore one another,
for he that loves another, has fulfilled the Law, that is, that part of the
Law, which concerns our neighbor.

9 For this, Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou shall not kill, Thou shall
not steal, Thou shall not bear false witness, Thou shall not covet, and if
there be any other commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying,
namely, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

9. For this Commandment, thou shall not commit adultery, and this thou shall
not kill, and this thou shall not steal, and this thou shall not covet, and if
there be any other Commandment beside these concerning our neighbor, it is
briefly and summarily comprehended in this saying; Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self.

10. Love works no ill to his neighbor, therefore love is the fulfilling of
the law.

10. Love works no ill to his Neighbor, yea, it works all good it can for
him; Therefore is love the fulfilling of the Law.

11. And that, knowing the time, that now it is high time to awake out of
sleep: for now is our salvation nearer then when we believed.

11. Love therefore one another, as I said ( verse. 8.) and that considering the
time, that it is now high time for us, (who since our calling to the Gospel
have fallen asleep, and have thereby left off to do well) to awake out of that
our sleep: For now is our salvation nearer, than when we first believed:
therefore if when we first believed, we did rouse up our selves, and were
zealous in good works, because of the approach of our salvation: much more
should we rouse up our selves now, and be more zealous now, than we were then,
because our salvation is nearer now, than it was at that time.

12. The night is far spent, the day is at hand: let us therefore cast off the
works of darkness and let us put on the armor of light.

12. The night of ignorance is gone, and the day of knowledge is risen, and
has shone upon us: let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and works
of the night (evil works, which cannot endure the light) and let us put on the
armor of light, let us cloth our selves with such works, as we shall not be
ashamed of, at the highest time of day.

13. Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in
chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying.

13. Let us do that which is honest, as they are wont to do, which do any thing
in the day time; let us not walk in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering
and wantonness, not in strife, and envying.

14. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh,
to fullfull the lusts thereof.

14. But put ye on the example of our Lord Jesus Christ and imitate him, and
make no provision for the flesh, or for your carnal affections to fulfill the
lusts thereof.

CHAP. XIII.
Ver. 1. Let every Soul be subject to the higher powers] i. e Let every one
whatsoever he be, be subject to them, which are endued with the Supreme or
highest power, and keep, as it were, their order, under him.

The Soul is put here for The whole man, by a Synechdoche, which is very
srequent with the Hebrews.

And powers are put here for such as are in power, or which are invested with
power by a Metonymy, very frequent in the Eastern languages.

I say, Powers, are put here for such as are in power, or such as are invested
with power, For those which he calls Powers here he calls Rulers, ver. 3. And
the Ministers of God, ver. 4. So they which are called Principalities, and
Powers, Tit. 3.1. are there, in the next words, called Magistrates.

These Powers are called here The higher Powers: but in the Greek (...) that
is, the eminent or excelling powers, where the Epethite (...) is the same, as
is given to a King, 1 Pet. 2.13. in those words, (...) which our translation
renders, whether it be to the King as supreme.

He speaks here, no doubt, of lawful powers.

The Apostle goes on to show how we should present our selves a Living
sacrifice holy and acceptable unto God, as he spoke Cap. 12 v. 4. and how we
should be transformed from the world.

By every duty which we perform as we ought, we present our selves a sacrifice
to God: yet does not the Apostle here, in these his precepts insist upon, or
mention every duty, which lies upon us, in particular; but only some, neither
in those, which he does mention, does he enlarge himself upon all a like. Now
the reason of this, is, because they to whom he wrote, had more need to be
taught or put in mind of some precepts more than other, and to have some
precepts more urged upon them, than others, because of the contrary sins, which
they were most prone unto.

And as for that, that the Apostle urges so earnestly here, subjection to the
highest powers, he seems to urge it especially; Because of the Jews (many
whereof lived at Rome) for the Jews generally (because they pretended
themselves to be the people of God) would not be subject to any Gentile or
heathen power, read Act. 5. ver. 35. etc. Yea Mat. 22.17. They ask whether it
be lawful to pay tribute to Caesar or no. But though the Apostle took an
occasion from thence, to give this precept, yet by what he says, he would have
no man to think himself exempted from subjection to the powers aforesaid (no
not the faithful) under any pretext or color of Religion whatsoever.

As for the order of this precept; the Apostle may give this precept here in
this place, to show, that though he said Cap. 12.19. Dearly beloved, avenge not
yourselves, etc. For it is written vengeance is mine, I will repay it says the
Lord: yet he did not intend to prejudice Magistrates thereby, but that God did
repay his vengeance (for a great part) by them.

For there is no power, but of God] i. e. For there is no power, throughout the
whole world lawfully constituted, whatsoever it be, whether it be Jewish or
whether it be Gentile, but it is of God.

I take power here as before, for men invested with power, yea with the chief
or supreme power in a Nation.

The Apostle extends his speech to all, and every the highest powers in the
world, to have the Jew know, that God ordained Rulers and Magistitrates among
other people; as well as he had done among them, which also they, and all
others must obey, while they live under them.

For their is no power but of God] The Apostle brings this as an argument to
persuade men to subjection to the civil powers, and it is an argument drawn
from the original or prime efficient cause of Government.

There is no power but of God] He does not surely so speak of the Powers being
of God, as that he would be meant, of their being by Gods bare permission only
(for so Evil may be of God) but of being of God by his warrant and
constitution, by which to be, appertains only to lawful powers.

But now how are the powers here spoken of, of God?

In these powers there are three things considerable. First, the manner or kind
of Government, limited or appointed in every several Nation, as Monarchical,
Aristocratical, Democratical, etc.

Secondly, the Persons designed or appointed to bear rule in these Governments
respectively.

Thirdly, the power it self, and authority with which these persons are endued
and invested, to act in these said several Governments. And every one of these,
we say, are of God.

God, when the Children of Israel desired a King, condescended to their desire,
and ordered that People to be ruled by a Kingly or Monarchical Government, 1 Samuel 8 9. And he did not only limit or appoint the Government, but he did also
design the Persons who should govern and bare rule in and manage that
Government: For he first designed Saul to be King over Israel, and after him
David and his posterity successively, so that these powers were immediately of
God, and ordained of him immediately in every respect. But God has not done so
for every people, immediately to order their manner or kind of Government, and
to design their Governors with an immediate designment; yet nevertheless may
all lawful powers of the world be said to be of God, and ordained by him: even
in respect of the manner of Government and the persons designed thereunto.

For though we suppose, that the several Governments of the world, as they are
at this time, were constituted and ordained by the agreement and consent of
several people respectively at the first; and that their lawful Governors were
designed by them respectively, to their several places of Government, without
the particular designment and revelation of God: yet may this also be said to
be of God First, because God endued man with wisdom and prudence to provide for
his peace and welfare, by making choice of such Governments, and such Governors
to rule over them, as would be most conducible thereunto. And Secondly, because
what men do in this kind, they do not without the providence of God, who works
all things according to the pleasure of his own will, though by mediate ways,
and several means: and who is King over all the Earth, and therefore has a
more special providence in the Regiment thereof.

But though the constitution of this Government, and designation of the persons
to Govern, is not always immediately from God, yet the power with which they
are endued, and the authority with which they are invested, are surely from him
immediately.

And to the proof of this (to omit others) the Apostle suppeditates three
Arguments, in this Chapter: For first, he says that the Ruler is the Minister
of God ver. 4. And why rather then because he is Gods Vicegerant, and has his
power and authority immediately from God? Secondly, he says that he bears
the Sword v. 4. And he bears it no doubt to cut of them from the land of the
living, who deserve death. But who can give this power to any one, but he which
is the Lord of life and death? for what man has this power over himself, to
use the Sword upon himself, though he judges himself a Malefactor and worthy
of death, that he should resign, or give up this power to any other, either
Community or Single person? Thirdly, he says that he is a Revenger to execute
wrath upon him that does evil, ver. 4. And who can make a Ruler a Revenger, and
give him this power, but he that says, Vengeance is mine? Deuteronomy. 32.3. Romans
12.19.

As therefore in the generation of Man, the disposition of the matter is from a
man, but the infusion of the Soul is from God: so it is for the most part in
the creation of Supreme Rulers, Governors, or Powers; for though the
constitution of the kind of Government, and the designation of the Persons be
ordinarily from men, as their immediate cause; yet the power and authority
which is the life and soul of all, is immediately from God, who gives power to
the several Governors suitable to their several kind of Governments.

And the Person or Persons which are thus designed and thus invested with
supreme power in what kind of government soever, but especially in that which
is Monarchical; are as sacred as was the person of Saul, who was chosen
immediately of God to be King of Israel, of whom David said, The Lord forbid
that I should stretch forth my hand against the Lords anointed, 1 Samuel 26.11.
For when by the disposing hand of Gods providence, a Right is conveyed to a
person, or to a person and his Line successively, to the supreme power or Rule
of a Nation, though it be by second causes, and he is invested by G^d with this
power, he is above the reach of any just force on earth, for there is now no
lawful hand above him, (he being the Supreme) to use the Rod or the Sword
against him.

What we have spoken hitherto we have spoken of the supreme powers or Rulers of
Nations: Of which Saint Paul here speaks. But if you ask whence inferior
Governors and Officers are, and by whom ordained; I answer, Th y, as their
persons are usually designed to the Offices which they bear by the supreme
Powers; so have they their power immediately from them, yet so as that they by
reason of Gods all-working providence, may be said to be of God also, and to
have their power from him: but not (I say) so immediately as the supreme powers
or rulers have.

The powers that be, are ordained of God] i. e. All the Lawful powers, that is,
All the Lawful Rulers throughout the whole world (and not they which are of
Israel and Judah only) are ordained of God.

This is a Repetition of that which went immediately before.

Ver. 2. Whosoever therefore resists the power, etc.] i. e. Whosoever
therefore resists those which are invested with the Supreme power, See ver. 1.

That which the Apostle speaks in this verse, is a Corollary drawn from that
which he said in the former verse, viz. There is no power but of God, the
powers that be are ordained of God. A Corollarie not impertinent to his present
discourse, and very fit for the Jews to take notice of, who upon the conceit of
that, that they were Gods people, would not willingly be subject to any Heathen
power, but would resist it, oppose it, and take Arms against it, as occasion
was.

Whosoever Resists, etc.] The Greek is (...), a word which signifies
properly to stand against in Battle array. And likely it is, that the Apostle in
making choice of this word, had an eye upon Judas of Galilee who drawing many
Jews after him in the days of the taxing, opposed the Roman power, by force of
Arms, Acts 5.37. whose Example many other Jews were likely to follow, and did
follow in after times

Resists the Ordinance of God] i. e. Does resist and oppose the Ordinance of
God, by which Rulers have their powers; and by consequence does resist and
oppose God himself, who ordained the Rulers and gave them their power.

They that resist] i. e. They which resist or oppose their Rulers; And by
resisting or opposing them resist and oppose the ordinance of God, and by
consequence God himself.

Shall receive to themselves damnation] i. e. Shall bring damnation upon
themselves; damnation temporal from man's tribunal in that they resist him: and
damnation Eternal from the Tribunal of the great and terrible God, in that they
resist his ordinance.

Ver. 3. For Rulers are not a terror to good works but to the evil] i. e. For
Rulers are (to wit by the end of their constitution) not a terror to them which
do well, but yet they are a terror to them which do evil.

When the Apostle says that Rulers are not a terror to good works, he uses a
(...), and by being not a terror, he understands that they are an Encouragement
and reward^rs of their good works, the like Phrase he uses verse, 10.

Good and evil works are put here, for such as do works, which are good or evil
by a Metonymie.

And by good and evil works understand here especially such works as are civily
good or evil; that is, such as are either according or contrary to the Laws and
Constitutions of the places, or the Edicts of the power under which they live
which were made for the maintenance of civil or humane society. For though a
Magistrate be Custos utriusque Tabulae, Yet these Magistrates were at this time
Heathen, and knew little of the first table.

Now for the connection of this with that which went before: The Apostle seems
to prevent an Objection here: for they might object and say, that if they
should be subject to these powers, and put their necks under their yoke, they
should ever be without fear, For such powers are a terror to them which live
under them.

This Objection I say the Apostle seems to prevent, as if he should say in
these or the like words; But ye have no reason to fear this if ye do well (and
if ye do ill ye are worthy to suffer for it.) For Rulers are not a terror to
good works, but to evil.

It is a benefit to all persons which live under any government, that the Rulers
or Governors are not a terror, that is, are an Encouragement, and are Rewarders
of them which do well: And it is a benefit to them too, that they are a terror
to them which do evil. For when Evil men do fear to transgress, by reason of
the awe they stand in, of Rulers and Magistrates, the public peace is thereby
preserved, and the public good promoted.

When therefore we receive this benefit by Rulers, and this is the end of their
constitution; this should be an inducement, to induce us to be subject to them.

Will thou then not be afraid of the power?] i. e. Will thou then not be afraid
of the Ruler.

Power is put here by a Metonymie for him that has power, that is, for the
Ruler, as verse 1.

Do that which is good] i. e. Do that which the Laws or Edicts of the Power
under which thou live, requires of thee.

See what we said a little before on those words Good works.

The Apostle draws a Corollarie here, or makes use of the doctrine which he
delivered immediately before because it was profitable for them to whom he
wrote, and there was need of it.

And thou shall have praise of the same] i e. Thou shall be so far from having
cause to be afraid, as that thou shall have praise of the same, for thy well
doing.

Praise is so congruous and pleasing to a man's nature as that it will cause him
to approach to him that will praise him; whereas fear will make him stand off
from him, of whom he is afraid. Praise therefore may be opposed here to fear,
in respect of these effects.

Ver. 4. For he is the Minister of God to thee for good] i. e. For he is Gods
vicegerent, and one whom God has appointed or set over thee, for thy good.

The good for which God has appointed rulers over men, is for them to honor
and reward their Subjects, when they do well, by praising them for well doing,
as well as by promoting them to honor; and for them to procure the peace,
quiet, and welfare, and to keep off wrongs and injuries from them, over whom
they are placed.

He gives a reason here why he said do that which is good and thou shall have
praise of the same, for praise is wrapped up, in the bundle of the good, which he
here speaks of.

Note, that when the Apostle said verse. 3. Rulers are not a terror to good
works but to the Evil, and here again, He is the Minister of God to thee for
good, It was not, nor is it his intent to give these or any of these dictates,
as a measure of our obedience; as though he would have us to obey Rulers while
they are this, and do this, and no longer: But he brings them only as
persuasive arguments why we should obey. So that if Rulers do not their duty to
us, we are not freed, by any thing which the Apostle here says, from doing ours
to them. Wherefore what Saint Peter says to good servants, 1 Pet. 2.18. may be
said as well to good Subjects as to good servants, viz. Be subject with all
fear not only to the good and gentle; but also to the froward. For this is
thank worthy if a man for conscience toward God, endures grief, suffering
wrongfully Yea, if thou art a good Christian and have learned Christ thoroughly:
A Ruler, be he never so bad, cannot be a terror to thee, if thou do well, nor
can he be otherwise then a Minister of God to thee for good; for if he should
punish thee undeservedly and persecute thee, yet if thou suffer it patiently
God will abundantly reward thee for that thy patient suffering, in obedience to
his commands; so that his punishments and persecutions shall turn to thy good,
though he intends it not so: For our affliction works for us a far more
exceeding weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17.

But if thou do that which is evil] i. e. But if thou art disobedient and
Rebellious to him, and will not be subject to his Laws and commands but wilt do
evil.

Be afraid] i. e. Be afraid of him, that is, be afraid of that punishment which
he will inflict upon thee.

This Imperative is not praecipientis, but Denunciantis;

For he bears not the sword in vain] i. e. For God has given him a Sword,
and he has not given him a sword in vain or for no use, and purpose; but for
this end, that he should cut them off from the Earth, which do evil by
transgressing the Laws, and are Rebellious against him.

By the Sword understand a power even to put Malefactors to death, which is
signified by the Sword, which is usually carried before the chief Magistrates.

For he is the Minister of God] What kind of Minister of God he is, of whom he
speaks, the Apostle shows and determines in the next words; for there be many
kind of Ministers of God; For the Prophets and Apostles and Evangelists and
preachers of the Gospel were Gods Ministers as well as were Magistrates or
Civil Rulers.

He shows therefore in the next words, that he of whom he speaks, is a
Revenger to execute w^ath upon him which does evil, and so determines this
Ministry to the Civil Magistracy.

The Apostle shows by these and the words following, that the Magistrate
bears not the sword in vain.

A Revenger] i. e. One whom God has ordained or appointed to be a Revenger.

To execute wrath upon them that do evil] i. e. To take vengeance of them, or
to execute punishment upon them which do evil: that is, to take vengeance of
them, or to execute punishment upon them, which are disobedient and rebellious
to his Laws, and so as much as in them is, break the bands of common society,
which ought to be kept inviolable among men, for their public good.

Ver. 5. Wherefore ye must needs be subject] To wit, to the highest powers ver.
1. that is, to Rulers.

Ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath but also for conscience sake] q.
d. Ye must needs be subject to the highest powers, if ye will either escape
punishment, or keep your conscience void of offense before God.

Not only for wrath] i. e. Not only for escaping punishment, or if ye would
escape punishment.

Wrath is put here for Punishment per metonymiam Causae: Punishment threatened
from the Magistrate or highest powers.

But also for conscience sake] i. e. But also for this end, that ye may keep
your conscience clear and void of offense before God, which ye cannot do, if ye
are not subject to the highest powers, as I commanded verse 1.

That they must needs be subject to the highest pow^rs, if they will escape
punishment from them, the Apostle gathers or draws here from those words,
Rulers are a terror to evil works, ver. 3. And from those, He is a Revenger to
execute wrath upon him that does evil: and that they must needs be subject to
the higher powers, if they will keep their conscience clear and void of offense
before God, he gathers or draws from those words, There is no Power but of God,
the Powers that are, are ordained of God v. 1. and from those, He is the
Minister of God to thee for good: and from those again, He is the Minister of
God v. 4.

The Apostle does repeat here in this verse (by way of inference or collection
out of what he has said) what he gave in charge or command in the beginning of
the Chapter, concerning being subject to the highest powers; but he repeats it
with a polite addition of that, that we must do it not only for wrath, but also
for conscience sake.

Ver. 6. For, for this cause pay ye tribute also] q. d. I said verse 4. That
the Ruler is the Minister of God to thee for good, wherefore being that he is
the Minister of God to thee for good, for this cause, be ye not only subject to
him, as I said verse 5. but pay ye tribute also.

I take For here, for Wherefore, as it is taken Chap. 8.38.

And I take (...) Pay ye, to be not of the Indicative, but of the Imperative
Mood, though most Interpreters take it for a Verb of the Indicative Mood. For
the Jews were never forward in paying tribute to any Heathen power, but when
tribute was demanded, they raised commotions and rebellions upon it, as we may
read Acts 5.37. And in Josephus and Suetonius, and others; wherefore there was
need of a particular precept for this.

Tribute was money raised upon the goods and lands of the People, according to
their ability, for the support of the Rulers in their great and expensive
offices.

To pay tribute is a part of subjection but though the Apostle had given a
charge to the Romans in general to be subject; yet does he add this in
particular, that they should pay Tribute; because the Jews (many of which lived
at this time at Rome) were averse from it. And it is a part of Rhetorique, to
mention a particular after a general, or a species after a genus, when there is
a reason for taking special notice of the species. See Chap. 1. v. 21.

For they are Gods Ministers attending upon this very thing] i. e. For they are
Gods Ministers, I say, attending upon this very same thing, viz. which I spoke
of ver. 4. that is, attending upon your good.

What this thing was which they attended on, we must gather from what went
before.

If Rulers are Gods Ministers, and attend by his appointment, upon our good,
they are worthy of tribute upon a double account. First, as they are Gods
Ministers, (whose is the Earth and all things therein contained) And Secondly,
because they do attend upon our good.

This is an argument to persuade to the willing paying of tribute.

Ver. 7. Render therefore to all their dues] i. e. Render therefore to all the
highest powers, whatsoever they are, and in what parts of the world soever
their dominion is, that which is due to them from you, which live under their
dominion.

This being the Imperative mood, makes it the more propable, that that must be
of the imperative mood also, ver. 6. Viz. For this cause pay ye tribute also.

Tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custome] What tribute was, we
said, ver. 6. Now custom is a tole, or tax that is paid for importation or
exportation, that is, for carrying of Merchandise into or out of a land.

Fear to whom fear] By fear is here meant Reverential fear, or rather that
reverence, or reverent carriage, which proceeds from reverential fear, per
Metonymiam causae.

Honor to whom honour] i. e. Render all the signs and expressions of the high
esteem, which you have or ought to have of his Excellency, whom God has made
excellent by reason of his authority.

Honor is the sign of an esteem which we have of another excellency. And we
ought highly to esteem (and therefore to show the signs of this our esteem) of
the excellency of power which is in the supreme Rulers, as they are Gods,
Vicegerents: Although perhaps for their life and conversation they should
otherwise be wicked.

All these four things, which the Apostle here mentions. Viz. Tribute,
Custom, Fear, and Honor are not so disjoined in nature, but that they may
belong to one and the same powers and Rulers.

Ver. 8. Owe no man any thing, but to love one another] q. d. Pay to every man,
that debt which you owe, so that you may owe it him no more; except it be that
debt of love, which though you pay always, by doing the duties of love one to
another, yet ye must always owe.

This is a new precept different from that which went before, though perhaps it
may have its place here, by occasion of those words, Viz. Render to all their
dues, Ver. 7.

The former precept, which the Apostle has amplified and pursued from the
first verse of this Chapter hitherto, concerned the duty of subjects toward
those which were their Rulers, as such. But this precept concerns the duty of a
private man to a private man as such.

There be duties or debts which when they are once paid, are due no more, as
debts for money borrowed, wares bought, or the like: and there are such dues or
debts, which we must continually pay, as we have occasion, and yet they will
never be quite paid, or never be so paid, as that we owe them not any more, and
such are the duties of love, which we owe (by virtue of Gods command) every
one, one to another. The former kind of debts the Apostle would have us so to
pay (when they are due) as that we owe them no more; the second kind of debts
he would have us owe, but yet so owe, as that we should notwithstanding be
daily paying them, for this is the Apostles meaning.

Charitas semper redditur and semper debetur* says Saint Augustine in Psalm. 33
Tim. 8. page. 94. Charity is always paid, and yet always owing.

But here some make an obj^ction saying; the Apostle said, Ver. 7. Rend^r fear,
to whom fear is due; and honor, to whom honor. But if the Apostle would have
us to owe nothing, but to love one another, than would he not have us to owe
f^ar, or to owe honor to our Rulers; for he seems to think of them as dues, or
debts, which we may so pay at the present, as that we may be discharged of
them, for the future.

Answ. To this some give this answer, Viz. The Apostle when he says: But to
love one another, he does under the name and duty of love comprehend the duties
and acts of all other virtues too, because they are to be directed by love, and
to proceed from thence, whereas therefore fear and honor are acts of other
virtues, which are to be directed by love, and to proceed from thence They must
be as love is, always in paying, and never paid: We must always pay them and
still owe them.

But perhaps we may say, in answer to the aforesaid objection, that the Apostle
gives this his precept, not to subjects as subjects, and in relation to their
superiors, but to private men in relation to Private-men. And therefore this
objection has no place here, because here there is no such duty, as fear and
honor due from any one, to any one, to whom this precept is directed.

And this I conceive as probable, because the Apostle though he reckons other
the duties of the second Table, in the verse following, yet he omitteth that
concerning Rulers and Superiors, which he would not (as it seems) have done, if
he had intended to have spoken here, of such duties, as are due to them.

For he that loves another has fulfilled the law] Between these and the
foregoing words, understand these or the like words. But as for love, be always
owing that, and yet always paying it. q. d. But as for love, be always owing
that, and yet always paying it; for he that loves another, has fulfilled the
Law.

The Apostle does here show the great benefit that does accrue to us, by love;
and which we cannot attain to, without it; namely the fulfilling of the Law,
and this he does the more to incite us, or stir us up to love.

Has fulfilled the Law] That is, has performed all the Commandments of the
Law.

The fullness which the Apostle here speaks of, has respect to the full number
of the commandments concerning our Neighbor, q. d. He has kept all the
commandments concerning his neighbor, so that there is none, which he has not
kept, or left unperformed, for that part of the Law, which contains the
duties of Neighbor to Neighbor.

Ver. 9. For this thou shall not commit adultery] i. e. For this Commandment,
viz. Thou shall not commit adultery

The Apostle proves here that which he said, ver. 8. That he that loves
another has fulfilled the law; And he proves it by an Induction, or by
Reckoning up all the particular commandments of the Law.

These Commandments are all delivered in the future tense: But after the Hebrew
manner the future tense of the Indicative mood, is put for the Imperative.

These commandments are also all of them delivered Negatively: But in these
Negatives the contrary affirmative duties are included.

Adultery] Under the name of Adultery understand Incest, fornication, and the
like, as well as Adultery, strictly taken.

It may be asked here, why the Apostle omitted the first commandment of the
second Table, to wit, Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be
long in the Land, etc.

Answ. Because the Apostle speaks here only of such and to such, as are in an
equality, in respect of rule and subjection, having spoken of subjects as
subjects, and in relation to their Rulers, as so, from the beginning of this
Chapter to the eighth verse.

Or else we must say, that the Apostle involves that commandment in those
words, And if there be any other commandment. But the first seems to me to be
the most probable answer.

It may be asked again, that whereas in the twentieth of Exodus, and
wheresoever the Law is repeated, the precept or command concerning Murder, is
put before the command concerning Adultery: Why the precept or command
concerning Adultery, is put here before that of Murder.

But to this we cannot give an answer, except it be, that the Apostle did it,
because he thought that the Romans were chiefly to be admonished of the sins of
the flesh, which were sins most rise amongst the Gentiles, and sins reducible
to that precept or command, Thou shall not commit Adultery.

Thou shall not kill] i e. And this commandment, Viz. Thou shall not kill.

He is said to kill here, which having no lawful authority to do it, kills a
man, whether the man be nocent or innocent.

Thou shall not steal] And this Commandment to wit, Thou shall not steal.

He is guilty of the breach of this Commandment, which either takes away or
detains that, which is another man's against the will of the owner, whether he
does it openly or privately; by fraud or by force, etc.

Thou shall not bear false witness] i. e. This commandment, viz. Thou shall not
bear false witness.

He is guilty of the breach of this commandment, who witnesses any thing, that
is false, especially in judgment, to the injury of his neighbor. Yea, who
tells any lie.

Thou shall not covet] i. e. And this commandment, Viz. Thou shall not covet.

He is guilty of the breach of this commandment, who lusts after any thing,
which is his neighbors, whom by so lusting he injureth, at least in desire and
affection.

And if there be any other commandment] To wit, of this nature, or concerning
our Neighbor.

It is briefly comprehended in this saying] i. e. It is briefly, summarily, or
implicitly comprehended in this General saying.

Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self] Thou shall love thy neighbor, as
truly, as thou love thy self.

How we should love our neighbors, as truly as our selves, we are taught by
those two general precepts of the Law of nature. Whatsoever ye would that men
should do to you, do you even so to them, Matthew. 7.12. And do that to no man,
which thou hate, To bit 4.15.

By our Neighbor, is not here meant a near dweller only, as some vulgar men,
may think, nor one only which is of our own Nation, or of our own Religion, or
which is any of our friends and acquaintance only: But any of what Nation or
Religion soever he be: for he is our Neighbor whom we may not lawfully kill,
and with whose wife we may not lawfully commit adultery; and whose goods we
cannot lawfully Steal, etc.

Ver. 10. Love works not ill to his neighbour] i. e. He which loves his
Neighbor, works no ill to his Neighbor, yea, he works to his neighbor
all the good he can.

Love is put here by a Metonymie for him which loves; and note that the
Apostle uses a (...) here, by which he understands more than his words reach
to: For by not working ill to his Neighbor, he understands working all good,
as he is able, to do.

Therefore love is the fulfilling of the Law] i. e. Therefore the performance
of the duties of love, that is, therefore whosoever does the duties of love,
fulfilleth the Law.

Love is taken here by a Metonymie, for the performance of the duties of love,
or rather for the man which performs them.

What is meant by fulfilling, what by the Law, See ver. 8.

Ver. 11. And that knowing the time, that now it is high time to awake out of
sleep] Refer this, to those words of the eight verse, Owe no man any thing, but
love one another. Or else, between this and the former verse, understand these
or the like words, Let us therefore love one another, and so fulfill the law, q.
d. Let us therefore love one another, and so fulfill the Law, and the rather;
because we know the time, that now it is high time to a wake out of sleep.

That] This particle, that, signifies as much as, the rather or especially.

Knowing the time, that it is now high time to awake out of sleep] i. e.
Knowing the time to be such, as that it is high time for us, now (even your
selves being Judges) to awake out of sleep.

The sleep here spoken of is Metaphorically to be taken, not for the sleep of
the body but of the mind. Now as the sleep of the body is the tying up as it
were of the senses, so that they which are asleep are quiet, and perform not
any humane, and external function, during this time: so is this Metaphorical
sleep here, a tying up, as it were, or a cessation or rest of the mind from
good and virtuous actions, but yet with a freedom and activeness in, or to that
which is vicious.

Note, that the Apostle uses an Allegory here, in which he alludes to certain
Warlike or Millitary passages. Now therefore as Soldiers are often times
alarmed, and called up by the sound of the Drum or Trumpet out of their sleep
to do their Millitary duties; so does our Apostle in allusion to that, call
upon the Romans here to awake out of this their sleep, to fall to their
Christian duties, as being high time for them, so to do.

For now is our salvation nearer then when we believed] q. d. For now is our
salvation come nearer to us, to rescue and deliver us; then it was when we
first believed; Let us therefore Rowse up our selves and fall to our spiritual
weapons, that we may break through all our enemies, and get through them safe,
to this our salvation.

This is an Argument to persuade, that it is time to awake out of sleep.

The Apostle alludes here to men besieged, who having succors drawn near to
them to relieve them, and deliver them, break out with all courage through
their Enemies, to join with them.

Now is our salvation nearer then when we believed] By salvation is meant here,
that which the School calls Salvation Complete, which is that Eternal Glory
which the Saints shall one day enjoy in Heaven.

Of this Salvation does the Apostle speak here as of a Person, yea, a Captain
approaching to the rescue of his besieged party, by a Prosopopoeia.

And here he speaks, or conceives at the least of the Romans, to whom he
writes, as of such as are besieged and compassed about with the lusts of the
flesh, the vanities of the world, and temptations of the Devil, as their
enemies, through which they must break, to come to Salvation.

Salvation may be said to approach to the rescue of men, thus besieged with
their spiritual enemies, in that they which apprehend salvation with a strong
faith, and hope for it, are so animated thereby, as that they break through all
the temptations and difficulties of this world, that they may at length attain
to her, because of her inestimable value, and unconceivable excellency; for,
Eternal Glory ads great courage to such as believe and hope after it.

Salvation may be said to be now nearer to the Romans at this time; than it was
when they did first believe and were baptized: In that there had some time
passed between this time, and the time that they first believed; for the time
of their Salvation was fixed, it went not backward, so that the longer they
lived, the nearer they approached to it.

Though in this sense, we are rather to be said, to approach nearer to
salvation, than salvation to us, yet he says, that salvation approaches to
us, or draws near to us, because he speaks of salvation under a figure, or,
as of a Person (as I said before) coming to relieve her friend as besieged.

Note here, that the Romans when they first believed and received the Gospel,
were very active then, and zealous of good works, watching (as I may so say)
thereunto, in hope of Eternal salvation approaching: But after a while, they
flag'd and slacked, and fell, as it were, a sleep, and grew cold and neglective
of good works, which they had followed heretofore. And this was that which made
the Apostle to awake them here out of this sleep; putting them in mind of their
salvation, that if they thought it time to awake out of sleep, and were
thereupon zealous and watchful to good works, when they first believed, in hope
of salvation then approaching; much more should they think it now high time to
awake out of sleep, and watch to good works, being that that salvation, which
they hoped for and expected, was nearer to them now than it was then.

Then when we believed] i. e. Then when we first believed and were baptized.

The Greek is (...) (when we believed) and Verbs of this nature, do signify
sometimes the beginning, sometimes the progress, sometimes the end of what
they signify. So Exodus 4.10. whereas it is according to the Hebrew, Latin, and
English, Since thou have spoken unto thy Servant, It is in the Greek according
to the Septuagint, (...). i. e. Since thou did begin to speak to thy Servant.

Ver. 12. The night is far spent, the day is at hand] These words in the
Original are these (...), which may be rendered thus, The night is past, and the
day is come; and so the Arabique, and Aethiopique translate them. And the
Syriaque also translates (...) Is past. And as for the word (...) (which the
Arabique and Aethiopique translate Is come.) We shall find Lam 4. v. 18. that
according to the Septuagint the words (...) and (...) are all one, and signify
that the time there spoken of, was then present. And whereas St. Matthew uses
the word (...) in the parable of the householder Mat. 21.34. If we compare the
place with what S. Mark and S. Luke say on the same subject, in the same
parable, Mark 12.2. and Luke 20.10. we shall find, that the word (...),
signifies, was come. Add to this, that that Householder would not have sent to
demand his Rent Fruit, before the time of that Rent was come. Let this be then
the interpretation of this place. The night is past, the day is come. That it
may be for sense parallel with that which we read 1 These. Chap. 5. ver. 4. Ye
Brethren are not in darkness, etc.

The Apostle then gives a second reason here why it was high time for them to
awake out of sleep; it was time therefore for them for this reason also, to
awake out of sleep, because the day was come, and the day is for watching and
for working, not for sleeping.

The night is far spent] Rather the night is past. By Night understand the
ignorance, or time of ignorance, which they were in, before their conversion,
when they knew not God, or the things of God. A Metaphor or Allegory.

The day is at hand] Rather (as I said) the day is come. By The day understand
the knowledge or the time of knowledge which they now had of God, and of the
things of God (through the preaching of the Gospel) since their conversion. A
Metaphor or Allegory as before.

Let us therefore cast off the works of darkness] i. e. Let us therefore cast
off those works which we did, while we were in ignorance and knew not God, or
the mind, or things of God. Or let us cast off the works which men, though they
do them, yet will do them only in the night, or in the dark, that they might
not be seen; that is, Let us cast off evil works.

By the works of darkness he means evil works, and such as he speaks of verse
13. which he calls works of darkness, because they are such as the Romans
committed in the night while they were in darkness, that is, while they were in
ignorance; before the light of the Gospel had shined to them: And because they
are such, as they which commit, commit in the night, or in the dark, as loving
darkness more than light, and night more than day, yea, as hating the light,
because their works are evil, as our Savior speaks, John 3. v. 19.20.

And let us put on the armor of light] i e. And let us do the works of light,
and of the day, that is, let us do such works, as are according to the Law of
God, and which are beseeming such as have the light of the Gospel, and such
works as a man will not be ashamed to do, in the light or in the day.

By the armor of light then he means, good works; and good works as they are
sometimes compared to a Vestment or Garment, so are they here compared to
Armor; and they may be compared to armor, because they do not only cover us,
but also defend us from the assault of the Devil and spiritual wickedness in
high places. See Ephesians. 6. v. 13. etc. where the Apostle sets out the Armor of
a Christian.

Good works are called the Armor (to wit) of light or of the day, not so much
in allusion to Armor, as in respect of the works signified by Armor; which
are such as are not ashamed of the light, or of the day, as evil works are. Yet
as men will wear such clothes in the night, which they would not willingly be
seen in, in the day: So the better sort of Soldiers might wear more foul,
rusty, and unfurbished Armor in the night, than they would wear in the day;
and to this might the Apostle here allude.

We said verse 11. that the Apostle did use an Allegory there, in which he did
allude to certain War like or Military passages: In pursuance therefore of that
Allegory, may he use this phrase, or manner of speech here, saying, Let us put
on the Armor of light.

V. 13. Let us walk honestly as in the day, etc.] He does as it were interpret
and show here in this verse, what he meant by that which he said verse 12. in
those words, Let us cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on the
armor of light.

Let us walk honestly as in the day] i. e. Let us walk honestly and
circumspectly, as men use to walk in the day time, when their works are seen,
and their doings taken notice of, of all.

It is not unknown to any which are versed in the Scripture, that the life and
conversation of a man, is often likned in the Scripture to walking.

Not in rioting and drunkenness] These are such works as the Apostle called
works of darkness ver. 12. For they that are drunken, are drunken in the night,
1 These. 5.7. etc.

These which the Apostle mentions here, are not all the works of darkness
which are, but some only. And the Apostle seems to mention these when he
omitteth others, because the Romans were more prone to these, than they were to
others

Not in rioting] i. e. Not in banqueting and Junqueting, and riotous feasting.

He speaks of such banqueting, and feasting, and Junqueting as are (not for
necessity, or for honorable and seemly entertainments) but for voluptuousness
and gluttony; only to please the paunch or gullet, and to stir up Venery.

And drunkenness] By Drunkenness, the Hebrews mean all excessive drinking,
though it proceeds not to the eclipsing or taking away of the use of reason,
for the time.

Not in chambering] By Chambering, he means all unlawful lying of men with
women, etc. which uses to be practiced in Chambers.

And wantonness] By wantonness understand all unchaste and lascivious gestures,
dealings, and doings.

Not in strife] i. e. Not in strife of words, as reproaches, etc. nor in strife
of deeds, as fighting and quarrelings.

And envying] i. e. Envying other men for their riches or honor, or the like.

These two last sins are manifestly hurtful to our Neighbor; and the four
other sins are hurtful to our neighbor too; in that they are committed with
others, and so they with whom they are committed, are brought by our means,
into the guilt of sins, with us, and loss of their good names and reputation

Ver. 14. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ] By the Lord Jesus Christ, is
here meant the life and conversation of the Lord Jesus Christ by a Metonymy.

And then do we put on the Lord Jesus Christ, when we imitate his v^rtues, and
live, as he lived.

It is plain by the foregoing verse, that by putting on the Lord Jesus Christ
is meant here nothing else, but the imitation of his life and conversation.

The Life therefore or Conversation of Christ is likened here either to a
garment, or else to Armor (as he likned good-works before, ver. 12.) when he
says, Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ.

And make no provision for the flesh] i. e. And provide not either meat or
drink, or any other thing for your Bodies.

By the Flesh is meant the body here, by a Synechdoche, or for the carnal
affections.

To fulfill the lusts thereof] To satisfy the inordinate desires thereof.

Note, that the Apostle does not simply forbid us to take care or to provide
for the body here; for there is no man, but may lawfully nourish and cherish
his own body, Ephesians. 5. ver. 29. But he forbids us only to take care and
provide for the body, for fulfilling the lusts thereof, that is, to take care
for and to provide voluptu^us m^as, and drinks, and the like, which are only
to satisfy, or fulfill the inordinate desires and lusts thereof, and to stir
it up to venery and uncleanness.

Note, that the Apostle uses here an Enallagy of the Person, changing the
first into the second person. For whereas he said, ver. 13. Let us walk
honestly as in the day, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and
wantonness, not in strife and envying: He should have said here in order of
speech: But let us put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and not make provision for the
flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. But such an Enallagy is frequent.

CHAP. XIV.
1. HIm that is weak in the faith, receive you but not to doubtful disputations.

1. That Jew, which is weak in the faith, and is not persuaded of the
abrogation of the Law of Moses, ye Jews, which are strong in the faith receive
ye; but when I bid you receive him, my meaning is not, that ye should receive
him to disputations, concerning his tenets or opinions, the event whereof will
be doubtful, whether you will thereby convince him of his error, or make him
fall back again to Judaisme; but my meaning is, that ye should receive him into
your company, with all meekness and gentleness and into your hearts with all
tender affection. And this mine admonition, is not without cause.

2. For one believes that he may eat all things: another, who is weak, eats
herbs.

2. For one of you believes that he may lawfully eat all things, yea those
things, which were forbidden to be eaten by the Law of Moses: Another, who is
weak, and doubts, or is not persuaded of the abrogation of that Law, eats
only herbs, and such meats, as that Law did permit.

3. Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not; and let not him which
eats not, judge him that eats. For God has received him.

3. Let not therefore him that eats all meats indifferently; despise him as
an ignorant or superstistious fellow, and neglect his spiritual welfare, who
eats not all things indifferently, as he does: and he that eats not all
things indifferently, but only such things as the Law of Moses did permit to
be eaten, let not him judge or condemn him, as a sinner or transgressor of the
Law, who eats all things indifferently, yea, though he eat those things,
which Moses his Law did forbid; for not withstanding this his eating, God has
received him into his favor.

4. Who art thou that judge another man's servant? to his own master he
stands or falls, yea, he shall be holden up: for God is able to make him
stand.

4. Who art thou, O thou weak in faith, that thou judge and condemnst another
man's servant, yea, the servant of God? he shall be acquitted or condemned, as
he deserves by his own Master: yea he shall be acquitted for this, that he
eats all things indifferently: For God (who is his Master) is able, I hope,
to acquit him.

5. One man esteems one day above another: another esteems every day a
like. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind.

5. One of you esteems one day for holiness above another: another esteems
every day alike, none more holy, or more unholy than another. Now therefore
that you might not wound your consciences in observing or not observing days
after this manner, Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind, that what
he does is lawful.

6. He that regards the day, regards it unto the Lord, and he that
regards not the day, to the Lord he does not regard it. He that eats,
eats to the Lord, for he gives God thanks: and he that eats not, to the
Lord he eats not, and gives God thanks.

6. He that observes a day as holy, because Moses commanded it, observes it
to the glory and honor of the Lord: And he that observes not a day as holy
(which yet was commanded to be kept holy by Moses his Law) to the glory and
honor of the Lord, he observes it not. He that eats all things
indifferently, yea, even those things which were forbidden by Moses; he eats
them to the glory and honor of the Lord; for he gives God thanks, that he
has given him that liberty of meats under the Gospel, which he had not under
the Law: And he that eats not all things indifferently, but only such things,
as Moses did permit to be eaten, to the honor and glory of the Lord he eats
not, and to the honor and glory of the Lord he abstains from those meats,
which Moses forbad; for he gives God thanks for that, that though the use of
some meats were forbidden, yet he gave him and allowed him the free use of
others.

7. For none of us lives to himself, and no man dies to himself.

7. For my charity tells me, that no Christian does that which he does in his
lifetime, for his own glory and honor; nor does he in his death seek his own
glory and honor.

8. For whether we live, we live unto the Lord: and whether we die, we die unto
the Lord: whether we live therefore, or die, we are the Lords.

8. For whether we live, we lead our life to the honor and glory of the Lord:
or whether we die, we do in our death seek the honor and glory of the Lord.
Whether we live therefore, or whether we die, we show our selves to be the
Lords Servants by our doings.

9 For to this end Christ both died, and rose, and revived, that he might be
Lord both of the dead, and living.

9. And this is but just, and meet for us to do, and just and meet for me to
think: For to this end Christ both died and revived, and rose again, that he
might be Lord and Master both of the dead and living.

10. But why do thou judge thy brother? or why do thou set at naught thy
brother? we shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ.

10. But why do thou which art weak in the faith, judge and condemn thy
brother as a sinner? Or why do thou which art strong in the faith, set at
naught thy brother, as though thou carest not if he perished? We shall all
stand before the judgment seat of God, there to give an account to God for
these things.

11. For it is written, As I live, says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me,
and every tongue shall confess to God.

11. For it is written, Isaiah 45.13. As I live (says the Lord) every knee
shall bow to me, and every tongue shall glorify me.

12. So then every one of us shall give account of himself to God.

12. So then every one of us shall appear at the last day before God, and
therefore shall we appear, that we may every one give an account of our selves
to him.

13. Let us not therefore judge one another any more: but judge this rather,
that no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in his brothers way

13. Let us not therefore judge one another any more; not the weak the strong
as a sinner; not the strong the weak, as one that is culpably ignorant of the
truth; or superstitious, or the like; lest by so doing, we should make our
accounts the greater against our selves, in that day of Judgment. But as for
thee, O thou that art strong in the faith, judge thou this rather, and
determine of this as of a truth, that no man ought to put a stumbling block, or
an occasion to sin in his brothers way.

14. I know, and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean
of it self: but to him that esteems any thing to be unclean, to him it is
unclean.

14. But thou will say to me: Paul, How can I put a stumbling block, or
occasion to sin in my brothers way by eating any thing, when as there is
nothing which I eat is unclean in it self? To this I answer, That I know by the
light of nature, and am persuaded by the knowledge which I have gained by the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean in it self; but yet to
him that esteems or is persuaded that any thing is unclean, though
erroniously, to him it is as if it were unclean, and he is as much bound to
abstain from eating of it, as if it were unclean indeed. Thy eating therefore,
of that which is not unclean in it self, may be to thy brother as a stumbling
block, and an occasion to sin, if he esteems it to be unclean.

15. But if thy brother be grieved with thy meat: now walk thou not
charitably. Destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ died.

15. But if thou do grieve thy brother, by drawing him by thy example, to
eat any thing against his conscience, which he esteems to be unclean, which
must needs be somewhat grievous to him: or if thou grievest him any other way,
with that thy meat, whereby thou make him to sin, thou walk not charitably
toward thy brother, but do even slay his soul by making of him thus to sin.
But O destroy not him with thy eating, or with this thy meat, for whom Christ
died.

16. Let not then your good be evil spoken of.

16. And being that Christ has made thee free from the yoke of the Ceremonial
Law, which put a difference between meats; which freedom we cannot look upon,
but as on a great good conferred upon us by Christ; Let not this good, this
freedom, by our abuse of it, be evil spoken of, as it must needs be, if you
abuse it, to the grief, and destruction of your weak brethren.

17. For the kingdom of God is not meat and drink; but righteousness, and
peace, and joy in the holy Ghost.

17. But thou will say I may justly fear that God will be angry with me, and
good men will blame me, if I should not make use of that liberty which Christ
has purchased for me; And that I should not advance the Kingdom of God as I
ought to do, if I should neglect to exercise so great a grace of Christianity,
as this liberty is. But fear not this, for the advancement of the Kingdom of
God consists not in eating of meats and drinking of drinks without
discrimination; but it consists in Righteousness, and peace, and joy through
the holy Ghost.

18. For he that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and
approved of men.

18. For he that in these things serves Christ in the advancement of his
Kingdom, is acceptable to God, and approved of all good men.

19. Let us therefore follow after the things which make for peace, and things
wherewith one may edify another.

19. Being then that the advancement of the kingdom of God consists in
Righteousness, and Peace, let us follow after the things which make for peace,
and after Righteous things wherewith we may edify one another, which will be
the cause of a true and holy joy in us.

20. For meat destroy not the work of God: all things indeed are pure; but it
is evil, for that man who eats with offense.

20. For by using thy liberty in eating meats, without any difference, destroy
not thy weak brother, whom God has created in Christ Jesus. But thou will say:
are not all meats clean, and pure, why then may I not eat them? to this I
answer, that all meats are pure indeed in themselves, so that that they cannot
in themselves defile a man. But yet notwithstanding it is evil for that man,
who eats any meat with the offense and destruction of his weak brother.

21. It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor any thing whereby
thy brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak.

21. It is good for a man neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor to do
any thing whereby his brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made to show his
weakness.

22. Have thou faith? Have it to thy self before God. Happy is he that
condemns not himself in that thing which he allows.

22. But thou will say: I believe and am persuaded, that I may lawfully eat all
manner of meats through Christ; shall I then have this Christian faith or
persuasion, and yet never be suffered to make use of it? I say therefore to
thee, do thou believe and art thou persuaded that thou may lawfully eat all
meats whatsoever? make use of this thy faith and persuasion; but make use of
it, not before thy weak brother, but only before God and thy self; where none
else may see. For happy is that man which in the use of that thing which he
approves of, and is persuaded that he may lawfully use, does not that for which
he may be condemned.

23. And he that doubts, is damned if he eat, because he eats not of faith:
for whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

23. And not only he which is persuaded that he may lawfully eat all manner of
meats without any d^fference, may do that in eating for which he may bring
damnation upon himself, but he also which doubts whether he may lawfully eat
of such or such meats, is damned, if he eat of them: Because he eats not out
of a persuasion, that he may lawfully eat, of what he eats. For whatsoever we
do, if we do it not out of a full persuasion that we may lawfully do it, it is
sin.

CHAP. XIV.
Ver. 1. Him that is weak in the faith, receive, but not to doubtful
disputations] q. d. Ye which are strong receive them which are weak in the
faith. But when I bid you receive them, my meaning is not, that ye should
receive them to doubtful disputations.

By disputations, He means disputations concerning their opinions, which he
calls doubtful because the Issue thereof will be doubtful, It being uncertain
whether they can bring them, by disputing with them to a full persuasion of the
truth; or whether they will make them thereby to revolt, and forsake the faith
of Christ, which they have already embraced.

Concerning the word (...) Receive ye, See more Chap. 15. ver. 7.

The Apostle speaks here to such as were strong in the faith; that is, to such
as were persuaded, that the Law of Moses was abrogated by Christ, and had not
power to obliege Christians to the observance of meats and days, as it did the
Jews while it was in force: So that they might lawfully eat those meats which
were forbidden to be eaten by the Law of Moses, And might lawfully omit the
Sanctification of those days, which the Law of Moses made holy. And he speaks
to them concerning the weak, that is, concerning such as were not so persuaded,
but observed the choice of meats and days as Moses had commanded, out of the
weakness of their judgment; toward whom he would have them carry themselves,
withal prudence and charitableness.

Whether the Apostle directs this his admonition or precept to all the Saints
of Rome which were strong in the faith, whether they were Jews or Gentiles; or
whether he speaks here only to such Jews as were strong in the faith, is a
question. Some take it as spoken to all the strong whether they were Jews or
Gentiles Some again take it as spoken to such Jews only as were strong; And
the reasons of these latter are these. First, because simply, it was not lawful
for the Gentiles to observe the Law of Moses at this time no not for the weak
Jews sake, which they think is sufficiently manifest by the Epistle of S. Paul
to the Galatians; wherefore say they the Gentiles were not in any wise to be
exhorted to that which is here written. Secondly, Because the Apostle says,
ver. 3. Let not him which eats not, judge him which eats, that is, let not
the weak which eats not, condemn the strong which eats that which was
forbidden by the Law of Moses, as if he were thereby a transgressor of that
Law; which a Jew, though he were weak, would not do to a Gentile, because he
knew that the Law of Moses belonged not to the Gentile, but to the Jew only.
And to these latter do I incline.

The Apostle therefore directs this his precept by an Apostrophe, in
particular, to such Jews as lived at Rome and were strong in the faith,
concerning such things, as were forbidden indeed by the Law of Moses, but might
be lawfully used by Christians; And to such does he speak, when he speaks to
the strong, throughout this Chapter: But in the beginning of the next Chapter,
he passes from this special Doctrine, concerning things which were forbidden
by the Law of Moses, to that which is more general, and there speaks to all,
both Jews and Gentiles, which were strong in the faith.

Now as for the Connection of this with the former Chapter: The Apostle goes on
still to teach the Romans, how they should present their bodies a living
Sacrifice, holy acceptable unto God, which is, their reasonable service (as he
speaks Chap. 12. ver. 1.) And because this precept is a precept of charity, as
appears, ver. 15. He brings it in here after the precept of love and charity
which he gave, in the latter part of the foregoing Chapter. Though in giving of
such precepts as these are, the coherence is not so exactly to be looked for;
no more than, in the Proverbs of Solomon.

Him that is weak in the faith] He is said to be weak in the faith, which
doubts of any thing concerning the Doctrine of Faith, or is persuaded against
the truth thereof; taking that for truth which is not true. Such a one in this
present case, was he which doubted whether he might Lawfully eat of such meats
as were forbidden, or which thought that he sinned which did eat of such meats
as were forbidden to be eaten by the Law of Moses.

This weakness, therefore, is opposed to a full persuasion of a thing. For
which see, Romans Chap. 4. ver. 19, 20, 21. And See 1 Cor. Chap. 8. ver. 7. and
12.

He speaks here of the weak Jew, as the sequel will show.

Receive you] To wit, into your company or society as brethren; And into your
hearts as those which are dearly beloved of you.

He speaks to such Jews, as were strong, that is, as were fully persuaded (and
that according to the Gospel) that they might now lawfully eat those meats
which Moses did forbid in his Law, to be eaten: And that they might lawfully
neglect the observation of those days, which Moses would have observed by his
Law.

But not to doubtful disputations] i. e. But receive them not to dispute or
contend with them, about their opinions, which they have concerning those meats
which were forbidden, and those days which were commanded to be kept as holy by
the Law of Moses; for the Issue thereof will be doubtful.

The word (...), Receive you, is a word of an Indifferent signification, and
may be taken either in a good or a bad sense; as it is limited, and the
Terminus ad quem is specified. The Apostle therefore shows here, first what,
the term thereof is not according to his meaning; and afterward gives us to
understand what it is by the carriage, which he would have us to use, to such a
one, as I spoke of a little before.

Should weak Jews, newly converted to the faith of Christ, be set upon by hot
disputations and contentions, that by those means they might be drawn from the
opinions which they held; they might as soon be driven from that faith which
they had of Christ, as be drawn from those their opinions; wherefore the
Apostle would not have this, to be put to such a venture.

Ver. 2. For one believes that he may eat all things] i. e. Now one (who is
strong in faith) is fully persuaded in his conscience, that he may lawfully
eat, all manner of meats whatsoever.

The Apostle does as it were state the case here.

Note, that the particle, For, may be taken here, for Now, as when we say Now
the birth of Jesus Christ was after this manner, Matthew. 1.18. Now the God of
patience and consolation grant you to be like minded one toward another, Chap.
15.5. For this particle For may be here, (not the sign of the cause or reason
of any thing which went before but) a note of an explication, which sets out
the matter in hand by way of an Example, as it were, before our eyes, placing
the weak on one side, and the strong on the other.

Yet we may take the particle, For, here as it is usually taken, that is, for a
Conjunction causal, q. d. Him that is weak in the faith receive ye; but not to
doubtful disputations. And think not that this Admonition is needless, For
there be weak Jews and there be strong Jews among you. One Jew who is strong
and believes that he may eat all things: Another who is weak, and who eats
only herbs, etc.

One] i. e. One who is strong in faith.

Believeth] i. e. Is fully persuaded in his conscience.

That he may eat all things] i. e. That he may Lawfully eat all things, which
are good for meat, notwithstanding the Law of Moses.

Here that Rule is pertinent Id possumus quod jure possumus. That we may be
said to do, which we may lawfully do.

Note, here that there were many things forbidden as unclean, and not to be
eaten, by the Law of Moses, which yet none of them, were unclean in themselves:
Of many of these you may read, Levit. 11. verse 13, etc.

Another who is weak] To wit, in the faith, See ver. 1.

Eats herbs] i. e. Eats only herbs, that is, eats only such things as
were Lawful to be eaten by the Law of Moses.

Note, that the word Only is here to be understood, as it is often elsewhere.
And that by Herbs, he means all such herbs as were by their nature fit for the
food of man. But yet by such herbs, he does by a Synechdoche mean also all
manner of meats whatsoever, which were not forbidden to be eaten by the Law of
Moses. And these meats he signifies by Herbs, because there were no Herbs
forbidden by the Law of Moses to be eaten; but it was lawful at all times, to
eat any herbs, which man had a mind to eat, for food.

Ver. 3. Let not him that eats despise him that eats not] i. e. Let not him
which is strong in the faith, and which eats all things and is persuaded,
that he may eat all things lawfully, despise him that eats not all things
(because he thinks, that all things may not be lawfully eaten) as one that is
ignorant and unskilful in the word of God; or as one which is superstitious; or
rather, let him not so despise him, and vilify his Salvation, as by his eating
to offend him; or to make him sin, by provoking him by his example to eat
against his Conscience, See ver. 20.21.

Knowledge puffs up says the Apostle, 1 Corin 8.1. And so might it puff up
the more knowing Jew, against him which was less knowing, even to the contempt
of him, who was less instructed or strengthened in the faith.

But this is not all (as some think, and as I intimated before) which the
Apostle here means by despising, but by despising they think that the Apostle
means, a slight accounting also of the salvation of a weak brother, whereby a
man does offend his brother, by eating such meats as his brother thinks
unlawful; and so makes him by his example to eat against his conscience, that
which he himself judges to be unlawful to eat, to his condemnation. And this
indeed agrees with that which the Apostle says, ver. 15. and 20.

Let not him which eats not, judge him that eateth] i. e. Let not him which
eats not all things, but abstaineth for conscience sake, from many things
(because he thinks they may not be lawfully eaten) as being forbidden to be
eaten by the Law of Moses. Let not, I say, such an one, judge him that eats
all things, out of a persuasion that he may lawfully eat them; as if he were a
Transgressor of the Law of Moses, and a sinner against God.

Such a Judgment (as the Apostle here speaks of) as it is accompanied, with
difference of opinion from him whom we Judge; so is it (for the most part)
accompanied with alienation also of affection.

For God has received him] i. e. For God has received him, whom thou judge,
to wit, to be his servant. And therefore he is not to be judged of an other man.

Thus is this commonly interpreted of him whom he which eats not, judges,
because he eats, yet some interpret it not of him, whom he, which eats not,
judges, because he eats; but of him, whom he, which eats, despises,
because he eats not: and so refer it, not to those words, which went
immediately before. To wit, those, Let not him which eats not, judge him that
eats: But to those Let not him, that eats, despise him that eats not, q.
d. Let not him that eats, despise him, that eats not, for God has (not
despised him, but) received him, as one of his.

This is a good reason to persuade him, that eats, not to despise him that
eats not, to say, that God has not despised him, but received him as his
own. And further, this makes, for this interpretation; that if we refer these
words to the former part of the verse, namely to those words, Let not him that
eats, despise him that eats not, there will be a reason adjoined to both
the Apostles admonitions here, after this man^er (which otherwise will not be)
Let not him that eats despise him that eats not, for God has received him:
and let not him, which eats not, judge, him that eats, for who art thou,
that judge another man's Servant, etc.

Ver. 4. Who art thou that judge another man's servants?] i. e. Who art thou,
that art so bold, as to judge another man's servant, though it might be, that he
has offended in eating, which yet thou know not.

The Apostle alludes here to one man, who will be busy in another man's family,
and find fault there, where he has nothing to do.

To his own master he stands or falleth] i e. It belongs not to thee, but to
his own Master to acquit him, or to condemn him.

He stands or falleth] These are terms borrowed from Courts of Law, in which
he is said to stand, who overcomes in a Cause, wherein he is accused as Psalm.
1.5. and so is acquitted. And he is said to fall, against whom the Cause goes,
and so is condemned.

The Apostle might have said, Who art thou that judge or condemnest one, for
that in which he offends not? But he says not so, nor does he use this, as a
reason against the weak Jew, which judges the stronger here; because the weak
Jew was not as yet convinced of that, that the strong sinned not in this, that
he eat all things: He uses therefore a more general reason, saying, Who art
thou therefore, that judge another man's servant? to his own master he
stands or falls.

Yea he shall be holden up] q. d. Yea and his Master will acquit him. Or yea,
and he shall be acquitted of his Master, for this.

The Apostle borrows these terms also from Courts of Law. And in these words
he corrects, that which he said before, as putting that out of all doubt here,
which might be doubtfully interpreted before.

Note, that it is not the Apostles meaning, that he that eats shall be
acquitted of whatsoever shall be laid against him; but his meaning is only
this, that he shall be acquitted against this charge, and that this shall not
prove sin to him, or a cause of condemnation, but it shall be so that
notwithstanding this, he shall be acquitted quite, if in other things also, he
has behaved himself in a Christian manner.

For God is able to make him stand] For God (who is his Master, and whom he
serves in every point) is able enough (I trow) to acquit him.

He uses a kind of Jrony, or Sarcasme here, signifying thereby, that if such a
man should not be acquitted it would not be, because he had transgressed in
what he did, but it would be (which no man would say) because God were not able
to acquit him.

Ver. 5. One man esteems one day above another, another esteems every day a
like] The Apostle stateth the case (as I may so say) here again, as he did
verse 2. And it is not much unlike that, as for the grounds of it. For both are
grounded upon the validity or invalidity of Moses Law: only the instances or
examples, are diverse.

One man esteems one day above another] q. d. Again, one man, esteems one
day above another, or more holy than another.

One man esteems one day above another] q. d. One man, who is not persuaded
of the liberty, which we have by Christ from the obligation of the Law of
Moses, esteems one day more holy than another; because they were made one day
more holy than another; by Moses Law, and does observe them as one day, more
h^ly than another. Supple, as much as he can observe them, being absent from
the place, which was appointed for sacrifices, that is, from Jerusalem.

He speaks here of such a^ he called weak in the faith, Ver. 1. who thinking
that Moses Law was still in force (though falsely) esteemed those for
Holy Days, which Moses appointed for such, such as were their new-moones, and
Sabbaths, etc. And those for working days, which Moses appointed, or permitted
for servile work.

Upon the days which Moses appointed to be kept holy, there were peculiar
Sacrices, to be performed according to those days: These Sacrifices could not
be performed out of Jerusalem; therefore, I said, of the weak Jews of Rome,
concerning those days, that they observed them, as they could observe them,
being absent from the place of Sacrifice, which was Jerusalem.

Another every day alike] i. e. Another who is strong in the faith, and
believes that the Law of Moses is abrogated by Christ, so that he is not bound
thereby, to the observation of days, as the Law did once bind him; esteems
every day alike, and one day no more holy than another, notwithstanding Moses
Law.

Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind] i. e. Let every one, whether
he esteems one day above another; or whether he esteems every day alike; be
fully persuaded in his own mind (Supple) that what he does in this, he may
lawfully do, least otherwise he should sin in doing it, against his conscience,
or his mind.

Ver. 6. He that regards a day, regards it unto the Lord] That which the
Apostle does here, in those three verses, viz. 6, 7, 8, is to prove, that both
he that eats, and he that eats not, and he that observes not a day, and
that he which observes a day, is the Lords, as appears by the last words of
the eighth verse, whether we live therefore, or whether we die, we are the
Lords. And having proved that, he leaves it to us to judge, that it is not fit
for us either to despise, or to judge those which are the Lords Servants; when
as it is not fit for us to do it, in the Servants of men.

He that regards a day] i e. He that regards a day as holy, because the Law
of Moses commanded it to be kept holy; not being persuaded (through the
weakness of his knowledge) that the Law of Moses is abrogated, though indeed it
is.

Regards it unto the Lord] i. e. Regards it to the honor of Christ: That
is, he does it, that he may honor Christ thereby.

By the Lord is meant Christ: And indeed Christ is every where called by the
name of Lord, in the Apostles writings; as he which is Lord of us all, and who
has made us all to be Servants to himself, by right of Redemption, See v. 9.

Note, that to Regard to the Lord, is, after the Hebrew manner, put for to
regard to the honor of the Lord, so, Isaiah 5.1. it is said, I will sing to my
wel-beloved a song of my wel-beloved: For, I will sing to the praise or honor
of my beloved, a song concerning my wel-beloved.

But now, how can he that regards a day, regard it to Christ? that is, how
can he regard it to the honor of Christ?

Answ. First, He may do it, in that he, being a Christian, may know, that
whatsoever we do, we must do it in the name of the Lord Jesus, Colos. 3.17. Or
Secondly, he may do it in the honor of Christ, in that he acknowledges Christ
to be God; and being God, to be author of the Law of Moses, in observance of
which Law, he does, as he does.

And he that regards not a day] i. e. And he that being persuaded that the
Law of Moses is abrogated, regards not the day as holy which Moses in his Law
commanded to be kept holy.

To the Lord he does not regard it] i. e. He does not regard that day to the
honor of Christ: i. e. He does not regard that day, that he may thereby honor
Christ.

But how does he not regard that day to the honor of Christ? or how does he
honor Christ by not regarding that day?

Answ. He does it, because by not regarding it, he shows that he is persuaded
that Christ has freed him from the bondage of the Law of Moses, by his own
death as Chap. 7.4.

He that eateth] i. e. He that eats all things, yea, even those things which
are forbidden to be eaten by the Law of Moses.

Eats to the Lord] i. e. Eats what he eats, to the honor of the Lord.

For he gives God thanks] i. e. For when he is going to eat, he gives God
thanks for the meat which he is to eat.

He that gives God thanks for the meat which he is to eat, honors God, in
that he acknowledges God thereby to have created what he eats, and to have
given it to man for his food, and to have taken off the restraint, which
restrained from eating some meats by Moses Law.

It was always a custom among the Jews, to give thanks to God, as the Creator
and giver of what they did eat or drink, when they did eat meat or drink wine;
and thus did our Savior give thanks when he did eat or drink, Mat. 15.36. and
Mat. 26.25. etc. which custom Christians also have. And to which custom the
Apostle here alludes.

That he that eats gives thanks to God for the meat which he eats, should
be an argument to him that eats not, that he that eats, eats to the
honor of the Lord Christ, who is true God.

And he that eats not] i. e. And he that eats not, Supple, those things
which are forbidden to be eaten by the Law of Moses.

To the Lord he eats not] i. e. He eats not those meats which are forbidden
by the Law of Moses, that is, he abstaineth from them, to the honor of the
Lord.

And he gives thanks] i. e. For he gives God thanks, viz. For that he has
given him temperance to abstain from such things as he did forbid to be eaten
by the Law of Moses.

And, is to be taken here for, For, as will appear, by that, that went a little
before.

We may interpret these last passages, thus also, And he that eats not] i. e.
And he that eats not those meats which are forbidden by Moses Law, Supple,
and eats only such meats as the Law of Moses does allow of. To the Lord he
eats not] i. e. He eats not those meats which are forbidden by Moses Law,
Supple, and eats only such meats as the Law of Moses does allow of; to the
honor of the Lord. And he gives God thanks] i. e. For he gives God thanks,
Supple, for that, that he has allowed him the lawful use of some meats, though
he has forbidden him the use of others.

Note, that what the Apostle says here, he says by the Judgment of Charity,
not out of any certain or infallible knowledge.

The Apostle is here, very favorable to these Romans, which being weak in
faith, did abstain from meats, which were forbidden by the Law of Moses, and
did observe those days as holy, which the Law of Moses commanded to be kept
holy, and makes an Apology for them: Yet he is very angry with the Galatians
for observing Moses Law, as may appear by diverse passages of the fourth and
fifth Chapters of the Epistle written to them A question therefore may be
asked, why the Apostle should be so favorable to the Romans in this, and so
sharp to the Galatians.

Answ. They of which the Apostle speaks here, were such as were Jews living at
Rome and converted from Judaism to Christianity; who therefore were brought up
under the Law of Moses, and accustomed to those things, which were commanded,
and forbidden therein respectively; for which cause the Apostle thought it fit
to deal gently with them, least by harsh and sharp dealing, they should forsake
the Gospel of Christ and his faith, rather than be suddenly brought off from
those observances, to which they had been accustomed all their days: And for
that also that he would show such reverence to the Law of Moses, as that it
being dead, it should be buried, as it were, with honor. But the Galatians to
which he wrote, were such as were Gentiles, and had been all their lifetime
brought up in Gentilism, never in Judaism: Therefore he would never suffer the
Law of Moses, to be imposed upon them; but when they seemed to be willing to
receive it (when false Apostles would have imposed it upon them) he rebukes
them sharply for it; lest if he should seem to tolerate it, or wink at it in
them, it might be thought that the keeping of Moses Law, was necessary to
Justification, to which faith only is required.

Yet though the Apostle dealt thus gently and favorably with these Romans,
that is, with these Jews of Rome here, and would not have them to be received
to doubtful disputations concerning their opinions, yet he did suffer them but
for a time, and did by little and little instruct them in the truth, and
persuade them concerning the abrogation of the Law of Moses by Christ, as he
had opportunity.

That therefore these weak Jews of Rome did observe days, and abstain from
meats, according to the Law of Moses, and not according to the liberty or
freedom which was purchased by Christ; It was not a thing commendable in them
(for it did proceed from their weakness in the faith, ver. 1.) but was a fault
in them rather; yet such a fault, as the Apostle would excuse, and have others,
which were strong in the faith to excuse also; interpreting what they did to
the better part, and looking charitably to that, which was good or might be
good in it.

Ver. 7. For none of us lives to himself] i. e. For none of us, which are
Christians, does that, which he does while he lives, for his own profit, or
for his own glory.

Of us] i. e. Of us Christians.

Liveth] i. e. Does any thing in his lifetime.

To himself] i. e. For himself, that is, for his own profit, or for his own
glory. Understand, chiefly or principally, or in comparison of what he does for
the glory of God.

And no man dies to himself] i. e. And no man (which is a Christian) does if
he dies, by his death seek profit or glory to himself; understand, chiefly and
Principally, here too.

The Apostle speaks here in the person of a good and faithful Christian, such
as we must take every one to be in Charity, while we have evidence to the
contrary: And what he says, he says out of his Charity: And by what he says
here, he would confirm and prove, what he said before, to wit, that both the
weak and strong Christian, did what they did there, to the honor of God the
Lord.

Ver. 8. For whether we live we live unto the Lord] i. e. For whether we live,
we do what we do all our lifetime to the Glory of the Lord, that the Lord may
be thereby glorified.

We] i. e. We Christians.

Whether we live we live, etc.] These two words Live, and Live are not to be
taken here after the same manner or in the same sense; but are so to be
distinguished, and taken, as we have showed a little before.

Unto the Lord] i. e. Unto the Honor and Glory of the Lord. See verse 6.

And whether we die we die unto the Lord] i. e. And whether we die, we do by
our death glorify the Lord.

Whether we live theref^re or die we are the Lords] This is the conclusion
which the Apostle aimed at, and gathers from the sixth verse inclusive hitherto.

And now having proved that all both strong and weak are the Lords, he leaves
us, as a thing most evident to us, to conclude and judge, that it is not fit
for us either to despise or to judge those which are his Servants.

Ver. 9. For to this end Christ both died and revived that he might be Lord
both of the dead, and the living] Between this and the former verse, Understand
these or the like words.

And, this is but meet and just, viz. for us to be his servants, q. d. And this
is but meet and just for us to be his servants. For to this end, Christ both
lived and rose and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead, and of the
living, etc.

He says that Christ died for this end that he might be Lord both of the dead
and the living, because Christ gave his blood as a price of our redemption, to
redeem us out of the hands of the Devil, that we might be his Servants and a
peculiar treasure to him, whether we live or whether we die.

And he is said to rise again and to revive after his death, that he might be
Lord both of the dead and of the living; not that he did redeem us by his
resurrection, or that his Resurrection was the price, or part of the price of
our Redemption; but because by his Resurrection he showed, that he had paid the
full price of our Redemption, and by that, he came to take possession as it
were, of that which he purchased or redeemed by his death. Neither could he
have been Lord of us, as he was the man Christ Jesus if he had not risen again;
For he was not man, after death, till by his Resurrection his body and soul
were reunited, which had been severed by his death.

Christ when he redeemed us to be his Servants, he did it, that we should be
his Servants not only for term of this life, (which term, civil services among
men cannot exceed) but also, that we should be his Servants for the life to
come, yea, for ever and ever. And therefore is he said here to die, and rise,
and revive, that he might be Lord both of the dead and of the living.

And rose and revived] Either here is an (...), where, And rose and revived is
put for revived and rose again; Or, And rose and revived is as much to say, As,
he rose, and by his Resurrection acquired a new sort of life.

Of the dead and living] By the living he means here, those which live before
death; yet puts he them here, after the dead; and therefore may he seem so to
do; because they which live after death, are more obedient to God then they
which live before death; and do him better service, as being freed from those
Incumberances, which did beset them while they were in this life.

Ver. 10. But why do thou judge thy brother?] He uses an Apostrophe here to
him who eats not, and to him which observes days, that is, to the weak in
faith; who was ready to judge him, which did eat all things, and esteem all
days alike, contrary to the prescript of Moses Law, for a sinner, in that he
did so.

Why do thou judge] i. e. Why do thou condemn as a sinner.

Thy Brother] Supple, Which eats all things, and puts no difference, of
holiness between days and days.

Or why do thou set at naught thy Brother?] He uses an Apostrophe here to
him, who eats all things, and who puts no difference of holiness between days
and days; who because he was fully and truly persuaded that the Law of Moses
(which put a difference between meats and days) was abrogated, and had no more
force now to bind, since Christ's death; despised him and set him at naught,
who abstained from meats forbidden by the Law of Moses, and who observed days
as holy, which that Law made holy, for fear he should offend against it, as
though it were still in force.

Why do thou set at naught] See for the sense of these words, what I said on
those, ver. 3. Despise him that eats not.

Thy Brother] i. e. Thy brother in Religion, to wit, Christian Religion, where
all professors are Brethren and Sisters: And thy brother also according to the
Flesh. For Saint Paul speaks here to Jews concerning Jews.

There is an energy or force in this word Brother, to condemn those which thus
judge, and thus set at naught one another, and to make their fault the heavier.

We shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ] ^o wit, at the last
day, there to give an account of all our actions to Chrirst our Judge, and to
be condemned even for this, that we Judge and set at naught our brother, except
we are sorry for what is past, and redress what is to come.

Ver. 11. For it is written] Viz. Isaiah 45 23.

He proves here what he said before, to wit, That we shall all stand before
the Judgment Seat of God.

As I live, says the Lord, etc.] These words, Says the Lord, are not read,
Isa. 45.23. But the Apostle does either add them of himself, to show in whose
Person the words are spoken; or else he repeats them out of some other part of
that Chapter.

As I live, etc.] This is an Oath, and in this does the Lord (who has no
greater to swear by) swear by himself.

Every knee shall bow to me] i. e. Every one shall worship me, either
willingly, or whether he will or no.

To bow the knee is a sign of internal worship, and is external worship it
self, and it is put here for any worship in general.

And every tongue shall confess to God] i. e. And all men of all languages
shall confess to God, Supple, that he is the Lord. Or every tongue shall praise
God. For to confess is often put among the Hebrews, for to praise.

This shall they do both good and bad at the last day: The good willingly, the
bad even against their will.

The good do this willingly even before that day comes; and many bad, yea, the
Devils themselves have been forced already to confess to God; but yet all bad
men have not so done. But at the last day, when Christ shall come to judge the
quick and the dead there is none but shall do it, though they shall not all do
it before that day.

The Apostle proves by this verse what he said in the former. We shall all
stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ. For then, and at no other time but
then, shall every knee bow and every tongue confess to God, when they shall all
stand before his tribunal, to be judged there.

Note from hence, that Christ Jesus is true God; for he is true God of which
the Prophet Isaiah speaks this: And it is Christ Jesus to whom the Apostle
applies it.

Ver. 12. So then every one shall give an account of himself to God] i. e. So
then every one shall give an account of his actions to God.

This is that which the Apostle said in effect verse. 10. when he said, We shall
all stand before the Judgment Seat of God. For, for that end shall we all
stand before the Judgment Seat of God, that every one, may give an account of
himself to God.

The sense therefore is this, q. d. So then (being that we shall all stand
before the Judgment Seat of Christ) every one of us, shall give an account of
himself to God.

Shall give an account of himself to God] i. e. Shall be judged by God of all
his actions.

The Apostle alludes here to those which are Stewards or Bailiffs of other men's
Goods, which are to give an account to their Lords or Masters, how they have
laid out thos^ their Goods.

Ver. 13. Let us not therefore judge one another any more] q. d Being therefore
that every one of us, shall give an account of himself to God; let us not judge
or condemn one another any more, lest by so doing we should make our accounts
the greater against our selves at that day.

Note, that whereas the Apostle did before in this Chapter, use this word Judge
only of the weaker brother toward the stronger; here he uses it, not only of
the weaker brother toward the stronger, but of the stronger also toward the
weaker, and includes in it that which he called despising and setting at
naught, verse 3. and 10. For he that despises his brother, or sets him at
naught, does in some sort judge him; for he judges him either to be culpably
ignorant, or superstitious, or such a one as is not thankeful to Christ for
that liberty, with which he has made him free.

The Apostle makes himself here one of those which he speaks of, by a Figure
called (...) or (...).

Let us not judge] That is, Let us not condemn.

(...) is put here for (...), as it is often, and as it is before in this
Chapter.

But judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to
fall in his brothers way] q. d. But judge this rather, and resolve, and
conclude of this as of a truth, that no man ought to put a stumbling block, etc.

The word Ought is here to be understood, for the Apostle speaks not of this as
of an act, but as a duty.

Judge this, etc.] To Judge is to be taken here otherwise than it was
immediately before; for there it was taken for to Condemn, here it is taken for
to think, or firmly to resolve or conclude of the truth of a thing upon mature
deliberation. There is therefore an Elegant (...) here in these words, (...)
and (...) Let us judge, and Judge, by reason of the diversity of their
signification.

The Apostle seems to turn here by an Apostrophe to those which are strong.
And note, that the Apostle changes the persons here: For whereas he said
before Let us not judge, in the first person. He says here, Judge, that is,
Judge ye, in the second person.

That no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in his brothers way]
i. e. That no man ought to put a stumbling block, etc.

The word (...), oportere, ought, is here to be understood (as I said before.)

To put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in a brothers way, signifies
to give an occasion to a brother to sin. And the phrase is Metaphorically taken
from a stumbling block, which is laid in the way wherein a man should walk, or
run, whereat he stumbleth or falls, and so receives hurt. And from the Till
of a Mouse-Trap (for so the word (...) signifies which is here rendered an
occasion to fall) which bears up the Trap, and to which the bait is tied,
which while the Mouse gnaweth, the Till yields, and the Trap falls, and the
Mouse is taken.

That in which the Apostle feared, that the strong in faith would put a
stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in his weak brothers way; that is, that
by which he was afraid, that the strong in faith would make his weak brother to
sin, was this, That the strong in faith, that is, that he (which was fully
persuaded that Moses Law was abrogated by Christ, and that therefore he was not
bound to put that difference between meats and meats, as was put by Moses Law,
but was now free from that) would make use of his freedom, and so eat those
meats which were forbidden (and pronounced as unclean by Moses Law) before and
in the sight of his weak brother, who was not persuaded of the abrogation of
Moses Law, but that those meats which Moses Law made unclean, were unclean
still: by which means a weak brother would either rashly condemn him, as a
sinner and transgressor of the Law, whom he saw eat of those meats, and so
would sin, by his rash censure of his brother: or else he would eat of those
meats himself, which he was persuaded were unclean, being drawn thereunto
against his conscience, by the example of his stronger brother; because he saw
him which was strong eat thereof, and so by eating thereof, would sin against
his conscience, and so against God.

Ver. 14. I know, and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing
unclean of it self, etc.] i. e I know by the light of nature, and am persuaded
by the knowledge which I have, through the Lord Jesus Christ, that there is
nothing unclean of it self, etc.

The Apostle prevents an objection here, for whereas he would not have the
strong Christian (by his eating of meats indifferently) to put a stumbling
block or occasion to fall in his brothers way. The strong Christian might
object and say. But how can I put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in
my brothers way, by any meat that I eat, when as there is no meat which is
unclean in it self. And it must be now unclean in it self, if it be a stumbling
block or occasion to fall, when as Moses his Law is abrogated, which made
things unclean by forbidding them to be eaten.

To this the Apostle answers. I know, and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that
there is nothing unclean of it self, but yet to him that esteems any thing to
be unclean, to him it is, as if it were unclean indeed. Therefore the eating of
that which is not unclean in it self, may be to thy brother a stumbling block
and an occasion of a fall to him, if he do but think that it is unclean.

To him that esteems any thing to be unclean] i. e. To him that esteems, or
is persuaded, that any thing is unclean, either in it self; or because it is
forbidden by the ceremonial Law of Moses.

To him it is unclean] To him it is, as if it were unclean, and it will, if he
uses it, make him unclean and a sinner, because he uses it, with such a
thought, or such a persuasion.

The Apostle says here, that to him that thinks any thing to be unclean, to
him, it is unclean, not because a man's thought can make that any way unclean,
which is otherwise clean; but because the conscience of him, that thinks any
thing to be unclean, which is not so; binds him as much to abstain from it, as
if it were unclean indeed.

Therefore the particle As, is here to be understood, that the sense may be
this, to him it is as unclean, a particle which is often left to be understood.

Ver. 15. But if thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now walk thou not
charitably] The Apostle prevents another objection here: For the strong
Christian may say. If it be so that there is nothing unclean in it self, being
that the Law of Moses is abrogated, though a weak brother be offended, yet, why
may not I lawfully use any meat that I have a mind to. This objection, I say,
the Apostle prevents, saying. Yea, but if thy brother be grieved with thy meat,
now walk thou not charitably. As if he should say, thou may lawfully eat
what thou have a mind to, because nothing is unclean in it self, and because
the Law of Moses is abrogated, which made many things ceremonially unclean, if
thou do not offend a weak brother by thy eating, and thereby transgress the
rule of charity; but if thou can not, use this liberty, but that thou must
offend thy weak brother and grieve him, if thou eatest; thou transgressest the
Law of charity by eating and so sinnest.

Note here, that we must not so use the liberty of things indifferent, but that
in the use thereof we must be subject to the Law of charity, by which we are
bound, not to offend a brother, that is truly weak. But yet things, which are
in there own nature indifferent, when they are either forbidden, or commanded
by lawful authority, are now no longer indifferent, to those, which are under
that authority during the time, that they are so forbidden, or commanded.

If thy brother be grieved] i. e. If thy brother be so far troubled, with thy
eating those things, which are forbidden by the Law of Moses, as that he thinks
to his grief, that thou dispisest the Law of God, which was given by Moses, who
yet would be accounted a Servant of God: Or that he is in a manner forced by
thy example to eat against his conscience, and so to his grief, those things
which he is persuaded in his conscience (though falsely) cannot lawfully be
eaten: Or is any other way grieved with the meat, that he sees the eat, and
with thy eating of it, etc.

We may say, that to be grieved, here, is as much as to be offended, or to
stumble or fall by occasion given. For they which stumble, and fall, and so
come by hurt (...) i. e. They are grieved. The sense therefore of these words.
If thy brother be grieved, may be this if thy brother be offended, in relation
to what he said, ver. 13. That no man put a stumbling block, or occasion to
fall in his brothers way.

This word this way taken, has in it a metaphorical Metonymy.

With they meat] i. e. With thy meat, or because he sees thee eat those meats,
which are forbidden by the Law of Moses, which he yet thinks, thou may not
lawfully eat.

Now walk thou not charitably] That is, thou transgressest the law of
Charity, which commands the to love thy neighbor as thy self.

Destroy not him] i. e. Cause not or give not therefore occasion to him to do,
or commit that, for which he may be damned and lose his soul.

A man may be damned and loose his soul, for every sin, as for rash judging or
condemning his brother: For judge not that ye be not judged, says our Savior,
Mat. 7.1. And for eating that which he does but doubt whether he might lawfully
eat or no; for he that doubts is damned if he eats, says the Apostle, ver.
23. etc,

With thy meat] i. e. With the use of thy liberty, which thou have in eating
what meats thou will: or with the abuse thereof, rather.

For whom Christ died] This is emphatically and feelingly spoken. And this does
aggravate the sin of him which eats, with the scandal and offense of his
brother; when as his brother is considered, as such an one, as for whom Christ
died.

Ver. 16. Let not then your good be evil spoken of] That is, Do not ye then so
use your Christian liberty (which is a great good, which you have received by
Christ, and an ease from a hard yoke) as that your weak brethren, should so
much as defame it, and speak evil of it, through you.

The Apostle speaks here to the faithful Jews, which believed in Christ, and
the stronger sort of them, and by their good, he means their Christian
liberty, which they had by Christ (who by his death abrogated the Law of Moses)
in eating any kind of meats without difference: Which liberty he calls their
good, because by that they were delivered from a great evil (I speak not evil
of sin) That is, from a great yoke, or burden of the ceremonial Law.

This good is evil spoken of, when it is called by weak brethren, who are not
persuaded of the abrogation of Moses Law, Sin, Abomination, Uncleanness, the
Licentiousness of the flesh, the indulgency and cockering of the Gorge, the
Patent or Privilege of gluttony, and the like, which terms the weak brethren
would be ready to give it, if they should see the faithful, and stronger Jews
using this liberty freely before their eyes. Yea, it would be called the murder
of souls, if it should be so, that they should cause their weak brethren to
sin, by their abuse of it: And, this last the Apostle seems here to mean,
having said just before: Destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ died.

Ver. 17. For the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink] The Apostle prevents
another objection here; for the strong in faith might say: yea, but I may
justly fear that God will be angry with me, and good men would blame me, if I
should not make use of that liberty, which Christ has purchased for me; and I
may fear that I should not advance the Kingdom of God, as I ought to do, if I
should neglect to exercise, so great a grace of Christianity, as this our
liberty is. This objection, I say, the Apostle prevents here saying; For the
Kingdom of God, etc. q. d. And, you need not fear that God will be angry with
you, and that good men will blame you, if you should not make use of that
liberty, which Christ has purchased for you, and that you should not advance
the Kingdom of God, as you ought to do, if you should neglect to exercise so
great a grace of Christianity, as this liberty is, especially in this case. For
the advancement of the Kingdom of God consists not in the eating of meats or
drinking drinks indifferently, but in righteousness, and peace, and joy,
through the Holy Ghost: And he that in these things serves Christ, is
acceptable to God, and approved of men.

For the Kingdom of God] i. e. For the advancement of the Kingdom of God,
Metonymia.

The Kingdom of God is to be taken here, first, for the Church of God, the
Church militant here on earth, which is also called the Kingdom of Grace; and
this Church is called the Kingdom of God, because God reigns in the hearts of
the Saints and the faithful, which are the members thereof, by his holy
Spirit; and he gives to all the members thereof his Laws, and protects them,
and does all the offices of a King to them, and moreover rules them visibly by
his Ministers and vicegerents.

Then Secondly, The Kingdom of God is to be taken here by a Metonymy, for the
advancement of this Kingdom.

It is the duty of every Christian to advance this Kingdom of God, which we do,
when we edify one another, as the Apostle speaks, ver. 19.

Is not meat and drink] i. e. Consists not in the free use of that liberty,
which Christians have in eating and drinking all things, without difference or
distinction.

Meat and drink, are taken here by a Metonymy, for the free use of meat and
drink, without difference or distinction.

Note, that there was no such distinction of drinks under the Law, as there
were of meats. For there was no restraint of drinks, but to the Nazaren. Numb.
6.3. And to the Priest, when he was to go about his ministry, Levit. 10.19.
Therefore he seems not to speak of drinks, as they are in themselves, but as
joined with meats in meals, and are, as it were, one with them.

Note here, that it is no where commanded to eat and drink all things
indifferently, it is only free for us to eat and drink, what we will, so it be
done without offense: But as for the other things here mentioned, as
Righteousness, and Peace, they are commanded and those things we must do though
a weak brother; be offended thereat.

But Righteousness] Righteousness is taken here for the working of
Righteousness that is, for an holy and righteous conversation.

And peace] Peace is taken here for the following and ensuing of peace with our
Neighbor and brother, and using the means conducing thereunto.

Note, that whatsoever other Christian virtue, there is, besides Righteousness
and Peace, it is to be understood here by a Syllepsis.

And joy] The joy here spoken of is the joy, which we take in working the works
of Righteousness, and in pursuing and following and maintaining peace with our
Neighbors. (...), as says, Aristot. Ethic. ad Nichomach. lib. 1. cap. 8. That
is, He is not a good man, which rejoices not in virtuous actions; nor can any
one say, that he is just or righteous, who rejoices not to do justly or
righteously, etc.

In the holy Ghost] i. e. Through the holy Ghost; That is, which joy is stirred
up in us by the holy Ghost, who does not only make us to do these things, but
to do them joyfully.

The Apostle adds this, to distinguish this Righteousness and Peace, from that
which is Civil: And this joy, from that which is carnal.

Note, that the preposition In, is taken here by an Hebraism for By, or Through.

Ver. 18. For he that in these things serves Christ] i. e. He that in these
things, to wit, Righteousness, and Peace pursued with joy, Serves Christ in
the advancement of his Kingdom.

Is acceptable to God] i. e. He is accepted of God, and pleases him well; (For
that he does by these things, promote and advance his Kingdom) though he do not
eat of those things, which he may lawfully eat of.

And approved of men] i. e. And is approved of good men, as a good man, who
praise him for following after Righteousness and Peace, and rejoicing therein.

Ver. 19. Let us therefore follow the things, which make for peace and things
wherewith one may edify another] This Inference, or Corollary is drawn from
that, that the kingdom of God is said to consist, not in meat and drink, but in
Righteousness and Peace, ver. 17.

Let us therefore follow after the things which make for peace] q. d. Being
then, that the kingdom of God consists as in Righteousness, so in Peace, let
us follow after those things which make for peace. That is, let us follow after
those things which beget, and preserve Peace and Concord one with another.

The Apostle obliquely taxes here, the free eating of all things, before the
weak brethren: which did not only discover a diversity of judgments between
the strong and the weak, but did also produce alienation of affections: He
taxes also their disputes and contentions, which they had about the Lawfulness
of eating things forbidden by Moses Law (of which ver. 1.) which ended in pure
discord.

And things wherewith one may edify another] q d. And being that the Kingdom
of heaven consists as in Peace so in Righteousness, let us follow after
Righteousness, and work the works thereof, that by our example we may edify
others also.

To edify or build up is in the Apostles language sometimes to bring to
Christ, sometimes to better one another which is in Christ already, in the way
of Christianity. And the word used in this sense is Metaphorically used; And
the Metaphor is taken from houses or Material buildings, in allusion to which
the faithful are also called the Temple of God, in which God dwells by his
Spirit: And in allusion to which the Church of God (which is the company of the
faithful) is sometimes also called by the name of a City as the new Jerusalem,
which is built and compacted out of the Saints, and faithful of God; as a
material City, is out of stones, etc.

The Apostle obliquely taxes here again the free eating of all things before
the weak brethren, whereby they were offended and occasioned to sin, yea, and
whereby some also were so offended as that they turned from Christianity to
Judaism again.

Ver. 20. For meat, destroy not the work of God] These words are like to those,
ver. 15. Destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ died. And are a kind of
repetition thereof, which the Apostle repeats to make the strong Jews, the
deeper to apprehend it, q. d. For meat, I say, destroy not, etc.

For meat] i. e. For that that, thou will use ^hy liberty in eating all meats
without differ^nce.

D^^troy not] See ver. 15.

^^e work of God] i. e. Thy weak brothe^

A weak brother, yea, every Christian is called ^he work of God, not so much
for that, that God mad^ him and fashioned him when he was in his mothers womb;
as for that, that God formed in him the Image of Christ, Gal. 4.19. For we are
Gods workmanship, created in Christ Jesus to good works, Ephesians. 2.10.

All things indeed are pure] The Apostle prevents an objection here: For the
strong Christian may say, are not all meats clean and pure, why then may I not
eat them? This objection the Apostle prevents, saying; All things indeed are
pure, but yet it is evil: For that man who eats with offense.

All things indeed are pure] i. e. That is, all meats indeed are pure in
themselves, so that they cannot in themselves defile a man.

All things] That is, all meats, as verse 2. Synechdoche Generis.

But it is evil for that man who eats with offence] i. e. But yet it is evil
for that man who eats any meat with the offense and destruction of his weak
brother; for he sins by that, against the law of charity.

That which is pure and clean in it self, may be ill and sinful by accident, to
him that uses it.

Ver. 21. It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, etc.] It is good
to abstain, not only from meats and drinks, which are forbidden by the Law; but
also from all other meats and drinks, yea, and from all things else of this
nature, whereby a weak brother stumbleth, or is offended, or made weak.

It is good, etc] It is good to abstain, as is aforesaid: because he that
should not abstain, in this case, would sin, and so incur the guilt of
punishment, due to him, for making his weak brother to offend; as also because
if he does abstain, he shall not lose his reward with God, for having this
tender respect to his weak brother.

Nor any thing] Nor to do any thing. The speech is Elliptical.

Whereby thy brother stumbleth or is offended] i. e. Whereby thy brother is
made to sin.

These phrases are Metaphorical, see of the Metaphor, ver. 13.

Or is made weak] The Apostle speaks here of a weak brother: And then is a weak
brother said to be made weak, when that infirmity or weakness of his, is made
by any means to show it self, or is by any means increased.

A Brothers weakness may show it self, and be increased, not only to sin, but
to revolt from Christianity if it be not regarded and born with, Or, (...) may
be taken in the same sense here as I said (...) was taken verse 15. and upon
the same, or like reason, for a man may so stumble and fall as that he may
(...) there is to be weak in soul through some hurt there received by sin.

Ver. 22. Have thou faith? have it to thy self before God] The Apostle prevents
another objection here: For a strong brother may say, I believe and am
thoroughly persuaded that I may lawfully eat all meats; shall I then have this
Christian faith or persuasion, and yet never be suffered to make use of it?
This objection the Apostle prevents, or answers, saying, Have thou faith? that
is, do thou believe and art thou persuaded that thou may lawfully eat all
meats: Have thou this thy faith and persuasion, and make use of them privately
before God only, where God only and not man sees, that thou may not offend
any one in the use thereof.

Have thou faith?] Faith is taken here, for a persuasion, by which a man is
persuaded or believes, that that is lawful which he does; And in particular
that it is lawful for him to eat all manner of meats, yea, those which were
forbidden by Moses Law, See more ver 23.

Have it to thy self before God] Make use of it by thy self in private, before
God, only (who sees in private) and not before men, who may be offended at it.

The word Only is to be understood here, as it is often else where to be
understood.

God sees in private, and takes notice of what is done in private to reward
it, Matthew. 6.4.

Happy is he that condemns not himself, in that thing which he alloweth] i.
e. Happy is he, that in the use of that thing, which he approves, and is
persuaded is lawful, does not that, for which he may be condemned.

He does that for which he may be condemned even by God, who in the use of
that, which he is persuaded may be lawfully used, offends his weak brother,
and causes him to sin.

That condemns not himself] i. e. Which does not that, for which he may be
condemned.

Which he alloweth] i. e. Which he approves, and finds (upon trial, as it
were) to be lawful, and is thereupon persuaded of the lawfulness thereof.

Allowing here is opposed to doubting, verse. 23. And he which allows of what
he does, to him which doubts of what he does.

Ver. 23. And he that doubts is damned if he eat] q. d. And he also which
doubts whether it be lawful to eat, what he is about to eat, or no, is damned
(without repentance) if he eat, during this doub^ing.

The Apostle may use an Apostrophe here to the weak Christian, and tell him in
what he also might be damned, as well as the strong, in what he, that he might
avoid it: Or else he may continue his speech unto the strong, and show, how he
may condemn himself in that thing which he allows: he may condemn himself, in
making his weak brother, by his example to eat of that which he indeed
allows, but his weak brother doubts of, and so in bringing his weak brother
into damnation: For he that doubts is damned if he eat, because he eats not
of faith, etc.

Because he eats not of faith] i. e. Because he is not persuaded, that he may
Lawfully eat, that which he eats.

Faith is not taken here for that faith whereby we believe in Christ, and which
denominates them faithful which have it, and Infidels which have it not; but it
is taken for the belief or persuasion of the Lawfulness of that which we do, so
that he which does any thing with a doubting conscience, does it not of faith.

Whatsoever is not of faith is sin] i. e. Whatsoever is not done out of a
belief or persuasion that it may be lawfully done, is sin.

Been praecipiunt, qui vetant quicquam agere, quod dubites aequum sit, an
iniquum; aequitas enim lucet ipsa per se: Dubitatio autem cogitationem
significat injuriae, says, Tully Offic. Lib 1.

That which the Apostle says here, viz. Whatsoever is not of faith is sin, is
a general saying, which concerns all, both Jews and Gentiles.

CHAP. XV.
1. WE then that are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not
to please our selves.

1. Whereas therefore it is not good to do any thing, whereby our weak brother
may stumble, or be offended, or be made weak, we, whosoever we are, whether
Jews or Gentiles, that are strong in the faith, ought to bear the infirmities
of the weak, and not so to please our selves (in doing that which we know we
may lawfully do) as to make the weak to do that, which they think they may not
do lawfully.

2. Let every one of us please his neighbor, for his good to edification.

2 Let every one of us please his neighbor as well as himself, yea, let him
please his neighbor though he displease himself, and humor him, for his good,
that he may grow up more and more in Christianity.

3. For even Christ pleased not himself, but as it is written, The reproaches
of them that reproached thee, fell on me.

3. For even Christ (whose example we ought to follow) though he were Lord of
all, and above all principalities and powers, yet he pleased not himself; but
did that which was grievous to his humane nature, that he might do good to
others; for, that he might do good to others, and please them; he took upon
himself the punishments due to them for the reproaches wherewith they
reproached the living God; according to that which he says ( Psalm 69.9.) The
reproaches of them (O God) which reproached thee, fell on me.

4. For whatsoever things were written before time, were written for our
learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have
hope.

4. But thou will say: What does that appertain to thee now, which is written
in the Old Testament? But say not so. For whatsoever things were written
heretofore, in the books of the Old Testament, were written for our
instruction, to teach us (among other lessons which we may learn from thence)
patience to bear the infirmities of the weak; and comfort, which the Scriptures
minister to all those, which do bear any thing, which God would have them to
bear, with patience: That we through such patience and comfort as the
Scriptures teach, may have hope, even hope of eternal life, which God will give
to them which do such things.

5. Now the God of patience and consolation, grant you to be like-minded one
toward another, according to Christ Jesus.

5. Now, seeing that patience and comfort are such precious things, and give us
hope of eternal life, the God of patience and of comfort, give you patience,
and comfort, through the Scriptures, that ye, through patience and comfort, may
be of the like affection one toward another (and so may bear one with another)
according to the will and example of Christ Jesus.

6 That ye may with one mind and one mouth glorify God, even the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

6. That being of the like affection, when ye meet together in the holy
Congregation, ye may with one heart and one mouth glorify God, even the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ; which will be yet a greater blessing to you.

7. Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ also received us, to the glory
of God.

7. Wherefore receive and embrace ye one anothe, in a loving and respectful
manner as Christ also received and embraced us, that God may be thereby
glorified.

8. Now I say, that Jesus Christ was a minister of the circumcision for the
truth of God, to confirm the promises made unto the Fathers:

8. And that ye may so receive and embrace one another, I say to you Gentiles,
that Christ Jesus was himself in person a minister of the Jews; and that he was
so, to show the truth and veracity of God, and to confirm the promises which
God made to their forefathers, of sending the Messiah in person to them; so
that being that the Jews were so highly honored of God, and of his Christ; ye
ought also to love, honor, respect and receive them.

9. And that the Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy, as it is written,
For this cause I will confess to thee among the Gentiles, and sing unto thy
name.

9. And I say to you Jews, that the Gentiles have received such mercies by
Christ, as that they have cause to praise and glorify God for them. And that
which I say concerning the Gentiles, is no other than what was prophesied of
them of old. For ( Psalm 18.49.) David says in the person of Christ: For this
cause I will confess to thee among the Gentiles, and sing praises unto thy name.

10. And again he says, Rejoice, ye Gentiles, with his people.

10. And again, Moses by a prophetic Spirit says, Rejoice ye Gentiles with
his people, Deuteronomy. 32.43.

11. And again, Praise the Lord all ye Gentiles, and laud him all ye people.

11. And again, David says, Psalm 117.1. Praise the Lord all ye Gentiles, and
laud him all ye people.

12. And again Esaias says, There shall be a root of Jesse, and he that shall
rise to reign over the Gentiles, in him shall the Gentiles trust.

12. And again Isaiah says, Isa. 11.10. There shall be a a root of Jesse, and
he that shall rise to reign over the Gentiles, in him shall the Gentiles trust.

Being therefore that the Gentiles have received such mercies of God, as that
they may justly praise and glorify God for them, according to the prophesies
which went of them of old, ye Jews ought also to love, honor, respect and
receive them.

13. Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that ye
may abound in hope, through the power of the holy Ghost.

13. Now that I have told you Gentiles these things concerning the Jews, and
you Jews these things concerning the gentiles, the God of hope grant that ye
may believe them, that he may fill you with all joy and peace by believing, and
that ye may have thereby abundant hope of eternal life, through the powerful
operation of the holy Ghost.

14. And I my self also am persuaded of you, my brethren, that ye also are full
of goodness, filled with all knowledge, able also, to admonish one another.

14. But perhaps some of you will say unto me: Paul by this your writing to us,
you think that there is little goodness in us, and that we are such babes or
fools, as that we know not what is amiss, and are not able to admonish one
another, in a brotherly way when any of us erreth: But whatsoever you think,
yet others think that we are full of goodness and knowledge, and that we are
able to admonish one another. But in answer to this, I say, I Paul also, even I
my self, am persuaded as much of you, brethren, that ye also (as well as other
Christians) are full of goodness, filled with knowledge, able also to admonish
one another.

15. Nevertheless, brethren, I have written the more boldly unto you, in some
sort, as putting you in mind, because of the grace that is given to me of God,

15. But yet notwithstanding, my brethren, I have written somewhat boldly unto
you in some sort, not that I might teach you what ye know not, but that I might
put you in mind of, and call to your remembrance what ye know. And this I do,
because the grace or office which is given to me of God, requires this of me.

16. That I should be the minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, ministering
the gospel of God, that the offering up of the Gentiles might be acceptable,
being sanctified by the holy Ghost.

16. For I have this grace or office of God, that I should be the Minister or
Servant of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, performing the holy function of a
Priest in the Ministry of the gospel of God, that the Gentiles being made as a
sacrifice or oblation, might become such a sacrifice or oblation, as is
acceptable unto God, being sprinkled and sanctified by the gifts of the holy
Ghost, through my ministry.

17. I have therefore whereof I may glory through Jesus Christ, in those things
which pertain to God.

17. But perhaps some of you Romans will say, But Paul if thou have this grace
given thee of God, that thou should be the Minister of Jesus Christ to the
Gentiles, why do thou not make use of this Ministry? why have thou not come
to Minister the gospel of Christ to us Gentiles which live at Rome? Thou lets
this thy gift, to lie Idle. Know ye therefore that this grace or office which I
received of God, was not bestowed upon me in vain, for by the exercise of that
office, and stirring up of that grace in me, I have done that in those holy
things which appertain to God, whereof I may glory through Jesus Christ.

18. For I will not dare to speak of any of those things, which Christ has not
wrought by me, to make the Gentiles obedient by word and deed,

18. For, (for I will not dare to speak of any of those things which Christ
has not wrought by me) Christ has wrought effectually by me, by word and deed.

19. Through mighty signs and wonders, by the power of the Spirit of God, so
that from Jerusalem, and round about unto Illyricum, I have fully preached the
Gospel of Christ.

19. By mighty signs and wonders, by the power of the holy Ghost, to make the
Gentiles obedient to the Gospel: So that from Jerusalem, and round about
Illyricum, I have fully preached the Gospel of Christ with happy success.

20. Yea, so have I strived to preach the gospel, not where Christ was named,
lest I should build upon another man's foundation:

20. And I have, with a kind of Ambition, endeavored thus to preach the
Gospel; Not where Christ had been named before, (lest I should build, as it
were, upon the foundation, which another man had laid; and enter upon his
labors.)

21. But as it is written, To whom he was not spoken of, they shall see: and
they that have not heard, shall understand.

21. But where Christ had been never before preached or heard of, there have I
preached; So that, that is in part fulfilled, by me, which was written, Isa.
52.15. To whom Christ was not spoken of, they shall see, and they that have not
heard of him shall understand him.

22. For which cause also I have been much hindered from coming to you.

22. For which cause also (among others) I have been much hindered from coming
to you, whom I have desired of a long time to see.

23. But now having no more place in these parts, and having a great desire
these many years to come unto you.

23. But now finding no place in these parts, in which I have not preached the
Gospel already, so that there is no necessity now of my continuing here any
longer, and having a great desire these many years to come unto you.

24. Whenever I take my journey into Spain, I will come to you: For I trust
to see you in my journey, and to be brought on my way thitherward by you, if
first I be somewhat filled with your company.

24. Whenever I take my journey into Spain, I will come to you. For I trust
to see you in my journey, and to be brought on my way thitherward by you, when
first I have been somewhat filled with your company, and have enjoyed that and
a while.

25. But now I go unto Jerusalem, to minister unto the saints.

25. But for the present, though I much desire it, I cannot come to you, for I
am going to Hierusulem, to carry to the poor Saints there, those alms, which I
have received of the Churches of Macedonia and Achaia for them.

26. For it has pleased them of Macedonia and Achaia, to make a certain
contribution for the poor saints, which are at Jerusalem.

26. For it has pleased them of Macedonia and Achaia to make a certain
contribution, for the poor Saints, which are at Jerusalem, who are in much
want, at this time.

27. It has pleased them verily and their debtors they are. For if the
Gentiles, have been made partkers of their spiritual things, their duty is also
to minister unto them in carnal things.

27. It has pleased them I say, and indeed they could not well do any less:
for their debtors, they are so to do in a certain manner; for if the Gentiles
have been made partakers of their spiritual things; their duty is truly to
answer this, and to minister to them in carnal things.

28. When therefore I have performed this, and have sealed to them this fruit,
I will come by you into Spain.

28. When therefore I have performed this journey to Jerusalem, and this
service, which I spoke of, and have delivered to them, that money which the
Churches of Macedonia and Achaia have contributed to them (which by Gods grace
I will do without any diminution of it, at all) which is the fruit of their
faith, I will come by you, when I go to Spain.

29. And I am sure that when I come unto you, I shall come in the fullness of
the blessing of the Gospel of Christ.

29. And when I come unto you, I am sure I shall so come, as that you shall
receive abundance of blessing by the Gospel of Christ, which I shall preach
unto you, at my coming.

30. Now I beseech you brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ sake, and for the
love of the Spirit, that ye strive together with me in your prayers to God for
me.

30. Now because I am employed in this business to Jerusalem of carrying alms
thither, I beseech you Brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ his sake, and for
the loves sake, which the holy Ghost works in us Christians, one toward
another; that ye strive together with me in your prayers to God for me.

31. That I may be delivered from them, that do not believe in Judea, and that
my service which I have for Jerusalem, may be accepted of the saints:

31. That I may be delivered, and kept safe from them, that believe not in
Judea, which bear a cruel hate against me; And, that my Service, which I have
for the Saints at Jerusalem, may be accepted of them.

32. That I may come unto you with joy by the will of God, and may with you be
refreshed.

32. That so I may come to you with joy, if it be Gods will, and may be
refreshed with you.

33. Now the God of peace be with you all, Amen.

33. Now God, which is the Author of peace, be with you all, and grant you his
peace, Amen.

CHAP. XV.
Ver. 1. We then that are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak]
The Apostle having in the former Chapter, instructed the Christian Jew which is
strong in the faith, how he should carry himself to the Christian Jew which is
weak, turns his speech here from him to the strong Christian in general,
whether he be Jew, or whether he be Gentile, by an Apostrophe, and whereas he
spoke in the former Chapter, and treated there of such days and such meats
only, as had been differenced by the Law of Moses: Here he speaks of all
things, which are any ways differenced by the opinion of men. He speaks here I
say, in general to the strong Christian, whether he be Jew or Gentile, and
instructs the strong Jew how he should carry himself to a weak Gentile; and a
strong Gentile how he should carry himself to a weak Jew; and this he seems to
do especially, though a strong Gentile may also learn from hence, how to carry
himself to a Gentile, which is weak.

We then that are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak] This is
inferred from the last verse of the fourteenth Chapter, for it is a general
truth which he there says, viz. that he that doubts is damned if he eat,
because he eats not of faith: for whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Or
rather it is inferred from those words of the 21 verse. It is good neither to
eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor any thing whereby thy brother stumbleth, or
is offended, or is weak.

We that are strong] Those he calls strong here, which are strong in faith,
that is, which are so well skilled and so well persuaded, of the lawful use of
things which are indifferent in their own nature, as that they can use them
without scruple or doubt of conscience.

Ought to bear the infirmities of the weak] Those he calls weak here, which are
weak in faith, as he said Chap. 14.1. that is, such as have not attained to so
much knowledge, as to know what they may lawfully do, or what they may lawfully
leave undone, in such things as are in their own nature indifferent, and are
soon offended at other men's doings in such matters. And this their ignorance
and aptness to be offended, he also calls their infirmity or weakness.

Then do the strong bear the infirmity of the weak, when they patiently suffer
them in things indifferent, and do not rashly, or unadvisedly contradict them;
when they avoid all means and occasions of offending them: And when, as they
have opportunity, they do meekly instruct them, and wisely inform them
concerning things indifferent, that they may come to the right knowledge
thereof, and may be confirmed in the faith.

In these words To bear the infirmity of the weak, the Apostle uses a Metaphor
taken from fellow travelers, where the stronger and best able to travel, will
help the weakest and less able, to carry part of his burden or pack.

And not to please our selves] i. e. And not for our own humor or pleasure
sake (because we will show what we may do in things indifferent) offend others
by doing such things.

To please our selves therefore signifies here by a Syllepsis or a Metalepsis,
so to please our selves in our doings (which we may as well not do) as to
offend another, and be an occasion to him of sinning.

Ver. 2. Let every one of us please his neighbor, for his good to edification]
i. e. Let every one of us, whether Jew or Gentile, do that which is pleasing to
our neighbor, whether he be Jew or Gentile, and comply with him for his good
to edification, though by so doing, we do contrary to our own humor or fancy.

The Apostle would have us to please our neighbor as well as our selves, that
is, not to offend him, but to comply with him; but yet he would not have us to
please him, and comply with him in any carnal and unseemly matter. And
therefore he adds here, to his good to edification The chief things which he
would have us here to please him in, are things indifferent in their own
nature, in the use of which he would not have us to cross him, so as to offend
him, or to make him sin.

To his good] By his good he means his spiritual good.

To edification] i. e. That he may be thereby edified.

Concerning the meaning of the word Edification, See Chap. 14. ver. 9.

Ver. 3. For even Christ pleased not himself] i. e. For even Christ (who ought
to be our pattern, and whom we ought to imitate) though he were Lord of all,
yet did he do that which was grievous to his humane nature, and displeasing to
that, that he might save others, and so do that which was wel-pleasing to them.

But as it is written] Viz. Psalm 69. verse 9.

The reproaches of them which reproached thee, fell on me] i. e. The punishment
due to them which reproached thee, for those their reproaches, fell on me,
Supple, and they fell on me, not against my will, but with my will, yea, I
willingly took them upon my self, that I might satisfy thee, for those their
sins.

This is the meaning of these words, as the Apostle here uses them, and it is
the end (which is here left to be understood) and the manner of Christ's taking
upon him the punishment due to the reproaches, of those sinners that reproached
God, which brings this authority up to his purpose.

The reproaches] i. e. The punishments due to the Reproachers. Metonymie.

Of them which reproached thee] i. e. Of those sinners which reproached thee, O
God, by their words and by their actions: For every sin, whether it be in word,
or in deed, is a reproach to God, against whose Law they sin.

Fell on me] i. e. Fell on me, who yet was willing to bear them, yea, who did
willingly take them upon me, and undergo them, that I might satisfy thy
Justice for them, and so set them free.

Who sees not here, that Christ did that which was not pleasing to his humane
nature in it self, but that which was pleasing to others: For to whom is it not
pleasing, that Christ should satisfy for his sins, that he might escape the
punishment due to them, and so be saved? And how would it be otherwise than
grievous to the humane nature of Christ, in which he suffered, to suffer such
pains as he suffered, and so be displeasing to that.

But note here, that these words as they lie in Psalm 69.9. are in the first
sense spoken of David, who complains there to God of his afflictions, and how
he was grieved to see and hear his enemies, so to reproach him the living God,
as they did: And the sense of these words as they are thus spoken by David, is
this; And the reproaches of them which reproached thee, fell on me, to the
wounding of my Soul, to think that thou should be so reproached. That is:
And I was grieved at the heart to hear men reproach thee, as they did, and took
it as grievously as if they had reproached me my self. But in the second and
sublime sense, they are to be understood as the words of Christ, and bear the
same sense, as we at the first gave of them. For note, that David was a type of
Christ, and his sufferings of Christ's sufferings, wherefore many things which
are spoken of David, in the First, and Historical sense; are to be understoood
of Christ in the Second and Sublime sense, and many words which are spoken by
David, are to be understood as spoken by Christ also, but yet not always in one
and the same sense, the Holy Ghost so fitting the words, as that they may be
spoken as well by the one as the other, in their several senses: But of this
see what I said in my Preface to my Exposition on the Prophet Isaiah.

The reproaches of them which reproached thee, fell on me] It had been more
congruous to the context here, for the Apostle to have said, The reproaches of
them that reproached God, fell on him: But, as I have observed before, the
Apostle when he quotes any authority out of the Psalms or the Prophets, or any
other part of the Old Testament, he quotes it (for the most part) as it lies
there, and leaves his Reader to apply it here.

Some ask the Question here, why the Apostle brings this testimony here, when
he had more plain testimonies for his purpose, as that of Isaiah Isa. 53.4. He
that has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows, etc.

For answer to this: I conceive that the Apostle made choice of this testimony
here, because it mentions reproaches expressly, and reproaches were the
chiefest fault, which he had to complain of in the Romans, which if they had
patiently born at the hands of one another, there had not been those
contentions and discords among them, as were: For the weak judged the strong as
a sinner in what he did, and the str^ng could not bear his censure: the strong
despised the weak and vilified his weakness, and the weak could not bear this,
and from hence and the like, arose reproachful words, and from thence discords
and contentions among them.

Ver. 4 For whatsoever things were written, etc.] Between this and the former
verse, understand these or the l^ke words: Neither think, that what I cite out
of the Psalms is frivolous, as though that which was written in the Old
Testament concerned us not q. d. Neither think, that what I cite here out of
the Psalms is frivolous, as though that which were written in the Old Testament
concerns us not, for whatsoever things were written before time, were written
for our learning, etc.

The Apostle did more than hint in that discourse which he had in the former
Chapter, that the Law of Moses was abrogated; now lest any should think from
thence, that the writings of the Old Testament concerned not any Christians,
and they should object so much to him; he prevents this Objection saying: For
whatsoever things were written before time, were written for our learning, etc.

Whatsoever things were written before time] i. e. Whatsoever things were
written, to wit, in the books of the Old Testament, which books were written in
former times, by the instruction of the Holy Ghost.

The Apostle speaks here, of those things which were written in former times,
by men inspired by the Holy Ghost (which writings are contained in the books of
the Old Testament) not of any other writings.

Were written for our learning, etc.] i. e. Were written for us, to teach us
(among many other things) patience to bear the infirmities of the weak, and
comfort, which the Scriptures minister to all those, which do bear any thing,
which God would have them to bear, with patience.

That we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope] i. e.
That we through the patience, which the Scriptures teach, and the comfort which
the Scrip^^res minister to all those which do bear any thing, which God would
have them to bear, with patience, might have hope, even hope of eternal life;
which God promises them, who with patience and cheerfulness, bear those
burdens which he would have them bear.

The patience which the Apostle here speaks of, is the patience, which is seen
in the bearing of the infirmities of the weak; with which he mentions or
joyneth comfort, which the Scriptures minister to them, that bear the
infirmities of the weak willingly; to encourage those to whom he writes, to
the patience which he speaks of; which encouragement is yet augmented by that,
that he says, that this patience and comfort beget an hope in us of eternal
life.

Of the Scriptures] i. e. Which the Scriptures teach and minister.

This Genitive is Genitivus efficientis.

Might have hope] To wit, of life or glory everlasting.

They that bear that which God would have them to bear patiently, and find
comfort in their patient bearing, have hope of life everlasting, both because
God has promised everlasting life to them that bear such things with patience,
and also because this their patience, and the comfort which he ministers to
them in their bearing, being gifts of the Holy Ghost, are as earnests and
pledges of life everlasting, See what we said Chap. 5. ver. 4.5.

Note, that though the Apostle mentions here only patience and comfort, as
lessons which the Scriptures teach; yet these are not all the lessons which the
Scriptures teach, and which we learn from them. For the Scriptures are able to
make a man perfect, thoroughly furnished to every good work, 2 Timothy 3 17. But
the Apostle mentions only these, because these are enough for his present
purpose: For his present purpose here, is only to persuade the strong
Christians to bear the infirmity of the weak ver. 1. And to please every man
his neighbor (though it be against the grain of his own humor, and so
burdensome to him) for his good to edification, ver. 2. To which he had need of
patience to do these things, and comfort to hearten and encourage this his
patience, that he might hold out; but if he had patience and comfort, he had
enough.

Ver. 5. Now the God of patience and consolation, grant you to be like minded
one toward another] q. d. Now, being that patience and comfort are such
precious thin^, and give us hope of everlasting life; the God of patience and
comfort give you patience and comfort, that ye may by them be like minded one
toward another, and have your hope of everlasting life confirmed in you.

Patience and Comfort were attributed in the foregoing verse, to the
Scriptures, as to their cause, here they a^e attributed to God: But in this
there is no repugnancy; for they are attributed here to God, as their
principal, their to the Scriptures, as their instrumental cause, of which God
is the Author.

Whereas the Apostle speaks in the foregoing verse of these three, Viz.
Patience, Comfort, and Hope: He magnifies the two former, to wit, Patience, and
Comfort. And adornes them here in this verse, by making God the Author of them;
and the like he does of Hope, ver. 13.

Grant you to be like minded one toward another] i. e. Grant you, whether Jews
or Gentiles, to be like minded one toward another, Jews to the Gentiles and
Gentiles to the Jews again, to wit, through Patience and Comfort.

To be like minded one toward another, signifies, to be of the same affection
one toward another, that is, to be at concord and unity among your selves. For
the Greek is (...) where (...), is to be referred (according to Saint Paul's
usage of the word) not to the understanding, but to the affection. And (...)
signifies, among your selves. See the like Chap. 12.16. 2 Cor. 3.11. etc.

If men were of the same affection one toward another, they would have the
same affections to others as they have to themselves, and would do no otherwise
to others, than they would to themselves, which would make all well among them.

Patience, and Comfort which strengthens and encourages Patience, were good
means to make the Romans to be of the same affection, or to be at concord or
unity among themselves: For that which hindered the joining of their affections,
and unity and concord among themselves, was, that they could not bear one
another burdens, nor could they please every one his neighbor; this was too
troublesome and burdensome to them; but if they had but patience, and comfort
joined with their patience, then might they easily bear one another burdens,
and every one please his neighbor for his good to edification, upon which an
unity and concord of affections would follow.

In praying that they may be like minded one toward another, he prays that the
strong might bear the infirmities of the weak, yea, that every one might please
his neighbor for his good to edification (which was that which he exhorted to
ver. 1.2.) and somewhat more.

According to Christ Jesus] i. e. According to the will and Gospel of Christ
Jesus, who requires this at your hands.

Or (because he proposed the example of Christ ver. 3.) after the example of
Christ Jesus, who showed his kind affection toward us.

Christ Jesus is put here either for the Will or Gospel; or else for the
example of Christ Jesus, by a Metonymie.

Ver. 6. That ye may with one mind and one mouth glorify God] i. e. That ye
may meet together in one Congregation, and there with one heart, and one voice
glorify God in prayers, and praises jointly, which ye cannot do so long as
these divisions, and causes of these divisions are among you; and so long as
the strong will not bear the infirmities of the weak; and so long as every one
endeavors to please not his neighbor, for his good to edification (but
himself only to satisfy his own humor) And this also will beget and nourish
in you hope of everlasting life.

We glorify God when we praise him, and we glorify God when we pray to him,
for by both these we acknowledge him to be the giver of all good things.

The Apostle intimates here, that their prayers and their praises would be more
acceptable to God, if they themselves were united in their affections, and were
of one heart and one mouth. And this is another argument to persuade them to
patience, and to bear one another, and to be like minded one to another.

Even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ] This is God, even the true and
essential God described in the New Testament; and by this is he distinguished
from the false gods, which the Gentile Romans worshipped in their Gentilism

But not only for this reason may the Apostle add this Epethite here, but for
this also, Viz. that this might be the more persuasive to persuade the Romans
to glorify God after this manner, when God is set out to them as the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, whose Disciples they professed themselves to be, and
whom they professed to love.

Ver. 7. Wherefore receive you one another as Christ also received us] i. e.
Wherefore being that Christ Jesus has received us, not pleasing himself, but
pleasing us by bearing the punishment of our reproaches, receive ye one
another, as Christ also received us.

Receive ye one another] i. e. Make much one of another, and respect and love
one another.

The words in the Greek are (...). i. e. Take to you one another.

(...) is opposed to (...) to shove or put away from us. By the word (...)
therefore, we come the better to know the meaning of the word, (...).

Now we sh^ve, or put, or thrust away from us only such as we scorn or hate,
caring not for their company. Now, if these are they, which we put, or shove,
or thrust away from us, we are contrarily affected to those, whom we take to
our selves; so that we highly esteem of them, we love them, we regard and
delight in their company. So that now by a Metonymie or Metalepsis (...). i. e.
Receive ye one another, may signify, highly esteem ye one of another, love ye
one another, and delight ye in the company and communion one of another.

In this word the Apostle includes the bearing of the infirmities one of
another, and not pleasing our selves, but pleasing others for their good to
edification, of which he speaks, ver. 1, 2 Or,

These words, or this verse depends upon ver. 3. and is drawn or inferred from
thence q. d. Being therefore that Christ pleased not himself, but pleased
others, as it is written, the reproaches of them that reproached thee (O God)
fell on me, receive ye one another as Christ also received us to the Glory of
God, the fourth, fifth, and sixth verses therefore are to be read, as with a
Parenthesis.

As Christ also received us] i. e. As Christ also received us, whether we are
Jews, or whether we are Gentiles, and pleased not himself, but as it is
written, Psalm. 69.9. The reproaches of them (whether Jews or Gentiles, which
reproached God) fell on him, ver. 3.

To the Glory of God] i. e. So as God may be glorified by it, as our Apostle
speaks v^r. 6.

These words, To the glory of God, are to be referred to those, R^ceive ye one
another.

Ver. 8. Now I say that Jesus Christ was minister of the circumcision] i. e.
Now that ye both Jews and Gentiles may be the bettter induced to receive one
another, as Christ has received us: I say to you (O ye Gentiles) that Christ
was a minister of the circumcision, etc.

The Apostle makes here an Apostrophe, first to the Gentile in this verse, then
to the Jew in the next verse following, that by these means he may the better
and more easily induce them, to receive one another. The Gentile the Jew, and
the Jew the Gentile, for he seems in this Chapter to endeavor especially to
make up those breaches or divisions, which were between the Jew and the
Gentile, by reason of the use of things indifferent, as I said before. Though
they of the same stock also may learn from hence, how to carry themselves one
toward another in these matters.

Jesus Christ was a Minister of the Circumcision] By the Circumcision is here
meant the Jews, which were circumcised by a Metonymy.

Christ is said here to be the Minister of the Circumcision, because he was
sent of God in person, to the Jews, to preach to them, and minister to them the
means of salvation, which he was not to the Gentiles: for I am not sent (says
our Savior himself) but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, Matthew. 15.24.

For the truth of God] i. e. To show or make good the veracity of God; and to
demonstrate how true and faithful, he was in his word and promise.

God promised to send the Messiah in person to his people the Jews: For I will
raise them up a prophet from among their brethren like unto thee, and I will
put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I shall
command him, says the Lord to Moses, Deuteronomy. 18.18. Yea that he would raise up a
Salvation, that is, a Savior, for his people from among them, as he spoke by
the mouth of his holy prophets, which have been since the world began, Luke
1.70. When therefore God sent Christ to be a Minister of the circumcision, that
is; of the Jews, he did it (among other ends) to show how true and faithful he
was in his word.

To confirm the promises made to the Fathers.] i. e. That he might perform what
God promised to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, etc. the Fathers of the Jews, See
Luke 1. ver 69, 70, 71, 72, 73.

Then is a promise said to be confirmed, when the thing promised is exhibited,
and performed.

By that which the Apostle says here, he shows the prerogative of the Jew:
For it was a prer^gative of the Jew above the Gentile. And a great honor to
him, that God promised to send the Messiah in person to the Jew, for his
Salvation, which he promised not to the Gentile: And that so many years, yea so
many ages before he came. And it was the prerogative of the Jew, that Christ
came in person to him, according to that promise; which he did not to the
Gentile at all.

These prerogatives does the Apostle mention here, and make known to the
Gentil^s, that the Gentiles might for these prerogatives sake, the more
willingly and more heartily receive the Jews.

Ver. 9. And that che Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy] i. e. And I
say to you (O ye Jews) that the Gentiles have received such mercies by Christ,
as that they have cause to glorify God therefore. For though Christ came not
in person to the Gentiles, yet he sent his Apostles and ministers to them, with
the fullness of the blessing of the Gospel.

By this he shows that they have received great mercies.

The Apostle makes an Apostrophe here to the Jews: Where we must repeat those
words, I say, from the former verse, and add these words, O ye Jews.

When he says The Gentiles may glorify God for his mercies he signifies by a
Metal^psis, that God had vouchsafed the Gentiles great mercies, such as
challenge great acknowledgement, and great glory to be given to God from their
hands.

The mercy which God vouchsafed the Gentiles was, that though he sent not his
Son Christ Jesus to them in person, as he did to the Jews, yet he sent his
Apostles and Ministers to them with the fullness of the blessing of the Gospel
of Christ.

These mercies vouchsafed of God by Christ to the Gentiles, does the Apostle
mention here to the Jews, that the Jews, might the more willingly and the more
heartily receive the Gentiles.

Note that what God did for the Jews, in sending Christ to them is said to be
for the truth of God, and for his promise, etc. But what he did for the
Gentil^s is said to be of mercy: yet we must not think that it was so of debt,
which God did for the Jews, as that it was not of mercy also. Indeed a promise
does produce a debt, for he which promises, is bound to perform his promise:
But yet this promise of God to the Jews did proceed from mercy, so that it was
Mercy, which God showed both the Jews and the Gentiles, but to the Jews a
mercy promis^d, to the Gentiles a mercy not promised, but only foretold by the
prophet^.

As it is written] Supple, In the Scriptures, viz, Psalm. 18.49.

The Apostle backs this which he says, with proofs out of the Scripture,
because of the backwardness of the Jews to believe this mercy showed to the
Gentiles; And so he does almost every where, where he speaks e^ther of the
calling, or of mercies showed to the Gentiles, for this reason.

For this cause I will confess to thee among the Gentiles, etc.] To confess is
to be taken here for to praise; for there is Confessio Laudis, as well as
Confessio peccatorum, etc. a confession of praise, as well as a confession of
sins. But note that Confession, as it signifies praise, is not given in
Scripture to men, but only to God: And to confess to God signifies to praise
God, because to praise God is nothing else, but to confess the goodness, and
power, and wisdom, and mercy, and other attributes of God.

The sense therefore of these words is this: For this cause I will praise thee
among the Gentiles, etc.

These words are taken out of the eighteenth Psalm and the 49 verse, as I said.
And they are spoken by David in his own person upon occasion of the
deliverances, which God wrought for David, and the victories which he gave him,
over all his enemies, which were so signal, that he says (in the words now in
hand) that he would declare the great mercies and blessing of God vouchsafed to
him, even to the Heathen that dwelt round about him.

But David was herein a type of Christ, and David's deliverances from Trouble, a
type of Christ's deliverances from death and the grave, etc And David's victories
over his enemies, a type of Christ's victories over his enemies: So that as
these words were spoken by David in the first or Historical sense, they must be
understood as spoken by Christ in the second or mystical sense, upon his
victory over Satan and sin, and the world, which reigned in the Heathen, or
over the Heathen, before that he subdued them: Yet must they not be so
understood as that Christ sung them, or uttered them in his own person, but so
as that the Heathen, which found Satan and sin and the world (which reigned
over them) subdued in them by the Spirit of Christ, did by the same Spirit sing
this song of thanksgiving, at least in the sense thereof. And what is done by
the Spirit of Christ is Interpretative done by Christ himself. O^ that the
Apostles or Ministers of Christ sung this song to the praise of God. For what
they did Christ may be in some sense said to do. When I say The Spirit of
Christ I mean that Spirit which the Apostl^ so calls: Chap. 8. ver. 9.

And sing unto thy name] i. e. And sing in the praise of thee.

The name of God is taken here for God himself by a Metonymie.

And to sing to, is taken, for to sing in the praise of, See the like Phrase,
Chap. 14.6.

Ver. 10 And again he saith] i. e. And again the Scripture says.

The Greek is only this, (...), Again, He, or it says, for not the suppositum
or nominative case to the verb, but the verb is only expressed, but the
nominative case to this verb may be dug out (as I may so say) of these words,
ver. 9. As it is written; that is, as it is written in the Scripture.

Rejoice ye Gentiles with his People] This the Scripture says, Deuteronomy. 32.43.
And it is part of that prophetical song which Moses sang before his death, in
which he shows Gods goodness to Israel in taking Israel to be his people; then
he foretells of the sins of Israel, which they would most unworthily commit
against God; then he prophesies of the punishment which God would inflict upon
them for these their sins, and that he would for them, deliver them over to the
Sword, and to Captivity; and at last that he would deliver them and destroy
their enemies, which persecuted them with the sword, and held them Captives:
Whereupon he infers this which our Apostle here quotes: Rejoice ye Gentiles
with his People, that is, Rejoice ye Gentiles with his people Israel.

Why Gods people Israel should rejoice here, it is clear, to wit, because after
the Sword and Captivity, they should be delivered from them which persecuted
them: But now why should the Gentiles rejoice with his people? I Answer:
because the Gentiles (such as Moses here speaks to, by way of prophecy) were
persecuted by the same sword, and held captive by the same men, by which the
people of Israel were persecuted and held captive, and when the people of
Israel were delivered from the Sword and Captivity, they were delivered too.

I doubt not but that Moses prophesies here chiefly of the miseries and
captivities which the people of Israel suffered under Sennacharib King of
Assyria, and under Nebuchadnezzar and the Babylonians, which were mere hunters
of men; and so oppressed not the people of Israel only, but all other people
that they could reach; When therefore the people of Israel were delivered from
the sword and captivity of the Babylonians, these Gentiles also were delivered,
and by reason of that delivery they had reason to rejoice, as well as the
people of Israel. See Isaiah 14. verse 6.7. and Isaiah 42.10, etc. to this
purpose.

But this is for the first and Historical sense. Now it is very well known that
t^mporal miseries and afflictions were types of Spiri^ual miseries and
afflictions which we suffer under the Devil, and sin, etc. and the delivery
from temporal miseries and afflictions were a type of the delivery from the
miseries which we suffer by sin and the Devil: though therefore in the first
and Historical sense of these words, Moses speaks here of the corporeal
deliverance of the people of Israel, and such Gentiles as were persecuted and
held captive by the Assyrians and Babylonians and the like; from their sword
and their captivity: Yet in the second and mystical sense; he prophesies of
the spiritual delivery of the Jews and Gentiles both (from that which they
suffered by sin and the Devil) by Christ, and for that are they exhorted to
rejoice in these words, Rejoice ye Gentiles with his people.

Ver. 11. And again] Supple, the Scripture says, Psalm. 117.1. Praise him all
ye Gentiles, and Laud him all ye people.

The Gentiles are exhorted here to praise the Lord, and that for some great
mercy showed unto them, or to be showed: this mercy was either spiritual or
corporeal: If Spiritual it is immediately for the Apostles purpose: If
Corporeal, that Corporeal was a type of this Spiritual, and so for the Apostles
purpose too, mediately at least.

Ver. 12. And again Esaias saith] i. e. And again Esaias (a penman of the
Scripture) says, Esa. 11.10.

There shall be a root of Jesse, and he shall rise to reign over the Gentiles,
in him shall the Gentiles trust] i. e. And at that time, there shall be a
branch which shall spring out of the root of Jesse, and he shall reign over the
Gentiles (after a spiritual manner.) And in him shall the Gentiles trust for
salvation.

This is taken out of the prophecy of Isaiah, Isa. 11.10, as I said; but not
verbatim, word for word, but for the sense: And in the Historical sense
Hezekiah is meant, by the Root of Jesse, whose prosperity invited many of the
Gentiles to come and live under his protection. But in this Hezekiah was a Type
of Christ, who also was a root, that is, a branch of the root of Jesse: And the
Gentiles, which lived under Hezekiahs protection, a type of the Gentiles, which
should believe in Christ and submit themselves to him, and trust and rely on
him, for forgiveness of sins and everlasting salvation: so that in the mystical
fence, this is spoken of Christ, and of the Gentiles which should believe in
him, and this is the sense which the Apostle here aims at.

There shall be a root of Jesse] Jesse was the father of David, from whom
Hezekiah descended, and of whom Christ came according to the flesh, Matthew.
Chap. 1. ver. 6, 9, 16.

Christ and Hezekiah may either of them be called the root of Jesse by a
Metonymie, because he was a branch growing out of the root of Jesse, according
to that of Isaiah, Isa. 11. ver. 1. Or, we may say that as by (...). Genus, is
understood, the head of a generation or kindred, and the generation or kindred,
or that that comes of it: So both the head of a generation or kindred, and the
generation or kindred it self, or that that comes of it, is meant by the root
in the Hebrew manner of speaking, for it signifies the head, Isa. 14.1. And it
signifies the offspring, Revel. 22. ver. 16.

By the root of Jesse Christ is here meant. Not Hezekiah, for the Apostle
alleges this testimony in the mystical sense.

And he that shall rise to reign over the Gentiles] i. e. And one that shall
rise to reign over the Gentiles.

This is the same as the root of Jesse, to wit, Christ who should be King, (not
of the Jews only) but of the Gentiles also.

They are called Gentiles, which were not of the seed of Abrham according to
the flesh.

In him shall the Gentiles trust] To wit, for Salvation.

Ver. 13. Now the God of hope, fill you with all joy, and peace in b^lieving]
Now, that I have told ye Gentiles these things, concerning the Jews, and ye
Jews these things concerning the Gentiles, the God of hope give you both to
believe these things respectively, which I have spoken to you, that so ye may
be at firm peace and unity among your selves, which may be a great joy, yea,
even fullness of joy to you, and that further ye may abound by them, throuh the
power of the Holy Ghost, in hope of Eternal life.

This Exhortatory Corollary the Prophet gathers from that which he said of
Christ's being the Minister of the Circumcision, v. 8. And from that which he
said of the mercy of God showed to the Gentiles, ver. 9.

The God of hope] i. e. God which is the Author of hope, and which works hope
in us.

Here the Apostle adorns that third thing which he spoke of ver. 4. to wit,
Hope, by declaring God to be the Author of it, as he had done the two others,
Patience, and Comfort before, ver. 5.

Fill you with all joy and peace in believing] i. e. Give you fullness of peace
among your selves, through believing, even peace in which you may take
abundance of joy and delight.

By peace, he means unity and concord of mind and heart, and he speaks it
in opposition to that variance, discord or contention which was among them.

When he says, with all joy and peace, I conceive that he uses an (...), and
that he says with all joy and peace, for, with all peace and joy, for I
conceive that this joy flows from this peace, as joy and gladness does from
every Cordial virtue, See Chap. 14. ver. 17.

All joy] All joy in the Hebrew phrase, signifies full and perfect joy, as
James 1.2. My Brethren, count it all joy when you fall into diverse temptations.

In believing] i. e. By beliving, to wit, that which I said concerning the Jews
and the Gentiles ver. 8 9. etc.

In is put here for By, or Through, after the Hebrew manner.

The Object of this believing, I conceive to be, not the Gospel in general, but
that which he said concerning the Jews and Gentiles ver. 8, 9 etc. For if the
Jews and Gentiles which were at variance and discord among themselves, as I
have said before, should but believe the truth of what the Apostle says here,
the Jews concerning the Gentiles, and the Gentiles concerning the Jews, their
variance and discord must needs end in a firm peace and concord.

That ye may abound in hope] i. e. That ye may have exceeding strong hope of
everlasting life, or everlasting glory. Through that joy and peace.

The fruits of the Spirit are love, joy, peace, etc. Galat. 5.22. and such
fruits raise an hope in us of everlasting glory to a great height, and make it
exceeding strong. See Romans 5. v. 4, 5.

Through the power of the Holy Ghost] i e. By the powerful operation of the
Holy Ghost.

Ver. 14. And I my self also am persuaded of you, Brethren, that ye are full of
goodness etc.] The Apostle prevents an Objection here. For some of the Romans
may say, Paul, By this your writings to us, you think that there is little
goodness in us, and that we are such babes or fools, as that we know not what
is amiss, and are not able to admonish one another in a brotherly way, when any
errs: but whatsoever you think, others think that we are full of goodness and
knowledge, and that we are able to admonish one another: This Objection I say,
the Apostle prevents here, saying, I think not so, but I my self also am
persuaded of you, Brethren, as well as others, that ye are full of goodness,
filled with all knowledge, and able to admonish one another.

I my self also am perswaded] Supple, as well as others.

This persuasion which the Apostle here speaks of, was grounded upon the fame
and speech of men of credit.

That ye also are full of goodness] i. e. That ye also, as well as other
brethren, are full of goodness, Supple, one toward another, etc.

By Goodness understand here the act or acting of goodness, and take Goodness
here for Loving kindness.

Filled with all knowledge] i. e. That ye are endued with very much knowledge.

He says all knowledge here, as he said all joy, v. 13.

Here is a double Auxesis in these words, Filled with all knowledge: One in the
word Filled, another in the word All.

He speaks here more especially of the knowledge which they had of Christ's
receiving both Jews and Gentiles; and of the nature of things indifferent; and
of what was a fault, and what not, and how to teach and admonish, etc.

Able also to admonish one another] Supple, when any did amiss, and wanted
admonition.

Note, that what the Apostle speaks here, he does not attribute to all the
Roman^, as though all were full of goodness and knowledge, and able to admonish
his brother: but only to certain of the most eminent of them.

Because the Romans were one Body, or one Church, in which were members of
diverse qualities, a^ some ignorant, some knowing, etc. The Apostle speaks of
them sometimes as of ignorant, and wanting admonition: And sometimes again as
knowing, and able to admonish, in respect, sometimes to one sort of them,
sometimes to another.

Ver. 15. Nevertheless, Brethren, I have written the more boldly unto you, in
some sort] q. d. Though I am persuaded of you, Brethren, that ye are full of
goodness and knowledge, and are able to admonish one another, yet nevertheless,
I have written to you somewhat the more boldly or more freely (than otherwise I
should do) because of the grace that is given to me of God, etc. that is,
because I am the Apostle of the Gentiles.

Note, that this Comparative degree does here diminish its Positive.

In some sort] By this the Apostle does also lessen or mince what he said
before of his boldness, for these terms (...) and (...) do diminish something
of that, of which they are spoken, as ver. 24. 1. Cor. 13.9. etc.

As putting you in mind] i. e. Not as teaching you what ye know not, but as
putting you in mind, or calling to your remembrance what ye know.

By this the Apostle does somewhat excuse his boldness to the Romans: but that
by which he does chiefly excuse it, is that which follows, Viz. Because of the
grace that was given to him of God.

Because of the grace that was given to me of God] These words relate (not to
these which went immediately before, but) to those I have written the more
boldly to you in part. And contain (as I said) his chief Reason, why he wrote
so boldly unto them.

By Grace here, is meant that which follows in the next verse, Viz. That he
should be the minister of God to the Gentiles: q. d. I have written unto you
the more boldly, because the Office in which God has placed me, requires me
so to do.

The word Grace, does commonly signify a free gift of God, here an Office, by
a Synechdoche generis.

Ver. 16. That I should be the Minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles] i. e.
That I should be the Servant of Jesus Christ, to the Gentiles, to minister the
Gospel to them.

In what he should minister to the Gentiles, he shows in the next words: Viz.
ministering the Gospel of God.

And among these Gentiles, the Romans are contained, as being the most part
Gentiles.

That I should be the minister of Jesus Christ] This Greek word (...) minister,
is a word which generally signifies any public minister, whether Civil or
Ecclesiastical: As appears ( Chap. 13. ver. 6. Acts 13.2. But it is limited
here, by those words following, Viz. Ministering the Gospel, To an
Ecclesiastical Minister, a Preacher of the Gospel, yea to a Priest; for though
the preaching of the Gospel be the Office to which this minister is here
limited, yet the Apostle speaks of himself here Metaphorically as of a Priest,
and the Sacrifice which he has to offer (for every Priest has his Sacrifice)
are the Gentiles.

To the Gentiles] Saint Paul was elected of Christ Jesus to be a minister to
the Gentiles, Acts 9.15. And it was agreed between Paul and other Apostles,
that he should go to the Gentiles, and they to the Circumcision, Galat. 2.9.
wherefore he calls himself a Teacher of the Gentiles 2 Timothy 1.11. But yet we
must not understand him so, as if his ministry were limited only to the
Gentiles, to preach to them only, for he teaches the Jews in many places of
this Epistle, as well as the Gentiles and it is not likely that Saint Paul,
would go beyond the limits of his commission; he therefore says, that he is
the minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, not because he might not or ought
not to preach the Gospel to the Jews also, but because it was the will of
Christ Jesus, (who chose him to be his minister) that he should preach chiefly
unto the Gentiles, and bring forth fruit chiefly among them.

It seems by this, that the Apostle spoke (what he spoke here ver. 14, 15,
etc.) to the Gentiles which lived at Rome, who perhaps were men skilled in
humane learning, and therefore somewhat puffed up, and not so ready to take
such admonitions as Saint Paul gives them, which made him to excuse himself
here.

Ministering the Gospel of God] Performing the holy function of a Priest, about
the Gospel of God.

The Apostle uses here a Metaphor taken from the Levitical Priests, for this
his performance consisted in preaching the Gospel, not in any Priestly function
or operation, properly taken.

That the offering up of the Gentiles] Better thus, That the offering of the
Gentiles] i. e. That is, that the Gentiles being converted to God by any
ministry, and so made, as it were, a Sacrifice, or an offering to him; might
be, etc.

Note, that when he says The offering, the Apostle does not mean any active
offering up of the Gentiles, whereby they offer up any thing themselves to God,
but a passive offering, by which the Gentiles themselves were ^ffered up to
God, and were themselves as an offering and a Sacrifice.

Wherefore these words, That the offering of the Gentiles, are put for these,
That the Gentiles which are an offering, as The Sign of Circumcision, is put
for, Circumcision which is a Sign, Chap. 4.11.

The Apostle persists still in his Metaphor of a Priest, and here he shows
the end of his ministry, why he was sent as a Minister to the Gentiles, and
why he did minister the Gospel unto them, or among them, It was that the
offering of the Gentiles might be an offering acceptable unto God.

Might be acceptable] i. e. Might be an acceptable offering, or an acceptable
sacrifice.

He persists still in the Metaphor of an offering or sacrifice, and therefore
he says That it might be acceptable, a word borrowed from the sacrifices, and
offerings of the Old Law, See Chap. 12. ver 1, 2.

Being sanctified by the Holy Ghost] i. e. Being adorned with faith, peace, and
joy, and other gifts of the Holy Ghost.

The Holy Ghost is taken here by a Metonymie, for the gifts of the Holy Ghost,
which gifts are conferred upon the faithful by the ministry of men, set apart
for Gods Service.

He says, Sanctified by the Holy Ghost, because he persists still in the
Metaphor of a Levitical sacrifice, or Levitical offering, which was wont to be
sacrificed, or consecrated, and made acceptable to God, by certain Rit^s and
Ceremonies, to which he compares or likens the Holy Ghost, or, the gifts of the
Holy Ghost.

Some, think that the Apostle in this his Metaphor alludes to the sacrifices of
Beasts, which were used in the Law for burnt-offerings, as he alludes to them,
Chap. 12.1. Others, think that he alludes not to the sacrifices of Beasts, but
to the meat offerings of which we read, Levit. 2. And that he alludes further
in this to those words of the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 66.20. And they shall bring
all your brethren for an offering unto the Lord, out of all Nations upon
horses, etc. as the Children of Israel bring an offering in a clean Vessel into
the house of the Lord. And that he in those words, Being sanctified by the Holy
Ghost alludeth particularly to the Salt which was used in the meat offerings.
For no meat offering was to be without Salt, Levit. 2.13 And indeed the gifts
of the Holy Ghost, may be many ways resembled or likened unto salt.

It is easy to interpret the word, either one way or other of these two, by
what I have said, and I leave my Reader to his choice.

That which the Apostle speaks here in this verse under a metaphor being
Stripped of the metaphor is in plain terms this, q. d. That I should be an
Apostle of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles preaching the Gospel unto them, that
they might be thereby enriched with the Holy Ghost, and made pleasing and
acceptable to God, and such as he delights in.

Ver. 17. I have therefore whereof I may glory, through Jesus Christ in those
things, which pertain to God.]

The Apostle prevents an objection here. For whereas he said that Grace was
given to him of God, that he should be the minister of Jesus Christ to the
Gentiles, etc. A Roman might object and say. But if it be so Paul, that thou
have Grace given thee of God that thou should be a Minister of God to the
Gentiles, why do not thou make use of this Grace? For thou never came to us
Romans, who are Gentiles to minister the Gospel to us, etc. Thou let this
Grace therefore to lie idle. This objection the Apostle prevents saying. I have
therefore whereof I may glory, etc.

The word Therefore is not an illative here, but a continuative, not signifying
the Illation of any thing from that which went before, but continuing only the
Apostles speech, and signifies as much as And, or Now, or And now.

Whereof I may glory through Jesus Christ] He that glories, let him glory in
the Lord says our Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.19. Though therefore our Apostle glories
here, yet he transgresses not his own rule, but glories in the Lord Christ
Jesus, by attributing that, of which he glories, to him.

In those things which appertain to God] i. e. In those things which concerns
Gods Service,

Note here, that as the Apostle described his Apostle-ship in the sixteenth
verse in Metaphorical terms, borrowed from the Levitical Priesthood calling it
a Liturgy, and himself (...); so does he continue the same Metaphor here, for
it is said of the Levitical high Priest, that he was ordained in things
appertaining to God, Heb. 5.1.

Ver. 18. For I will not dare to speak of any of those things which Christ has
not wrought by me, to make the Gentiles obedient in word and deed, etc.] These
words are obscure and Elliptical, and put many to their Conjectures; but my
Conjecture is this, that these words, I will not dare to speak of any thing
which Christ has not wrought by me, must be read with a Parenthesis, and after
them, these or the like words are to be understood, Christ has wrought
effectually by me, So that the Sentence complete and set in order, is this, For
(I will not dare to speak of any of those things which Christ has not wrought
by me) Christ has wrought effectually by me, both by word and deed, through
mighty signs and wonders by the power of the spirit of God, to make the
Gentiles obedient to the Gospel.

To make the Gentiles obedient] To wit, to the Gospel, that is, to bring them
to the faith, or belief of the Gospel.

Obedience is sometimes taken for faith or belief, see Chap. 1.5.

These words [I will not dare to speak of any of those things which Christ has
not wrought by me] The Apostle speaks thus, that they may not think, that what
he speaks, he speaks out of vainglory, and that they may therefore give the
word credit to what he speaks.

By word and deed] These words are to be referred not to those which went
immediately before, to wit, to those To make the gentiles obedient. But to
those, which I said were left here to be understood: to wit, Christ has
wrought by me effectually.

Note, that by word the Apostle means the preaching of the Gospel; By deed he
means the miracles which he wrought in confirmation of what he preached, as he
himself expounds himself in the subsequent words, see Acts 7.22. where is the
like manner of speech.

Ver. 19. Through mighty signs and wonders] He shows here what he meant by
the word Deed, ver. 18. which is to be taken there collective for deeds.

The Lord gave testimony unto the word of his grace, and granted signs and
wonders to be done by the hands of his Apostles, Acts 14.3.

Concerning these signs and wonders, some make a r^al distinction between them,
as though signs were lesser miracles; wonders greater: signs, such as may be
done by the force of nature, though not so quickly: Wonders, such as exceed the
reach of nature. But others make signs and wonders to be the same things, and
say that they are called signs, because by them as by strange and unwonted
things some thing is signified to be from God; (For they are wrought to assure
men, of some Divine truth) and wonders because they raise wonder and
admiration, in the beholders.

By the power of the spirit of God] Some make this to be the sense of these
words, q. d. Through mighty signs and wonders which I wrought by the power of
the Spirit of God. Others, this, q. d. Through Mighty signs and wonders and by
the Spirit of God, And as by the mighty signs and wonders they understand the
casting out of Devils, healing of the sick, the raising of the dead to life,
and the like: So by the power of the Spirit of God they understand the gifts of
prophecy, gift of tongues, and discerning of Spirits, etc. of which see 1 Cor.
12.10.

In this sense the power of the Spirit of God is to be taken for the miraculous
gifts of the Spirit, which are the effects of the power of the holy Ghost, by a
Metonymie; and they again for such particular gifts, as I spoke of, by a
Synechdoche generis. Again, In this second sense, the power of the Spirit of
God, is taken for works or miracles wrought; In the first sense, It is taken
for the means; or cause by which those signs and wonders were wrought, which he
spoke of.

From Jerusalem and round about unto Illyricum] Jerusalem was the chief City of
Judea, and Illyricum was a Country now called Sclavonia many hundred miles
distant from it: Between these two places did S. Paul travel, and preach to the
interiacent people, not steering his course in a straight line, but traveling
up and down in a compass, which he calls here round about.

S. Paul began not his preaching at Jerusalem, but at Damascus, yet afterward
he went to Jerusalem and preached there, from whence he went North and
North-west, preaching the word.

That which the Apostle says here in sum, is particularly and largly
described in the Acts of the Apostles.

I have fully preached the Gospel of Christ] The Greek is (...) that is, so
that I have filled all places with the Gospel of Christ. So some, who say that
these words All places are here to be understood, and that (...) the Gospel,
which is of the Accusative case, is put for (...) with the Gospel is of the
Dative case in Greek, which answers to the Ablative case, in Qutin. by an
Antiptosis.

But, (...), that is, so that I have extended or dilated, or spread the Gospel
of Christ. So others who say that (...) signifies sometimes to extend, dilate,
propagate, or spread by a Metaphor perhaps from a bladder or some such thing,
which is dilated and extended or stretch d out, while it is filled with wind or
the like.

A proof of this signification of (...) they give by a like word out of
Ecclesiasticus Chap. 24. ver. 35. where we read thus in the Septagint, (...).
Which they render, thus, and extending or diffusing wisdom as Phison and Tigris
(do their matters) in the days of new fruits. And Ecclesi. 24. 36. (...),
which they render thus; And extending or diffusing understanding as Euphrates,
and as Jordan in the time of Harvest.

Again, (...), i. e. So that I have fully perf^rmed the preaching of the Gospel
of Christ. So a third sort, And thus the Gospel is put by a Metonymie for the
preaching or Ministry of the Gospel. And this comes near to our translation,
when it says, I have fully preached the Gospel of Christ. The meaning whereof
is this, that he had fully preached to all that lived between Jerusalem and
Illyricum round about, all the Mysteries of the Gospel, which were necessary to
Salvation. That is, (as our Apostle says in other words, Acts 20.27.) That he
had declared unto them all the counsel of God.

And yet me thinks there is somewhat more that the Apostle aims at, in this
word (...), in this place, and that is, the success answering the end or intent
of his preaching, which was that his Gospel was also received.

We must therefore understand these words (...) That is, So that I have fully
preached the Gospel, not only of that, that he preached the Gospel, and all
the mysteries thereof in all those places, but also that he preached them
effectually, so that they were believed and received by all, that dwelt there.

Ver. 20. Yea, so have I strived to preach the Gospel, not wh^re Christ was
named, etc.] i. e. Yea, I have with a kind of ambition strived and chosen to
preach the Gospel after this manner, to wit, in word and deed with signs and
wonders, by the power of the Spirit of God, not in those places where Christ
was named; lest I should build upon another man's Foundation: But in those
places where Christ was not so much as named, before, so that, that which is
written, etc.

Now for the connection of this with the former verse the Apostle prevents an
objection here. For whereas he had said in the former verse that he had fully
preached the Gospel of Christ from Jerusalem to Illyricum, it might be
objected that that was no great matter for him to do, or glory of; For it might
be that others had preached there before, and instructed them in the knowledge
of the Gospel. This objection the Apostle prevents saying: Yea, so have I
strived to preach the Gospel, not where Christ was named, but where he was
never so much as named before.

So have I strived to preach the Gospel] This particle so relates not to that
word strived but to that word Preach, q. d. Yea I have strived to preach the
Gospel so. And this particle so signifies after that manner, that is, after
that manner, to wit, that he had spoke of, that is, by word and deed through
mighty signs and wonders, etc.

Have I strived to preach the Gospel, not where Christ was named, etc.] By
these words the Apostle shows with how great desire he desired to exercise
his Apostolical function, and to preach where Christ was never preached before,
and that he made it as it were his Ambition, so to do. And he intimates also
hereby, that the Gospel was never preached (before he preached it) in the
places between Judaea and Illyriam.

But why did the Apostle so much desire to preach where Christ was never named,
that is, where Christ had never been preached before?

Answ. He might do it first out of Charity: for being that the knowledge of
Christ is absolutely necessary to Salvation, it is more charity to preach the
Gospel, where it was never preached before, than to preach there, where it had
been preached before, and where the foundation of Christian Religion had been
laid.

Secondly, He might desire this, because to preach the Gospel, where it had
been never preached before, is more proper for an Apostle (such a one as Paul
was) then to preach, where it had been preached before; for to plant and lay
the foundation of Churches, is the proper and peculiar work of an Apostle.

Thirdly, The Apostle might desire this, that he might have whereof to glory
against false Apostles, or at least, that false Apostles might not have whereof
to glory, so much as in show against him. For false Apostles would seem
Apostles, and boast of themselves, as if they were Apostles; though they built,
and that unskilfully too, not upon their own, but upon another man's foundation,
that is, though they preached where Christ had been preached before, and when
they preached, they preached errors and vanities instead of sound doctrine.

Lest I should build upon another man's foundation] i. e. Lest I should have
preached the Gospel to them, to whom it had been preached by others, before.

By the foundation he means here the Essential points of Christian Religion,
and by building thereupon, he means preaching there, where they had been
preached before.

This foundation he calls another man's, because it was laid, that is, preached
before, by another Apostle, or another preacher than himself, otherwise this
foundation is always one and the same; for other foundation can no man lay than
is laid, which is Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11.

It is not unusual with our Apostle to liken the doctrine of Christian Religion
to a building: The essential parts thereof to the foundation of this building:
the points less necessary to salvation to the superstructure: the Preacher
thereof to a Builder.

Ver. 21. But as it is written, to whom he was not spoken of, they shall see:
and they that have not heard shall understand] That is, q. d. But I have
preached where Christ was never so much as named, much less preached before, So
that, that which was prophesied of by Isaiah: Isaiah 52.15. is by me in part
fulfilled: for they to whom Christ was never spoken of, have seen him: And they
that have not heard of him, have understood him by my ministry.

As it is written] Isa. 52.15.

To whom he was not spoken of, they shall see] i. e. The Gentiles, to whom
nothing was spoken of or concerning Christ: They shall see Christ by faith.
Viz. Through the preaching of the Apostles.

He] That is Christ, but with Christ understand all his benefits also.

And they that have not heard] i. e. And they that have not heard any thing, to
wit, of Christ, shall understand, Supple by the ministry of his Servants.

This is the second and mystical sense of these words; but in the first and
meaner sense, they speak of those Gentiles, which saw the event of certain
prophesies of Jeremy, prophesying of things, yet such as they never heard of
before by any.

But of this see my exposition of the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 52.15. etc.

Ver. 22. For which cause also I have been much hindered, from coming to you] i.
e. And for this cause, to wit, because I was so much employed in preaching the
Gospel, between Jerusalem and Illyricum (where the Gospel was never preached
before) I have been (among many other causes) much hindered from coming to you.

It required more pains, and took up more time to preach the Gospel where it
was never so much as heard of before, then to preach it there, where it had
been preached before.

For which cause also] This particle Also implies, that there were other cames,
which hindered him from coming to them, before this

Ver. 23. Having no place in these parts] i. e. Finding no place in these
parts, Supple, without the foundation of Christian Religion. i. e. Finding no
place in these parts, in which I have not preached the Gospel already, so that
there is no necessity now, of my continuing here any longer.

In these parts] By these parts he may mean Macedonia and Achaia, as is
probable by ver. 26. As also by that, that this Epistle was written from
Corinth, which was a chief City of Achaia. Or by these parts, he may mean the
parts lying between Jerusalem and Illyricum, of which he spoke ver. 19.

Ver. 24. Whenever I take my journey into Spain, I will come to you] This he
says, because he was intended to go to Spain by Italy, and so to take Rome in
his way.

And to be brought on my way thitherward] i. e. And to be accompanied on my way
thitherward by some of you.

(...), which is here rendered, to be brought on my way, signifies, to be
honorably accompanied on the way, and to be supplied with things necessary for
a journey, if need be. But perhaps Saint Paul might understand it only of being
accompanied.

If first I am somewhat filled with your company.] i. e. When I have somewhat
filled my self, with the delight and pleasure which I shall take in your
company. That is, when I have enjoyed your company a while.

If I be somewhat filled] By that, that he would be filled, he signifies how
acceptable their company would be to him; which would be so sweet and
delectable to him, as that he desired to be filled with it: But when he says,
If I be somewhat filled, by that word Somewhat, he signifies that his stay
would be somewhat short, (shorter than he desired) so that he could not in so
short a time be filled so full with their company, as he desired.

Be filled] Some understand this as a Metaphor taken from meats, others, from
Odors or sweet smells.

But now I go unto Jerusalem] The Apostle prevents a question here: For the
Romans may say; Paul, If thou have had a desire these many years to come unto
us, and you have now no more place in those parts where you are; why come you
not to us now? This question the Apostle prevents, saying: But (for the present
I cannot come, for) now I go unto Jerusalem, etc.

I go unto Jerusalem] i. e. I am going to Jerusalem.

Jerusalem] Jerusalem was the chief City of Judaea.

To minister to the Saints] i. e. To carry to the poor Saints of Jerusalem,
and Judaea, those Alms which I have gathered for them, in the Churches of
Macedonia and Achaia, and to distribute them among them.

To the Saints] i. e. To those Christians, That is, to those Jews which are
turned to Christ, and believe the Gospel.

Christians are among other titles called by the name of Saints, not because
all that profess the name of Christ are Saints, that is, are truly holy; but
because every Church of Christ is called a Congregation of Saints, from the
principal members thereof, which are truly Saints: As also because the Doctrine
which Christians profess, is an holy Doctrine, and the life required of them,
and which they profess, is an holy life.

Ver. 26. For it has pleased them of Macedonia and Achaia] i. e. For it has
pleased the Saints, that is, the Christians or Brethren which live in Macedonia
and Achaia, etc.

To make a certain contribution for the poor Saints which are at Hierusalem]
The Jews which believed, were persecuted by the unbelieving Jews, and spoiled
of their goods, as appears Heb. 10.34. 1 These. 2.14. And this was one great
cause of the poverty of these Saints of Jerusalem.

The Apostle commends the Churches of Macedonia and Achaia here, that he might
thereby tacitly stir up the Romans to the like Contribution, or Alms-deeds,
toward the poor Christian Jews.

Ver. 27 It has pleased them] q. d. It has pleased them, I say.

The Apostle repeats these words, out of the former verse, that he might add
something to them.

And their debtors they are] i. e. And the Saints of Macedonia and Achaia, are
debtors to the Jews of Jerusalem, Viz. so to do, that is, to relieve them, in
their necessities.

Upon what account they are their debtors, to relieve them in their
necessities, he tells in the next words.

For if the Gentiles have been partakers of their spiritual things, etc.] For
being that the Gentiles have been made partakers of the Spiritual things of the
Jews, etc.

It is not Dubitantis but Affirmantis here.

The spiritual things, which the Apostle here speaks of, are such things as
conduced to a spiritual life, to wit, the Word of God, that is, the Gospel, and
the Sacraments, etc. And these he calls the things of the Jews, because the
Gentiles received them from the Jews, and because they were deposited with the
Jews at the first, as the gift of God promised to them from the days of old,
and at last performed. And of these spiritual things the Gentiles were made
partakers also, by the ministry of the Apostles, which were Jews.

Their duty is also to minister unto them in carnal things] i. e. Their duty it
is truly, and they are bound to minister unto them, and relieve them in carnal
things.

Also is as much here as Truly, or it signifies a retaliation.

By carnal things, he means such things, as are requisite and necessary for the
maintenance of the Flesh, that is, the Body or Bodily life.

The Apostle says here, that the Gentiles which received the Gospel and the
Sacraments from the Jews, were debtors to the Jews, and bound to them (by
reason of the Gospel, and the Sacraments which they received from them) to
relieve them, in their necessities: And speaks not of those Jews only which
preached the Gospel, and ministered the Sacraments to them, which were the
Apostles, but of as many of the whole people or nation of the Jews (from which
they came out) as were Christians.

But now the question will be, whether this of the Gentiles to the Jews be a
debt properly, or improperly taken: that is, whether it be a debt, such as the
Jews by virtue thereof, might exact in the way of justice relief of the
Gentiles in their necessity: Or whether it be only called a debt of the
Gentiles, because the Gentiles, if they should not relieve the Jews in their
necessity, by reason of what they had received from them, would not carry
themselves seemly and handsomely toward them, though this seemliness and
handsomness, arises not out of Justice, but some other Fountain.

I answer: It is a debt not properly but improperly taken, if we speak of as
many of the whole nation or people of the Jews which were Christians: Though in
respect of those Jews, to wit, the Apostles, which labored in ministering of
the Gospel, and the Sacraments to the Gentiles, it would be a debt properly
taken, and properly due to them, to relieve them if they stood in need; because
of the pains and travel which they take with them; for the labourer is justly
worthy of his hire.

Ver. 28. When therefore I have performed this] When I have finished this
Journey to Jerusalem, and this Service which I speak of

And have sealed to them this fruit] i. e. And when I have delivered unto them
this money, which the Gentiles have contributed to them, which I will do
without any deminution of it at all.

To Seal signifies here to deliver, as a thing which is sealed, where there is
no purloining nor surreption; for there is an allusion here to goods or moneys
which are sealed up in a bag, or the like; which is therefore sealed up; that
they may come entire to them to whom they are sent; and that they who receive
them, may know (by the integrity of the Seal) that nothing has been diminished
of them, but that they are entire as they were sent.

By this the Apostle intimates how unblamably and entirely he would behave
himself in this matter.

This fruit] He calls the alms or the contribution which the Achaians and
Macedonians sent to the Jews at Jerusalem, Fruit because it was the fruit of
their faith.

I will come by you into Spain] Supple, if God will. For this, to wit, if God
will, is to be supposed to be understood by all Chrians, in their speaking of
their determination.

Whether Paul went ever into Spain, as is here written, is doubted.

Ver. 29. I am sure] This assurance which the Apostle here speaks of, seems to
be not an assurance (as they say) of faith, or an infallible assurance; but an
assurance only of hope; so that when he says I am sure, it is as if he should
say, I hope, or I am persuaded; yet it may be more than an assurance of hope,
if the Romans themselves hindered not by their own fault, the abundance of the
blessing which he speaks of.

I shall come in the abundance of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ] i. e. I
shall so come, as that you shall receive abundance of blessing by the Gospel
which I shall preach to you, at my coming.

In the abundance of the blessing] i. e. With abundance of blessing. In is put
for With.

The blessing of the Gospel, I conceive to be nothing else here, but the
comfort and strength of grace, which is conveyed into the hearts of the
faithful, by the preaching of the Gospel, which he speaks of here as things
subsistent, by a Metaphor.

Ver. 30. And for the love of the spirit] i. e. And for the loves sake, which
the Holy Ghost has wrought in us Christians, one toward another.

By the Spirit understand the Holy Ghost, which being of the Genitive case, is
Genitivus Efficientis, or cause.

That ye strive together with me in prays to God for me] i. e. That ye would
assist me with your prayers, so that we may contend and strive to out go one
another in prayers, which we shall make to God in my behalf.

Thus this striving is between the Petitioners, or Prayers, striving who shall
exceed, or out go one the other in prayers.

Yet some understand this place, as if the striving were of the Petitioners or
Prayers with God combining together that they may force him, as it were, to
yield, or give what they desire of him: See Col. 4.12. A type or figure of such
a combat, strife, or contention we have in Jacob, when he strove or contended
with the Angel, Genesis 32.26.

As in other Combats, so in this spiritual combat the more are joined
together, the stronger the party is, and the easier (as I may speak with
reverence) is God overcome. Therefore does the Apostle desire others to join
and strive with him here, that he may the more powerfully graple with God, and
make him yield.

For me] i. e. In my behalf.

Ver. 31. That I may be delivered from them that do not believe in Judea] That
is, that when I come into Judea (to bring the alms of the believing Saints of
Achaia and Macedonia to the believing Saints there) I may so be delivered, as
that I fall not into the hands of those there, which believe not the Gospel.

The Apostle knew that he was very much hated of the Jews in Judea, which
believed not, therefore does he pray the Romans to join in prayer with him to
God, that he might be delivered out of their hands.

What befell Paul in his way, in this his journey into Judea, and there, when he
came thither read, Acts Chap. 20. ver. 17. and Chap. 21, etc.

Saint Paul might not only fear that the unbelieving Jews of Judea, might meet
with him, and take away his life: But also that they might take away the alms,
which he was to carry to the Saints of Jerusalem, from them of Macedonia and
Achaia. For that Saint Paul was to carry such Alms and such money, might well
be known, being a thing publicly acted, and resolved on in the Churches of
Achaia and Macedonia.

And that my service which I have for Jerusalem, may be accepted of the Saints]
The service which he speaks of, is the carrying of the alms or money sent from
Macedonia and Achaia to the Saints at Jerusalem, and the tendering or
distributing of it, as a relief from those of Achaia and Macedonia.

This his service he prays may be accepted of the Saints of Jerusalem, both in
respect of them, from whom it was sent; and in respect of himself, who carried
it; for they which sent it were Gentiles, and the Jews were not altogether so
well persuaded of that, that God did respect the Gentiles and accept of them,
as they should be: And as for S. Paul himself, he was suspected even of the
believing Jews of Judea, that he was an adversary, and enemy to the Law of
Moses, of which they were zealous, Acts 21. ver. 20.21. both which might lessen
that kind acceptance of the Alms, sent by Saint Paul to them; with which they
should accept them. The Jews might also think the Alms sent, a small pittance
in respect of their number, though it was large in it self.

Ver. 32. That I might come unto you with joy] q. d. So it shall be, that I
shall come with joy to you, when I see so good a success of my service.

By the will of God] i. e. If it be the will of God.

The Apostle adds this, because it is the property of the Saints and faithful
Servants of God, to expect all good from the will of God; and to depend upon
his providence in all things: As Saint James also teaches us in his Epistle,
Chap. 4. ver. 15.

Ver. 33. Now the God of peace be with you all] Now God, which is the Author
and lover of peace, be with you all, bless you, preserve you, and keep you all.

This he says, the more to incline them to peace, and to take away
contentions, which were among them.

Amen] Amen is an Hebrew word, by which, if it be used in the end of a prayer,
as here it is, is wished or desired the accomplishment of that which we pray
for. See more of this Word, Chap. 1. ver. 25.

CHAP. XVI.
1. I Commend unto you Phebe our sister, which is a servant of the Church which
is at Cenchrea:

1. I commend unto you Phebe our Sister in Christ, which has done many good
services to the faithful members of the Church of Christ, which is at Cenchrea,
a Port or Haven of Corinth.

2. That ye receive her in the Lord, as becomes saints, and that ye assist her
in whatsoever business she has need of you: for she has been a succourer of
many, and of my self also.

2. That ye receive her, and use her with all courtesy, for the Lords sake, as
becomes Saints; and that ye assist her in whatsoever business she has need of
you: For she has been a succor to many, and to my self also.

3. Greet Priscilla and Aquila, my helpers in Christ Jesus:

3. Salute Priscilla and Aquila her husband in my name, for they have been a
help to me in the ministry and propagation of the Gospel of Christ Jesus.

4. (Who have for my life laid down their own necks: unto whom not only I give
thanks, but also all the Churches of the Gentiles.)

4. Who have, to save my life, ventuted their own: for which thing, not only I
my self give thanks unto them, but also all the Churches of the Gentiles do the
like.

5. Likewise greet the Church that is in their house. Salute my wel-beloved
Epenetus, who is the first fruits of Achaia unto Christ.

5. Likewise salute the faithful members of Christ's Church, which are in their
house. Salute my wel-beloved Epenetus, who is one of the first of them which
believed in Christ, and received his Gospel in Achaia.

6. Greet Mary, who bestowed much labor on us.

6. Salute Mary, who bestowed much labor upon us.

7. Salute Andronicus and Junia, my kinsmen and my fellow prisoners, who are of
note among the Apostles, who also were in Christ before me.

7. Salute Andronicus and Junia my kinsmen, and my fellow prisoners, who are
much esteemed of by the Apostles, who also embraced the faith of Christ; and
were made members of his mystical body before me.

8. Greet Amplias my beloved in the Lord.

8. Salute Amplias whom I love for the Lords sake.

9. Salute Vrbane our helper in Christ, and Stachys my beloved.

9. Salute Urbane who helped us in the ministry or propagation of the Gospel.
And Stachys whom I love with a true love.

10. Salute Apelles approved in Christ. Salute them which are of Aristobulus
household.

10. Salute Apelles who has been by many trials proved to be a faithful
Disciple and Servant of Christ. Salute the Saints which are of Aristobulus
household.

11. Salute Herodion my kinsman. Greet them that be of the household of
Narcisus, which are in the Lord.

11. Salute Herodion my kinsman. Salute them that be of the household of
Narcisus, which are ingraffed into our Lord Christ.

12. Salute Tryphena and Tryphosa, who labor in the Lord. Salute the beloved
Persis, which labored much in the Lord.

12. Salute Tryphena and Tryphosa, who labor in the propagation of the Gospel,
and Word of the Lord. Salute the beloved Persis, who has also taken much pains
in the propagating the Gospel of the Lord.

13. Salute Rufus chosen in the Lord, and his mother and mine.

13. Salute Rufus (a man of singular piety among the Servants of the Lord) and
his mother and mine, his by nature, mine by affection.

14. Salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermas, Patrobas, Hermes, and the brethren
which are with them.

14. Salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermas, Patrobas, Hermes, and the brethren of
our Religion, which are with them.

15. Salute Philologus, and Julia, Nereus, and his sister, and Olympas, and all
the saints which are with them.

15. Salute Philologus, and Julia, Nereus, and his sister, and Olympas, and all
the saints and faithful in Christ Jesus, which are with them.

16. Salute one another with an holy kiss. The Churches of Christ salute you.

16. Salute one another in token of Christian love and charity one toward
another, not with a carnal, but with an holy kiss. The Churches of Christ which
are in these parts salute you.

17. Now I beseech you, brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offenses,
contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them.

17. Now I beseech you, brethren, mark and observe them which cause divisions
and offenses among you, by setting on foot such doctrines, as are contrary to
the doctrine, which ye have received of the Ministers and Apostles of Christ
Jesus, and avoid them.

18. For they that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own
belly; and by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple.

18. For they that do this, do not serve our Lord Jesus Christ, and seek his
honor, as they pretend they do, by their doings; But they serve their own
bellies, seeking by these means, to get entertainment at rich men's Tables; and
by goodly words and fair speeches, deceive the hearts of such as are simple,
and easy to be deceived.

19. For your obedience is come abroad unto all men. I am glad therefore on
your behalf: but yet I would have you wise unto that which is good, and simple
concerning evil.

19 Mark them, and observe them, I say, and avoid them; for it would be a shame
for you to be deceived by them, being that your obedience to the doctrine which
has been preached by the Ministers and Apostles of Christ is such, as that the
fame thereof is come abroad and heard of all men. I am glad therefore on your
behalf, because your obedience to the doctrine, which the Ministers and
Apostles of Christ have preached, is come thus abroad, and heard of all men:
yet notwithstanding, I am bold to give you this admonition (lest that your
obedience to the Gospel should be corrupted) That ye be wise in embracing and
adhereing to the Gospel, and the true Ministers thereof, which is a good thing:
And that you be simple, as to all false doctrine, because it is evil, and have
nothing to do with them which teach it.

20. And the God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly. The grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen.

20. And the God of peace bruise Satan under your feet speedily, who brings in
these pernicious doctrines, by his Ministers, to the causing of divisions and
offenses in the Church of Christ. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with
you. Amen.

21. Timotheus my work-fellow, and Lucius, and Jason, and Sosipater my kinsmen
salute you.

21. Timotheus my work-fellow, who labors with me in the ministry of the
Gospel, and Lucius, and Jason, and Sosipater my kinsmen salute you.

22. I Tertius, who wrote this Epistle, salute you in the Lord.

22. I Tertius who am Paul's Ammannensis, and who wrought this Epistle out of
his mouth, salute you in the Lord.

23. Gaius mine host, and of the whole Church, saluteth you. Erastus the
Chamberlain of the City saluteth you, and Quartus a brother.

23. Gaius (at whose house I lodge, and who has entertained me nobly, and not
me only, but all Christians that have occasion to come hither) saluteth you.
Erastus the Chamberlain of the City of Corinth, saluteth you, and so does
Q^artus a brother.

24. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.

24. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.

25. Now to him that is of power to stablish you according to my gospel, and
the preaching of Jesus Christ (according to the revelation of the mystery,
which was kept secret since the world began,

25. Now to him that is of power to establish you in the faith which ye have
received, to wit, the faith which is according to the Gospel which I have
preached unto you, and according to the preaching of Christ Jesus, and
according to the revelation of the mystery, which has been kept secret from
the beginning of the world until now,

26. But now is made manifest, and by the Scriptures of the prophets according
to the Commandment of the everlasting God, made known to all nations for the
obedience of faith)

26. But now is laid open, and according to the Commandment of the everlasting
God, made known by the Scriptures of the Prophets (which are opened and
explained among us) to all Nations, that they may be brought to obey the faith
and Gospel of Christ.

27. To God only wise, be glory, through Jesus Christ for ever. Amen.

27. That is, to God who only is wise, be glory ascribed by us through Jesus
Christ, for ever. Amen.

CHAP. XVI.
Ver. 1. I commend unto you Phaebe our sister] He calls Phaebe his Sister, or
their Sister, not because she was so by reason of alliance of blood, but
because she was so by reason of the common faith, and by reason of Religion,
for Christians called all men that were of the same Religion and embraced the
same faith with them, Brethren, and women, Sisters.

When we commend any person to another, it is for that, that they to whom we
commend him, may show some courtesy to the person commended; Now what
courtesy it was that Paul desired of the Romans in the behalf of Phaebe is
expressed in the next verse: It is, that they would receive her in the Lord as
becomes Saints, and that they would assist her, in whatsoever business she
should have need of them.

Which is a servant of the Church, which is at Cenchrea] Cenchrea was a port
town, or village near that famous City of Corinth and serving thereunto: or a
Port of that City, in which Christ had a Church, that is, a Company or
Congregation of such as embraced his Gospel; to which Church Phaebe was a
Servant.

Which is a servant of the Church, etc.] There were in the Primitive times
women chosen as well as men to do service in the Church (but not in things
immediately appertaining to God) called Deaconnesses, which were appointed to
have a care of the poor members of the Church, and especially of those which
were sick, etc. Such Saint Paul speaks of 1 Timothy 5.9. Some think that this
Phaebe was such a one, and therefore called here a Servant of the Church.

But others think, and not without reason, otherwise; for that she is supposed
to have been a Rich woman, and a woman of a noble birth: she is called
therefore a servant of the Church, as they say, in that she willingly did many
good services of her own free bounty, for the Church in relieving the poor
distressed members thereof, and doing for all, what they stood in need of, to
her power.

Ver. 2. That ye receive her] i. e. That ye receive her in to your houses and
entertain her.

In the Lord] i. e. For the Lord, or for the Lords sake, whose servant she is,
and whom she serves in ministering to his members.

In is put here for For, after the Hebrew manner, or, for the sake.

And that ye assist her] i. e. And that ye stand by her, and help her.

To Asist or stand by one, is to help him; And it is, as some think, a
millitary word.

As becomes Saints] This phrase may be understood as well of them which
receive, as of those which are received. For they which receive must carry
themselves so as it becomes Saints: and they which are received are to be
entertained so, as that it may appear, that they are accounted of, as Saints
and Brethren in the Lord.

Do good to all; but especially to those which are of the household of faith,
says our Apostle, Galat. 6.10. The faithful therefore must be respected, more
than other men.

Saints] i. e. Christians, See Chap. 1 ver. 1.

She has been a succouror of many] She might be a succouror of many, by
standing between them and dangers; and defending them protecting them, and
procuring them safety, when any storms arose against them. As also by
entertaining them in her house, and harboring them hospitably, when they were
strangers, and means fell out to be short with them.

Greet Priscilla and Aquila, etc.] i. e. Salute Priscilla and Aquila in my name.

A salutation is a signification of our love, whereby we wish all temporal and
spiritual welfare to Him, whom we salute.

When we desire one another to salute a third person in our name, it is to
desire him to signify to that third person, our wishes of his temporal and
spiritual welfare.

Saint Paul does desire many here to be saluted in his name, and this he does,
that by his courtesy, he may win them to respect him and his Doctrine the
more; and that he might receive the better welcome from them, when he comes
among them. Or he may do it, that the Romans might take the more notice of
them, whom he desires to be saluted, and give them the more respect for his
salutation, etc.

Priscilla and Aquila] Priscilla and Aquila were both Jews; And Priscilla was
the wife; Aquila the husband; some ask therefore why Saint Paul does name
Priscilla here before Aquila, the wife before the husband? And they answer,
that it was, because Priscilla did believe and became a Christian before her
Husband; And grace is to be preferred in order, before nature.

But though Priscilla be named here before Aquila, yet Aquila is named before
Priscilla, 1 Cor. 16.19. Acts 18.26.

Of Priscilla and Aquila you may read Acts 18. ver. 2, 3.

My helpers in Christ Jesus] Saint Paul calls these, his helpers in Christ
Jesus because they were an help to him in the Ministry and propagation of the
Gospel of Christ.

How in particular these were Saint Paul's helpers in the Ministry or
propagation of the Gospel, is not here expressed: but we read of Aquila and
Priscilla that they took Apollos to them, and expounded to him the way of God
more perfectly, Acts 18. ver. 26. whereby they might help this way, in the
conversion of others.

In Christ Jesus] i. e. In the Gospel of Christ Jesus, Metonymie.

Ver. 4. Who have for my life laid down their own necks] i. e. Who have
ventured their own lives, to preserve mine, and free me out of danger.

The Apostle when he says here that they have laid down their own necks,
meaning thereby, that they ran the hazard of their lives, seems to allude to
the manner of the Romans, who chopped of their necks with an ax, which were
condemned to die.

The Apostle in that which he says here, seems to have an eye upon the danger
in which he was in Acts 18.12. when an Insurrection was made against him with
one accord at Corinth, and they brought him before the Judgment seat, Gallio
being deputy of Achaia.

Unto whom not only I give thanks] To wit, for that their love, in preserving
my life.

But also all the Churches of the Gentiles] The Churches of the Gentiles might
all of them give thanks to Priscilla and Aquila for preserving the life of Paul
out of danger; because that Paul was the common Master or Doctor of the
Gentiles, and therefore the benefit of the presevation of his life, redounded
to them all.

There may be an Hyperbole in these words, and by all the Churches of the
Gentiles may be meant, not all in general, but only all those Churches of the
Gentiles which were about Corinth, who knew of this deliverance of Paul.

Ver. 5. Likewise greet the Church that is in their house] The Church is
sometimes taken in a narrow sense, for the members of any family or household
which are believers, of which believe in Christ, and profess his Gospel; and so
surely it is taken here. So that the sense of this place is this: Likewise
greet those of their household who believe in Christ, and have given their name
to him. In this sense Saint Paul says, All the saints salute you, chiefly they
that are of Caesar's household, Phil. 4.22. where he might have called the saints
which are of Caesar's household, the Church which were in Caesar's household, as he
does here the saints of the household of Aquila and Priscilla, the Church in
their house, for it is all one.

The Church] i. e. The saints and faithful which are members of the Church of
Christ.

Here is therefore a Synechdoche generis in the word Church, as it is here
used, where the whole Church is put for a part, or for some members only of the
Church.

Who is the first fruits of Achaia unto Christ] i. e. Who was one of the first
of them which believed and gave his name to Christ in Achaia.

The Apostle uses a Metaphor here, and alludes therein to that Ceremonial Law
of offering the first fruits, of which we said something, Chapter 11. verse 16.

Note, that for Achaia many books read Asia, q. d. Epenetus, who is the first
fruits of Asia unto Christ. And then Epenetus may be so called, because he was
the very first which believed in Asia; otherwise if we read in Achaia, he must
be interpreted to be but one of the first, not the very first. For 1 Corinthians.
16.15. Stephanus is said to have been the first fruits of Achaia too.

Ver. 6. Who bestowed much labor on us] What this labor was the Apostle tells
not, though we may think, that it was some such labor as did make him more
expedite to preach the Gospel.

Ver. 7. My fellow prisoners] These suffered bonds and imprisonment with Paul
for the Gospels sake no doubt, but where, is not so obvious to say.

Who are of note among the Apostles] i e. Who are very well known, and that for
good, to the Apostles.

Some interpret this place, as if they were of note, as Apostles among the
Apostles, and take the word Apostles in a very large sense, for any Ministers
of the Gospel whatsoever: For otherwise there were but twelve Apostles, among
whom Andronicus and Junia were none.

Who were also in Christ before me] i. e. Who were also converted to the faith,
and so ingraffed into Christ, before I was converted and ingraffed into him.

Ver. 8. My beloved in the Lord] i. e. Whom I love for the Lords sake, because
he is a member of his.

By this, he shows his love to be not carnal but spiritual.

Ver. 9. Our helper in Christ] i. e. Our helper in the Gospel of Christ, to
wit, in preaching that.

Christ is put here for the Gospel of Christ, by a Metonymie.

Ver. 10. Approved in Christ] i. e. One who has been approved by many trials,
to be a sincere and faithful Servant and Disciple of Christ: Or one approved to
be faithful and sincere in the Church of Christ, or among Christians.

He uses a Metaphor here from Gold that is tried and found good.

In Christ] (...) may signify one ingraffed into Christ, and so a Disciple or
member of Christ.

Or (...), In Christ, may signify in the cause, or in the service, or in the
business of Christ, by a Metonymie, or in the Church of Christ, by the same
Figure, Or Christ may be taken by a Metonymie, for Christians, as Gal. 3.16.
and then (...) may signify among Christians.

Ver. 11. Which are in the Lord] i. e. Which are Ingraffed into Christ, and so
have received his Gospel, and are his Disciples.

Ver. 12. Who labor in the Lord] i. e. Who labor in the propagation of the
Gospel of Christ the Lord, to wit, with that labor which is beseeming their
Sex, being women: which may be by ministering and doing service to the Apostles
and Preachers of the Gospel, whereby they took off that care from them by which
they might otherwise have been hindered.

In the Lord] The Lord is taken here by a Metonymie for the Gospel of the Lord,
and then by a further Metonymie for the propagation of the Gospel, as it is
also in the last words of this verse.

Ver. 13. Chosen in the Lord] i. e. One of choice or singular piety in the
Church of Christ, who is the Lord, See verse 10.

He uses the word Chosen here, not for one chose either to justification or
eternal life; but for one who is excellent in any kind, so as if any one were
to make choice of any one of that kind, he would make choice of him, q. d. One
of Eminency.

And his mother and mine] This was Rufus's mother by nature; Paul's only by
affection; But in that Paul calls her his mother this way, we cannot, but think
her to have been a very good and reverend woman.

Ver. 14. And the brethren which are with them] i. e. And the Christians which
live with them, or are of their families.

Ver. 16 Salute one another with an holy kiss] It was a Custom among the
Eastern people for friends and acquaintance to salute one another, at their
parting away, and at their meeting, with a kiss, men so saluting, not women
only, but men also: And this they did in token of love, for a kiss is a token
or sign of love, wherefore the Greek word (...) which signifies a kiss, is
derived from (...) amo, to love.

But of kisses some were treacherous kisses as that of Joab to Amasa, 2 Samuel
20.9. And Judas to our Savior, Matthew. 26.49. Some unchaste as that of the
Harlot, Prove. 7.13. Some flattering kisses as that of Absalon to him that came
to make him obeisance, 2 Samuel 15.5. At the best the kisses used among the
Eastern people were but civil kisses in token of a civil love and respect. Paul
therefore as he would have the Romans (to whom he writes) to salute one another
with a kiss, so he would have them salute one another with an holy kiss, in
opposition to the former kisses, a kiss which was wont to be used among Saints,
which professed the Religion of Christ, and which testified thereby the holy
and spiritual love which was between them; This kiss Saint Peter calls a kiss
of charity, 1 Peter 5.14.

Christians were wont not only at their meetings and partings to kiss one
another; but after their Common or public prayers were ended, and that in
token of the Christian love which they had among themselves, and the charity
which was in them one toward another: As also in token of the peace which they
were at; from whence ancient Church-writers call such a kiss in Latin Pax,
Peace: They did also by the manner of their kisses signify the equality of
minds which they were of one toward another; for they kissed the mouths one
of another, which was a sign of equal esteem which they had one of another; for
among the Eastern people which used the salutation of kisses, equals only
kissed the mouths or lips one of another, but Superiors held out their hands
to kiss, to their Inferiors.

There were dissentions among the Romans at this time, as will appear, as by
what our Apostle has said before in this Epistle, so by what he says, ver.
17. And for this reason may he wish the Romans here to salute one another with
an holy kiss, to wit, in sign of true conjunction of minds and affections
forgetting all offenses.

The Churches of Christ salute you] Some Copies have (...) here, q. d. All the
Churches of Christ salute you.

Saint Paul says here The Churches of Christ salute you, not because he had
any word from the Churches to salute them, for they were some a far off from
him at this time; But because he knew or presumed that the love and affections
of the Churches was such, toward the Romans, as that they did wish them all
health and prosperity both Spiritual, and bodily.

Ver. 17. Now I beseech you Brethren mark them which cause divisions and
offenses, etc.] q. d. Now (before I make an end of this Epistle) I beseech you
brethren mark them which cause divisions, etc.

Mark them which cause divisions and offenses, etc] i. e. Mark them which teach
any thing contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and thereby make
differences of opinions, and by them Divisions and Schisms in the Church.

By causing Divisions and Offenses, he means teaching Doctrines causing
Divisions and Schisms, by a Metonymie.

And offences] By offenses he means Schisms.

Which ye have learned] To wit, of the Ministers of the Gospel.

And avoid them] i. e. And have no company with them, and entertain them not,
least that they should infect you by their company: As also that they may be
ashamed of their Doctrine, and leave of to deceive.

Ver. 18. For they which are such] i. e. They which teach Doctrines contrary to
the Doctrine, which ye have learned of the Ministers of the Gospel.

Serve not our Lord Jesus Christ] q. d. Though they pretend that they serve the
Lord Jesus Christ in what they do, and that they seek his Glory; Yet they serve
him not, nor seek his Glory; For they dishonor him and adulterate his
Doctrine, by what they do.

But serve their own Belly] i. e. But they serve their own Belly.

They are said to serve their own belly, who seek by all means that they may,
to fare deliciously, and to get dainty meats for their belly; which these
Heretics thought to do, by teaching their heretical Doctrines, and by making
themselves to seem some body, that so they might be entertained at the full and
plenteous tables of such, as were taken with these their new doctrines.

It is conceived of these of whom S. Paul speaks here, that they were such as
did Judaize, that is, that they were such as though they were not Jews
themselves yet did endeavor to bring those Gentiles which had received the
Gospel, under the Yoke of Moses his Law, contrary to the Doctrine of Christ;
And such as these were, our Apostle does note, were particularly given to their
belly. Hence he says of such ye suffer if a man bring you into bondage, if a
man devour you, that is, if a man eat up all that ye have (alluding therein to
these men's eating) 2 Cor. 11.20. And that their God is their belly Phil. 3.19.
And calls them Slow-Bellies, Tit. 3.12.

And by good words] i. e. And by flattering words. Or words that carry a show
of piety and goodness.

Deceive the hearts of the simple] i. e. Pretending as guides to lead the
simple into the right way, deceive them and lead them clean out of it:

He says Deceive the hearts of the simple intimating thereby, that they had
stolen into their affections, and got a place there.

Of the simple] The word in the Greek is (...), i. e. which signifies
Innocents, Innocent men, Homines minime malos, as the saying is, And by these
he means, per (...), such as are easy to be deceived.

Ver. 19. For your obedience is come abroad unto all men] i. e. For your
obedience or submission, to wit, to the Gospel or Doctrine of Christ which you
have learned, is such, as that the fame thereof is come abroad to all men, See
Chap. 1. ver. 8.

Concerning the relation of that Causal particle, For, and how this depends
upon that which went before, there be diverse conceits: But to omit all others,
I conceive that this relates to, and depends upon those words of the 17. ver.
Viz. To the doctrine which ye have learned, as a reason given why he said so,
q. d. I said contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, for so well have
ye learned that Doctrine as that the same of your obedience and submission
thereunto, is come abroad unto all men.

But the Apostle as he gives this for a reason why he said to the doctrine
which ye have learned, so does he withal hereby admonish them, that being
their obedience is spoken of so far, they would look, that they maintain it and
preserve it, least they should grow infamous, if they should swerve from it.

Note, that the Causual particle For is not always referred to that which went
next immediately before, but sometimes (yea often, as I have showed in this
Epistle) to that which went a good way before.

But the whole Eighteenth verse may be read here with a parenthesis, and so
this particle For may have a more immediate relation to what I spoke of.

I am glad therefore on your behalf] q. d. And I am glad on your behalf, or for
your sakes, that your obedience or submission to the Gospel of Christ or
doctrine which ye have learned, is such, as that the fame or report thereof is
come abroad to all men: For not only a great honor will accrue to you by
this; But great good too, even everlasting salvation.

But I would have you, etc.] q. d. But yet (Supple) though your obedience to
the Gospel of Christ and the doctrine, which ye have learned be such, I would
have you (least that Obedience of yours to the Gospel, should be corrupted) to
be wise to that which is good, and simple concerning evil.

The Apostle seems to prevent an objection, for whereas he said of the Romans,
that their obedience was gone abroad to all men, I am glad therefore on your
behalf: The Romans therefore might object and say, if our faith is so famous
as you speak of, and as you believe, what need you to admonish us to beware of
false teachers, as though we should be so simple to hearken to them, against
our faith. This objection the Apostle prevents saying, But yet I would, etc.

I would have you wise to that which is good] q. d. Yet by reason of the great
Love I have to you, and the godly jealously I have over you, it cannot but
admonish you to be wise to that which is Good, and simple concerning evil least
that obedience of yours should be corrupted.

The good which the Apostle here speaks of, is to be understood of their
adhearing to the Gospel and doctrine which they had learned and harkning only
to the teachers thereof, so that they be not deceived or seduced from that, by
any flattering words or fair speeches of any whatsoever. And this would show
them to be wise.

And simple concerning evil] i. e. And I would have you simple as to doing that
which is evil, and so to carry your self in that as if ye had no power to, or
knowledge how to do any such thing.

The Evil which is here spoken of, is to be understood of embracing the false
doctrine of heretical teachers, contrary to the doctrine which they had
learned, and receiving them themselves which teach it, into their company or
houses, and their entertaining them, which if they should do, they would show
themselves simple men, yea stark fools.

They which give ear to false teachers, are not only misled by them from the
truth, which they have learned; but come in time to be teachers of those false
doctrines themselves; yea, through pride and vainglory (that they may be
esteemed above ordinary men) they may in time come to be inventors themselves
of more false Doctrines. Therefore this admonition may not be amiss in this
Respect also.

Some conceive that the Apostle, when he says, Be wise to that which is good,
and simple concerning evil, Alludes to that speech of our Savior, Matthew.
10.16. Be ye wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doves.

Ver. 20. And the God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet] i. e. And if
ye be this, Supple, wise to that which is Good; And simple concerning Evil; God
which is the Author of peace, will tread Satan under your feet, who by these
his wicked Ministers, broacheth these false Doctrines, contrary to the Doctrine
which ye have learned, whereby dissentions and schisms are brought into the
Church.

The words as they are here read, are verba Sperantis, the words of one hoping
well concerning that which he speaks.

But the words in the Greek are these (...). Which may be rendered thus (as they
are rendered by the Sirack, Aethiopique and vulgar Latin translations.) But the
God of peace bruise Satan under your feet quickly. And so they are words of one
wishing well, in what he says, to him or them to whom he speaks,

And this Interpretation I dislike not; where note that though in the Greek,
the verb is of the future tense, yet it may be put after the Hebrew manner, for
an Imperative mood.

By Satan understand the Devil himself here who is called Satan, that is, by
interpretation, an adversary, because he is the chief Capital Adversary of man
kind; yet Satan as he works by his wicked ministers as instruments, to set on
foot false Doctrines, that he might cause dissentions, and schisms in the
Church of Christ, where by the Gospel and the end thereof might be hindered.

Many conceive that the Apostle does allude here to that passage of Genesis,
Genesis 3.15. where the Lord says to the Serpent, that is, to the Devil,
concerning the seed of the woman It shall bruise thy head, and thou shall
bruise his heel.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ] That is, the favor of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and all the blessings proceeding from that favor, etc.

The word Grace primarily signifies favor, But sometimes by a Metonymie, the
effects of that favor; and sometimes again by a Syllepsis, both favor and the
effects thereof.

He says, The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, both because the Lord Jesus
Christ does favor us himself, and show us the effects of his favor in
blessing us; as also because he has purchased for us the favor of God, and
the Issue or Effects thereof.

Amen] See Romans 1.25.

Ver. 21. Timotheus my work-fellow] This Timotheus is he of whom we read, Acts
16.1, 2. to whom Saint Paul wrought those two Epistles which are called, to
Timothy, whom he commends diverse times to the Churches, and whom he ordained
Bishop of Ephesus.

He calls him his work-fellow, because he did cooperate and take a part with
him in the work of the Ministry, in propagating the Gospel.

Ver. 22. I Tertius who wrought this Epistle] This Tertius wrought this Epistle
either from S. Paul's mouth, or from his Papers.

Ver. 23. Gaius mine Hoste] i. e. Gaius at whose house I lodged, and who
entertained me nobly.

Gaius seems to be the Latin or Roman name Caius, which the Greek by turning
Cappa into Gamma make Gaius.

And of the whole Church] i. e. Of all Christians coming from all parts, whom
he entertains nobly both at bed and board, as we use to say.

This is a notable commendation of Gaius, that he was so noble and hospitable
as to entertain all Christians that came, at his own house.

Some think that Gaius is called here the host of the whole Church, because the
whole Church of Corinth had their meeting place for Divine Service in his
House. But I prefer the former exposition or conceit.

Erastus the Chamberline of the City] To wit, of Corinth.

The Chamberline] i. e. The treasurer, or steward of the treasury.

Ver. 24. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.] See ver. 20.

Ver. 25. Now to him that is of power to establish you, etc.] i. e. To God, as
we shall see, ver. 27.

That is of power] i. e. Who only is of power.

The word Only is here to be understood, which is expressed ver. 27.

To establish you according to my Gospel] i. e. To establish you and make you
stand fast, to wit, in the faith which ye have received, the faith which is
according to my Gospel. Ellipsis.

There is an Ellipsis here of the word Faith.

This he says, that neither they, nor any of them be shaken and carried away
from the faith, by such false teachers as he spoke of ver. 17.

According to my Gospel] i. e. According to my preaching.

The Gospel is taken here by a Metonymie for the preaching of the Gospel.

He calls the Gospel his Gospel for no other reason, then because it was
preached by him.

And the preaching of Jesus Christ] q. d. That is, according to the preaching
which I preach of Jesus Christ.

The Genitive case of Jesus Christ is Genitivus not Efficientis, but Subjecti.

This particle And is here not a Copulative, but an Exegetical particle: For
the Apostle does explain here what he meant by those words, to wit, My Gospel,
he means his preaching, or that which he had preached of Jesus Christ.

Yet some take the particle And for Yea, as though the Apostle would ascend
higher, and say more here then he said before, q. d. according to my preaching,
said I, yea, according to the preaching of Jesus Christ, taking the word
preaching Actively, and the Genitive, of Jesus Christ, for, Genitivus
Efficientis.

According to the revelation of the mysteries] i. e. According to the
revelation of that which was a mystery.

This depends upon that which went before, by apposition: Except we understand
And here, or Or, that is, q. d. And, or that is, according to the revelation of
that which was a mystery, to wit, before it was revealed.

A mystery (according to the signification of the word) is a thing kept close
and unknown.

The mystery here spoken is the mystery of man's whole Salvation by Christ,
which mistrey was revealed and made known at first by Christ himself, who may
therefore be called the Son of Righteousness as Malachi, 4.2. And the day star
from on high, Luke 1.79.

The Revelation of this mystery, is nothing else but that which he called the
preaching of Jesus Christ, but the Apostle amplifies what he said, here, that
he might set the greater value upon what he says, and have the greater notice
taken of his words.

The mystery which was kept secret since the world began] The salvation of man
by Christ Jesus was a mystery of which there was a great silence for all times
heretofore in comparison of what is now revealed, and which was overcast and
shadowed with many types and figures, and so was kept secret in respect of what
it is now until these vails were taken away now at the last, by Christ.

Ver. 26. But now is made manifest] i. e. But now in these last days, is made
manifest, that is, is most plainly revealed, to wit, by Christ and his Apostles.

And by the scriptures of the Prophets made known] i. e. And made known by the
scriptures of the Prophets opened and explained, etc.

This he adds to vindicate the Gospel from novelty.

The dark writings of the Prophets may be opened and made plain, either by the
exposition of men, or by the mere event of things, as when things fall out
plainly and evidently according to, and answer the prophesies of the Prophets:
But the Apostle speaks here of opening the scriptures of the Prophets by the
Exposition of holy men, to wit, the Apostles, as appears by these words,
According to the commandment of the everlasting God, though they may make use
of the event of things, in expounding those prophesies or scriptures of the
Prophets.

This mystery was made known by men as by the Efficient, and by the scriptures
of the Prophets, as by the Instrumental cause.

Note, that though all things which were explained by Christ and his Apostles
were taught in times past by the Prophets; yet they were taught so obscurely
then, in regard of that cleerness with which they are taught now, under the
Gospel, as that it is no wonder that they were said to have been kept secret
since the world began, and now made manifest in the days of the Gospel.

Note here, that though some take this mystery here for the whole mystery of
man's salvation: yet others take it only for the mystery of the calling of the
Gentiles, q. d. Now to him that is of power to establish you in the Faith (the
Faith which is according to the Gospel which I have preached and according to
the preaching of Christ Jesus) and so to establish you, as that you may being
Gentiles, appear to be effectually called of God according to the Revelation of
the mystery, etc.

According to the commandment of the everlasting God] To wit, which he gave to
his Apostles to preach and make known this mystery.

The Apostle does silently here commend the dignity of his office or
Apostle-ship in that he reduces it to God, who sent him forth; whom he styles
here by his proper Epethite. The everlasting God.

Of the everlasting God] He had rather say the Commandment of the everlasting
God here then his Commandment, to set out the more the dignity of his office,
by such an Author thereof.

Made known to all nations] i. e. Made known to very many nations, Hyperbole.

The Gospel though it was to be made known to all nations, yet as yet it was
not made known to all, but to very many it was.

For the obedience to the faith] i. e. For this end that they might know the
faith, that is, the Gospel, or the doctrine of their Salvation, and believe it,
or obey it.

The faith is taken here by a Metonymie for the Gospel, or Doctrine of man's
Salvation, which is the object of our faith.

Ver. 27. To God only wise] q. d. That is, to God who is only wise, etc.

These words relate to those verse. 25. Now to him that is of power, etc.

Only wise] God is called The only wise, as Christ said he was the only
good, when he said there was None good but God, Luke 18.19. that is, he is
called the only wise because he is the only wise by himself or by his
Essence, for no others are wise after that manner, but God; for the creatures
are wise only by participation of his wisdom: And their wisdom is finite, and
concluded within a little compass, whereas His is Infinite.

The Apostle speaks here of God the Father as appears by that, that he adds
through Jesus Christ; but he calls him The only wise, Not in opposition to any
of the persons of the blessed Trinity (who have the same essence with himself)
as though the other persons were inferior to him in wisdom: But he calls him
so, only in opposition to the Creatures.

The Apostle makes mention here of the wisdom of God, that he might bring men
to admire and adore that his wisdom; and that he might persuade them, that it
was of the great wisdom of God, that the Mystery which he speaks of, was kept
secret, since the world began, and is now at the last revealed and made
manifest, though they knew not ^he reason of it. For men are prone to open
their mouth, and question the wisdom of God, where they see no reason of his
doing with their dim eyes.

Be glory through Jesus Christ] i. e. Be glory ascribed by us through Jesus
Christ. He adds through Jesus Christ, because our Spiritual Sacrifices are
acceptable to God through Jesus Christ as S. Peter speaks, 1 Pet. 2.5. And are
to be offered up through him.

FINIS.

