

THe Parliament is held, Bills and Complaints
Heard and reformed, with several restraints
Of usurpt freedom; instituted Law
To keep the Commonwealth of Bees in awe.
THE PARLIAMENT OF BEES, With their proper Characters.

OR A Bee-hive furnished with twelve Honey- combs, as Pleasant as Profitable.

Being an Allegorical description of the actions of good and bad men in these
our days.

By JOHN DAY, Sometimes Student of Caius College in Cambridge.

OVIDIVS. -- Mihi Flavus Apollo Pocula Castaliae plena ministret Aquae.

LONDON: Printed for William Lee, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's
Churchyard near Paul's Chain. 1641.

To the worthy Gentleman Mr. George Butler professor of the Arts Liberal, And
true Patron to Neglected Poesy, All Health and Happiness.
Worthy Sir,
I May be thought bold, if not impudent, (upon so little acquaintance) to make
this saucy trespass upon your patience; But fame, whose office, (like the
Nomenclators at Rome) is to to take notice and proclaim the Name and virtues
of every Noble Personage, has given you out for so Ingenuous a professor of the
Arts, and so bountiful a patron of poor scholars it has imboldned me, to
present my Hive of Bees to your favorable protection; and when I remember how
Lewis the eleventh (of that Name) King of France took notice, and bountifully
rewarded a decayed Gardener, who presented him with a bunch of Carrets, I doubt
not of their kind and generous entertainment; upon which assurance I rest ever.

Yours in all service devote. JOHN DAY.

The Arguments of the 12. Characters or Colloquies.
Prorex. Character 1. Or the Mr. Be.
THe Parliament is held, Bills and Complaints
Heard and reformed, with several restraints
Of usurpt freedom, instituted Law,
To keep the Commonwealth of Bees in awe.
Elimozinas. Char. 2. Or the Hospitable Be.
THe Author in his Russet Be,
Characters Hospitality,
Describes his Hive, and for his feasts
Appoints fit days, and names his guests.
Thraso. Char. 3. Or the Plush Be.
INvention here does Character
A near vainglorious Reveller:
Who scorns his kindred, grindes the Poor,
Hunts only Riot and his (why not).
Armiger. Char. 4. Or the field Be.
THe Poet under Armiger,
Shadows a soldiers Character,
His worth, the Courteous coy neglect,
His Pen does sparingly Detect.
Rivales. Char. 5.
TWo Rival Bees do here express,
Good things grow loathsome through excess:
Flowers, in the Spring trod under feet,
In winter would be counted sweet.
Poetaster, Char. 6.
HEre Invention aims his drift,
At Poets wants, and Patrons thrift:
Servile scorn, and Ignorant Pride
He spurns and justly does deride.
Parcimonious. Char. 7. The thrifty Be.
THe thrifty Be, that hoards up wax,
The idle Loyterer here does tax:
Who toils not whilst his strength does serve,
May with * Cicada sing, yet sterve -- The Grasshopper.
Foenerator. Char. 8. The broaking Be.
IN this the Poet lineats forth,
That bounty feeds desert and worth:
Brands usury, inveighs against bribes,
And Fenerators hive describes.
Pharmacopolis. Char. 9. The Quacksalver
THis Colloquie is characters
Of an impestrous Quacksalver:
Who, to steal practice, and to vent
His drugs would buy a Patient.
Inamorato. Char. 10. The Passionate Be.
IN this the Poet spends some Art,
To character a Lovers smart:
Who for a sigh his love let fall,
Prepares a solemn Funeral.
Obron in progressu. Char. 11. Obron in progress.
OBron his royal progress makes,
To Hybla where he gives and takes
Presents, and privileges, Bees
Of worth he crowns with offices.
Rexacillium Char. 12. The Kings bench Bar.
OBron in his Starchamber sits,
Sends out Sub-paenas, high Court writs:
For the swarm of Bees, Degradeth some,
Frees others, all share Legal sum.
The Authors Commission to his Bees.
ABroad my pretty Bees: I hope you will find
Neither rough tempest, nor commanding wind
To check your flight, carry an humble wing,
Buzze boldly what I bid, but do not sting
Your generous Patron: wheresoere you come
Feed you on wax, leave them the Honey-combe:
Yet if you meet a tart Antagonist,
(Or discontented rugged Satyrist)
That sleights your Errant, or his Art that pendit,
Cry, Tanti: Bid him kiss his Muse -- and mend it:
If then they Meawe, reply not you, but bring
Their names to me, I Will send out Waspes shall sting
Their Malice to the quick; If they cap words,
Tell 'em your Master is a twisting cord's
Shall make pride skip; if I must needs take pains,
'T shall be to draw blood from Detractions veins,
Tho shevelld like Parchment, Art can make em bleed,
And what I vow, Apollo has decreed:
Your whole commission in one line's enrowld,
Be valiantly free, but not too bold.
John Day.

The Book to the Reader.
IN my commission I am charged to greet
And mildly kiss the hands of all I meet,
Which I must do, or never more be seen
About the Fount of sacred Hippocreene.
Smooth sockt Thalia takes delight to dance
In The Schools of Art, the door of ignorance
She sets a Cross on; Detractors she does scorn,
Yet kneeles to Censure, (so it be true borne)
I had rather fall into a Beadles hands
That reads, and with his reading understands,
Then some Plush-Midas, that can read no further
But Bees? whose penning? mew, this man does murder
A writers credit and wronged poesy
(Like a rich Diamond dropped into the Sea)
Is by him lost for ever, quite through read me,
Or amongst wast paper into Pastboard knead me,
Press me to death, so tho your churlish hands
Rob me of life, I Will save my paper lands
For my next heir, who with Poetic breath
May in sad Elegy record my death.
If so: I wish my Epitaph may be
Only three words, Opinion murdered me.
Liber Lectori Candido.
The Parliament of Bees.
Character 1: Prorex, or the Master Bees Character.
A Parliament is held, Bills and complaints
Referd and heard, with several restraints
Of usurpt freedom, Instituted law,
To keep the common wealth of Bees in awe.
Speakers. Prorex, Aulicus, Oeconomicus, Dicastes, Speaker:
Prorex. TO us, who warranted by Obrons love,
Write our self Mr. Be, both field and grove,
Garden and Orchard, lawnes and flowrie meades,
Where th'amorous wind plays with the golden heads
Of wanton Cowslips, Dasies in their prime,
Some loving Marigolds, the blossomed Thyme,
The blew-veind Violets, and the Damask rose,
The stately Lilly, mistress of all those,
Are allowd and given by Obrons free areede,
Pasture for me and all my swarms to feed.
Now that our will and sovereign intent,
May be made known, we call this parliament,
And as the wise determiner of power,
Proportion, time to moments, minutes, hours,
Weeks, months, years, ages, distinguished day from night
Winter from Summer, profunditie from height
In Sublunaries, as in the course of Heaven
The bodies Metaphysicall run even,
Zeniths and Zones have their apt stations,
Planets and Stars their Constellations,
With Orbs to move in, so divinely made
Some spherically move, some retrograde,
Yet all keep course; so shall it be our care
That every Family have his proper Sphere.
And to that purpose, Auticus be groom
O fall our lodgings, and provide fit room
To lay in wax and Honey, both for us
And all our household: Oeconomicus,
Be you our steward, carefully to fit
Quotidian diet, and so order it,
Each may have equ^ll portion: And beside
Needful provision, carefully provide
Store against war and Famine: Martio thee
I have found valiant, thy authority
(Being approved for Discipline in arms)
Shall be to muster up our warlike swarms
Of winged lances, for like a peaceful King,
Although we were, we are loath to use our sting.
Speaker, inform us what petitions
Our Commons put up at these Sessions.

A bill preferred against the Humble Be.

Speaker. A Bill preferred, against a public wrong:
The surly Humble Be, who has too long
Lived like an Outlaw, and will neither pay
Honey nor wax, do service, nor obey)
But like a fellon coucht under a weed
Watches advantage to make boot and feed
Upon the top-branch blossoms, and by stealth
Makes dangerous inroads on your commonwealth,
Robs the day-labourer of his golden prize
And sends him weeping home, with empty thighs.
Thus like a thief, he flies ore hill and down
And Out-law-like does challenge as his own
Your Highness due, nay Pyratick detaines
The waxen fleet sailing upon your plains.

Prorex. A great abuse, which we must have redrest
Before it grows to high: on too the rest.

A bill preferred against the Waspe.

Speaker. A bill preferred against the Waspe; a Fly
Who Merchant-like under preteuce to buy
Makes bold to borrow, and paies too.

Pro: But when?

Speaker. Why ad Kalendas Graecas, never then.

A bill against the Hornet.

Speaker. There Is the strange Hornet, who does ever wear
A scaly armor, and a double Spear,
Coucht in his front, rifles the Merchants packs
Upon the Rhode, your honey and your wax
He does by stealth transport to some strange shore,
Makes rich their hives, and keeps your own groves poor.

Prorex. I thank your Industry, but we will devise
A statute that no such Outlandish flies
Shall carry such high wing:

A bill preferred against the Drone:

Speaker. Yet these alone
Do not afflict us, but the lazy droane
Our native country Be, who like the Snaile
(That bankrowt-like makes his own shell his jayle
All the day long) Ith'evening plays the thief,
And when the laboring Bees have taken relief,
Be gone to rest, against all right and law
Acts burglary, breaks open their house of straw,
And not alone makes pillage of their hives;
But (Butcher-like) bereaves them of their lives.

Prorex. Against all these Out-lawes. Martio be thou
Lieutenant General, thou know well how
To hamper such Delinquents. Dicastes thee
We make our advocate, thy office be
To moderate each difference and jar
In this our civil Oeconomicke war,
And let both plaintiff, and defendant be
Heard and dispatched for conscionable fee
And more to keep our Anomoi in awe
Our self (the chief) will live under a law. (sine leges viventes)


Dicast. To each desert I Will render lawful weight,
The scale of justice shall use no deceit:

Prorex. It looses name and nature, if it should,
Next Villicus, thou that frequentst the wood
Our painful russet Be, we create thee
Chief baylife both of fallow-field and lee?
Appoint each Be his walk, the medow-bee
Shall not encroach upon the upland lee,
But keep his bound, if any with intent
To wrong our state fly from our government,
Hoarding their honey up in rocks or trees,
Sell or transport it to our enemies,
Break down their Garners, seize upon their store,
And in our name divide it amongst the poor,
Only to us reserve our royalties,
High ways and wastes, all other specialties
We make thee ruler of Vill: and I Will impart
To all with a free hand and faithful heart:

Pro. Now break up Court, and each one to his toil,
Thrive by your labors, drones live a'the spoil,
Fear neither Waspe, nor Hornet, forreyners
Be bard from being intercommoners,
And having labored hard from light to light,
With golden thighs, come singing home at night,
For neither Droane, Waspe, Fly nor Humble-Bee,
Shall dare to rob you of your treasury.
So to your Summer harvest, work and thrive
Bounti's the blessing of the laborers hive.

Eleemozynus. Character. 2. The Hospitable Be.
THe Author in his Russet Be,
Characters Hospitality,
Describes his hive; and for his feasts
Appoints fit days, and names his guests.
Speakers. Eleemozynus. Cordato.
Cordato: Your hiv's a rare one, Rome did never raise
A work of greater wonder.

Eleemozynus. Spare your praise,
It Is finished, and the cost stands on no score,
None can for want of payment, at my door
Curse my foundation; seeing the smoke go
Out of those lovers, for whose straw I owe.

Cordato. Why to your hive have ye so many ways?

Elemozynus. They answer just the number of seven dais,
On Mondayes such, whose fortunes are sunck low,
By good houskeeping, I Will my alms bestow.
On Tewsdaies such as all their life-times wrought
Their countries freedom, and her battles fought;
On Wedensdaies, such as with painful wit
Have dived for knowledge in the sacred writ;
On Thursdayes such as proved unfortunate
In Counsel, and high offices of state;
On Fridayes such as for their Conscience sake
Are kept in bonds; on Saturdaies I Will make
Feasts for poor Bees past labor, Orphane fry
And widows ground in Mils of usury.
And Sundays for my Tenants and all Swains
That labor for me on the groves and plains.
The windows of my hive, with blossoms dight
Are Porters to let in (our comfort) light,
In number just six hundred, sixty five,
'Cause in so many days the Sun does drive
His Chariot (stuck with beams of burnished gold,)
About the world by Sphericall Motion rowld,
For my alms shall diurnall progress make
With the free sun in his bright Zodiac.

Cordato: Some Bees set all their Tenants on the Rack
Not to feed bellyes, but to cloth the back.

Eleemo. I with their actions hold no Sympathy,
Such eat the poor up, but the poor eat me.

Cor. And you will perform all this?

Eleem. Fair and upright
As are the strict vows of an Anchorite,
An alms that by a Niggards hand is served
Is mold and gravelly bread, the hunger-sterv'd
May take, but cannot eat: I Will deal none such
Who with free hand shakes out but Crumbs, gives much.

Cordato. You Will have bad helps in this good course of life,
You might do therefore well to take a wife.

Eleemo. A wife? when I should have one hand in Heaven
To write my happiness (in leaves as even
And smooth as Porphyry) she would by the other
Pluck me quite down, virtue scarce knows a mother.
Pardon sweet Females, I your Sex admire,
But dare not sit too near your wanton fire,
Fearing your fairer beauties tempting flame
My sound affections might put out of frame.
In like manner said Alexander by the daughters of Drius.

Nescio quid latentis veneni habet caro foeminea, Vt prudentiores citius
corrumpat.


Card. Who then shall reap the golden crop you sow?
It Is half a curse to have wealth, and not to know
Whom to call heir.

Eleemo: My heirs shall be the poor
Bees wanting limbs, such as in days of yore
Pend learned Canzons, for no other meed,
But that in them unletterd Bees might read,
And reading lay up knowledge, being alive
Such I Will maintain, and being dead my hive
Honey and wax I will bequeath to build
A skep where weekly meetings may be held
To read and hear such ancient moral sawes
As may teach ignorance the use of laws;
And these will be a true Inheritance,
Not to decay, neither sword, fire, nor chance,
Thunder of Jove, nor mundane Casualties
Can ruin the succession of these:
Manors, Parkes, Towns, nay Kingdoms may be sold,
But still the poor stand like a Lords freehold
Vnforfeited; of all lawe-tricks not one
Can throw the poor out of possession:
Should I loose all my hives and waxen wealth,
Out of the poor man's dish I should drink health,
Comfort and blessings, therefore keep aloof
And tempt no further, whilst I live my Roof
Shall cover naked wretches, when I dye
I Will dedicate it to Saint Charity.

Character 3.
Thraso or Polypragmus. The Plush Be.
INvention here does Character
A mere vaineglorious Reveller,
Who scorns his equals, grindes the Poor
Hunts only Ryots, and his (::)
Speakers. Polypragmus. Servant.
Poly. The Room smells: foh, stand off, yet stay dee hear,
O'th saucy Sun, which mounted in our sphere,
Strives to outshine us?

Ser: So the poor Bees hum.

Pol: Poor Bees? potguns, Illegitimate scum
And bastard flies, taking adulterate shape
From reeking dunghils, if that meddling ape
Zanying my greatness, dares but once presume
To vie expense with me, I will consume
His whole hive in a month. Say you that saw
His new-raisd frame, how is it built?

Ser. Of straw
Dyed in quaint colors, here and there a row
Of Indian bents, which make a handsome show.

Poly. How, straw and bents, say? I will have one built
Like Pompeys Theater, the seeling guilt
And enterseam'd with Pearl, to make it shine
Like high Jove's palace, my descents divine.
My great Hall I have paved with Clouds, which done
(By wondrous skill) an Artificial Sun
Shall roll about, reflecting golden beams,
Like Phoebus dancing on the wanton streams,
And when it is night, just as that Sun goes down
I Will have the Stars draw up a silver Moon,
In her full height of glory, over head
A roof of woods, and Forests I Will have spread.
Tree's growing down-wards, full of Fallow-deare,
When of the sudaine (listening) you shall hear
A noise of Horns, and hunting, which shall bring
Acteon to Diana in the spring,
Where all shall see her naked skin: and there
Acteons hounds shall their own Master tear,
As Emblem of his folly that will keep
Hounds to devour and eat him up asleep.
All this I Will do, that men with praise may crown
My fame for turning the world upside-downe,
And what plush Bees sit at this Flesh-flies Table.

Ser. None but poor lame ones and the ragged rabble.

Poly: My board shall be no manger for scabd Jades,
To lick up provender, no Be that trades
Sucks Honey there.

Ser. poor scholars.

Poly: Beg and sterve,
Or steal and hang, what can such rogues deserve?
Gallows and Gibbets, hang them: give me Lutes
Vials and Clarions, such Music suites
Scholars like common Beadles, lash the times,
Whip our abuse, and fetch blood of our crimes,
Let him feed hungry Scholars, fetch me whores,
They are man's bliss, the other Kingdoms sores:
We gave in charge to seek the grove for Bees
Coming in Cookerie, and rare qualities
And wanton females, that sell sin for gold.

Ser: Some of all sorts you have.

Pol. They are stale and old
I have seen 'em twice.

Ser: We have multiplied your store
Unto a thousand.

Pol. More, let me have more
Then the Grand signior. And my change as rare
Tall, low, and middle-siz'd, the brown and fair.
I Would give a Prince his ransom now to taste
Black Cleopatras cheek, only to wast
A richer pearl then that of Anthonyes,
That fame might write up my name and race his.
Oh that my mother had been Paris whore,
And I might live to burn down Troy once more,
So that by that brave light I might have ran
At barly-brake with my sleek curtezan.
Yet talk of Scholars? see my face no more.
Let the Portcullis down and bolt the door.
But one such tattered ensign here being spread
Would draw in numbers, here shall my rogues be fed;
Charge our Mechanicke Bees to make things meet
To manacle base beggars hands and feet,
And call it Polypragmus whipping post
Orth' beggars ordinary, they shall taste my roast.
And if ye spy a Be that has a look,
Stigmaticall, drawn out like a black book,
Full of Greek (...); to such I Will give large pay,
To watch and ward for poor Bees night and day,
And lash 'em soundly if they approach my gate,
Whipcord's my bounty, and the rogues shall have it.
The poor are but the earths dung fit to lie
Covered in muck-heaps, not offend our eye.
Thus in your bosoms Jove his bounty flings
What are gold Mines, but a rich dust for Kings
To scatter with their breath, as chafe with wind.
Let me then that have gold, bear a Kings mind
And give till my arm aches, who bravely powers
But into a wenches lap such golden showers,
May be Jove's equal, there his ambition ends
In obscure Rivalship, but he that spends
A world of wealth, makes a whole world his debtor,
And such a noble spender is Jove's better:
That man I Will be, I Am Alexanders heir
To one part of his mind, I wish there were
Ten worlds,

Sir. How for to conquer?

Pol. No to sell
For Alpine hills of silver, I could well
Husband that Merchandise, provided I
Might at one feast draw all that treasure dry.
Who hoards up wealth is base, who spends it brave.
Earth breeds gold, so I tread but on my slave

Ser. Oh wonderful! yet let all wonder pass
He Is a great Be, and a vainglorious ass.

Character 4.
Armiger. The field Be.
THe Poet under Armiger
Shadows a soldiers Character
His worth, the Courtiers coy neglect
His pen does sparingly detect.
Speakers. Armiger. Done. Cocadillio. Prorex.
Arm: Is Master Be at leisure to speak Spanish
With a Be of service?

Don. No.

Arm. Smoaked Pilcher vanish:
Proud Don with th'oaker face, I Would but desire
To meet thee on a breach midst smoke and fire,
And for Tobacco, whiffing Gunpowder
Out of a brazen pipe, that should puff louder
Then thunder roares, there (though illiterate Dawe)
Thou nere could spell, thou should read Canon law.
How the Iades prance in golden trappings, ho?
Is master Be at leisure.

Don: What to do?

Arm: To hear a soldier speak.

Don: I cannot tell,
I am no eare-picker.

Are: Yet you hear well,
Ye'ar of the Court?

Don: The Mr. Bees chief harbor.

Arm. Then Don you li'd, you are an eare-picker.

Don. Well, if thou come to beg a suit at Court,
I shall descend so low, as to report
Thy paper business:

Arm. I beg proud Don,
I scorn to scrible: my petition
Is written on my bosom in red wounds.

Don. I am no Surgeon Sir: Alloone.

Arm. Base hounds!
Thou god of gay aparrell, what strange looks
Make suit to do thee service? Mercers books
Show men's devotions to thee, Hell cannot hold
A Fiend more stately: my acquaintance sold,
Cause poor? stood now my beaten tailor by me,
Pleiting of my rich hose, my silke-mannye me,
Drawing upon my Lords-ships Courtly calfe
Payers of embroydered stockings, or but half
A dozen things called creditors, had my Barber
Perfumed my lowzy thatch (this nitty harbor)
These pi'd-wingd Butterflies wud know me than,
But they nere landed in the I Will of Man.
That such a thing as this, a decoy fly
Should buzze about the ear of Royalty,
Such whale-bon'd bodied rascals, that owe more
To Linnen-drapers, to new vampe a whore,
Then all their race from their grand beldame forth
To this their reign in clothes were ever worth,
That such should tickle a commanders ear
With flattery, when we must not come near,
But stand (for want of clothes) tho we win towns
Amongst almsbasket men, such silken clownes
When we with blood deserve, share our reward
We held scarce fellow-mates to the black guard;
Why should a soldier being the worlds right arm
Be cut off by the left? (infernal charm)
Is the world all ruff and feather? is desert
Bastard? does custom cut of his child's part
No difference twixt a wild goose and a swan,
A Tailor and a true borne gentleman?
So the world thinks, but search the Heralds notes,
And you shall find much difference in their coats.

Pro: A field Be speak with me? bold Armiger,
Welcome, thy bosom is a register
Of thy bold Acts: virtue's still poor I see.

Armi. Poor? rich:

Pro. In scars:

Arm. In wealth, in honesty.
Since I first read my ABC of war,
In nine set fields I sayld by that bright star,
Ere I was tronchion high, I had the style
Of beardlesse Captain, and I all this while
Drild under honesty, near purst dead pay,
Never made week the longer by a day.
A soldier dead, his pay did likewise dye,
And still I served one General honesty.
From his own trencher I was daily fed
With Canon bullets, taught to chewe steel and lead,
Nay digest Iron, and when ere I dye
I Will have no Epitaph but honesty
Writ over me.

Pro. I know it, thou black Swan,
I have seen this Be, (in his fate more then man)
Write in the field such stories with his sting,
That our best leaders reading ore his writing
Swore it was a new philosophy of fighting,
His acts were so remarkable in one field
Fought against the surly waspe, (I needs must yield
Desert his due,) having bruizd my filmy wing,
And in fierce combat blunted my keen sting
(Beaten into a tuft of Rosemary)
This manly Be (armd with true honesty)
Three times that day redeemed me, and bestrid
My body with Colossus thighs, he did,
Whilst all the thunderbolts that war could throw
At me, fell on his head he cannot now
Choose but be honest still, and valiant: still
His hive with wax and honey-combes I Will fill,
And in reward of thy bold chivalrie
Make thee commander of a Colonie,
Wishing all such as honor Discipline
To serve him, and make honesty their shrine.

Character 5.
Poetaster. Poetical Be.
HEre Invention aims his drift
At Poets wants and patrons thrift,
Servile scorn and Ignorant pride
Free Judgment slightly does deride.
Speakers. Gnatho. Iltriste. Poetaster.
Ilt: A Scholar speak with me?

Gn: He says a Poet,
I think no less for his apparel show it,
He Is of some standing, his cloth cloak is worn
To a searge.

Ilt: He Is poor, that proves his high things scorn
Mundane felicity, disdaines to flatter
For empty air, or like crow poets chatter
For great men's crumbs. But what is his suite to me.

Gn: To beg a dinner, old dame charity
Lame of all four limps out, and sounds a Call
For all the rogues.

Ilt: Out senseless Animal,
Hearing of my retirement, and the hate
(...) bear to Court attendance, and high state,
He Is come perhaps to write my Epitaph.

Gn: Some lowzy ballad? I cannot choose but laugh
At these poor squitter pulps.

Ilt: Thou ignorant elfe
(...)hold he know this, he would make thee hang thy self
In strong Iambicks:

G: what is that hemp? or flax?

Ilt: A halter stretch thee, such ill-tutord jacks
Poison the fame of Patrons, I shall I doubt me,
be thought Jobs wife, I keep such scabs about me.
Seal up thy lips, and if thou needs must sin,
Do It privately, out spaniell, bring him in.

Gn: He Is come: Poet: to you my love presents this book.

Ilt. I am unworthy on it. Except a hook
Hung at each line to choke me, stay what name
Have given thy brat? To the most honored Dame.
Come lying into the world? be thy leaves torn,
Rent, and used basely, as thy title's borne?

Gn. Rare sport: no marveile if this poet begs
For his lame verses, they have nor feet nor legs.

Po. Nor thou humanity.

Ilt. Go burn this paper spright.

Gn. Sir your dark Poetry will come to light:

Poet. You are not noble, thus to wound the heart,
Tear and make martyrs of the limbs of art,
Before examination: Caesar taught
No such Court doctrine, Alexander thought
Better of Homers lofty Iliades,
And hugged their Mr. tho this, and such gald jades
Were spurre-gald-hackneyes, kick at their betters, though
Some hide-bound worldlings neither give, nor show
Countenance to Poets: yet the noble spirit
Loves virtue for it own sake, and rewards merit
Tho nere so meanly habited, nor Be
That frequents Hibla, takes more pains then we
Do in our Canzons, yet they live and thrive
Richly, when we want wax to store our hive.

Ilt: I honor Poesy, nor dislike I thee,
Only thy fawning title troubled me,
I love your groves, and in your libraries,
(Amongst quaint odes, and passionate Elegies)
Have read whole volumes, of much injured dames
Righted by poets; assume thy brightest flames,
And dip thy pen in worm wood-juyce for me,
Can write a satyr? Tart authority
Do call 'em Libels: can write such a one?

Poet: I can mix ink, and copperesse.

Ilt: So go on.

Poet: Dare mingle poison with 'em.

Ilt: Do It for me,
Thou have the theorie.

Poet: Yes each line must be
A cord to draw blood.

Ilt: Good.

Poet. A ly to dare
The stab from him it touches.

Ilt: Better, rare.

Poet: Such satyrs, as you call 'em, must lance wide
The wounds of men's corruptions, open the side
Of vice, search deep for dead flesh and rank coars.
A Poets ink can better cure some soars
Then surgeons balsum.

Ilt: Undertake this cure,
I Will crown thy pains with gold.

Boet: I Will do it be sure,
But I must have the parties Character.

Ilt: The Mr: Be.

Poet. That thunder does deter
And fright my muse, I will not wade in ills
Beyond my depth, nor dare I pluck the quils
Of which I make pens, out of the Eagles claw.
Know I am a loyal subject.

Ilt: A jack-dawe.
This baseness follows your profession,
You are like common beadles, easily won,
To whip poor Bees to death (scarce worth the striking,
But fawn with slavish flattery, and throw liking
On great droanes vices, you clap hands at those
Which proves your vices friends and virtues foes,
Where the true Poet indeed does scorn to guilde
A cowards tomb with glories or to build
A sumptuous Pyramid of golden verse
Over the ruins of an ignoble hearse.
His lines like his invention are borne free,
And both live blameless to eternity.
He holds his reputation so dear,
As neither flattering hope, nor servile fear
Can bribe his pen to temporize with Kings,
The blacker are his crimes, the louder sings,
Go, go thou dare not, can not write, let me
Invoke the help of sacred Poesy.
May not a woman be a Poet?

Poet. Yes
And learn the art with far more easiness
Then any man can do, for Poesy
Is but a feigning, feigning is to lie,
And women study that art more then men.

Ilt. I am not fit to be a Poet then;
For I should leave off feigning and speak true.

Poet. You Will nere then make good Poet.

Ilt: Very few,
I think be good.

Poet: I think so too.

Ilt: Be plain.
How might I do to hit the Mr. vain
Of Poesy?

Poet: I descend from Persius,
He taught his pupils to breed Poets thus,
To have their temples girt and swadled up
With night-caps: To steal juice from Hebees cup,
To steep their barren crowns in, pilfer clouds
From off Parnassus top. To build them shrowds
Of laurel boughs to keep invention green,
Then drink nine healths of sacred Hippocreene
To the nine muses, this says Perseus,
Will make a Poet, I think cheper thus,
Gold, music, wine, tobacco, and good cheer
Make Poets soar aloft, and sing out clear.

Ilt. Are you born Poets?

Poet. Yes.

Ilt. So die.

Poet. Die never.

Ilt: My miserie's then a Poet, that lives ever,
For time has lent it such eternity;
And full succession it can never dye,
How many sorts of Poets are there?

Poet: Two,
Great and small Poets:

Ilt: Great and small ones? so
Which do you call the great? the fat ones?

Poet: No,
But such as have great heads which emptyed forth
Fill all the world with wonder at their worth.
Proud flies, swollen big with breath and windy praise,
Yet merit brakes, and nettles stead of bays.
Such, title Cods, and Lobsters of arts Sea;
The small ones, call the shrimps of Poesy,
The greater number of spawne feathered Bees
Fly low like Kites, the other mount on trees,
Those peck up dunghill garbadge, these drink wine
Out of Jove's cup: those mortal, these divine.

Ilt: Who is the best Poet.

Poet. Emulation,
The next necessity; but Detraction
The worst of all.

Ilt. Imagine I were one,
What should I get by it?

Poet. Why opinion.

Ilt. I Have too much of that already, for it is known
That in opinion I am overthrown,
Opinion is my evidence, Judge and jury,
Opinion has betrayed me to the fury
Of vulgar scandal, partial opinion
Gapes like a Sheriff for execution.
I wonderd still how Scholars came undone,
And now I see it is by opinion;
That foe to worth, sworn Enemy to art,
Patron of ignorance, Hang man of desert,
Ask any man what can betray a Poet
To scandal? base opinion shall do it.
I Will therefore be no Poet, no nor make
Ten muses of your nine, my reason take.
Verses (tho freemen borne,) are bought and sold
Like slaves; their makers too, (that merit gold)
Are fed with shalls: whence grows this slight regard?
From hence Opinion gives their reward.

Character 6.
Rivales.
INvention labors to discover
The pretty passions of a lover,
Showing how in amorous fits,
Long lost, a Be may find her wits.
Speakers. Arethusa. Vlania.
Well met fair beauty, pray you can you tell
News of Meletus?
Vl. Such a Be does dwell,
In my fathers hive, but ask you as a friend?

Areth. Yes, and as one who for his good would spend
Living and life.

Vla. Yet not so much as I.

Areth: Why do you love him?

Vla. I Am mine own echo, I,

Areth: Wherefore?

Vla. I know not, there is some fallacy,
For not a Village fly, nor meadow Be
That traffikes daily on the neighbor plain,
But will report how all the winged train
Have su'd to me for love, when we have flowne,
In swarms out to discover fields new blown,
Happy was he could find the forwardst tree
And cull the choicest blossoms out for me:
Of all their labors they allowd me some
And like my Champions mand me out, and home,
Yet I lovd none of them, Philon a Be
Well skild in verse and amorous Poesy,
As we have sat at work, both of one rose
Has humd sweet canzons both in verse and prose,
Which I nere minded, Astrophel a Be
(Although not so poetical as he)
Yet in his full invention quick and ripe,
In summer Evenings on his well-tuned pipe
Upon a woodbine blossom in the sun
(Our hive being clean swept and our days work done)
Would play me twenty several tunes, yet I
Nor minded Astrophell, nor his melody.
Then there is Amniter, for whose love fair Lead
(That pretty Be) flies up and down the Mead
With rivers in her eyes, without deserving
Sent me trim Akron boughs of his own carving,
To drink May dew and Mead in; yet none of these
My hive-borne play fellows and neighbor bees
Could I affect, until this strange Be came,
And him I love with such an ardent flame
Discretion cannot quench.

Areth: Now I begin
To love him, fresh examples ushers sin,
How does he spend his time?

Vla. Labors and toils,
Extracts more honey out of barren soyles
Then twenty lazy droans, I have heard my father
Steward of the hive profess, that he had rather
Loose half the swarm then him; if a be poor or weak
Grow faint on's way, or by misfortune break
A wing or leg against a twig; alive
Or dead, he will bring into the Mrs. Hive
Him and his burden; but the other day
On the next plain, there grew a mortal fray
Betwixt the waspes and us, the wind grew high,
And a rough storm raged so impetously,
Our bees could scarce keep wing, then fell such rain,
It made our Colonie forsake the plain,
And fly to garrison, yet still he stood
And against the whole swarm made his party good,
And at each blow he gave, cried out his vow,
His vow and Arethusa, on each bough
And tender blossom he ingraves her name,
With his sharp sting, to Arethusaes fame
He consecrates his actions, all his worth
Is only spent to character her forth.
On damask roses and the leaves of pynes
I have seen him write such amorous moving lines,
In Arethusaes praise, as my poor heart
Have when I read them, envied her desert,
And wept and sighd to think that he should be
To her so constant, yet not pity me.

Areth. Oh.

Vla. Wherefore sigh you?

Areth. Amoratho. Oh
My marble heart melts.

Vla. What sigh and weep you too?

Areth. Yes in mere pity that your churlish fate
Should for true love make you unfortunate.

Vla. I thank you, what this Arethusa is
I do not know, only my suit is this,
If you do know this Be, when you next meet him
(He Is laboring in that mead,) In my name greet him,
And tell him that I love him more, far more
Then Arethusa can, nay I adore
His memory so, that he shall be my Saint;
And when his tender limbs grow weak and faint,
I Will do his labor and mine own, the spring
Being dry grows much unfit for laboring.
To prevent famine and a sudaine dearth,
For his sake I Will befriend the barren earth
And make it fruitful with a shower of tears,
In which I Will drown his scorn and mine own fears.

Areth. What have I heard? Amoratho pardon me,
For I have been (by much) too cruel to thee,
Yet (if as she reports) I find thy heart
Bequeathd to Arethusaes weak desert
Nature shall work a miracle so strange,
All amorous Bee's shall wonder at my change.

Character 7.
Parsimonius. -- The gathering Be.
THe thrifty Be does tantingly deride
The prodigal, inveighing against his pride.
Speakers. Parsimonius. Acolastes.
Par. THou art my kinsman, yet had not thy mother
Been constant to thy father, and none other,
I would have sworn some Emperor had got thee.

Acol. Why so he might, let not opinion sot thee.

Par. Suppose all Kingdoms in the world were bals
And stood'st with a Racket twixt four walls
To toss ad placitum, how would thou play?

Acol. Why as with bals, bandy 'em all away,
They gone play twice as many of the score.

Par: A tennis Court of Kings could do no more
But (faith) what do thou think that I now think
Of thy this days expenses?

Acol: How in drink,
Dice, drabs, and music? why that it was brave.

Par. No, that thou art a proud vainglorious knave,
That teeming womb thy father left so full
Of golden issue, thou like a brainlesse gull,
Have Viper-like eat through: oh here is trim stuff,
A good man's state in garters, rose, and ruff.

Acol. How one man's state? that beggar's wretched poor
That wears but one man's portion, I Will do more,
Had I my will, betwixt my knee and toe
I Would hang more pearl and diamonds then grow
In both the Indies, poor Fucus musk my hose,
Match your old greasy cod-piece.

Parc. Let Us not part foes:
I Would have thee live in compass.

Acol. Fool i will be,
Like Phoebus in the Zodiake, I am he
That would take Phaetons fall, tho I set fire
On the whole world, to be Heavens Charioter.

Par. Tha'st fired too much already, parks and chases
Have no part left of em save names of places.
Tha'st burnt so much, tha'st not one tree to fell,
To make a fire to warm thee by in hell.

Acol. I Will warm me by thy bones then.

Par. Say and hold;
Want fire till then; thy lust will sterve with cold:
It Is voic'd abroad too, that thy lands are sold.

Acol. They are: what then?

Par. And that the money went
Toward great last proud entertainment.

Acol. Its a lie.

Par. I thank you.

Acol. But suppose it true
That I spent Millions, what is all that to you?
Had I for every day in the year a friend,
For each hour in that year a mine to spend,
I Would wast both Indies but i would feast em all.

Parsi. And sterve thy self, still a true prodigal:
What should thy stews have then?

Acol. Out lazy droan,
Thou enviest Bees with stings, 'cause thine is gone.
Plate, Jewels, treasure, all shall fly.

Parsi. They shall,
And then some dunghill give the burial.

Acol. No i will turn pickled thief.

Par. what is that?

A. A pitcate.
If gold keep house, a Sea or land I Will hate,
As to feed riot I the land did brave.
So scorning land, water shall be my grave.
Mean while the circle I Have begun I Will run,
Should the Devil stand in the Center, like the Sun
In his Meridian, my ascent's divine.
The vanity of all mankind is mine.
In me all prodigalls loosenes fresh shall flow
Borrow and spend, never look back what I owe,
Wine, Harlots, Surfeits, rich embroidered clothes,
Strange fashions, all sins sensual, new coynd oaths
Shall feed and fill me, I Will feast every sense.
Naught shall become me ill but innocence.

Parce. Farewell, I spy a wallet at thy back.
Who spends all young, ere age comes, all shall lack.

Character 8.
Inamoratho. The Passionate Be.
IN this, the Poet spends some art,
To character a lovers heart:
And for a sigh, his love let fall,
Prepares a solemn funeral.
Speakers. Chariolus. Arethusa.
Char. OH Arethusa, cause of my souls moving,
Nature, save thee, has no work worth the loving
For when she fashioned thee, she summoned all
The Graces, and the Virtues Cardinal;
Nay the whole swarm of Bees came laden home,
Each bringing thee a rich perfection;
And laid them up with such Art in the hive,
Thy brain, as since that, all thy beauties thrive;
For being mixed at thy creation,
They made thee fair, past Art or imitation.

Aret. It Is he, is not your name Chariolus?
Son to our Mr. Be?

Char. What art that thus
Bluntly salut'st me?

Aret. One that has to say
Somewhat to you from lovely Arethusa.

Cha. How does she?

Ar. Well.

Cha. Ill tutored Be, but well?
The word's too sparing for her, more than well;
Nay, more than excellent's an Epithet
Too poor for Arethusa.

Aret. This is right
As the Be told me, Can she better well
Than with the Gods?

Cha. The Gods?

Aret. A passing bell
Proclaimed her death, and the whole swarm of Bees
Mourned at her Hearse in sable liveries:
Long she lay sick, yet would not send, till death
Knocked at life's gate to fetch away her breath:
But just as he came in, go thou (quoth she)
Seek out Chariolus, greet him from me,
And pray him that he would no longer shroud
His fair illustrate splendor in a cloud,
For I am gone from the worlds vanities
Unto the Gods (a pleasing Sacrifice)
Yet there I Will wish him well, and say, Good youth,
I bequeath nothing to him, but my truth.
And even as death arrested her, she cried,
Oh my Chariolus; so with a sigh she di'd.

Cha. So with a sigh she died.

Ar. What mean you, Sir?
I have told him like a foolish messenger,
What I shall first repent.

Cha. Come, let us divide
Sorrows and tears, for with a sigh she died.

Aret. Nay then she lives.

Cha. It Is false, believe it not,
I Will have that sigh drawn on a chariot
(Made of the bones of lovers, who have cried,
Beaten their breasts, sighed for their loves and died)
Covered with azure-colour'd velvet; where
The sun of her affections shall shine clear,
In careless manner, 'bout the canopie
Upon the Blew (in quaint embroyderie)
Arethusa and Chariolus shall stand
As newly married, joined hand in hand.
The chariot shall be drawn by milk-white Swans,
About whose comely necks (as straight as wands,
In stead of reins, there shall hang chains of pearl
As precious as her faith was: The prime girl
That shall attend this chariot shall be Truth,
Who in a robe, composed of ruined youth,
Shall follow weeping, hanging down the head,
As who should say, My sweet companion's dead.
Next shall the Graces march, clad in rich sables,
With correspondent hoods, 'bout which large tables
Of pearl and gold (in rich embroyderie)
Shall hang sad motto's of my misery.

Aret. Oh no, my misery.

Cha. Next these shall go
All Arethusa's virtues in a row:
Her wisdom first in plain Abilliments
(As not affecting gaudy Ornaments)
Next them her chastity attired in white
(Whose chaste eye shall her Epitaph indite)
Looking as if it meant to check desire
And quell th'ascention of the Paphian fire,
Next these her beauty, (that immortal thing)
Decked in a robe that signifies the spring,
The loveliest season of the quartered year,
Last shall her virgin modesty appear,
And that a robe, nor white nor red shall wear
But equally participating both,
Call it a Maiden blush, and so the cloth
Shall be her Hieroglyphicke, on her eye
Shall sit di sretion, who when any spy
Would at that Casement, (like a thief) steal in
Shall like her hearts true porter keep out sin:
These shall be all chief mourners, and because
This sigh killed Arethusa, here weel pawse
And drop a tear, the tribute of her love,
Next this because a sigh did kill my Dove
(A good conceit, I pray forget it not)
At the four corners of this Chariot
I Will have the four winds statued, which shall blow
And sigh my sorrows out, above, below,
Into each quarter, then Sir, on the top
Over all these gaudy trim things, I Will set up
My Statue in jet, my posture this
Catching at Arethusa; my lost bliss:
For over me by Geometrick pins
I Will have her hang betwixt two Cherubins,
As if they had snatched her up from me and earth
(In Heaven to give her a more glorious birth)
The word this what should virtue do on earth?
This I Will have done, and when it is finished: All
That love come to my poor sighs funeral.
Swell gall, break heart, flow tears like a full tide,
For with a sigh fair Arethusa died.

Areth. Rather then thus, your youthful flames should smother,
Forget her thought and entertain another.

Char. Oh never never with the Turtle dove
A sigh shall bear my soul up to my love.

Character 9.
Pharmacopolis. The Quacksalving Be.
THis Satyr is the Character
Of an imposterous Quacksalver,
Who to steal practice and to vent
His drugs would buy a patient.
Speakers. Senilis. Stewart. Pharmacopolis.
Sen. What Is he?

St. The party.

Sen. How? what party Sir?

Stew. A most sweet rogue, an honest Quacksalver:
That sues to be your household Pothecary,

Sen. What sees he in my face that I should buy
His drugs and drenches? my cheek wears a color
As fresh as his, and my veins channell's fuller
Of crimson blood than his; my well-knit joints
Are all trussed round, and need no Physical points.
Read the whole alphabet of all my age,
Amongst sixty letters shall not find one Ach:
My bloud's not boiled with fevers, nor (tho old)
Is It isicled with cramps, or dropsy cold:
I am healthful both in body and in wits,
Coughs, rheumes, catarrhes, gouts, apopleptick fits:
The common sores of age on me nere ran,
No Galenist, nor Paracelsian,
Shall ere read Physic lectue out of me,
I Will be no subject for anatomy.

Phar. They are two good artists, Sir.

Sen. All that I know,
What the Creator did, they in part do,
A true Physitian's a man-maker too.
My kitchen is my Doctor, and my garden,
My college, Master, chief Assistant, Warden,
And Pothecarie, when they give me pills,
They work so gently, I Am not choked with bills,
Ounce, Dram, Dram, the mildest of all these
Is a far stronger grief than the disease.

Phar. Were It not for bills, Physicians might go make
Mustard.

Sen. I know it, nor bills, nor pills I Will take;
I stand on sickness shore, and see men tossed
From one disease to another, at last quite lost:
But on that sea of surfets where they are drowned,
I never hoysting sail am ever sound.

Phar. How, ever sound? were all our Gallants so,
Doctors and Pothecaries might go sow
Dowlasse for saffron-bags, take leave of silk,
And eat green chibbals, and sour butter-milk,
Would you know how all physic to confound?
Why it is done thus, keep but your Gallants sound.

Sen. It Is their own faults, if they before springs or falls,
Emptying wine-glasses fill up urinals.
Man was made sound at first; if he grows ill,
It Is not by course of Nature, but free will:
Distempers are not ours; there should be then,
Were we our selves, no physic, men to men
Are both diseases cause, and the disease.
Thank Fate I Am sound, and free from both of these.

Phar. Steward, my fifty crowns, Read.

St. Not I.

Phar. I Will give you then a glister.

St. Me Sir, why?

Phar. I Will tell your Master, Sir, tho you will take none,
Let me give your Steward a purgation.

St. Why, I am well.

Phar. No, you are too hard bound,
And you must cast me up the fifty pound
I gave you in bribe-powder.

St. Be patient.

Phar. You Will practice on me then.

Sen. If this be true,
My health I see is bought and sold by you:
A Doctor buys me next, whose Mess of potions,
Striking me full of ulcers; oils and lotions
Bequeath me to a Surgeon; last of all
He gives me diet in an Hospital.
Then comes the Scrivener, and he draws my will,
Thus slaves for gold their Mrs. sell and kill,
Nay nay, so got so keep it, for thy fifty
Take here a hundred, we will not now be thriftie,
But of such artles Empiricks I Will beware,
And learn both when to spend and, when to spare.

Character 10.
Fenerator. Or the Usuring Be.
IN which the Poet lineats forth,
That bounty feeds desert and worth:
Checks Counterfeits, inveighs'gainst Bribes,
And Foenerators nest describes.
Speakers. Dicastes. Servitor. Fenerator. Impotens.
Dicastes. What rings this Bell so loud for?

Ser. Suitors great Be
Call for dispatch of business.

D. Say what they be.

Ser. Wrackt Fen-Bees, aged, lame, and such as gasp,
Under late bondage of the cruel waspe.

Dicast. Cheer them with hearty welcomes, in my chair
Seat the Be most in years, let no one dare
To send 'em sad hence, will our Janitors
Observe them nobly, for the Mariners
Marryners Character Are clocks of danger, that do never stand still,
But move from one, unto an other ill,
There dyals hand still points to th'line of death,
And tho they have wind at will, they often loose breath.
Of all our Bees that labor in the mead
I love them, for they earne the dearest bread
That life can buy; when The Elements make war
To ruin all, they'are saved by their good Star.
And for the Gally-slaves, oh love that Be,
Who suffers only for pure Constancy,
What suitors that?

Fen. A very sorry one.

Dic. What makes thee sorry?

Fene. Pale affliction:
My hive is burnt.

Dic. And why to me do come?

Fen. To beg a 100. pound:

Dic. Give him the sum.

Fen. Now the Gods:

Dic. Nay nay, kneel not nor be mistook:
Faces are speaking pictures, thine's a book,
Which if the proof be truly printed, shows.
A page of close dissembling:

Fen. High Heaven knows.

Dic. Nay tho thou be one, yet the mony's thine
Which I bestow on Charity, not her shrine.
If thou cheat'st me; thou art cheated, and have got
(Being Licourish) poison from my Gally-pot
In stead of honey, thou art not my debtor:
I Am never the worse, nor thou (I fear) much better.
Who Is next?

Ser. A one legged Be.

Dic. Oh use him well.

Imp. Cannons defend me, Gunpowder of Hell!
Whom have thou blown up here?

Dic. do know him friend?

Imp. Yes for the Kingdoms pestilence, a fiend,
A moath takes up all petticoats he meets,
Eats Feather-beds, Boulsters, Pillows, Blanquets, Sheets,
And with sale bills, lays Shirts and smocks abed,
In Linen close adultery, and (instead
(A Broakers Of clothes, strows Lavender so strongly on 'em
(Character The owners never more can smell upon 'em.
This Be sucks honey from the bloomes of sin.
Be It nere so rank or foul, he crams it in,
Most of the Timber, that his state repairs,
He hew's out ot'he bones of foundred players,
They feed on Poets brains, he eats their breath.

Dic. Most strange Conception, life begot on death?

Imp. He Is a male powl-cat; a mere heart-bloud soaker,
Amongst Bees the Hornet, but with men a broaker.

Dic. Well Charactered, what scath has he done thee?

Imp. More then my legs loss: in one month eat three
Of my poor fry, besides my wife; this Jew
Though he will eat no pork, eats Bees, it is true.

Dic. He told me, when I asked him why he mournd,
His hive, (and all he could call his) was burnd.

Imp. He Is burnd himself (perhaps) but that's no news,
For he both keeps, and is maintaind by the stews,
He buys their sins, and they pay him large Rents
For a Long-lane of lowzy Tenements.
Built up in stead of Mortar, Straw, and Stones
With poore-pawne-plaister, and sterv'd debtors bones,
He may be fired, his rotten hives are not
To this Autumn Woodsare, Alias Kingdoms rot
I pawnd my weapons, to buy course brown bread,
To feed my fry and me, being forfeited,
Twice so much money as he lent I gave,
To have mine arms again, the griping slave
Swore not to save my soul, unless I cood,
Lay down my stump here, my poor leg of wood
And so hop home.

Dic. Unheard of villainy.

Ser. Is this true?

Fen. I dare not say it is a lie.

Dic. And what say thou to this?

Imp. Nothing but crave
Justice against this Hypocritical knave,
This three-pile-velvet rascal, widows decayer,
The poor fryes beggerer and rich Bees betrayer.
Let him have Russian law for all his sins.

Di. What Is that?

Imp. A 100. blows on his bare shins:

Fen. Come home and take thine arms.

Imp. I Will ha thy legs:
Justice great Be, it is a wronged cripple begs.

Dic. And thou shall have it: I told thee goods ill got
Would as ill thrive, my gift I alter not,
That Is yours. But cunning Be, you played the knave
To crave not needing, this poor Be must have
His request too, else justice loose her chair:
Go take him in, and one his shins stripped bare
In ready payment, give him a 100. strokes:

Imp. Hew down his shanks, as Carpenters fell Oaks.

Dic. Nor think me partial, for I offer thee
A hundred for a hundred.

Imp. Just his usury.

Dic. A hundred pound, or else a hundred blows
Give him the gold, he shall release you those.

Fen. Take it and rot with it.

Imp. Follow thee thy curse:
Wud blows might make all broakers thus disburse.

Character 11.
Obron in Progressu. Obron in Progress.
OBron his royal progress makes,
To Hibl^, where he gives, and takes
Presents, and privileges, Bees
Of worth he crowns with offices.
Speakers. Obron. Agricola. Pastoralis. Flora.
Obron. THe sessions full to avoid the Heat,
In this cool shade each take his seat.

Agr. The winged Tenants of these Lawnes,
Decked with bloomes, and downy pawnes,
Like Subjects faithful just and true,
Bring Obron tribute.

Ob. What are you?

Agr. A poor Be that by Obrons will,
First invented how to till
The barren earth, and in it throw
Seeds that dye, before they grow,
And being well read in natures book,
Devi'sd Plow, Sickle, Sith and hook,
To weed the thistles, and rank brakes,
From the good Corn: his voyage makes,
From Thessalie, my native shrine,
And to great Obron all Divine
Submit my self. This wreath of wheat
(Ripend by Apollos heat)
My bosom filled with ears of corn,
To thee that were before time borne
I freely offer.

Ob. May thy field,
Laden with bounty, profit yield,
May the root prosper, and each ear,
Like a teeming female, bear
April deluge, and May frosts,
Lightnings and Mildews fly thy Coasts;
As thou in service true shall be
To Obrons Crown and Royalty:
True baylife of our husbandry
Keep thy place still; the next:

Past. A Be,
That Is keeper of King Obrons Groves,
Sheepreeve of his flocks and Droves,
His Goats, his Kids, his Ewes, and Lambs,
Steeres and Heyfers, Syres, and Dams,
To express homage at the full,
Greets Obron with this fleece of wool.

Ob. May thy Ews in yeaning thrive,
Stock and increase, stand and survive,
May the Woodsare, Coffe and rot
Dye, or living, hurt thee not,
May the Wolf and wily Fox
Live exiled from thy Herdes and flocks;
Last, not least, prosper thy Grove,
And live thou blessed in Obrons love,
As thou in service true shall be
To us and our high Royalty:
The next.

Vint. High Steward of thy vines,
Taster both of grapes and wines,
In these ripe clusters that present
Full bounty, on his knees low bent,
Pays Obron homage, and in this bole
Brimm'd with grape blood, tender tole
Of all thy vintage.

Obr. May thy grapes thrive
In Autumn, and the roots survive
In churlish winter, may thy fence
Be proof against wild Bores violence:
As thou in service true shall be
To us and our high royalty:
A femall Be thy character?

Flo. Flora, Obrons Gardener,
Huswife both of herbs and flowers,
To strew thy shrine, and trim thy bowers,
With Violets, Roses, Eglantine,
Daffa down, and blew Columbine,
Has forth the bosom of the Spring
Plucked this nose-gay, which I bring
From Eleusis mine own shrine. (Ita Scaliger.)

To thee a Monarch all divine;
And as true impost of my grove,
Present it to great Obrons love.

Obr. Honey deawes refresh thy Meads,
Cowslips spring with golden heads,
July-flowers, and Carnations wear
Leaves double streakt with Maiden hair,
May thy Lillies taller grow,
Thy Violets fuller sweetness owe;
And last of all may Phoebus love
To kiss thee, and frequent thy Grove,
As thou in service true shall be
Unto our Crown and Royalty,
Keep all your places, well we know
Your loves, and will reward 'em too.

Agric. In sign that we thy words believe,
As well the birthday as the eve
We will keep holy; Our winged Swains,
Neither for pleasure, nor for gains,
Shall dare profane't, so lead away
To solemnize this holy day.

Character 11.
Rexacillium. The high Bench Bar.
OBron in his Star Chamber sits,
Sends out Subpoena's, High Court Writs,
To the Mr. Be, degradeth some,
Frees others, all share legal doom.
Speakers. Obron, Fairies, Mr. Be, Prorex, Vespa, Hornet, Humble Be, Fucus or
Droane.
Obr. NOw summon in our Mr. Be,
With all his swarm, and tell him we
Command our homage.

Fai. He is come,
Room for great Prorex there, make room.

Obr. What means this slacknesse?

Pro. Royal Sir,
My care made me a loyterer,
To bring in these transgressing Bees,
Who by deceits and fallacies
Clothed with a smooth and fair intent,
Have wronged me in my government.

Obr. The manner how?

Pro. These wicked three,
The Wasp, the Droane, and Humble Be,
Conspired like Traitors, first the Wasp,
Sought in his covetous paw to grasp
All he could finger, made the Sea
Not only his monopoly;
But with his winged swarms scowr'd the plains,
Robbed and slew our weary Swains
Coming from work: The Humble Be
(A fly as tyrannous as he)
By a strange yet legal stealth,
Nonsuited Bees of all their wealth.
The Drone, a Be more merciless,
Our needy commons so oppress,
By hoording up, and poisoning the earth,
Once in three years he would make a dearth,
A needless one, transporting more
To strangers than would feed our poor,
At quarter day, if any lacks
His rent, he ceaze both honey and wax,
Throwing him out to beg and sterve
For which.

Obr. As they your self deserve
Due punishment, for servants sins
We commit their Masters, Justice wins
More honor, and shines more complete
In virtue, by suppressing great,
Than hanging poor ones; yet because
You have been zealous in our Laws,
Your fault we pardon; for Delinquents
We have legal punishments:
Vespa that pillaged sea and land,
Engrossing all into his hand,
From all we banish, dead or alive,
Never shall Vespa come in Hive;
But like a Pyrat and a Thief,
Steal and pilfer his relief:
Thou have fed ryots, lusts, and rapes,
And drawn vice in such horrid shapes,
As very Horse-flyes, had they known 'em,
For credits cause, yet would not own 'em:
Thou Have made thy Hive a Brothell, acted sin
Against Nature, and the royalty of kin,
So base, as but thy self none could invent:
They are all thine own, and thou their president:
For which, as thou thy fame have lost,
So be thine Arms and Titles crossed
From forth the roll of Heraldrie,
That blazons out true Gentry,
Live ever exiled: Fucus, you
That engrost our Honey deaw,
Bought wax and honey up by the great,
(Transporting it as slaves do wheat)
Your Hive (with honey hid in trees
And hollow banks) our poor lame Bees
Shall share, and even as Vespa so
Unpatroniz'd live banished too.
Last, you that by your surly hum,
Would needs usurp a Praetors room,
Your chamlet gown, your purple hood,
And stately phrase scarce understood,
Or known from this our Mr. Be,
Made th'ignorant think that you were he,
And pay you reverence, for your hate
To th'poore, and envy to our State,
We here degrade and let you fall
To the dunghill, your original;
From Nettles, Hemlocks, Docks and weeds,
(On which your Pesant-linage feeds)
Suck your diet: to be short,
Never see our face, nor haunt our Court.

Pro. And whither must these flies be sent?

Obr. To everlasting banishment,
Underneath two hanging rocks, Charact. Gehennae.

(Where babbling Echo sits and mocks
Poor Travelers) there lies a grove,
With whom the Sun's so out of love,
He never smiles on it, (pale Despair
Calls it his monarchall chair)
Fruit half ripe, hang rivell'd and shrunk
On broken arms, torn from the trunk:
The moorish pooles stand empty, left
By water, stolen by cunning theft
To hollow banks, driven out by Snakes,
Adders, and Newts, that man these lakes:
The mossie weeds half swelter'd, served
As beds for vermin hunger-sterv'd:
The woods are Yew-trees, rent and broke
By whirle-winds, here and there an Oak
Half cleft with thunder, to this grove
We banish them.

All. Some mercy, Jove.

Obr. You should have cried so in your youth,
When Chronos Tempus.
and his Daughter Truth
Sojourned amongst you, when you spent
Whole years in ryotous merriment,
Thrusting poor Bees out of their hives,
Ceazing both honey, wax, and lives,
You should have called for mercy, when
You impaled common blossoms, when
In stead of giving poor Bees food,
You eat their flesh and drunk their blood.

All. Be this our warning.

Obr. It Is too late,
Fairies thrust them to their fate:
Now Prorex our chief Mr. Be,
And Viceroy, thus we lesson thee,
Thy preterit errors we forgive,
Provided you hereafter live
In compass, take again your Crown,
But make your subjects so your own,
As you for them may answer.

Pro. Sir,
(For this high favor you confer)
True loyalty (upon my knee)
I promise both for them and me.

Obr. Rise in our love then, and that you,
What you have promised may pursue,
Chaste Latria I bestow
On vou in Marriage, she will teach you how
(...) your self; fair truth and time,
Boulvatch, and constant Chime,
To all your actions: Now adieu,
Prorex shall again renew
His potent reign: the massy world
Which in Glittering Orbs is hurld
About the poles, be Lord of: we
Only reserve our Royalty,
Field-musicke? Obron must away
For us our Gentle Fayries stay,
In the Mountains and the rocks
We Will hunt the Gray, and little Fox,
Who destroy our Lambs at feed,
And spoil the Neasts, where Turtles breed,
If Vespa, Fucus, or proud Error
Fright thy Bees, and be a terror
To thy Groves, it is Obrons will
As Out-lawes you them seize and kill,
Apollo, and the Muses dance,
Art has banished ignorance,
And chased all flies of Rape and stealth
From forth our winged Commonwealth.

FINIS.

