Sir WILLIAM DAWES's SERMON Preached before the Lord Mayor, April the 11th.
1697.

CLARKE, Mayor.
Martis xiii. die Aprilis 1697. Annoque R. Rs. Wilhelmi Tertii, Angliae, etc.
Nono.
THis Court does desire Sir William Dawes Baronet to Print his Sermon Preached
at the Guild Hall Chapel, on Sunday last, before the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen
of this City.

GOODFELLOW.

A SERMON Preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, AND ALDERMEN, AT
GUILD HALL CHAPEL, On Sunday the 11th of April, being the Anniversary of His
MAJESTY'S CORONATION.

By Sir WILLIAM DAWES, Baronet, D. D. and Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Speed, at the Three Crowns, near the Royal Exchange
in Cornhill, MDCLXXXXVII.

A SERMON PREACHED before the LORD MAYOR,
Proverbs, Chap. IVth, Verse. 34. The former part of the Verse, Righteousness
exalts a Nation.
THE word, which we here translate Righteousness, and which is sometimes used
in Scripture, to signify the particular virtues of Justice or Mercy, has in
many places, more especially of this Book of Proverbs, a more large and
comprehensive signification; taking in the whole of Religion, or the universal
practice of Piety and Virtue. In this sense we find it used no less than three
times in one Chapter, Chap. 11.
where it is opposed to wickedness, transgression, and a persuit of evil in
general, and consequently ought to be generally understood of virtue,
obedience, and a persuit of that which is good. And that this is the sense, in
which it must be here taken, is evident from the opposition of it to sin, in
the Verse out of which I have chosen my Text, Righteousness exalts a Nation,
but sin is a reproach to any People.

By exalting a Nation is meant, the rendering it a great and a famous, a
flourishing and mighty nation, abounding with blessings of all sorts at home,
and respected and reverenced by all abroad: Z^ph. ^. 2^.
a making it, as the Prophet Zephany speaks, a name and a praise among all the
nations of the earth, that so it may be said of it, as it was of old of the
Children of Israel, what one nation in the earth is like this People. 2 Samuel
7.23.


The full sense and meaning then of my Text may be brought within the compass
of this single proposition, viz. that Religion, or the universal practice of
piety and virtue, in any nation, will infallibly make it a great and a happy
nation.

For the clearing and making good of which proposition, I shall endeavor to
prove.

First, That Religion does, in its own nature, very much tend to promote the
public good and prosperity of any nation.

Secondly, That it gives it a secure Title to the protection, favor, and
blessing of God, who is the supreme Lord and Governor of the World, and
sets up or pulls down nations, when and as he pleases.

First, That Religion does, in its own nature, very much tend to promote the
public good and prosperity of any nation. And here, if my time would give me
leave, it would be very easy to show, how great an influence every particular
virtue has, toward the happiness or well-being of any people; but, this being
too large a subject for the present, I must content my self with a short proof
of these following particulars, which, I hope, will abundantly illustrate and
confirm the truth of the proposition now in hand.

First, That Religion conduces very much toward the preserving any nation in
peace, both at home and abroad.

Secondly, Toward the making it cautious, valiant and successful in war.

Thirdly, Toward the increase of it is Riches, plenty and trade, And

Fourthly and Lastly, Toward the gaining honor and respect to it, from all
the nations round about it.

First, That Religion conduces very much toward the preserving any nation in
peace, both at home and abroad.

And First, For Domestic peace, which must certainly be well secured, where
ever the Laws of Religion are well observed, because by these the very springs
and fundamental causes of all intestine quarrels and divisions, in any nation,
will be either effectually stopped, or totally removed. For, as St. James puts
the question, Chap. 4. v. 1
From whence come wars and fightings among you, come they not hence, even of
your lusts, that war in your members? And are not the Laws of Religion
admirably well fitted, for the quieting and suppressing of these Lusts? Will
they not effectually remove those sins, which are the fruitful cause of all our
Civil discords and contentions, and, by so doing, make room for peace and
quietness to come unto us, and encourage and invite them to take up their abode
with us? But, to be more particular.

How is it possible there should be any room for quarrels and contentions, in
that Nation, where all Men's troublesome passions shall be carefully kept under
due government and subjection; where there shall be no black plots of envy, nor
blustering storms of rage and anger, to disturb the common peace and quiet;
where revenge and malice, pride and ambition, shall have no place, but an
universal evenness and sweetness of temper, an universal meekness and
contentedness of mind, shall obtain among Men? where no Man shall invade
another's right or property, but all shall be exactly just in giving each other
their dues, of what nature or kind soever; where Kings shall Rule their People
with equity and tenderness, and Subjects shall obey with Zeal and Loyalty, the
one enjoy his Prerogative secure, and the other be undisturbed in the
possession of their Lawful Rights; where the Duties of all Relations shall be
nicely observed, and every Man shall enjoy his own, and not meddle with that
which belongs to another. In a word, where Men shall heartily and sincerely
love each other, earnestly desire each other's good, and faithfully and
industriously endeavor to promote it: where they shall pity and pass by one
another's Infirmities and Mistakes, be cautious of doing Injuries, and ready to
forgive them, what ground or even pretense for quarrelling can there be in such
a Nation?

And thus it must be, wheresoever true Religion bears an universal sway; for
this sets bounds to our Passions, Col. ^, 5. Romans 12.10. Heb. 13.1. ^it. 2.12.
Mat. 7.12.22.21. Romans 13.7, 8.12, 18.
mortifyeth our inordinate lusts and affections, and fills us with brotherly
love and charity. This it is which teaches us to deny all worldly lusts, to do
to other men, as we would they should do unto us, to give to Caesar, and every
body else, the things that are theirs, and to endeavor, if it be possible, as
much as lies in us, to live peaceably with all men.

And then, as for peace abroad, Religion has already more than half obtained
this, by securing peace at home. The greatest encouragement, which Foreigners
can possibly have to make war upon any Nation, are the Civil Discords and
Intestine Quarrels that devour and weaken it within. They know that a Kingdom
divided against it self cannot stand, and that they shall obtain an easy
victory there, where even their enemies shall destroy one another, and fight,
though not professedly, yet in reality, their Battles, and on their side: but
they know also, by parity of reason, that a Kingdom United in it self can
hardly fall, and that where a Whole Nation shall combine together as one Man,
as Religious Nations always will, it will become Invincible, and, like a mighty
Fortress, secured without with strong and well-cemented Walls, and within by a
resolute and faithful Garrison, not only receive the most impetuous attacks of
their Enemies, without much impression, but likewise return them with redoubled
force and fury. And therefore they will not care for meddling with such a
Nation, where they are more likely to become a prey, than to obtain one.

But besides, Religion will most certainly preserve any People, from giving
Foreign Nations just grounds and occasions of War; for it will not only teach
them to give all other Nations their just dues, in every respect, but likewise
to be friendly, helpful and assistant to them, and, as far as they can serve
one without disserving the other, to be kind and useful to them all. And then
surely, where no causes of War are given, we may reasonably expect there should
be no War: where the seeds of Peace are sown, we must naturally hope to Reap
the Fruit.

But if, through the unreasonableness and injustice of other nations, it should
sometimes so happen, as we have often seen it has, that a Religious nation,
right or wrong, must be forced to take up arms, and to engage in war: let those
people who have unjustly provoked it know, that they have roused a very
dangerous and formidable enemy; as will appear from considering:

Secondly, That Religion conduces very much, toward the making any nation
cautious, valiant and successful in war. For, tho Religion is an utter enemy to
all quarrelling, and willingly begins no wars, yet, when in defense of it self
it is forced into the Field, it generally ends them victoriously. And I am
verily persuaded you will be of opinion that it can hardly possibly be
otherwise, when I shall have given you a full view of a nation, truly
Religious, in it is arms.

First then, You have here an Army of men, that are prepared and fitted by
their virtues for all the hardships and fatigues of War; that have neither
crazed their bodily constitutions by intemperance, lost their active spirits in
a Lethargy of lazyness, nor broken their courage by effeminacy. But, on the
contrary, of men whom Religion has preserved in their firm health, strength and
vigor, whom it has inured to labor and business, and accustomed to despise
and avoid all the softning and enfeebling arts of delicateness and luxury.

Secondly, You have here a body of men, that have been exquisitely well
disciplined and trained up in the school of Religion in all the prudent arts of
care and watchfulness; that are taught to be wise as serpents, to watch and be
always upon their guard, to lay hold of all opportunities that may make for
them, and to be sure to give their adversaryes none against them. Of men, that
will avoid all those vices, which render them careless and negligent in their
duties, and lay them open to the designs of their enemies; and neither drink
themselves out of a capacity of resisting them, 1 Samuel 13.16. 1 Kings 20.16.
Joseph. l. Ant. Jud. 6. c. 15.
as the Amalekites and Syrians did of old; nor yet, like the foolish Quos nulla
mali vicerat vis, perdidcre nimia bona ac voluptates immodicae. Live. l. 23. c.
18.
Carthaginians, Sacrifice their opportunities of victory and success, to the
trifling invitations of some lewd debauch; but of men, that will preserve their
heads cool, their eyes open, and their whole body in a fit and ready posture, to
prevent their enemies designs, and execute their own.

Thirdly, Add to this, that a Religious army will be careful to engage in none,
but a just and good cause; And, how much the goodness of their cause will
increase their strength and enspirit their courage, our reason, as well as the
Quantam vim habeat in bel^is justitiae conscientia passim estendunt Historiae
Scriptores qui victoriam saepe huic causae praeripue ascribunt. Inde proverbia
illa, srangi and attolli vires in milite a causa: raro eum sospitem redire qui
injusta arma sumpserit; bonae causae spem adesse comitem; and alia in cum
sensum. Grot. prolegom. ad libr. de jure belli and pacis.
History of all ages, will easily inform us. When men's Consciences draw them
one way, and their vices and passions another, they can then only fight by
halves, and give but very faint and feeble strokes: because they are not
inwardly pleased with what they do, or, as we generally speak, do it not with a
good will. But when their Consciences shall, not only not keep back, but even
allow and applaud the stroke, it will then fall very heavy, and make dismal
havoc wheresoever it comes.

Fourthly and Lastly, Such an Army as this must needs be full of undaunted
courage, bravery and resolution, because their Religion will settle in their
minds that principle, which is the only foundation of all true courage, I mean
fearlesness and contempt of death. It is a contradiction to suppose that those
men, who are afraid of death, can go with any manner of true courage into the
Field, where they shall be so very likely to meet that, which they are so very
much afraid of. But those who have good reason not to fear death, and that such
as are Religious only can have, may safely and cheerfully go out to meet it,
and defy it wheresoever they find it. Such men as these therefore are only fit
for true Warriors: The Righteous, as Solomon tells us, are bold as a Lion;
Prove. 28.1.
they will maintain their posts, even in the midst of death, and be so far from
flying from it, that they will bear up against it, with as much courage and
resolution, as if they really meant to conquer and outbrave it.

And what cannot such a Religious Army as this do? Shall not Success attend on
them, on whom Conduct and Courage always wait? Or shall it be possible for them
to fail of Victory, who fight for a good Cause, with good Consciences, with
resolute and prudent Minds, with vigorous and active Bodies?

Thirdly. We shall find the Influence of Religion, toward the promoting the
Public Good and Prosperity of any Nation, much greater, if we proceed to
consider farther, how much it conduces to the increase of its Riches, Plenty
and Trade; and that more especially by these three ways.

First, By encouraging Diligence and Industry, which we all know are the
parents of Riches and Plenty. Religion allows no Man to be useless or
unemploy'd, but allots us all our several tasks, and sets all hands to work for
the increase and benefit of the Common Stock. It condemns all such as are idle
and Work not at all, 1 Timothy 5.13. Rom 12.11. 1 These. 4.11.
exhorts us not to be slothful in business, and expressly commands every Man to
study to do his own business, and to work with his own hands. If then, Prove.
14.23.21.6.10.4.
in all labor there is profit, if the thoughts of the diligent tend only to
plenty, and the hand of the diligent makes rich; How mightily will Riches and
Plenty there abound, where every particular Member of the Community shall make
his own labor and diligence, a sure Fund for Public Wealth and Plenty.

Secondly, By promoting frugality and good husbandry; I do not mean stinginess
or covetousness, for these Religion abhors: but only a prudent care not to
squander away our Wealth in Vice and Luxury. It is in vain for that Nation to
hope to grow Rich, which spends as fast or faster by Intemperance, than she can
get by Diligence: and lavisheth away by Luxury with one hand, more than she can
fetch in by Industry with the other. But there can be no fear at all of this in a
Religious Nation; because the Rules of Religion are Rules of sobriety and good
husbandry; and, as long as any Nation keeps to these, it is impossible it
should be extravagant. Lust and Vice will indeed soon eat up the most Immense
Treasures, and what the Wise Man observes of single persons, is every whit as
true of Whole Bodies or Communities, Prove. 21.17.
That Nation that loves pleasure, immoderate, forbidden pleasure, shall be a
poor Nation; but it was never yet known that Sobriety, Temperance and Modesty,
which are the peculiar ornaments of the Righteous, impoverished or wasted the
stock of any Nation; but they often have, nay they always must, increase and
double it.

Thirdly, By making a Nation famous for those Virtues, which are the foundation
and encouragement of all mutual Commerce, and thereby inviting Foreign Nations
to Converse and Trade with it. Such are Justice, Honesty, Simplicity and
Sincerity in dealing, being reasonable and easy in making Bargains, and
exactly just and punctual in keeping them when made; such Virtues as these will
soon render any Nation amiable in the sight of the World, and its acquaintance
and commerce very desirable, and can no more fail of bringing Chapmen to its
Markets, than Injustice, Dishonesty, Trickishness, and Underhand-dealing,
Extortion in making, and unfaithfulness in keeping Bargains, can fail of
frighting them from them. There only will Men be fond of Trading, where they
can Trade with safety and security, with benefit and advantage: and there only
can they do this, Ecclus. 42^.4.5.
where Religion shall warrant them exactness of balance and weights, and of the
Merchants, indifferent, impartial, fair, selling, as the Son of Syrach
expresses it.

If then Religion instructs men, not only by their Diligence to bring in
Riches to the Commonwealth, in which they live, but likewise by their prudence
and frugality to improve the stock laid in by Diligence: If it will make a
nation so famous, that the merchants of the country round about her, 1 Ma^^.
^.^1.
hearing of her fame, shall take gold and silver very much, with servants and
come to buy; I think I need not thank any man for assenting to the truth of my
Third proposition, viz. that Religion conduces very much, toward the increase
of Riches, plenty and trade, among any people.

And now surely I shall hardly be asked to make good

My Fourth Proposition, which is this: that Religion conduces as much toward
the gaining honor and respect to any nation, from all the nations round about
it. For this is so plain and necessary a consequence from what has been already
said, that I should think it a reflection upon such an auditory as this, to
spend any long time in a solemn proof of it, For who knows not, that a nation
that either enjoys it self in peace at home, and is famous for being useful and
beneficial to all other nations: or at least is victorious in all it is wars
abroad, that flourishes in wealth and plenty, and extends it is trade over the
whole earth, must needs be honorable among all people? Who knows not that, as
love and kindness do invite, so power and wealth command respect and veneration?

I shall therefore but just mention two other considerations, proper under this
head.

First, That a Religious nation will be respected purely for it is being
Religious. Religion is a thing, in it self, so truly amiable, so agreeable to
the reason and nature of man, and so worthy of and like to God, that, however
some few men may make a hard shift, by doing violence to their natures, to
contemn and neglect it, yet the far greater part of mankind always have had,
and always will have, a veneration for it. Insomuch that we may safely observe,
as Tully did of old concerning the belief of a Deity, that there is hardly any
nation so barbarous, and so entirely forsaken of good manners, that does not
respect and honor such as are truly Religious. And therefore we find Solomon,
throughout his whole book of Proverbs, make honor a constant attendant upon
wisdom or Religion.

Secondly, Religion is the great patroness of Arts and Sciences: they always
walk in her train, and flourish where she flourishes. For, as she preserves
men from those vices, which swallow up both their time and parts, and leave
them neither opportunity nor capacity to improve in Art and Knowledge, and, by
so doing, keeps them always in a fit temper, ready and prepared for study and
business: so does she likewise encourage and command them to be always
exercising their Talents, improving their faculties, and exerting all their
utmost powers, in making useful searches and enquiryes for the good and benefit
of mankind. And when men shall diligently bring all their natural faculties, in
their full force and vigor, under the command of Religion, to lay close siege
to the fort of knowledge, how can they possibly fail of taking it?

This then will be another part of a Righteous Nation's Glory: It Is Learning
shall be equal to it is Piety, make it admired and courted by all abroad, and
all the foreign sons of Learning, that nobler and better part of the World,
shall rise up and pay obeisance to it.

Thus much will Religion, considered in it self, do toward the exalting of any
Nation. And here I dare appeal to the Atheists themselves, how little soever
they may care to say any thing in commendation of Religion, whether what I have
said of it be not true. I am sure if they will not allow it to be so, they have
done very foolishly in giving Religion the name of a State-Engine, of a
politic device to keep people in awe and good order, of an Instrument of
Government, and the like. But to proceed; Religion will still do much more,
toward the exalting of any Nation, if we consider it.

Secondly, As it gives a Nation a sure Title to the protection, favor, and
blessing of God, who is the Supreme Lord and Governor of the World, and
sets up, or pulls down Nations, when and as he pleases; a sure Title,
indeed, even as sure, as the Fidelity or Justice of God himself can make it.

First, As his Fidelity, by which he becomes engaged to make good those
Promises of his Favor and Protection, which he has been pleased to make to
Righteous Nations in Scripture. Thus in the Twenty Eighth Chapter of
Deuteronomy, to name no more: Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
And it shall come to pass, if thou shall hearken diligently unto the voice of
the Lord thy God, to observe and to do all his Commandments; that the Lord thy
God will set thee on high, above all the Nations of the Earth. And all these
Blessings shall come on thee, and overtake thee, if thou shall hearken unto the
voice of the Lord thy God. Blessed shall thou be in the City, and blessed shall
thou be in the Field, Blessed shall be the fruit of thy Body, and the fruit of
thy ground, and and the fruit of thy cattle, the increase of thy kine and the
flocks of thy Sheep. Blessed shall be thy basket and thy store. Blessed shall
thou be, when thou come in, and Blessed shall thou be when thou go out.
Which promises, although they were primarily designed for the Jewish Nation, we
are warranted to apply to our selves, by the Holy Spirit of God, which tells
us, Romans 15.5.
that whatsoever things were written afore-time, were written for our Learning,
that we, through patience and comfort of the Scriptures, might have hope.

And, if we will allow the proceedings of Divine Providence, all along in times
past, to have been a silent pattern and intimation of what it designed to do in
times to come, we have still a more ample promise to depend upon; it being
plain from many examples, that public Religion and public happiness have
constantly gone hand in hand, and the one been the sure Reward of the other. A
most remarkable Instance of which we have in the Jewish People, who, to use the
Words of Octavius Nam and ipsi, Deum nostrum, idem enim omnium, Deus est,
quandiu cast innoxie, religioseque coluerunt, quandiu praeceptis salubribus ob
temperaverunt, de paucis innumeri facti, de egentibus divites, de servientibus
Reges.
in Minutius Felix concerning them, as long as they Worshipped God, Chastely,
Innocently and Religiously: as long as they continued in obedience to his most
wholesome Precepts; of a small handful of Men were made a Nation without number,
were lifted up from Poverty to vast Riches, and from Slaves became Princes. And
St. Austin Augustine. de civitate Dei, l. 5. cap. 12. and 15.
was of opinion, that God gave Success to the Roman Arms, and enlarged and
prosper'd their Empire, purely because they were strictly and sincerely
Religious, though in a mistaken way, and, as one of the Ancients Summum hominis
officum, eisi non reipsa tamen proposito tenerent. Lactant.
speaks, kept close to that, which is the main end end business of Man, though
not in reality, yet in purpose and inteation. But

Secondly, Had not God been pleased to have made us any Promises of this, yet
nevertheless we should have had sufficient security for it, in his Justice: by
which he stands bound, at some time or other, to make a difference between the
good and the bad, between such as serve him, and such as serve him not, to
reward the one, and to punish the other. Now this is a piece of Justice, which
can only be done to Nations in this World, because there will be an end of all
distinct Bodies and Communities in the next. Since then God is in Justice bound
to reward a Righteous Nation: and since every Nation, considered as such, must
have it is Reward in this World; we may safely conclude a Righteous Nations
Title, to the present favor and Blessing of God, secure and infallible.

And what a Glorious Nation must that needs be, which shall be sure of having
God for her Friend and Helper? How securely shall she enjoy her self in Peace,
which has the God of Peace to dwell with her? Or, at least, how victorious
shall she be in War, when the Lord of Hosts shall go forth with her Fleets and
Armies, and Fight her Battles for her? Shall not her garners be full and
plenteous with all manner of Store, who has the Lord of the whole Earth to
supply them? And shall not her Treasurehouses abound with Gold and Silver, who
is a peculiar favorite of him, who alone has it in his power, to make Poor
and to make Rich? To what a prodigious height of grandeur and respect shall
that Nation be exalted, to which the Lord himself shall get fame and praise in
every land, which he shall take to himself for a People and for a name, for a
praise and for a glory? Happy, yea beyond all expression happy, shall such a
Nation as this be, which shall have the Lord for it is God.

From what has been said it plainly appears,

First, How much it is the Interest of Princes and Magistrates, both by their
Examples and their Laws, their Terror and their Favor, to Countenance and
Maintain an Universal Sense and Practice of Religion among their People. They
ly indeed under many Obligations to do this: under the Obligations both of Duty
and Gratitude to him, from whom they have received their Authority: under the
powerful Obligations both of Hope and Fear: fear of future punishment, if they
abuse the Power committed to their Charge, for the punishment of evil doers, 1
Pet. 2.14.
and for the praise of them that do well: hope of a future reward, Romans 13.4.
if like true Ministers of God, they are careful to execute wrath upon them
that do evil. But, were they under none of these, yet methinks their
obligations, in point of Policy, should be strong enough. For since a Nation
that is truly Religious cannot fail of becoming truly happy, great and
glorious: What can Governors, whose Happiness, Greatness and Glory consists
in, and must necessarily rise or fall in proportion to, that of their People,
do more prudently, than endeavor, by all possible ways, to make their people a
Religious, that is, a happy, flourishing, and renowned people? The Religion of
Subjects is indeed the great safeguard and security of any Government, nor can
it possibly long stand fast without it; but this is not all, it is also a sure
Fountain of such blessings, as will at once make it both easy and prosperous,
and adorn and lighten the Administration of it. Give me leave then to Address
my self to Governors, in the Words of the Wisest Governor that ever lived;
Exalt wisdom, Prove. 4.8, 9.
and she shall promote thee, she shall bring thee to honor when thou do
embrace her. She shall give to thine head an ornament of grace, a Crown of
Glory shall she deliver to thee.

Secondly, Hence all Subjects learn, which is their best and truest way of
expressing their Love and Loyalty, toward their Prince and Country. If they
desire to see these in a happy and flourishing condition, let them endeavor,
as far as possibly they can, to put them into it by their Righteousness; let
them prove the sincerity of their desires by the goodness of their lives, and
take this certain way to make their Country as great and happy, as they pretend
to wish it may be. Let but every Man of them be so kind to his Nation, as to
forsake the evil of his ways, and return unto the Lord, and from the instant of
their becoming an Holy, they shall, they must, become a Happy People. As long
as Jonah continued in the Ship contrary to God's will, the Sea was Stormy and
Tempestuous; but, as soon as ever he was thrown out, the Sea ceased from her
raging. A true and lively emblem this of the Fate which Nations may expect from
Providence; as long as they cherish any thing among them, which God hates, they
will be an Unhappy, and an Unsuccessful People; but no sooner shall they have
purged themselves of every thing that is displeasing in his sight, but the
Blessings of Heaven shall descend upon them, and the Favor of the Most High
shall overshadow them. In vain do we talk of Securing our Government against
Conspirators and Plotters, whilst we our selves betray it by the Immorality of
our Lives, and do our Enemies business more effectually for them, than they can
possibly do it for themselves. Never alas! is any Nation in so much danger from
any thing, as from the General Corruption of the Lives and Manners of its
Inhabitants; for besides that, this does, by a natural efficiency, disable and
unfit Men for the Service of the Commonwealth in which they live, it does
likewise stop the Blessings of Heaven from descending upon it, nay, and which
is infinitely worse, sometimes turns them into Curses against it. Let us then
beware of this worst sort of Treason, and by that True Loyalty, the goodness of
our Lives, not only render our selves useful Servants to our Country, but
likewise draw down the Blessings of God upon it.

More particularly now, when our Enemies seem to have laid aside all hopes of
prevailing against us, and the Divine Providence seems, in infinite Love and
Condescension, to be reconciling it self to us, and designing great things for
us: let us be careful not to live our selves back again into God's displeasure,
and our Enemies contempt; I mean, not to live so as, by the dissoluteness and
factiousness of our lives, to give our Enemies new hope and courage against us,
not so, as to provoke God, Levit. 26.25. Deuteronomy. 28.25.48.
to bring a Sword upon us, that shall avenge the quarrel of his Covenant, and
so cause us to be smitten before our Enemies, and to serve them in hunger, and
in thirst, and in nakedness, and in want of all things. But let us all unite,
in one common bond of Love and Charity, and in one steadfast resolution to amend
our Lives and become better for the future, that so we may become a Terror to
our Enemies, and a Blessing to our selves, the darlings and favorites of
Heaven, and the praise and glory of all the Earth. In a word; let us be
exhorted, Levit. 26.3.
in the words of Moses to the Children of Israel, to walk in God's statutes,
and to keep his Commandments, and do them, and then we shall most certainly
inherit those Blessings, which he promised them upon condition of their
Obedience; verse. 6. Deuteronomy. 28.11, 12 13.
Then will the Lord give Peace in our Land, and we shall lie down, and none
shall make us afraid: He will make us plenteous in Goods, in the fruit of our
Bodies, in the fruit of our Cattle, and in the Fruit of our Ground. He will
open unto us his good Treasures, the Heaven to give the Rain unto our Land in
his season, and to bless all the Work of our hands: and we shall lend unto many
Nations, and shall not borrow. Then will he make us the head, and not the tail;
and we shall be above only, and shall not be beneath.

And when can we more properly begin such a glorious and noble work as this, a
work of such public and universal concernment, than on this Auspicious day, on
which the brow of our Illustrious Sovereign first graced the Crown of these
Realms? When can we more properly resolve upon exalting our Nation, than on
this promising and encouraging day on which she first received him for her
Guardian, who has for those many years (many, if computed by the blessings
which we have enjoyed in them; but few, exceeding few, if compared with those
which we still wish and pray for) has, under God, been the Lifter up of her
head? When more properly begin to think of procuring the Blessings of Heaven
upon us, than on this happy, happy day, which brought us one of it is first and
greatest Blessings? O may every individual man of us so entirely and sincerely
dedicate himself to God's service, for the future; so strictly and
conscientiously observe and live up to the precepts of his most Holy Religion;
that the name of our God may be well spoken of, the Reign of our King made long
and prosperous, our Nation set up on high above all Nations, and every
particular Member of it rendered happy, both in this World, and that which is
to come.

Grant this, O Merciful Father, for the sake of thy Dear Son Christ Jesus, to
whom with thee, and the Holy Spirit, be all Honor and Glory, Might, Majesty
and Dominion, from henceforth and for evermore. Amen.
Some BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Thomas Speed.
1. THE Duties of the Closet, being an Earnest Exhortation to Private Devotion.
Price 1 s. 6 d.

2. A Sermon Preached before the King at White Hall, November the 5th. 96. By
Sir William Dawes, Baronet, D.D. And Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty. The
Second Edition, Price 6 d.

3. Conversation in Heaven; in two Parts. The first being Devotions, consisting
of Meditations and Prayers on several considerable Subjects, in Practical
Divinity. Written for raising the Decayed Spirit of Piety. Part the Second,
being Sacramental Devotions, consisting of Meditations and Prayers, Preparatory
unto a Worthy Receiving of the Holy Communion: As also Meditations and Prayers,
suited to every part of Administering and Receiving it. By Dr. Lawrence Smith,
Rector of South-Warnborough in Hampshire. The Second Edition, Price 3 s.

4. Of the Happiness of the Saints in Heaven: A Sermon Preached before the
Queen at White Hall, October the 12th. 90. By William Beveridge, D. D. Rector
of St. Peter's Cornhil. The Second Edition, Price 6 d.

5. A short Discourse on the Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. Wherein its
Primitive Practice, with the Reasons of its Disuse and Neglect, are fully set
forth. What are meant by Eating and Drinking Unworthily, and Eating and
Drinking our own Damnation, are made plain to the meanest Capacity. Also all
the most Material Scruples and Objections, commonly urged for not Receiving the
Blessed Sacrament, are fully Answered. To which are added a Serious Exhortation
with Directions and Forms of Prayer for Receiving of the Lord's Supper. By John
Shank, late Lecturer of St. Mary Magdalen Bermondsey, in Southwark. The second
Edition, Price 1 s.

6. Religion the only Happiness: A Poem: In a Letter to a Friend. Price 6 d.


