ANOTHER ESSAY For Investigation of the Truth, IN ANSWER TO TWO QUESTIONS,
Concerning I. THE SVBJECT of BAPTISM. II. THE CONSOCIATION of CHVRCHES.


By JOHN DAVENPORT B. of D. and Pastor of the Church of Christ, at New Haven,
in NEW ENGLAND.

Matthew. 17.5. This is my beloved Son: ^e^r him.

2 Cor. 13.8. We can do nothing against the Truth; but for the Truth.

1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Pr^ve all things* hol^ fast that w^i^^ is good.

Tertul. de Vel. Virg. Veritati nemo praescribere potest; non spatium temporum,
non P^trocinium Pe^sonarum, non Privilegium Regionum: ex his enim fere
Consuetudo initium, ab aliqua ignorantia vel simplicitate, sortita, in usum,
per successi^ne^, ^^r^oboratur, and ita adversus v^ritatem vindicatur. Sed
Dominus noster Chr^st^^ Ver^^^tem se, non consu^tudinem, C^gnominavit. Si
semper Christus and prior omnibu^, aeque veritas sempiterna and antiqua res
est. Viderint ergo quibus novum est, quod sibi vetus est

Cypr. Caecilio. Epist^la. Si solus Christus audiendus est; non debemus
attendere quid aliquis artenes f^ciendum putaverit, sed quid, qui ante omnes
est, Christus Prior fecerit, and fa^i^^dum praeceperit.

I^em and caeteri in Council. Carthag. Stephano. Scimus quosdam quod semel in
biberint nolle dep^n^re, nec propositum suum s^cil^ mutare, sed salv^ inter
Collegas pacis, and concordie vinculo, quaeda ^ro ri^ q^^e apud se semel sint
usurpata, retinere. Q^a in re nec nos cuiqu^^ f ^imus aut legem damus, cum
habeat in Ecclesiae ad^inistratione v^luntat^s suae arbitrium li e rum
unusquisque Pr^epo^itus r^tion^m a^tus s^i Do^ino redditurus.

Amicus S^^rates, a^icus ^lato, magis amica Veritas.

Non eadem sentire bone^ de rebus i^sdem
in^clumi l ^uit semper ami^^t^a
CAMBRIDGE: Printed by Samuel Green and Marmaduke Johnson. 1663.

AN APOLOGETICAL PREFACE TO THE READER.
IT was an Observation (or an Inspiration rather) of h ly Cle^^^em a (...)
^^tu^o (...) Bright. in Apoc. 17.^.
Brightman'^, That some faithf lones in a Wilde^ness should have the most clear
Discoveries of the Abominations of the Man of Sin: which Prophetic passage of
that Reverend and Learned Writer, some have applied unto those worthy
Conf^ssors in New England, who forsook the^r Count^y and Fathers houses, and
left a pleasant Land, far dearer to them then their lives, for the Testimony
of Jesus; and upon no other account, but only that so they might see the Lord
in his Sanctuary, and Worship him whom their Souls love, in the Beauties of
Holiness; where indeed they have seen him walking in the midst of his golden
Candlesticks. So much the more sad it is to consider, that there should be any
Declensions or Contentions amongst a People for whom the Lord has done such
wondrous things. We hope that none will be so injurious and unreasonable, as to
impute it unto any defect in the Way (even The good Old Congregational-Way) of
Government, which these Churches have hitherto Professed, that there should
such Differences in judgment arise about things of a lesser moment. Do we not
know, that even in the Churches Planted by the Apostles themselves, there arose
no small dissension? Acts 15.2. Yea, that there was a (...) Act. ^.39.
Paroxysm between a Paul and a Barnabas? Let Rome glory in her Peace against
all Reformed Churches, shall we therefore think that all our Foundations are
out of course? True it is, our hearts cannot b^t mourn and bleed, that ever it
should be told in Gath, or published in the streets of Askelon, that there are
any different Apprehensions amongst us: And in that respect we could gladly
have forbo^n the Publication of the ensuing Essay. Yet, when we remember, that
Opinionum v^rie^as (...) o^inant^u^ ^^ntas, non sunt (...).
Variety of Judgments may stand with Unity of Affections, and tha^ Disputation
is the way to find out Trut^, Ex collisione ingeniorum fit scintilla veritati;
and, that ^ui statuit al^^^ p^^^e (...) st^tu (...) ^^erit. S^n. T^^g.
He that judges a Cause before he has heard both parties speaking, although
he should judge rightly, is not a righteous Judge, We are willing that the
World should see what is here presen^ed. Bu^ especially, being perswa^e^ that
the Honor of God, and of his Truth, require this as a duty at our hands, We
durst not hinder what is here maintai^ed from coming into light, l^st we should
one day have it laid unto ou^ Charge, that we did withhold the Truth in
unrighteousness. And, in very deed, our Opinion of wh^t is here by the Reverend
Author ass^rted, is such, as that we do believe it will tend to our rejoicing
in the day of the Lord Jesus, that ever we were made instrumental to bring the
Truth into public view, whereby the World might fare the better for it. We are
to follow Peace, but not with the loss of Truth: But when Truth may be
discovered without any hazard unto Peace, and oneness of Affection, (is we hope
the case is so in the publication of this Elaborate Essay) we should be very
injurious indeed, if we did not what in us lay to forward it. Moreover, what is
here held forth, ought to be regarded upon more accounts th^n one. Salvian his
Observation is too often found true, that Men in reading Books look more at
^alv^^n. de A^cr^. l. 1.
Quis, then Quid scripsit; who has written, then what he has written. If we
respect either of these, the following Discourse may be commended to the
Reader: The Author is a Commendation of the thing Written; and the thing
Written is a Commendation of the Author. As for the Author, His praise is in
the Gospel throughout all the Churches; and indeed, His Works praise him in the
Gates. Well did M^. Cotton give this Testimony concerning him, that He is a
Pavent^rtus, Judici^, ^^^d^tione, (...) s^^gul^ri ^ru^^ntia Cott^n. (...).
Apol. ad ^o^t^n. R^ip. Apollon.
Man mighty in Judgment, and Learning, and Singular Prudence. And we d ubt not
but those that love and honor him far less then we do, yet w^ll say, that He
is one of a thousand. It is indeed an evil under the Sun, to have men's persons
in admiration, so as to take any man's (...) for a demonstration: yet there are
some Writings which are the more to be respected, because of the Writer.
Logicians know, that Testimonies are to be more or less valued, according to
the person Testifying. And truly, if there be any man amongst us, whose words
d^s^rve regarding for his sake that speaks them, th^n so do the words of this
Judiciou^, Learned, and Holy man. Furthermore, if we consider the Thing
written, it calls for due respect and reverence. As that for-ever famous Dr.
A^es. ad (...). in Tw^ss* (...) c. contra Ar^^n.
Ames said of the most Scholastically-Learned D^. Twisse, so may we much more
say, that We are not amongst the number of those who can add any thing by our
Testimony, unto the esteem of what is here maintained. Nevertheless, having
diligently p^rused this Essay, we hold it our duty to declare unto the World,
That we fully concur (as to the Sum and Substance thereof) with what is
here maintained and managed with great Wisdom and Piety, and irrefragable
Strength and Solidity. We shall say no more to Apologize for our Publishing of
this Reply: But having this opportunity of speaking unto the World, we deem it
meet to add something, in the behalf of those who went under the Notion of
Dissenting Brethren, in the late Synod held at Boston. We perceive, that there
are many things Objected against them; and therefore, that so their Cause may
not thereby be prejudiced, it is needful that something should be said for the
removal thereof.

First, it is Objected, That there were but a few in comparison, who Dissented
from the major part of the Assembly.

Answ. Suppose it were so; Is Truth bound up to Number? It was, indeed, a sore
Temptation to Luther, when it was Objected to him, Tune solus sapis? Is there
never a wise man in the world but you? It may be the same thing has been as
great a Temptation to some of us. In the Council of Constance, one of the
Prelates said un^o that blessed Martyr John Husse, Hi^tor John Hu^^e, fol. ^^.
That he should never show himself so Arrogant, as to prefer his own Opinion
above the Judgment of the whole Council. Yet the whole C^uncil (though it were
an Universal Council) erred, and this one good man held the Truth against so
many. Which we do not mention, as though we would prefer our own Judgments
above others; such a thought we abhor. Neither is it in our intention^, any
ways to reflect upon those Honored and Reverend Persons from whom we
Dissented; nay, we look upon them as far better then our selves: only by this
I^stance given, we may see, that in a Council (nay, an Oecomenical Council) a
few (nay one) may dissent from all the rest, and yet neither Ignorance nor
Arrogance (but Truth and Conscience) be the gr und of it. I^ the Nicen Council
there was but one Sc^^^. l. 1. c. 23. M g^ ^ cont. 4. l. 7. p^g. 86.
Paphnutius, who opp^sed all the rest of the Synod, that had concluded upon a
gross Err^ur.

And if we look into our own Nation, there were but Five Mr. Tho: G^^dwyn, Mr.
Ny^, Mr Symp^on, Mr Bu^^^ugh, Mr. Bri^g^.
Dissenting Brethren who maintained the Truth (as we cannot but be persuaded)
about Church Government, against Seventy persons, who were also wo^thy of
Respect and Honor. N^w though our Ass^mbly was not so Numerous as that, yet
there were more then Five twice told, who could not see sufficient Reason to
apprehend as others did. And that we are not singular in our apprehensions
about these matters of Controversy now in agitation, appears from these
following Witnesses. Blessed Mr. Cotton has these very words: Mr. Cotton's Way
of the Churches ^^e^sured i^ the G^lden Re^^ of the Sanctuary, page 81.
Infants cannot claim right to Baptism, but in the right of one of their
Parents or both: where neither of the Parents cannot claim right to the Lords
Supper, there their Infants cannot claim right to Baptism. That Learned man,
and Renowned Sufferer for Christ under those Bloody Fathers (as they would
needs be styled) the Prelates, even Mr. Burton, writes after this manner:
Burton vind^c. of I^dependent Churches, p. 62.
It is not now under the Gospel, as it was from Abraham unto Christ. The
Covenant was made with Abraham and his seed, so as by virtue hereof all the
Male-infants of believing Abraham were and ought to be Circumcised: But now,
under the Gospel, those only are accounted Abraham's seed, who profess the
Faith of Abraham; so as that the Covenant is Entailed only to Believers now,
and so to their children, Acts 2.39. If then the Parents refuse Christ, they
cut themselves off from the Covenant, and therewith cut off their children. And
Mr. Beverly (a late ingenious Writer) speaking the judgment of the
Congregational-men in England, as far as he had knowledge thereof, has such
passages as these: Beverly against Timson, p. 173, 174.
Let me beseech my Presbyterian Brethren to consider, what sad advantage you
give to bold Intrenchments upon the Lords Supper, by your too loose
Administering Baptism; methinks you do but contradict your selves, when you
suspend from one Ordinance Signal, and yet allow the other Ordinance of
Baptism, which is as Signal, etc. Nor was there ever any such enlargement of
Baptism, as is here pleaded for, practiced in any gathered Churches in England,
that ever we knew, or could hear of.

Secondly, it is Objected, That we deny all Church Membership unto Infants,
which is a Principle of Anabaptism.

Answ. Mr. Rutherfurd in his Reply to Mr. Hooker, charge him with Principles
of Anabaptism; yet Mr. Hooker was never guilty of any such Opinions. So are we
charged with laying Cornerstones of Anabaptism; but this is injuriously la^d
unto ^ur change: Yet let us not for fear of Anabaptism, do worse, even Defile
our selves with Antichristianism. We are willing to profes^, that we look upon
it as great a sin to baptize all Children, (for that is no less then Du^
Sacra^^^ ^^^^n^ur, (...) ^unt (...). ^l^c^un. ^n Mal. 1.
a violating of God, as Jerome speak) as to baptize no Children; though both
Opinions, we think, are sinful. Neither c^n we plead Guilty unto that Charge,
That we deny all Church Membership unto any Infants; we only deny that they
are personal and immediate Members. Indeed, as personal Membership is taken
subjectively, so we say it is in Infants, i. e. their persons are Recipients of
the Adjunct of Church Membership: But as personal Membership is taken formally,
i. e. for such as have by themselves in their own persons entered into Covenant
with God and his People, so Infants are not capable of personal
Church Membership. I^'s strange to us to conceive, that they should have this
personal formal Membership, and yet that they should not be subjects capable of
formal personal Censures. We neither do, nor ever did deny, That the persons of
Infants of Believing Confederate Parents are brought under the Covenant; only
we conceive, that their Membership is See the first Essay o^ this Rev^rend
Author i^ Manuscript.
Conjunct with, and Dependent upon the Membership and Covenant of their
Parents, so as to live and die therewith. Hence Mr. Cotton has these words;
Mr. Cotton^ Hol^ness of Church Members, p. 63.
The Membership of Children (I mean Infants) is founded in the Faith and
Profession of their Parents. Hence the Childs Membership may continue after
the Parents decease, because his Parents Faith and Covenant may live, though
himself be dead; as it is said, Abel being dead, yet speaks. So the Covenant,
and Faith, and Prayers of a godly man, who is dead, yet live. Hence also, when
the Parents are Excommunicated, the Membership of the Infant-childe is cut off,
because Excommunication puts an end to the Outward Covenant, (which Death it
self does not do;) and if the Root be destroyed, the Branches cannot live. True
it is, that we have made much use of that distinction of Immediate, and Mediate
Members, which seems, to us, to carry a mighty and constraining Evidence of
Scripture Light along with it, yea, and so as to s^lve (if rightly understood
and managed) the strongest Obj^ct^ons that are brought against the Cause and
Truth we plead for. And let it be considered, that Church Members have been
commonly distinguished into Complete, and Incomplete: And Authors who have been
Stars of the first Magnitude, if ever there have been such upon Earth, have
made use thereof. We might instance in that Incomparable Champion for the
Truth, and for the Non-Conformists, against Prelacy, Mr. Robert P^rker de ^^l.
E les.
Parker: so likewise Ames. M^d. T^e^l. l. 1. c. 32. Ti^. 13
Ames, Voetius, H rn^e^^ Ep^^t. ad Duraeum. p. 356.
Hornbeck, Dr. Dr. Winter on Act ^.3^ p 9^.
Winter, Mr. Mr. H^nmer, Exercit. about Con^irmati^n in Post^^r. Second Edit.
Hanmer, etc. make use of the same distinction: and the D^ssenters have proved
it in their Antisynodalia.

Thirdly, it is Objected against us, That we maintain a strange Opinion,
namely, That a person who is a Churchmember, may become no Member, by an act
(or a defect rather, which may be called an act, as Sins of Omission are termed
Actual Sins) of his own, without any Church-act in Censuring of him.

Answ. Most true it is, that we do Maintain this, and must do so, till we see
the contrary proved. Neither do we know that this Opinion contains any thing in
it dissentany from Scripture or good R^^son: Nor see we how some Arguments for
the Affirmative can fai^ly be answered. Suppose we an English Fugitive that is
become a Priest in Antwerp, or a Cardinal at Rome: Or suppose we a Turk who is
an Englishman by Birth; this Turk was baptized a Member of some Parish Church
(which those that we dispute against maintain to be true Churches, and we are
far from denying of it universally) and he was never Censured by any Church
for his Apostasy: n^w we dem^nd, Whet^er this Turk be a Member of the Church of
Christ yea or no? To affirm it, would be gross; To say that Turks are Members
of the Church of Christ, is ^n truth to speak Dagg^rs. When the Arch-Flamin
Whitgift said, that Papists and Atheists might still remain Members of the
visible Church: M^. Parker De P (...). l ^. c. ^6
tells him, That even a Vorstius would condemn him. An^ it is no n^w Doctrine
in the Schools, to say, that M rt^. A^^^. ^^tho. pa^. 1. l. 1. c. 3.
An Heretical Apostate is no more a Member of the Church of Christ, then a
Wound, a So^e, or a Brand, is a men her of a man; which none ^^^^^^gine. The
truth of this none can doubt of, that is mediocriter doctus n Schol^s^i^ l
Divini^y. Therefore we conclude, that Church Members may become no Members by
their own defection. And we humbly conceive (though with submission, as is fit,
to better judgments) That thus much is held forth by these Scriptures, Hebr.
10.25. 1 John 2 19. Jude ver. 19. Again, how came Esau to lose his Membership?
We read not that he was Excommunicate: Therefore it remains, that he
dis-Covenanted, and so dis-Membered himself. And how came the Children of
Abraham by Keturah to lose their Membership? i^ was not by Censure. In like
sort, when persons under the Gospel, do not come up to the terms of the
Covenant, to show themselves to be Abraham's Children, by holding forth his
Faith, and walking before the Lord in simplicity and godly sincerity, we
suppose that they are justly deemed Breakers of the Covenant, and have justly
put themselves out of that Covenant which their Parents (because of their then
personal incapacity to act for themselves) made for them. Alas! that any should
look upon us as Maintaining dangerous Opinions, because of this! Wherefore,
that all may know, that there is neither Danger nor Singularity in this our
Assertion, That a Churchmember may possibly become no Member, without any act
of the Church in formal Censuring of him, give us leave to produce some
Testimonies to prove it. Judicious and blessed Dr. Ames Cas. Cons^. l. 5. c.
12. in Resp. ad Quaest. 4. Th. 8.
says, That in case of pertinacious Separation, such persons, though they may
be of the invisible, yet they are not to be accounted Members of the visible
Church: Which words of the Learned Doctors do make the more for our purpose,
for that they are Cited and Approved of by The Answ. to quest. 4. p 17.
Answer to the XXXII. Questions. Our Congregational Preface to the Declaration
of Faith and Order, at the Savoy.
Brethren in England, do with one voice say, That some Church Members may be
felones de se, such as may destroy their own Membership. Yea, and this was once
sound Doctrine in New England. Blessed Mr. Cotton (whose Name is and will be
precious, so long as the Earth shall endur^) maintains it for a Truth, That Way
of Churches, p. 9.
many in Churches have cut themselves off. Another Testimony which we would
produce, is them Discourse of the Church Covenant, (of which the Reverend Mr.
See Preface to the Answer to 21 Questions.
Richard Mather was the sole Author) and the words are these following:
Discourse of Church Covenant, Printed An. 1639. p. 17.
That if men had not promised, and also performed in some measure of truth, the
duties of Faith and Obedience unto God, they had not taken hold of the
Covenant, but had DISCOVENANTED THEMSELVES, notwithstanding all the Promises of
God unto their Fathers or others. Thus though God prom^sed Abraham to be a God
unto him and his seed, in their generations, Genesis 17.7. yet the Ishmaelites and
Edomites descending from Abraham, were discovenanted, by not promising nor
performing those duties of Faith and Obedience, which God required on the
peoples part. And the same Truth is held forth by the same Author, in The
Answer to the XXXII. Quest^ons bef rementioned. This is ^he main thing wh^rein
we Dissent from the major part of the Synod. Now, if this were Truth in the
Year 1639. (as it then had the Approbation of the Elders hereabout^) w^ see no
reason why it should not be Truth in the Year 1662. For, Veritas in omnem
partem sui semper eadem est. Either this was a Mistake then, or else it is a
Truth at this day. Here let us add the words of Mr. Cotton, in his Excellent
Treatise of The Holiness of Church Members, which are these following: Mr
Cotton, H^^^ne^^ (...) Chur h-members, p. 19. ^. 41.
Such as are Born and Baptized Members of the Church, are not orderly Continued
and Confirmed Members, unless when they grow up to years, they do, before the
Lord and his People, profess their Repentance and Faith in Jesus Christ. To say
no more of this; Renowned Parker, speaking of the Interpretation of those words
[Laying on of Hands] in Heb. 6.2. cites many judicious Writers, whose
judgem^nts he expresses, in words to this purpose: P^rker. ^e P^^, F ^les in
^ap ^e (...) E lesia (...). Se^^. 9. ^. 13.
That they who were baptized in their minority, when they are grown up, after
that the Church had approved their Faith by the Symbol of Imposition of Hands,
they were admitted Members of the Church. This was according to sound Doctrine
in the Primitive times (as Parker says.) Now we demand, How they can be
admitted as Members, who are already as complete and perfect Members as any in
the Church? But the ancient Doctrine was, ( Tertullian.
Antiquissimum u^issimum) That Children who were baptized in their minority,
after they shall come to profess their Faith, so as to be accepted of the
Church, may be admitted as Members. Theref^re, according to the ancient
Doctrine, Such children are not as complete and perfect Members as any in the
Church. Yea, therefore it follows, That when they are Adult, in case they do
not, by holding forth Faith and Repentance, join unto the Church, that then
they ^o not retain their Membe ship which they had in minority.

Fourthly, it has be^n Ob^ cted, That we will not suffer Children to come
under the Watch and Care of the Church.

Answ. We are so far from being of that Op^nion, a^ that we verily fear there
is great guilt lies upon the Churches, ^^c^use ^hey have neglected their duty
toward the Children in questi^n. I^ is as clear to us as the Light at Noon, or
(to use Tertullians p^r s^) as if it were written with the Beams of the Sun,
Th^^ (...) special Care (even Church-care) and Inspection is due, over those
Children that are Born within the Gates of Zion. H^ppy ^ight it be for us all,
if the issue of these troublesome Controversies might be only to awaken
Churches to stricter Watch and Diligence, in Overseeing those Children that are
in minority: Only we conceive, that the Watch over them is to be Mediate,
according to the state of their Membership. The Church is to see that the
Parents do their duty toward their Children, in bringing them up in the Nurture
and Admonition of the Lord. (...).
And if when they shall be adult, they do not bring forth fruits of Repentance
and Faith, then (as the Fig Tree which did not bear fruit, was to be cut down)
the Church is to disown them, as having no part in the Lord, and to declare,
that they by their unbelief have Discovenanted themselves. But we see not
sufficient warrant from the Word of God, to proceed to a formal Excommunication
of the Children in question, because that is applicable unto none but those who
have been in full Communion. Now if this be all that is striven after, That
Church-children might be brought under Church-watch, why should the Contentions
of Brethren be like the bars of a Castle, that cannot yield?

Lastly, it has been Objected, That the reason of our Dissenting from the
major part of the Synod, was Weakness and Ignorance, and mere Wilfulness, in
that we could bring no Arguments, but what were sufficiently refuted.

Answ. The very same thing has been said of those Worthy Champions, who stood
up for the Congregational-Way, in opposition to the Assembly at Westminster,
that See t^es^ word^ in The (...) a^^inst (...) P. p 21, ^^.
Their Arguments were weak and ridiculous, and had been Confuted, and
sufficiently answered, and that themselves were Self-conceited, and Obstinate.
But these Criminations were unworthy Calumniations. It was a common Reproach
cast upon the Christians of old, That they were all weak and unlearned men:
which made Jerome write that Book De viris Illustribus. So Stapleton makes no
bones to call Whitaker, An Ass, and A Fool. And the same hissing of the
Serpent have we seen in the Prelates against the Renowned Non-Conformists. But,
we suppose, their saying so, did not prove it was so. Nevertheless, we are
content to accept of the Charge, when we are charged with Weakness and Folly:
Let us be fools for Christ's sake, or for his Truth; Let us fall, so the Truth
may rise; let us sit in the dust, so that Truth may sit in the Throne. We
deserve not to be otherwise esteemed, then as Weakness and Ignorance it self:
Yet let us not be reputed Obstinate, and such as are and will be blind,
because we dare not betray the Truth, and sin against our Consciences. For, our
weightiest Reasons never were Answered unto any tolerable satisfaction, even to
this day. If it be demanded here, What our Reasons were, why we accorded not
with the major part of the Synod? We shall by the help of Christ, and in the
fear of God, declare what our chief Reasons were, which caused our Dissent;
which when they are Answered, we shall lay down our Opinion, as knowing that it
is Nullus pudor ad meliora transire.

1. The Synod did acknowledge, That there ought to be true saving Faith in the
Parent, according to the judgment of rational charity, or else the child
ought not to be baptized. We entreated, and urged again and again, that this,
which they themselves acknowledged was a Principle of Truth, might be set down
for a Conclusion, and then we should all agree. But those Reverend Persons
against whom we placidly disputed, would not consent to this, though our Unity
lay at the Stake for it.

2. We have not Warrant in all the Scripture, to apply the Seal of Baptism unto
those Children, whose Parents are in a state of unfitness for the Lords Supper.
Those, Acts 2.41. who were Baptized, continued breaking Bread also, ver. 42.
It Is granted, That those Children were Circumcised amongst the Jews, whose
Parents were for a time debarred from the Passover, but that was only upon
accident of Ceremonial Uncleanness, which alters not the case; for, Unless the
father were in a state of fitness for the Passover, he was not fit to have his
child circumcised. The like may be said concerning the Gospel-Passeover, and
the Gospel-Circumcision. Neither do we read, that in the Primitive times
Baptism was of a greater latitude, as to the Subject thereof, then the Lords
Supper: but the contrary. The Catechun eni ad Baptisterium nunquam admittendi
sunt. Council. Araus. c. 19.
Catechumeni were not to be Baptized, before they were fit for the Lords
Supper. And thence, when through the darkness of the times, the Lords Supper
was not administered except at Easter, (as it is called) the Council. Gern. did.
4.
Baptism of the Catechumeni was deferred until then also. In the Dawnings of
Reformation in England, our Juell could plead against Harding, that Juels Reply
to Harding. p. 553.
Baptism was as much to be reverenced, as the Sacrament of the Body and Blood
of Christ. Nay, in former Ages, some Churches have been so far from extending
Baptism, further then the Lords Supper, as that they have committed a grievous
Error, in administering the Lords Supper unto Infants. So it has been in the
Churches of Dav. Chytra
Bohemia, and in Paul. Od^rbor. de relig. Russor.
Russia: And this was maintained by Austin, and Innocentius, and See Fulk.
Annot. on Joh. 3.5.
all the Churches in their time. Which Testimonies we produce, to show, that
former Ages have been far from looking upon the Lords Supper, as being of a
more sacred nature then the other Ordinance of Baptism. Indeed of l^te there
have been those who have made Baptism of a far larger extent then the Lords
Supper. This has been one practical Difference between Congregational-men and
Presbyterians (whom the Lord unite in the Truth) in that the Congregational-men
would baptize the Children of none but such, whose Parents were fit for the
Lords Supper: when as the Presbyterians would Baptize the Children of such,
whose Parents were not fit for the Lords Supper; and their promiscuous
Administration of that Ordinance, was very grievous unto their Congregational
Brethren. See Beverly against Timson.

3. The Parents of the children in question, are not Members of any instituted
Church, according to Gospel-Rules, because they were never under any explicit
and personal Covenant. To prove which, we reason thus: If this second
Generation do retain their Membership by virtue of their Parents Covenant made
for them in minority; then, in case all the pro-Parents were dead, this second
Generation would be a true Church of Christ, without any further Act or
Covenanting. But this second Generation are not a true Church of Christ without
some further Act. Ergo, they do not retain their Membership. If they are a true
Church of Christ, then they have Power to Vote in Church Affairs, as to choose
Officers, and to cast out Offenders, and the like; because every true Church
has this power given to them by the Lord Jesus, who is the only Head of his
Church. But they have no such Power (say the Synod, who do expressly See the
Answ. to 21 Questions.
exclude the persons in question from the Lords Supper and Voting:) Therefore
we conclude that they are no true Church of Christ. Therefore the persons in
question do not retain their Membership; therefore their children ought not to
be Baptized.

4. It is not Mere Membership, (as the Synod speaks) but qualified Membership
that gives right unto Baptism. For the evincing whereof, we argue thus: John's
Baptism was Christian Baptism, (as all our Divines maintain against the
Papists) John's Baptism might not be applied unto some, who were standing
Members of the visible Church, because they were not qualified with Repentance,
Luke 3.8. and 7.30. Therefore Christian Baptism is not to be applied unto such
as stand Members in the visible Church, if they be not qualified with fruits of
Repentance. This seems to us to cut the Sinews of the strongest Arguments which
are brought by the Synod for the Enlargement of Baptism: for, their strongest
Argument, is the Membership of the Children in Controversy; when as it seems
to us, that the Scripture does not acknowledge any such Mere Membership as they
speak ^f. And besides that, the case is clear in our apprehension, from the
Instance given, That it is not Mere Membership, but qualified Membership, that
gives right unto this Divine and Sacred Ordinance.

5. That which will not make a man capable of receiving Baptism himself, in
case he were unbaptized, does not make him capable of transmitting right of
Baptism unto his child. It is a Ruled case, Mr. Hooker, Survey, part. 3. p. 17.
That he that has not Title himself unto any Privilege, cannot entitle
another. The Lawyer says, Acts (a non habente potestatem) are invalid. But all
that the Synod has said, will not give a man right to Bap^ism himself, in case
he were unbaptized; for a man may be an unbeliever, and yet come up to all that
the Synod has said in their fifth Proposition, and more too. Ergo, all that
the Synod has said, is not enough to make a man capable of transmitting right
of Baptism unto his child. The judg^ment of that famous Martin Bucer, alleged
and approved by Parker, is worthy our consideration, who maintained, that Bucer
de regno Christi, in cap. de Confirmatione. Parker ubi supra.
None ought to be confirmed Members of the Church, besides those who do hold
forth not only verbal Profession of Faith, but apparent Signs of Regeneration.
Nay, these great Divines say, That if there be not tam necessaria signa fidei
quam publica and solennis Professio, as well such signs and outward appearances
of Faith, as shall necessarily argue (^s far as men can judge) that there is
truth in the heart, as a public solemn Profession, the Church ought not to
accept of the Professions of such persons, so as to confirm them in their
Membership. If the Synod would but have expressed as much as this, there had
been no Dissenting on our parts. Here also we cannot but take notice, that the
judgment of that worthy and for-ever famous Mr. Cotton was as ours is; for his
words are these: Holiness of Church Members, p. 93.
I conceive more positive fruits of Regeneration are required in the
Church Members of the New Testament, then of the Old.

6. The Application of the Seal of Baptism unto those who are not true
Believers (we mean visibly, for de occultis non judicat Ecclesia) is a
Profanation thereof, and as dreadful a sin, as if a man should administer the
Lords Supper unto unworthy receivers; which is (as Instit. l. 4. c. 12.
Calvin says) as sacrilegious impiety, as if a man should take the Blood or
Body of Christ, and prostitute it to dogs. We marvel that any should think,
that the Blood of Christ is not as much profaned and vilified by undue
Administration of Baptism, as by undue Administration of the Lords Supper. Yea,
that saying of Austin's is solemn and serious, August. co. Fulgent. c. 6.
Qui indigne accipit Baptisma, judicium accipit non salutem. He who receives
Baptism, either for himself or his child, unworthily, is guilty of the Blood
of Jesus, as well as he who receives the Lords Supper unworthily. And the same
Austin in his Book de Fide and operibus, pleads for strictness in the
Administration of Baptism: and so did Tertullian before him.

7. It has in it a natural tendency to the hardening of unregenerate creatures
in their sinful natural condition, when Life is not only Promised, but Sealed
to them by the precious Blood of Jesus Christ. Baptisma totum foedus gratiae
obsignat fidelibus. Ames. Med. l. 1. c. 40. These. 6.
Baptism is a Seal of the whole Covenant of Grace, as well as the Lords Supper;
and therefore those that are not interested in this Covenant by Faith, ought
not to have the Seal thereof applied to them. Thus have we given an Account of
the principal Reasons which caused our Dissent from the major part of the
Reverend Assembly. We might add to all this, That there is danger of great
Corruption and Pollution creeping into the Churches, by the Enlargement of the
Subject of Baptism. They are the words of a good man, and faithful Minister of
the Gospel now in Europe, in a Letter sent unto one in America: I hope (says
he) some in New England will with clear light stand up against the Enlarging of
Baptism to any, but those whose Parents are admitted unto the Lords Supper. If
ever it be passant Doctrine in the Churches, that others have a right to it,
Farewell to New England 's Peculiar Glory of undefiled Administrations of holy
things. These things are Discouragements with me, from hastening to
New England. Thus he. It may be some will think that we do (as it is in the
Adagy) Nodum in scirpo quaerere, make scruples to our selves, and fear where
there is no fear: Well it will be for us, and for the Churches, if in the end
it prove so.

Now the Lord grant, that his People may have one heart and one way (and that
it may be the right way, even the way which is called Holy) to serve him, for
the good of them, and of their Children after them. And the God of Truth and
Peace, lead us by his Spirit into all Truth, through him who is made unto us of
God, the Way, and the Truth, and the Life.

CERTAIN POSITIONS Out of the HOLY SCRIPTVRES, Premised to the whole ensuing
DISCOURSE.
WE may fitly begin this Discourse, with what the Reverend Elders say (in
their Preface to ^h^i^ Printed Book) That the Prayer of Ep^phra^ for the Co^
ssians, ought to be the Prayer and Labor of us all, viz. That we may stand
perfect and compl^a^ in all the will of God. And it is a good Profession which
they make, saying, We trust it is our sincere desire, that ^is will, all his
will, and nothing but his will may be done among us. To the Law and to the
Testimony we do wholly refer our selves; and if any thing in the following
Conclusions be indeed found not to speak according thereunto, ^et it be
rejected. This does encourage me to join with them, in seeking the right path
in this unfrequented way, so far as the Glory of Gods Holiness and Grace,
together with the honor of his Truth, may be manifested to be dearer to us
then all Creature-concernments and Self-respects. In order whereunto, I
conceive our principal inquiry should be, what those more general Principles of
Truth are, which lie in the things controve ted, and how they may be rightly
applied: using herein only such Light as the Scripture affords, by comparing
one Text with another, and depending on God in Christ for supply and assistance
of the Spirit of Truth to lead us into these Principles, and to teach us by
them; that thereby we may be brought to an universal harmony of Truth; all the
Lines of Truth (however separated in the Circumference) meeting together in
these Principles, as in their Center, and becoming one Point. The finding out
of such Principles, and rightly applying them, would make the way to Truth
shorter, the mystery of Truth clearer, and the united force of Truth stronger
against Error, a sweeter closing of Spirits among good men, and the examining
of other men's Opinions easier, then walking after the larger Circumference of
the voluminous Writings of men, which lead us further from these Principles,
then the Scripture alone. This is that which I would attain, and am pressing
after, as in other Controversies, so in these Questions. For clearing the truth
wherein, I shall first propound certain Theses, or Positions: Secondly apply
them, in a way of Replying to their Propositions.

1. The Theses or Positions propounded shall be these following, and the like.

breathed of God, holds forth a perfect Rule, as of Righteousness toward men,
so, of Holiness toward God, in all things that concern his Natural and
Instituted Worship, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished
unto all good works, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.

the Apostle and H^gh Priest of our Profession, is to be considered, by all
holy Brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, as not inferior in his
Office to Moses: For, as the Office of Moses reached to all the House of God,
and all the Service of it under the Law; so Christ's Office reaches to all the
Church of God, and all the Service of it under the Gospel 2. And whatsoever
Christ did institute or abrogate in the Christian Churches, he did it by Gods
appointment; as Moses, by Gods appointment, gave out what he delivered in the
Church of Israel. 3. And Christ is no less faithful therein, then Moses was,
Heb. 3.2, 3. So that it is as unlawful for men to alter the Ordinances of
Christ given to Christian Churches, under the Gospel, or to add thereunto, or
to diminish ought therefrom, as it was under the Law, Deuteronomy. 12.32. Mat. 28.20.

Moses, as the Father has counted him worthy of more Glory then Moses; and as
far above the whole Church, as the Builder is above the House in honor and
authority. Men's authority being but Ministerial, as Servants, who are to act
only by direction and appointment; Christ's authority being Magisterial and
Despotical, which Prerogative he has as he is Son of the Eternal Father by
eternal generation. Hence the Church is Christ's own House, and he alone may
dispose of it, and of the Service thereof, as it pleases him, by altering the
Mosaical Levitical Ordinances, and appointing a more Spiritual and simple way
of Worship in place thereof, Hebr. 3.3, to 7. Joh. 4.23 24. 2 Cor. 11.2, 3.

Moses for the Service of God under the first Tabernacle, were imposed on the
Jews, until the time of Reformation at the coming of Christ, who being come as
the true Melchisedec, changed the Levitical Ordinances into other more suitable
to his Royal Priesthood. Heb. 9.9, 10. For, the Priesthood being changed, there
is made of necessity a change of the Law, Heb. 7.12. And, having taken away
that unsupportable Yoke, calls Believers under the Gospel to take his easy
and sweet Yoke upon them, Acts 15.10. Mat. 11.29.

Abraham was the same in substance to believing Jews under the Law, and to
Believers, both Jews and Gentiles, under the Gospel, Romans 4.11, 12. And, though
the Kingdom of God be the same in substance, which is taken from the
unbelieving Jews, and given to the believing Gentiles, Matthew. 21.43. yet the
administration of the Covenant and Kingdom is not the same, in all ages, but
varied according to the different times, wherein the Church has been gathered;
the progress thereof, in that variety, being from less perfect, before the
coming of Christ, to more perfect, after his coming: the former was more
external and carnal, Heb. 9.10. the latter more internal and spiritual, Ioh.
1.17. that was accommodated to the state of the Church being a child; this to
the state of the Church being an heir grown to full age, Gal. 4.1, to 5.

the same Covenant in substance, Col. 2.11, 12. Romans 4.11. Yet, neither must we
look at Circumcision as it was of Moses, but of the Fathers, I h. 7.22 nor at
every subject of Circumcision, as the subject of Baptism extensively.
Circumcision was extended to all that were born in the house, and bought with
money, Genesis 17 12, 13. But Baptism is limited to believing Jews and their
children, and to so many as the Lord our God shall call, Acts 2.38, 39. 1 Cor.
7.14. Your children are holy; he says not, Your servants, ^c.

M^t. 28.20. 1 Timothy 3.14, 15.

The Constitution of Christian Ch^rches, are 1. That the Matter of them must
be, if adult, approved Believers, Acts 5.14. if infants, or children in
minority, such whose Parents (both or one) are orderly, and visibly joined to
the Church of Christ, Acts 2.39. 1 Cor. 7.14. 2. That the Form of them, must be
their visible confederating with the Lord Christ, as the Head of the Church,
and one with another mutually, to walk together according to his Rules, for the
attainment of the ends of Church communion, 2 Cor. 8.5. 1 Pet. 2.5.

The Ordering of Christian Churches, are, 1. In general; that all Gospel
Ordinances be dispensed and administered according to Gospel-Precepts and
Patterns, Col 2.5, 6. 2. In particular; 1. That fit persons be orderly admitted
into this holy Fellowship, by the Door, which is Christ believed on and
professed, Ioh. 10.7, 9. 2. That Officers appointed by Christ be regularly
chosen and ordained, and that the Elders, both Teaching and Ruling, especially
Teaching, be singularly loved, and honored with double honor, and obeyed, 1 Timothy 3. T^t. 1 Ph l. 1.1. Acts 6.6. and 14.23. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. 1 Timothy 4.17,
18. Heb. 13.17. 2. That the Members exercise mutual Watchfulness one over
another, Heb. 10.24, 25. with mutual Submission of one to another, and of every
one to the whole Body, 1 Pet. 5.5. 3. That the visible Seals, instituted by
Christ for Gospel-Churches, which are only two, Baptism, and the Lords Supper,
1 Cor. 12.13. be administered by the Teaching Officers, according to Christ's
Institution, Mat. 28.19. 1. Baptism is to be administered by Christ's Ordinance
to Disciples, ibid. Viz. 1. To grown persons not before baptized, after their
holding forth their Repentance and Faith in Christ, and voluntary taking hold
of the Covenant for themselves and their seed, Mat. 3.6. Luke 3.3. Acts 8 37,
38. and 2.38, 39. 1 Cor. 12.12, 13. These, for distinction sake, I call
Immediate Members. 2. To their infant seed or children in minority, who also
are members in the right of their Parents covenanting for them, Acts 2.39. 1
Cor. 7.14. these I call Mediate Members; because the membership which they have
is Mediante Parentum foedere: therefore, these being grown up, must be admitted
into immediate fellowship, and full communion with the Church, by their
personal faith held forth to satisfaction of the Churches charitable
discretion, and by their taking hold of the Covenant for themselves and their
seed, as their Parents before them did; as it is prophesied of Gospel-Churches
in Isa. 56.6, 7. and 62 5. 2. The Lords Supper is to be administered according
to Christ's Institution, in reference both to the Ordinance it self, 1 Cor.
11.23, to 27. and to the Communicants, ver. 27 to 32. 4. That Church Censures
be applied to delinquent Members, in private offenses, according to Mat. 18 15
to 18. and in public criminous Scandals, according to 1 Cor. 5.11. Rev. 22.15.
but so as the public judgment be, not by the Elders alone, but, together with
them, by the Fraternity, 1 Cor. 5 12.

for the Propagation and Cont^nuing of Christian Churches, are properly suited
to their Congregational and Spiritual state. They are not the same with those
before the Law, when the Church was only in Families, nor with those under the
Law given to the Church of the Jews: in both which the Church was to be
propagated, and continued by natural generation, in a lineal descent, from
Noah, by Shem; and from Abraham, by Isaac and Jacob, till the coming of Christ;
this way best suiting to a Domestical and National Church, in their respective
constitutions. Christian Churches are of neither of these sorts, but are, by
Christ's appointment, cast into a Congregational, and more Spiritual Form; and
therefore, are not capable of being propagated and continued, in a lineal
succession, by natural generation, ordinarily: but must be propagated and
continued 1. In adult persons, by Regeneration visibly manifested to the
charitable discretion of the Church, Joh. 3.3, 5. being wrought in the working
of Faith in Christ, Joh. 1.12, 13. and made visible, by a right conf^ssion and
profession of Faith, both quae creditur, Romans 10.10. and qua creditur, Gal.
3.26. 2. In their infant seed, by their Parents covenanting for them; to the
end, that such, being engaged to God in their infancy, may be thereby engaged
and excited the more to give up themselves to God in Christ, when they come to
years of discretion, not by constraint, but willingly, Psalm. 110.3. through the
operation of God working Faith in their hearts, Col. 2.12. by the Spirit, who
is a voluntary Agent, and therefore likened to the wind which blows where it
lists, Joh. 3.8. Sometimes in some of the next posterity, yet not in all, 2 John 4. sometimes in the Grandmother, and Mother, and child; as in Timothy, 2 Timothy 1.5. Accordingly the Church must make a difference of children grown up,
where God makes a difference, as he did between Jacob and Esau, Mal. 1.2. and
receive only such whom Christ receives, Romans 14.1, 2.

Concerning the Communion of Christian Churches, are, 1. Concerning the Ground
of it; which is their Spiritual Union under one Head, Christ, Ephesians. 1.22 23. in
one Body, one Spirit, one Hope of their calling, one Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism, one God and Father of all, and they must endeavor to keep the unity
of the Spirit in the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5, 6. As they have one common
Faith, Tit. 1.4. so they must contend earnestly for the faith once given to the
Saints, Jude, ver. 3. They have also one and the same Rule, Gal. 6 16. The same
Officers, in all Churches, Tit. 1.5. The same Ordinances and Decrees, 1 Cor.
7.17. and 16.1. Acts 16.4. The same Order, Col. 2.5. The same Doctrine, 1 Cor.
4.17. and 15.11. Gal. 1.7. which all the Churches must hold fast, Rev. 3.3. and
renounce all other Doctrines, Gal. 1.8, 9. 1 Timothy 1.3. and 6.3.14.

2. Concerning the Manner of it; for, as the Church generally considered, is
the Mother of all the faithful, Gal 4.26. so particular Churches are Sisters
each to other, Cant. 8.8. and there is a Brotherhood of visible Saints
throughout the World, 1 Pet. 5.9. Hence the manner of their communion must be
social, as between equals, none exercising jurisdiction and authority over
another. Par in parem, non habet imperium. The giving of Laws to the Churches
is Christ's Prerogative, I^m. 4.12. who has also committed the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven to each particular instituted Church, to be exercised by
each Church within it self, without dependence upon the Authority of other
Churches in re propria, Mat. 16.19. 1 Cor. 5.12.

3. Concerning the Things, wherein this communion must be exercised, 1. In
general; in mutual Helpfulness, according to God, by mutual care one of, and
for another, 1 Cor. 10.24. Phil. 2.20 21. 2. Particularly, 1. By Spiritual
Helpfulness, and care exercised

1. In mutual Prayer, and endeavors for their edification, Cant. 8.8, 9. 1
Cor. 12 7. 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. and for their confirmation and establishment in the
truth, Acts 15.41. and 16.4, 5. and for strengthening each other in the regular
application of Church Censures to their delinquent Members, 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. 2 Timothy 4.15.

2. By outward Supplies unto their Necessities, Acts 11.29. Romans 15.26, 27. 2
Cor. 8.2, etc. throughout that Chapter.

3. By their mutual care to avoid Offenses, 1 Cor. 10.32.

4. That, when a Church finds need (in respect of want of light or of
competent consent within it self) it is their duty to seek help by the counsel
of some other Church or Churches, and the other Church or Churches ought to
give it, in a brotherly way, from the Word of God, not by the Elders apart, but
in the presence, and with concurrence of the Brethren, Acts 15.4, 22, 23. nor
may they bind such a Church to rest in their determination, further then the
same shall be found, upon searching the Scriptures, to seem g^od to the Holy
Ghost, as well as to them, Acts 15.28. or, if Neighbour-Church^s find it
ne^essary, to offer their helpfulness to a Church, in case of the Officers
Maladministration, or of Errors, and Scandals, and Schisms, and the like
cases, to prevent the infection of themselves, or to remove corruption from
such a Church, which, being obstinate in their way, seeks not for help, the
Neighbour-Churches ought to exercise the Comm^nion of Churches, by enquiring to
find out the truth, and by admonishing the offending Church, in a brotherly
way; whereunto that Church ought to submit according to God, R^m. 16.17 G^l.
2.11-14. And, if it obstinately persisteth in scandalous Evils, after
convincing light held forth, the offended Churches may renounce communion with
them, to avoid fellowship in their sin, Ephesians. 5.11 1 Timothy 5.22.

Christ to Christi^n Church, in the Premises, and the l^ke, are to be Received
by all the Churches, and the Members of them, and to be obeyed, as his Laws and
Commandments, who is our ^ne Lawgiver. In observing whereof, and not
otherwise, the Purity and Peace of Christian Churches will ^e preserved, by the
blessing of Christ, Iam: 4.12. Mat: 28.20. 1 C^^: 14.37. 1 Timothy 6 13. Gal: 6:16.

These, and the like, being general Principles of Truth, the particular
Determinations of the Synod, in the Two Question^, are to be Examined by them;
and so far, and no further, to be Approved and Rece^ved, as a consent and
harmony of them with these, may be cleared to the consciences of men rightly
informed which may be manifested by a right application, and compari^g them
together.

2. The Application of the former Theses or Posi^ions to the Questi^ns and
Answer^, as they are stated and express^d by the Reverend Elders, in their
Printed Book, follows.

The first Qu^stion propounded to them by the Honored General Court, was,

"Quest. 1. Who are the Subjects of Baptism?

"Answ. The Answer may be given in the following Propositions.

Which are seven in number.

Propos. 1 They that according to Scripture, are Members of the visib e Church,
are the Subjects of Baptism.

Propos. 2. The Members of the visible Church, according to Scripture, are
Confederate visible Believers, in particul^r Churches, and their infant seed,
i. e. children in m^nority, whose nex^ Parents, one or both, are in Covenant.

Reply. I cannot approve the two first Propositions, without some change of the
terms. In the first, thus; they that, according to Christ's O^d^nance, are
regular, and actual Memb^^, etc. The second, thus; The actual and regular
Members of the visible Church, acco^ding to Christ's Ordinance, ar^, etc. The
nec^ssity of this alteration will appear, if, either the p emised Positions be
duly co sidered* wherewith these Proposit on^ w^ll not otherw^se agree: or, if
the Proofs alleged by them from Scripture for confirmation of these two
Propositions, be duly ex^mined; o^, if what is hereafter to be Replied unto
the following Prop^sitions, shall be duly weighed.

Propos. 3. The infant seed f confederate visible believers, are Members of the
same Church with their Parent^, and when grown up, are person lly under the
Watc^, Discipline and Government of the Church.

This Proposition c^nsisteth of two parts, both which they endeavor to prove
distinctly.

1 That ^hey are Members of the same Church wi^h heir Parent] This may pass in
a rig t sense, being understood of Medi^te Member, in and by their Parents
covenanti^g for them, in their infancy, or minority. I shall no oppose it.

2 That when h^y are g own u^, hey are pe s^n lly under the W^^ch, D scipline
and Government of the Chur^^] This expressi^n c^ll^ for serious consideration,
and the Proofs of it ^e^ui^e due ex^^ina^ion. 1. F r the Exp^^ssion the meaning
of ^t ^^^ms to be this; That when the child^en, that were baptized in their
minority, are grown up to years of discretion, or become men, they are Members,
(or, as they speak afterw^rd, (...) Membe^) and by that membership, are under
the Watch, Discipline, and Government of the Church. But what membership is
th^s? Their membership, in their minority, was m^d^^te, in and by their Parents
covenanting for them, as themselves say in page 14. and answerably, they are
under the Watch of the Church in and by their Parents, who are immediately, and
personally under the Watch, D scipline and Government of the Church, which is
to see that the Parents do their d^ty, and perf^rm their Covenant for them, in
b i^ging them up in the nurture and admoni^ion of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.4. and to
help them therein.

B^t by what right are they personally under the Watch, D^scipl^n^, and
Government of the Church? No^ by their Parents Covenant: for that was theirs
only in their inf^^cy, and minority; because then they were not capable of
covenanting for themselves person^lly. It remains then, that, when grown up,
they m^st be, eith^r not members of the Church personally, or members by their
personal coven^nting for themselves and theirs, as other adult persons must be,
who offer themselves to Church-fellowsh^p: Else, though they were members o^
the same Church with their Parents, in their inf^ncy, and minority; yet they
continu^ not members, when grown up, not are p^rsonally under the Watch,
Discipline, and Government of the Church, by their ow^ fault. But they say the
contrary is manifest. Therefore let us examine their Argum^nts.

Arg. 1. Chi^dren w^^e under Patriarchal and Mosaical Di^c^pl ne of ol^, Genesis
18.19. and 21.9, 10, 12. Gal. 5.3. and theref^^e under Cong^eg^^^na^ D c^p^ine
now.

Reply 1. The Tex s alleged do not prove the Antecedent. 1. Abraham's command
ng his ch^ldren and housh^l^ after him, to keep the w y of the Lord, etc. does
not necess^rily infer Church-d^scipline: It being enjoined to all Fathers of
Famil^e^, in the National Church of ^r^^* D^ut. 6.7. and 11 19. and in the
Congre^ational Church^s of Christ, under the Go pel, (...). 6.4, 9. within
t^eir own Families, where they have not power to exercise Church Discipline:
or, if any fart^er thing was meant, it may be applied to the command concerning
Circumcision, as ^en. 17 26, 27. 2. That in Genesis 21 9. where Ishmael, who was
bo n after the flesh, persecuted Isa^c w^o was born after the Spitit, and was
therefore cast out of the Church, in A^ra^^ms Family, is improved by the
Apostle to another purpose, in Gal. 4.22-29 nor does it prove their
Proposition. For Ishmael was not circumcised at e^gh^ daye^ old, but when he
was thirteen years old: and therefore may be thought to be circumcised upon his
p^ s na^ t^k^ng hold of the C^vena^^, as other grown persons in the family d d,
the^e being nothing said in that story to evince the contrary. To which opinion
Poly^a^pus Lys^rus seems to incline. If it was so, then there is a man^fest
difference between Ishmael^ case, and the children of conf^derates, baptized in
i^fancy: for Ishmael was admitted into Churc^-f^l owsh^p and full communion, by
his personal covenanting, whereupon he was circumcised being grown up to y^ars
of discretion, and so might be regularly excom^un cat^d, which they who never
were in f^ll communion may not be. 2. To pr^ve that children were under
Mos^ical discipline of ol^, they p od^ce only one Text, Gal. 5.3. where the
Apostle speaking of ci^cumc^sion, (not as it was given ^f God, and rightly used
by Ab^aha^, as a seal of the righteousness which is by fai^^, R^m 4.11. but as
it was abused by false Teachers, to establish Justification by the works of the
Law) testifies to every m^n that is circ^mcis^d, that he is a debtor to do he
whole Law, and that t^er^f^r^ Christ s^all pr^f^ them nothing. Because he that
seeke^h Righteousness in Circumc^si^n, is bound, by like reason, to se^k it in
other works of the Law. Therefore this text does not prove that, for which it
is all^dged, viz. that children circumcis^d in infancy, were, being grown up
under the external Mosaical Watch, Discipline, and G^vernment of the Church.

Reply 2. Their Argument also is to be denied: Because, if the Antecedent were
more manif ^ ly true then it is found t^ be; yet the Consequent is not good.
^or there is not ^ar ^all^, the like reason of those Patriarc al, and Mosaical
C^urches, and Congregati^nal Churches under the Gospel. The m^mbe^s of the
Church, in the Patriarch^ f^^^^^, were to conti^u^ i^ communion with the
Church, from their being circumcised all the days of their life, until they
were cast out, as pers^cuting ^s^mael was, or voluntarily departed from it, as
pr^fane Esau did, together with his p^sterity; which was ordered by Gods
special Providence to separate the Ishmaelites and Edomi^^ f om the Is^a^lites,
of whom, as concerning the fles^, Christ came, Romans 9.5. As for the Church of
Israel, under Moses, 1. We do not read of any Ordinance g ven them f^r casting
out their members for sins against the Moral Law; as we find it to be
commanded and pract sed under the Gospel, 1 Cor. 5.4, 5 11. 2. The grown
members of the Church of Israe^, under Moses, were brought under such
Discipline, as was established in that Church, by a solemn Covenant, whereof
all adult persons were, by Gods Ordinance, to take hold person lly, and to have
full communion with that Church in all Legal Ordinances, D ^t. 26.16, 17, 18.
But we have no such Ordinance, under the Gospel, whereby the grown children of
Christian Churches are members in full communion or, as mere members, brought
under Church Discipline, and Government, in Congregational Churches.

Arg. 2. They are within the Church, or Members thereof: and therefore subject
to Church-judica^ure, 1 Cor. 5.12.

R ply. The Argument is to be den^ed, in their sense; nor does the text prove
it: for that text spe^keth of men that are members in full communion. Such an
one was that ^ncestuous Corinth^a^, till he was taken away from amon^ them by
Excommunication, 1 Co. 5.1, 2, 5. and such were they who were afterward spoken
of in ver. 11. who were called Brethren, in respect ^f th^i^ f^ll communion
with the Church, before they were put, by the just censure of the Church, into
that st^te, wherein the mem^e s are forbidden to eat with them. And of that
Church-jud^catu e he speaks in v^r. 12. saying, D not y^ ^d^ them that (...) wi
hin* vi^. in full membersh p, as well of all other Ordinances, as ^f Censures.
And indeed, seeing Excommunication is the casting out from communion; How can
any be f^rmally excommunicated, w^o were never in communion and so with^n the
Church? Now themselves deny such com^un on to the adult persons, whom they call
mere members, to d^st^nguish them from members in full communion: therefore not
subject to Judicature of the Church according to the meaning of that text.

Arg. 3 They are Di cip^^^, and therefore under D scipline in Ch^^sts School,
Mat 28.19* 20.

Reply. Though all Church Members are Disciples; infants, foe^erall, in and by
their Parents covenanting for them; and adult persons, pers^^ally, by their
covenanting for then selves, and t erefore both are under the Discipline of the
Church suitably t^ h^ir membersh p: the first, in and under their Parents; the
second, in and by th mselves, being in full commun^on with the Church; Yet I do
not find any where in S^ript^re, that such adult p^rso s as they call mere
Members, are styled Disciple, or accounted Memb^^s. The adult persons in M^^. 8
20. must observe and do all Christ commandment^; th^r^fore the Disciples there
intended, with reference to adult persons, are members in full commun^on.

Arg 4. They are in Church Covenant; th^r^fore subject to Church Power, Genesis
17.7. with 18.19.

Reply. They are not in covenant ^e fu^^, being ad^lt* and not admitted into
C^urch-communion, in ^ll the O^d n nces; therefore are not subject to Church
power. That ^ext in ^en 17.7. has resp^ct especially to Isaac, v^r ^9. for in
Is ^c was Abr^hams seed to be called, Ge^. 2^.12. So the ch^ldren of the flesh
are not the children of God, but th children of the prom^s^ are accounted for
the seed, Romans 9.8. and, The Gentiles are adopted through faith in Christ. Gal.
3.26. for it is in Christ (either apprehended by pe sonal faith, as in adult p
rsons or co^prehending ch^ldren in t^eir Parents Covenant) that the Covenant is
everlasti^g, and so to be perpetu^lly continued in the substance of it; though
by mutable si^ns. J^^ us. The Covenant of Grace is eternal, though it was to be
v^sibly sealed by circumc^si^n, t^ll the coming of C^r^st, and after the comi^g
of Christ by Baptism perpt^ally unto the end of the World. There is no
difference between us, concerning the infant seed, but only concerning adult
persons, who ar^, by age in a capacity of covenant ng for themselves and
theirs. Let these approve th^n faith in Christ, to the charitable discretion of
the Church, and so be r^ceived into Covenant, and Church Communion personally;
and then, and not oth^rwise they are r^gularly subject to Ch^rch-power. Their
second proof from Gen 18.19. has been spoken to before, when I examined their
first A^gument for this third Propositi^^.

A^g. 5. They a^e Subjects of the Kingdom ^f Christ; and th^^efor^ under the
Laws and Government of his ^ingdome, Ezekiel. 3 25 26

Reply. This A^g^ment may justly be retorted against themselves, and ^he Pro f
of it. For, th Subjects of Christ's Kingdom there meant, are voluntary
Subjects, according to that Prophecy in ^sal. 110 3. and such Subjects have
full communion in all p^iviledg^s of Christ's Kingdom, and so under the
Government of ^t But they deny that the mere Mem er^, of whom they spe^k, have
communion in all the privileges of Christ's Kingdom. Therefore, they are not
under the Laws and Government of it, and by Cons^q^ence they are not Subjects
of it.

Arg. 7. Baptism leaves the b^ptized (of which number these ch^ldren are) i^ a
state of subjection to the authorita^ive teaching of Christ's Min^^^ers, and to
the observation of all his commandments, Mat. 28.19, 20 and therefore in a
state of subjection unto D cip^ine.

Re^l. This is not another Argumen^, but the some wit^ the third Argument, thou
h clothed with other words. Th^^ f^re the same Answer may serve for this also.

Arg. 7. Elders are ch^rged o take h^ed unto, and to feed ( i. e. b^^h to Teach
and Rule, comp^r^ Ezekiel 34.34.) all the Flock, r Church, over which the Holy
Gh^st ^a h m^d^ them O^e s ers, Acts 20.28. That child^en are a part of the
^l^^k, was proved bef re: an^ s^ P^ul ^cco^nts then, writing to the same Fl^ck,
or Church of Ephesus, Ep. 6.1.

Rep^^. Be it so that children are part of the Flock which is all that I find
b^f^re proved and tha^ Elders are cha^^ed to t^ke heed, and to feed (^ e. b^th
T^ach and R^l^) all the Fl^ck suitably, to their different capacities; yet all
this concern^th no such g^own persons, to whom they deny full C^urc^ comm^nion
For they that are of competent age and understanding, must be orderly joined to
the Church, by holding forth their calling and faith in Christ to the
satisfaction of the Church, acc^rd^ng to the Rule, and so to be received into
f^llowsh^p of the Covenant and Communion, by their pe^sonal right, without
which they are not to be accounted ^f the Flock or Church. Nor did P^^^ so
acc^unt such. But t^ose children noted in Ep^. 6 1 were eit^er in their
minority and so he puts in their duty in that Epistle as part of their
Catechetical i^struction; or, if they were adult they were personally jo^ned to
the church in communion, and so were under the teaching and d^scipline of the
C^u^ch.

Arg. 8. ^t e^wise I^^eligion and Apostasy would inevitably break into
Churches, and no w^y l^f^ by Chr^s^ to prevent or heal the some, which w^u^d
also bring ma^y C^^rch-members under that dreadful^ j^dgement of being let
alone in their wickedness, Hos. 4 16, 17.

R ^ly. 1. There is no cause of fear that Irreligion and Apostasy will break
into Churches, if the Po^ter look well unto the D ors of the Lords House, that
no adult persons be r^ce^ved into pe^s^nal Membership, but such as reg^larly
approve their personal fi nes for all Church Communion O^, if such ev^ls break
into the Church, through the hypocrisi^ of such a^ creep in u^ awares, J^de,
ve. 4. yet then Christ ^ath l^ft a clear and plain way to prevent and heal the
same, by su^jecting such u^d^r ^he W^tch, and D scipl ne, and G^vernment of the
Chu^c^. But the admitting of such adult persons, as are not qual^fied for
Church communion in all O dinances, will be found, in the ^ss^e, the cause of
the breaking in of Irreligion and Apostasy into Churches, by the fault of men,
who ga^he^ wi hout Christ, and ^^^ive such as he rej ct^t^. Nor w ll the
Churc^es censuring of such, prevent or heal those ev^ls, s^eing ^e bl^ss^th
only his own Inst^tutions, not men's Devices. Humane Inventions usually cause
the Evils wh ch they pretend to cure; as we see in the Lov-feasts, which brake
love among the Co^in^hians, 1 Cor. 11.18-22. 2 Though no Chu^ch-way is left by
Christ for preventing or healing such evils in men that should not be of the
Church; yet, if they were kept out of the Church, till their fitness of
communion should appear; as these evils, and the like, would not inevitably
break into Churches, so neither need any Church Members be let alone in their
wickedness, s^eing Christ has delegated the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, to
bind and ^^s^, and Di^ections how t^ manage them toward delinquent Members
that are orderly admitted into Church Communion, Mat. 16.17, 18, 19. Nor need
they who are not thus joined to the Church, be let alon^, if the Authority in
Famil^es and in the Commonwealth, be wisely and faithf^lly managed by the
Rulers of both, to restrain t^ose under their power f om evil companies, and
courses, and to constrain them to a constant reverent attendance to all Family
duties of Relig on, and to the Word publicly Preach^d in Church-Assembl^es,
and to the Sanct f^i g of the Christian Sabb^th, as a Day of holy Rest unto the
Lord. Such means will b^ blessed of Christ, to the preventi^g of the
^ut-breakings, and some of them to the healing o^ those evils Fai h being w^ou
ht in their hearts, through the efficacy of the Spirit, in and by the Preaching
of the Word; and so they will become fit to be received into Church Membership
and commun on.

Hav^ng thus examined their third Prop^sition. I find it d^stitute of
Scripture-p^oofs, and therefore must leave it, as Irregular, a d not agreeing
with the Posi^ions formerly g^ven, for Rules of Trial, whether Doctrines and
Pr^ct s^s in mat^er, of Church Order, ^gree wi^h the Princ^ples of Truth, or
not. I proceed to examine their fourth Proposition, for answer to the first
Question.

Propos 4. Those adult persons are not theref re to be admitted o f^ll
Communion, merely because they are, and continue Members, without such furthe^
qual^fica i^ns as the Wo^d of God requires thereunto. The truth hereof, they
say, is plain.

Reply. Though it seems to them plain yet it seems not suffic^ently cleared by
their Pro^fs. 1. From 1 Cor. 1^.28, 29. where it is r^quired, th t such as come
to the Lords Suppe, be able to examine then serves, and to di^cern the Lords
Body; else they will eat and drink unworthily, and eat and drink damnation, or
judgment to themselves, when they partake of this O^d^nance. But mere
membership is separable from such ability to examine one's self, and discern
the Lords Body, as in the children of the Covenant that grow up to years is too
often seen.

Re^l. 1. The want of such abil ties in the children of the Covenant, is indeed
too ^ften se n, through the too frequent neglect of Pa^ents in their Education,
and of Ministers and Churches in their Institution, and Catec^^zing, and
Watc^ing over them: which should ^w ken their circumspection in look ng
narrowly to their fitness for personal Membership when they grow up to years.

2. Though Membersh^p be s^parable from, yea d^st^tute of such ability in the
infant seed, or c ildren ^f the Covenant in their minority, and therefore they
are not to be admitted unto the Lords S pp^^, and that text proves it; yet it
may not be granted tha^, when they are grown up to years, they are, and
continue Menbers r^gularly, being through want of that ability not fit for
Chur^h-commun^on personally. For as if adult persons, being unbaptized, should
desire to have the Covenant, and their Church-me^bership sealed by Baptism,
they must hold forth Faith in Christ, wrought in their hearts, as P^il^^
required the Eunuch, before they may be b^ptized, Acts 8 36 37. So, by parity
^f reason, if one baptized in infancy, being grown up to years, desires to be
joined to the church by his own personal Rig^t ^e must h^ld fo^th his personal
Faith in the Son of God, to their charitable satisfaction, that they may know
his ability to examine himself, and discern the Lords Body, b fore they admit
him into personal Membership, which infers full communion with the Church.

2. They say, that, In the Old Testamen^, ^ho^gh men did continue members of
the Church, yet for ceremonial uncleanness they were to be kept from full
communion in the h ly things, Lev. 7.20, 21. Numb. 9.6, 7. and 19.13, 20. yea,
and the ^ri sts and Porters had special charge, that m^n should not partake in
all the holy things, unless duly qualified for th sa^^, notwithstand^ng their
membership, 2 Chronicles. 23.19. Ezekiel 22.26 and 44.7, 8 ^, 23. and therefore much
more in th^se times, where Moral fi n^ss and Spiritual qual^fications are
wanting, Membership ^l ne is not sufficien^ for full communion. More was
required to adult persons ea^ing the Pa^sover, the^ mere membership: therefore
so there is now to the Lords Suppe^, etc.

R^ply. 1. The invalidity of Proofs from the Old Testament, under Mose^, being
appl^ed to Gospel Ordinances under Christ, and so this of Baptism under the New
Testament, in things whereof there is not the like reason, has been declared
in the f urth, sixth, and eighth Positions, with which this Proof does not
agree.

2. If the Texts alleged were applicable to Church Members in the times of the
Gospel; yet they suit not the case in question. For, all men, that were
accounted Members of that Jewish Church had full communion with that Church in
all Legal Ord^nances; even they that were ceremonially unclean had so, before
their uncleanness, and after they were healed of their uncleanness, as well
as others.

3. Particularly: 1. The typical uncleanness in Levit. 7.20, 21, etc.
signified, that all Unbelievers, Hypocrites, and Wicked ones, that, professing
the Gospel, partake of the outward Signs and Seals of Grace unworthily, do eat
and drink condemnation, or judgment, to themselves; according to 1 Corinthians.
11.28, 29. 2. Those in Numb. 9.6. who were unclean by the dead, might not come
into the Lords Sanctuary, nor into the Lords Camp, as also every Leper, or one
that has an Issue, Numb. 5.2. Those legal pollutions signified sin of all
sorts, and the removal of such out of the Lords Sanctuary and Camp, figured the
removal of scandalous and impenitent sinners out of Church Communion, though
they were in it before, and the keeping them from admittance into
Church Fellowship, if they were not in before: for, The unclean may not come
into i^, Isa. 52.1. Any thing that defiles, may in no wise enter into it, Rev.
21.27. 3. That Text in Numb. 19.13, 20. concerns one who, being defiled by the
dead, yet presumptuously came into the Tabernacle, that is, into the Court of
it, in his uncleanness, that man must be cut off: Otherwise, if he did it igno
antly, he was to bring a sacrifice, Lev. 5.3-6. because he defiled the
Sanctuary by coming into it, before he was pu^ified. This, and the former
Texts, figured, in reference to G^sp^l-Churches, not the distinction between
mere M mb^rs, and Members in Communion, (for no such distinctions of adult
Members was known or made in that Church) but that they should not admit any
that are spiritually unclean (as all that are v^sibly unregenerate are, Tit.
1.15, 16.) into Church Communion. And that they should put away from
Church-commun on, by Excommunication such as were in Church Communion before
such uncl^anness appea ed in them, till their healing should be n an f sted. 4.
That which is added, concerning the charge given to the ^ r ests and Por ers,
had been more fully, and so more truly expressed, if they had said, Their
c^a^ge was, that men should not partake of all the holy ^^ing^, unless ^^^y
qualified for the same, notwi ^standing their (not Membe^ship, in their sense
but) Membership in full comm^ni^n with the Chu^c^, For, such Members the men of
^srae were, b fore their Legal uncleanness: and they were also charged to keep
out the Heathen uncircumc^sed in flesh, who never were Members. That text in
E^^^. 44 7 8, 9. is a Prophecy of the times of the Gospel, expressed under
legal phrases, according to the manner usual with the Prophets, wherein the
Gospel-Churches, and their Officers, are forewarned (by the example of the
Jews, under the Old Testament, with whom God was highly offended for the like
abomination) not to admit such as are uncircumcised in heart into
Church Fellowship, to defile the Lords Sanctuary, which is (not now, as then it
was, a material House, but) a Society of Saints, called, An holy Generation, a
Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People, that they might show forth
the virtues of him, who has called them out of darkne s into his mavelous
light, 1 Pet. 2.9. Such men therefore as cannot approve themselves to the
Churches charitable judgment, to answer this description, in some measure,
should not be received into Church-fellowsh^p.

Whereas they add, that M re was required to adult persons eating the
Passover, then mere Membership; therefore so there is now to the Lords Supper.

Reply. It is true that more then that Membership, which they had in their
inf^ncy, or minority, was required in adult persons to eat the Pass^ver. For,
1. When they became adult, they were to covenant solemnly with the Lord, and
his People, in their own persons, Deu. 26.17, etc. whereunto heart fitness was
necessary, that their persons and services might be accepted of God, in that
Church Communion, Isa. 56 4, 5. with Deuteronomy. 3.6. 2. This heart-fitness was also
to be exercised, when they were to eat the Passover, suitably to the nature,
end, and use of that Ordinance, 2 Chronicles. 30.6-9, 18, 19, etc. Thus they were to
keep the Passover, once every year, all the days of their life, till Ch is it
our P^ssover was come: Since which time it is sp^ritually to be kept by
Believers under the Gospel particularly, in our communicating at the Lo^ds
Table) in remembr^nce of his Death, and of our Redemption thereby, until he
come, 1 or. 5.7.8 (...) 11.25, 26. but all they that did eat the Pass^ver, were
Members in full communion. The Membership of adult pers^ns then was not a mere
Membe^ship, but a Membership in full Church Communion. So it ought to be now.

They say, Though all Members of the Church are the Subjects of Baptism, they
and their children, yet all Members may not partake of the Lords Supper, as is
further manifest from the different nature ^f Baptism and the Lords Supper,
etc.

Reply. 1. Church Membership infers such Church Communion, as is suitable to
that Membership. The Membership of the ch ld^en of Conf^derates, in minority,
infers Church Communion, so far as they are capable of it, in and by their
Parents covenanting for them being not capable of covenanting for themselves:
Hence they have communion with the Church by being bap^^zed 1 C^^. 12.13. So
the Church Membership of adult pers^ns, infers Church Communion in all
Ordinances, particularly in the Lo ds Supper, 1 Cor 12.13. and in Voting and
Censures. 1 Cor. 5.12. Therefore no adult person may be rec^ived into me
Member^^, reg^larly, until he be qualified fitly for other O^dinances and for
Voting and judging in Church Affairs, 1 Co. 5.12. So ^uch for the fourth
Proposition.

Propos. 5. Their fifth ^roposit^on is: Church Members, who were admi ted in
mino^it, understanding the D ctrine of Faith, and publicly professing their
assent thereunto, not scandalous in lif^, and solemn^y owning the C venant
before the Church, wh ^^n they give up themselves and their children to the
Lord, and subject themselves to the Government of Cor st in the Church, their
children are to be baptized.

Reply. This Proposition agrees not with our tenth Position, where more is
declared, from Scripture, to be required unto Church Membership, in reference
both to infants and adult persons, then is here expressed. Yet, say they, This
is evident from the Arguments f^llowing. But to him who shall duly examine
their Arguments by the Light of the Word and Spirit of God, in the New
Testament, the Proposition will appear to be not evidenced by them, as we shall
evince, by the help of Christ, in examining the particulars.

Arg. 1. These children are partakers of the which is the main ground of
baptizing any children wha^soever; and neither the Parents nor the children do
put in any bar to hinder it. This they endeavor to prove in the two parts of
it, severally.

1. That they partake of that which is the main ground of baptizing any, they
say, is clear; Because interest in the Covenant is the main ground of title to
B^ptism: and this infants have.

Reply. The Parents must be fitly qualified before they may be admitted to
Covenant with the Lord, and his Church, for themselves and their children: Else
the Covenant will be profaned; and such covenanting cannot regularly give them,
and their children, an interest in the Covenant, and title to Baptism. The
Parents, or adult persons, regularly admitted to Covenant, must be B lievers in
Christ, effectually called, in the charitable judgment of the Church, judging
according to Rule for to such only, and their seed, is the Promise, or
Covenant, Act 2.39 If the Primitive Churches had not exactly looked for this
qualification in the men whom they admitted unto Church Membership, the
Apostles neither could, nor would have styled those to w^om they wrote their
Ep^stles, Beloved of G^d, called Saints, Romans 1.7. Sanctified in Christ Jesus,
1 Cor. 1.2. Faithful in Christ J^ us, Ephesians 1.1. Saints in Christ Jesus, Phil.
1.1. The Church which is in God t e Father, and in the Lord Je^us Ch is it. 1 Thessalonians 1.1 which they d d not by the judgment of Infallibility, f om Divine
Revelation, but from the judgment of Charity, from what they heard of them,
and saw in them, Romans 1.8. 1 C^r 1.4. Ephesians 1.15, 6. Co^. 1.3, 4, 5. (...) 2.5.
Phil. 1.3, 5, 6 7. 1 Thessalonians. 1.3, 4, 5, 9. Therefore, whereas they say,

That a Member, or one in Covenant, as such, is the subject of Baptism, is
further cleared in Pr^p^s. 1.

R ply. The light which that Proposition holds forth for clearing this is in
one clause, which is here omitted, viz. According to Sc ipture. "They that
according to Scriptu e are Memcers of the visi^l^ C urch, are the subjects of B
ptism, etc. Now, according to Scripture, the Covenant was differently
administered, in different times of the Church. Under Ab^ah^m it was administered
by Circumcision to all that we^e of his House, and to their seed abiding in his
Family: For the Church was then only in Abraham's Family, and after him in the
Families of Isaac and Jacob, until M se; yet even then the Circumcision of all
Parents did not interest their seed in the Covenant and first Seal of it, as
may be seen in the Posterity of Esau, and of Abraham himself by Keturah. 2.
Under Mose^, it was administered to the twelve Tribes suitably unto that
Ceremonial and Typical state of the Church, which was then National, Deuteronomy. 4.7,
8. and the Proselytes, who were then add^d to them, were to be ordered by the
same Laws with the People of Israel; for, accessorium sequitur naturam
Principalis. This administration of the Covenant was, according to the
Scripture of the Old Testament, until Christ came; under Christ the Covenant is
administered, according to what has been exp essed in the Positions formerly
noted; particularly, the tenth Position.

2. That these children have interest in the Covenant, they say, appears; 1.
Because if the parent be in Covenant, the chude is also, etc. But the parents
in question are in Covenant, etc.

Reply. 1. Add, According to Gospel-Rules, given by Christ unto Christian
Churches for admittance of persons spiritually fit for Church Covenant and
communion. Thus; if Parents be in Covenant, according to Gospel-Rules, the
i^fant child or child in minority, is so also; else the Prop sition must be
denied: That being added, the Assumption is to be denied. Then, according to
that addit^on it may be granted also, that, if the Parent stand in the Church,
so does the child in infancy, or minority, among the Gentiles now, as well as
among the Jews of old, Romans 11.16, 20-22. They say, It is unheard of in
Scripture, that the progress of the Covenant stops at the infant child. Reply.
Nor do we say it does, but at the adult person, or Parent, who breaks the
Covenant; and that the progress of the Covenant stops there f o^ the children
also, it is not unheard of in Scripture: for the Scripture has told us of the
stopping of the Covenant in Ishmael, Esau, and Abraham's posterity by Keturah,
after they were sent away from the Church in Isaac's family. Nor do their
Reasons prove the Assumption.

The first is, Because they were once in Covenant, and never since
discovenanted. If they had not been once in Covenant, they had not warrantably
been baptized; and they are so still, except in some way of God they have been
discovenanted, cast out, or cut off, which these have not been.

Reply. 1. If they had not spiritual fitness for the Covenant, Parents, or
adult persons were not regularly in Covenant, nor are their children in
infancy, or minority, warrantably baptized. And, when those infants are grown
up, though they have not been discovenanted, by being cast out, or cut off from
their Covenant Relation; yet they are discovenanted, by their violating their
Parents Covenant for them, through their not performing that whereunto they
were engaged thereby, in that, when they became adult, they did not regularly
enter into Covenant with the Lord and his Church, for themselves and theirs, as
their Parents, if they were godly, did, Romans 2 25. 2. Thoug^ they say, Persons
once in Covenant are not broken off from it, according to Scripture, save for
notorious sins, and incorrigibleness therein, which is not the case of these
Parents. Yet if they break off themselves, by breaking the Covenant which was
sealed by Baptism in their infancy, or minority; they thereby deprive
themselves of the benefits and privileges of the Covenant, as it has been
proved. And, in such a case, they are to be looked at, like those of whom John
speaks, 1 John 2.19.

2. Because the tenor of the Covenant is to the faithful and their seed after
them in their generations, Genesis 17.7. even to a thousand generation, i. e.
conditionally, provided that the Parents s^ccessively do continue to be keepers
of the Covenant, Exodus 20 6. Deuteronomy. 7.9, 11. Psalm. 105.8. which the Parents in
question are, because they are not (in Scrip ure account in this case)
forsakers or rejecters of the God and Covenant of their fathers; see Deuteronomy.
29.25, 26. 2 Kings 17.15-20 2 Chronicles 7.22. Deuteronomy 7.10.

Reply. 1. The tenor of the Covenant (...). 17.7 had (as it has been formerly
noted) a special resp^ct unto Isaac v^r. 19. for in Isaac was Abraham's seed to
be called, ^en. 21.12. So the children of the flesh are not the children of
G^^, but t^^ children of the prom se are accounted for the s^^, Romans 9.8. The
sealing f this Covenant to the Posterity of Isaac and Jacob, by Circumcision,
was to continue throughout their generations, till the coming of Christ. The
Covenant ^n the tenor of it, is, for substance, the same to us as it was to
them (though the outward Signs. and manner of dispensing it, d^ffer) it being
establ shed by the blood o^ Christ, Luke 1.69, 71, 73. Heb. 13.20. The
extending the Covenant to a thousand generation^, themselves say, is
conditiona^, provided that the Parents s ccessively do c ntinue to be keepers
of the C^venan^. Such a succession in the Covenant, through Faith is not to be
found even in the best Churches that ever were in the world for a thousand, o
an hundred generat^ons: But such the Parents in question are not. For though
they are not such forsakers and ^ej^cters of God, and the Covenant of their
fathers, as they who are sp ken of in Deuteronomy. ^9 25 26 2 Kings 17 15-20 2 Chronicles.
7.22. Yet, besides that g oss Idolatry, there is a spiritu^l Idolatry in
scandalous Covetousness, C^^^st 3.5. and Worldly-mindedness whereby men forsake
and reject G^d and his Covenant, to serve the World, M^ 6.24. 1 Timothy 6.17. 1 I
h. 2.15. to these, the text alleged by them in Deu 7.10. may fi^ly be applied;
and they forsake the Covenant of God, as I n. 4 4. and such may they b, who
answer all the erms of then fif h P^oposition, externally and visibly. Now, t e
Religion of such is no better then that of the Sh^chern^e, who took upon then
the Religion of the Jews and were circumcised only for worldly ends, en 34.22,
23, 24. Such Religion will end in Apostasy, in times of Persecution for the
Truth, (...). 13 21.

2. That the Parents in question do not put a bar to h nder their ch^ldren
from Baptism, they say, is plain from the words of the Proposition, etc.

Reply. 1. Notwithstanding what is said in the Proposition, Parents may put a
bar to hinder their children from being baptized regularly. A man may do and be
all that is there required, yet have not Faith in Christ, but be an
unregenerate person; and that will put a bar to hinder himself and his
infant seed from entering into the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3.3, 5. and, by
consequence, from the Seal of entrance. 2. Nor can they prove that all adult
persons, whom they admit into personal and immediate Membership, are such as
the Proposition describes. For, I demand, Does y all understand the Doctrine
of Faith? What course do they take to k^ow it? If they do not, their publicly
pr^fessing their assent thereunto, is a mere mockery. A Parret-like saying the
Doctrine of Faith, and an ignorant assent thereunto, may justly be a bar of
gross Ignorance, Atheism, and Infidel^ty, and Hypocrisy. P^t^^ b^ought the
Eunuch to understand what he read, before it could become a word of faith to
him, ^ct^ 8. 2. Nor is literal understanding what they assent to, sufficient to
remove all bars: These the Devils do, Jan. 2.19. Arig^^ m^n^er f knowing and
assenting, must be added. Such a manner of knowing, whereby the Church may
judge that Christ is let into the Soul. As Reverend Mr. Hooker was wont to say,
Such (...) profess d Assent, as has a pr^fessed Consent joined with it, Isa.
1.10. Such a manner of knowing and consenting, as produces Obedience flowing
from Faith: which is the next end of the Ministry of the G^spel, Romans 1.5. and
16.26. Else, they are defi^^^, and unbelieving, to whom nothing is pu^^, but
even their mind and conscience is defiled, who profess that they know Go^, bu
in their works they deny hi^, Tit 1.15 16. 3 And though t ey are not scandalous
in l fe, but solemn^y own the C^venant before t^^ Church, wherein they give up
themselves and their children to the Lord, and subject themselves to the
Government of Christ in he Church; yet all these may be affirmed of many who
have a so of godl^nes^, b^^ de^y the power thereof: From such, Pa^. (who tau^ht
him how he ought to behave himself in the House of (...), which is the Church
^f the living God, the pillar and g^ o^nd of Truth, 1 Timothy 3.15.) warned
T^mothy to turn away, 2 Timothy 3.5. 4. But are all the adult persons, whom they
admit into Membership, such as the Proposition describes? Do they take a right
course to know they are such? 1. That they are no^ scandalous in life: What
testimony or certain knowledge have they, that the Church may confide in, that
they f equent not loose and vain Company in d^sorderly N^ght-meeting^ at
unseasonable hours, and in suspected places, in unwarrantable Gamings and
Drinkings, etc? not to speak of other evils. 2 H^w do they S lemnly own the
Covenan^ before the Church? when some of them having publicly said, They do
own it; being afterward asked ^n private, What is the Covenant which you owned?
answered, I do not know. 3. As for their Subjecting themselves to the Governme
t f Christ in the Church; Do they orderly submit to the Government of their
Family-Governours, Parents and Masters, etc? If the Church know not that, How
can they expect that they will really subject themselves to Christ's Government
in the Church? Yea, if they have not been weary and heavy laden, and then came
unto Christ, they are not fit to take his yoke and burden upon them, Matthew.
11.28, 29. I proceed to their second Argument.

Arg. 2. The children of the Parents in question are either children of the
Covenant, or strangers from the Covenant; either holy or unclean, either within
the Church or without, either such as have God for their God, or without God in
the world. But he that considers the Proposition, will not affirm the latter
concerning these children: and the former being granted, infers their right to
Baptism.

R^ply. The more seriously I consider their Proposition, the less I find in
it, to evince the former, and the more, to conclude the latter; viz. That if a
man have no more then the Proposition holds forth, he may be a stranger from
the Covenant, unclean, and without the Church, in Scripture account R^m 9 6, 7
8. and without God in the world, through want of faith in Christ, whereby the
heart is purified, and men have an interest in Christ and in God through Christ.

Arg. 3. To deny the Proposition, would be 1. To straiten the grace of Christ
in the Gospel Dispensation, etc. 2. To render the children of the Jews, when
they shall be called, in a worse condition then under legal Administrations,
contrary to Jer. 30 10 Ezekiel. 37.25, 26. 3. To deny the application of the
initiatory Seal to such as regularly stand in the Church and Covenant, etc. 4.
To break Gods Covenant, by denying the initiatory Seal to those that are in
covenan^, Genesis 17.9, 10, 14.

Reply. The contrary to all, and every one of these, is true. For, 1. It
enlarges the Grace of Christ in the Gospel Dispensation by showing that
Christian Churches are in a more spiritual and gracious frame and sta^e, then
the Jews of old were, under Legal Dispensations: which therefore are not
continued and propagated by a natural succession, as that National Church was,
but by Gods ^illing them with an holy calling, according to his purpose and
grace, 2 Timothy 1.9. and adding thereby to the Christian Church such as, in their
charitable judgment, shall be saved, Acts 2.43. 2. It declares that the state
of the Jews, when they shall be called, will be far better then it was under
Legal D^spensations, yea, then the condition of the Gentiles is now. For, under
the Law, their light and holiness was defective, and Christian Churches now,
how careful soever they be in point of admittance, cannot avoid the creeping in
of Hypocrites: but the Jews, when they shall be called, shall have a far
greater measure of light and holiness then was to be found in former ages of
the Churches, and all the Members of the New ^erusalem shall be Elect, they and
their children successively; and no Hypocrite shall be mingled with them, Rev.
21. and 22. 3. Nor does the denial of the Proposition, infer a denial of the
application of the initiatory Seal to such as stand regularly in the Church and
Covenant: but the contrary. 4. Nor does it break Gods Covenant, by denying
Baptism to such as are regularly in Covenant. These are Accusations without
Proof.

Arg. 4. Confederate visible Believers, though but in the lowest degree, such
are to have their children baptized: But the Parents in question are confede
ate visible Believers, ^t least in some degree.

Reply. The major being granted; the minor is denied For, 1. All that is said
in the Proposition, may be affirmed of sundry that have not visible saving
Faith in Christ, in the lowest degree. Therefore these are no sufficient
grounds for charity to account them Believers in Christ, in the least degree.
Let them that are to be admitted into Membersh^p, by the^r personal right, show
how Faith was wrought, and how it works in them, in the lowest degree: then the
Church will have some ground for their charitable judgment concerning their
fitness for regular Church Membership and communion. 2. Nor are the ch^ldren of
the godly, qualified but as the persons in the Proposi ions, said to be fait
full in ^^t. 1.6. whether we understand that Text in a Moral, or Spiritual
sense: The first, is a f^uit of Moral Principles and Education; these are short
of the qualifications in the Proposition: The second, is a fruit of the Spirit
G ^. 5.22. These are Believe^s in Christ, Acts 16.15. 3 Epist Ioh. ver. 5. and
are qualified above what the Proposition requ^reth. 3. They say, Chi dren of
the Covenant, as the Pa^ents in questionare, have frequently the beginnings of
grace wrought in them in younger years: Hence this sort of persons, showing
nothing to the contrary, ^re in charity, or to Ecclesiastical reputation,
visible Believers.

R pl. 1 It remains to be proved, that the Parents in question are children of
the Covenant: They were children of the Covenant in their infancy and minority,
and bound thereby, when they became adult, to covenant for themselves and their
seed, in their own persons, being fitly qualified, as their godly Parents did
before them: If they, being grown up to be men, perform not this Covenant, they
cannot fitly be called Children of the C^venan^, but Transgressors of the
Covenan^, and Breakers of it. 2. The Argument is fallacious: Some children of
the Covenant have had the beg nnings of grace manif stly wrought in them in
younger years. Therefore all persons of this sort, showing nothing to the
contrary, are, in charity, or to Ecclesiastical reputation, visible Believers.
This A^gument is to be denied: both because it argues from some Particulars, to
infer a General affirmatively; and from that which is positively manifest, in
some, to p^ove the same to be in others, in whom it is not positively manifest,
but only they show nothing to the contrary: which makes them at best but
Negative Christians, which is not to be Christian indeed.

4. They say, They that are regularly in the Church (as the Parents in question
are) are visible Saints: for the Church is (in Scripture account) a company of
Saints, 1 Cor. 14.33. and 1.2.

Re l Both their Assertion, and their Proof of it, are to be denied. 1 The
^ss^rtion is not true, that the Parents in quest on are regula ly in the
Church. Infants and children in minority of co^f d^rate Believers, are in the
^hu ch, by their Pare ts covenant ng f^rt^e^^, 1 C^. 7.4. But Parents are not
reg l^^ly i^ the Church, t ll, being fitly qualified they confede^ate for th
mselves, and their children und r age, Acts 2.30 b^ing q^al^fied according to
that Prophecy concern ng these time of the Gospel, in (...). 56.6, 7. 2. The
Proof is not apposi e: f^^, P^^^ wro^e that Ep stle to the adult Members
regularly admitted un^o full communion with the Church at Ch i^^, whom he
styleth, Sanct fi d in Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 1.2. and such were they of whom he
sp^^ks in all the Churche^ of the Sai^^, 1 Cor. 14.33. But the Parents in
question, being ^^cer Members, not in fu^l communion, are not regularly
approved of the Church to be such. Therefore this co^cerns not them.

5. They say, Being in Covenant, and baptized, they have Faith and Repentance
indefinitely given to them in the Promise, and sealed in Baptism, Deuteronomy. 30.6.
which continues valid, and so a valid testimony for them, wh le ^hey do not
reject i^.

R ply. Reverend Mr. C^tton was wont to say, Elect children have the grace of
the Covenant, viz. Fai h and Repentance etc. given to them, in and by the
Covenan^, and sealed by Baptism, Deuteronomy. 30.6. but the rest have only the
Covenant of Grace, for eternal means ^f grace, given in the Promise, and sealed
by Baptism, till they reject them. This testimony is true, and this distinction
is grounded upon Scripture, R^m. 11 7. and it is necessary, to prevent that
Opinion of Universal Baptism-Grace, which the Arminians improve to establish
their dangerous Error of the final and total Apost^cy of the Saints from
Grace. But God, who has promised, is faithful, and will do according to his
Promise, working effectually in the Elect, in his appointed time, the grace
promised in the Covenant, so powerfully that they shall not reject it; the rest
shall have the outward means of Grace, according to his Promise, till they
reject them, as Es^u did. To these, Faith and Repentance are not indefinitely
given in the Promise, and sealed by outward Baptism; as neither was it given in
the Promise, and sealed by outward Circumcision indefinitely to those who, when
they became adult, brake the Covenant. Whereupon Paul distinguish d the jews
and Circumc si^n, Romans 2.28 29. and answerable thereunto is Peter^ distinction
of B^ptism 1 Pet. 3.24. Therefore such as reject the offers of G ace as all
that living under the m^a^s of Grace remain unb lievers, do Mat. ^3 37. cannot
be said to have Faith and Repentance indefinitely given to them in the Promise,
in that sense, wherein that phrase is used in 2 Pet. 1.4.

They add, Yet i^ does not necessarily ^o^^, that these persons are
immediately fit for the Lords Supper, etc.

Reply. If they have Faith and Repentance given them under Gods Hand in the
Covenant, and sealed by Baptism; and if they do so receive them, that it
continues valid, and so a valid testimony for them: What can hinder regularly
such Church Members from partaking of the Lords Supper, ^c? They say, Because,
though they are in alat^^ de of exp ession, to be accounted visible Believers,
or in numero fidelium, as even infants in covenant are, yet they want that ab
lity of examining themselves, and that special exercise of Faith, which is
requisite to that Ordinance, as was said upon the fourth Proposition.

Reply. 1. If any man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God, 1 Pet. 4.11.
The New Testament no where allows that latitude of speech to call men visible
B lievers, who never were regularly joined to that number, nor fitly qualified
to take hold of the Covenant personally for themselves and their children. 2.
Nor can they be accounted Believers, or in the number of Believers, as infants
are, who are lo^ked at only as in their Parents Covenant, being not capable of
covenanting for themselves, as men are: So that there is not par ratio between
them. 3. Visible want of ability to examine themselves, and of that special
exercise of Faith which is requisite to that Ordinance, argues a visible want
of that Faith wh ch is to be examined and exercised, and is a just bar to the
admittance of such into immediate and personal Church Membership, as well as to
the Lords Supper, etc.

Arg. 5: The denial of Baptism to the children in question, ha^h a dangerous
tendency to Irreligion and Apostasy; because it denies them, and so the
children of the Church successively, to have any part in the Lord, which is the
way to make them cause from fearing the Lord, Josh 22.2^, 25.

Reply. The children in qu^stion, are children of Parents who are not members
in full communion with the hurch, and so not regularly personal Members. If
such and their children, be denied to have any part in the Lord, it is the
degenerate Parents, not the Churches fault. They who a e not in
Chu^ch-communion, cannot regularly communicate unto their infant seed a right
and title to Baptism, which is the first visible Seal of Church-commu^ion, 1
^or. 12.13. 2. It is not true, that the Churches denying Baptism to the
children in question, is a denial of the children of the Church to have any
part in the Lord; f r such are not, according to Scripture Rules child en of
the Church succ^ssively: for the Parents have cut off the Entail of the
Covenant from themselves and their seed, by their not confederat ng for
themselves and theirs regularly. 3. That this denial ^a ^ a dangerous te^dency
to Irreligion and Apostasy, is not proved by them, nor can be. That Text in
Josh. 22.24, 25. speaks nothing for their advantage in this case; for the men
there spoken of, were Members in full communion with the Church of Israel, and
their children, when they were grown up, were j^yned in Covenant person^lly,
and immediately with the Lord and his Church, by a solemn Covenant, every third
year, Deu. 26.17, 18. which was to continue in Canaan, throu^hout their
generations, till the coming of Christ. So that they had a part in the Lord
successively, from which if they had been excluded caust^sly, it m ght have
caused their children to cease from fearing the Lord B t Christ has not
appointed any such Ordinance to continue such a succession in Christian
Churches under the Gospel. Therefore the Text in J^^^ does nothing at all
concern the children of Parents in question.

The tendency of the following Discourse is to prove, that The owning of the
children of th^se that s^cc^ssively continue in Covenant to be a part of the
Church, is so far from being destructive to the purity and prosperity of the
Church, and Religion therein, that this imputation belongs to the contrary
Tenent.

Reply. They, who so conceive, have such grounds of that persw si^n, as w ll
not easily be removed nor are so much as shaken by any t ing said in their
Book. I will^ngly grant, that to seek to ^^e more holy than the Rul^, will ever
^n^ in impurity in the issue: but that cannot be truly applied to those who
conceive herein according to Gospel Rules. Let them also grant, that to
increase, continue, and propagate Churches under the Gospel, by means not
ordained by Christ under the New Testament, but opposite thereunto, is to
gather without Christ, wh ch will ever end in scattering ^n ^he issue, and
then, What will become of the purity and prosperity of Christian Churches? It
is true, that the frame of the Covenant runs, T^ou, and to our se^d after us in
their genera^^ons; but it must be understood and applied suitably to the
different constitution of Churches, under different admin strations of the
Covenant, under the Old Testament, and under the Gospel.

They say, that, To keep in the Line, and under the influence and efficacy f
this Covenant of God, is the true way to the Churches glory.

Reply. It is indeed the Churches glory to keep in the Line, and under the
infl^ence and efficacy of this Covenant, successively, when the Spirit, as a
free A^ent, brings any into that Line, and under that efficacy of the Covenant
by succession in Faith, as he did (...) the Grandmother, and Eun^ce the
Daughter, and Timo^hy her G^andchilde, 2 Timothy 1 5. That is the only true Gospel
succession, when it is made visible to t e Churches charitable judg^ment,
according to Gospel Rules. But that cannot de done, by setting up such a Mere
Members^ip in Christian Churches, whereby the infants shall be bapt^zed, by a
right derived to them from Parents, who are not in full communion with the
church by their personal Membe^sh^p. What influence and efficacy has the
Covenant upon such Parents as a^e n such a Memb^rship, wherein the Church
judges them unfit for communion? and that, not for any Scandal given by them,
after their adm^ssion, but for the nature of their Mere Membership. To d savow
such a Memb^rship, is so far from cutting off the prosper^ty of M^n, and from
hindering it from being, as in the most glorious times it shall be, An eternal
Excellency, and the joy of many generations, that this imputation belongs to
the contrary Tenent, which is here asserted.

But they argue; This progress of the Covenant establishes the Church, Deuteronomy.
29.13. Jer 30.20. Therefore the contrary does disestablish it.

Rep y. The Argument is to be denied. For, it will not follow, that, if God did
establish the Church of the Jews, before the coming of Christ, by such a
successive progress of the Covenant in Deuteronomy. 29.13. therefore he does so now.
As for the place Jer. 30 20. where it is said, that the children of the Jews
shall be as aforetime; it is meant only of their outward condition, that it
shall be as good as before the Captivity. See Engl. Annotat. This place then is
impertinent to Circumcision or Baptism. But there is a manifest difference
between the constitution of these Churches. The Church of the Jews before
Christ, was, for the matter of it, of the Israelites descended from Jacob, by
successive natural propagation; yet this successive progress of the Covenant,
did not then establish the whole Church of Israel in the twelve Tribes: for the
ten Tribes fell off under Jeroboam, and never returned again. The Church of the
Jews that shall be under the New Jerusalem, must consist, for the matter of it,
of Elect and Sincere Believers only, both they and their children successively
to the end of the world, according to the Prophesies in Isa. 60.15. and 50.21.
Ier. 32.39. Ezekiel. 37.25-28. Psalm. 102.16, 28. and sundry other places. But
Christian Churches among the Gentiles now are constituted of visible Believers,
for the matter of them, among whom sundry close Hypocrites creep in. The
progress of the Covenant in them, by Christ's Ordinance, is thus far successive,
that the children in minority of confederate visible Believers shall be
baptized, and thereby bound, when they become adult, to perform the Covenant in
their own persons, and to confederate for themselves and theirs, as their godly
Parents did before them: which if they do not, those Parents by their
degeneracy stop the successive progress of the Covenant: In which case, Christ
does not allow the Churches to provide for a succession, by setting up a Mere
Membership of adult persons, that are visibly unfit for Church Communion in all
Ordinances. Such irregular bringing of men into Membership, will unavoidably
bring in the corrupting of Religion, which will end in Apostasy. There be
better ways to convey Religion down to after-generations, and to continue a
Nursery in Christ's Vineyard, then this way of setting up such a successive
Membership, which Christ has not sanctified by his Institution; viz. The
vigilance and faithful care and endeavor of Church Elders, and Family-Rulers,
to fit them for regular Church Fellowship, in the using of all suitable means,
with fervent Prayer to God in Jesus Christ for his blessing upon the same,
leaving the issue to his All-disposing wisdom, who works all things
according to the counsel of his own will; according whereunto, he withholds
from, and adds unto the Church whom he will, Acts 5.13. and 2.47. Nor can I
but marvel how it comes to pass, that they who seem to approve Mr. Cottons
Treatise of the Holiness of Church Members, (which indeed is worthy to be
highly approved) do act as they do, in setting up such a Mere Membership of
adult persons (as has no agreement with his description) who are far from
personal holiness: The young people of this Country, yea, the children of
Church Members generally, as well as others, being commonly known to be
Profane, Vain, Licentious, Vicious, Disobedient to Parents, Unfaithful to
Masters, Stubborn, Proud, Self-willed, and yet these shall be accepted into
immediate personal Membership, whereby they become Covenanters for themselves
and theirs; to whom the Lord justly says, as in Psa. 50.16, to 23. What have
thou to do to take my Covenant into thy mouth?

Obj. They have the more need to be under the Watch, Discipline, and Government
of the Church.

Answ. Their unfitness for such an holy Fellowship, as Christian Churches are,
being so manifest, how can it be rationally expected that they who submit not
themselves to the Yoke of Family-Government, will orderly submit themselves to
Christ's Yoke in Church-censure? But, as the admission of such, is without due
regard to their Spiritual Fitness; so the application of Church Censures to
them, will be disregarded and slighted by them. The Churches will have trouble
enough with them, and dishonor, and infection, and disturbance by them,
without any acceptance with God, who will say, Who has required these things
at your hands? and without any blessed fruit, either to the Church, or to such
Mere Members. For, God limits his Blessing to his own Appointments. When Vzzah
put forth his hand to take hold of the Ark of God (for the Oxen shook it) the
anger of the Lord was kindled against Vzzah, and he made a breach upon Vzzah, 2 Samuel 6.6, 7, 8. because they sought not the Lord in the due order, 1 Chronicles.
15.2, 13. The application is easy. I proceed to examine their sixth Argument.

Arg. 6. The Parents in question are personal, immediate, and yet-continuing
Members of the Church. This they endeavor to prove in the terms severally. 1.
That they are personal Members, or Members in their own persons, appears, 1.
Because they are personally holy. 2. Because they are personally baptized. 3.
They are personally liable to Church Censures. 4. They are personally, by means
of the Covenant, in a visible state of Salvation. 5. When they commit iniquity,
they personally break the Covenant.

Reply. The Argument has Parents for its Subject, but most of the Proofs
belong only to Infants; viz. three of them; the other two belong only to
adult persons, regularly admitted into Church Membership, which therefore does
not concern the Parents in question. There are two sorts of Church Members, and
both are accounted holy: 1. Children of Confederates in their minority, whose
right to Membership is from their relation to confederate Parents covenanting
for them; whence they are holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. though not in their persons, yet
foederally and relatively. 2. Are Baptized, though in their persons, yet by and
for their Parents covenanting for them, being incapable of covenanting for
themselves. 3. They are personally under Discipline, and liable to
Church Censures in their own persons. This is answered before, when the third
Proposition was examined. 4. By means of the Covenant, their persons are in a
visib e state of Salvation; while nothing appears to the contrary 2. Adult
persons, whose Membership is founded in their own personal Faith, made visible
to the regular satisfaction of the Church. To these the other two properties do
agree: 1. That they are personally under Discipline, and liable to
Church Censures in their own persons. See Propos 3. examined. 2. When they
personally commit iniquity, they personally break the Covenant. This is not
proved concerning infants, nor can be; for that in Ier. 11.2, 10. is spoken by
the Prophet to the men of Judah: so that in Ezekiel. 16.

2. They say, that Children are immediate Members, as to the essence of
Membership; i. e. they themselves in their own persons are the immediate
Subjects of this Adjunct, Membership, though they came to it by m^ans of their
Parents covenanting. This, they say, appears by like Reasons as the former.

Reply. By what is answered to the former, it appears, that personal Membership
is of two sorts; 1. Purely, or merely Personal; such is the Membership of adult
persons regularly admitted: for their Membership is both subjectively, and
formally personal, by their orderly covenanting for themselves. 2. Mixtly
Personal; such is the Membership of the infants and children in minority of
confederate Parents. For their Membership is only subjectively Personal, but
formally Relative, by their Parents covenanting for them, they being unable to
covenant for themselves. To apply this to childrens Membership, which they
unfitly style Immediate: I say, unfitly; for two things are requisite to the
denominating of a Member, Mediate or Immediate. 1. To an Immediate Member, that
his Membership arise 1. From his personal Faith, made visible to the Church. 2.
From his personal Confederating with the Lord and his Church, for himself and
his seed. Such an one is an Immediate Member, because his Membership is from
himself, as well as in himself. 2. To a Mediate Member, 1. That is Membership
arises, not from his personal Faith made visible to the Church, whereof he is
not capable, but from his believing confederate Parents. 2. That it is from
such Parents covenanting for him. Such an one is a Mediate Member, because his
Membership, though it is subjectively in himself, yet it is relatively from his
Parents. Whence it will follow, that this kind of Membership is peculiar to
such infants and children in minority, only during their nonage. This
distinction of Mediate and Immediate Church Members, the Writers of that Book
exagitate causlesly, saying, As touching that distinction of Mediate and
Immediate, as applied to Membership, (which some urge) we are to distinguish 1.
Between the Efficient and Essence of Membership. 2. Between the Instrumental
Efficient and Means thereof, which is the Pa ents profession and covenanting,
and the Principal Efficient, which is Divine I stitution. They may be said to
be mediate (or rather mediately) members, as they become members by means of
their Parents covenanting, as an instrumental cause thereof.

Reply. I look at believing confederate Parents, not as the instrumental, but
as the procreant cause, as of the childs natural being, by his generating him;
so also of his Church Membership, by his confederating for him, and this by
Gods Institution: therefore I choose rather to call him a mediate membe^, then
to say he is a member immediately; to show, that the childs Membership differs
from the Parents specifically, or in the kind of Membership. For, the childs
Membership is Relative, in it Essence, though Personal, in its Subject; which
does vary the Essence, or Nature of it, from the Parents, which is both in its
Essence and Subject merely Personal. Divine Institution gives a real, and
mixtly personal membership to such children by their Parents covenanting for
them, as the immediate procreant cause of their membership, whereby the
children become mediate Members, i. e. mediante Parentum foedere, which gives
Being to the Membership of such children, and differenceth it from the
Membership of adult persons. Divine Institution, though it does not make every
Parent a Public Person, against which Title I excepted in my first Essay, and
whereunto I find no Answer here: Yet it makes such Parents Covenant to be
Obligatory to such children, and the Parents act in covenanting for the child,
to be the childs act interpretatively, not formally, so as to make the child
an immediate Member thereby.

They add, Hence the Essence of membership, i. e. Covenant Interest, or a
place and portion within the visible Church, is really, properly, personally
and immediately the portion of the child by Divine Gift and Grant, Josh.
22.25, 27.

Reply. The interest in the Covenant, and thereby a place and portion in the
visible Church, is twofold: 1. A Childs interest and portion; which is in and
by the Parents covenanting for him, and so is mediate. 2. A Man's interest and
portion; which is by his own covenanting for himself and his child, and so is
immediate. Though nothing comes between to sever the Adjunct from the Subject;
The Child, from A portion in the Lord: yet something comes between to bring
that Adjunct and Subject together; viz. The Parents covenanting for the Child;
which if it did not come between, they would be severed, as they are in other
children, who have no such portion in the Lord, through their want of such
Parents to covenant for them. Therefore the Membership of the Infants of
confederates is truly and properly said to be mediate.

Again, though their visible ingraffing into Christ the Head, and so into the
Church his Body, is sealed in their Baptism: and though in ingraffing, nothing
comes between the graft and the stock; Their union is immediate.

Reply. Yet it will not follow, that they are immediate members of the visible
Church: For, the union between Christ and the Church, and all visible
Church Members, is not properly, but Metaphorically called Ingraffing, because
there is some similitude of this Spiritual Union in Material and Corporal
Ingraffing, Now similitudes do not run on four feet (as we commonly say) it
suffices that they agree in the main point of Union: Whether that Spiritual
Union, which is likened to corporal ingraffing of a graft to the stock of a
Tree, be mediate, as that of confederate Infants is, or immediate, as that of
Parents and adult persons is; both may be called Ingraffing, in respect of the
event, which the Apostle notes in Romans 11.17. that both, together with other
branches or members, partake of the root and fatness of the Olive Tree,
suitably to their union with it. Mediate Members, as Infants, and children in
minority, partake of Baptism, and the special Instruction, Prayers, Blessing,
and Watch of the Church, by their Parents covenanting for them: But Parents and
adult persons, being immediate Members by their personal covenanting for
themselves and their seed, partake of the root and fatness of the Olive-tre^,
in all Ordinances, as, The Lords Supper, and liberty of Voting in all
Church Affairs, and are liable to Church Censures immediately in their own
persons. Paul knew no such mere membership as they set up, who shall by their
personal Membership be under the Watch, Discipline, and Censures of the Church,
and have their children Baptized, but not partake of other Privileges together
with other adult Members, no offense intervening after their admission to put
them under Church-censure, and so to debar them regularly as delinquent
Members, from full communion. So that this Text makes nothing for them in the
case of Infants, but much against them, in the case of adult persons mere
Membership. Nor does that Text in D ut 20.11. prove, that the little children
were immediate Members of the Church of Israel so as their Parents were. And
though to be in Covenan^, is the formalis ratio of a Churchmember; yet it will
not thence follow, that every Covenantee does covenant immediately for himself;
nor that every Member of the Church is an immediate Member.

They say, To act in Covenant, is but the instrumental means of membership, and
yet children are not without this neither. For the act of the Parent (their
public person) is accounted theirs, and they are said to enter into Covenant,
Deuteronomy. 29.11 12.

Reply. The Parents acting in Covenant for their Infant Seed, has been before
proved to be the Procreant cause of the childs Membership: not are the
children said to enter into Covenant, Deuteronomy. 29.11. otherwise then in and by
their Parents Covenant. Yet, as if all they have said were clear, they demand,

What is it that children want unto a r actual, complete, proper, absolute, and
immediate Membership, etc? Is it Covenant interest, which is the formalis ratio
of membe^ship? No, they are in Covenant. Is it Divine Grant and Institution,
which is the Principal Efficient? No; he has clearly declared himself, that he
grants unto the children of his people a portion in his Church, and appoints
them to be members thereof. Is it an act of Covenanting, which is the
Instrumental Means? No; they have this also reputatively, by Divine
Appointment, making the Parent a public person, and accounting them to
Covenant in his covenanting.

Reply. All that they have here expressed, does not supply what is wanting to
little children, to invest them with an actual, complete, proper, absolute, and
immediate membership. For, though they are in Covenant, which is the formalis
ratio of their Membership, yet it is mediately, (i. e. mediance Parentum
foedere) and so their Membership is mediate. 2. Divine Institution grants unto
the little children of his people such a portion in his Church as they are
capable of, during their minority, and appoints them to be such Members, as
such covenanting of Parents for them can make them. 3. This Divine Institution
makes their Parents Undertakers for such children, and them bound, by their
Parents acting, to perform that Covenant, when they shall become capable, and
when they grow fit, to covenant with the Lord and his people for themselves and
theirs, and so to be regularly, in their own persons, by their personal act,
immediate Members. So that there is wanting unto children in minority, to make
them actual, complete, proper, absolute, and immediate Members, A personal
fitness in themselves, to act in orderly covenanting for themselves, which is
required in all adult persons unto immediate Membership. When one comes to be
in Covenant in one way, and other in another way; though both are in Covenant,
yet these different ways makes their being in the Covenant different, and so
their Membership. He that comes to be in the Covenant by his own immediate
acting, is an immediate Member: He that comes into it by another acting for
him, is a mediate Member. For, though we are as truly, personally, and
immediately Members of the Body of fallen Mankind, and by Nature Heirs of
Condemnation, as Adam was, though he came to it by his own personal act, and we
by the act of our public person; yet that does not suit the case of Infants in
question: for, 1. Adam stood as a public person, in whose loins all Mankind
were under the first Covenant, and to be happy or condemned, by his standing or
falling. No Parent is such a public person covenanting for all his Posterity,
but for his Infants, and children in minority, while they are such, leaving his
adult children to Covenant for themselves, if he has any such children, when
himself enters into Covenant. 2. Adams Covenant was only with the Lord, not
with any Church, as the Covenant of co^federate Parents is; and therefore, if
Adam had stood, his posterity had not been Church Members thereby, as the
infants of Church-confederates. 3. Nor does the Parents breaking his Covenant,
make his children Heirs of Condemnation, as Adams did all Mankind. So that
this example of Adam is impertinently produced in this case of infants, and
their Parents confederating for them, not as their public person, but as
Undertakers for their infant seed by Gods Institution. Nor indeed is any to be
accounted a public person, as Adam was, but Jesus Christ, for all that are in
him, Romans 5.14, to 20. Nor does their similitude of a Prince giving Lands to a
man and his heirs successively, while they continue loyal, suit the case in
question, concerning Infants, who cannot be visibly disloyal; nor that,
concerning adult persons not regularly joined to the Church, as immediate
Members, whose Parents were godly when they covenanted for them in their
infancy. For, they have cut off the Entail of the Covenant from themselves and
their Posterity, by their personal disloyalty: so that nothing is given to them
and theirs by their Covenant which they presume to usurp, without warrant from
God. They say true, that A member is one, who, according to Rule (or according
to divine Institution) is within the visible Church: But that refutes nothing
that I have said, concerning mediate and immediate Members; for both are within
the Church according to Rule and Divine Institution, though both have not full
communion with the Church in all Ordinances, which is the privilege of all
adult persons, who are immediate Members by their own personal right, 1 Cor.
5.12. They frame an Objection thus:

Obj. If children be complete and immediate members, as their Parents are, then
they shall immediately have all Church Priviledges as their Parents have,
without any further act or qualification. And they Answer it thus: Ans. It
follows not. All privileges that belong to members, as such, do belong to
the children as well as to the parents: But all Church Priviledges do not so. A
member, as such, (or all members) may not partake of all privileges, but they
are to make progress, both in memberly duties and privileges, as their age,
and capacity, and qualifications do fit them for the same.

Reply. The intendment of the Objection (as I apprehend) is to show, that
complete and immediate Membership, as such, does infer complete and immediate
communion in all Church Priviledges: But children in minority have not complete
and immediate communion in all Church Priviledges without some further act or
qualification: Therefore such children are not complete and immediate Members,
as such. Now to this, their Answer is insufficient: For, the best Members have
need to make progress in memberly duties and qualifications, to fit them more
and more for Church Priviledges. Yet all have that communion that suits their
Membership: Infants, in Baptism, the Watch, Prayers, and Blessing of the
Church, by their Parents covenanting for them: Adult persons, orderly and
regularly joined by their personal covenanting for themselves, in the Seals,
Voting, and Censures, which belong to them, as such Members. Nor does the
Scripture any where allow the Church to admit any one by personal covenanting
for themselves and theirs, into any other Membership then complete and
immediate. But Infants are not capable of such Membership, without some further
personal act and qualification, when they shall become adult. Therefore their
Infant-membership is not complete and immediate.

3. That their Membership still continues in adult age, and cease not with
their Infancy, appears, 1. Because Scripture persons are broken off only for
notorious sins, or incorrigible impenitency and unbelief, not for growing up to
adult age, Romans 11.20.

Reply. 1. When I affirm, that their mediate Membership continues during their
minority, while they are under the Institution and Government of Parents, etc.
I deny that that Membership continues in adult age, and when they are at their
own disposal, or have children of their own to covenant for: because then the
reason of their mediate Membership cease, they being by age capable of
covenanting for themselves. 2. Their first Reason does not prove, that the
Membership of all baptized in Infancy, continues in adult age: For the Text
alleged speaks only of such as have been received into complete and
immediate membership regularly, by their personal Faith and Covenanting with
the Church visibly, who are broken off, either by the just judgment of God, as
the unbelieving Nation of the Jews are, or by the just Censure of the Church.
Whereas our question is, not of such, but of adult persons, that break off
themselves from the Covenant, by profane neglect, or contempt of the
Ordinances, or unsuitable Conversation. Who ever said, that any were broken off
for growing up to adult age? Such intimations should be forborne by godly men.

2. The Jews children circumcised did not cease to be members by growing up,
but continued in the Church, and were by virtue of their membership received in
infancy, bound unto various duties, and in special unto those solemn
professions that pertained unto adult members, not as then entering into a new
membership, but as making progress in memberly duties, Deuteronomy. 26.2-10. and
16.16, 17. with Gal. 5.3.

Reply. 1. That the Jews children circumcised were bound to various duties, and
to those solemn professions that pertained to adult members, when themselves
were grown up, is clear enough by the Texts alleged, and sundry other.
Whereunto I willingly add, that Baptism also binds the Infant Seed of
Confederates to various Gospel-duties, and especially this, of using all means
that Faith may be wrought in their hearts, unto obeying the Call of God, and
then holding forth their Faith unto the Church, that they may take hold of the
Covenant for themselves and theirs, and so become complete and immediate
Members. But 2. It is not proved, by those Texts, that when they were adult,
they did not enter into a new Membership; rather the contrary appears in Deuteronomy.
26.17, 18. For, they entered into that Covenant personally and immediately, not
in and by their Parents, as they did in Infancy, Genesis 17.7. If convenanting be
the Form of Church Membership, (which they affirm) then a different form of
covenanting, makes a different kind of Church Membership. Immediate
covenanting, makes immediate Members; Mediate covenanting, makes mediate
Members.

Their third Reason is, Those relations of Born-servants and Subjects, which
the Scripture makes use of to set forth the state of children in the Church by,
Lev. 25.41, 42. Ezekiel. 37.25. do not (as all men know) cease with infancy, but
continue in adult age. Whence also it follows, that one special end of
membership received in infancy, is to leave persons under engagement, to
service and subjection to Christ in his Church, when grown up, when they are
fit for it, and have most need ^f it.

Reply. 1. Those Relations of born Servants and Subjects in the Text alledg d,
have d fferent respects. That Lev. 25. was typical, figurin the time of Grace,
whereby now Christ has freed u f o the servitude of Sin and Satan, (...) 8.32,
36. R^^. 6.14, 18. to b^come the Servants of God in Christ, Romans 6 22. 1 C r.
7.23. Parents and children, so far a^ they have in^^r^st in the Redemption
wrought by Christ, as they are freed by him from other Lord, so they are bound
thereby serve him all the daye^ of their l^f^, Luke 1.74, 75. Therefore this
relat^on does not cease with infancy, but continues in adult age. But this
does nothing concern the thing in question, concerning M diate Membershi. The
other Text, in Ezekiel. 37.25. is a Prophecy of the calling of the Elect Nation of
the Jews, and of the state of the Church under the New Jerusalem; the
difference between which, and the Chr^stian Gentiles now, I have formerly
shown: so that neither does that fit the question. But 2. I grant, (though not
as following thence) That one special end of membership received in infancy, is
to leave persons under engagement, to service and subjection to Christ in his
Church, when grown up, when they are fittest for it, and have m^st need of it.
The engagement is strong, both on the Parents, To train up their children, from
their Infancy, in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.4. and upon
the Children, To know the God of their Parents, and to serve him with a perfect
heart and with a willing mind, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. and upon the Church, To exercise
their Watchfulness, that both Parents and Children do their duty, helping them
also therein with their Instructions, and Prayers, and Power, which is given
for Edification, as the case may require. Yet, when all this is done, neither
can the Parents nor the Church give Grace unto the Children, that, when they
become adult, they may be spiritually fit for personal and immediate
Membership; and to bring them into it without such fitness visibly, is to
profane the Ordinances, and to pollute the Lords Sanctuary.

Reas. 4. There is no ordinary way of cessation of membership, but by Death,
Dismission, Excommunication, or Dissolution of the Society: none of which is
the case of the persons in question.

Reply. This enumeration is insufficient; there is another ordinary way of
cessation of Membership, i. e. Desertion. Thus Esau's Membe sh p cea^ed, and so
may the Membership of others, though they abide in the place where the church
^s; yet, if being adult, they regard not to join with the Church by their
personal and immediate Confeder^tion, nor to fit themselves for it, these
despise the Church of God. And, if that is sufficient to deprive th^se of all
hurch priv ledg s who were before in personal and immediate Church fellowsh p
when they forsake it. 1 Job. 2.19 much more those who never had such
Membership, nor have approved their Spiritu^l fitness for it, to the Churches
charitable judgment, nor truly desire and end a^our so to do. What can the
mediate Membersh^p, which such had in Infancy, advantage them for continuing
thereby still in Membership, when being adult, they live in the breach of that
Covenant, whereby they were left under engagement in their Infancy unto service
and subjection to Christ in the Church?

Reas. 5. Either they are when adult, Members, or Non-members; if Non-members,
then a person admitted a Member and sealed by Baptism, not cast out, nor
deserving to be, may (the Church whereof he was, still remaining) become a
Non-member, and out of the Church, and of the unclean world, which the
Scripture acknowledges not.

Reply. A Freemans child (suppose of London, or any other Corporation) was
freeborn, and might, in his minority, trade under his father; yet, being grown
up, he must personally enter into the common Engagement of Freemen, and be
accepted of the Company, as his father was, unto all Duties and Liberties of
that Society in his own person; else he may not trade for himself. If it be
said, Why so? either he is a Freeman, or a Non-freeman. It will be readily
answered, He is a Non-freeman, and that by his own defaul^. If it be said, He
was Free by his Fathers Copy, and is not dis-franchised by any public Censure,
nor has deserved so to be; may such an one (the Society whereof he was, still
remaining) become a Non-freeman, and out of that Society, etc? The answer will
easily and readily be given, He has lost his Freedom, by not entering, in his
own person, into the common Engagement of Freemen, to the Duties whereunto all
Freemen are personally bound. So, and much more justly it is in this case. An
adult person makes himself to become a Non-member, as to privileges, by not
performing the Duties whereunto he was bound by his Parents Covenant for him in
his minority, and by his not regularly covenanting, as his Parents did. And his
is according to Scripture, which tells us, that Circumcision received in
Baptism may become, by his own fault, being adult, no Circumcision, Romans 2.25.
Those Texts in Romans 11.16. 1 Cor. 7.14 Genesis 17.7. are not applicable to the
adult persons in question, but only to Infants, and Children in minority.

Propos. 6. Such Church Members, who, either by death, or some other
extraordinary Providence, have been inevitably hindered from public acting, as
aforesaid, yet, having given the Church cause, in judgment of charity, to look
at them as so qualified, and such as had they been called thereunto, would so
have acted, their children are to be baptized.

Reply. This Proposition may not be granted. For, 1. It grants the privilege
of Church Membership to such as are not actually and regularly Church Members,
which is contrary to Christ's Ordinance, whereby Baptism, being a public
Church-Ordinance, is due only to them who have a public state and Interest,
such are only the Members of the public Ecclesiastical Body, the Church.
Hence 1. An ordinary Minister cannot orderly perform an act proper to his
Office, in reference to Church Communion, to any that are not regularly and
actually Members of the visible Church, without great usurpation: as, if a man
do a work proper to Magistracy, to one that is not under his Magistratical
Power, he is an Usurper. So it is in this case of a Minister. To administer
Baptism, is an act of his Office-power: If he administer Baptism to children,
whose Parents are not regularly in Church Order; in so doing, why may not the
Lord say, He is an Usurper? Suppose an unbaptized person, professing his Faith,
and qualified according to the description in the sixth Proposition; yet
deferring, for some probable causes, to adjoyn himself to the Church, for the
present, should desire Baptism of any of these Ministers who framed this
Proposition; Should they administer it to him, and so do a proper work of their
Office upon him? If yea; if they admit him to Baptism, why not to the Lords
Supper, and to the choice of Officers, and to the Censures of the Church,
either actively or passively? for all these are Actions and Ordinances of one
general nature: and it is merely his want of Church Order that debars him from
them. 2. The Church may not receive into any privilege of Church Communion,
such as Baptism is, (whatever cause they seem to have, in the judgment of
charity, to think them fit for Church Membership, and such as had they been
called, would have so acted) until they be actually in public Church Order; no
more then the children of every good Subject of the King, may be admitted into
the special Prerogatives of a Corporation, whereof themselves, or their next
Parents are not regularly free. All things must be done in order, 1 Co^. 14.40.
whereunto, what is more contrary, then that he, who is not regularly and
personally of a public Society, should have Fellowship in a public
Privilege, proper to that Society? Yet they say this, which the Proposition
holds forth, is manifest:

1. Because the main foundation of the right of the child to privilege,
remains; viz. Gods Institution: and the force of his Covenant carrying it to
the generations of such as are keepers of the Covenant, i. e. not visible
breakers of it, etc.

Reply. The Parents of the children in question are visibly breakers of the
Covenant, which was sealed to them by Baptism, in their Infancy, and obliged
them to service and subjection to Christ in his visible Church, having
confederated personally and regularly for themselves and theirs, as their
Parents did before them. If they do not this, they are out of that order, by
their own fault, wherein they might have given their children right to Baptism,
according to Christ's Institution. That right which Parents have nor for
themselves unto Baptism if they were unbaptized, they cannot ^e to their
children. They who are not Members in their own personal and immediate right,
cannot give a right of membership to their children. And though their
Membership in Infancy was distinct from their Parents, yet being only mediate,
by their Parents covenanting for them, it cease, when they become adult, by
their own fault, in that they were not orderly joined to the Church,
immediately, by their personal covenanting for themselves and theirs, regularly.

2. Because Parents not doing what is required in the fifth Proposition, is
through want of opportunity; which is not to be imputed as their guilt, so as
to be a bar of the Childs privilege.

Reply. 1. It has been already proved, in our examining the fifth Proposition,
that more is required to fit one that is adult, for Church Membership, then is
there expressed, viz. Faith in Christ made visible to the Church, without which
they are not regularly Church Members. Now Baptism administered by ordinary
Church Officers, to such as are out of Church Order, is profaned, as
Circumcision was by the Shechemites, and would have been by the Ishmaelites,
and Edomites, and the posterity of Abraham by Keturah, if it had been
administered to their children, when their Parents were not joined to the Church
of God, or abode not in it, in the Families of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. For,
1. One end of Baptism now, (as it was of Circumcision then) is to seal
Church Communion, 1 Cor. 12.13. it is a public Testimony of the Admission of
the party baptized into the Family of God, The Father, Son, and Holy Spirit,
into whose Name he is baptized, Mat. 28.20. either immediately, if he be adult,
by his personal Covenanting for himself and his seed; or mediately, if in his
minority, by his next immediate Parents Covenanting for him. This the Parent in
question has not done. Hence the want hereof is a bar to his childs Baptism.
2. The regular and lawful use of B^ptism now (as of Circumcision of old)
presupposes both Gods Promise, and his Faith, who is to use it, either upon
himself or upon his Infant. Therefore he that presumes to use it, being not so
qualified visibly, ( viz. not having before the Promise of Christ, and Faith
for Justification with Abraham) does he not treacherously usurp the Great-Seal
of the King of Heaven and Earth? If not, surely it had need to be soundly
cleared.

3. God reckons that as done in his service, to which there was a manifest
desire and endeavor, albeit the acting of it be hindered, etc

Reply. We must distinguish between private and public Service in a public
state and order. 1. In private Service, God accepts the will for the deed, when
the act^ng of it is hindered, either by God himself, as Abraham's sacrificing his
Son, and David's building the Temple; or by the parties inability to do so much
as he would, as in that case 2 Cor. 8.12. and the like. 2. But in public
Service in a public state and order, he does not accept of that as done which
is not done, so far as to bring them into that state and order, whatsoever
their desires and endeavors have been; for this were to overthrow and subvert
that Order, which God has by his Institution established, and to bring in
Confusion. Will God accept a man in doing acts of Office power proper to a
Minister of a Church, because he desired and endeavored to be a Minister, when
he is not actually and regularly in Office? Or may a Church receive unto
Fellowship of the outward Seals of the Covenant, such as are not actually and
regularly joined to the Church, because they desired and endeavored to be of
the Church, albeit their joining with the Church was hindered? To be baptized,
in voto, will nothing advantage any to Church Fellowship, though a Martyr, in
voto, is accepted of God as a Martyr, because though God searches and knows
the heart, yet the Church does not: De occultis non judicat Ecclesia; secret
things belong to God, but revealed things to men, and things are not manifested
to the Church, otherwise then by congruous actings: nor, in this case, can they
or theirs have a right to Church Priviledges, otherwise then by actual joining
with the Church.

4. The terms of the Proposition import that in charity, that is here done
interpretatively, which is mentioned to be done in the fif^h Proposition
expressly.

Reply. 1. It Is an unwarrantable charity that makes such an interpretation; for
it is without warrant of any Rule in Scripture, or in good Reason. 2. If that
which is mentioned to be done in the fifth Proposition expressly, is here done
interpretatively, both being put together, will not avail to put the Parent
regularly into Church Fellowship, in any sense, and to give his Infant a right
to Baptism thereby. For, by Christ's Ordinance, only adult persons, who have
true Faith in Him, and Holiness, are adult Members of the invisible Church, and
the same persons, making holy Profession thereof outwardly in the order of him
appointed, may be Members of the visible Church; and they only can give their
Infant Seed a right unto Baptism. For, seeing without faith it is impossible to
please God, in matters of his public Worship and Service, whereof Baptism is
one; and seeing God has appointed us to Worship him, both in it, and in all
other public Duties and Services, so as we may please him therein: It
follows necessarily, that he requires true visible Faith in all whom he
priviledgeth to baptize their Infants, which yet is not expressly required in
the fifth Proposition, nor interpretatively in this.

Propos. 7. The Members of Orthodox Churches, being sound in the Faith, and not
scandalous in life, and presenting due testimony thereof, these occasionally
coming from one Church to another, may have their children baptized in the
Church whither they come, by virtue of Communion of Churches: But if they
remove their habitation, they ought orderly to Covenant, and to submit
themselves to the Government of Christ in the Church where they settle their
abode, and so their children to be baptized: It being the Churches duty to
receive such into communion, so far as they are regularly fit for the same.

Reply. The regular Communion of approved Churches, I look at as the Ordinance
of Christ, according to the 11th and 12th Posi^ions premised: but this
Proposition is so ambiguously expressed, that it leaves me in the dark, till
some Questions be answered, that the extent and compass of the sense and
meaning of it may be better cleared. They distribute it into two parts, which
they endeavor to prove severally: but neither of them are sufficiently
explained. In the first part, I Enquire; What Churches they account Orthodox?
whether such only as have the Truth of Doctrine, as it is opposed to
Heterodoxies and Errors about the Doctrine of Faith, viz. Churches that are
Heretical; or such also which are right in Judgment and Practice in matters of
Church Order. For both these the Church at C^losse was praised by Paul, in Col
2.5, 6. 2. What course the Church, where the Members of such Churches desire to
have their children baptized, do take to know that such Members are s^und in
the Faith For a Member of an Orthodox Church may hold and maintain dangerous
Errors, contrary to the Faith, 1 Cor. 15.12. 3. Whom they account to be not
scandalous in life? whether only such as fall not under the censure of Civil
Courts, or also such as are justly offensive to Gods People by their sinful and
disorderly walking? For they say, in their proof of the second part of this
Proposition, that, to administer Baptism to such as walk in disorder, would be
to administer Christ's Ordinance to such as are in a way of sin and disorder,
which ought not to be done, 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. 1 Chronicles 15.13. and would be contrary
to that Rule, 1 Cor. 14.40. 4. What they account due Testimony? whether that
which is given of them by the Church, from whence they come, or only that
which they may have from some in the place where they live, and have been but a
little while, whether they be Members of the Church or not? 5. What they mean
by their occasionally coming from one Church to another? whether they take a
due course to know that their occasion of coming be approved by the Church
whence they come, or not? 6. When they say, They may have their children
baptized in the Church whither they come, by virtue of the Communion of
Churches? Quaere; 1. Whether they have Letters of Recommendation from the
Church whence they come, whereby that Church desires this fruit of Communion
with the Church where they would have their children baptized, or not? That
being the orderly way of exercising Communion among Churches, Romans 16.1, 2. 2
Cor. 3.1. 3 John ver. 9, 12. and, Whether the Infant must be baptized as a
Member (in and by his Parents covevenanting for him) of that Church, whence his
Parents come, or as a Member of the Church where he is baptized, and where the
Parent is not a Member, but only has this benefit of the Communion of
Churches, that himself is admitted to the Lords Supper, pro tempore, and his
children to Baptism in a transient way? When these and the like Questions are
Answered, I shall better know what to say to the first part of the Proposition,
then now I do. In the mean time, to the first Proof thereof I have already
spoken in my Replies to Propos. 1. and 2. and 5. and 8.

2. To clear their meaning in the second part of this Proposition: Quaere; 1.
Whether such Removers have an orderly dismission from the Church whence they
come, or not? 2. Whether the Church where they settle their abode, do subject
themselves to the Government of Christ, or not? 3. Whether all refusing to
Covenant with any Church whatsoever, where they are necessita ed to settle
their abode, is to be judged to be disorderly walking, and to savor of
Profaneness and Separation? 4. Whether if the Church in that place refuse to
receive them into communion, so far as they are regularly fit for the same, or
if they do not join in communion with that Church in the place where they
dwelt, it b^ing not to be approved; Does this their not being joined, d^bar
their children from being baptized in another Church that is approved? These,
and the like Questions, being clearly Answered, I shall understand the true and
full sense of this Proposition, and what to say to it. So much may suffice, for
the present, for Reply to their Answer to the first Question.

Quest. II. Whether according to the Word of God, there ought to be a
Consociation of Churches? and what should be the manner of it?

Answ. The Answer may be given in the Propositions following.

Reply. The Propositions following are eight. As for the first four: The first,
Concerning the full Power and Authority Ecclesiastical, within it self, of each
particular Congregation of visible Saints, in Gospel Order, furnished, at
least, with a Teaching Elder, and walking together in Truth and Peace. And the
second, concerning The Sisterly R^lation of the Churches of Christ each to
other. And the third, concerning The Union and Communion of such Churches. And
the fourth, concerning The Acts of Communion; I fully close with, as well
agreeing with the 11th and 12th Positions premised. Excepting only the sixth
Act of Communion, and that, but in one part of it. For, To admonish one
another, when there is need and cause for it, I confess is an Act of this
Communion, and which may be proved from Gal. 2.11, 24. by proportion. But, for
that other part of it, To withdraw from a Church, or peccant party therein,
after due means, with patience used, obstinately persisting in Errors or
Scandals; this must be taken with a grain of Salt. They refer us to the
Platform of Discipline, (Chap. 15. Sect. 2. Partic. 3.) where they fetch a
proof for this withdrawing, from Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. by proportion. But there
seems to be a threefold dispr porti^^ between that and this For, 1. There the
Withdrawing is a consequent and ff ct of the C^urches authoritative Censure of
a^ obstinate offender after the first, and second, and third Admonition, the
offender being a Member, and so under the Power and Authority of the Church,
and to be so censured by the Church, to whom Christ has given ^he Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, and has ordained, that such an one shall be Excommunicated
for his obst^nacy in off^nces, which were materially of a lesser kind, but, by
obst^nacy of the delinquent, (after secret, priva e, and public Admonition)
against the Ordinance of Christ for his reclaiming, becomes formally an heinous
Scandal. But the Wi hdrawing of other Churches from a Church which they account
peccant, is an act of different nature and kind. For, it is not an act of
public Au^hority of such Churches over that Church, by virtue of the Keys of
the Kingdom of Heaven given to any Synod, or Council of Neighbour-Churches, as
they themselves confess in their first Proposition, for Answer to this second
Question.

2. The steps, whereby they proceed to this Withdrawing, are, 1. That one
Church Admonish another. 2. If the Church under offense, does not hearken to
that Admonition; the offended Church is to acquaint other Neighbour-Churches
with that offense, and with their negl^ct of that Admonition: whereunto those
other Churches are to join, in seconding the Admonition formerly given: and if
st^ll the offending Church continue in obstinacy and impenitency, they may
forbear communion with them.

Reply. This is not, by proportion, according to Matthew. 18. For, there Christ
does not allow them, who have proceeded in Admonishing, but to the second step,
to forbear communion with the delinquent: whereas these Neighbour-Churches are
but in the second step Yet, they say, they may forbear communion with them.
Then they ascend to the third step; To proceed to make use of a Synod, or
Council of Neighbour-Churches walking orderly (if a greater cannot conveniently
be had) for their conviction. If they hear not the Synod, the Synod, having
declared them to be Obstinate, particular Churches, approving and accepting the
judgment of the Synod, are to declare the sentence of Non-communion
respectively concerning them; and thereupon, out of a Religious care to keep
their own communion pure, they may justly withdraw themselves from
participation with them at the Lords Table, and from such other acts of holy
communion, as the Communion of Churches does otherwise allow and require. Thus
they speak, in that Platform. But, is this, in proportion, according to Mat.
18. that the Neighbour-Churches may first withdraw, and then a Synod or Council
of Neighbour-Churches must be made use of for their conviction? and, if the
Synod declare them to be Obstinate, particular Churches are to declare the
sentence of Non-communion, and then to withdraw themselves from all acts of
holy communion? Till they can produce a clear Rule for warrant of such a
proceeding, I cannot look at this otherwise, then as a mere humane Invention.

3. Though Churches may withdraw from a Church that is obstinate and impenitent
in some cases, (without any such solemn sentence of Non-communion declared by a
Synod) yet, not for such causes as a delinquent Brother may be Excommunicated
by a Church, according to Mat. 18. For there, though the Offense was in some
lesser matter, and private between two at first; yet, by obstinacy against
convincing light, held forth in those three steps of proceeding, it becomes a
public and heinous Scandal, and so the Delinquent must be at last
Excommunicated by the command of Christ, and the Sentence of the Church, in
obedience to Christ, who has for such ends given the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven unto them. But Neighbour-Churches may not withdraw from a true Church
for every Error and Scandal, though persisted in, and, in their opinion,
obstinately. For 1. It may be the Error of Neighbour-Churches, to think that
to be light from Scripture, which they hold forth for their conviction, when it
is not from Scripture, rightly understood, and rightly applied If the Synod, by
whom this Book is published, should conclude any Church to walk in Error, and
Scandal, and Obstinately, which shall not be convinced from what light they
have here held forth, nor practice accordingly, till what is Replied ad
oppositum, be soundly Refuted, and their Allegations and Applications of
Scripture, more convincingly and irrefragably cleared, and Withdraw communion
from them, after the first, second, and third Admonition; and, If any
Neighbour-Churches, for this or the like cause, should Withdraw from communion
with them, after the Admonition of one Church, and, after that, of other
Neighbour-Churches; They should greatly sin in so doing, and act contrary to
their own Doctrine in their second Proof of their 7th Proposition for Answer to
this second Question, page 28. where they say, To refuse communion with a true
Church, in lawful and pious actions, is unlawful, and justly accounted
Schismatical. For, if the Church be true, Christ holds some communion with
it; therefore so must we. Now the Churches in New England were approved by
their Neighbour-Churches to be true Churches, by their giving unto them the
right hand of fellowship: and an Error in lesser matters, though persisted in
against their Admonitions, (which may be from want of convincing light) does
not make any of them cease to be a true Church. But to Withdraw themselves from
all holy communion with such a Church for such a cause, is Total separation
from a true Church, which, themselves say, is unlawful, Ibid. 2. The cases,
wherein communion may be regularly Withdrawn from a Church or Person, are only
such as Subvert the Fundamentals of Religion, and are obstinately persisted in,
against due means regularly used with patience for their conviction, being
contrary to the Faith once given to the Saints; from whence they may be justly
denominated Heretical, Tit. 3.10, 11. 2 John ver. 10, 11. Or to the communion
of Saints; from whence they may be justly styled Schismatical, Romans 16.17, 18.
Or to both, being fallen from the Truth once received; from whence they be
justly called Apostatical, 2 Timothy 4.10. Or, if there be any other case of like
heinousness. But in cases of lesser importance, Churches and Christians are to
be exhorted to walk worthy of their calling, with all lowliness, and meekness,
with long-suffering, forbearing one another in love: Endeavoring to keep the
unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, etc Ephesians. 4.1 2, 3, etc. concluding
with blessed Paul, that (the main things of Religion being provided for, and
secured, for lesser matters) if in any thing ye be otherwise minded; God shall
reveal even this unto you, Phil. 3.15. For, in such matters, godly men do
frequently differ, and are not easily convinced; some from the strength, others
f om the weakness of their Intellectuals: and the b^st ^now ^ut in part.

I have been the larger in clearing this Point for necessary causes. Having
thus sp^ken to the four first Propositions, I proceed to the fif^h and six^h
Propositions.

Propos. 5. C^nsoci^tion of Churches, is their mutual and solemn Agreement to
exercise communion in such acts as aforesaid, among themselves, with special
reference to those Churches, which by Providence are planted in a convenient
vicini^y, though with liberty reserved, without offense, to make use of others,
as the nature of the case, or the advantage of the opportunity, may lead
th^reunto.

Propos. 6. The Churches of Christ in this Country, having so good opportunity
for it, it is meet to be commended to them as their duty thus to consociate:
For, 1. Communion of Churches being commanded, and Consociation being an
Agreement to Practice it, this must needs be a Duty also, Psalm. 119.106. Neh.
10 28, 29.

Reply. Before I proceed to argue upon these Propositions, some things should
be premised, in way of Enquiry, that the terms may be rightly understood.
Quaere. Whether by mutual and solemn Agreement, they mean a Vow? It seems by
the Texts alleged by them, in the first Proof of the sixth Proposition, that
they mean so; and therefore I shall take it for granted that that is their
meaning. 2. When they say, This solemn Agreement or Covenant must ^e made with
special reference to Churches in vicinity: Quaere. 1. How many Churches in
Vicinity or Neighbour-Churches, must thus Covenant together? 2. Whether they
must have set times of Meeting for this purpose? and who are to meet? Whether
Elders alone? or others also sent from the Churches with them? and how frequent
these Meetings must be? and whether the set times must be kept constantly,
though they have no present need of counsel from another? 3. Whereas they speak
of Liberty reserved, without offense, to make use of others, as the nature of
the case, etc. may lead thereunto. Quaere. How they may avoid giving offense to
Neighbour-Churches, if they use the help of Churches more remote? Whether they
must have their consent thereunto before they use them? 4. Concerning the end
and issue of this Consociation of Churches; Whether they are bound thereby to
acquiesce in the judgment and determinations of those Neighbour-Churches, and
to practice accordingly, whether they see convincing light in the Scriptures,
or Arguments propounded to them, or not, under a Penalty of being judged by the
rest to be Obstinate in Error and Scandal, and accordingly in time to have all
holy communion with them withdrawn from them? It seems, by what was before
said in the fixth Act of Communion for Answer to the first Question, page 31.
that this will be the end and issue of this Consociation unto any Church that
shall dissent from the rest. This Consociation they endeavor to prove to be a
duty incumbent upon the Churches in New England. I shall briefly weigh their
Reasons.

For 1. Communion of Churches being commanded, and Consociation being but an
Agreement to practice it, this must needs be a duty also, Psalm. 119.106. Nehem.
10.28, 29.

Reply. It does not necessarily follow, till they have proved that Consociation
of Churches by a mutual and solemn Covenant is commanded, as Communion of
Churches is. Nor do the Texts alleged prove it in Psalm. 119.106. David swore
to keep Gods righteous judgments, and would perform it; because, though he was
not bound to swear, yet he had voluntarily sworn it, and so was under a double
bond to perform it: for, both his keeping Gods righteous judgments, and his
performing that Vow, were commanded of God, Deuteronomy. 10.13. with Psalm. 76.11. 2.
And his Vow was private, betwixt God and himself. Hence it will not follow,
that Churches are bound to consociate with a Vow or Covenant, after the manner
here described, which is not proved to be a duty, and may be unsafe for
particular Churches. That Covenant, in Neh. 10.28, 29. was their
Church Covenant renewed and explained, and so was a mutual solemn Engagement,
by entering into a Curse, and into an Oath (to which form we are not bound) and
Church-covenanting is Gods Ordinance, Isa. 19.21. and 56.4, to 8. and 62.5. all
which are Prophesies of the Churches under the Gospel. But between the
covenanting of a Church within it self, and such a covenanting as this for the
consociating of Churches, there are considerable differences. 1. Because this
wants Warrant from the Scripture, which that has; there being neither any
Precept in Scripture commanding it, nor any Pattern among the Primitive
Churches, planted or approved by the Apostles, commanding it unto us. 2. Nor is
there like Reason for such Consociation of Churches by a mutual and solemn
Agreement or Covenant between Churches in a vicinity, as is for a
Church Covenant within it self. For, the Church Covenant is necessary, because,
without it, the ends of Church Fellowship cannot be attained. For, 1. Each
particular Church is a Spiritual Corporation; which therefore must receive its
being from a Spiritual Combination, or Foederal Engagement. 2. By virtue
hereof, they that had no natural impression to subject them to others, or to
give them power over them, have mutual power each over other, to command, and
constrain, as the case requires; of which power they could not have been made
partakers without mutual Agreement and Engagement. 3. Hereby they come to enjoy
such Spiritual and Ecclesiastic Privileges, unto which none can be admitted
without the approbation and allowance of the whole; which necessarily requires
this Engagement to the whole, which is by Covenant. Thus Mr. Hooker argues, to
prove the necessity of a Church Covenant, Survey, part. 1. chap. 4. p. 50, to
55. But the ends of Church Communion, (which is mutual helpfulness by counsel)
may be attained (without such a Consociation by mutual Engagement) by the
Communion of Churches, which of it self, without any other Engagement, gives
Churches a right and interest in another way mutually for their help by
counsel, when their needs require it. The Churches in New England have, by the
blessing of Christ, found the benefit of the Communion of Churches for settling
Truth and Peace among them, without such a Consociation, and may so still. 3.
Such an Agreement between Churches will become a Snare unto them, by straitning
them in the use and exercise of their Church Power within themselves, in re
propria. 1. If, by virtue hereof, they may not administer Church Censures
within themselves, without concurrence of Neighbour-Churches, or Elders
approbation sought and attained thereunto before: Or, 2. If thereby they stand
bound under the fore-noted Penalty, to rest in, and practice according to the
judgment and advice of such Churches, having sufficient light and consent
within themselves without them. 3. Mr. Rutherfurd affirms, That a convenient
number of Churches, having ordinarily conversing one with another, shall
voluntarily combine themselves in one Society; this last gives in the formality
of Classical Membership, Lib. 2. p. 320. He adds: When God has made him a
combined Member, now, by institution, of one Presbyterian Church, not of
another, though by ordinary converse with other Churches, in case of scandal,
his example may prove prejudicial and infestuous to others, yet this Presbytery
must proceed in Excommunication against him, because he is combined with them.
Thus, you see, by this voluntary combination of Churches, a Church become a
Classical or Presbyterian Church, and the Members, by consenting thereunto,
become Members of a Classical Church, and under the power of it, so as to be
Excommunicated by it. And is not this Consociation to be looked at as a Snare
to the Churches? which 1. Transforms them from Congregational Churches into a
Classical Church? And 2. Subjects them under the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of
that Classical Church? And 3. Without any warrant of Christ's Institution? Let
us see if there be more in their second Proof.

2. Paul an Apostle sought with much labor the conference, concurrence, and
right hand of fellowship of other Apostles* and ordinary Elders and Churches
have not less need each of other, to prevent their running in vain, Gal. 2.2,
6, 9.

Reply. 1. This necessity was proper to Paul's case, who did not converse with
Christ on earth, as the other Apostles did, but was as one born out of due
time, 1 Cor. 15.8. and so was more liable to be objected and excepted against,
then the other Apostles; and therefore had more need to be countenanced among
men, by them, then they by him: Whence he wisely sought approbation from them.
But this is not the case of the Churches in New England, each of them having
been approved by the right hand of fellowship given to them by other Churches
at their first gathering, and at the Ordination of their Teaching and
Ruling-Elders. 2. Paul did thus, not by reason of such a consociation of
Churches, as is here described, but for other Reasons. 3. The running in vain
of any Elders and Churches, has been hitherto prevented by the communion of
Churches regularly exercised, and still may be.

3. Those general Rules, touching the need and use of counsel and help in
weighty cases, concern all Societies and Polities Ecclesiastical, as well as
Civil, Prove. 11.14. and 15.22, etc.

R ply. It is true, and it is their duty to make use of them, in obedience, and
with thankfulness to God, as need requires, when they want light or consent
within themselves, by virtue of the communion of Churches, without such a
Consociation as they describe.

4. The pattern, in Acts 15. holds forth a warrant for Councils, which may be
greater or lesser, as the matter shall require.

Reply. But, 1. Not with special respect to the vicinity of Churches: for Paul
and Barnabas, and the Messengers from the Church of Antioch, passed through
other Churches nearer, to go to Jerusalem for counsel. 2. Nor by virtue of such
a Consociation of the Church at Antioch with that at Jerusalem, but of the
communion of Churches.

5. Concurrence and communion of Churches, in Gospel Times, is not obscurely
held forth in Isa. 19 23, 24, 25. Zeph. 3.9. 1 Cor. 11.16. and 14.32, 36.

R ply. Some of those Texts note only a communion of Saints in one and the
same Church. 2. None of them hold forth a Consociation of Churches as they
describe.

6. There has constantly been in these Churches a profession of Communion, in
giving the right hand of fellowship at the gathering of Churches, and
Ordination of Elders; which imports a Consociation, and obliges to the
practice thereof.

Reply. Together with the profession of communion, has been the practice of it
in these Churches. But that this communion imports such a Consociation, as
they describe, and obligation to the practice thereof, was not expressed, nor
understood. Worthy Mr. Cotton, (whose Name ought to be honorable among the
Saints, both in Old England and New) in that Book which he entitled, The Way
of the Churches in New England, the sixth chapter, speaks of the Communion of
Churches, and shows seven ways, whereby it ought to be, and is, in these
Churches, exercised. They do (as I apprehend) reach all the Duties to be
performed, by virtue of Church Communion, mutually, by each other: But of this
Consociation (as it is here described) he speaks not a word; nor, I believe,
did apprehend any Necessity of it, or Rule in Scripture for it. Therefore, when
they say, Without this, we shall want an expedient and sufficient cure for
emergent Church-difficulties and differences; the constant experience of these
Churches, from their beginning, to this day, evinceth the contrary. And though
our Way is charged with the want hereof; yet it is unjustly, and by such as
would bring us into their Way of Classical Churches, which is not proved to be
the Ordinance of Christ, as this of the Communion of Churches is, and has been
found effectual, by the blessing of Christ, and so will be still. And though
this part of the Doctrine of the Church, as they call it, concerning such a
consociation, it being not proved to be the Doctrine of Christ, was never
practiced in these Churches: For without it, the Churches either have been, or
might have been, and may be hereafter, kept in purity and peace with Brotherly
love among themselves mutually, by the regular improving the communion of
Churches, which is manifested to be the Ordinance of Christ, who has given us
perfect Rules in the New Testament, for the ordering of the communion of
Christian Churches, which are sufficient for attainment of the ends, for which
Christ has appointed it, according to the second, third, fourth, eleventh, and
twelfth Positions premised. With which, if this way of Consociation of Churches
shall be clearly proved to agree (which I do not find to be yet done) I shall
readily and heartily close with it, and submit unto it. For it is only the
Truth that I search for, and desire to bear witness unto, that, when my time
shall come to lay down this earthly tabernacle (which I expect daily) I may
give up my account with joy. 2. And, if any Church be refractory, we have the
help of the Civil Power, which is ordained of God for the just punishment of
those that do evil, whether in Church or Commonwealth, Romans 13. Every
O^dinance of God has Gods blessing annexed; which we cannot expect in this
way, till it be proved to be Gods Ordinance, which yet is not done.

Propos. 7. The manner of the Churches agreement herein, may be by the Churches
open consenting unto the things here declared, in Answer to this second
Question; as also to what is said thereabout, in Chap. 15, 16. of the Platform
of Discipline, with reference to what is before expressed in Proposition 5th.

Reply. If the Churches do express their Agreement herein openly, they do
voluntarily engage themselves, and covenant to practice according to the things
declared, not only in the point of Church Communion, but also of such
consociation as is here expressed, which they have need to see to be warranted
by the Word, if they will act accordingly in faith, knowing that whatsoever is
not of faith, is sin, Romans 14.23. What is said in the Platform, chap. 15 has
been, in part, examined before in chap. 16.5.

They say, The Synods Directions and Determinations, so far as consonant to
the Word of God, are to be received with reverence and submission, not only
for their agreement therewith, etc. but also secondarily, for the power whereby
they are made, etc.

Reply. I grant, that the Synods Directions and Determinations, so far as
consonant to the Word of God, are to be received with reverence and submission.
But what if the Members of Churches, to which they are sent, do not find them
consonant to the Word rightly understood and applied? Are they nevertheless
still bound to practice according to the Synods Directions and Determinations,
because the Synod coucludeth that they are consonant to the Word? I suppose, no
Orthodox Synod, in these times, will arrogate to it self such infallible
Assistance, as the Apostles, being assembled with the Church at Jerusalem, had,
Acts 15. (though they argued and concluded only from Scripture, yet that
Council could not err in their understanding and applying Scripture, having
such guides as the Apostles were) but will confess that they may err in their
understanding and applying the Scriptures, whereupon they seem to g^ound their
Directions and Determinations. And if so it is the duty of every Church, and
the Members thereof, to examine by the Scriptures whatsoever Direction or
Determination is propounded by the Synod. If they find that they are consonant
to the Word of God, they are bound by Gods Authority to receive them with
reverence and submission. If otherwise, wrought to obey God, rather then man,
Acts 5.29. 2. This power of the Synod (though they say it is but secondary, and
that it is for their agreement with the Word, which is the principal ground
thereof, and without which their Directions and Determinations bind not at
all, yet) they make so binding, that, if any Churches shall refuse to practice
according to the Directions and Determinations of the Synod, (though they have
strong grounds of dis-satisfaction about the Synods interpretation and
application of the Scriptures alleged by them) they will withdraw themselves
from communion with them. Whether such an authoritative urging their counsels
upon Churches be warranted by Scripture, let the Reader enquire and consider:
and, Whether it will agree with what themselves before declared, concerning the
unlawfulness of a total Separation from a true Church: and, Whether there be
need of it to cure emergent Church-difficulties and differences; seeing all
that are godly will readily close with such Directions and Determinations of
Synods, as are clearly consonant to the Word of God: and, if any obstinately
will persist in their own ways, contrary to the Word held forth to them by the
Synod, the Civil Power is Gods Ordinance for punishment of such evil doers,
that the Churches may be kept pure and peaceable, in the exercise of
Church Communion among themselves in a Brotherly way. Which yet is no
impediment to the Churches (and that by the declaratory Sentence of a Synod,
that is, after due conviction of a Church that is Heretical, Schismatical,
Apostatical, or the like, with due patience exercised) to withdraw the right
hand of fellowship from such as make themselves worthy, by their obstinacy
against the light clearly held forth from Scripture, to be rejected, as not
true Churches of Christ. Yet this they may not regularly do, merely for their
Dissenting from the Determinations of the Synod, upon conscientious grounds,
and in lesser matters. What is before expressed in the fifth Proposition, has
been already examined.

Propos. 8. concerns The manner of exercising and practicing that Communion,
which this consent and agreement specially tends unto, which, they say, may
be, by making use occasionally of Elders, or able Brethren of other Churches;
or by the more solemn Meetings of both Elders and Messengers, in lesser or
greater Councils, as the matter shall require. Such Meetings, for the end
specified, being rightly ordered, and carried on in a Brotherly way, by men
sincerely affected to establish Truth with Peace in the Churches of the Saints,
according to the Rules given unto us by Jesus Christ, our Lord and Lawgiver, I
do fully approve, as of profitable use, by the Blessing of Christ, for the good
of the Churches.

The Reverend Author's POSTSCRIPT.
Christian Reader,
THese Lines and Labors of Love (I trust) to the King of Saints, and his
Subjects and Laws, I leave with thee, with the wise perusal and consideration
of them. The issue and success, I commit unto the only wise God, and our
Father in Jesus Christ, desiring all those into whose hands it may come, to
receive nothing said by me, further then they shall find it consonant to the
Word of God in the Scripture, specially of the New Testament: And that, if they
dissent in any particulars, they will gratify me with notice thereof, together
with their Reasons; whom they shall find thankful for such help, and ready to
embrace any Truth that is yet hidden from me; and that no man will suspect that
I seek any thing in this Essay, but Truth with Peace, lest they become judges
of evil thoughts. Farewell in our Lord Jesus, who is the Truth. Let his good
Spirit lead us, and all his Churches and People, into ways of Truth and Peace,
and establish our goings in those ways. Amen.

Your assured Friend and Brother. J. D.

CONSIDERATIONS UPON THE SEVEN PROPOSITIONS Concluded by the SYNOD sitting at
BOSTON, June 10th. 1662. By the Reverend, Mr. NICHOLAS STREET, Teacher of the
Church of Christ at New Haven.
I.THis Phrase, Members of the visible Church, in the first Proposition, I take
to be explained in the second Proposition.

II. By this Phrase in the second Proposition, Their Infant Seed, I suppose is
meant only their legitimate infantseed, and is not to be extended to
illegitimate children; against which a strong Argument may be gathered from
Deuteronomy. 23.2.

III. The second Proposition does seem to distinguish of Members in particular
Churches: Some are said to be Confederate visible Believers; whereby, I
suppose, is meant, such as have immediately and personally taken hold of the
Covenant themselves, both for themselves, and for their seed: for it is
manifest, that it is spoken of such as are made contradistinct to an
infant seed, that cannot thus do. Some are said to be Their infant seed, (i.)
children in minority etc. And how come these to be Members? The last words in
the Proposition do show; which are, Whose next Parents, one or both, are in
Covenant; which does imply at least, that they become Members in and by their
next Parents covenanting for them. Hence the ground of the distinction of
Membership into Immediate and Mediate is very clear. The Argument may be thus
framed: Such as is the ratio formali^ of the Membership, such is the
Membership, so may it be distinguished and denominated. But Confederation,
which is the ratio formali^ of the Membership, is immediate in the Parent, in
the Childemediate. Ergo.

A difference in Membership is granted, both in this second Proposition, and
some others after; and if this distinction to express the difference be not
proper, let some better be laid down, that does more aptly and fully suit the
nature of the thing, and we shall receive it. In the mean time we shall hold to
this, as conceiving, that the admitting of it would be a good means to preserve
the Churches in purity, to prevent many unprofitable and u^co^fortable
disputes, and other great inconveniences, which, the rejecting of it will
unavoidably make way unto.

IV. This clause in the third Prop^sition, When grown up, are p^^sonally under
the Watch, Discipline, and Government of the Church; had need be warily
understood, and does call for some clear explication For, if it be meant that
they are in the same way, and as fully under the D^s^ipline and G^vernment of
the Church, as those who in their own persons have taken hold of the Covenant,
it cannot be assented unto: For then, in case of such delinquency, as does call
for Excommunication in another Member, they are formally to be Excommunicated.
But this may not be admitted. For,

1. Formal Excommunication does not suit their state; they are within the
Church only mediately, by their Parents confederation: Therefore are not to be
cast out of the Church immediately and personally by formal Excommunication. 2.
Besides, they are, in respect of strength, weak; and in respect of state, dead:
especially being considered as in this third Proposition, without
qualifications, even such as are mentioned in the fifth Proposition, which yet
are separable from true and saving grace: They are too weak to bear the weight
and strength of that Censure, which is mighty through God, 2 Cor. 10.4. it is
to put new wine into old bottles, which Christ does dislike in Spiritual
matters, Mat. 9.

2. It seems to be very injurious to them, to lay them open to the highest
Censure, and not to allow them proportionable privileges.

3. The main end of Excommunication, when it passes upon such, is not like to
be attained, which is, the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be
saved, 1 Cor. 5.5. The Ordinance does suppose the Subject of it to be flesh and
spirit; they who are considered as without qualifications to make them capable
of Church Priviledges, as in this third Proposition, cannot be looked at as
other then all flesh.

V. In the fourth Proposition it is said, These adult persons are not therefore
to be admitted to full Communion, because they are and continue Members,
without such further qualifications as the Word of God requires thereunto. But
whether the children of such are to be baptized, or not, is not said; and it is
necessary that it should have been expressed, that the sense and meaning of the
Synod might be rightly understood.

VI. To the fifth Proposition many things may be said.

1. This Proposition may rationally be looked at, as holding forth the
qualifications wanting to full Communion, mentioned in the fourth Proposition:
And if so, then it will follow, that such as have these qualifications, have
right to full Communion: if I miss it, I would be thankful to him that should
show me my mistake; if I am right, and do rightly express the sense of that
Proposition, it were expedient that the Synod should plainly and fully express
their meaning therein, to the understanding of all.

2. The qualifications are, Understanding the Doctrine of Faith, and professing
their Assent thereunto; Not scandalous in life.

1. There is more required in a Churchmember, even in point of knowledge, then
to understand the Doctrine of Faith, and assent thereunto. He ought, in a
competent measure, to understand Church Order and Discipline appointed by
Christ, otherwise he cannot Covenant in judgment, or own the Covenant; neither
does he know how to behave himself in the House of God, as a Member thereof.

2. The Devil does understand the Doctrine of Faith, and does assent thereunto,
Jam. 2.19.

3. Not scandalous in life, is wholly Negative, and may be said of irrational
Animals. He only that does righteousness, positively, can be denominated
righteous, 1 John 3.7.

4. Besides all these, there must be the work and grace of Faith held forth,
Acts 8.37, 38. and 16.31-34. before any meddling with the Covenant, Isa. 19.21.

3. It is said, And solemnly owning the Covenant, etc. The Scripture speaks
of Entering into a Covenant, 2 Chronicles. 15.12. of Making a Covenant with the Lord,
2 Chronicles. 29.10. and, Before the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 34.31. of Taking hold of the
Covenant, Isa. 56 4. Now if their Owning the Covenant be the same; then, not
only their children are to be baptized, but themselves admitted to full
Communion; if short, then it is a mere humane invention, not warranted by the
Word.

4. Upon supposition, that the qualifications expressed be found in them, it is
said, Their children are to be baptized. But

1. The first and second Propositions are against it. The first Proposition
does limit Baptism to the Members of the visible Church: The second Proposition
does explain who are meant by Members of the visible Church according to
Scripture; 1. Confederate visible Believers in particular Churches, (i.) such
as have personally and immediately Confederated for themselves, as the last
clause shows. And 2. Their Infant Seed, (i.) children in minority, whose next
Parents, one or both, are in Covenant. Now these mentioned in the fifth
Proposition, to whom Baptism is allowed, are neither the one nor the other.
Ergo.

2. The grace of Faith is wanting, if there be no more then the qualifications
before mentioned, and that is necessary to give their children right to
Baptism, Acts 2.38, 39.

3. The children of such are not to be baptized, who themselves do live under
great offense visibly, and do not reform, Exodus 20.5.

But so do these Parents, in not taking hold of the Covenant personally and
immediately, for themselves. Ergo.

It may easily and abundantly be proved, that such as have been baptized in the
Church, and have lived under precious means and great light, until they are
Married, and have children, and all this while have neglected the main thing
that does concern them, which is to Believe, and upon their Believing,
personally, and for themselves, to take hold of the Covenant, are under very
great sin and offense. But I will only use one Argument, which is this:

Neglect of taking hold of the Covenant, or of entering into Covenant now under
Christ and the Gospel, is as gross a neglect, as great a sin, as much
displeasing to God, as was the neglect of Circumcision, the sign of the
Covenant before Christ. Grounds of it are:

1. The thing it self is as weighty, that I say not, more.

2. As fully under command as that, 1 John 3.23. Romans 10.9, 10.

3. The neglect of it does as necessarily and peremptorily infer Gods highest
displeasure, and everlasting destruction, if continued in, as that, Joh. 3.36.
Mark 16.16. Heb. 2.3.

But that neglect was gross, the sin great, and very displeasing to God, Genesis
17.14. Exodus 4.24-26. Ergo.

4. If the children of such are to be baptized; if their children again thus
baptized, live to have children, themselves not personally taking hold of the
Covenant, or not entering into Covenant, what shall become of them? shall they
be baptized, or not?

1. If not; it is needful that it should be declared, that all may know where
to stop, and to understand, that this Privilege is not to exceed the Third
Generation. Again, if not, it is strange that a child should be begotten or
born of a Member, and yet it self be no Member; or, if a Member, have no right
to Baptism.

2. If so; it may be demanded, By what right? or, Where is the ground of their
right to Baptism? Not in the Grandfather, or Great-Grandfather; that is
generally disliked: and the second Proposition does limit it otherwise; but in
the immediate Parent, I suppose. But, how is the right of these childrens
Baptism founded upon him? Not upon his personal Confederating; for it is
supposed there is none: Nor upon his owning the Covenant of his father; for his
father made no Covenant: he did only own the Covenant of his Parents, and that
gave the right of Baptism to his children, as is held forth in the fifth
Proposition, It remains therefore, that this Parent of the third Generation
does own what his Parent of the second Generation (he can go no higher) has
done, and what is that? He entered not into Covenant, but only owned the
Covenant that his father entered into. And thus these last children, who are of
the fourth Generation, do come to have right to Baptism, not by their Parents
Confederation, as the second sort mentioned in the second Proposition; nor by
their Parents owning their fathers Covenant, as the third sort spoken of in the
fifth Proposition; but by these Parents (of the third Generation) owning their
Parents (of the second Generation) owning the Covenant of their fathers, of the
first. This seems to be an uncouth way, and very unpleasant Divinity.

VII. The sixth Proposition I look at as an Exception to the fifth; otherwise
it is cross unto it, and against it. To this I say,

1. If there be any weight in the Arguments used under the sixth Consideration,
against the baptizing of children, to whom the fifth Proposition does allow
Baptism; then they are likewise of force against the baptizing of children
mentioned in this sixth Proposition.

2. I cannot but take notice of the several sorts of Membership, all giving
right to Baptism: Two in the second Proposition, a Third in the fifth; a Fourth
in the sixth: and if Membership, without personal Confederation by the seed of
Confederate visible Believers, does not end in the third Generation, then there
is a Fifth, and a Sixth sort of Membership; and all these are differing one
from the other. The two first are of God, and according to his Word, the rest
are not.

VIII. The last Proposition seems to open a very wide gate in the Church,
wider then God does allow, Isa. 26.2. for though it requires qualifications in
such Members who claim right to Baptism for their children in other Churches,
by virtue of Church Communion, yet it is altogether silent of the
qualifications of such Churches themselves, only they must be Orthodox; that
respects the Doctrine of Faith alone. There is much more to be attended: A
Church may be Orthodox in matters of Faith, yet Scandalous in Practice: A whole
Church may be under Scandal, as well as a particular person; and in that case
another Church may withdraw from it, and have no communion either with it, or
its Members. And this was, not long since, the Judgment and Practice of some
of the chief Churches and Elders in the Bay.

Again, a Church may believe the main Articles of Faith, yet be so defective in
Discipline, yea, so opposite to Christ's Government, as to lay aside his Laws
and Institutions, and set up the Inventions and Traditions of men: And likewise
may have such a corrupt Constitution, both in regard of Matter, Open scandalous
livers; and likewise of Form, No visible express Covenant according to the
Rules of the Gospel, that there can be no such communion held and maintained
with such a Church, or her Members holding communion with it, as is expressed
in this seventh Proposition, without manifest disobedience to the Word of God,
in these, and many other places, Rev. 18.4. 2 Cor. 6.17. Ephesians. 5.11.

If the Members of Orthodox Churches may, upon the terms expressed in the
seventh Proposition, claim Baptism for their children in our Churches, by
virtue of Church Communion, then themselves have right to communicate with us
in the Lords Supper; and then what should hinder but that we may, by virtue of
Church Communion, occasionally coming to any of these Orthodox Churches, have
our children baptized in such a Church, and our selves partake in the Supper of
the Lord? Or, if we should have occasion to remove our Habitation to such a
place where such an Orthodox Church is, why may we not join unto it, and have
fellowship with it? And if we may so do, New England Christians are of all
Christians in the world most miserable and foolish. We have suffered many
things in vain, in leaving such a Country for this; our Estates, Friends,
Comforts there, to enjoy God, and Christ, and our Consciences in the
Congregational-Way, in a low afflicted condition in the Wilderness, for so many
years together; and now we must lose those things which we have wrought, and
may return to our former state when we please: which the Lord preserveus from.

FINIS.
THere is now in the Press a small Treatise, Entitled, A Discourse of the Last
Judgment, on Matthew. 25.31. to the end, etc. By Mr. SAMVEL WHITING, Pastor of
the Church of Christ at Lynne; which will shortly be extant.


