HOSANNA* BEFORE THE BISHOPS, Preached to them when they were come to the
Tower, by Master DAVIS, Chaplain to the Lord COTTINGTON.

Being the heads of his Sermon, as it was taken by one of his Hearers on
Sunday-Morning, being the second of January. 1642.

In which is many Remarkable Passages.

With their manner of Salutation to the Archbishop of Canterbury.

LONDON: Printed for W. R. 1642.

TWo of the Bishops, the Bishop of Durham, and another, are in Custody under
the Black Rod: The Archbishop of York would not come to the Chapel; But the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and the other nine were there, who saluted the
Archbishop of Canterbury when he came into the Chapel with very low Congies;
As also at their going out after Sermon; and came forth of the Church with the
Liefetenant, and then parted each of them to their own Chambers.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE BISHOPS IN THE TOWER.
JOHN 12. 13. Hosanna.
THis Text is but one word; But as out of one Adam did descend a world of men,
so out of this one word does issue forth a world of matter. Hosanna, it was the
Jews acclamation, the joy of the people at the coming of Christ to Jerusalem;
for it was told them, that he would come, but not in stare, but in meekness:
Rejoice greatly, oh daughter of Zion; shout O daughter of Jerusalem; Behold,
thy King comes unto thee, he is just, and having salvation; lowly, and riding
upon an Ass, and upon a Colt, the foale of an Ass, Zachary 9. 9.

But though he humbled himself, yet he would be honored of them; for Christ
is a great King, and expected to be entertained of them as a King, which should
they have denied him, the very stones should have given it to him; I tell you,
if these should hold their peace, the very stones would cry out. Luke 19. 40.

In the two Greek words, there is but one Letter between that which signifies
a stone, and that which signifies people: And I say unto you, that God is able
even of stones to raise up people, Luke 3. 8. If the people will not Cry
Hosanna, God can make the stones to cry Hosanna to Jesus Christ.

Yet though the Disciples and the people, did not cry Hosanna to Christ, yet
should he not loose one jot of his honor; and though the Pharisees and Scribes
should have cried with them Hosanna, yet had there been nothing at all added to
his honor; one could not increase, nor the other decrease one jot of his
honor.

Yet our blessed Savior liked the one, and reproved the other; not that he
needed it, but Christ expected it, because it was his due, and the people
spread their garments, and took Palms in their hands, and cried Hosanna. This
is recorded by all the four Evangelists, save only one, to show that it is a
matter of moment; Matthew has it, Mat. 21. 9. Mark 9. 11. and S. John as it is
here in the Text. Though Matthew writ in Hebrew, Mark in Latin, and John in
Greek; yet all use the same word Hosanna, as some say; because in this they
would not alter the Jews language, it being the very word they used.

Others are of opinion that the matter that is included in this word could not
be fully expressed in any other language, and therefore they would not translate
it, because they would not loose the force of the word.

But this we may be sure of, that certainly they did not do it with any intent
to make the world ignorant of the meaning of it; if I know not the meaning of
the voice, I shall be unto him that speaks a Barbarian, and he that speaks
shall be a Barbarian unto me. 1. Cor. 14. 11.

When Ptolemeus Philadelphus had found an Hebrew Bible in his Library, he spoke
to this effect* What shall it profit me, quoth he, to have a Bible, and cannot
understand what is in it? So he sent for Scholars that came unto him, and
translated it into his own language.

This word Hosanna, here, is either supplitory, to beseech for benefit to be
received: or gratulatory, thanks for benefits received already.

They who hold it supplitory, look upon the word in the Etymology of it; and
they who hold it gratulatory, they look upon the meaning of the word; but we
will have respect to both.

1. For the perfect signification of the word Hosanna, according to the
Etymology of it* and thus some compare it with the Psalmist: Save thou; and
thus it is a plain prayer: as it is Psalm. 118. And then we must understand; 1.
who is prayed for. 2. What is prayed for. Thus some understand it, to be a
prayer to God for Christ: others, to be a prayer to Christ for the people: and
that thus.

1. O God save the Son of David.

2. O save thou us thou Son of David.

In the first is set down Christ's weakness, as he is man. In the second is set
forth his power as he is God.

In the first as he is man: in the second as he is the Savior of men: both
which he was on earth, and both which he is now in heaven. Then mutable, but
immutable now.

If this acclamation did flow from the people naturally of their own accord, it
was then for Christ, whom they esteemed but man: yet they prayed for him as
their King, as we ought all to do, especially for them that are in authority,
as it is, 1. Tim. 2. 2.

He that was the first King, and one of the worst too, was to be prayed for:
much more, a good King, and for such in Authority as fear God.

But I think it was not they themselves, but rather the Spirit of God in them
that cried Hosanna: who knew Christ to be their King by the same Spirit, and
then Hosanna is a prayer to Christ the Son of David, for the people of Israel,
to save them, for besides him there is no Savior, Isa. 43. 11. An horse is a
vain thing for safety, neither shall he deliver any by his great strength,
Psalm. 33. 17. And as vain a thing is man to save a man, a mighty man is not
delivered by an host, or by much strength, a Prince cannot save a man.
Therefore put not your trust in Princes, but in the Lord.

If the Lord sease upon you, nothing can take you out of his hands: but who
ever seaseth on you, if God will save you, then are you safe from all danger,
you shall not perish.

And this is our comfort, that as Christ is God able to save us: so is he man
also, touched with the sense of our infirmities; he is no hireling, but the
good Shepherd that will deliver his lambs, from all Bears, and Lions. As David
did deliver his fathers sheep out of the paw of the Lion, and the Bear; so will
Christ also deliver his sheep, though the Lions and the Bears be ready to
devour them.

Christ is our head, and we are his members; now the head is the head of life,
and motion, etc. to the body, and so is Christ the fountain of all the true
health of the soul, to him we ought to cry Hosanna, O Lord save us.

Neither are we only to cry Hosanna to Christ as King alone, and so to defend
us against our enemies, the world, the flesh, and the devil: but as Priest
also, to reconcile us to the Lord. Let us abandon all our own power, and all
that we can do, and rely on the sacrifice of our Priest and Reconciler, Jesus
Christ. Neither are we only to cry Hosanna to him as King, and as Priest
alone, but as our Prophet also, to instruct us through this vale of misery,
till we arrive at our eternal bliss with him in heaven.

2. In the next place we must look upon the word in the signification
congratulatory; Thanks is so necessary, that such is the condition of men, that
to be unthankful, is to be unworthy of the society of men: an unthankful man
is such an one from whom no good can be expected.

Jesus Christ has done exceedingly for us, and we are infinitely bound to be
thankful to him. Look upon man, in his fall, and he is worse then any
creature, like the beasts that perish, therefore worse then beasts: not so
good, only made like them, not quite so good.

Angels are glorious spirits placed in the presence of God himself, when they
fell, our Savior never looked after them; but he took our nature upon him, to
save us: he took not upon him the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham. He
that was God took upon him the form of a servant, and became man, this work he
undertook for us, and this work he performed. Therefore it behoved the people
to cry Hosanna: And here it is to be observed, that the people that went
before, and they that followed after, both cried Hosanna. So ought those people
under the Law before Christ, and we also under the Gospel after Christ, all
ought to cry Hosanna, like the two faces of the Cherubims, that looked both
ways on the Mercy seat, both they before, and we after ought all to turn our
faces upon Christ; crying Hosanna to the Son of David.

FINIS.

