A GREAT DISCOVERY OF A DAMNABLE PLOT AT RVGLAND CASTLE In Monmoth-shire in
WALES: Related to the High Court of Parliament, by John Davis, November the 12.
1641.

The chief Actor being the Earl of Worcester, Wherein is discovered the
Number of Horses, Men, Powder, Match and Shot by them prepared, with the places
where they are, and the Danger we were in, had not God by his Mercy protected
US.

With certain Quaeres presented to the High Court of Parliament Concerning
such wicked Designs.

As also, the Reasons wherefore the House of Commons gave strict command, that
there should be a strong watch set about the Earl of Worcesters house, and the
French Ambassadors.

Wherennto is annexed, the true Relation of a damnable Plot which was
discovered on tuesday last, by a Religious man intended against the High Court
of Parliament.

LONDON Printed by Barnard Alsop, MDCXLJ.

A great DISCOVERY Of the damnable Gunpowder PLOT, At Rugland Castle; in
Hereford shire. Lately found out by John Davis.
The chief Agent in this Hellish Plot, is the Earl of WORCESTER.
ONe John Davis* servant to Mistress Lewis, who keeps an Inn at the sign of
the George in Rosse, in the County of Hereford, near unto Rugland castle in
Monmouth shire, where the Earl of Worcester now is.

This John Davis being newly come to London, chanced to be at Alderman Actons,
one of the Aldermen of the city of London: and being formerly acquainted with
his Coachman, related unto him the Discovery of a dangerous Plot, which the
Earl of Worster has cunningly contrived at this time.

Which when the Coachman had heard related, he acquainted his Master, the said
Alderman Acton therewith; who caused him to be brought in unto him, and asking
him further of it, he thought it worthy the consideration of the honorable
Assembly in the high Court of Parliament, and therefore brought the said John
Davis before the house of Commons on Friday last* being the 12 day of November.
The said John Davis being called into the house to relate this discovery, was
commanded by Mr. Speaker to relate what he knew of it. Alderman Acton being
also present, told him that the thing that the house did require of him, was to
relate that to them, which before he did to him.

Then he being a plain Country-fellow, and not able so fully to express
himself: yet so well as he could, spoke to this effect.

May it please your honors, to give me leave to speak the truth, so near as I
can, as I have formerly done to this Gentleman Mr. Acton: I am, and it please
your honors, a poor man, the servant of Mistress Lewis, she keeps an Inn at
the town of Rosse, in Hereford shire.

And not long since, there came two Gentlemen to lodge at my Mistrisses house;
who when they went away, desired of my Mistress a guide to conduct them to the
Earl of Worcester at Rugland Castle in Monmouth shire. Now my Mistress keeping
a good Gelden or two always in the stable: in case any Guests should want upon
any urgent occasion, I knowing of the way thither very well, it pleased my
Mistress to appoint me to go with them, which I did, and returned home again
orderly, as I use to do, receiving satisfaction for my pains. Afterward
again there came a very person^ble gentleman to our Inn himself alone, having
no company at all: who having layne there all night, desired my Mistress
likewise to have some man to conduct him to the said Castle, to the aforesaid
Earl of Worcester. And she sent me with him also, as she did before with the
other two.

So in the next morning we set out, and I rode with him on the way, upon a
very good Gelding of my Mstresses, as I used to do.

And when we came to the Castle, he alighted, and caused me to alight also: he
was a very portly man for person; he had a Monteer on his head, with a red
feather in it, and very rich in apparel, and going into the house he called
for some water to wash his hands, which was brought to him in a pewter Basin,
but he refused, as being unwilling to wash in pewter. Then he called for a
Uenice Glass, which glass they brought with water, holding about a quart:
which glass he took, and set the bottom of it in the Basin of water; for the
top he could not, it being about a foot high, there he set it, and washed his
hands in it.

To what end this Ceremony was used, I do not know, your Honors can better
judge of it then I. Then I having conducted this gentleman hither, he paid me,
and gave me satisfaction, and my horse was set in the Earls stable to beat a
while, to the end, that afterward I might the better return home. I being
there in the stable, saw many light Horses, and falling in discourse with the
Groom of the stable, he showed me to the number of about threescore horses
prepared for war.

And he seemed to me, to go about to entise me by many persuasions, and
entisements to have an affection to stay there.

After he had showed me all that was in that stable, he led me into a
Uault-under the ground, which went round about the Castle, where was made an
obscure stable: in which I perceived about twelve light Horses for it was dark
I could not well see.

I was going further into that stable under ground to have seen the rest of
the house there, which was, as he reported, about forty, but it was so dark,
that I was fearful to go any further, for fear of danger.

In another place under ground, he showed me furniture for about six or
sevenscore of horse. In which place was furniture also, for about two thousand
men, with great store of match and powder, and other Ammunition belonging to
war, in abundance: one of these stabl^s I guess to be about sixescore foot in
length, and twenty four foot in breadth.

Then he was leading me to show me the Uault that went round about the Castle:
but I was fearful, partly having regard to my charge, the Gelding whereon I
rode, lest I should be cosened of him, and partly in regard I was in so
dangerous a place: therefore I desired to make the more haste away.

Then he returned with me to my horse again, and amongst other discourse, he
told me that his master the Earl of Worcester, gave notice privately, that any
man who would be entertained, should have sixteen pence a day, good pay from
him, in case they would be true to him.

And to press me, as I conceive, to have some desire to serve him: he told me
that his master had at this time seven hundred men under pay. But I, being
nothing at all pleased with this discourse, hasted away to return to my own
business at home, where I returned immediately: and now by Gods providence, am
come hither to acquaint your honors with what I know.

After the house, had heard him speak, they took notice of it, and appointed
him to come again certain days before them.

In the mean time, great care is taken, to provide for his safety, and great
charge given at his lodging, that he shall want for nothing.

Quaeries upon this Plot, humbly presented to the High Court of Parliament.
1 Whether Father Philips was not an Agent in this Plot? 2 Whether there be not
more such evill-affected plotters in Wales besides? 3 What evil consequence
might ensue of our hopeful Princes going to such a place* 4 What punishment
they are worthy of, who shall seek to have him there? 5 Whether we have not
as just cause to fear the Papists in England, as they had in Ireland and
Wales, and if they should once take an head, and he not prevented, what evil
consequence may ensue thereof?
FINIS.
UPon this plot discovered, the Parliament has caused a strong Guard of men to
be set about the Earl of Worcesters house here in London.

As also, they have caused another strong Guard to be set about the French
Ambassadors house in Lincolns Inn fields supposing he has some hand in this
business, and to be a chief Agent in this damnable Plot*

The true Relation of the great discovery, which was brought to light on
tuesday last, being the 16 day of November, 1641.
THere was a cruel and wicked Plot discovered about the City of London, which
was intended against some of the chief Members in the High Court of
Parliament, and brought to light by a religious man. Therefore it was commanded
by the house of Commons, that great search should be made for the finding out
of two Frenchmen. who were supposed to be the chief Agents in this wicked
Design.

FINIS.

