Certain and good NEWS From the West of IRELAND, and City of Cork.

Sent in a Letter from John Davis, Attendant on Sir Charles Vavasour, who is
there resident under the Lord President of Munster, unto his Father, Master
Nelson, living in the new Palace yard at Westminster.

Concerning the taking and besieging of the Town of Dungarven, and the
overthrow of many hundred of the Irish Rebels. With some other skirmishes, as
they marched from Youghall.



London, Printed for F. Coule

Certain and good News from the west of Ireland, and City of Cork, etc.
SIR,
AFTER my Duty remembered unto you, and my Mother, with my blessing to my
Children, and my love unto all my friends: This is to certify you, that I, my
wife, and my brother are very well, and desire to hear from you by these
Bearers. As concerning our voyage, was this Sunday; being the twentieth day of
February, we loosed from Mynhard with all our men: On the Tuesday following
we landed in Yohell, there we remained until the first of March, then we had
a Command from the Lord President of Munster to march away toward Dungarring,
a Port Town situated by the Sea side, the which the Rebels had taken about a
month before we came there. On Wednesday night we came near it, but by
reason of the ill weather that night we were enforced to return back to a
Town called White Church.

The next morning we advanced toward the Town with our Regiment of foot, and
four Troops of Horse, and came before it about ten of the Clock in the
morning. Then we sent a Trumpeter and summoned the Town; and their Answer
was, that they would come out and fight with us. Then we drew our men into
Battalia, and so waited about an hour, but no enemy came: Then did we summon
them the second time; and their Answer was, that they would not yield, but
stand upon their guard within the town. The Trumpeter returning with this
Answer, we immediately sent two Troops of Horse, and two companies of foot to
assault the Town, the which they did very bravely, and after some two hours
fight, they were relieved with as many more: the which did assail the town so
hotly that they did kill a number of the Rebels, and set fire on one of the
gates: and whilst the Rebels were a putting out of the fire, our men gained
one of the other Gates, and entered the Town. The Rebels perceiving this,
forsook the Walls, and retreated all into strong stoned houses, and there
maintained sight a great while, but in the end, they were constrained for to
yield, with their lives only saved, and so t^ be sent out of the Town, the
which was granted, and they went away that night. Then we placed strong Guards
in all the Town for that night.

On the morrow we summoned the Castle for to yield; but they Answered us again
by their shot: so we assaulted the Castle the same day twice, but were forced
to retreat with the loss of only one man.

The night drawing on, all that night was spent with exchange of Shot on both
sides, but little hurt done on either side. The next day they sent to us by one
of their Captains, his name was Butler, that we would give them leave to
march out with their Arms, and Colors flying, they would deliver up the
Castle.

So there was a Counsel held about it, and it was agreed on by my Lord and the
rest, that by reason we wanted Beer and other provisio^ they should. So the
next day, being saturday, and the fifth day of March, they marched away their
Arms, and Colors flying. And some two hours after, we left the Town, and
marched after them, they on the one side of the water, and we on the other.

We left in the Castle a Garrison of threescore Soldiers. Then we marched
back again to a town called Capperquin, where we lay that night in the town.

I have left my Brother with Captain Thornton, and have preferred him to be
his Barber, and to wait on him in his Chamber. His Captain is left for to
command that town and Castle as their Garrison, with their Company, which
consists of an hundred men.

The next day we marched toward Cork, and that night we lay at a Castle of my
Lord Baltimores. The next day we marched toward Cork, and we heard by the way,
that the enemy was coming against us with eight thousand men: For all that we
marched on, and came to Cork that night, where I remain as yet, until we do
go unto our Garrison of Kinsale, when I know not, by reason that my Lord of
Musgrave is betwixt us and Kinsale, and we are not of sufficient strength to
oppose him.

The Rebels do increase daily, but if strength comes over in any time, we
make no question, by the assistance of the Lord of Hosts, who is the giver of
all victory, but to reduce this Province to her former state, for the Rogues
are very cowardly, and dare not do any thing but on great advantages, that is,
five to one.

More News have I none as yet, but that we are all well, and desire to hear
from you by this Bearer. You may direct your Letter to Kinsaile to me, to Sir
Charles Vavasour my Colonel. Pray send me word how my Children do, and how
you all do. Thus with my prayers to the Almighty for your long life here, and
eternal happiness hereafter: I rest

Your dutiful son till death does dissolve me, JOHN DAVIS.

FINIS.

