A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL Of that incomparable Lady, the Honorable,
the Lady MARY ARMYNE.

By J. D. M. A.

With an Epistle, and Elegy, by two Grave Divines.

Sancti sunt honorandi propter imitationem. -- Whose Faith Follow.

LONDON, Printed for Nevil Simmons at the Princes Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1676.

TO THE HONORABLE, William Pierreponte Esquire
Sir,
I Do not trouble you with these Lines to flatter you, your high merits and
just and numerous Praises raise you above the reach of that usual endeavor of
self-seeking; But to present you with those things which received being at
first, and now publishing by you desires, as also to leave in your Hand some
few short Remarks of the many large Excellencies of a near Relation of your
own, whom (I know) your Nature and Conscience will invite you to imitate. What
I here offer to your perusal, stands in great need of your candor, because it
was drawn up under great discomposure of mind, the reason of which you will
easily gess. That you may close the world as your dearest Aunt did, that is,
full of days, Peace, and Honor, etc. is the most hearty Prayer of

Sir, Your Honors great Admirer, and most Humble Servant J. D.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
AS Historians do freely divulge the crimes and shame, even of Princes when
they are dead, whom yet men are bound for the sake of their Office, and the
Government of the world, to honor while they live, and (if it may be) to
conceal their faults, that contempt disable them not, to the detriment of the
Republic; so I take it to be a great duty to transmit the examples of holy and
worthy persons to posterity, and to publish their just praises, especially to a
world which is inclined to mis-understand, and vilify and abuse such, whom
they must imitate if ever they will partake of their felicity: For God who will
have the names of the wicked to rot, will have the memory of the just to be
blessed. Their praise is more Gods praise than theirs: The common and dangerous
sin of Pride, will so readily feed upon imprudent commendations, that we must
be very cautelous how we so tempt the living: But the dead are out of the reach
of such temptation: Yet even the living that honor God must be honored by
men, and shall be honored by God: But we must praise them most behind their
backs.

Much of the work of God and of the Devil in the world, is carried on by
Praising or Dispraising persons: God speaks so highly of his sanctified
people, and gives them such honorable names, as we durst never have done, if
he had not gone before us in it: What greater things can be spoken of them
here, than that they are his chosen and peculiar treasure, his jewels, the
apple of his eye, the beloved of his soul, his servants, his friends, the
members of his Son, his children, and the heirs of life, yea and coheirs with
Jesus Christ, and that he is their Father and their God, etc. Yet does he know
more faults in them than we do, and hates those faults much more than we. But
he better knows the excellency of his Graces and Image, and their relation to
Christ, and what he will make them hereafter in Glory? He that sent his Son to
bring home wandering sinners to himself, and to redeem them from iniquity and
make them a peculiar people, zealous of good works, a holy nation, a royal
Priesthood, or a Kingdom of Priests to offer him sacrifices acceptable through
Christ, he that has written a holy Law, to make them holy, and makes it the
work of his spirit to sanctify them, will certainly be glorified in their
holiness: To this end the light of their good works must shine before men,
Matthew. 5.16. though no ostentation must be made for their own glory. And though
they dishonor themselves, and displease him, by their manifold imperfections,
yet he that washes them in his blood, will come at last with thousands of his
Angels to be glorified in his Saints, and admired in all them that do believe,
and will present them without spot or blemish to his Father, Ephesians. 5. 2 These.
1.9, 10, 11.

The due praises of the holy heirs of life, and the notice of their certain
difference from the ungodly world, is a matter of grand importance to mankind:
Who can believe else that God is holy, and a lover of goodness, and the
righteous Governor of the World? Who can believe that Christ is the Savior of
souls, if he save them not from their sins? Matthew. 1.21. Or that he is the true
Physician, if he do not heal men, or that he is any better than Philosophers or
common Teachers, if he make his truest followers no better? Who can believe
that there is a sanctifying Spirit if none be sanctified by him? And who can
believe that there is any heavenly Glory to be hoped for, if there be none that
by a heavenly mind and conversation are prepared for it? For I know not whether
the Sadducee that believes not any future glory, do err more grossly than they
that think that all, even ungoldy sinners shall possess it.

Let unbelievers hear of never so holy a Law, if they see not also a holy
people, they will think it is but a Romance or Fancy, and describes but an
Utopia or City in the Sun. And if the ungodly see non much better than
themselves, they must needs believe either that there is no salvation, or that
they shall be saved notwitstanding all their wickedness.

The holy Scriptures are perfecter in their kind than the holiest men on earth;
for they are free from culpable errors and defects: But Gods Image on his
Saints is of a nobler kind, than that which is in the Scriptures; for it is a
living word and Image: It is holy Life, and Light, and Love, which the
Scripture (in it self a seal or dead Letter) was indtied to effect: And the end
is better than the means as such.

The Devil knowing this, does labor above all, if it may be, to keep men
without this Image of God; If not, to blot and blemish it, by men's folly,
errors and miscarriages; or if that may not be, to hide it by slanders and the
reproach of wicked lying tongues; for by so doing his malice does many ways
attain its ends: He robs God of the Glory of his Grace (and it is God that
he most maligneth): And dishonors Christ and his Gospel and true Religion:
He tempts the world into the damning sin of malignant calumny and
persecution: And he injureth Gods servants in their due reputation: But chiefly
he thereby deterreth the ignorant from a holy life, and keeps them quiet in a
state of sin, and a worldly life, as thinking that indeed there is no better.

And there are scarce any in the world that wrong God more, than they that rob
him of the Glory of his servants real holiness. That is, 1. They that live
wickedly, or no better than Infidels, while they profess the Christian Faith.
2. They that by false accusations would make the best men seem the worst, and
make serious Religion suspected to be but humorous singularity and hypocrisy,
and who upon lying fame will vend any calumny against the innocent; and that
upon worldly interest and the advantage of civil discords will injuriously make
good men odious to their Superiors, and the Rulers of the World. 3. Yea and
those that while they pretend to the strictest religiousness, do maculate that
profession with scandalous practices, with pride and self-conceit, with
perverse opinions, and with such miscarriages and follies as tend to persuade
the unbelieving world, that Christians are as bad and contemptible as any other
men.

Christ himself teaches men, as to know the thorns and thistles by their
pricks and rending property, and the wolves in sheeps clothing, by their
devouring of his Flocks, (for those are the fruits to which he does refer us)
so to know the Vine and the Fig Tree also by their fruits, and his Disciples by
their extraordinary love to one another (and to all men.) And to tell
unbelievers that Christians are holy, self-denying, loving, humble, heavenly
persons, when they see no such thing appearing in their converse, yea when they
commonly see the contrary, will seem more incredible to them, than to tell them
of Saints in the unseen world, where such persons may be for ought they know,
though they take invisible things to be uncertain. And if Christianity made no
greater a change upon man's soul, than to bring men to a lifeless uneffectual
formality, and to paint over a fleshly, worldly life with a few good words, and
to differ from Philosophers no further than some Learned Divines themselves do,
that is, not in their holy Love, obedience, humility, patience, hope and joy,
but in their opinions and words, in going to Church and saying their Prayers,
and keeping up their several forms and orders, and contending fiercely for
their several Sects, I could not my self, be heartily a Christian. The Kingdom
of God is not in Word but in Power, and it is not meats and days and
ceremonies, but Righteousness and Peace and joy in the Holy Ghost: And he that
in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God and approved of men
(except they be Tyrants, Sectaries, or malignant.)

Upon these accounts I take it to be a real part of his Masters service, which
this Reverend Brother has here performed, in transmitting to posterity so much
of the exemplary Life of this excellent Lady in her deserved praise: And as it
is said of Antonine, that it is the top of all his Praises, that while a
multitude of Writers, Heathen and Christian, described his great virtues, no
one was found that contradicted them, and spoke against him: So I think our
Brothers work (here undertaken) is such as is like to meet with no gainsayers,
nor need he fear least any should cast any blots upon the pourtraiture which he
has drawn. Those of us, who are called publicly to militate against the
errors and wickedness of the world, must expect to have as many defame,
calumniate and reproach us, as to praise us: But such persons as are placed in
a calmer Region, and are called to serve God in a less-militant way, and that
with the advantage of Wealth and Honor, do use more to escape the scourge of
tongues. Indeed the Life of this Lady was such, as of it self without any such
advantage, might have silenced or shamed obtrectation. I remember not, that
ever I heard any person speak a word to her reproach. And though I was seldom
with her my self; yet these last fifteen years I lived so near her, as that I
might easily hear the voice of fame: and that little converse which I had with
her was such, as gave me opportunity to know her more intimately, than many
that saw but her blameless and pious Conversation. For her business with me was
no other, than to open the state of her soul, and confess her infirmities, and
produce her evidences for Heaven, and to desire my judgment of them, with my
Counsel for her further strength and comfort; and to ask my advise concerning
such works of public good which she Charitably intended, and liberally (as I
am well informed) did perform. By which I perceived that she had a safe and
well settled state of soul, not free from all degrees of fear, and lesser
doubtings of her self; (and far from a presumptuous unhumbled self-justifying.)
But her evidences were sound, and her discerning of them was so clear and sure,
as enabled her to conclude her Right to Life, and with the greater peace to
think of Death, which as she had opened to me not long before, so did she over
again at large, in her sickness, not many days before her death, when after
her complaints for such imperfections of grace, as were her trouble, she
professed the full dedication of her self to God, her firm consent to the terms
of his Covenant, and her longings after perfect holiness, and her trust in the
merits and mediation of her Redeemer. After this we were in hope for a day or
two that she was like to be recovered; But hearing of my troubles, she sent her
servant to me to enquire of my Case, and was dead before he returned home.

But as she lived to God, so God gave her a long life, and full of mercies:
Though she had long been troubled with a sore and dangerous disease, which had
painful and perilous paroxysmes or critical fits. Stones voided by the
intestines, supposed to be from the Gall.
God had in her later years given her great ease from it, (though it is not
unlike that it was the root of that fainting aguishness which took her hence:)
So that to near fourscore years of age, she served God in competent health, and
serenity of mind.

Though she sprang from an Honorable Family inclined to the Roman Sect, God
was her Teacher, and did confirm her not only in the Protestant Reformation,
but also in the true Love of Practice and seriousness in the Religion which she
professed: she was not like those deluded formalists, who contend most
furiously for this Religion against that, or for that against this, while
indeed they are of none: and that will be zealous Papists, or zealous
Protestants, or zealous in more singular Sects, but will never be persuaded to
be zealous Christians; who will furiously persecute or at least reproach those,
that are not of their Church, or side, or way, as erroneous, irreligious
persons, while nothing can prevail with them to be themselves on Christ's side
against the flesh, the world and the Devil; who are implacably hot for their
several parties and opinions, but as to a heavenly mind and life, and Love, and
good works, and humility, and self-denial, they are mortally cold; who fiercely
contend for the Baptismal water, and the Christian vestments, ornaments and
name, while they inwardly fight against the word and spirit of Christ, or live
till they are old before they truly know what the Baptismal Covenant is, and to
what, and for what it does engage them. She was not addicted to Sects or
novelties, on pretense of rising to the highest form: But she truly took the
height of her Religiousness to consist in the height of Love to God and man,
and in close and constant obedience to Christ, and confidence in his mediation.
And they that do so with all their hearts shall have a sound and durable
consolation, which will bear them up in life and death, when the formal, the
Dogmatical, and the superstitious Hypocrite has a comfort which lives and
dies with his prosperity, or which is heartless and delusory, as living but on
the flattery of his party, or of himself. Though according to her rank, she
lived in the decency of a plentiful estate, it was with humility and lowliness
of mind; Her Prudence, Sobriety and Gravity were very exemplary; and her
impartiality in loving all that were truly Christians (and their divisions, and
wrangling contentions she was much against:) she was not of their mind who take
it to be a mark of Christ's Disciples, to be accusers of the Brethren, and to
reproach and vilify and persecute his Disciples, and deny them to be His, that
they may do it with less dishonor and remorse. She took it to be no
countenancing of Schism (as some account it) to relieve such servants of Christ
in their distress, as men accuse and afflict as Schismatics, though she was an
adversary to real Schism. When she first heard of eighteen hundred Ministers
ejected and silenced 1662, she gave a considerable sum toward the relief of
some of them, (which I was acquainted with, though I saw it not.) And the good
works which she did before her departure, I hope will Live and declare
themselves, and be an encouragement to others that are trusted with Riches, to
follow such examples, and make themselves friends of that which to the
worldling is the Mammon of unrighteousness.

It is a confirming evidence of the truth of Gods promises, and the goodness of
a holy life, which I have observed in many, who have lived to a great age in
constant uprightness and serious Religion: I have met with few young Christians
that are like them, in a peaceable mellowness of temper, and an honest
plainness in Religion, most like to the description of the Primitive
Christians, and a readiness and willingness to be with Christ: I have known
many in a healthful state of very old age, who having lived in exemplary piety
and blamelesness of life, have many years longed to be dissolved and to be with
Christ, not by any pain or misery in the flesh, but from better Causes, I
suppose from all these three together; 1. From Gods rewarding Grace, who even
in this life does often give persons of long and great fidelity, an encouraging,
inviting foretast of Heaven: And 2. from the ripeness of Grace: And 3. somewhat
from the ripeness of Nature, which all make such Christians to be like ripe and
mellow fruit, which needs not much shaking, but easily drops into the owners
hand.

O that more Christians did well consider, how much of true Religion consists
in a true cheerful readiness to die, and in living by Faith, and Hope, and
Love, above the Love of this Life and world, and all the present interests of
the Body! They would then better lay out their thoughts, labor and time, and
live and die in solid peace, more answerable to their holy profession than most
do, such a Faith, as will cause men to Live and Die to God in Christ, will
justify, and comfort and save the soul; when many that suppose themselves more
wise and Orthodox than others, and think that they better please God and honor
Christ, by their several Notions, Words and Forms, which they account
Evangelical Knowledge of godliness, and take themselves for the happy defenders
and the Truth, and adversaries to other men's dangerous errors; will find ere
long that the sincerity and worth of knowledge and Belief are to be judged of
by the measures of that Love and Holiness which they cause; and that he that
has the most Love to God and man, and the most fruitful life, and the most
heavenly desires and hopes and comforts, and the most sound and joyful
preparations for his change, has the best knowledge and Belief, and is the
most Religious person, and of the highest form, 1 Cor. 8.1, 2, 3. We all have
knowledge (and some that call their Brethren Ignorant or erroneous have no more
than others:) Knowledge puffs up, but Charity edifyeth: And if any man think
that he knows any thing, he knows nothing yet as he ought to know: But if
any man Love God the same is known of him.

To live as this excellent Lady did, in gravity, prudence, humility,
temperance, in a Charitable, peaceable, impartial Religiousness, studying
Realities, even God, and her Redeemer, Grace and Glory, and her own Heart and
Duty, and how to do good, and to prepare for the day of her accounts, will
prove more safe and comfortable at the last, than the proud, wrathful,
turbulent Religion of such as strive to set up the CHURCH and CHRIST (they mean
THEMSELVES) by Persecution or Division, by hurting or destroying their
Fellow Christians, or reproaching them, and avoiding them as unworthy of their
Communion: That I and all Christians may live in the Wisdom from above, which
is Pure and Peaceable, and may escape the infernal wisdom, (or religion) which
is earthly, sensual and calumniating, and may be followers of them, who through
faith and patience do inherit the promise, is the daily Prayer of

An unworthy sinner, RICHARD BAXTER.
Sept. 22. 1675.
Upon the much-lamented Death of the truly HONORABLE, very aged, and
singularly pious Lady, the Lady Mary Armine.
MARIE ARMINE
Anagram.
Rare mine I am.
For Piety, Charity, Humility, and for Birth,
Matchless, Magnificent, Rare, Noble was this earth;
Virtues, and Graces Treasure! what e're became
True Saint, she was; might say, Rare mine I am. J.S.
Mary Armine.
Anagram.
Ar mine Army.
HAil Mary full of Grace, 'bove women blessed;
A Name more rich in Saints than all the rest;
An Army of them famed in sacred Story,
All good, none bad, an unparalled Glory!
The Blessed Virgin well may lead the van
Next follows Mary the Bethanian,
Next Mary Wife of Cleophas; Another
Mary was of James and Joses Mother:
How much is spoke of Mary Magdalen?
Of Mary St. Marks Mother we read again:
At Rome a Mary commended by St. Paul;
All Saints; yet not to pray unto at all.
A Mary was the Mother of our Lord;
A Mary 'twas laid up in heart his word.
A Mary 'twas that chose the better Part.
A Mary 'twas that wept with broken heart.
A Mary 'twas that did anoint Christ's feet;
A Mary poured on's Head the Spicknard sweet.
At Christ's Cross standing Mary's three I find,
When others fled they were not so unkind.
Christ dead, interred, at the Sepulcher door
Two Mary's stand, I find no women more.
So that from Cradle to the Passion,
From Passion to the Resurrection,
From Resurrection to the Ascension,
Observe you may a Mary still was one.
The Army of such Ladies so Divine,
This Lady said I Will follow, they all Ar-mine
Lady Elect! In whom there did combine
So many Mary's, might say All Ar mine.
Thou Mother, Sister, Spouse, wast of the Lord,
In that in Heart and Life thou kept his word.
With the other Mary chose the better Part;
With Mary Magd'len had a most tender Heart.
On Christ a Mary spent all that she could;
Though others grudged, more if she had she would.
To the Head above could not, of the Feet below,
Thou did not spare much cost for to bestow.
Thy name, a precious Ointment, and the Armies
Of Saints and Angels are the Lady Armines.
Now God and Christ ar thine, and what is Divine
In Heav'ns-enjoyment. Blessed soul! now all ar thine.
J. Sheffield.

2 Cor. 5.1. For we know, that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in
the heavens.


Funeral Sermons derive their Original from Primitive times, and are of a pious
design, to affect the Heart by the ear with a sense of Death and Judgment;
Eccles. 7.1.
and so raise the soul above the world, above sense and flesh; which things I
shall attempt from the double Text before me, viz. This I have read, and that
which is the occasion of it, The Honorable Lady whose interment we attend.

In this Text we have three general Parts; 1. A Supposition. [ If our earthly
house of this Tabernacle were dissolved.] -- 1. This supposition contains --
it. A description of the present worldly tenement in which the soul dwells,
which is a poor mean thing, in these words [ our earthly house of this
tabernacle] What meanness these words import you shall see presently. -- 2. An
intimation of the downfall of this Tenement; this clay-house will inevitably
e're long tumble down into the dust, as we see by these words [ were dissolved]
-- Now, this supposal would be very grievous, if not followed with that which
is able to render it much more eligible and pleasing viz.

2. A Proposition, [ We have a building of God, an house not made with hands,
eternal in the heavens.] -- Here also we have two things: -- 1. The description
of the souls glorious house in the other world, and that is very magnificent:
viz. [ a building of God, a house not made with hands.] How transcendent this
is you shall see by and by, when I come to open the terms of it. -- 2. The
duration of this dwelling, it is to be [ eternal in the heavens.]

3. You have The certainty of these things laid down, in these words [ we
know.] It Is not a pleasing juggle, nor a cunning devised Fable, but a thing
that we know to be true.

From these words, I shall only give you two Observations or Conclusions;
though I could easily give you several others.

1. Its certain that the souls of men have their various habitations.

2. That the souls of true Saints have a more glorious and magnificent
habitation in the other world.

First Conclusion is,

Its certain that the souls of men have their various habitations.

One sort of them is in time, to wit, the dying bodies of men; in the Text
called [ earthly houses] in the Book of Job called Houses of clay, Job 4.19.
whose foundations are in the dust. These are the Winter Houses, where men
undergo all the storms and bitter blasts of the present world; These stand on
the lower ground, in the vale among mire and dirt; all you that hear me grant
this, or else you neither know where you are, nor what you are.

Another sort of them is in eternity, i. e. either in Heaven or in Hell. That
the souls of all men when they leave the body make a remove to one of these two
places, has been the strong and harmonious belief of the most men that ever
lived in the world, and is often and plainly affirmed in the indisputable
Oracles of God. -- These Habitations of souls (which have left their houses of
clay) are, I say, either in Heaven or in Hell; If in Hell, Oh how woeful and
lamentable they are! If in Heaven, Oh how happy and blessed beyond all
describing and comparison! The sole instance of Dives and Lazarus does
competently illustrate these things, Luke 16.25.

The certainty of these things appears from the Apostles saying, [ we know]
that is, we know that these things are true; we have a full understanding and
satisfaction, that there is a great reality in what we say. This term of
[knowing] often goes for infallibility and certainty in Scripture dialect. --
So that it appears plainly that the souls of men have their various habitations.

Well, then be sure you loose not your better Habitations for your souls in the
happy world, by over pampering those they dwell in at present. As some loose
their bodies for their estates, so others loose their Heaven for their bodies;
Romans 13. clos. Mat. 16.26.
and like the brutish Cardinal prefer their part in Paris to that in Paradise.

Again, If the soul have variety of habitations, then be sure you lay out the
greatest pains and cost on that which is the most worthy, and will continue
longest, Eccles. 12.5.
and that is, the house in the other world. You are a going presently to remove
to your long home, where you must abide for a long season, a very long-long
time; Oh then be sure you be best provided for it! Alas, what will become of
them that must dwell with everlasting sorrows? that must remove from a bed of
down, to one of thorns and vipers stings! from a sweet air, to stinking smells!
From sumptuous fare, to feed on agonies of Conscience and flames of divine
wrath! from great attendance, to be made eternal slaves to ugly devils! Oh what
mad and infatuated souls that forget those houses from whence they must never
remove, and yet fondly humor those that must presently be left behind? Now,
its most certain, when men have said what the please to the contrary, ^uk.
16.19, 24, 25. and 12.18, 19.
(for their lives confute them to their faces) that they prize their bodies
above their eternity in heaven; this silly clay house above that building of
God, which is without end in glory.

Second Conclusion, is,

That the souls of true Saints have a more glorious and magnisicent habitation
in the other world.

This I Will first Illustrate, then Apply.

1. For Illustration; I Will endeavor to make this truth shine by that rare
light which I Will let in upon you from the words of my Text; and here I Will gloss
upon the several terms, keeping close to the Apostles Metaphorical manner of
speech: that the matter may appear, as really it is, more lofty and high, and
so be made more winning and taking to your souls, that they may more
importunately desire and endeavor after an interest in this more magnificent
Habitation in the other world.

That the souls of true Saints have such an habitation there; will be
illustrated by considering, First, What their habitation is in this world.
Secondly, What it is in the future; for when we have compared them one with the
other, you may easily see whether is the more magnificent.

First, We Will consider what their habitation is in the present world; and that
the Apostle tells you in the first part of my Text, is, [ An earthly house, a
tabernacle, which is to be dissolved.]

1. As to the material, Its an earthly house; i. e. A poor sorry Cottage,
patched up of a little slime and mud; an house made up of a bag full of bones,
and dawbed up with a little rotting consuming flesh; a moving clod of earth,
and a little dung finely washed over. An earthly house as coming from, and
going to the earth: Dust thou art, Genesis 3.19. Eccles. 1^.7.
and unto dust thou shall return, is more than once affirmed of the body in the
holy Text. Oh what a silly thing is this clay-house! a disease or a discontent
makes the rarest beauty very deformed; as you see in the case of Job, when he
stunck above ground, and his own familiars loathed him, fit to sit no where but
upon a dunghill, nor to have any thing touch him but an old nasty potsheard,
notwithstanding all his foregoing loveliness. Such a woeful thing is man's poor
body. Thus the soul of the greatest man that now lives, or of the choicest
Saint, is confined to a poor sorry little clay-hut, no higher usually then two
yards (if so high) and not one of them over. A shadow, a vapor, a vanity, and
a kind of nothing is enough to describe you what the souls earthly house is. It
has often been observed that men (as to the body) are born and dye in the
night, which shows what a dark and cloudy piece man's body is. Job 17.14. and
19.26. and 21.26. and 24.20.
The finest pampered bodies are but only mortal, dying carcasses well fed for a
few crawling slimy worms to domineer over and live upon in the grave. This now
can but be a poor house for a precious soul. This as to the material.

2. As to the nature of this house, it is but a Tabernacle, i. e. Like unto a
pitiful, ragged, weather-beaten, dirty Tent, pitched in the earth upon a few
stakes for a little time, so is man's body. Heb. 11.9, 10.
This is fit for none to dwell in but Soldiers and Pilgrims, such as do not
resolve for any long continuance in a place. Tents (or Tabernacles, for they re
both one in this place) are things that are hugged and hurried up and down, and
fret and wear away every day with using. Oh what a sorry thing then is the
souls house in a present world? Like a poor moveable shed made up of a few
sticks and clouts? Thus when the work is finished it does but amount to a
decaying Tent, not a durable marble, nor Ivory Palace.

3. And last. It is an house that will presently be dissolved; so in the Text:
Like such houses as children, and they that have nothing else to do, make them
of snow of Ice in the winter season, which a few days or weeks will melt away,
and no appearance will be left; and I may tell you that to dissolve and melt
are of the same signification: So Job speaking of his body, says, That his
substance did dissolve or melt away. And the Original word in the Text, (...),
signifies nothing less, Chap. 30. in differ Transl.
if not much more. -- Thus now we see what the souls house is in the present
world; as to the material of which is made, that is poor earth, clay, or dust:
As to nature, when finished with its best ornaments, no stately structure, but
a poor Tent, weather-beaten, and dirty: As to duration, not to continue long,
but to be dissolved, to disappear, and be brought to a sort of nothing. --
Surely this is but an humble and mean house for the souls of Saints, those
great and noble persons to dwell in. -- But we will see

In the 2. place, what it is in the other world; and then the glory of this
will utterly cloud the other. The second part of my Text shows you what this
is, v. [ A building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the
heavens] -- Here I Will speak to four things, to show that this habitation and
dwelling place for the souls of Saints is much more glorious and magnificent
than the other. 1 Pet. ^. 9.
-- And here,

1. Let Us confider the nature of it i. e. It Is a building; not a poor shed and
hut like the other, but a very stately Palace, we at present can only see the
remote outwork all bespangled with glorious Luminaries, far beyond the most
orient gems, and therefore that description of St. John the Divine in Rev.
21.10. to the end, though it seem very great at the first view, yet much of it
is but a dark shadowy resemblance of what it really is; for this building is
glory it self, of which we can say nothing, but sit down admire and wonder; the
greatest sort of mortal Orator in the world, if he came to speak of this, would
only speak a finer sort of nonsense, for Coelum non patitur Hyperbolen; the
best description of this place lies in 1 Cor. 2.9. Eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God has
prepared for them that love him. The eye has seen great and stupendous
rarities of Art and Nature; the ear has heard exhilerating transporting
sounds; and the heart of man can conceive of, and wish for, a world universally
more rich then gold and gems, and more illustrious than the Summers Sun; and
yet all these are nothing, when laid in the Balance with this Building that is
above. If the Idolatrous Temple of Diana at Ephesus was so bright, that the
doorkeeper cried always to them that entered into it, Take heed to your eyes.
Oh what then is Heaven? It Is almost difficult to imagine how even an immortal
eye should look within that place and live. Ovid in his Metamorphosis having
called this place Regalem Domum, and Atria Nobilium, takes it as a bold attempt
to tell what it is, it is so much transcending our skill to describe without
blemishing its glory.

Hic locus est, quem, si verbis audacia detur Hand timeam magni dixisse Palatia
Coeli.

2. We Will consider the Architect of it; that is, who was the Builder of it; for
according to him that works so usually is the workmanship both in esteem and
real worth. And here,

1. In the Negative, it was not man that made it; for its expressly said, Is an
house not made with hands: so that it is a work beyond humane. If man had made
it, it might have been matched in time by some of the wonders of the world, as
by the foresaid Diana's Temple, Mansolus Tomb, or some other Prodigies of
Industry and Ostentation, which have had many years, thousands of men all that
time, and millions of money laid out to raise them in: but this house is not of
man's making. But,

2. In the Affirmative, It Is a Building of God: A structure raised by him who
is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working; him that made Sun and Moon,
and created Angels and glorious spirits: Oh what a sublime and glorious place
must this needs be! Solomon was a wise man, and therefore the Temple he made
was a wonderful thing; but a greater than Solomon is here, and therefore the
work must needs be much more great and stupendous. Oh how splendid then is
this Habitation of Souls! Oh the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and
knowledge of God! How unsearchable and past finding out is this building of
God, which he has prepared as an habitation for the souls of his Saints?

3. Let us consider it as to its durableness; for that is the next thing in our
words, to wit, that it is [eternal]: A building of God not made with hands,
eternal. The body is far from being eternal, as I have showed you; and Houses
in this world, Gutta cavat lapidem, etc.
though they be made of flint, yet wear away with time: but this house in the
superior world is endless-endless! And it is here, as not in all other things,
the longer the better, the length is the happiness. Eternity in this dwelling
of souls is an infinite endless progress and duration of most glorious
happiness: but we had best let this alone till we come there, for it will be
difficult to speak pertinently of it till then. Oh who would value that which
has an end, unless it be as it leads to that which has no end? all things
must needs be as dung and dross that are of a perishing nature. What a
matchless wonder, and durable miracle is eternity, that swallows up all our
Chronology and Arithmetic? It was our misery as to the worldly Paradise, that
there was a way out of it, but none in again; but it is our happiness in glory
that there is a way in, but none out again.

4. And Lastly. Let Us consider the Country where this glorious dwelling lies,
and that is, [in the Heavens] A building of God, an house not made with hands,
eternal in the heavens. Some Countries have vast trade, others most fruitful
soil: Some have most healthful and pleasing air, and others most famous Arts;
But what are all these to Heaven, but a company of pleasing appearances
represented in a dream? Oh it is Heaven that is all alone, and all things else
are nothing without it! Who would not desire an house, where all desirables
that can be thought o^, are freely and fully to be enjoyed? Why, this house
only stands in Heaven: Here is no man sick, no man poor, no man reproached, no
man has any ailment at all: This is the excelling Country indeed! Who would
not have a dwelling here? Well, here all true Saints must be Inhabitants.

Now, Is it not fully apparent, That the souls of true Saints have a more
glorious and magnificent habitation in the other world, seeing I have showed
you what they both are? And does not this which is in heaven infinitely
outshine that which is here on earth?

Thus I have illustrated the truth of the Doctrine by a little glossing upon
the words of the Text. My next thing is,

2. To Apply this Doctrine, and to bring it into life and use, in four
Exhortations.

1. If it be thus that the souls of true Saints have a more glorious and
magnificent Habitation in the other world, then, Let the souls of true Saints
be wained to the present habitations in which they dwell in this lower World.
Who would be fond of an old thatched crazy Cottage, of an House made of such
perishing materials, that wash away with every storm, such an one as if it had
not daily new props to shore it up, would presently drop down into the dirt;
and when all is done that can be done, down it will fall presently. It Is much
like a suit of clothes that wear gradually away every day, and must in a
little time be put off and laid aside, or else will piece by piece fall off the
man's back that wears them; to this the Apostle alludes, when he tells of
putting off this Tabernacle, and that shortly, 2* Pet. 1.14. And so does the
Psalmist, Psalm. 102.26.
when he says, All of them wax old like a garment, and as a vesture they shall
be changed. And Paul tells you of the world in general, 1 Cor. 7.31.
That the fashion of it passes away. Oh what a cooling character is that of
Saint James concerning this clay-house, in which the soul dwells at present,
when he says, What is it? and answers his own question, saying, Its even a
vapor that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away. Man's body is
often compared to a flower that flourishes in the morning, Job 14.1, 2. Psalm.
103.14, 15.16. 1 Pet. 1.24.
and is very brave and illustrious, but before night is cut down and withered
away unto a very obscure or cloudy appearance. Who would not now be weaned to
the Souls present lower house? And the rather because if we be Saints, there is
one that is glorious and magnificent behind, in an higher and more happy
Region. 2 Cor. 5.8.
Who would not be weaned to the thing they must most certainly and suddenly
leave? and such a thing too, as within a very little while will so rot and
stink, that those who were once most enamoured upon it, will be as importunate
(as once Abraham was) to bury their dead out of their sight. Ah poor Bodies!
Who would humor and pamper such pitiful vile carcasses to the wronging of
their interest in that more glorious building of God in Heaven? Thus be weaned
to the souls present Habitation, and that in such a manner, as the gracious
Paul once was, when he kept under the body and brought it into subjection,
lest, 1 Cor. 9.2^.
notwithstanding his holy Profession and services, he himself should be a cast
away. How brave was that of Seneca? How manlike? And how divine? Major sum, and
ad majora natus, quam ut sim mancipium corporis mei.

2. If it be thus, that there is such a more glorious and magnificent
habitation for souls in the other world, and that our souls must within a
little while be gone out of these poor clay-huts in which they now dwell, Then
let us do all we can to get a title to that more glorious and magnificent
habitation. It is such an House as all men that will may purchase, and yet
every man that will may have a full title to it: Now, the Doctrine fairly
intimates how this House not made with hands, eternal in the heavens may be
got, viz. By becoming true Saints: We know the Saints great Charter runs for
both worlds, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. All things are yours, whether things present
or to come. The first Chapter and second Verse will tell you that this was
spoken to Saints: So will the first verse of the second Epistle tell you that
the words of my Text are spoken by or of the same happy sort of men. 1 Timothy
4.8. Godliness has the promise of the life that now is, and of that which is
to come. This glorious Habitation is promised and prepared for Saints by Christ
himself, John 14.2, 3. In my Fathers house are many mansions, I go to prepare a
place for you; and I will come again and receive you unto my self, that where I
am there ye may be also. Well, may the serious soul say, Is it possible to get
a title here? Then I Will do as the wise Merchant did, viz. Sell all that ever I
have to get this glorious Habitation made up of matchless Gems, of endless
value and worth; an House cut forth of one great Diamond, all round beset and
walled with Gold and more excelling things, is but an obscure Metaphor of what
it is. The way to get a Title here you see is to become Saints, and how to be
such the Gospel gives you many great Characters: As, it tells us, That such an
one has laid aside the corrupt nature and life; and is got into, Ephe. 4.22,
^^. Rom 8.1.
and goes on in that nature and life which is divine. If mere innocent mortal
nature, because mortal, most not, cannot, dwell in Heaven, as is affirmed in
sacred Writ, then not corrupted nature, that which is morally stained and
defiled: 1 Cor. 15.48, 49, 50, 53. Psalm. 5.4, 5. Revel. 21.27. The Saint is
best known by his progressive durable manner of living, not by his notional
Principles, or pretenses unto Christ. Acts 12.13. and 14.22 and 2.23, 24.
He is one that has a full purpose of heart about these better things, he does
not fluctuate, but is fixed upon them, tide life or death. He has a right and
a full mind for God. Others must know us by our lives, but we may best of all
know our selves by our minds, by observing which way our wills and affections
go; for men may practice holy things for company, or some other such perishing
principles, but they cannot will and affect upon these: So that the man is what
his mind is. But I must not be particular; if you would dwell in this glorious
building when turned out of door from the house of clay, then you must become
glorious persons: but read at your leisure Psalm 15. Well, Psalm. 5. or 24.
get a title to this magnificent house in the other world, you see the way of
doing it; and you must be gone hence presently, and when you are gone, there is
but two great houses that all men go unto to dwell in for ever: The one is an
horrible habitation of Devils and damned spirits, full of all manner of
unalterable woe and misery, and to this you are born heirs, and have a fast
title; Oh do all that ever you can to cut off this Entail! And to get Title to
that most pleasing ravishing Habitation that is above, unto which you have no
right by nature, but may obtain a full right by entering upon, and continuing in
the gracious state and life. Do not then perish when the way of safety and
happiness is so plainly set before you.

3. If it be thus, that there is such a glorious habitation for the souls of
Saints to dwell in when in the other world, Then let this encourage Saints
while they continue in this world against all the ailments and miseries that
attend the body. What makes the matter, though storms beat against the crazy
walls of the souls present house, or though it be about to fall into the dust;
for you, if true Saints, have a magnificent house in the other world, will make
amends for all? It Is certain the Apostle brings in my Text upon such an account
as this, if you compare it with the foregoing Chapter, ver. 1, 8, 9, 11, 16,
17, 18. And then my Text comes in, as an high encouragement; As, against
tiresome and fretting industry and labors; Heaven is a rest, Heb. 4 9. Rev.
14.13
and there is a cessation from labor; all men that get thither shall have an
happy maintenance without any toil or sweat at all. Against sicknesses and
pains; this stinging tormenting gout, stone, and the like, shall not last
always, there is a dwelling behind, where these shall not approach; an house
(such an one was never heard of besides) as keeps out all ailments, and is ever
full of health and happiness: no groan, no sigh, is heard in this place; not
one tear appearing in the eye; there is nothing can dwell in it but must smile
for ever and ever. Revel. 21.4. God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes
(that get thither) there shall be no more sorrow nor crying, neither shall
there be any more pain, etc. Against blemishes and decaies of body, because
Heaven frees the soul from those ailements its subject to in this afflictive
world; there will be no blindness, nor lameness, nor defective, nor blemished
member or part; all things there shall be eternally sound and perfect, the
first entrance into that place does render all things juvenile, fresh and
active: The Transfiguration of Christ, when his face did shine as the Sun, and
his raiment was white as the light; was some type of what Heaven makes all
those that come there. Against Scoffs and reproaches, and ill usage for serving
God; there will be no Ishmael to flout at the Son of the promise; no Doeg to
complain to higher Powers, of the innocent servants of God; no Saul to
persecute them from place to place, and to hurry them into Prisons and death;
if we but once get into heaven, then we are quite beyond the reach of what evil
men and Devils can do. And lastly, Against Death it self; Oh how dreadful would
this be if there was not a most happy life that follows it! But death is but
the dark passage into a most pleasing happiness: or, it is the taking down the
old crazy shed where the soul dwells at present, that the unwillingness may be
taken away, and it may be removed into that most magnificent house in glory:
God's put to take down the stakes of the present Tabernacle to make us willing;
and who would not become willing and encourage themselves to leave the
afflicted body, and go and see what that most glorious habitation is that is
above. But,

4. And lastly. If there be such a most excelling Habitation for the soul, then
desire to be in it. This is what Paul breaths after, ver. 2, 4. following my
Text, We groan earnestly to be in our house in the heavens, says he. Was ever
weary or sick child unwilling to put off his clothes, and go to lie in his
dearest fathers bosom. Oh the unwillingess there is in us all to be gone! Why
pray we Thy Kingdom come, and yet have no mind to be hailed out of this dirty
house of bondage? Why? Alas, the reason is, because not weary of sin; not
sensible of the vanity of the creature: Oh how defective are our faith, love,
and longings after Heaven? How wedded to the world, even when going out of it?
Alas if you would not dye and go to Heaven, 2 Cor. 5.6, 8. Phil. 1.23. and
3.20, 21. Heb. 11.9, 10, 13, 14, 16. and 13.13, 14. and 4.9, 11.
what would you have more than beasts and Epicures? If once truly desirous to
be gone, then the fear of death is gone.

Say then to your souls, Ah poor and precious souls, Awake your selves, loose
your selves from earth and flesh, and make on with all your might toward these
eternal mansions! What? places so sweet, so excelling, where we shall live in
all manner of joys, without the least heart-qualmeing fear of ever leaving
them! Oh what sweet words are these! [ A building of God, not made with hands,
eternal in the heavens] able to put the serious soul (that has the title and
hope of enjoying what they propose) into a rapture and transport of desire, and
to look out at her windows, and say, Oh why are his chariot wheels so long a
coming? When shall the day dawn, and shadows flee away? Why do these clay-walls
interpose between me and that glorious habitation that is above?

Thus I have done with my first Text, and have but one word more to say by way
of use to unite the first and second together; thus,

If it be so, That the souls of true Saints have a more glorious and
magnificent habitation in the other world, then this shows us the probable
happiness of the more noble part of this Honorable Lady, whose poor clay-house
lies here before us, that now must make worms its companions, and moulder away
to dust; for I would not question her interest in Saint-ship, and so
consequently the triumphing of her soul in endless happiness, This building of
God, not made with hands, eternal in the heavens.

I come now to my second Text, which is to give you some account of this elect
Lady whose Interment we attend: And what I shall say, I Will put under three
Heads, of Nature, Art, and Grace.

1. Of Nature; Here her Privileges and accomplishments were considerable. If
we consider Her,

1. As to Original, she was an happy Branch of one of the most Noble and
Illustrious Families in England, whether you look at Descent, Degree, or
Actings: As to Descent, of a long tract of time in the world, among the oldest
our present Nobility: As to Degree, high born, I can say, and say truly, she
was Atavis edita Regibus, really allied to Kings and Princes: As to Actings, to
pass over the great and Heroic performances both in matters Civil and
Millitary done by her Progenitors in their native soil, See Graston, Speed, S^r
Rich. Baker, in Henry the 6th. Johannes Talbotus, Comes Salopi^nsis, vir
clarissimus, fortissimusque, cujus virtute populi Anglicani nomen maxim Gallis
sor midolosum extiterat. Polid. Virg. Ang. Hist. l. 23.
the Talbots Name continues till this day so great in France for long and
numerous Conquests and Triumphs in that Kingdom, that they use to hush
disturbances into quiet and composure by the mention of it. I might here give
you a true and large History, but I must remember that time will but allow me
to give you brief notices of what takes up and merits considerable Volumnes. To
be the Sons or children of Nobles is honourary, (even in Scripture Dialect,
which uses to overlook such things) especially when found in the way of
righteousness, as here we have it.

2. As to Feature and Activity of Body; she was in the first of these more
considerable even to her dying day then most of her date in the world, which
showed what she was in the Summer of her age, being what I have said in the
deepest part of winter days; I the rather mention this because of that old, and
in this place true, saying, Gratior e pulchro veniens e corpore virtus. In the
latter of these, Activity of Body, she was much above ordinary, being very
lively and stirring to her very close of time; being able to walk with
quickness and durableness without the help of hand or staff: Something of this
nature is recorded to honor the memory of Moses after his death, Deuteronomy. 34.7.
close.

3. As to Natural Parts: She was quick, vivacious and comprehensive in judging
of things even to the last hours of life: Though she might be considerably past
fourscore years of Age, yet could discourse as rationally the day she died on,
as others in the flourish of age and life: which was not a lightning before her
death, for forerunning days were the same. (As Rationality raises men above
Beasts, so the higher any are in it, the nearer they are to Angels.) These
Excellencies are admirably beyond those imaginary ones of external honors and
riches; and so some of the old poor Philosophers did wonderfully transcend the
Conquerours and Emperors of their times.

Thus in a few words for her Privileges and accomplishments as to Nature.

2. We Will consider them as to Art: Her Ladyship was the owner of no mean
Acquirements.

1. In General; she was well skilled in all, or the most, things that referred
to her Sex, Degree, and Place, which referred to numerous things, and so
required such seize, which she had in an high measure arrived at. But,

2. I Will speak to some things particularly; but with brevity, that I may have
leave to say the more to the last General Head; Her Ladyships Acquirements did
appear in these particulars.

1. She was not without skill in some languages more than her own native
Tongue; as, I have often made remarks upon her knowledge in Latin and French.

2. She was considerably skilled in Divinity and History; In the first, not
only knowing practical things, but also very intelligent in matters notional
and polemical. In the second, she had a good acquaintance with the Jewish,
Roman, and Evangelical Histories in their older days. As to both Divinity and
History, I can truly say, That I have observed many of her Sex talk only with
more confidence, but less skill, in either than her self.

3. She was one that well understood how to manage her concerns distant and
near to the very last of her time, without even so much as small miscarriages.
I believe few that ever lived to such a number of days was ever in these things
more exact than her Ladyship.

4. And Lastly. She was of a very obligeing deportment to the utmost date of
life; In this she was a Critic, few could go beyond her: with humble courtesy
in carriage and words she would have obliged any thing she conversed with; for
as she was the owner of activity of body, so of pertinent and taking language
even to the close of life. which she used to employ to oblige her Visitors and
Friends, yea, all men with. This piece of Humanity (or candor) is a very
lovely thing, Gal. 5.22. with many other places.
much recommended to the world by the Gospel Divinity.

3. As to Grace; Here I have such things, and so many to say, as will highly
add to the memory of this Elect Lady: Without this all the rest had been
perishing accomplishments, only Ornaments in mere Humanity. Some notable
beyond-Seamen have nervously attempted to prove, That it is only Religion, and
not mere Reason, that disserenceth men from Beasts.

Well, -- 1. In General.

This Honorable Lady was of an holy life; she used to affirm, an holy life
and graces of the Gospel to be more dignifying then Birth, Estate, or great and
shining worldly Titles: and would use to say, That what Paul says, was a great
truth upon her long experience, 1. Cor. 1.26. Not many wisemen after the flesh,
not many mighty, not many Noble are called. I have heard her also affirm, that
the new birth deserves to be (as it truly is) the greatest, John 1.13. Born,
not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.
Blessed be God this pious Lady was not like a fair house with an ill
Inhabitant, but had a noble soul inhabited all her other excellencies. Though
many other things raised her to an high pitch of greatness; yet none did so
much dignisie her as her Religion; and that which made it splendid was its
regularity, universality, and constancy. But,

-- 2. To be particular:

Her Religion or Grace appeared,

1. In loving it in others; In loving those that were of a good and gracious
life; Saint John makes this the infallible Testimony of the gracious state, 1
John 3.14. We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the
Brethren; he that loves not his brother abides in death. Noscitur exsocio,
qui nondignosciturex se.
She could not at all be at ease in ill company; she might in a good measure
say as the holy Psalmist, The Saints, the excellent in the earth, in whom is
all my delight, Psalm. 16.3. She loved it not only in those that lived in her
Family (choosing her servants by this standard) but also in mere strangers,
which showed she loved it for its own sake.

2. In endeavoring to advance it in others; not by mere conference and
counsel, for these were the cheapest sort of endeavors she used; but also by
many Letters writ with her own hands, pertinent and nervous for the advancement
of holiness; and further also, she used often to give Books and sometimes money
to draw on to a serious life: but this will be farther illustrated in the next.

3. In her Charity to souls; As I need mention no more instances for this, but
her large contribution to the conversion of the poor Indians in America,
continued year by year for many years till this she dyed in; of which, blessed
be God, she had a yearly account to her great refreshment and joy.

4. In her love to be invited to holy services; This was so durable and lively,
that she might truly say without ostentation or vanity, as David once did,
Psalm 122.1. I was glad when they said unto me, let us go into the house of the
Lord. She used to be as eager to go to holy Ordinances, as others are, or can
be, to go to their worldly vanities.

5. In her Reverence to holy things, or Persons; As to God and Christ even in
their very Names, which she used to mention with a more than ordinary dread.
She used to deport her self with abundant gravity in the House of Prayer, and
with high respectfulness to the lowest of the Ministry, if industrious and
serious men; I have observed her always more excellent in this than others of
the lowest Degree.

6. In her Discourse, Loquere u' ^e videam.
which always dropped as the honey Comb; It was always favoury and seasoned
with salt, so as to minister grace to the Hearers, according to the Apostles
advice concerning it.

Thus I have given you some brief hints of things, time not allowing further.

I have not told you of her Ladyships constant giving upon Charity; besides her
known Almshouses in three Counties; and many other ways, sometimes large
sums; and now gone she has lest 40 l. a year, for an hundred years time
wanting only one.

Nor have I told you of this Ladies constant Devotion, In a daily reading of
Scripture and other choice Books, besides retired Prayers twice every day; and
in these things she was constant to the close of life.

Thus you have seen something of her Life; I Will say a little to her Ladyships
dying state, and then I Will close: Here you may see some noble Testimonies of
her Grace or Religion:

1. In her fervor to do good to the last of life: which she highly breathed
after, the day she dyed on; desireing to do still more for God.

2. In her warm and bleeding sense of the low estate of Religion and its owners
in the world. 1 Samuel 4.13. Her Heart trembled for the Ark of God.

3. In her submission to the divine will and disposal; she freely offered up
her self to her great Lord and Owner, to do what he would with her.

4. In her peace of soul. I have this to say of both these, That though I had
often before seen her in danger of dying, yet I never saw her in such a submiss
and peaceful frame of soul; I might really say, that I saw that one Scripture,
Psalm. 37.37. made plain and true, Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright,
for the end of that man is peace.

5. In her Faith; commending Christ as the highest and most proper Cordial in
the fainting hour; which were some of the last words she spoke before she dyed.

6. In solemn Prayers; In this holy Duty she solemnly gave up her soul to God.

Now may we not say as Luke 10.42. Mary has chosen that good part, which shall
not be taken away from her. The Jews at this day look upon women as of a lower
Creation, and suffer them not to enter into their Synagogues: So the Turks make
no reckoning of the Religion of women; but we see by this instance that they
may excel. Let it be observed also that in the days of our dearest Lords
corporal converse here on earth, three of his most thorow-followers were women,
and all of the same Name with our Honorable Lady, viz. the Virgin, Magdalen,
and Martha's Sister. We have many other instances of famous women in the
Gospel, as, of Elizabeth, walking in all the commandments of God blameless: Of
Dorcas, fruitful in the works of Charity and love: Of Priscilla, who was
learned and skilled in the Gospel Divinity: Of Lois and Eunice, excellent in
unfeigned Faith: Of Lydia, one whose heart was notably opened to entertain the
things of God; with many others much commended in the New Testament for
excelling Persons: Something of what was in all these might be found in this
Lady I have been discoursing on. -- Now, what should I say, but as once Seneca,
Non omne tempus Catones parit, etc. Every day brings forth common Persons, but
would to God that every year, nay, every 10. or 20. years, would but bring us
such a Lady, to live to such an age.

But you will say, Had she no failings? Yes, I grant she was not without them:
But, blessed be God, what I have said was the main of her Life, the other by
the by: To be without unallowed failings, 1 Cor. 13.12. and 15.54.
would be to be without mortality. I question not but many great Persons much
applauded have not merited half of what this Lady did: I am sure I may put her
in the Balance with thousands of her Rank, Prove. ult. 29.
and say, Many Daughters have done virtuously, but she excelled them all.

Soli Deo Gloria.

