DE JVRE VNIFORMITATIS ECCLESIASTICAE: OR Three Books, OF THE RIGHTS Belonging
to an UNIFORMITY in CHURCHES.

IN WHICH The chief things, of the Laws of Nature, and Nations, and of the
Divine Law, concerning the Consistency of the Ecclesiastical Estate with the
Civil, are unfolded.

printer's or publisher's device ET EXCUTIT ICTIBUS IGNEM



By HUGH DAVIS, LL. B. Late Fellow of New-Colledge in Oxford, and now Chaplain
to the Lord Duke of BUCKINGHAM.

LONDON, Printed by S. Simmons, and to be sold by T. Helder at the Angel in
Little Britain, and S. Lowndes over against Exeter house in the Strand, 1669.

To the HIGH and MIGHTY PRINCE CHARLES the II. By the Grace of God, KING of
Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
EXCELLENT SOVEREIGN,
WHile your Great Affairs are prosperously managing, both abroad, and at home;
behold here, I present this Book, as one means, in its kind, toward the
settlement of the Peace of your Kingdoms. The Rights of an Ecclesiastical
Uniformity have been many times debated in the World with Fire and Sword: And
Your Kingdoms have been of late, through the debates concerning them, the dire
Field of Blood. Which Rights, because it is of so great moment (both to all
Divine and Humane Affairs) that they should be duly stated, and because they
have never yet been stated by any; I have therefore here adventured the stating
of them; and that according to the evident dictates of the Laws of Nature, and
Nations, and of the Divine Laws concerning them, and as they make to the
preserving, and promoting the Public, and standing welfare, both of Religion,
and Government, and the Consistency of Religion with Government; the Principal
and Fundamental matters of all Humane Societies. And I have made a search into
the frame and fabric of all Humane Affairs, and have unravel'd the
transactions of the former and present Ages, of the Churches both of the Jews
and Gentiles, Christians and Mahometans, for the doing of it. And I here
Dedicate it, particularly, to the Peace of Your Majesty's Kingdoms; at least
so far forth, as a Book may be a means for the procuring the Public Peace; and
where it may meet with men, either of Reason or Conscience, and not of furious
Ignorance, or temporal Interests. Behold Great Prince! I Present it at your
feet, most Humbly craving leave, that I may light this Candle at the Sun, and
draw a Luster upon this Discourse from Your Majesty's Sovereign Patronage.
Herodotus relates it of Midas; In Clio, paulo post princip.
That, of all things, he chose to offer at Delphos his Regal Chair, in which he
was wont to sit, and give Laws to his Kingdom. It is, because this Book
concerns these great matters of Law and Public Right, that I presume to offer
it, thus in Duty, to Your Majesty. What the Church Historian tells the
Excellent Emperor Theodosius, Sozomen. In Praefat. ad Imperatorem Theodosium.
That it was said of him, that he spent the day and night in Councels and
Causes, in looking after his Religious and Civil and Military Affairs: The like
is said of Your Majesty, that You are at all times ready at Your Councels and
Deliberations; That You go abroad to Visit Your Garrisons and Navies; and that
You spend your time in looking after the settling the Church and State, the
Charge committed to you by God. May Religion, and your Majesty's Government
long flourish together in your Dominions; that the Divine Blessing may
accompany you, and there may never be wanting one to Sit upon the Throne of
your Fathers, so long as the Sun and Moon shall endure.

YOUR SACRED MAJESTY'S Most Humble, and most Obedient Subject, Hugh Davis.

TO THE High Court OF PARLIAMENT; AND To the rest of the Subjects of the KING
of GREAT BRITAINS Dominions.
THE Subject-matters of this Book (Most Noble and Generous Patriots!) contain
the sum and substance of Humane Affairs; and which concern the Peace and
Tranquillity of the Dominions of Princes. And they are those also which are now
upon the Wheel, and more particularly and principally in agitation amongst us,
like Balls of Fire thrown to and fro in the midst of us. You have more then
once Determined concerning them: And Your determinations claim this Direction
and Submission of them to you. And the more peculiar respects which they bear
to the occasions of his Majesty's Subjects, the like Direction of them also to
them. I have endeavored the impartial stating of them according to the
dictates of the three sorts of Laws current amongst men: And, where our Affairs
Domestic have more particularly occurred, have avoided, what I could, the
intermixing with the Heats and Passions of the Times. I do not presume, in the
least, in these things (Honorable, and Renowned SENATORS!) to interpose in
your Great and Public Councels, those Sovereign Balmes of ENGLAND. Nor to
undertake to instruct many of the able and sufficient minds of others, those
more Ethereal and Celestial Beings amongst men. But only, if it may be for
Information, if for Satisfaction, where there is Occasion for the giving of it;
I have adventured the Representing of those great matters which do so highly
concern the Establishment and Preservation of the Peace of Your Country, and
of all Humane Societies.

THE PROLEGOMENA TO THE Three Books ENSUING.
DIverse have written of the diverse sorts of Laws amongst men; Of the Laws of
Nature, and Nations, and of the Divine Laws: And that both more generally and
particularly. Diverse also have applied those Laws diversely: And that both in
respect to the Civil and Ecclesiastical part of Humane Affairs: But none yet
has applied them to the Rights of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity, (viz.) those
of the Prince, the Priest, and the People belonging to it; Nor digested those
Rights into any due connection and order (viz.) as they make to the preserving,
and promoting the public welfare both of Religion, and Government, and the
Consistency of Religion with Government. And yet scarce any thing, next to the
Divine Law it self, is of greater moment to Humane Societies. Right is the
Public Cement of all Humane Affairs; and that which all men contend about, and
expect, even from God himself; And Religion and Government, and their mutual
consistency, are the things primarily fundamental to the very being, and
welfare of all Humane Societies, besides what respects they have to another
world. Wherefore Plato calls, In Gorgia^, prope fin.
all preparations both of War and Peace which are made in a City, Toys, if
Justice and Temperance be not preserved in it. In Hercule furent. (...) paulo
post princip.
And Amphitryo in Euripides, cries out to Jupiter; (...);
(...).
But do thou not know how to save thy Friends?
Either thou art an unskilful God, or else thou art not just.
And Cicero, in his Books of Laws, Nihil tam aptum est ad jus, conditionemque
naturae; quam Imperium, sine quo nec Domus ulla, nec Civitas, nec Gens, nec
hominum Vniversorum Genus stare, nec Rerum Natura omnis, nec ipse Mundus
potest: There is nothing is so suitable to the Right and condition of Nature as
Government; without which neither any private Family, nor City, nor Nation, nor
all Mankind, nor yet the whole nature of things, nor the very world it self can
subsist. R. Simeon, in Pirke Avoth. Cap. 4. and Talmud L. Jucasin, Fol. 13.
Plaut. Pers. 5.
And the Jews Celebrate a threefold Crown, which made Israel to flourish: The
Crown of the Law, and of the King, and of the Priest. And the acute Comedian;
Quid id, quod vidisti, ut munitum muro tibi visu 'st oppidum? etc.
What is that thou saw, which seemed to be like a Town, fortified with a
wall?
P. If the Inhabitants be well manner'd, I think it to be very well fortified:
If Perfidiousness, and Theft, and Covetousness, be banished out of the City.
If the fourth thing Envy, the fifth Ambition, the sixth Slander,
The seventh Perjury. T. Ha well said. P. The eight Idleness;
The Ninth Oppression; and the Tenth the worst of wickedness.
Unless these things be absent from it, an hundredfold wall will be but a
small matter for the preservation of it is Affairs.


In the Kingdom of Israel, God himself distributed those Rights of an
Uniformity amongst the several Estates. And that at diverse times, and in
diverse manners, according to the several occasions of that Society: But yet
there are no footsteps to be found of any Humane Collection that ever was made
of them. The first Governments of Greece were fetched from other Countries; but
most of all from Egypt, which was then of most Fame and Note, for learning and
wisdom, and the better ordering of mankind: and whether all, who would be men
of Renown, were wont first to Travel; and from whence the Egyptians boast,
that Moses the Hebrew, and Orpheus, and Homer, and Lycurgus, and Solon, and the
other men of Fame, of those times, derived their Knowledge. And the like is to
be said of the Roman State; that the most ancient settled Laws of the Ten Tables
(afterward made Twelve) in the time of the first Consuls were fetched from
Greece. Placuit Publica Authoritate, D. De Origin Jur. L. 2. Exoctis.
says Pomponius, december constitui viros, per quos peterentur Leges a Graecis
Civitatibus: That it was thought fit, that Ten men should be appointed by
Public Authority, by whom Laws should be fetched from the Cities of Greece.
And in the remainders of the many excellent, both Greek and Roman Writers, (of
several sorts) there are diverse of the Rights of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity,
and of the matters relating to them, dispersedly mentioned; especially those
belonging to the Prince and Priest. But yet none of them as reduced to their
certain Title, or head of things; nor under the notion of such Rights, so
belonging to such Persons, and as concerned in such an Uniformity. Last of all,
in the Christian Church, all Canons of Councels, Bodies of Laws,
Ecclesiastical Histories, Systemes of Civil Policy, and the like, are full of
the recitals and assertions of them, and the things belonging to them also; but
yet still not under their specifical Notion: and there are many defenses which
have been made of the Doctrine of the several subdivided Professions; and many
Rationales, which have been written upon Liturgies, both in the Roman and other
Churches: And several Irenicums, which have been occasionally published;
especially in the European Churches, late called Reformed. But all these
things, or any other the like, either in the Christian (or Mohammedan)
communion, have not reached the common occasions of Churches, nor given the
last and general grounds for pacification. And the interiors, belonging to the
explication of the Rights of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity, especially of those
on the peoples part, have never yet been touched upon by any. And these then
are those Rights which are here unfolded, and stated, according to the dictates
of the several sorts of Laws mentioned and digested into their due Connection
and Order.

This then being the more general matter of this work; the manner of handling
it, is accordingly. When we inscribe it, of the Consistency of the
Ecclesiastical estate with the Civil, or of Religion with the Government (which
is all one) it is, because that is the thing which we do most principally, and
designedly treat of. The welfare both of Religion and Government, as separately
and singly taken, being supposed to it, and as always co-incident with it: And
the consistency of Government with Religon being touched upon but by the by.
And when we entitle it, Of the Rights belonging to an Uniformity in Churches;
it is because such an Uniformity (in some kind of it or other) is the necessary
and only means for the effecting and preserving of that Consistency of Religion
with Government; and the Rights belonging to such an Uniformity are the bounds,
within which all ought to acquiess, for that effecting and preserving of it:
which, when they are Transgressed and Invaded, either by the Prince on his
part, then either the Priest or People are injured: or else by the Priest or
People on their parts, then there is undutifulness and Rebellion practiced
toward the Prince, and mutual Religious Feuds are created and contested
amongst the People; -- Et, ruptis inter se Legibus, Vrbes
Arma ferunt --
So that it is very much for the Common peace and welfare of all affairs
amongst men, that those Rights be duly stated, and unfolded, both on the
Prince's part, and in order to his affording the Priest and People their due;
and also on the Priest and People's parts, and in order to their enjoyment of,
and acquiescence under the Liberties (both external, and internal) belonging to
them. And the work it self then is accordingly divided into three Books: to
each of them being assigned it is proper subject matter. In the first Book;
after the explications and distinctions of things laid down, which are common
to the whole, I have treated of the Divine Original, both of Religion and
Government: which things being so primarily Fundamental to the whole body of
this Discourse, I did suppose that men would expect a rational account of them.
And I have treated of them more immediately and principally, in order to the
stating the Consistency of Religion with Government, in the general, and whose
charge and Right the Tuition of all three of them, (viz.) of Religion, and
Government, and the consistency of Religion with Government, is. And within the
compass of these things, there are many things co-incident with them which are
common to the whole. And as to Religion, in my discoursing over the distinction
of true and false, particularly, I have laid down the general grounds of all
Religions. And as to Government, I have done one thing remarkable, and that
is, I have absolutely denied the Jus ad arma, the right of rising in Arms (and
particularly in defense of matters of Religion, and in opposition to the Laws
of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity in any State) which is claimed by some, both of
the Priesthood, and people; Contrary to what Grotius and others of note have
done, in the stating of that Question: But I have given the Reasons for the
denial of it. And no less then the whole conforming Clergy and others in
public employment of the State at this day in England have subscribed to the
very same matter: And in the end of the stating of it I have more explicitly
disputed the tendency of the derivation of Government from the people, and of
the Doctrine of Rising, depending upon it, to the good of Religion, and Humane
Society. Which thing, truly, ought to have been done by Grotius and others, who
have stated that question; although in a separate Notion from an Ecclesiastical
Uniformity. In the Second and Third Books, I have treated of an Ecclesiastical
Uniformity; the necessary means mentioned, for the accomplishing the
Consistency of Religion with Government. In the Second Book I have treated of
it, and the Rights belonging to it, more Generally. And in the Third Book of
both of them more particularly. And in both these Books, I have taken In the
several Cases, Questions and Quere's belonging to the treating of both those
sorts of things: and in the stating both of those Cases, and of other matters,
I have many times considered Humane Nature, (sometimes Tacitly, and sometimes
expressly) and how it is to be dealt with: And he that will not consider it in
such things, is never likely to govern the World. Omnes, De Natura Deor. lib. 1.
natura duce, vehimur, says Cicero; That we are all carried on powerfully by
Nature. And Bodin concerning the suiting the Government to the nature of the
Country; De Repub. lib. 5. cap. 1. in princip.
Haec porro Naturae consentana ratio spectanda in primis est ei, qui
Rempublicam fundare, aut Civitatem optime instituere volet. That this agreeable
respect of Nature is principally to be heeded by him, who will found a
Commonweal, or set a City in order after the best manner. And Nimium ipse
durus est, praeter aequumque and bonum, Mitio Senex, apud Terent: in Adelph.
Act. 1. Scen. 1.

Et errat long, me a quidem sententia,
Qui imperium credat gravius esse, aut stabilius,
Vi quod sit, quam illud quod amicitia adjungitur.
Mea est sic Ratio, and sic animum induco meum.
He is too rigid, and besides all Right and Reason,
And he err's much truly in my opinion,
Who believes that Government to be more firm and stable,
Which is framed by force, them that which is cemented by love.
So is my sense of it, and so I am apt to believe.
And the elegant Fabulist at the meeting of the two strangers at the Lake,
(...). Homer in (...).

But how will thou make me thy friend, who am nothing alike to thee in nature?
And Thucydides in the case of Public Commotions and stirrs in a Commonweal;
When a Commonweal is disturbed, Lib. 3.
the nature of men, leaping over the Laws, does willingly show it self to do
unjust things against them: Being transported by the greatness of Anger, more
prevalent then Right, and an enemy to the more excellent things. So that he
that will well govern men, must do it by first Governing humane nature. In my
stating the more particular Consistency then of Religion with Government, I
have taken the best care I could, That Religion should have it is due. Neither
do I believe, That the particulars concerning either of them, as they stand
mutually in this their relative Condition, can well be stated otherwise then
here they are. And one great Reason of men's mistakes and doubts, and
dissatisfactions of Judgment and Conscience, concerning the Ecclesiastical
Laws of Princes, and their submission to them in all Societies, is, their not
considering of the relation in which Religion ought always in the World to
stand to the being and exercise of Government, both in Church and State. In my
Defense of the Rights of Princes, there are two sorts of Adversaries chiefly
which I have met with to be opposed; and those are the Churchmen of Rome, and
those of the late Scotch and English Presbitery, who have trodden in the same
steps with them in this matter, though under different Notions: and I have not
spoken any thing concerning either of these, either invidiously, or at mine own
pleasure; but only from the Testimonials of their own Writings, and Practices.
And the like I have done, where I have met with any, who have opposed the
Rights either of the Priest or People. In my going through the whole, There are
three things, which have caused me to descend the deeper into the Mines of
Labor: And those are, 1. The invention of matter; it being in several places,
wholly new: and almost every where, not applied, by any other, to my present
purpose. 2. The digesting of that matter into it is due Method; It being very
various, and the places of connecting and disposing it into its Right Order
recurring also frequently, and in a very various manner. 3. And lastly, the
numerous Books which I have been forced to consult with, for the furnishing out
of the whole body of this Discourse into the World, but in some tolerable
manner, and according to the deserts of the weight of the matter. And those
Books, which I have accordingly made use of, have been of those professions,
which concern the most substantial matters of the Public Affairs amongst men.
The first of those Faculties, or Professions, is Divinity. And in it, first of
all, I have attended to the Books of God; the Divine Law of the Old and New
Testament. And in the Old; for the Interpretation of the Laws and Ordinances
of Moses, and what was the external practice of them in Israel; the writings of
the Hebrew Rabbines are ordinarily produced, and especially those of Moses
Maimonides; Of whom the Jews have a saying, A Mose ad Mosen non fuit similis
Mosi; That from Moses their Master, to Moses the Son of Maimony, there has
not been the like to Moses the Son of Maimony. And the Rabbinical Age began
about the time of the destruction of Jerusalem, and the dissolution of the
Jewish Polity by Titus: De Bello Jud. Lib. 7 cap. 24.
In whose Triumph afterward at Rome, Josephus mentions only the Book of the
Jews Law (amongst whatsoever other Writings they had) to have been preserved
and carried along with him in it. Out of the Books of the Old Testament, and
the Writings of the Rabbis, there are also many late Christian Writers, who
have made Systematical Collections of the Frame of the Jewish Polity; such as
Schickardus, the Hebrew Professor at Tubingen; Bertram, and others. The most
staple, and authentic Writers in the Christian Church, and next to the new
Testament it self, are of diverse sorts. De Jure Belli. lib. 1. cap. 3.. 3. and
ad idem alibi.
Amongst the Canons of Counsels, the Canons commonly called the Apostles
deserve first of all to be mentioned; Nam in Canonibus antiquissimis, qui
Apostolici dicuntur etc. For in those most Ancient Canons, which are called the
Apostle's, says Grotius. The after Counsels, besides the large Tomes of them,
are Epitomized by Carranza in his Summa Conciliorum, Justellus, and others. And
whether the Councels, whose Canons I have cited, have been of one sort or
another, either more Primitive, or Papal, or otherwise, I have not regarded, so
long as they have complied with Right and Reason, in the matters to which they
have been applicable. The Greek and Latin Fathers, and Doctors of the
Christian Church, I have made use of also, sometimes professedly, but more
times only occasionally. The writings of the Schoolmen are generally
Doctrinal, and so little to my present purpose, except it be in the point of
Prelacy, in their definitions, and the like. The Ecclesiastical Histories are;
in the Jewish Church, Josephus; in the Christian, both the more ancient and
modern; both those that write more generally, and more particularly of the
Affairs of Churches. Last of all, the confessions, either of the Churches, late
called Reformed, or others, show what is their consent or dissent in things:
And I have sometimes also made use of them. The Profession, next to Divinity,
which most of all concerns the Affairs of Humane Societies, is, that of the
Laws. And the five Books of Moses, as they are the most ancient Systeme of
Laws, now extant in the World; so also they are Divine: and therefore,
wheresoever I have asserted any thing to be, either necessary or lawful for
Humane Societies, I have been careful to see, first, whether it were either
established, or else at least permitted by that Law in Israel: The due respects
being had still to the diversities of the peculiar occasions of Societies. The
ancient Laws of the more humane and learned Heathen Nations heretofore, and
what remains of them, is dispersed diversely up and down in their several
remaining writers. The Greek and Roman States are those, which we have the
most, and most received Monuments of. The Grecians thought so highly of
themselves, that they called all the rest of the world Barbarians, says
Herodotus, In Euterp. prop. fin.
who spoke not their Language. In Greece, the two Famous Common-Weals were that
of Sparta or Lacedemon, and that of Athens. In Lycurgo.
The Famous Lawgiver of Sparta, says Plutarch, and others, was Lycurgus; and
of Athens, were Draco and Solon: In Solone.
And their Laws were engraven in Tables of Wood, called (...): But those
Tables of Laws are now extinct; as also the twelve Tables amongst the Romans,
for the most part derived from them, as has been mentioned. Only there are
some reputed fragments of them remaining (like the dust of Carthage) and
ordinarily annexed to the Code, and Novels of Theodosius, and the other ensuing
Emperors. And the extracts out of the Comments of all the ancient Roman
Lawyers upon them, and the other parts, and sorts of Laws current in the
Empire, are those, which are collected together, and methodiz'd and digested
into the Pandects, or Digests of Justinian, according to the judgment of
Tribonianus, and the others employed in that business by him. And the Comments
of those ancient Lawyers themselves are now also extinguished: Some say, by the
special command of Justinian, some otherwise. But however the defect of them
makes room for those complaints of the Civilians concerning it to this very
day, that, if they had been preserved, they should have had the Roman Law from
the fountains, and that then, Frustra scripsisset Accursius: To no purpose had
Accursius written; and the like. So then, the body of the Roman Civil Law is
the largest, and most complete body of that sort of Humane Laws, that we have
at this day extant in the world. And of it we have made much use in the ensuing
Book, wheresoever we have come to the quotation of Humane Laws; and the rather,
because of its universal current authority, in these parts of the world; It
being received, and professed, generally in all the Universities of Europe; And
it being attended to, and consulted with more or less in all the ordinary
Negotiations, and several Dominions of Princes. In the Empire, it is Lex
Terrae, In Prax. Civil. Tit. 5. Cons. 18. N. 15.
The Common Law of the Land. And it is commonly held by Gothofredus, Pacianus,
and the other German Civilians, that the Roman Civil Law ought to have the
force of Law in all the Territories of the Empire. Amongst the Princes of Italy
almost the same is its use and authority; and so more or less in the other
Dominions of Princes. But yet notwithstanding I have in some few particulars
taxed some texts of the Civil Law, and that professedly in the principle of
natural freedom; as also Grotius and others following it: And the reasons of
my so doing lie open to censure. Next in Dignity, to the body of the Civil Law,
follows the Code and Novels of Theodosius, and the few other Laws ordinarily
annexed to them. And, besides these, also I have had occasion to make use of
the more particular Civil Laws of Countries: And that, whether set forth by the
Legislative Authority in those Countries, or not; and whether professedly, as
such, in a body of Laws; or else occasionally mentioned in other writings. Such
are the Capitulare Caroli Magni, the Ordines Camerae Imperialis, and the like.
Under the faculty of the Laws, and in conjunction with the Law Civil, is
comprehended also the Law Canon: and the authority of which, in things just and
regular, ought not to be the less regarded, because it is Papal. And both those
who compiled the body of it, and annexed it to come within the compass of that
profession in the Universities, intended by it the consistency of Religion with
Government, the matters Papal in it being only excepted. And last of all, I
have had some occasion also to consult with the Christian Doctors upon both
these sorts of Laws. Upon the Civil Law appear, first of all, the glosses of
Accursius, after him Bartolus, and his Auditor and Scholar Baldus, both of
very principal esteem, and next to Accursius amongst the Civilians. After them
follow Angelus Perusinus, Paulus Castrensis, Jason, and others: And after them
Decianus the Italian, Antonius Augustinus the Spaniard; Cujacius, Hottomannus,
and other French men; and the like out of other Nations. The like have
commented also on the Canon Law; Bartholomeus Brixiensis, Abbas Panormitanus,
Didacus, Covarruvias, and others, some of which I have made use of. The third
and last sort of profession here to be mentioned, is, Philosophy; (viz.) the
Phylosophical Prudences, ordinarily so called; and the more principal of them,
is, Politics. And of Politicians, he that bears the name amongst the ancients,
is Aristotle: But, semper excipio Platonem, and excepting only, that none of
the works of Divine Plato ought to be detracted from; and whose Books of Laws,
and his other works contain in them many things, both of the Laws of Moses and
Christ, and of the ancient Laws of Greece. Amongst the Moderns, Jesuits, or
others, the learned Bodine deserves an Asterisk, as being so excellently well
skilled both in the Civil Law, and also in the particular Laws and Policies of
Countries. Besides those, who have written just Tracts of Politics, are others
also who have debated particular Questions in it; such are Junius Brutus,
Buchanan, the late Englishman Milton, and others in the question of Rising in
Arms. Next to Politics, and the prudences concerning the ordering the matters
of Church or State, follow the exemplary prudences of History and Poesy: And
last of all, the subservient discipline, and diverse from all these mentioned,
of Oratory. The Greeks and Roman Histories contain in them many of the notable
examples of prudence in Governors, in the ordering the affairs of those Mighty
States. The Histories of the Christian Church that follow Eusebius, contain the
like in Church affairs. Of either the present or late condition, both of
Churches and States abroad in the world, there are many who give an Historical
account; Such as Chytraeus, the Messenger of Maximilian; Georgeviz, the Turkish
Captive; Damianus a Goes, the Knight of Portugal; the Venetian Cardinal
Contrarene; Leunclavius, in his Annals Turcici, his Pandects Historiae
Turcicae, and the like. And those Books which principally concern the state of
the Church of England in particular, either as to matters Historical or
Controversal, I have given an account of in their places hereafter. And of the
principal of those which concern the more general and principal controversals
only in the margent, for the reasons in those places mentioned. And, in the
last place, who will deny, but that the many admirable writings of the Greek
and Roman, both Poets and Orators, are of singular use many times, both for the
professed, and occasional, both illustration and confirmation of things? Nonne
Sexcenti Scriptores, tam Graeci, quam Latini, passim Homeri, Hesiodi, and
aliorum Poetarum exemplis, and testimoniis utuntur, ut rei veritatem
confirment, horumque spoliis sua scripta ditent, atque magnifice decorent? Do
not many hundreds of writers, as well Greek as Latin, make use of the
examples, and testimonies of Homer, Hesiod, and of other Poets, up and down in
their writings, that they may confirm the truth of things; and with the spoils
of these, enrich, and magnificently adorn their writings? says Emilius Portus.
And, (...), etc. Hesiod and Theognis, In Epistola Dedicatoria praefixa Euripidi.
and Phocylides; these all men do confess to have left behind them the best
precepts of life, says Isocrates. And as to the language that either these or
others have written in, I have in the citation of them, Oratione ad Nicoclem
Primo.
taken this course, (viz.) for the English Readers sake, generally I have
rendered them all into English, the Language in which I have written; but yet
for the satisfaction of others, who might perhaps desire the present view of
either the original Authorities, or the Latin Translation of them, I have,
where I thought there was occasion, and it would not make too great an Hiatus,
and gap in the Text, set them down also ordinarily before the English of them:
But otherwise, I have generally, either set them down only in English, or else
directed to them with an Et caetera, after the recital of somewhat of them. And
last of all, as to the style in which I have written, I have attended to the
two things requisite, and which ought principally to be heeded in it, (viz.)
its conciseness, and plainness; its conciseness, that I might rather say much
in little, then be tedious; and its plainness, that I might be understood. And
in this manner then I have commended this whole ensuing work to the Reader. And
if any man think much of those Principles, of which it consists; behold the
whole current of times, the Authority of all Laws, and the experiences and
practices of all Ages (at least generally, and in the main) attesting to them.

In the interim, that I write not this Book to the vulgar amongst men, it is
sufficiently evident, both from the matter and form of it. They may, where
occasion requires, and for satisfaction of conscience sake, be more familiarly
instructed in the Rights, and Liberties belonging to them in the matters of an
Ecclesiastical Uniformity; but otherwise, it has always been their
unhappiness, and ever will be, not to be capable, neither in those matters, nor
others, of being rationally dealt with. The very nature then of this discourse
directs it to the other sort of men, and particularly to those who have the
guidance of others, and the ordinary sway of affairs in Common-weals in their
several Spears of activity and stations belonging to them, either in the
Church or State; that they may see the reasons of those things which are
necessary for the supporting the welfare of Societies, and make the several
uses of the matters contained within the compass of this Discourse, in order to
the Public Peace.

Last of all then, this being the more general drift, and intent of this whole
work; in that posture (such, such as it is) in which it comes forth into the
world; if there be any thing said in it, that is prejudicial, either to
Religion or Government, or the consistency of each with either, I wish it were
unsaid again. In the mean while, I have for some time retired my self to write
it; and have only here further to say; May it serve the King of Kings in his
Universal Monarchy over men, and Kings and Princes in their Governing of them.

THE General Contents OF THE WHOLE.
LIB. I.
CHAP. I. THe General Notion of an Uniformity; and also those of Religion, and
Government, and the Consistency of Religion with Government, defined and
distinguished. CHAP. II. The first Proposition laid down, (viz.) That Religion
is appointed by God. The rational Grounds of the Proposition given: And the
consent of Nations about it; from whence the true Prescript of Religion is to
be discerned: And the general grounds of all Religions, laid down, and
compared. CHAP. III. The second Proposition asserted, (viz.) That Government
also is appointed by God. The Question concerning the Derivation of it from the
people, and the consequent Doctrine of Rising in Arms, in case of
Maladministration, and particularly in defense of Religion, and the matters
of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity stated. And of the Tendency of those Doctrines
to the hurt of Religion and Humane Society. CHAP. IV. The third Proposition
also asserted, (viz.) That Religion and Government, being both so appointed by
God, must needs be Consistent mutually amongst men: And that their Consistency
explicated, and stated. CHAP. V. To whom the charge and right of the
preservation of the welfare of Religion and Government, and the Consistency of
Religion with Government, is committed, in Humane Societies: and of the means
necessary for the accomplishing and preserving of it, (viz.) An Ecclesiastical
Uniformity.
LIB. II.
CHAP. I. THE Relation of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity to things Sacred,
further, and more particularly distinguished. And that the Ecclesiastical
Uniformity is judicated by the Civil. CHAP. II. The healthfulness of Religion
to Humane Societies. The ordinary causes of Religious contests assigned. From
thence the necessity of some unity to be held, as to matters of Religion. The
benefits of Charity and Peace ensuing upon it. And how much they are commanded
in Scripture. CHAP. III. The description of the Rights, directly belonging to
men in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity. And first, of the Primitive Liberties,
both Civil and Ecclesiastical, which belong to the People. And first, of the
Civil; and of its Right of being preserved. CHAP. IV. Of the Primitive
Ecclesiastical and Spiritual Liberties; which belong to the People. And of the
several Obligations and Rights relating to them. CHAP. V. A more particular
consideration of the two Grand causes of all Mischiefs in Humane Affairs,
(viz.) The weakness and corruptions of men; and more particularly of their
Influence on the Public charge of the Magistrate: The thing to be preserved
ultimately by an Ecclesiastical Uniformity. CHAP. VI. The more general
Description of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Powers: and which belong to the
chief Magistrate and Ecclesiastical Ministry, as their distinct Rights in an
Ecclesiastical Uniformity. CHAP. VII. The Proposition asserted; that, Humane
condition in this world, being considered, there can be no such thing indulged,
really in any State or common Society of men, as a loose and open Toleration of
venting, and disseminating of Opinions in matters of Religion, without deadly
Feuds and Contentions in that Society, and the dissolution of it, in the end,
by those Feuds, and men's falling together by the ears, and to war one with
another. The dispraise of such and the like Feuds and contentions: and how much
they make to the hurt of Religion, and also of Government, and also of the
Consistency of Religion with Government, and how much they are forbidden in
Scripture. The Conclusion drawn from all these things. CHAP. VIII. The two
Propositions asserted, (viz.) 1. That there must of necessity be some Doctrine
or Body of Doctrines, for profession of assent to be made to, and some Form, or
way of Worship, to be used in Common; and both these as a foundation for a
medium, or common means of procuring a charitative communion amongst men, in
matters of Religion in any Society. 2. That there must of necessity also be a
restraint held upon men's venting of their opinions, as a means for the
preventing, and remova of Religious Contests. And both these sorts of means t
be used to these ends, by the Chief Governor, or Governors in such Society.
CHAP. IX. Hence the way of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity, (viz.) in outward
profession, and Public Worship, has been always endeavored, and made use of
by the Governors of all Societies, in their different ways: And that from the
Dictates of the Laws of Nature and Nations, and the Divine Law approving of,
and leading them to it. CHAP. X. What are the Extremes, in respect to this
Ecclesiastical Uniformity; and what are the faultinesses in it. CHAP. XI. From
whence the just measures of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity sure to be taken; and
of the more particular Rights and Liberties relating to them.
LIB. III.
CHAP. I. OF the two Grand Instruments of an Ecclesiastical Vniniformity,
(viz.) a Canon of Doctrines, and a Liturgy framed according to it. CHAP. II.
What are the general ends of such a Canon of Doctrines and Liturgy, in any
National Church. CHAP. III. What are the more particular aims or ends of the
Canon of Doctrines and Liturgy, in order to these three General? CHAP. IV. Of
the inward Unity of Assent, which is supposed to the outward unity of
Profession, and use of Public Worship, in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity. CHAP.
V. How the Canon and Liturgy ought to be composed in order to their answering
to their general ends. CHAP. VI. What are the Uses that are to be made of the
Canon and Liturgy by the members of any National Church? CHAP. VII. What is the
Doctrine of the Church in the Canon and Liturgy? CHAP. VIII. Of the
interpretation of the Canon and Liturgy, to be made by private persons; and how
it ought to proceed. CHAP. IX. Of the rewards and punishments belonging to an
Ecclesiastical Uniformity; and the Authorities, and Rights concerned in the
dispensing of them. CHAP. X. Of the Magistrates further intent, in relation to
the inward notions, supposed to the External Profession, and use of things: And
of the more particular latitudes, belonging to those notions, and the Assent
included in them. CHAP. XI. Of the Testimonials to profession, in an
Ecclesiastical Uniformity: And what they are. CHAP. XII. Of these Testimonials
as Religious Bands: and in what manner, upon what grounds, and to what things
they oblige. CHAP. XIII. Of men's Liberty of opining and exercising their
judgment of discerning, concerning the matters of the Canon and Liturgy; and
how far it extends. And some cautions concerning such the exercise, and
spending of it. CHAP. XIV. What are the more particular restraints and
liberties, and the Rights of the Magistrate, relating to men's divulging of
their opinions; Especially concerning the matters of the Canon and Liturgy?
CHAP. XV. Of the Supervisors in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity. CHAP. XVI. Of the
Supreme Interpreter in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity.
DE Jure Vniformitatis Ecclesiasticae: OR, OF THE RIGHTS Belonging to an
UNIFORMITY in CHURCHES. BOOK I.
CHAP. I.
The General Notion of an Uniformity, and also those of Religion and
Government, and the Consistency of Religion with Government, defined and
distinguished.
I AN Uniformity defined; and the first and Capital distinction of it.

II The first and capital divivision also of all Affairs amongst men, and the
application of them to the general intent of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity.

III Religion defined.

IV The first distinction of it.

V The Second.

VI The Third.

VII The Fourth.

VIII The Fifth and last.

IX Government defined.

X The first distinction of it.

XI The Second.

XII The Third.

XIII The Fourth.

XIV The Consistency of Religion with Government defined.

XV The first distinction of it.

XVI The Second.

XVII The Third.

XVIII The Fourth.

XIX The Fifth.

XX The Sixth and Last.

XXI The Conclusion subjoyned to these preceding Matters.

The definition and first distinction of an Uniformity.
I. AN Uniformity, from the common use and connotation of the term, is nothing
else but an Unity of the outward Form of things; and it is either
Ecclesiastical or Civil. The Ecclesiastical is that which is Directly
conversant about the Affairs of Churches; And the Civil that which is in like
manner conversant about the Civil State.

II. The first and capital division then of all affairs amongst men, is,
according to this first distinction of an Uniformity. The first and capital
division also of all Affairs amongst men; and the application of them to the
general intent of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity. D. de rerum divisione and
qualitat. L. 1.
Summa rerum divisio, says Paulus the Civilian, in duos Articulos diducitur;
nam aliae sunt Divini Juris, aliae humani: That the chief division of Affairs
is derived into two parts; for some of them are of Divine Right, and the others
of humane: And the Divine Affairs are those which concern Religion; The Humane,
those which concern Civil Government. And God and Nature have appointed both
these to Consist. These three things then, and the preservation of the welfare
of them, (viz.) Religion, and Government, and the Consistency of Religion with
Government, are the general matter, about which an Ecclesiastical Uniformity is
conversant; About the preservation of the welfare of Religion, and it is
consistency with Government primarily and directly; and about the preservation
of the welfare of Government collaterally, and by consequence. And because in
our following Discourse concerning this kind of Uniformity, and the Rights
belonging to it, we shall have many things to say about these three more
general matters, which will be common to the whole; therefore it is that they
are here first of all to be unfolded accordingly, and that for our clearer
passage to the discussing and determination of other things founded upon them,
hereafter, in their several Topics and places properly belonging to them. So
then, that which I shall do in the unfolding of them shall be, 1. To define
them severally. 2. To distinguish them.


Religion defined.
III. Religion then is here first of all to be defined. First of all, because it
is in our following Discourse the thing first in order which we treat of. And
to be defined, (viz.) in the general notion of it. Religion then is nothing
else but the Law of God prescribed to men. In respect to God, the Lawgiver and
prescriber of it, it is his Law; and in respect to men, the observers of it, it
is their Religion, or Service and Worship: So, when the Book of God calls it,
on his part, his Statutes, his Word, his Way, ( Psalm. 119.48, 105, 37, etc.)
and the like; and when the Hebrews, on man's part, call it by the several names
of (...) Reverence, (...) Fear, (...) Faith, and the like, all return in their
several respects, Etymol. lib. 18.
into the sense of the definition. Religion, says Isidore, Dicta est ab eo,
quod per eam uni soli Deo religamus animas nostras, ad cultum divinum, animo
serviendi; That Religion is called so from hence, because by it we bind our
souls to the one only God, for the performance of Divine worship to him, with a
mind of serving him. And Cicero says, that it is it, De Not. Deor. Lib. 1.
Per quam reverenti famulatu Ceremoniae divini Cultus exercentur, By which with
a reverend and servant-like deportment the Ceremonies of the Divine Worship are
practiced. And St. Austine defines it to be, De Civ. Dei. Lib. 26.
Nihil aliud quam cultus divinus, Nothing else but the divine worship. The
application of the general notion of Religion to other things besides the
worship of a Deity, needs not here be mentioned. And when the Latins use the
term for any great care or respect that a man uses about any thing, it is then
used Metaphorically and abusively; but then only properly and emphatically,
when it is applied to the Divine Worship, as we have mentioned: So the old
Roman Civilians, ordinarily in their cases, and the several texts of the
Digests. Religion toward God, Pomponius calls, the worship of some Deity, De
Justit. and jure. L. Veluti. Lib. 11. ^it. 17. Lib 47. Tit. 13. etc.
which is common to all Nations. And the several Titles, De Religiosis and
sumptibus funerum, de Sepulchro violato, and the like, will evidence the same
thing.

IV. Religion then being thus defined, The first distinction of Religion.
let us come to our distinguishing it, according to the occasions of the body
of our discourse hereafter: And the first distinction of it is by disparates;
that it is to be considered either in the General or Special, or individual. In
the General, it is such as we have already mentioned; the term being taken at
large, and not bounded by any special restrictions: In the Special it is taken
for this or that sort or kind of Religion; and that whether it be more special,
as it lies at a farther distance; or less, as it lies at a lesser distance from
the first general, according to the rules of Logic. Last of all, in the
Individual it is taken for this or that individual, or particular part of the
same sort of Religions, as it is either exercised or professed by this or that
part of the Professors of it: And so is Rome one part, and Verona or Florence
another part of the same Roman Catholic in Italy, and the like.

V. The second distinction of it is, The Second distinction of it.
by the two opposite members of true and false; and the effects of these in
men's minds and actions are either natural or supernatural. And this is most
certainly true, that any false Religion, if it be but apprehended to be true,
will have per omnia, the same natural effects in men, together with that which
is really true: and as having such are any false and erroneous sorts of
Religion in the world considered by us, when they are mentioned hereafter, and
applied either separately or mixtly to things.

VI. The third distinction of Religion is, that it is taken simply, The Third.
or relatively; simply, when it is considered by it self, and only in a simple
and abstracted Notion: and relatively, when it is relating to other things. And
that Religion is to be considered in a relative notion by men very frequently,
for the guidance of their actions by it, there needs no more said to evince it,
then that it is placed by God in the world, together with other things, which
it may either commodate or incommodate, according as it is apprehended of, and
used or practiced by them, in relation to those things: -- Vice cuncta
reguntur, --
Alternisque regunt -- Says Papinius,
That all things are Governed by vicissitudes of influences upon one another;
and he that considers not the respects of things in the world, which they bear
one toward another, and acts accordingly, will quickly by his actions bring
all to Confusion.

VII. In the fourth The Fourth.
place, Religion is either National; or not National, and secluded: National it
is called, by the usual application of the term, when it is the Religion only
publicly established by Authority in a Country, and then the Church is said
also to be incorporate into the State: And, not National, is the contrary. Of
the former of these Sorts, is the Christian Religion in the most of the
Dominions of Europe; In the large Territories of Preister John in Africa: Of
the latter is the Christian, and Jewish Religion in Greece, and in the most of
the Dominions of Asia, as is affirmed by Chytraeus, Johannes Boemus Aubanus,
Georgieviz, Godignus, and others. And although it be true, in the mean time,
that sometimes, De facto, there are diverse sorts of Professors of Religion
tolerated in the same State (as will be further mentioned hereafter) yet none
of those have the privileges, nor extent, ordinarily, of that which is the
National, nor cannot properly be called so, for those Reasons, and because
secluded from those more eminent endowments: But notwithstanding still all of
them have their respects severally to the State, and the Government of it; In
Declaratione praefix. ad Acta Synodi Dordrar.
Quia Ecclesia, quamdiu hic vivimus, vix separari possit a Republica: Because
the Church, so long as we live here, can scarce be separated from the State,
say the States, General of the United Provinces.

VIII. In the first and last The first and last distinction of Religion.
place, a Religion secluded is yet further to be distinguished; And that, as it
is either secluded only being at all practiced, or exercised in any Society.
Of the latter sort was the care of the Christian Religion in the days of the
Apostles, and afterward under the Heathen Roman Emperors; and of many Sects
afterward, under the Roman Christian Emperors, and such as are prohibited by
them, in the New Civil Law, and the Code and Novells of Theodosius: But this
case is here only pointed at by us, and comes not into ordinary consideration
hereafter: And that, because it seldom or never happens, that such a Religion
subsists with any duration in any Society; or that, de jure, the continuance of
it ought to be endeavored in respect to such or such a Society: unless where
there is an immediate and particular command from Heaven for it, as there was
to the Apostles in respect to their first preaching in Jury: otherwise the
Divines and Civilians do rightly prescribe to the professors of such a
Religion, either present Martyrdom, or else flight and change of the soil by
migration unto another Country. And thus much of this first general Term.

IX. The Term Religion then being thus explicated; the like is to be said also
concerning Government. Government defined.
And first, for its definition; Government in the general, is the disposition
of the Affairs of humane Societies. So Plato defines it to be Cura totius, In
Definitionibus. De Repub. lib. 1. cap. 1.
The care of the whole. And Bodinus says, That a Commonweal is, Familiarum,
rerumque inter ipsas Communium summa potestate, ac ratione moderata multitudo;
A multitude of families, and affairs, common amongst themselves, governed by
the Power and Reason that is supreme. And here presently then, for the
unfolding of this definition, will occur the several Societies that are
amongst men, to be distinguished. Any conjunct plurality of men is, in nature,
a Society; because they, by their plurality and conjunction, partake of the
general nature of such a Society. So, there is a Society in Families, in
Corporations, partaking of the same Municipal Laws, amongst Merchants, for
their Trade's sake; nay, even amongst Robbers and Pirates to a bad end.

(...)
(...).
Who rove like Thieves up and down the Seas, says the Poet, Homer. Odyss. 3.
D. De Testibus L. Vbi. 1. D. De Verbor. Sig. L. Nerntius.. 2. D. Eodem. L.
Familiae.. 3.
to infest Strangers. But the Civil Law would have no Society to consist of
less then three; and that three at the least did facere Collegium, make up a
Society, for Trade, or the like: And use and custom has obtained yet farther,
that, when humane Societies are mentioned, the Terms be applied only
ordinarily to States, and Kingdoms, and the like greater sorts of lawful
humane Societies. And so then is the term Society understood by us generally
in this Discourse: And the Notion of Government mentioned is in like manner
applied to it.

X. The first definition concerning Government, The first Definition of
Government.
is the same that was mentioned concerning Religion. It is considered, either
in the General, or in the Special, or in the Individual: the Terms being
applied here in the same manner as before; and the different respects of them
only being preserved.

XI. The second The Second.
distinction is by opposite members: that it is considered, either as a
faculty, or else in the exercise of it. As a faculty; and so it denotes the
power of him that Governes. And so the Roman Civilians call that power,
Florentinus D. De statu hominum. L. Libertas, etc.
which a man has over himself (which is his Liberty) or over others (which is
Dominion) by the name of a Faculty. Or else in the exercise of it; and so it
denotes the use and actual employment of that power of Government: And in both
these senses it is applied hereafter, sometimes Habitually, and sometimes
Actually taken.

The third Distinction.
XII. The next distinction of Government is by disparates; that it is to be
considered, either as a charge committed to the Governor by God (and so it
respects principally his obligation to God concerning it;) or else as the Right
of him that Governes (and so it respects his claim and title that he has to
it;) or as it intends the welfare of humane Society, and so it respects also
the means which he is to use, for the compassing such the welfare of it. And
under these considerations also it will occur hereafter.

XIII. The fourth and last The fourth and last.
definition of it, is, by opposite Members; and that by the farther
distinguishing it, according to the last notion of it mentioned. And so it is
considered; Either as it concerns the good of particular persons Eminently,
and that in Privileges; 12. Quaest. 96. Act. 1. 2. quaest. 90. Act. 2.
or else of the Community, and that in its Ordinary General intent, as was
said. Privilegia dicuntur quasi privatae leges, says Aquinas, That Privileges
are so called, as it were private Laws. And further, says he, Because the Law
is the Rule of humane Actions; the last end of which, so regulated by it in a
Society, is the good, and happiness of all the members of that Society; ideo
necesse est eam semper ad bonum commune ordinari, That therefore it must needs
follow, That the Law, in its ordinary general respect, must intend the common
good. Now the Law is that, by which the Governor proceeds in Government:
Neither is that benefit of the Law, which is common to all particular persons,
equally, and as included in the whole, to be called by the name of a Privilege.

XIV. In the third and last place we come to explicate also the consistency of
Religion with Government: The Consistence of Religion with Government defined.
and by it is meant nothing else but the agreement of the Precepts of Religion
with Government, and the right and necessary rules of it: and those rules of
Government are to be said to be necessary, which are so either ordinarily, and
in common to all Governments; or else pro hic and nunc, and according to the
occasions of particular Societies, and the present circumstances attending
their several public affairs: and the distinctions of this Consistency are
those which follow.

The first Distinction of the consistency of Religion with Government.
XV. First of all, it is taken either Negatively or Positively. In a Negative
sense, when Religion does not hurt or overthrow Government. In a Positive and
affirmative, when it does benefit and support it.

XVI. This Positive Consistency is again taken, either simply, The second
Distinction.
when in an ordinary common way Religion does benefit Government; or eminently,
when it does so in an extraordinary and eminent degree.

XVII. This Consistency is attributed to Religion, The Third.
either in respect to inward acts of the mind, and openings in matters of it;
or else in respect to outward acts of the Body, such as divulging of Opinions
any manner of way, as it immediately has such an influence upon Government.

XVIII. The consistency of Religion with Government, The Fourth.
is either Total or Partial: Total, when it so consists in all it is Precepts;
Partial, when but in some only.

XIX. It is yet farther, either Fundamental, or not Fundamental: The Fifth.
Fundamental when it so consists in matters Fundamental: and those either in
respect to Religion on it is part, or Government on it is: and not Fundamental is
the contrary, and when it respects only lesser matters.

XX. The sixth and last The Sixth and last.
distinction of this consistency is into actual and necessary: Actual, when de
facto only it is so: Necessary, when it can be no otherwise; which necessity of
Consistency is always proper to the True Religion; and these Distinctions also
are to be heeded hereafter.

XXI. Last of all, there is one only Corollery then to be subjoyned here to all
these things; and that is, The Conclusion subjoined to these preceding matters.
that the Decrees of God concerning these general matters mentioned are both
Infallible and Immutable: Infallible in his intent in placing them aright in
the world, and so as is best for humane affairs; And Immutable concerning their
continuance in such a state and condition as he has intended them for; which
things will be easily granted, since the denial of either denies a necessary
attribute and perfection to the Godhead.

CHAP. II.
The first Proposition laid down, (viz.) That Religion is appointed by God.
The rational grounds of the Proposition given. The consent of Nations about it.
From whence the true Prescript of Religion is to be discerned: and the general
grounds of all Religions laid down, and compared.
I. SOme Religion necessary to be prescribed to man, evident from the light of
Nature.

II. The Prescript of it must needs be from Gods appointment, evident from the
same Natural light.

III. Hence the consent of Nations, and the commands of God himself about it.

IV. That particularly instanced in, in Moses his derivation of his Law from
God.

V. So also the Heathen dated theirs.

VI. So the Christian prescript was derived from the same Authority with that
of Moses.

VII. So Mahomet also dated his.

VIII. Twenty sorts of precepts of Religion.

IX. What the true prescript of Religion is, is to be known only from divine
Revelation.

X. In what Divine Testimony consists: and how the Revelation of the true
prescript of Religion is to be known from it.

XI. Our discerning the opperation of Gods Attributes distinguished.

XII. The properties of the opperation of these Attributes of God; and
particularly of his Omnisciency, and Omnipotency: and of Tradition in relation
to the effects of them.

XIII. The operations of Gods Omnisciency, and Omnipotency, the only Primary
Divine Testimonies to matters of Religion: And Tradition, the only instrument
for the conveyance of the memory of them, and the Doctrines of Religion down to
future ages. And the consent of Nations, and of God himself about these things.

XIV. So in Moses his Law.

XV. So the Heathens.

XVI. So Mahomet.

XVII. So also in the Law of Christ: And the Christian Religion asserted from
it; and that also with a special respect to an Ecclesiastical Uniformity.

XVIII. The Universal Consent of Nations about it also at this day, (viz.) That
Religion is appointed by God.

I. THe general terms then, Some Religion necessary to be prescribed to man.
which are common to this whole Discourse, being thus first of all explicated,
I come next to the first particular consideration of things; and that is, of
that, first in Order, as I said, (viz.) That Religion is appointed by God: and
because the being of some Religion, in the General, for man to practice the
precepts of, is to be supposed as the foundation of its being constituted by
such or such an Author of it; therefore that is evident from the dictates of
Natural Light, concerning the Creation of Man. For, God having endued him with
such sublime faculties of his Soul, as whereby he was capable of practicing the
Precepts of such a Religion; either such a thing as Religion was to be
appointed for him to practice, or else such his natural faculties, (as to that
most excellent end of them) should have been bestowed upon him in vain: But God
and Nature make nothing in vain.

II. The Precepts then of such Religion, whatsoever they be, The Precepts of it
only from God.
must needs proceed Originally only from the appointment and prescription of
God: and that both because God only, on his part, has the right of prescribing
such Precepts obligatorily, and in the way of Divine Law (such as Religion was
said to be above in the definition of it) to man; Cap. 1. Sect. 2.
and also because such Precepts in the matter of them, must needs be according
to Gods will, or else they will not be acceptable to him: and if not
acceptable, then the observation of them, on man's part, cannot bear the notion
of service and worship; such as it was attributed to it to be, above, also, in
the explication of the definition. Ibid.
The Right which God has of obliging man by Precepts of Religion is twofold;
First, that which belongs to him Primarily as Creator; and secondly,
secondarily as Governor of the world: and therefore it is the first General
Principle of the Law of Nature, in matters of Religion, that the Creator and
Governor of the world is to be served and obeyed: Exodus 20.3.
As it is the first Commandment in the Law of Moses, Thou shall have none other
Gods before me. And it is the prime original of all Sabbaths (i. e.) times set
apart for the more stated, solemn service of God; the remembrance of God as
Creator, and governor of the world: as in the ancient Judical Sabbath, the
Creation of the world, and Gods resting from it to proceed to governing, were
assigned as the reasons of it, And it was the Doctrine of St. Paul to the
Athenians, Acts 17.24.
that God that made the world was to be worshipped: and as this is the reason
of Gods Right of prescribing the Precepts of Religion to man; so alike also are
the reasons, why the matter of such Precepts, by being according to Gods will,
must be necessarily, on man's part, his Service and Worship. For, if otherwise,
the Issue of it will be no less then the removal of God from being either a
rewarder, or a punisher of men; and so consequently from having to do at all
authoritatively in Humane Affairs: and so in the end, all Religion it self
toward him, will be destroyed; which would be all one, as to man, as if God's
very being it self were removed out of the world. For a reward is for something
done according to ones will. And, Paena est noxae vindicta; Punishment is
vengeance taken upon a fault, says Vlpian: But if Religion, by being according
to Gods will, be not man's service and worship, there can be no reward annexed
to it from God, nor punishment, because he is not wronged, if the precepts of
it be violated: and the impulsive cause of all Divine Worship in man being,
naturally, and primarily, Hope and Fear toward a Deity; and good and evil to
be expected from him, being the only objects of these affections; and the light
of Nature, where Divine Revelation is wanting (as it is supposed to be in this
case) dictating no other principles of expectation of good or evil from him,
but that of reward for serving him, or punishment for offending him. If Gods
having to do authoritatively by such rewards and punishments be removed from
amongst men, what ground or reason would there be left for the practicing of
any Religion at all toward him? and if not toward him, then toward none at
all; since none else but the Creator has any right of prescribing it.

The consent of Nations, and the commands of God himself about it.
III. From these Grounds and Principles in Nature, concerning these things, then
it is, that the consent of Nations has dictated the derivation of all Religion
only from God. And the Divine Law also has commanded the same thing. In Moses
his Prescript of Worship, it is the reason prefixed to the whole System of his
Laws, which were delivered after the Moral Laws, as well as to the two Tables
of the Moral Law it is self; I am the Lord thy God: and by the same Laws, the
Idolatry of the Nation was forbidden to Israel, as well as that the prescribed
worship of God was commanded. In the Law of Christ, he himself
contra-distinguish'd the commands of God to the traditions of men: Mat. 15.9.
and his followers practiced the very same Doctrine, and that expressly upon the
very grounds, in Nature, which we have mentioned. There is one Lawgiver, who
is able to save, and to destroy. Who art thou that judge another, says St.
James. And St. Paul lays down that maxim, Chap. 4.12.
That, Without Faith it is impossible to please God: and he annexeth the reason
of his assertion; for he that comes to God, Heb. 11.6.
must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently
seek him. The same thing concerning duties, Mat. 10.28:
that Christ himself also, before him, has prescribed concerning sins; Fear
not them that kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul; but rather fear
him, which is able to destroy both soul and body in Hell. The like has been
the Doctrine of the Heathen Sages also, upon these very accounts. Divine Plato
says, De Legib. Dial. 10. in princip.
That those are the two great sorts of destroyers of all Religion in the world;
(...); Either who deny the being of the Gods, or else do affirm them not to
take any care of humane affairs. De Natura Deor. Lib. 1.
And Cicero, Sunt Philosophi, and fuerunt, qui nullam habere censerent
humanarum rerum procurationem Deos: quorum si vera sententia est, quae potest
esse Pietas, quae Sanctitas, quae Religion? That there are indeed Philosophers,
and have been; who have thought that the Gods had no care of humane Affairs;
whose opinion, if it be true, what Piety can there be, what Sanctity, what
Religion? And Stratocles heretofore was laughed at, when he asked a Law at
Athens, That whatsoever should please King Demetrius, that should be reputed
Religious toward the Gods, and just amongst men.

IV. And these Grounds then of the Divine appointment of Religion, being thus
assigned from Nature; The derivation of Religion from God instanced in the Law
of Moses. Contra Appion. passion.
We shall also find the Universal consent of Nations to it in like manner, if
we will but take a view of the several prescripts of Religion (both True and
False) that have been in the world. So first, as to that of Moses, the most
ancient Lawgiver, (as Josephus, in his time, and when Gentilism was so rife in
the world, durst avouch him to be, against all the Heathen prescripts:) He
received his two Tables written with the finger of God; Exodus 32.15, 16.
Thargum. in Cant. Cap. 1.11.
and the Judicial and Ceremonial Laws of Israel from the same hand, at Mount
Sinai. And it is a Tradition amongst the Jews, that the Tables were hewn out of
the Sapphire of the Throne of Gods Glory, which they say is mentioned Exodus
24.10. But I need not insist further upon this particular.

V. Let us proceed next to the Prescript of Heathens, So also the Heathen dated
theirs.
and view their Derivation of their Religion from Divine Authority. The only
creditable and authentic Records of former ages, that are left in the World,
are those generally of the Greeks and Romans: In Timaeo, circa princip:
and therefore Plato calls the Greeks always Children, because of the defect
of the Histories of former Ages amongst them, that was even in his time: and
they being the Elder of those two latter Empires, if any are to be believed
concerning the derivation of their Religion, they are.

First then, as to them, and afterward we will come to the Romans, Herodotus
says, That they derived their Religion from the Egyptians. In Terpsichore. In
Cratyl. and Epimoni. etc. (...).
Plato from them, the Phaenicians, Assyrians, and others. Plutarch from Thrace:
But all agree in this, That they received it traditionally from the
Institutions of the Gods, in those Countries. And it is evident, that from
these, and such other Countries they received it, because they worshipped the
same Gods, and in the same Order, generally, that they did. So the two famous
Greeks, Homer and Plato, Vid. Homer in Hymnis; Solemn and Lunam. (...), etc. and
(...). Et Plat. de legib. Dial. 7. Mentimur nunc o boni Viri. De Magnis diis,
sole dico and Luna. Et Dial. 10. vid. etc.
mention the Sun and Moon as the Chief of the Gods; The one as the Queen, the
other as the King of Heaven: Such as the Moon is called in the Scripture, Jer.
7.18. and which the Phaenicians are said, from the Hebrew, to have called
Baaltis, or Baltis. And it is well known how these two Gods were famed to be
worshipped by the two first Empires of the Assyrians, Persians, and others: and
is without controversy, from the Writings that are left us by the Wise Men
amongst the Greeks, that there was no expectation of any one Precept of
Religion, to be received amongst them from any, but the Gods. I will quote but
two of those Writers, the Poet Euripides and Plato. The Poet Euripides,
Plutarch compares with Lycurgus, for his Divine Wisdom, testified to by the
Gods in the falling of Lightning upon both their Tombs (says he) presently
after their deaths. In Lycurgo, ad finem.
And Plato needs not to borrow a Name for the like wisdom also: and in both
writings of these men, Ibid.
the Derivation of Religion only from Divine Authority is constantly owned and
asserted. Vid. Troad. (...).
So Euripides in his Troades terms the Priestess to be enlightened from Heaven.

(...)
(...).
And the Divine Priestess,
Enlightened (from Heaven.
Vid. (...). in princip. (...).
So also in his Bacchae, he brings in Bacchus constituting his own Holy Rites,
(...),
(...)
(...). --
To this City of the Greeks I first of all came,
And there leading the Chori, and appointing mine own
Sacred Rites --
and afterward he calls the Drums, Ibid.
and other things used by the Monades at his Sacrifices, his own Inventions.

(...).
The Drums of Mother Rhea, and mine Inventions.
And afterward Cadmus affirms it to be lawful for him to lead the Chorus,
because the God had not revealed distinctly, whether a young man or old should
do it: So in his Rhesus he calls the Service of the Gods, (...), hidden
mysteries: And that, both in respect to the Divine Revelation of them at first,
as well as to any of their being kept secret afterward. And the like many more
instances might be given out of the Writings of this Divine Poet. And as to
Plato, we will quote but two remarkable places out of him, concerning all these
things; the one out of his Dialogues De Republica; where when he comes to
discourse of holy things, Dial. 4. Paulo post princip.
(...), etc. What then (said he) is there yet remaining to us in the
constituting of Laws, And I said, to us truly nothing; but to Apollo of
Delphos, the Greatest and most Eminent, and Prince of all Laws, To him belongs
the constituting of Temples, and Sacrifices, and the other sacred Services of
any of the Gods; besides the Ceremonies used about Supulchres, and Funerals of
the dead, and whatsoever services belong to the appeasing of them: And then
says he further, and more generally, concerning all such Divine Services,
Talia profecto neque ipsi scimus, etc. Such things truly neither have we
knowledge of; and in constituting a City, we will believe none else, if we are
wise; nor use any other Interpreter of them to us, but our own Country God,
(viz.) this God, being in all such things, and to all men, the interpreter
proper to every Country, sitting in the middle of the Earth, and upon the very
center of it, expounds them to them. Thus, far goes he in that place. And the
other is out of his books of Laws; Dial. 5. circo med.
and that speaks further.

These things are to be said, (says he) for this reason, to him that builds a
City, and Commonweal, (viz.) Whether he founds it new from the beginning, or
else restores it being old and dissipated; Concerning the Gods and sacred
Rites, whatsoever of them ought to be constituted, for each sort of people in a
City; And by whatsoever Gods or Demonds to be named: None that is in his right
Wits, will endeavor to innovate concerning these things, whether they are
received from Delphos, or Dodona, or Jupiter Ammon, or are asserted from some
Ancient Fame, to have been by Visions and Inspirations of the Gods; which
things being appointed of the Ancients, did constitute Sacred Rites, mixed with
solemnities; and that whether they arose from strangers; or are said to be from
Tuscia, or from Cyprus, or whencesoever else. So that it is evident now from
these, and the like Authorities amongst the Greeks (which might be produced)
from whence they derived their Prescripts of Religion (viz.) from their
Oracles, and Gods; from visions, divine Inspirations, and the like ways of
Revelation from Heaven.

In the second place let us make the like enquiry concerning the Romans;
Disputationem lib. 1. cap. 11.
And the like will be found also concerning them: So Numa (whom ( Machiavel
says) Rome owed more to for bringing in Religion amongst them, then to Romulus
their Founder: And he dated his prescript of Religion from night Converses,
which he feigned, with the Nymph Egeria; and day converses with the Muses, as
Livy, Decad. 1. lib. 1. In vita Numae.
and Plutark, and others affirm. But before either him, or Romulus, many
religious Rites and Ceremonies were brought into Italy by others. Faunus their
most ancient King, is famed first to have consecrated Groves: (the same things
which we read of to have been in use amongst the Assyrians and other Heathens
in the Scripture;) and so also to have erected Temples, appointed Sacrifices,
and the like. After him Evander brought other Rites from Arcadia; De falf.
Relig. Lib. 1. cap. 22.
and after him Eneas other Trojan Ceremonies from Troy: and Numa is said by
Lactantius, to have added to these. But however all these, whether Traditional,
or newly founded by Numa, were still derived from the Gods. St. Augustine in
his Book De Civitate Dei, reduces the Theology, both of the Romans, and other
Heathens, Lib. 6. cap. 5.
to these three sorts, delivered by Varro, as he says, Varro Tria genera
Theologiae dicit esse: Earumque unum Mythicon appellari, alterum Physicon,
Tertium Civil. Varro says (says he) there were three kinds of Theology; and
that the one of them was called Poetical, the other Philosophical, and the
third Civical. And he says consonantly elsewhere; Ibid. lib. 4. cap. 27.
That it was delivered by the Pontifex Scaevola, tria genera fuisse deorum,
unum a Poetis, alterum a Philosophis, tertium a Principibus Civitatum: That
there were three sorts of Gods; the one of them received from the Poets, the
other from the Philosophers, and the other from the Princes of Cities: And all
these were still said to be from Divine Revelation. The Poets were of old
looked upon as Inspired from Heaven. De furore Poetico. in Princip.
So Plato Testifies concerning those of Greece, (...); That they uttered their
excellent Poems, not at all from any thing of Art, but from Divine Inspiration;
and that they drew Wine, and Milk from the fountains, and hills of the Muses:
Vid. etiam in Phaedro, circa princip. Et de legib. Dial. 2. Et de Repub. Dial.
10. Et de legib. Dial. 3.
as Bees did honey from flowers. And were the Interpreters of the Gods; and the
like, in many other places. So the Latin Poets also had the same reputation in
their times and Countries.

Est Deus in nobis, agitante ealescimus illo, etc. That there was a God in
them; and that they grew warm by his motion. And the like is to be said of the
Philosophical, and City Divinity. The Philosophers and Senates (just as the
Sanedrim amongst the Jews concerning Prophets) did not receive any thing in
either, but what they judged to be from Divine Revelation. Suetonius in Tiber.
Tertul. Apolog. etc. 3. Eusebius. Hist. Ecclesiast. lib. 2. cap. 3.
The Story is known concerning Jesus Christ in Tiberius his time: whom the
Senate would not receive into the number of their Gods, because he had been
worshipped before they had approved of him. And as this is said concerning the
Religion of the Greeks, Vid: Ovid de Fast: Dii quoque Tristitiam poni per sua
festa jubent. Et Hora, Carm. lib. 1. Ode. 16. Non Dyndimaene, non adytis
quatit. Mentem Sacerdotum incola Pythius. Non Liber aeque. Et Vid. Hospinian.
de Orig. Festorum, etc. So the Christian Prescript was derived from the same
Authority with that of Moses. Matthew 23. In Apologia Socratis. Acts 5.29. Rev.
22.18, 19. Mahomet's Prescript dated also from God.
and Romans, and other Heathens in the general: So, the like also might be said
concerning all the particular parts of it. Their Festivals were dated from
their Gods; The Priests at their Oracles said to be Inspired by their Gods; and
the like in other things. So that thus was the Heathen Religion received
totally upon the account of Divine Authority: and we may be sure upon none
other account at all: for else to what purpose was it, that these Oracles, and
several other ways of Divine Revelation, mentioned, were held in such repute
amongst them for that end, (viz.) That they might thus receive their prescripts
of Religion from them?

VI. The Christian Religion, which proceeded from God indeed, may well be
expected then to proceed upon these only rational grounds. The commands of God
and men are always opposed (as to matters of Faith) in the New Testament. We
are bid to call no man Master upon Earth; and (that which Divine Plato also
taught in express terms) To obey God rather then men. And they are cursed, and
devoted, who add to the Canon of the New Testament. And the like things,
obvious to consideration, might be farther said; but they need not be here
recited.

VII. And lastly: The like we shall find also concerning Mahumet; That, as we
said, the Heathens feigned the Divine Original of their Religion, and derived
many Rites of it from Moses, as to the matter of them: so has he also feigned
the same Original of his, and derived many Rites of it, both from the Heathens,
and Moses, and Christ. He feigned converses with God and his Angel Gabriel,
Vide passim in Alcorano.
and the holy Ghost in the form of a Pigeon, dictating into his Ear the Law of
his Alcoran. He pretended the amendment and restoration of many Doctrines,
both of Moses and Christ, which he said, Vide ibid. Azoara 9.
since their times, had been corrupted: He pitched upon many things, as being
Media Licita, and indifferent in their own nature, and which were controverted
amongst Christians; and partly practiced, and partly tolerated by Moses his
Law, and by the Greeks, D. De Petitione haereditatis. L. Ancillarum etiam.. Sed
inquit Vlpianus, Non and in multorum honestiorum praediis Lupanaria exercentur,
etc. Et vid. Plat. De Rep. and De Legib. etc. Et Alcoran. ib. Azo. 9.
and the old Civil Law of the Romans; such as Polygamy, Circumcision, choice of
meats; and other Doctrines, and Sacred Rites, and Ceremonies. And in these he
pretended his reduction to the Primitive appointment of God; as if many of
these things had been altered, and corrupted, and otherwise constituted by
Moses, and Christ, in their times. Thus then the universal consent of Nations,
and all Divine and Humane Laws have established it; That all Precepts and
prescripts of Religion are to be expected only from God, and his divine
Authority. But because the Divine Original of Religion, in the general, and
under it is different Notions, is not only to be asserted in relation to the
treating of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity, and the Rights belonging to it; but
also that a more special respect is to be had to the true Religion, both by all
mixtly, that they may take heed of violating the consistency of it with
Government; and also by the chief Magistrate in particular, and eminently, that
he may take care for the settling of it as the National Religion in his
Society. And because we shall have many occasions hereafter in our following
discourse of referring to the distinction of Religion into true and false;
Therefore we will here proceed a little farther in relation to these things,
and lay down the general grounds of all Religions, and compare them.

Two only sorts of Precepts of Religion.
VIII. There are then two only sorts of Precepts, of which any Religion can
consist. 1. Natural. 2. Positive. For this is a complete distribution of the
Divine Laws into these two sorts. 1. The Natural it must needs consist of;
because God the Author of Humane Nature is supposed to approve of the dictates
of it. And the Law of Nature in the General is implanted in all Creatures for
their good; and that they might be governed by it. And so Vlpian describes it,
D. De Justit: and jure. L. Hujus,. Jus natural.
Jus Natural est quod natura omnia animalia docuit: Nam jus istud non solum
humano generi proprium est, sed and omnium animalium, quae in terra, aut in
Mari nascuntur. That the Natural Law is that which nature has taught all
living Creatures: for that Law is not only proper to mankind, but is the Law of
all living Creatures, which are generated and bred, either in the Earth, or in
the Sea. And therefore for man not to be governed by it, would be against the
whole order of the Creation; and it should be planted by God in him in vain.
2. The positive Divine Laws proceed from God's Supreme Sovereignty over man;
And that, Primarily, as he is Creator; and by which Sovereignty he is at
liberty to command him any thing else also, besides the Law of his Nature, What
the true prescript of Religion is, is to be known only from Divine Revelation;
and that Authorized by Divine Testimony.
in those Mediis Licitis, which I mentioned upon another account just now.

IX. What that Prescript of Divine Precepts is, which God has so appointed to
men for their Religion, especially as to the Positive sort of them, is to be
known only from Divine Revelation: and that because the perfect and original
light of Nature in man is in a great part lost and darkened; and till the
Pattern of it be showed him again (and that either by special grace, or else
ordinarily by a Prescript of Religion delivered from Heaven in common to all)
he does but as it were more obscurely in many things groap after it. And the
will of God in Positives is secret only to himself; and no Creature has any
such Intuition into the Divine Essence, as to know it, till revealed: and that
Revelation of it also from Heaven must be witnessed to by peculiar Divine
testimony, or else it cannot be known to man to be such; and if not so known,
it cannot rationally be received by him.

X. Divine Testimony in the general, In what Divine Testimony consists; and how
the Revelation of the true prescript of Religion is to be known from it.
consists in the exhibiting of supernatural operations: which, because
supernatural, are only proper to God; and his Supernatural operations proceed
severally from his Attributes; and that Religion which consists only of the
Precepts of the Law of Nature, and the Media Licita for it is positive commands;
and the Revelation of which from Heaven he has in a peculiar and particular
manner witnessed to as such, by such supernatural operations; it ought to be
received by man, and he is obliged to God, as Creator and Governor of the
World, to observe, and practice the precepts of it. God has not revealed from
Heaven, that he has committed it to any man or Angel to appoint for Religion
what shall seem right to him, or he shall think fit: But he has left every
particular precept whatsoever to be expected only ultimately from himself.

XI. The Essential Attributes of God are all those infinite perfections which
we ascribe to him, and to deny the Creatures: One discerning the operation of
Gods Attributes Distinguished. Prima Quaest. 3. Art. 5. in conclus.
The opperation of them, being any ways present, can be discerned by us only a
posteriori, and from the effect of them; and not otherwise, and a priori;
because we have not such intimate Cognizance of the nature of God as so far
to discern them. Neque est definitio Dei, neque demonstratio, nisi per
effectum, says Aquinas; That there is neither any definition, nor
demonstration of God, but by the effect. The effects of the Divine Attributes
then are discerned, either mediatly, or immediately: and there are only two of
those Attributes, the opperations of which we are able so far to distinguish as
to discern them immediately from their effects mentioned; and those are the
Omnisciency, and Omnipotency of God; and the effect of them are miracles, and
ordinarily Prophecy, or prediction of things to come, or sometimes any the
like knowledge, and Revelation of secrets, equivalent to it: and the effects of
the other Divine Attributes, as such, are not discerned but mediatly (i. e.) by
the Testimony of these two, being present to them, wheresoever is their
operation.

XII. The Properties of the operation of these Attributes of God; and
particularly of his omnisciency, and Omnipotency; and of Tradition in relation
to the effects of them.
The opperation of all these Attributes of God (as all other Acts of Creatures,
which are in time) either is in praesenti, or has been in praeterito, or else
is to be in futuro. In praesenti, it gives present Testimony to any thing being
from God; as in present Miracles, Prediction or Prophecy, in the first
utterance of it, attested to by such Miracles, as to matters of Religion. In
futuro, it is intended to give future testimony by the effect of it concerning
any Creature, as in prophecy in the event. And that which has been in
praterito, stands upon Record: and the only conservatrix of the memory of it,
and deliverer of it down to future ages is tradition. Which tradition, if it
has these two properties:

1. That it be true in the fountain, and first springhead of things.

2. That it be continued, and un-interrupted in the stream of the relation of
them down to us, then it is as infallible a conservatrix of former Records
(though for many ages together) as if so many men standing all in a row did
deliver those Records from hand to hand, immediately one to another.

XIII. These things then being said, from hence it is, that these three things,
The operations of Gods Omnisciency, and Omnipotency, the only primary divine
testimonies to matters of Religion; and tradition the only instrument for the
conveyance of the memory of them, and the doctrines of Religion down to future
ages: and the consent of Nations, and of God himself about these things.
(viz.) Miracles and Prophecy, or Prediction, ordinarily have been laid down,
by the consent of all Nations, and of God himself (as we mentioned just now
concerning the Divine Institution of Religion) as the great and primary Divine
Testimonies to all Religion in the world whatsoever. And the third of them
(viz.) Tradition, as the instrument for the conveyance of the memory of them
down to future ages. And having then here also assigned the Reasons just now
mentioned, for these things from Nature; Let us come to the instancing in the
consent of Nations, and of God himself also, as so approving of them: and that
in the same order and manner, as formerly, concerning the Divine Institution of
Religion in the General.

So in Moses his Law.
XIV. First of all then, as to the Prescript of Religion delivered by God to
Moses. The primary Divine Testimonies of it, as such, have been from these
things. The secondary have been from the other effects of the other Attributes
of God. And Tradition has been accordingly made use of, in relation to them
both; as we have mentioned. We will instance in all the three particularly.

1. Prophecy. The Old Testament Prophets are famously known: Floruit circa
Ann. mundi, 2460.
Moses, and cir. an. 2840
Samuel, and cir. an. 2900
David, and cir. an. 2900
Nathan, and cir. an 2900
Gad, cir. an. 3000
Elias, and cir. an. 3040
Elizens, and cir. an. 3040
Micha, and cir. an. 3110
Jonah, and cir. an 3120
Hosea, and l Joel; and so also the Prophetesses, Floruit. Cir. An 2460
Miriam, cir. an. 2610
Deborah, and cir. an. 3320
Huldah, and all along till Florun. cir. An. 3544
Malachi, the last of these Prophets, about Four Hundred years before Christ,
in whom the gift of Prophecy ceased, and that in order to the appearance of
Christ in the world; as the morning star disappears at the approach of the Sun.
And all these they called in Israel, Seers, from their Prophetic Visions, and
fore-sights of things to come: and they were * anointed to their Prophetical
Office, and had Colleges, and places of nurture for young men, whom they
called Sons of the Prophets, that by their Virtuous and Religious Education
they might there be prepared for the receiving the Spirit of Prophecy; and
Gods revelation of himself to these Prophets, by Dreams and Visions, and voices
from Heaven, and the like, is sufficiently known. Natus Christus cir. an. 3948.
Vide Joseph. Antiqu. Judaic. and Helvici Thea. Chronologic. etc.


2. Vid. 1 Kings 19.16. Psalm 4.19. Isa. 61.1.. 1.
The like is to be said as to Miracles, which we here distinguish from
Prophecy, although otherwise Prophecy be one sort of Miracle. And the
miracles of these Prophets, as attesting to the Prescript of Moses, are as
sufficiently known also. First of all, the miracles of Moses himself, by which
he out-did the Magicians, and which the Jews say, he wrought in the sight of
six hundred thousand men of Israel. And so of Elijah, and Elisha, and others.
And in Christ's time, the Jews asked, what sign show thou then, that we might
see, and believe thee? Our Fathers did eat Manna in the Desert, Jo. 6.30, 31.
and again Jo. 9.28. 2 King. 22.14
Thou art his Disciple, but we are Moses his Disciples: In Misn. in Jesudei
hatorah. chap. 8.
Now we know that God spoke unto Moses, etc. And Maimonides says of him, Moses
our Master, Israel believed not in him, because of the signs which he did; for
he that believes because of signs, there is in his heart a suspicion that the
sign may possibly be done by Enchantment, or Sorcery. But all the signs which
Moses did in the Wilderness, he did them upon necessity, etc. We needed Food,
he brought us down Manna; they were a thirst, he clave the Rock for them; the
Congregation of Corah rose up against him, the Earth swallowed them up; and so
all his other Miracles. But notwithstanding this, wherefore believed we him?
For that standing at the Mount Sinai, which our own eyes did see, and not a
stranger, and our own ears did hear, and not another, the Fire, the Thunders,
the Lightnings, etc. So that thus were the Prophesies and Miracles testimonial
to Moses his Law. And these things are pleaded also as such by God himself; so
his Miracles: see Exodus 4.20. and 8.22. and 16.33, 34, 35. and Deuteronomy. 4.11, 13,
and 34.10, 11, etc. And so the Prophesies, Isa. 41.23, 24, 25, 26. show the
things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are Gods, etc. And
Isa. 45.21, etc. and there is a special caution given to Israel by Moses his
Law concerning these things, in relation to the Idolatry of the Gentiles, that
they might never be drawn away to it, Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3, etc. If there arise
amongst you a Prophet, or a Dreamer of Dreams, and gives thee a sign or a
wonder, and the sign or the wonder come to pass, whereof he spoke unto thee,
saying, Let us go after other Gods, which thou have not known, and let us serve
them: Thou shall not hearken unto the words of that Prophet, or Dreamer of
Dreams, for the Lord your God proves you. And Maimony says, If there stand up
a Prophet, and he does great signs and wonders, Ibid. Tom in Jesude hatorah.
Chap. 8. Sect. 6
and endeavors to contradict the Prophecy of Moses, we may not attend to him:
But we are sure that those signs are by enchantment and Sorcery. For the
Prophecy of Moses was not by signs, etc. But we beheld with our own eyes, and
heard with our own ears, etc. So that thus it is, concerning both these sorts
of primary testimonials to the Law of Moses: and that Law was compounded only
of the Laws of Nature, and the Media Lacita for its positive Precepts. And God
testified also to it as such, and as accompanied with these Prophesies, in the
first utterance of them, in an eminent and peculiar way: and that both by his
affording Miracles to it strictly as testimonial, and also by his out-doing the
Magicians by them, and also by his affording such eminently apparent Miracles,
as were not amongst the Heathen; and as has been already mentioned.

3. The like is to be said also concerning Tradition, as the only instrument
for the conveying these things down to future ages. In confidence of which it
is well known that the Easterly Jews, in Greece, and other places where they
are permitted at this day, speak of Father Abraham, and Mother Sarah, and the
like, as familiarly as if they were at present living amongst them. This is it
by which they boast, that they have conserved the Cannon of the Old Testament,
ad punctumculam usque even to the very least point, and letter in the Original.
This is it by which the Oral Law also, they say, has been preserved: And God
himself also made use of it, for the preserving the Pot of Manna, ( Exodus 16,
22.) and the tables of the testimony themselves ( Exodus 25.16, and 21.) in the
Ark. And the cessation both of Prophesies and Miracles in the latter ages of
the Jewish Church, was an argument, that he would have the memory of them, as
having been formerly acted, conveyed down by tradition. Pirkeaboth Cap. 1. Vid.
and vid. Maimonid. in prefatione ad Commentarium suum ad Mischnam.
And the Jews have a famous saying concerning the tradition of their Law, and
all these and other things belonging to it; Moses accepit legem in Monte Sinai,
and tradidit eam Josuae, and Josua senioribus, and seniores Prophetis,
Prophetae denique eam tradiderunt viris Sinagogae Magnae: That Moses received
the Law in Mount Sinai, and delivered it to Joshua, and Joshua to the Elders,
and the Elders to the Prophets; and last of all the Prophets delivered it to
the men of the great Synagogue. And they name the several successions of it,
from hand to hand, also by Tradition: Thus they for these three fundamental
matters in Relation to Moses his Law.

So the Heathens.
XV. Let us go on to the like use of them by the Heathens.

1. Prophecy. So both amongst the Greeks and Romans, in both their ages of
Empire; they had their Prophetic Dreams, Voices, Visions, and the like, as
amongst the Hebrews, in use for this end: Such are those which are mentioned by
Homer, Xenophon, and others: -- (...); Says Homer, Iliad. 1. (...). in
princip. Pro. p. 33.
that a dream was from Jupiter: and Xenophon mentions the interpretation of
those dreams, and so Eschylius and others: And the like things also are
celebrated amongst the Romans. And so both Greeks and Romans also had their
Prophets and Prophetesses, and the like so esteemed amongst them. In Convivio
Such was that Diotima, whom Plato mentions, who foretold a plague at Athens
ten years beforehand. Such that other Epimerides, De Legib. Dial. 1.
whom he calls Virum Divinum, a Man of God, who, says he, Ten years before the
Persian War, being warned by an Oracle of God, etc. Such, and more also in some
things were the Sybills. Vid. In Theseo. and in Lycurgo, etc. De magis Inf.
Lib. 2. Cap. 13. Lib. 5. Dec: 1. In Phaedro.
Such are mentioned by Plutarch and others. Such were their Poets. And because
Poems were accounted for Prophesies, etc. says Wierius. Such were their
Priests and Priestesses, who gave responses from Oracles mentioned by Livy,
Plato and others. (...), says Plato, (...). For, both those things to come,
which the Prophetess has foretold at Delphos; and those also of the
Priestesses at Dodona, have brought many, and great Commodities to the Greeks,
both public and privately: and the like many more things might be mentioned.

2. Let us go on to their reputed Miracles: Such as are mentioned to be wrought
by their Oracles, and otherwise, in the removing of Epidemical sicknesses, the
giving successes in Battles: Such as their Temples, many of them, were founded
upon, as the occasion of the building of them. So two Pigeons are said first to
have appeared at Dodona, and to have commanded with man's voice a Temple to be
there erected. So Castor and Pollux, in the Latin War, are said to have
appeared in the field, in the likeness of Angels; and presently again at Rome,
in the forum, on sweating horses, and to have brought the news of the Victory;
and presently there was a Temple Erected to them. The like Miraculous thing
also is said concerning Titus Latinus his cure, by Livy, and recited by St.
Augustine. Lib. 4. de Civ. Dei. Cap. 6. In Vespatiano. Act. 8.
Such also are said to have been wrought by Apollonius Tyanaeus, and by
Vespatian in Suetonius: and Simon Magus is said by the Scripture, to have been
held for a worker of wonders in the Apostles time. And Numa is said to have
brought in his Divinity attested to by the apparition of the Gods, and to have
used Hydromancy and Necromancy, and the like Arts, to that purpose: and the
like to these, both Miracles and Prophesies, might be mentioned also concerning
other Nations, the Egyptians, Caldeans, Assyrians, etc. The Egyptian
Magicians are said to have stood in competition with Moses, in his time, in the
matter of Miracles; Exodus 7.8.
and the Caldean Astrologers and Soothsayers with Daniel in the matter of
prediction, Dan. 4.3.
in the Holy Scriptures. And the so much scrupled writings of Trismegistus,
Manetho, Berosus, and others, attest to the like things. And these, partly
cheats of men, and partly diabolical delusions, the Scripture says, that,
partly as to his permitting them, as an Evil, God winked at; and as to his
positive inflicting them, Acts 17.30.
that he inflicted them as a penalty and judgment on the Nations, which made no
better use of their more Evident light of Nature, in their practice of
Polytheisme, Romans 1.18. ad finem.
and such like things, (the several gross and foul Tenants of their Religion)
then they did. And the like, says St. Augustine, Lib. de Divino^ione Daemonum,
etc.
and the other ordinary writings of Divines.

3. Let us come then to the tradition of these things, and as relied upon for
the delivery of them down to future ages. I have mentioned the Tria genera
tradita from the Pontifex Scaevola, Supra, Sec. 5.
and Varro out of St. Augustine; and the Prescripts of worship descending to
the Greeks, by ancient Fame, out of Plato. And Ibid.
(...)
(...)
(...).
We do not feign any thing cunningly concerning the Gods:
Our Father's Traditions, which, coetaneous with us, a long time
We preserve, those nothing whatsoever shall subvert.
Says Euripides. (...). Tiresias.
And, Omnes Religione moventur, and Deos Patrios, quos a majoribus acceperunt,
colendos sibi diligenter, and retinendos arbitrantur, Cap. 6. Act in Verr.
says Cicero: That all are moved with Religion, and do think that their
Country Gods, whom they have received to be such from their Ancestors, are to
be worshipped, and carefully to be retained. And how the Dii Patrii, the Gods
of their Country; and the Instituta Majorum, or Religious Precepts received
from their Ancestors, and the like, are celebrated up and down in the Greek and
Roman Writings, who is there that knows not? So then thus the Heathens in
relation to these things.

So Mahomet.
XVI. The like will be said also (briefly) of the late Imposter Mahomet.

1. As to his pretended Prophesies, concerning those great matters of the Day
of Judgment, and his second coming in it, of the Carnal Paradise, and the like
other matters, up and down in the Alcoran: and as he styles himself to be, so
his followers style him to be at this day, (...), and by way of Eminency, in
respect to all others, the great Prophet, who was to come into the World; and
that both in the stricter notion of Prophecy, in respect to his Predictions,
as well as in a larger, in respect to his teaching to them their Law of God.

2. As to his Miracles, it is said he was a Magician; yet we hear little of his
particular Miracles. De Orig. Imper. Turc. Cap. de mirac. Machometi, etc.
There is a slight relation of some said to be done by him, given by
Georgieviz, Leunclavius, and others; and of the like said to be done by some of
his followers: But he had things in the place of eminent appearances of God
with him; such as his Dove at his Ear, his falling sickness Transes, In pandeot
Hist Turc. Et in Annalibus Turcic. cap. de Osmanis not. vitat. etc. Vid.
Alcoran. Azoara. 3.14.30. etc. Vid. Alcoran. Azoara. 3.14.30. etc. Vid. Passim
in Alcorano.
and the like. Indeed, in the Alcoran, he sometimes excuses the want of
Miracles, and says, Why should men look for Miracles? I am only the Messenger,
to deliver the Law of God to them: And then he says, he has wrought enough to
convince men. And indeed, in fine, he swears Oaths enough to stand in the
place of all: He swears by things visible, and invisible; by the East, and
West; Winds, and Clouds, and Sea, and Stars, and Angels, Se Dei Nuncium, non
Magum, That he is the Messenger of God, and no Magician; and the like other
things might be recited.

3. So also as to Tradition. The Original Copy of the Mohammedan Law is said to
be kept in the Chief Mufti's Custody. It is accounted profane, so much as to
touch it with common hands. And Tradition is the thing relied upon, for the
delivery of it at first by God to Mahomet; as is alleged; and for it is
continued uncorruptedness in the precepts of it to this very day.

XVII. In the fourth and last place; So also in the Law of Christ; And the
Christian Religion asserted from it. And that also with a special respect to an
Ecclesiastical Uniformity.
let us come last of all to the consent of the Christian Religion to these
things (as was mentioned concerning Moses his Law) and to the assertion of the
truth of it also from them; and that

1. For Prophecy (viz.) as attesting to it; and that in a peculiar manner; and
in it, it excelled all other Religions, and had greater evidence of Divine
Testimony from it then they had. The Law of Moses had chiefly Predictions or
Prophesies in the Original, and first delivery of them, attesting to it: And
which, Vid. Sect. 12.
as such (as I have mentioned) were but a secondary Divine Testimony, and not
credible any further then as attested to by Miracles. But the Christian
Religion had all the Prophesies concerning the Incarnation of Christ, and other
De Judaeis Christum rejicientibus. vid. Mark. 21.33. sit in sequent. Et cap.
22. in princip. Et Luke 15.11, etc. De extraneis eun. Amplectentibus, vid Mat.
8.2. Matthew. 12.21. Matthew 21 43, etc. De obsidione and ruina Jerusalem and
Templi, vid. Matthew. 23.38. Luc. 13.34. Et alibi; and sic and caeteris.
Principal things fulfilled actually, and in the event testifying to it. So it
excelled all the pretended Prophesies of the Heathens, which were either dark
and dubious, and interpretable either way, according as the event fell out
(such as their Responses of Oracles for the most part were); or else they were
concerning things near hand, and which might be foretold, either by Logical
conclusions, made by cunning men, concerning the consequences of them; or else
by Prae-sentiments in Nature (such as the Platonists, and others, who write of
Prophetic Euthusiasme, mention) and from the influence of Natural Causes on
it; or else those Prophesies might be much more from the sapience and vast
experience of evil Angels in humane affairs. And so also it excelled Mahomet's
religion; if he alleadg himself to be prophesied of, either by Moses, or
Christ; the Books neither of the Old nor New Testament, that were any where
extant at his appearing in the World, did testify any such thing. If he say,
they had been corrupted; neither was there any thing of it in the writings of
either Jews or Christians; neither was there any fame of any such thing ever
heard of amongst them: Especially the Christian Religion having been of no
elder date then about six hundred years before him; and for the most part of
that time also, its professors having been under the dint of Persecution; and
so there being little likelihood that they either should have had opportunity
of corrupting, in so great a measure, the Law of Christ concerning his coming,
in so little time; or else should have been at leisure, or in a disposition of
mind to do it, under such persecution. And last of all, what end can it
possibly be supposed, they should have had in the doing of it? The like also is
to be said of his own personal Prophesies of the day of Judgment, and his
second Coming, etc. after a thousand years; and how much the Prophesies of the
Christian Religion excelled them. Mr. Herbert, in his Travels into Persia. page
159.
Which Prophesies of his how well they have been fulfilled, the event shows;
For lately the time being expired, his second Coming was very seriously looked
for: and the people, seeing themselves gulled, began to stagger; till the Mufti
assured them that the figures were mistaken, and that it was two thousand in
the Original. And the Grand Sophi of Persia till then, kept his eldest Daughter
a Virgin, and a horse ready in his Stable for him; which after that he
dismissed. So that thus have been, either the pretended, or real prophesies,
attesting to other Prescripts of Religion; but not so those attesting to the
Christian. It has been attested to by Prophetic Heathens; as is evident from
the writings of the Sybills, De civitate. Dei, Lib. 18. c. 23.
and others: And as was showed to St. Augustine by Flactianus, from the
writings of Sybilla Erythraea (or as others Cumana) in which was found that
verse, (...), Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Savior. And so it has been
attested to also by the Prophets of Israel. And all their Prophesies also have
been fulfilled, in the person of Christ in the event: and that purely
providentially, and by such ways as could not be suspected of Imposture. So
some were fulfilled in others, in relation to his person; Matthew. 3.3. Joh.
13.18. Matthew. 26.31.56, etc. Acts 2.24, 25, 26, 27. Mark. 12.36. Ephesians. 4.8.
Matthew. 2.5, 6. Matthew. 2.15. Matthew. 21.16. Matthew. 27.9, 10. Joh. 19.36.
as the coming of John the Baptist, Judas his betraying him, his Disciples
forsaking him in the night of his arraignment, etc. So some also were fulfilled
in himself, which 'twas impossible for any man or Angel to bring to effect; as
his Resurrection and Ascension. So some by others, before he was of any Age, or
capable of dissembling them; as his being born at Bethlehem of Judea, his
coming out of Egypt, etc. Nay, some by persons, who were not capable of being
suborned by any man; as the little children saluting him with Hosanna. Nay,
some by the Jews themselves, the utter enemies of his being the Messiah; and
that at unawares; as their giving thirty pieces of Silver for him, their not
breaking his Legs on the Cross, their dividing his Garments amongst them. Joh.
19.24.
So that this Prophecy in the event, attested eminently to the Christian
Religion. And the Jews themselves also expected their Messiah about this time
of Christ's coming into the World, notwithstanding their rejecting him.

2. In the like manner also did the Christian Religion excel in Miracles. Moses
derived his power of working them from God; but Christ wrought them as God, and
in his own name. Moses dyed the common death of all men; but Christ rose again,
and ascended into Heaven. So in the Star, created on purpose, says Tycho, and
others, to lead to his Birth: So also in his being born of a Virgin; and other
the like things. So also he excelled the Heathen, and all their pretended
Miracles; and that, remarkably, in his silencing their Oracles, the great
pillars and supports of the Gentile Religion, and in other things. So also he
exce^led Mahomet; who did not so much as pretend the working of many Miracles;
Supra: Sect. 16.
as is said; but that he was to come with Arms, for the Propagation of his
Prescript of Religion. And these Miracles also, Vid. Alcoran. Azoara 3.14.17.30.
and the power of working them, Christ left to his followers; His Disciples,
being illiterate men, spoke with Tongues, uttered the most assured Precepts of
the Law of Nature; and such as the profoundest Heathens had before been famed
for, and the like. And their followers, in the succeeding ages, appealed to all
the world, to behold the Miracles accompanying them; and that continuedly, for
many Centuries and Ages together.

3. And lastly. The Tradition of all these things has been. 1. True in the
root, and Springhead of them. 2. Uninterrupted in the stream, and derivation
of them also down all along the Ages of the Christian Church. There is no way
for the proof, and evidencing of things amongst men, but by the Testimony of
witnesses; which was the last way prescribed by Moses his Law, and is by all
Laws of Countries in the world. Vid. F. De fide Instrumentorum. De Testibus,
etc.
And the Roman Civil Law requires, that they be fide digni (i. e.) that they be
Intelligent, and honest: and so also all other Laws; which is an Argument,
that, if they be so, it is as much as can be desired.

And such witnesses has the Tradition of these primary Evidences of the Truth
of the Christian Religion had attesting to it: And that in both it is Capacities
of that Tradition mentioned. It has had the Testimonies both of Enemies, and
Friends.

1. Of Enemies. Such is that of Josephus, concerning Christ. About the same
time, says he, was Jesus, a man of Sapience, Antique Judaic, Lib. 18. cap. 4.
and wisdom; if indeed it be lawful to call him a man; for he was a doer of
wonderful works, Supr Sect. 5. Et apud Su^tonium, Tertullian, and Eusebius. ut
prius.
and a teacher of those who would willingly receive the truth; and he had very
many followers both of the Jews, and Gentiles. Such also is that of Pontius
Pilate himself (as was before mentioned) who is said to have sent word to
Tiberius of his Miracles: Insomuch that Tiberius would have had the Senate of
Rome to have enrolled him amongst their Gods. Apud Eusebius. praeparationis Evang.
Lib. 5. Cap. 1.
Such also is that of Porphyrie, (...), etc. That, from the time that Jesus
began to be worshipped, none did partake of any public help from the Gods. And
the like acknowledgements there are of Celsus, and Julian, and other enemies of
Christianity. Apud Origin.


Apud Cyrillum, etc.
2. Of Friends, and those every ways worthy of belief: Such were Sergius
Paulus, and Dionisius the Areopagite, and many of the followers of Christ,
mentioned in the Scripture it self. Such were also many of the Primitive
Martyrs, and the Grand Doctors and Fathers of the Christian Church, Adversus
haereses, Lib. 2. Cap. 51. and floruit circa Ann. Christi, 180.
down all along the Centuries. So Irenaeus in his time; Si autem Dominum
phantasmata hujusmodi fecisse dicunt, etc. But if they say that the Lord did
these things by false appearances, says he, We will reduce them to the Writings
of the Prophets, and show plainly out of them, that all things were so foretold
by God, and that he was the only Son of God; Wherefore also in his Name, those
who are his true Disciples, receiving Grace from him, do the like things to the
benefit of the rest of men, even as every one has received the gift from him:
For some cast out devils most assuredly, and truly; others also have the fore
knowledge of things to come, and Visions, and utterings of Prophesies; and
others by the laying on of hands, do cure those who have labored with
infirmities, and restore them to health; and even at this day also, as we have
said, the dead have arisen, and continued among us for many years. Contra
Celsum, Lib. 2. Paulo post princip. and floruit circa Ann. Christi. 220.
So also says Origin, in his time, speaking of Celsus, Cum and Jesu virtutes
extenuaret, Magicis illas praestigiis editas olim affirmans; quod vero
virtutes, and mira de se ederet Jesus utcunque admittens: That when he did
extenuate the Miracles of Christ, affirming them to be wrought by Art of Magic
heretofore; but yet however admitting, that Jesus did work miracles, and many
wonderful things concerning himself: Ibid.
And afterward, Cumque Phlegon, in decimo tertio, vel decimo quarto (ut
Arbitror) annalium, libro vel futurorum quorundam praenotionem detulit Christo;
cum de Petro confusius pleraque and de Christo edisserit, and plane
testificatus, pro hujus praedictionibus, and res occurrisse: And that when
Phlegon, in his thirteenth, or as I think, fourteenth Book of his Annals,
attributed to Christ the foreknowledge of certain things to come; when he had
discoursed many things more confusedly concerning Peter, and Christ, and
plainly testifying, that also things came to pass according to his predictions.
Adversus Vigilantium, in princip. and floruit circa Ann. Christi. 390.
And so St. Jerome also, in his time, affirms the Miracles done at Martyns
Tombs, and bids Vigilantius, Sed responde, quomodo in vilissimo pulvere and
favilla, nescio qua, tanta sit signorum, virtutumque presentia? But Answer, how
can there be so great a presence of signs and wonders in some most contemptible
dust, Ibid.
and I know not what ashes of the dead? And after he recites Porphyrie and
Eunomius calling them Praestigias Daemonum, Ibid.
Deceits of Devils; and says he to Vigilantius, Spiritus iste immundus, quo
haec te cogit scribere, saepe hoc vilissimo tortus est pulvere, immo hodieque
torquetur: That unclean spirit, which compells thee to write these things, has
been often tormented by this most vile dust, nay, and even at this day is
tormented. And the like many other things might be recited out of the Primitive
and latter writings of the Christian Church, which are every where full of
these Testimonies: But we intend not here a justification of the Christian
Religion at large, but only a recital of these things, so far forth as belongs
to our present occasion: So much then for the Christian Religion, also its
excelling all other in the having had these primary Divine Testimonies annexed
to it, as such; and that also thus in a most peculiar way, by God; and the
Precepts of it consisting eminently, and only of the pure Laws of Nature, in
the mean time; and it having none but the Media Licita, for its Positives, as
was said above of the Law of Moses: So then the Christian Religion is it, the
consistency of which with Government men ought to have a special respect to,
that they do not violate it; and which ought by every Chief Magistrate, and his
Laws of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity, to be settled as the National Religion in
every Society.

XVIII. Last of all then, we conclude all with this, The Universal consent of
nations about it also at this day (viz) that Religion is appointed by God.
That our Proposition here thus first asserted, (Viz:) That Religion is
necessarily appointed by God, and none else, is the sense of all Nations
present in the world, as well as that it has been so of those heretofore. And
if it be not such a common confession, and supposition amongst them; then what
mean the mutual objections of Error, Superstition, will worship, etc. to be so
vulgar in matters of Religion, every where amongst men? What mean also the so
much adored names of Truth, Divine authority, the Will of God, and the like, to
be the Helenaes that men contend for? Truly these things will sufficiently
evince the derivation of Religion only from divine authority, to be still held
as a common principle amongst men.

CHAP. III.
The second Proposition asserted, (viz.) That Government also is appointed by
God: The Question concerning the derivation of it from the People; and the
consequent doctrine of Rising in Arms, in case of Male Administration; and
particularly in defense of Religion, and the matters of an Ecclesiastical
Uniformity stated; and of the tendency of those Doctrines to the hurt of
Religion, and Humane Society.
I. THe causes of the want of Records in the world assigned.

II. The first state of men, and the several ways of their coming together into
Societies.

III. Whence the necessity of Laws and Government.

IV. The ways by which men have arrived at Government.

V. The first and capital distinction of Government amongst men.

VI. The distinctions also of consent given to Government.

VII. That the present lawful Government is from God, proved in the general;
and concerning the Church Government in particular.

VIII. The two Constitutive causes, assigned, from whence the Civil Power is
said to be derived, in the controversy concerning it.

IX. The state of the Question concerning the derivation of the Civil Power
from the People.

X. The grand principle of Natural freedom refuted.

XI. The other propositions concerning the power of Magistracy fundamentally in
the People; and in the state of the Question considered.

XII. The state of the Question, on the Peoples part, considered also from its
effects.

XIII. Last of all, the prineiple of Rising in Arms, particularly in defense
of Religion, and the matters of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity, refuted.

XIV. The proof of the Affirmative part of the Question, that the Magistrates
Power is from God; And that,

XV. First, from Scripture.

XVI. Secondly, from the voice of Nature and Nations.

XVII. The tendency of the negative part of the Question to the good of
Religion, and Humane Society, disputed.

XVIII. That it does not tend to the good of it, proved: First, from Gods
having stated it otherwise in Scripture.

XIX. From the consent of the Civil Laws of Countries.

XX. From a comparison of things on both parts.

XXI. From another Comparison.

XXII. From another more particular comparison.

XXIII. The General Conclusion.

I. ALL Effects under the Sun proceed ordinarily from Natural Causes: And that
is evident from hence, The causes of the want of Records in the world.
because Miracles are but seldom: and the difference betwixt Miracles and
ordinary Effects is, That the one proceeds from a Natural Cause as such, and
the other from a Supernatural in like manner. The natural and ordinary causes
of the defects of Records and Histories of former ages amongst men have been
many; and they either more general, or more particular. The greater and more
general Plato assigns to have been necessarily, either from Conflagrations by
Fire, or Inundations by Water. In Timaeo. cired princip.
(...), says he, (...), etc. There have been, and will be many and diverse
destructions of men; and there is a necessity that the greatest should happen
by Fire and Water: Which is therefore true, because there are none other things
in the world, which can possibly, and ordinarily, be the causes of such
destructions, but the Elements; and of them there are none other, from which
such a general Destruction, both of the persons and writings of men can
proceed, but these two of Fire and Water: and both these, both Conflagrations
and Inundations, proceed either from natural causes, as such purely, or from
Gods special appointment cooperating with them. As to Gods special
appointment, such was the General Inundation in the time of Noah, mentioned in
the History of Moses, De legib. Dial. 3. in princip.
and pointed at by Plato; and the fame of which was amongst the ancients, and
has been found of later days remaining in many Countries. Such also will be
the general Conflagration at the last day, Epist. of Jude verse. 14, 15.
prophesied of, of old, by Enoch, and so often mentioned in the New Testament,
as also in the writings of the Sybils, and Lucan the Poet, and other Heathens.
And as to the proceeding of such more general desolations from purely natural
causes, In Timaeo. ibid.
Plato says, that it comes to pass once, after some long period, and return of
years, That the Heavens and their Rotations come to such a position, in respect
to one another, as that it is necessary for some vast and more general
Conflagration to follow from it. And the like may be said of Inundation. And
from hence the Fable of Phaeton's burning the world, by the fall of the
Chariot of the Sun, and the like. And there is no doubt but that, considering
the vastness of the Heavenly bodies, in respect to the Earth, either such
Conflagrations or Inundations may follow from them. The more particular causes
of the like Destructions of Records, In Timaeo. ib. and de legib. ib.
and Desolations of humane affairs, Plato says also, have been many; (...);
That such have happened by a thousand other causes: And they have been also of
the same sorts as the former. Genesis 19.4.
Such as the Conflagration of Sodom, proceeding from the special appointment of
God; concerning which some of the Greeks and Romans have said, That it sprang
from the sulphury vapors of the Earth, drawn up by the Sun; of which kind of
matter the parts of that Country were full. Which things may consist well
enough, although the denial of Gods special appointment, as cooperating with
those causes in Nature, is rightly taxed by Interpreters. Vid. Musculum in loc.
and alios.
Such have been also the diverse Wars, and Earthquakes, etc. says Plato. And
Machiavil (learned in all humane affairs, except in the neglect of a Deity)
assigns, Disputationum Lib. 2. Cap. 5.
for the like causes, the change of Religions and Languages, the several
Famines and Pestilences, and especially Floods, Apud Orosium, Cedrenum, etc.
that have been in the World: and that these things are true also, the many
instances that may be given concerning them will evince. Such were Ogyges and
Deucalion's Floods, mentioned in Histories. And the latter of which is
mentioned from Varro in St. Augustine, De Civ. Dei. Lib. 10. Cap. 10
and that it over-flowed not so far as Egypt, nor its confines. Such also have
been the like other particular causes, by which Records have perished. So the
Old Attick Law, and the ancient Laws of Greece have perished. So the twelve
Tables amongst the Romans, and all the Old Civil Law Doctors upon them are
perished by Justinian. So the ancient writings of the Heathens, against
Christianity in the Primitive times of it, are perished also, being sentenced
to the fire, when the Emperors came to be Christian. Hence their quotations
are taken out of others; and the Imperial Laws concerning these things are to
be seen in the Vid. D. in proaemio. and C. de vetere Jure Enucleando, etc.
Digests, Et vid. C. de summa Trinitate. l. sancimus igitur, etc.
Code, and Et Novel. 42 De officinis, sive Tab. Constantinop. Cap. 1. etc.
Novels of Justinian. In like manner also of late, the Pontifical Canon Law was
attempted to be committed to the fire by Melchiar Adam in vita Luth. Besold.
Dissert. de Lib. Jur. c. 7.
Luther, at his separation from the Church of Rome, although against the advice
of the Lawyers of Wittemburgh, and however it continued in use by the consent
of the e Augustine Confession, and is yet taught every where in the Protestant
Academies. Nay, the like had like to have been the fate of Justinian's famous
Pandects themselves also: They scarce thoroughly flourished so much as forty
years after their Author, says In Instit. in. Proleg. De Juris prud. Romans in
Prol.
Baldus, Vulteius, and others, till partly by the Revolt of the Germans, Galls,
Spaniards, and others, from the Empire, in these nether parts of Europe, under
the slothful Emperor Vid. Niceph. Lib. 18. Zonar. Tom. Annal. 3.
Phocas, about the six hundredth year of Christ; and partly by the ambition and
envy of the Emperor Vid. Ciron. Lib. 5. Observe. Jur. Canon. Cap. 4, and 5.
Basilius toward Justinian afterward, he endeavoring to suppress them; and
partly by the Sacking and Conflagration of Constantinople it self by the
Saracens, under the Emperor Zeno, the Seat of the Empire, and the Chief Civil
Law Academy, and where perished One Hundred and Twenty Thousand Books, says In
Orat. de excidio Constantinop.
Aeneas Silvius concerning this matter, (a great number of Books in that Age,
and before the Invention of Printing.) The like fate also suffered Beritus,
another of the Roman Civil Law Academies, by an Earthquake. And by these, and
other the like causes (which 'twould be tedious here to relate) it came to
pass, that Justinian's Books were scarce any where seen or heard of for many
Centuries together; till at last about the year One Thousand One Hundred Twenty
and Seven, under Lotharius the Emperor, and Innocent the second Pope, both of
them waging War jointly against Roger of Sicily and Naples, in the Sacking of
the City Amalphi in Apulia, the Pandects were found, and bestowed on the Vid.
Borol. De Cath. Reg. praestant. Cap. 27. N. 26. Er Gerhard. Voss. in dissert.
3. De Symbol. these. 33.
Pisani assisting them, as a part of their Triumph, and reward of their
Victory. And from thence, and Florence, afterward, they came to light, and
into request again. So that thus then it has been in the World, as to these
things. And many the like instances might be given to evidence, That by these,
and the like ways, Humane Records, and the many Generations of men making use
of them, in several ages and Countries, have perished.

II. From hence then partly, The first state of men, and the several ways of
their coming together into Society.
and partly from the Histories of Moses, it will be evident by what several
ways men have come first into Societies. From the Books of Moses we are assured
of the first Creation, and of Adams first multiplying into a Family; and of
that Familie's multiplying into others, derivative from it; and so on, till at
last Families united into a Conjunction of Families; and Conjunctions of
Families into Towns and Cities, and they into Provinces, and they into greater
Kingdoms, Empires, and the like; according to the several degrees of ascent,
that these things were capable of, from the several circumstances attending
them. Genesis 4.1, 2, 3, 4.
Hence we read of Cain and Abel their first exercising the same Family-duty of
Sacrificing together; Genesis 4.17.
after of Cain's going forth, and building a City; afterward of the Kings of
Cities and Countries, and greater and lesser Territories, and the like. By the
like degrees of ascent also have men arrived into Societies, after any of these
either more general, or more particular depopulations of Countries, and
destructions of humane affairs, which we have mentioned. So after the Flood of
Noah, mentioned in the Scripture. So after any of the more particular floods,
and desolations mentioned; as circumstances have attended the cases of
Countries severally. In the first beginnings of these several sorts of
Societies, men have been always of greater innocence, more simple manners, and
purer integrity; because emulations, and strifes, and with them all manner of
corruptions and injuries, have arisen afterward, when by men's coming nearer
together, there has been occasion of the acting and exercise of these things;
and when by reason of the Worlds growing too little for them, propriety has
been introduced, and men have busied their heads and hearts about the
attainings to it. Hence was feigned the first Golden Age of the World by the
Poets, both Greek and Latin, (...) Lib. 1. Metamo^ph. in princip.
Hesiod, Ovid, and others; and afterward its growing into Silver and Brass,
and at last into Iron, and that quickly also. And the first of mankind have
been famed by all for their greater innocence of life and manners. Vetustissimi
mortalium, says Tacitus, Annal. 3.
nulla adhuc mala libidine, sine probro, scelere, etc. agebant: That the first
of men did lead their lives, having not yet been stirred up by evil lust,
without infamous dishonesty, or wickedness. Epist. 90.
And Seneca, Ignorantia rerum innocents erant; That they were innocent, by the
Ignorance of Evil; and the like: But then Laws, Wars, and such other things
came in afterward, together with men's nearer converses one with another; and
their mutual contests for the Pleasures, Honors, and profits of this World;
and their exercising all manner of evil acts and practices for the obtaining of
these things. Of the first Age says the Tragedian; Seneca in Hippolito. Act. 2.
-- Nullus his Auri fuit
Caecus Cupido, nullus in Campo sacer
Divisit Agros arbiter populis lapis.
Nondum secabant credulae pontum rates.
Sua quisque norat Maria, etc.
That there was to these no blind
Desire of Gold, no sacred stone in the open Earth
Did divide the fields, being an Arbiter to the people.
The credulous ships did not yet cut the Sea.
Every one knew his own Seas --


But then what follows?

Rupere foedus impius lucri furor, Ibid.

Et Ira praeceps; quaeque succensas agit
Libido mentes; venit Imperii sitis
Cruenta factus praeda majori minor.
Pro jure vires esse -- etc.
They brake the league, the impious rage after gain,
And Headlong Anger; and lust, which violently hurrieth on
The Inflamed minds; the bloody thirst of Empire
Arose, the lesser was made a prey to the greater.
Strength was instead of Law --
And the like Juvenal, Satyr. 6.
Prima peregrinos obscaena Pecunia mores
Intulit, and turpi fregerunt saecula luxu
Divitiae Molles. -- etc.
Filthy money first of all brought in amongst men strange
Manners, and soft riches brake the ages with
Foul Luxury --


And Lucan, -- Pereunt discrimine nullo
Amissae leges, sed, pars vilissima rerum,
Certamen movistis opes --
The lost Laws perish,
Without any difference. But, O ye most vile part of things,
Riches, you moved the Contention --


So that it has been then upon these accounts, that passions, and all man
manner of mischiefs following upon them, have always ordinarily come in
amongst men.

III. This then being the first state of men in the Cases mentioned, Whence the
necessity of Laws, and Government. Genesis 6.1.
and their primitive innocence; after their multiplyings on the face of the
Earth, and uniting into Societies (as the Scripture mentions) thus degenerating
into all manner of naughtiness; from hence sprang the necessity of Laws, and
Government. Factae sunt autem leges, says the Decretum, Part prima, Distinct.
quart.
ut earum metu humana coerceatur Audacia, tutaque sit inter improbos
innocentia: That Laws were made, that by the fear of them the boldness of men
might be restrained, and that innocence might be safe amongst wicked men.

And, Jura inventa metu injusti fateare necesse est: Horat. Sermon. Satyr. 3.

We must needs confess, that laws were found out for fear of injury.


De Fast. 3. Ovid.
And, Inde datae leges ne fortior omnia possit.
That from hence sprang Laws that he that was strongest might not rule all.


And, Horat. Sermon. 1. ibid.
Oppida caeperunt munire, and ponere leges;
Nequis Fur esset, neu Latro, neu quis Adulter.
Men began, after a little time in the world, to fortify Towns, and make Laws,
That none should be a Thief, nor open Robber, nor an Adulterer.
And because that these matters of Lust, quarrels, etc. have been generally
common to all Ages of men; and also that the ways of Wars, Laws, etc. for
the ending and restraining of them by consent, have been alike common;
Therefore it is, that the Civil-Law asserts them to be of the Law of Nations.

L. Ex hoc Jur. D. De justit. and jure.
Ex hoc jure gentium, says Hermogenes, introducta sunt bella, discretae
gentes, regna condita, dominia distincta, agris termini positi, aedificia
collata, commercia, emptiones, venditiones, locationes, conductiones,
obligationes institutae: That from this Law of Nations it was, that wars were
first brought in amongst men, That Nations were divided, Empires were set up,
Dominions were distinguished, Bounds were set to Fields, Houses built,
Intercourses of Merchandise, buyings, sellings, lettings, hirings, and
obligations were appointed. And, In Institut. Tit. De jure naturali, etc. lib.
1.
jus autem gentium, says Justinian, omni humano generi commune est: Nam, usu
exigente, and humanis necessitatibus, gentes humanae Jura quaedam sibi
constituerunt. Bella etenim orta sunt, and captivitates secutae, etc. That the
Law of nations is common to all mankind: For, Custom, and humane necessities
requiring it, the Nations of men did constitute certain Laws for themselves:
For wars arose, and Captivities followed. And thus then, by the general consent
of men, is still evident the springing of Laws and Government thus from humane
necessities.

The ways by which men have arrived at Government.
IV. The ways by which men have arrived at Empire, or Government over
Societies, are many. And indeed as many as the ways have been, by which they
have united into Societies, according to the circumstances of their several
Cases, already pointed at in the mention of those other things (viz.) Adam the
first man was Created Monarch of the World, by the voice of Nature, and of God
himself from Heaven, bestowing it upon him: By the voice of Nature, as he was
the Father of all those that sprang from him; and by the voice of God, as it is
mentioned in the Scripture, Genesis 1.28. So Cain also, as the Elder, had the rule
over his younger Brother, in express Terms, bestowed upon him, Genesis 4.7. And
so Noah, after his coming out of the Ark, retained the same power that Adam
had. And it is a Current Tradition, See Maimon^des, and the Rabbis; and the
Commentators on these places of Genesis. (viz.) Ainsworth, and Selden's Mare
Clausum. lib. 1. cap. 4. Bodin. de repub. lib. 2. cap. 2. and Sr Robert
Filmer's Observations on Grotius p. 32, etc. Polit. lib. 1. cap. 8. De Repub.
lib. 1. cap. 4.
both amongst the Hebrews, and the generality of Christians, both Divines and
Politicians, that these were both Kings and Priests in their own Families: And
that Cain and Abel brought their Sacrifices to Adam their Father, to offer for
them, etc. And that this Power of Government was lodged in the several heads of
Families afterward; as there is no doubt but it was, so far forth as there was
regular proceeding amongst them, because it belonged to them thus by the Law of
Nature. And from hence, it may be well concluded, was derived the power of life
and death, which was conceded to Parents over their children, in the same
manner, as Kings had it over their Subjects in their more public affairs.
(...), says Aristotle, That the power of Parents over their children was like
that of Kings over their subjects. And, Fallit Justinianus Augustus, says
Bodin, That the Emperor Justinian was out, in his asserting, that no other
Nations had so much power over their children, as the Romans had, by their
Civil Law conferring it upon them; as is to be seen in the body of it, and
partly in the reputed Fragments of the twelve Tables yet remaining: Thus then
as to Moses his History. Vid. Fragment, Duod, Tabular. L. sipater silium, etc.
Polit. lib. 3. cap. 11.
And it does not appear from any humane Records, That there was any Government
but by Kings in the World, till it was almost three thousand years old. Prisci
Homines, says Aristotle, sub Regibus vivebant; That the ancient of men did
live under the rule of Kings. And, Principio rerum, Gentium, Justin. lib. 1. in
princip. In Theseo. Plutarch. Strabon, etc.
Nationumque Imperium penes Reges erat, says the Historian; That in the
beginning of humane affairs, of Countries, and Nations, the Dominion over them
was in the hand of Kings. And Plutarch affirms, that the first that gave over
Regal Power, and framed a Popular State, was Theseus: And he quotes Aristotle,
as of the same mind. And Theseus flourished about the year of the World, Two
thousand seven hundred and twenty. Others date a popular State in Greece from
others afterward. But it is certain that all the first writings of the World,
now extant, Homer, and others, sound only of Kings, the rightful Successors (it
is to be supposed) a great many of them, of the dispersed heads of families,
and all of them their partakers in the same kind of Government. As to profane
Histories, and other writings of the Heathens, and the several kinds of causes
of the changes and destructions of humane affairs, which I have mentioned, Hic
Supra, Sect. 1.
and besides what are mentioned in Scripture; the ways, by which men have
arrived at Government in Countries, after desolations made by those causes of
destruction, or otherwise, when, without such Calamities there has happened a
change in their Government, are ordinarily assigned in the like manner, by
those who write of these things. Some have supposed men to have come together
Ex terra geniti, aut servati ex aliqua vastitate; being born from the earth, or
having been saved out of some great desolation. So Aristotle; The like
Herodotus, Polit. lib. 2. cap. 6.
and others recite concerning the Egyptians, the fame of their springing from
Nile; The Ethiopians, their being the first men formed, by reason of the
nearness of the Sun to them. And the like is said by Acosta, De natura No^:
Orbis. Lib. 1. cap. 25.
of the West-Indians, and their opinion concerning the original of Mankind: and
so of other Nations. And, as to their Arrival at Government, some have arrived
at it by the pure consent of others, subjecting themselves to them voluntarily;
others by conquest; and some one way, some another, according to the diverse
circumstances attending their several cases, as has been said.

The Capital Distinction of Government amongst men. Lib. 1. c. 1. Sect. 1. Vid.
Interdicti veneti Histor. l^b. 4.
V. The first and capital distinction then of Government amongst men is,
according to the first division of their affairs above mentioned; and that is,
by the two opposite members of Ecclesiastical, and Civil, in relation to Divine
and Humane Affairs. It was the sum of the preface to the Venetians Writings,
publicly countenanced against the Pope, in the year one thousand six hundred
and six. Duplex a Deo, Opt: max: in mundo Regimen Justitutum: utrumque ab
altero independens: unum Spirituale, Ministerii Ecclesiastici; alterum
Temporale, Magistratus Politici: That there was a twofold Government in the
World, instituted by God; and either of those Governments independent from the
other, viz. The one Spiritual, of the ministry Ecclesiastical; and the other
Temporal, of the Political Magistrate. And therefore the reduction of all Laws
is to one of these two sorts, L. Justitia, D. De justit. and jure.
either Divine or Humane. Juris prudentia, says Vlpian, est Divinarum, atque
humanarum rerum notitia; justi, atque injusti scientia: That skill in Law is
the knowledge of Divine, and humane Affairs; Poloniae lib. 1. prop. fin.
the science of what is Just and Unjust. And as Cromerus says of the Poles,
that they are divided universally into the two states of Laics, and
Ecclesiastics; so in all other Countries, and in all former Ages there has
ever been the like division of men, where they have been members of Regular
Societies. And both these forts of Government are again to be divided by
disparates, Cap. 1. Sect. 9.
either into such in the General, or in the Special, or in the Individual, as
is above more generally mentioned.

The distinctions of consent also given to Government.
VI. The distinction also of consent given to both these sorts of Governments,
mentioned, is, that it is either Pure, as in purely voluntrary Associations
under one head; or mixed, as in Associations, to which men are principally moved
by the sense of Convenience, or Necessity. And both these are again, as
concurrent causes, either to the making, and constituting a Government; or else
to the establishing one already in the possession of Government. And both these
sorts of consent again are either personal; as every one that is sui juris
gives it for himself: or else obligatory of others; as in Parents obliging
their Children, by their act of consent. And both these yet again are either
only tacitly signified, as in acquiescence under Government (either of the
sorts of it, but now mentioned) or else which men are further obliged to by
some overt, Hic supra.. 5.
and apparent Acts; as in the case of their partaking more eminently in the
benefits of Government, of Subscriptions, Church and State Oaths given in, and
taken by them, and the like things common amongst men. And that men are obliged
to consent and submit to Government, both in the general, and in the special,
or any of the lawful sorts of it; and also in the particular, or individual; it
is both from the Law of Nature, which dictates such their consent and
submission to be yielded by them; and also from the express Divine Law, which
commands it from God. And as it is thus concerning Government in the State, so
also it is concerning Government in the Church, in any Society; That men,
either entering into, or else being already in the Society of any Christian
Church, are obliged to consent to the lawful Government of it, in these ways
mentioned. And they do also farther oblige themselves to consent, and submit to
it, more specially, and expressly by their particular Acts of receiving
Baptism in such a Church, partaking in Church Privileges, by Subscriptions,
Church-Oathes, and the like. And the like is to be said every way concerning
the State, in it is capacity, in relation also to these things, in their several
respects, which they bear to it; and as to their obliging men to acquiess under
the Government of it. And last of all, that consent once given in all these
sorts, and respects of it, does oblige men to yield their submission and
obedience due to Governors, and Government by it; it is remarkeably evident
from the dictate of the Law of Nature. For, where right accrues necessarily to
another (as in this case it does to Government) by a man's own voluntary Act;
That Act being once passed, a man cannot reverse, or revoke that right due by
it again. And the obligation induced upon men by consent, in the general, all
laws have ever Asserted: and both in the Canon and Civil Law there is no
appeal granted from Arbiters chosen by the parties Litigant: And the Doctors
of both Laws do constantly adjust the same things. Ab arbitris appellatio
permissa regulariter non est, That from Arbiters there is no appeal permitted
Regularly, Variar. Reso. lut. lib. 2. cap. 12. number. 3. The present lawful
Government is from God, proved in the general, and concerning the Church
Government in particular. Cap. 2. Sect. 2.
says Covarruvias: and so others.

VII. The present lawful Government, both Civil and Ecclesiastical, in any
Society, is the Ordinance and appointment of God: For so says the Scripture,
The Powers that be, are ordained of God, Romans 13.1. And the Governors derive
their Power also, or right of Governing, immediately from God; for there is none
else has it to bestow upon them but he; as the Omnipotent Creator, primarily;
and as the Supreme Governor of the world, secondarily, as was said above
concerning Religion. And so says the Scripture also, That therefore the Civil
Magistrate in the exercise of his power, is the Vicegerent, or immediate
Minister of God, Romans 13.4. Concerning the Civil Government; I shall prove its
being from God more at large anon. Concerning the Ecclesiastical, and the power
proper to the Church Governors in a Christian Church, Infra hic.. 15.
I shall evidence it here, and that from the Divine Law of Christ. So Matthew.
28.18, 19, 20. at his first giving them their Commission; All power is given
unto me in Heaven, and in Earth: go ye therefore, etc. So St. Paul, Heb. 5.4.
And no man takes this Honor to himself, but he that is called of God, as was
Aaron. And Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22, 23. with Ephesians. 4.8, and 11. And he gave some
Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers, for the
perfecting of the Saints, etc. And the like other Texts might be mentioned.
Hence in the Law of Moses, God himself gave particular Order for the Admission,
and Consecration, and anointing of Aaron and his Sons to their Priestly Office.
And the Heathens derived the power of their Priests from their Gods. Legib.
Dial. 6.
And Plato in his Laws would have the Creation of them determined by Lots; That
so it might be committed to God, to take whom he should please, by the disposal
of them: The very same thing which the Apostles of Christ did, Acts 1.26.
in the case of Matthias, in the New Testament. So also in the New Testament,
the Bishops of the Seven Churches of Asia are called the Angels of those
Churches: And the ordinary Ministers in the discharge of their Function, are
every where called the Ministers and Messengers of Christ. And therefore it is
the universally approved assertion of the Law Canon, and Schools, Praelationem
esse a Deo, That Prelacy is from God; and that for this Reason, says the Canon
Law, The Ecclesiastical Censures, rightly executed by Churchmen, are of the
same efficacy, and as much to be regarded, as if they were executed immediately
by Christ himself. So the Decretum, Decret. pars secunda, Causa 11: Quaest. 3.
nemo contemnat, etc.
Nemo contemnat Ecclesiastica vincula: Non enim homo est, qui ligat, sed
Christus, qui hanc potestatem dedit, and Dominus fecit hominis tanti honoris.
Let none contemn the bands of the Church; for it is not man that binds, but
Christ, who has given this Power, and the Lord has made men to be of so great
honor. And so also Aquinas, Prima Quaest. 96. In secundum sentent. Lib. 2.
distinct. 44. Quaest. 2.
Prelatio omnis est a deo, That all Prelacy is from God. And Durand, Prelatio
est in hominibus ex ordinatione divina, That Prelacy, in men, is from the
Divine appointment and Ordination. And it is the common vote of the Papal
Canonists, That Summus Pontifex est supra omnes gradus, and Constitutus solo a
Deo: That the Chief Prelate (the Pope) is above all Orders, and constituted by
God alone. Practicar. Quaest. lib. cap. 1. n. 2.. 4.
And Potestas Ecclesiastica, says Covarruvias, in hoc a Civili differt; quod
ea non est immediate penes totam Rempub:, sed fuit ab ipso Deo, Jesu, Petro ut
Principi, et Apostolis caeteris, eorumque successoribus concessa: That the
Power Ecclesiastical differs in this from the Civil (viz.) in its not being
immediately in the hands of the body of the People, to bestow; But it was
granted from God himself, Jesus, to Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, and to
their Successors. But I speak not these things to countenance what is meant by
them, by these men; but only so far forth as they make in the general, to my
present purpose.

VIII. In the controversy, The two constitutive causes assigned, from whence
the Civil Power is derived, in the controversy concerning it
concerning the original of Civil Government, there are two constitutive and
principal efficient causes of the Civil Power assigned. The one is God, and his
immediate donation of it. The other is the People, and their Authoritative
donation of it: And both are alleged. And because that this Principle of the
authoritative donation of the people, in this case; is directly opposite to the
immediate donation of God; and that also there are many dangerous consequences,
and such as are destructive to the very constitution of an Ecclesiastical
Uniformity in particular, and the Laws of it (and particularly the right of
Rising in Arms) which are derived from this authoritative donation of the
people mentioned; therefore also I will here farther state the Case concerning
both these matters.

IX. The state of the case then concerning the derivation of the power of
Government from the people, is thus; The state of the Question concerning the
derivation of it from the people.


1. A Primitive liberty of all men by nature, is laid down as the Ground and
Foundation of it.

2. The people, by their consent given, are said to confer the power of Civil
Government over them on their Governors.

3. The Governor set up by them, is stated, not as a Proprietary, but only as
the peoples Usufructuary, and Tenant at Will, in the mean time, in his
Government.

4. The power of Government is said to remain fundamentally (as they call it)
all the while in the people; and only the exercise of it, for the present, to
belong to the Governor.

5. The consequence derived from hence, is, that the people therefore may
resume it in case of Maladministration, and reduce all things again to the
state of Nature (as they call it) till another is set up.

6. That they may use the means, and exercise the right of Resisting, rising in
Arms, etc. for the deposing the Prince guilty of such Maladministration, if
occasion be.

7. And Lastly, All this is said to be appointed by God and Nature, for these
ends (viz.) The welfare of Religion, and the safety of Humane Society from
Tyranny. These then are the things that in our derivation of the Magistrates
Power immediately and authoritatively, in a special manner (and not only by the
concurrence of his general Providence, as our opponents say) from God, come
first to be examined.

X. First then, The principle of Natural Freedom refuted.
the principle of Universal Natural freedom is derived by our opponents, in
this matter, as the Law of Nature, from two Fountains or Spring-heads of things.

1. First from the Civil Law.

2. From the writings of the Heathens, both Greeks and Romans, extant in the
several Ages together with it. For this is observable, in this matter, that
although the writings of later times, asserting this Principle, are the
writings of Christians; yet there is little or no mention at all made of
Scripture concerning it.

1. Then for the Civil Law: There are several distinctions of liberty given,
and made use of, both by the Civilians, Philosophers, Poets, Orators,
Historians, Politicians, and others. Libertas est, vel Philosophica; that is,
that of the mind: vel Civilis; that is, of Citizens in their City, or Society:
vel Naturalis; that is, that of Birds and Beasts, when they are in their
Natural Laxity and freedom from us, says De verboru^ signific. lib. 10 verbo
Libertatem.
Brissonius, Johannes In Lexicon. Juridico. verb. Libertas. C.L. 44, 45. D. De
Adquirrend. Dom. L. 3.. Item feras. D. de ^quir. poss. Ferae. in fi. Justit. de
divisio. rer. D. L. Manumissiones. D. de Justit. ^^ Jure. E. L. Libertas. D. de
statu hominum.
Calvinus the Civilian, the Civil Law (c) Text it self, and other expositors of
the terms of it. And the like other distinctions, and sub-distinctions of it
are given, and made use of by these several sorts of writers. But the Natural
Liberty meant here, is that that is applied to men. So, Vt pote cum, Jure
Naturali, omnes homines liberi nascerentur; Seeing all men by the Law of
Nature, were born free, says (d) Vlpian. And after him, Florentinus; Libertas
est naturalis facultas ejus quod cuique fatere libet; nisi quod vi, aut jure
prohibetur: That Liberty is the natural faculty of doing that which every one
lists, unless so far forth as he is prohibited either by Law or Force. And D.
de Diversis Reg Juris. Quod attinet ad ad jus Civil.
Vlpian again, Quod ad jus natural attinet, omnes homines aequales sunt: So
far forth as concerns the Law Natural, all men are equal. And last of all Vid.
Instit. Lib. 1. Tit. de Just. and Jure. and, de Jure personarum. Et, de
Ingenius. Et, de iis, qui sui, vel alieni juris sunt. Et, de Patria potestat,
etc.
Justinian, in his Institutions, consonantly to these things, here and there in
the diverse titles of them. Thus the Law-Texts themselves, and the Doctors
generally, (and which is to be so much admired at in them being Christian) make
no great exceptions to these things; But some more expressly, rather assent to
them: So the Vid. in L. Manumiss. de Justit. and jure.
Glosses. Sed verius est, ut hodie nascantur servi; cum in hac part
derogaverit Juri Naturali jus Civil. But it is more true, that some at this
day are born Servants, seeing that in this matter, the Civil Law has derogated
from the Law Natural. And the like on the other Texts of the Pandects and
Institutions mentioned. In the like strain run Bartolus and Baldus, and the
several following Commentators on the Glosses, and Correctors of them
generally, Contius, Cicacius, and others. And the terms of Natural Liberty, are
frequent in the writings of the Civilians. What then is in this matter to be
answered to so Great Authorities?

Truly the first Commandment of the Law of Moses, will not suffer them to pass
for current. And which, because it is Divine, and their Authorities are only
Humane, it is necessarily to be preferred before them. And then, if that
Precept constitute the subjection of Children to Parents to be Natural; How
will any such thing as Universal Original Equality, and consequent Natural
Liberty follow? Cras respondendum est; This is not presently to be Answered: In
the interim, have not all the Hebrew Rabbis, and the Christian Divines, ever
accounted the fifth precept of Moses to be constitutive of such Natural
subjection? And therefore it is, that there is no mention of any such thing as
Natural Liberty, or the Power of Magistracy expressly from the people in
Scripture. And Grotius, and other Christian Civilians, who proceed upon this
principle of Natural Freedom, and yet own the subjection of Children to Parents
to be Natural, are to see to it, how they will consist with themselves.
Communis rerum usus naturalis fuit; And, De Jure Belli, and par. in Prolegom.
Ibid, Lib. 2. Cap 2. Sect. 2. Lib. 1. Cap. 1. Sect. 10.
hinc factum, ut statim quisque hominum, ad suos usus arripere posset, quod
vellet. And, Dominium, quale nunc est in usu, voluntas humana introduxit; and
the like says Grotius: That the common use of things was Natural; that from
hence it came to pass, that presently, every one might snatch away from another
whatsoever he had a mind to. And, that kind of Dominion, which is now in use,
the will of man has introduced. And yet, Ibid. Lib. 2. Cap. 5. Sect. 1. De
Imperio sum. pot. circa sacra. Cap. 1. De Jure Belli. in Prolegom.
Generatione Parentibus jus acquiritur in liberos; says he; That by Natural
Generation there accrues a right to Parents over their Children. And Paternum
imperium est natural, and antiquissimum: That the dominion of Fathers is
Natural, and the most ancient: and the like. What is the meaning of these
contradictions de eodem subjecto? If there accrue a right of dominion to
Parents over Children, by generation, then it is not by the Civil Law: And, if
not by the Civil Law, then where is the Natural Freedom of Mankind? And Grotius
himself confesses also, That the Civil Law does not always distinguish aright,
betwixt the Laws of Nature, and Nations, and the Civil Laws of Countries. And
the body of it compiled by Justinian, may better consist, in all the titles of
it, without the principle of Natural Freedom. In the distinction of Children,
into those by Nature, and those by Adoption; It F. Si tabulae testamenti nullae
extabunt. Et unde liber. L. 1 Et F. eodem. L. Liberi and L. Scripto haerede Et
F. de gradibus, and affinitatibus, and nominibus eorum. L. Si filium, and L.
Jurisconcultus.
prefers those by Natural Generation before the others; and it asserts
Generation to be a part of the L. Hujus studii. D. de Justit. and jure. Jus
natural est.
Law of Nature: and that the voices of Nature would have the natural children
to be first of all admitted to Inheritances, and the like. And why there should
not be a subjection and obedience due from children to parents, upon the
account of Natural Generation, as well as such a respect from the Parents in
preferring the Children, there is no sound Reason can be rendered. The like
also is the Case in the assignation of the degrees of Vid. D. de Grad. and
affinit. and C. L. Si quis de Epicopis, and oler. Et L. eum. Et L. Deo nobis
auxilium, etc. Comparat. cum secoto, declarat Arboris affinitatis, etc.
affinity, in both Laws: And the next of the Kin are first in order recited.
Consonantly to these things also have the wise Heathens delivered in their
writings. So Aristotle, Polit. Lib. 1. Cap. 8.
Nam qui procreavit, and amicitiae, and aetatis jure imperium obtinet: That, He
which has begotten, both by the ^ight of his natural affection to his
Children, and also of his Age, Hic Supra.. 4.
above that of theirs, obtains the dominion over them. And Plato gives strict
command for the honoring of Parents, both in words and deeds; And Ibid.
says, The first, and greatest, De legibus: Dialog. 4.
and most ancient Honor is due to them. And, says he, Quod de cultu Deorum
ignorare non oportet, id recte dictum ad honorandos parents proaemiorum erit:
Ibid. Dial. 11.
That there is one thing concerning the worship of the Gods, which we ought not
be ignorant of; That, that which is rightly said for the honoring of Parents,
ought to be one of the first things to be heeded. Moses himself could have said
no more. And the great Apostle of the Gentiles delivers the very same thing,
Ephesians. 6.2. That Moses his fifth Commandment is the first Commandment with
promise. The Laws of all Princes, in their particular Countries, have ever
established the same thing. Let the Laws of Charlemain, and others, be
consulted. It Is true, if men will proceed upon the principle of the Heathens
mentioned, Hic supra ^ Sect. 4.
of, Homines e terra geniti, etc. Of men's having been born from the earth; then
an original equity, and their having, at first, subjected themselves by pure
consent may be derived from it: but not so, by any means, from the opposite
principle of Adam's Creation: So that thus we see then, the Law of Nature, and
the consent of men, by stating such a subjection of children to parents,
removes totally this principle of primitive Natural freedom. The Law and
dictate of Nature is twofold; (both of them delivered by Vlpian, F. De Just.
and jur. L. Hujus studuii. Jus natural. Summae Aur. in Proaem. N. 6.
but not enough distinguished:) 1. That of the sensitive, common to Men with
Beasts. 2. That of the rational, proper only to Men. And so Hostiensis, Tempore
ante Legem Mosai came fuere tres Leges, (scil.) naturalis communis; item
naturalis rationalis, quae nihil aliud videtur quam naturalis ratio; item jus
gentium: That, in the time before the giving of the Mosaical Law, there were
three Laws, (viz.) the common natural; also the rational natural, which is
nothing else but natural reason; and also the law of nations. And, as both the
sensitive and rational natures do dictate to parents the love of their
offspring (the sensitive because of their similitude of humors (which is the
common foundation of all natural affection) and because they sprang from them,
and the like; and the rational because of their hopes of them, and that they
will be a defense to them hereafter in the world, and the like) so who will
deny, since the parents are those the children sprang from, and since they are
a part of their Families, and most properly under their Tutorage, in their
minority; and since they owe their life, and all to them; but that both these
Laws, upon these, and the like accounts, oblige the children also to
subjection, and the return of obedience to their parents. So then, if there
were no primitive natural liberty and equality of men (as I have evidenced from
these things) then neither is there any such liberty and equality as is
asser^^d by our opponents in this particular of this Question, belonging
naturally to their succeeding Generations, and in their several Ages in which
they chance to live under any Government.

2. The Great Authorities of the Civil Law, and Doctors, being thus confronted;
The next, from whence this principle is derived, is the writings of the
Heathens, the Greek and Roman Poets, Orators, Historians, Politicians, and the
like. And as to their writings, the notion of natural liberty is very illy and
unskilfully, by our adversaries, derived from them. For first, the notion is
only proper to the Civil Law, and Civilians, and so owned to be by themselves.
Let the Cardinal Brisson, and other Civil Law Dictionaries be looked into, and
they call it their sort of liberty, and distinguish it from the sorts of
liberty defined generally by all other sorts of Writers: Sed nunc videamus ad
nostram libertatem; But now let us return to our kind of liberty, says
Brissonius, after his recital of Cicero's and others definitions of it: and so
other Dictionaries. De verborum signific. Lib. 10. Verbo libertatem.
And if we will look also into the writings of these others, we shall find the
term Liberty made use of in the several senses of those distinctions, and
sub-distinctions, which we have above mentioned, Hic supra, in hac Sect. in
Princip.
and in which we have applied it to men. But these definitions touch not any
thing upon this of Natural Liberty, given by the Civilians in the mean time.
Let Aristotle be first consulted: Polit. Lib. 6. Cap. 2. and Lib. 5. Cap. 9. Et
de Repub. Lib. 6. Cap. 1. Ibid.
And it is defined by him, in the general, and as it belongs to every private
and particular man, to be, Potestatem vivendi ut velis, A power of living at
our own pleasure; and he says, that that was commonly held to be the property
of Liberty; Hoc enim Libertatis aiunt esse proprium, sic vivere ut velis: So to
live at our Pleasure. Amongst the Romans the very same definition also is given
of it by Cicero. Libertas, Paradon. 5. Offic. 1.
says he, est potestas vivendi ut velis; That Liberty is a power of living as
we will. And, cujus proprium est sic vivere ut velis: The property of which is
so to live as thou will. But here is not a word of the derivation of it from
any right of Nature in the mean time. Let us proceed to the consideration of
the term used by these men, as it imports a Civil Liberty, and relates to men
as members of a Society, and with respect to the public; and so, sometimes
they call it the peoples Liberty, when they had the supreme Sovereignty, as it
was in some ages both of the Greeks and Roman States: So Aristotle, in the
place but now cited, and others. Sometime again it is termed the Civil Liberty
of the people, under another subdistinction of it; when one of their own
Country, and who was their Natural Prince, Ruled over them. So Herodotus,
before Aristotle, In Cli^, in princip.
says, That all the Greeks were free, before Craesus his Conquest of them: But
he means only, that they were free from the Rule of of Strangers. Other notions
of Liberty, found in the writings of these Learned men, might be mentioned. And
because they have termed it Liberty in an eminent sense, in countenance of the
Greek, and Roman Democracies, and where the people have had the Supremacy;
therefore some men have supposed them, by that assertion, and other sayings of
theirs, to have countenanced their darling notion of Natural Liberty. Finally,
the sum of all is this; That, wheresoever any thing may be found, or supposed
to be found in them, which may any ways countenance this notion, Pessum dandum
est, it is not to be suffered to stand in Competition with the Authority of
Moses, and of right Reason assenting to it.

The other Propositions concerning the Power of Magistracy fundamentally in the
People, etc. in the State of the Question, considered.
XI. This Principle then of Natural freedom being thus refuted; The other
Propositions concerning the peoples conferring Power on Governors, and the
like derived from it, in the State of this Question, follow to be considered:
and that as to their being derived from the two Spring-heads of things
mentioned also, and concerning any such Power Fundamental in the people, to be
conferred Authoritatively on Governors, and the other following conclusions
which are above recited; we find no such thing as any of these are, derived
from the Principle of Natural freedom mentioned, neither in the Civil Law, nor
the Greek and Roman Writers, extant either before any part of it, or at any
time contemporary with it. For the Civil Law, I shall have occasion to make
farther mention of it anon; for the Heathen Authors, they constantly derived
the power of Princes from God, Hic infra. Sect. 19.
and place them as inferior only to him; and make no such mention of the
People, as is cried up by our opponents in this business. So Homer, the most
Ancient Greek Poet; what more usual with him in his writings, then the Epithets
of -- (...), Odys. 4. p. 95.
and (...), and the like?

Ibid. p. 85. Iliad. 2. p. 63.
So in his Iliads, (...),
(...) --
But the Anger of a King, the offspring of Jupiter, is great;
And his honor, is from Jupiter --


Ibid. lib. 1.
So again -- (...) (...) --
-- And those who, defend
The Laws, from Jupiter --


Ibid.
And again, (...);
The Scepter-bearing king, and to whom Jove has given his honor.


In Trag. Arg. Supplicibus.
So also Aeschylus brings in the people speaking to their King, (...),
(...), etc.
Thou art the whole City, and the whole People,
Being a Governor, not responsible to any Tribunal.


And the like Aristotle. (...):

That a King according to Law is no kind of Government at all. And he is very
unskilful in the Ancient Heathen writings, who knows not, that the constant
notion of a King in them, is as of one that is the supreme in his Dominions,
and subject to none on Earth. Let us proceed to the Latins; and amongst them
Horace, Regum timendorum in proprios greges, Carmin. lib. 3. Ode. 1.

Reges in ipsos imperium est Jovis.
The Dominion of Kings is over their own people;
But that of Jupiter is over Kings themselves.


And the like Juvenal; Nihil est quod credere de se Satyr. 4.

Non possit, cum laudatur, Diis aequae potestas.
There is nothing, which the Power, equal to the Gods,
Cannot believe concerning it self, when it is commended.


And Seneca; Vbicunque tantum honesta dominanti licent, Thyeste, Actu 200.

Precario Regantur --
Wheresoever honest things only are lawful to him that Rules,
There the rule is Precarious --


So that thus they ordinarily of these things. And where they speak otherwise,
either it is in the Person of another, or else it is concerning the Peoples
Offices only, where the people had the Supremacy, and the like; or else there
is a very great distraction and confusion in their Writings, concerning these
things. Neither will any man be able to justify the Principles and Conclusions
mentioned upon any other grounds from them; and however they are but Humane
Authorities.

XII. Having examined then these Propositions from the Causes of them, let us
do the like also from their effects. The state of the Question on the Peoples
part considered also from it is effects.
Of which the first is this: 1. That our Antagonists render it utterly
impossible for a Governor to have right and power conferred upon him: for if
but one in a whole Society either dissent, or else do not give his consent (all
throughout the several Generations of the World continuing naturally alike free
from their Birth, and till consent given to any Government, as is asserted) he
is a Governor injuriously even to that one, and not by right. But Infants are
not capable of exercising any Acts of Reason; and so not of giving their
consent in this Case: and it is a Rule in the Canon Law, Scienti, and
Consentienti non fit injuria, neque dolus, That to one conscious, and
consenting to a thing, there is no injury done, nor deceit: And then the
contrary also is a Rule. And, Quod omnes tangit, Sexti Lib. 5. Reg. jur. 27.
Ibid Reg 20.
debet ab omnibus approbari; That which concerns all, ought to be approved of
by all: and the like. If it be said here, that the Acts of Parents bind their
Children (which is true in this matter, as was said above in the distinctions
of Consent) This ruins the whole cause, and stumbles upon the true Original of
Government, Hic Supra Sect. 6* See the Anarthy of limited and mixed Monarchy.
page 8, 9, 10, 11, etc. said to be Sr. Robert Filmers. Hic supra, Sect. 10, in
princip: Pro populo Anglicano, cap. 2.
says the reputed Sr Robert Filmer: So that there is no evading the dilemma in
this business.

2. In the putting the power of Government into the peoples hands, they proceed
without any warrant from Scripture: Little or no mention at all is made of it,
as I noted but now. Mr. Milton in his intemperate discourse against Salmatius,
produces one Text for it, and but that one: and that is Deuteronomy. 17.14. When thou
art come into the Land, which the Lord thy God gives thee; and shall say, I
will set a King over me, like as all the Nations about me: -- And one would
think he might have answered himself from the very next verse, that is, verse.
the 15. Thou shall in any wise set him King over thee, whom the Lord thy God
shall choose (i. e.) God shall have the authoritative, and original designation
and appointment of the person, whom he will invest with that power; and thou
shall consent to him, and own him by all the inferior Acts which belong to the
people in Constituting him in his kingdom; as it was in the case of Saul,
David, Solomon, etc. The people brought gifts, Cried, See Ainsworth, Diodati
etc. in loc.
God save the King, and the like; but God himself sent his Prophets to Anoint
them, and invest them with their Power. The like answer is to be given to that
of St. Peter, 1 Pet. 2.13. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man; but
then it is for the Lords sake, who invested them with their Power. And,
according to this Tenor, runs the whole strain of the Scriptures, as will be
instanced in further anon.

3. In stating Princes to be only Vsufructuaries, they make the people to be
Supreme (viz.) by their supreme Power of Taxing Princes continually, and
calling them to an account for their Actions, and the like. For Majestas est
summa in Cives, ac subditos, legibusque soluta potestas, De Repub. lib. 1. cap.
8. in. princip.
says Bodin; That Majesty is the Supreme Power over the Citizens, and
Subjects, and that which is at liberty from the Laws. And (...) etc. They
which are like to Kings, do put a period to affairs, De legib. Dial. 6. circa
Med:
says Plato: And so all other Politicians, in stating the Supreme Power; as
necessarily they must. So that the People then, in this case mentioned, are the
Supreme, and have the absolute Power, and Princes are only their Subjects in
the mean time; and in so stating them, many Scriptures are contradicted; Such
as that of St. Peter just now mentioned, 1 Pet. 2.13. Submit your selves to
every Ordinance of man, for the Lords sake; whether to the King as Supreme. And
Princes are called Supreme there, both in opposition to the Inferior
Magistrates; which, some say, are to be the Peoples Instruments in the calling
Princes to an account; and also to the whole People, who are said thus to
Authorize them. Such also is that in the Old Testament, Dan. 2.37, 38. Thou O
King, Thou art this Head of Gold. Such also is that of Solomon, Eccl. 8.2, 3. I
counsel thee to keep the Kings Commandment, for he does whatsoever pleases
him: And Verse. 4. Where the word of a King is, there is Power; and who may say
unto him, what do thou? And this latter Text is the Text scaled at, as the
Fort Royal for the uncontroulableness of Sovereign Princes. Some give the weak
answer to it, of its being spoken only of the Kings of Israel; such as Solomon
was, who spoke it: Not considering their justifying the examples, as such, of
the people of Israel, their sometimes Rising against those their Sovereigns, in
the mean time. Others affirm it to be meant only of the just and lawful
exercise of a Princes Power; and not in the case of Male administration. Pro
Pop. Ang. lic. Cap. 2.
Milton particularly, That it is a precept delivered only to private men, and
not to subordinate Magistrates, or the Representative of the people; whom he,
and others make to be the people, by Interpretation in this case: But any of,
these things will not salve this Text. And, the truth is, that grant they but
these two things, which also are denied to it by none: 1. That it is but at all
assertive; And, 2. But of any just Power in Kings whatsoever; and then the
terms of it are too large to intimate in themselves any such limitation, as is
made to it; or otherwise to admit of it, unless there were a necessity from
some more cogent contrary Text of Scripture. And if the opponents part could
produce but the like evident and numerous Texts, to those that are produced
against them, there would be more credit given to their cause.

4. In stating it lawful to exercise the Right, and to use the means of
Resisting, Rising in Arms, and the like, for the calling Princes to account.

1. They render it impossible for any Government to stand.

2. They contradict other the like most evident Texts of Scripture, which
condemn it.

1. Impossible for any Government to stand; that is, the Corruptions, and Lusts
of men being considered, and so taking an object, as a Crown, and a Kingdom,
being proposed to the eye of covetous, ambitious men. For who shall be judge in
this case, of a Princes male administrations? And these things being taken into
consideration, it must needs be acknowledged, that there will never want
pretenses for Rising, till in the end there be neither Government, nor Humane
Society. And it is but merely Lusory, and spoken to no purpose in this matter,
what Grotius and others of our adversaries say, thinking by it to provide for
the conservation of the Authority, and the safety of Governors; That, Standum
est promissis; and, that consent once given to them, does oblige to obedience,
and submission, and cannot be retracted. Alas, What is this, since in the mean
time they allow so many starting holes, to the lusts of men, for retraction, by
making the consent in this case not to oblige generally, and by conceding it to
such variety of persons, and in such variety of cases, to have the right of
freedom from the obligation induced on them by such consent, and to be left at
liberty to Rise against Princes? Junius Brutus, In vindiciis contra Tyrannos,
Quaest. 2. post princip. Et vid. Poraeum in Romans 13. Explicat. dab. de pot.
civ. prop. 2. De Jure Belli. Lib 1. Cap. 2. Sect. 6. (...). 1 Pet. 2.14.
and others, put the power of Rising into the hands of the inferior
Magistrate, for the prevention of Tumults, by the disorderly (as they call it)
Rising of the People. To this Grotius, (with a censure of such men's too much
serving the times and places wherein they lived, who have written such things)
answers; That the inferior Magistrates, are in relation to the Supreme, but as
subjects, and private persons, and those that are sent by him, as the Scripture
says; although in relation to private persons, they are Magistrates. Others
concede this power even to any private persons, who have Valor and Power
enough in their hands for the Leading of the Multitude in their Insurrection.
Others say, they Rise not against the Authority, but against the Person of the
Prince: But the Person of the Prince is necessary to the support of his
Authority; and his Authority renders his Person Sacred. Others say, there ought
not to be any Rising at all, but in cases of extremity. Concedimus rectorem non
facile mutandum: We grant that the Governor is not easily to be changed, Pro
Pop. Anglic. Cap. 6. In Epit. in 4tu^ Decretal. Part. 2dae. Cap. 3. Sect. 4. N.
6. In vindic. contra Tyran. Quaest. 2. Adversus Monar^htam. Lib. 3 Cap. 8. De
Jure Belli. Lib. 1. Cap. 4. Ibid. Lib. 2. Cap. 2. Sect. 2. and Alibi. Et Lib.
1. Cap. 4. Sect. 7. and Alibi.
says the late Milton (the very words of Covarruvias, and the other Papal
Canonist.) And Omnia prius tentanda; That all other things are first to be
tried, says Junius Brutus, and the like, the others of them, that consider the
many hazards in the change of a Governor. Others concede a Rising, with
certain more particular limitations. Barclay also in the case of extreme
Tyranny, and in defense only. Grotius upon supposition that the Public Weal
receive no damage by it, and that the Person and Life of the Prince be spared.
And he makes frequent use of that Rule, In omnibus legibus humanis summa
necessitas videtur excepta: That extreme necessity seems to be excepted in in
all Humane Laws. Yet that is to be understood, only where the taking the
liberty of the exception, will either outweigh, or at least recompense the
evil accruing by the deviating from the Rule. But we leave all this to the
consideration of any versed in Histories of Times, and Humane Affairs; whether
any of these things do enough attend to the Lusts and Corruptions of men, the
giddiness of the Multitude, and the licentiousness of popular insurrections;
all which do not use to proceed by Logical Rules, and cases of Conscience,
especially when so tempting a thing, as the Dominions and Crown of a Prince (as
we have said) is lying open to the Conqueror. The Kingdoms of the World, and
the Glory of them were the third and last essay made, Mat. 4.8.
by the Great Tempter himself, upon the very Savior of the World. Who then
shall justify these allowances of Rising in these Cases against Princes?

2. They contradict plain Texts of Scripture in these things also; And they are
such as command obedience generally, and submission to be yielded to Princes,
and that in opposition to the resistance of them. Such are, Romans 13.1. Let
every soul be subject to the higher powers. And, 1 Pet. 2.13. Submit your
selves to every Ordinance of man. And, Romans 13.2. Whosoever therefore resists
the Power, resists the Ordinance of God: and Verse. 5. Wherefore ye must needs
be subject, not only for wrath, but for conscience sake. And it is that First
Commandment, (which I have above mentioned) concerning our Neighbor (and so
much applauded by Plato, and others) in Moses his Tables, Exodus 20.12. Honor
thy Father and thy Mother: See Tit. 3.1. 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. 1 Pet. 2.17, etc. De
Jure Regni apud Scot. prope fin.
And the like other Texts might be mentioned. Frivolous are the exceptions then
that are made to so evident Texts of Scripture. Buchanan, and some others, will
venture to say, That the New Testament Texts against Rising were only
Temporary, and intended for the Apostles, and Primitive times, till the
Christian Church could get Power of Resistance into their hands. But the
Primitive Christians never had such a Judgment of them, nor can it be thought
that they durst imagine St. Paul so to prevaricate. And the terms of the Texts
are, in the Letter of them, too general: and I do believe, will never be
certainly nor safely limited, in favor of conceding resistance while the world
stands. So others produce the Examples of the Guards Rising against Athaliah,
Ehuds killing Eglon, Jehu's killing Jesabel, and the like, to confront these
Scriptures by. But these, and the like acts in Scripture, were either made use
of on Usurpers (and so are but impertinently alleged) or else from
extraordinary command, or impulse (and so not ordinarily imitable) or else down
right impious (and so not imitable at all) or else at best are but dubious, and
so not to be compared with such evident Texts to the contrary. And last of all,
In Vindic. contra Tyran. Quaest. 2.
Junius Brutus draws a particular Argument, in the case of Religions being
endangered by any Prince, from a Covenant made, says he, by the Jews with God,
to continue in his True Religion: But the consequence is not good from a
Covenant made with the Jews Church to the like to be necessarily made with any
one Church of the Gentiles, in any supposed case whatsoever. Neither, in case
the Supreme Magistrate amongst the Jews should have turned to Idolatry, had
there been any necessity from that Covenant, of the peoples taking the way of
Rising, for their opposing him in it, unless God had particularly prescribed
it, because God could have prevented the Destruction of that Church, by many
other ways evidently more commodious both for their Divine and Humane Affairs:
as we see he did also in diverse presidents, that might be given from the
Scripture History: And the Jews, by the pretended Covenant made by them in the
mean time, could not be obliged any further, on their part, then to the use of
lawful means actively, and at last to passive obedience.

Last of all, the principle of Rising in Arms, particularly in defense of the
matters of Religion, and of and Ecclesiastical Uniformity refuted. Lib. 2. Cap.
5. and alibi. Lib. 2. Cap. 2. and alibi.
XIII. But because this pretense of Rising in Arms in Defense of Religion, and
particularly in opposition to the Laws of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity, in any
State, does use to be the most popular, so consequently the most dangerous to
the Public of any lightly that is pitched upon by any Innovators, or
Ringleaders of Sedition (and who will be made further mention of hereafter) in
any State: and because that for the Popularities sake of this most specious,
and prevalent pretense (the prevalency of which also with the Vulgar will be
made further mention of hereafter) it does use the most frequently to be
pitched upon, and made use of for the serving the designs of the persons, and
in the case mentioned. And, lastly, because also that it will be in vain that
an Ecclesiastical Uniformity, and the Laws of it, in any State, should be
constituted, if it shall be left free to men, by their Rising against Princes,
to break all the bands of obedience both to those and other Laws, either purely
at their pleasure, or else (which is in effect, and in this business much at
one) when their diverse impotent fancies and opinions in matters of Religion
particularly, shall lead them to it: therefore we will here, in somewhat a more
special manner, and before we pass farther, refute this Principle, and pretense
mentioned; and that only by these three Arguments, briefly:

1. That the Public care of Religion is not (in Humane Societies) the proper
and supreme charge of any private person (as shall be hereafter evidenced: Lib.
1. Cap. 5.
) and therefore he that shall undertake to make use of this extreme means of
open Rising in Arms for the Public Safety, and Defense of it (besides the
simple sinfulness of the means used) shall introduce himself into another man's
Province, and meddle with that which is not required at his hands. If any man
say here that he is bound to take the Magistrate upon him; What? in opposition
to the Magistrate; and to the use of his Power and Faculties? This will meet
with all the difficulties that have been already mentioned; and in the
consideration of this case of Rising in the general.

2. The undoubted strain of the Christian Religion, particularly, is absolutely
against this Principle, and pretense mentioned: (viz.) it appoints not
propagation of Religion to be made by the sword. That is Mahomets Law, In
Alcoran.
In Nomine Dei boni viri pugnent: In the Name of God let good men fight, says
he, although not in the case mentioned neither. But the Law of Christ, on the
contrary, and the main drift of it forbids to do evil, that good may come of
it; Commands, by well doing, to put to silence the tongues of evil men;
Presses to humility and patience, and prayer, promises the third Heaven and
Paradise to Martyrdom, and to such as take up their Cross, and follow their
Master; nay, a more weighty, and immortal Crown, and an hundred fold recompense
for suffering for Christ, and for righteousness sake; and in case of
persecution, Certe ubi Superiores, ob Religionem, mortem intentant Christianis,
Christus fugam concedit; his scilicet, quos officii necessitudo nullo loco
alligat; De Jure belli Lib. 1. Cap. 4.. 7.
ultra fugam nihil, says Grotius: That truly where the Superiors do threaten
death to Christians, for the sake of Religion, Christ does concede flight,
(viz.) to those, whom obligation of duty does not tie to any place, but beyond
slight nothing.

3. And Lastly, As by all these things which in the state of this question,
have been mentioned already at large on our opponents part (and whether they do
derive the affirmation of them, either from the Divine Natural, or Divine
positive Law; either immediately, or by consequence; and either as advising, or
permitting them) So also by their asserting this principle in particular, they
do eminently render Religion in the World inconsistent with Government. And
whether this Principle, Hic infra Sect. 17, 18, etc.
or the things mentioned be also for the good of all Humane Affairs,
comparatively with their contraries belonging to the debate of this question,
we shall examine anon. The proof of the affirmative part of the Quaestion, that
the Magistrates power is from God. Practicar. Quaest. Lib. Cap. 1. N. 2:. 1.
Ibid. Ibid.


XIV. Thus then for the negative part of the Question, that the Magistrates
Power is not Authoritatively from the People. And it is but a very poor and
feeble conclusion for so great a Doctor as Covarruvias, and others of the
Canonists to make, That the Civil Jurisdiction is in the power of the People to
bestow, and that from the nature of the thing, says Covarruvias, and the two
Laws of Nature and Nations; because men, having the use of their ordinary light
of nature in any Society, do easily perceive that a Governor is necessary for
the conservation of that Society: As if it were not a great inconsequence, that
because Nature dictates the necessity of some Governor over a Society, Ergo,
Ibid.
the people must needs have the Power and Act of Constituting him. And when he
says afterward, That, by the same natural light, they discern also that he can
be constituted by none other, and not by God; It is false, and a foul begging
of the Question. Ibid.
Of the like stamp is that also afterward, That the Prince is not immediately
constituted by God, and that it was by Divine positive Law, that God by his
Prophet, constituted Saul, and the other Kings of Israel in their Kingdoms.
This is to rob God of his Natural Right, and Power over Men, accruing to him as
Creator, and Universal Sovereign, Cap. 2. Sect. 2. and Cap. 3. Sect. 7.
as I mentioned above in respect to matters of Religion. These things then
being said, I proceed to the proof of the affirmative part of the Question;
That the Magistrates Power is from God, and that more particularly (as I
mentioned above) and only from two Topics, or places of Argument.

XV. First, First from Scripture.
then I will prove it from the whole current of Scripture; and that, first from
the Old Testament, and secondly, from the New: But before I come to do this,
here is one non-concluding Argument in this matter to be taxed; and that is, of
those who barely from the nature of the Magistrates Power, affirm the
derivation of it authoritatively, and immediately from God. And that because
the Magistrate has the power of Life and Death; which it is said, is not in
the peoples power to bestow; and that jus gladii must refer to God as the
Author, etc. But the argument does not conclude aright; and that because that
wheresoever the giving up of men's lives may make more for the Glory of God, and
the good of their neighbor, then the keeping of them does; there, both by the
Divine and Natural Laws, they have potentiam ordinariam, even, an ordinary
power conceded to them of the doing of it: Nay, they are obliged and commanded
to do it. (...), Polit. Lib. 8. Gap. 1. N. 2.
says Aristotle, That neither ought any Citizen to esteem himself to be his own
man; but that all owe themselves to their Country. And fear not them which kill
the body, etc. says our Savior Christ himself, Mat. 10.28. and Luke 8.35. For
whosoever will save his life, shall lose it; but whosoever shall lose his life
for my sake, and the Gospels, the same shall save it. Or else however, and
supposing that this were not so; yet God might be supposed to have conceded to
the people, in this fundamental and very extraordinary case, concerned in this
matter, of the erecting of Humane Societies, Potentiam extraordinarium, a
suitable extraordinary power of the disposing both every one of his own life,
and all conjunctly of the lives of others; and that together with the general
character pretended for their conferring the power of Government on
Magistrates: So that there is then no absolute necessity, ex natura rei, and
from the nature of the thing it self, only for the proceeding of this power in
criminal and capital causes immediately from God. And the Divine Precept of non
occides, will not, in the case mentioned, and by the exercise of such power in
such causes meritorious, be violated by the Magistrate neither, in the mean
time: But so much of this. We return to the evidencing the Magistrates Power to
be from God, from Scripture, as was said. And that,

1. From the Old Testament, and the voice of the Divine Law amongst the Jews;
for so it constantly, and plainly asserts. So, concerning the Supreme Civil
Government in the general; God exercised his Right in bestowing a general
Dominion upon Adam and Noah, by taking dominion away from the Kings of the
Canaanites, etc. So Psalm. 82.6. I have said ye are Gods. So Prove. 8.15, 16. By
me Kings Reign, and Princes Decree Justice. By me Princes Rule, and Nobles,
even all the Judges of the Earth. And Dan. 2.21. He removes Kings, and sets
up Kings. What can be more expressly said? So also in particular, concerning
particular persons. So concerning Pharaoh, (...) Constitui te.
a wicked King, Exodus 9.16. And in very deed for this cause have I raised thee
up. So concerning Saul, 1 Samuel 15.11. It repents me that I have set up Saul
to be King. And concerning David, 2 Samuel 12.7. Thus says the Lord God of
Israel, I anointed thee King over Israel. And concerning Jeroboam, in relation
to Solomon, 1 Kin. 11.35. But I will take the Kingdom out of his Son's hands,
and will give it unto thee: and verse. 37. And I will take thee etc. And so,
lastly, concerning Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 2.37. Thou, O King, art a King of
Kings; for the God of Heaven has given thee a kingdom, power, and strength,
and glory. And the like many other Texts might be recited.

2. From the Law of Christ, and the voice of it. So in the General, as above
mentioned, Romans 13.1. Supra Sect. 3.
The Powers that be are ordained of God: and verse. 4. for he is the Minister of
God: and the like. So also in particular, as Christ himself concerning Pilate,
Joh. 19.11. Thou could have no power at all against me, except it were given
thee from above, (i. e.) derivatively from the Supreme Magistrate. And the like
other Texts might be mentioned; all which and their Parallel Texts, speak
Emphatically of the person of God, as from whom immediately, and
authoritatively, in a special manner, and not only by his general concurrence,
and near Approbation (as our Adversaries say) the Magistrates Power is derived:
Neither can they otherwise be interpreted without taking away their
significancy, and accent, and putting an impropriety of speech upon them. And
if there were but any Scriptures comparably so pregnant on the other part of
the Question, as the constant Current of Scripture, we see, is on this; I say
again, it would add more credit to the cause of our Antagonists: But otherwise,
it is against all reason, and rules of Interpretation whatsoever, to expound
what is more evident by what is more dubious; and not rather what is more
dubious, by what is more evident.

XVI. Let us come then to the other place of Argument; Secondly from the voice
of Nature, and Nations.
and that is from the general consent of men, which is a popular Argument, That
the Tenent proceeds from the voice of nature alike generally dictating it in
them; and that there is no such thing as any Charter for conferring power on
Magistrates, neither from the natural, nor the Divine Law, nor that of Nations,
Hic Supra. 14. Hic supra. 4.
neither (as we recited above, was asserted by Covarruvias, and other Canonists
concerning this Question) conceded to the People. We might instance it in the
Jews, amongst whom we have said it is constantly held, That the first Parents
were the first Magistrates invested with power of dominion from God, and
Nature. Mare Claus. Lib. 1. Cap. 4.
And Mr. Seldom writes it as an Ancient Tradition, which has obtained repute
every where, concerning Noah; That he, as the Dominus fundi, after the Flood
was Author of the distribution of the World into private Dominions; and that
also by the appointment of a voice, or Oracle from God, he did confirm it by
his last will and Testament, etc. We might instance also in the writings of the
Heathens (some of which we have mentioned already,) and of others aliene from
Christianity. Hic supra.. 11. Et alibi.
But we rather come to the Christian Church; and to see what has been the
temper of that. And that, 1. In it is Primitive writers; and 2ly, In the late
reformed Churches, and others.

1. In it is primitive Writers: And they did constantly affirm the Magistrates
power to be so from God; And that both in the name of themselves, and also of
the community of Christians, their contemporaries. Apologia secunda ad Antonin.
Pium, circa princip: and floriat circa Ann: Christi 140.
So Justine Martyr, in his time, in his Apology to Antoninus Pius; Where he
says, that if they respect not the Christians laying themselves freely open to
all the world, they shall have no harm; but they believe rather that every one
shall receive according to his works. And poynting at the Emperors, (...)
According to the measure, says he, of Power, which they have received of God.
Ad Scapulam in princip. and floruit circa Ann. Christi 190.
So Tertullian also, in his time, writing to Scapula the President of Carthage;
Christianus nullius est Hostis, nedum imperatoris; quem sciens a Deo suo
constitutum, necesse est ut and ipsum diligat, and revereatur, and honoret,
etc. That a Christian is the enemy of no man, much less of the Emperor; whom
knowing to be constituted by his God, it is of necessity that he should love
him, reverence, and honor him. And again, Colimus Imperatorem, ut hominem a
Deo secundum; et quicquid est a Deo consecutum solo Deo minorem. We Honor the
Emperor as a man next to God; and, whatsoever is succeeding from God, as being
only lesser then God. And in his Apologetick, In Apologet adversu^ gentes. cap
30.
says he of the Emperors; Eum Deum esse solum, in cujus solius sunt
Potestate, and a quo sunt secundi, post quem primi ante omnes, and super omnes
Deos; That it is God alone, in whose only power they are, and next to whom they
are second in the world, and after whom they are first, before all, and above
all Gods. The like says Origin, In numeror. cap. 27. Homil. 22. and floruit.
circa Ann: Christi. 220.
on the 27th of Numbers; he puts the question to Moses, Quomodo non oras Deum
pro ipsis (i. e.) filiis tuis, ut eos constituat populi duces? How is it that
thou do not pray to God for them (i. e.) thy sons, that he would make them
Captains of the People? And the like Athanasius, In Epistola Synodali ad
August. Constant. Et floruit circa. Ann. Christi 330. In Romans 13. in princip.
Et floruit circa Ann. Christi. 380.
after him, speaking of the preceding Christians; (...). That their faith was
preserved, even to his time, by Christ; through whom he ruled even to them. And
the like St. Ambrose, after him, on Romans 13. Principes hos, says he, Reges
dicit: qui, propter corrigendam vitam, et prohibenda adversa, creantur, Dei
habentes imaginem, ut sub uno sint caeteri: That by these Princes he means
Kings: who are made so on purpose for correction of life, and prohibition of
evil, having the Image of God, that all others may be subject to one. And
again, Hoc autem in Seculo rectores ordinavit; But in this world he has
ordained Governors. Ideo dicit tributa praestari, vel quae dicuntur fiscalia;
ut subjectionem praestent, per quam sciant se non esse liberos, sed sub
potestate degere, quae ex Deo est: That therefore St. Paul says, that Tribute
ought to be paid, or that money which goes to the Exchequer of the Prince; that
men may perform subjection, by which they may know themselves not to be free,
but to live under a Power, which is from God. And the like St. Augustine,
Expositionis quarundi proposit. ex Epist. ad Romans lib. et floruit circa Ann.
400. De providentia Dei. lib. 7. sermon. 7. Et floruit circa an. 430. Libro ad
Theodosium, regem pientiss etc. and Floruit circa Ann. 440.
after him, on these words of St. Paul, Non enim est potestas nisi a Deo. And
the like Theodoret, on the same place of Scripture after him, and elsewhere,
speaking of the Power of Government committed to Magistrates, Quod summus ille
rerum Gubernator fraeni hujus habenas, tanquam Aurigis, ipsis commisit; That
the great Governor of the World has committed to them, as it were to
Chariotteers, the Raines of this Bridle. And the like after him also, St.
Cyril, in his book to Theodosius; he begins to him, Adeo, cujus est summa
Celsitudo, vobis, Christianissimi reges, humane claritudinis fastigium, etc.
incomparabilibus excellentiis, prae omnibus aliis exurgens, and exaltatum,
eximiaque ac honesta sort sunt data. From God, who is the Sovereign Highness,
To you, O ye most Christian Kings, is the top of humane Claritude given,
rising, and exalted above all other things, by incomparable excellencies, and a
singular and good providence. Finally, Let but any of these primitive Writers,
of the Christian Church, be viewed in their comments on the 13th to the Romans.
And as they do thus affirm on that Text; so, considering the Text it self, who
would imagine that they could possibly do otherwise? And so much for the
Authentic Primitive Writers of the Christian Church, both the Greek and Latin
Fathers.

2. Let us take a voice also of the later Writers amongst us. And that of those
also, which are held to be of most Authority, and better reception. The Civil
Laws of Countries, both former, Hic infra, Sect. 19.
and latter, we shall have occasion to argue from anon. We will produce here
the confessions of the several Reformed Churches. Harmon. Confess. Sect. 19. Ex
Helvetica posteriore, cap. 30.
See the Title de Magistratu Politico: So that of Helvetia, Magistratus omnis
generis ab ipso Deo est; institutus ad generis humani Pacem, ac
tranquillitatem; ac ita, ut primum in mundo locum obtineat. That the magistrate
of every kind is instituted by God himself, for the peace and tranquillity of
mankind, and so as that he obtains the first place in the World. So again,
Magistratus omnis a Deo cum sit, officiume jus (nisi Tyrannidem exercere
libeat) praecipuum est; 1. Religionem defendere, etc. That since every
Magistrate is from God, his principal office (unless he have a mind to exercise
Tyranny) is, 1. to defend Religion, etc. And so the Bohemian confession, Ex
Bohemica Confess. cap. 16.
Amplius ex sacris literis docetur, Politicum Magistratum esse ordinationem
divinam, and a Deo constitutum. Further it is taught us out of the holy
Scriptures, that the Civil Magistrate is the Divine Ordinance, and that he is
Constituted by God. And so that of Basil, Ex Basil. Confess. Art. 7.
Praeterea Deus Magistratui, suo Ministro, Gladium, and summam externam
potestatem, Bonis ad defensionem, Malis ad vindictam and Paenam, delegavit.
Furthermore God has committed to his Minister, the Magistrate, the sword, and
the supreme external Power, to the good for defense, to the evil for revenge
and punishment. And so the French Confession, Ex gallica Confess. Art. 39
Credimus Deum velle mundum legibus, and polititia gubernari, etc. Ideo etiam
Gladium in Magistratuum manus tradidit, etc. We believe that God would have the
world governed by Laws, and Polity; And therefore he has delivered the sword
into the hands of Magistrates. Ex Belgica Confess. Art. 36.
And so the Belgic, Credimus Deum Opt: Max: ob generis humani corruptelam
atque depravationem, Reges, Principes, and Magistratus constituisse; and
idcirco Magistratus ipsos Gladium armavit, etc. We believe that the God of
Heaven, because of the corruption and depravation of mankind, has constituted
Kings, Princes, and Magistrates, etc. and therefore he has armed the
Magistrates themselves with the sword. Ex Augustana Confess. Art. 16.
And so the Augustane, De rebus Civilibus docent, quod Legitimae ordinationes
civiles sint bona opera and Ordinationes Dei, sicut Paulus testatur, Quae sunt
Potestates a Deo ordinatae sunt, etc. Concerning Civil matters, they teach that
the lawful Civil ordinances are good works, and the ordinances of God, as Paul
witnesses, That the Powers that be are ordained of God.

Ibid. vid. ad finem Confess. dictae.
And the subscriptions of the Princes to it were, Caesareae M. V. Fideles and
Subditi. Johannes, Dux Saxoniae, Elector. Georgius, Marchio Brandenburgensis.
Ernestus, Dux Luneburgensis. Philippus, Lantgravius Hessorum. Johannes
Fredericus, Dux Saxoniae. Franciscus, Dux Luneburgensis. Wolfangus, Princeps ab
Anhalt. Senatus, Magistratusque Nurnburgensis. Senatus Rentlingensis.


To your Imperial Majesty Faithful and Subject, John, Duke of Saxony,
Elector. George, Marquess of Brandenburg. Ernestus, Duke of Luneburg. Philip,
Lantgrave of Hessen. John Frederick, Duke of Saxony. Francis, Duke of
Luneburg. Wolfangus, Prince of Anhalt. The Senate, and Magistracy of Nurenburg.


The Senate of Rentling. So also the Confession of Saxony. Ex Saxonica Confess.
Art. 24. Ibid. in fine.
Dei beneficio in Ecclesiis nostris haec pars doctrinae, etc. illustrata est:
docemus igitur, etc. a Deo institutam esse legitimam gubernationem, etc. By the
good Providence of God, this part of Doctrine is illustrated in our Churches:
We teach therefore that Lawful Government is from God. And see the express
subscriptions of the Divines to it. Ex Suevica confess. cap. 23.
So also in the Swedish confession: Juxta docent nostri Ecclesiasticae fungi
magistratu munus esse sacratissimum, quod quidem homini divintus contingere
possit: unde and factum sit, quod qui gerunt publicam potestatem, dii in
Scripturis vocentur: In like manner our Ecclesiastics teach also, that to
discharge the Office of a Magistrate it is the most Sacred matter which indeed
can be allotted to a man from Heaven; and from whence it comes to pass, that
those who have the Public Power in their hands, are called Gods in Scripture:
So that what can be desired more in these things? And where is the mention of
the people in all these, either Public or Private, either former or later
writings? And if the Argument of Authority shall prevail, and the common
dictate of men shall be thought reason, and to proceed from the common light of
Humane Nature in them; then what are a few opponents in the Christian Church
(and those only more private persons, and taxable upon many accounts) to all
these? And all these, both in their former and later writings which I have
quoted, if what they have so recorded, shall be said to be false, must be
avouched either to have erred, or else flattered Princes, and Colluded with
men. And then the Public Faith of the Primitive Times, and of the Reformed
part of Christendom fails (which God forbid) or else their Faith is true, and
rightly derived from Scripture. Nay, I appeal, in this matter, to the
generality of all Mankind, of Jews, Heathens, Mahometans (as has been partly
mentioned: Hic supra. 4. and. 11. and Sect. 16.
) And in the Christian Church, to the generality of Fathers, Counsels,
Historians, Lawyers, Politicians, Confessions, Schoolmen, and whosoever else
have been of any Received Authority, and so far forth as they have had to do in
these things, without being swayed by Corruptions. Sicut Apostolus dicit, Romans
13. Omnis potestas humana a Deo est, Primo secundae Quaest. 96, Art. 4, and 5.
says Aquinas. That as the Apostle says, Romans 13. All Humane Power is from
God. And, Princeps dicitur solutus esse a Lege, quia nullus in ipsum potest
judicium condemnationis far: That the Prince is said to be free from the Law,
because none can pronounce the Judgment of Condemnation upon him. In secundum
sententiar. Lib. 2. Distinct. 44. Quaest. 2.
And so Durand; Praelatio est secundum debitum Rationis, and Divinae
Ordinationis; That Prelacy is according to what ought to be by reason, and the
appointment of God, and the like. And so generally all others, excepting only
the Papal Canonists and Jesuits, and the like of that Church, who have
dedicated themselves to the depression of Princes, and the exaltation of the
Pontifical Chair, and Ecclesiastical Prelacy; and who have been the great
broachers of those principles, on the peoples part of this Question, in
Christendom; and from whom those few others of the Reformed part of
Christendom, The tendency of the negative part of the question to the good of
Religion, and Humane Society, disputed.
whom I have mentioned, have derived them; and men have put them in practice,
wheresoever they have desired Innovations.

XVII. These things then, on both parts of the Question, being thus said; let
us come last of all, to dispute the ends of them, and for which they are
alleged to be held, and practiced by each of the parties litigant, (viz.) The
welfare of Religion, and of humane society, Sic supra.. 9.
as was above mentioned, (i. e.) of Government also, and of the mutual
consistency each of these with the other. And for these ends then it is, that
the principles on the peoples part of the question also are said to be
intended, and consequently appointed by God to be put in practice.

The common good of Mankind, both in respect to Divine and Humane affairs, it
is true, is the great end of all Gods Ordinances and appointments, respecting
the Public amongst men: And so it ought to be also of all Humane Laws and
practices subservient to those Divine Ordinances, and respecting the Public in
like manner. And, but that every Governor in his Society ought to intend the
common good of it, as abovesaid, and as the last end of his Government in this
world, Cap. 1. Sect. 12.
there is no doubt of it. And, if he do not Act accordingly, he is accountable
for it, both in the Court of Conscience, and in the Court of Heaven. And when
the Question of the Princes being obliged, and how far forth to the Laws, is
disputed: That he is obliged to the Divine Laws, and to the Laws of Nature, and
Nations, and even to the Civil Laws also, by the direction of Natural Equity
(although not by any external force or Coaction to be brought upon him by men)
it is agreed upon by all both Lawyers and Divines: Ad C. 1.. fin. feudar. poss.
and alibi. Ad Auth. C. ne fill. pro patre Primo secundae Quaest 96. Art. 5.
Controvers. Illust. Lib. 1. Cap. 26. Number. 12. De Just. and Jur. Lib. 1. Quaest.
6. Art. 7. Variar. resolut. Lib. 3. Cap. 6. N. 8. In Orat. ad Nicoclem. Paulo
post princip. (...). Lib. 1.
So Baldus, Bologinnus, Aquinas, Vasquez, Sotus, and others. And therefore
Covarruvias does, in this sense, rightly tax the distinction of ordinary, and
absolute power in a Prince: Potestas absoluta, says he, de jure, non est in
principe: deinde haec ipsa distinctio potestatis ordinariae and absolutae in
humanis principibus falssima est: That absolute power of right, is not in a
Prince: And therefore this distinction it self of ordinary and absolute Power
in a Prince amongst men is most false. And Isocrates, in his Oration to
Nicocles, (...), etc. I think truly, that it is acknowledged by all, that it is
agreeable to Princes, that they should free their people from Calamities, and
preserve them in welfare, and cause their Commonweals from small to become
great. And the Poet Hesiod gives an admonition to Kings, from the elegant Fable
of the Hawk and the Nightingale.

(...).
(...),
(...), etc.
But now I will utter a fable to Kings, although also they are wise:
The Hawk so bespake the sweet-singing Nightingal;
Bearing her aloft in the Clouds, being snatched up in his Talons:
But the Nightingale did miserably bemoan her self,
Being pierced through with his crooked Talons: and he with imperious words so
spoke to her:
Unhappy Bird! Why do thou make a noise? One much stronger then thee has
thee now in possession:
Thou go this way that I carry thee, although thou can sing so well;
And I will either make my supper on thee, if I please, or else let thee go.
But thou, O Persa, attend to Justice, neither love to do Injury.
So then, this being said, let us come to the determination of this business,
whether it be most for the good of Religion, and Humane Society, (viz.) of
Government also, and the mutual consistency of them, That the Negative part of
our present Question, the Doctrine of the Princes Power it is being from the
people, and the other propositions attending it, be held and taught, or the
contrary. And I shall prove it concerning the contrary, (viz.) that it is most
for the common good of Humane Affairs, That the derivation of the Princes Power
from God, and the propositions attending on it be held and taught: And that
from these following Topics.

XVIII. First of all, from God himself, his having so stated it in the
Scriptures, The contrary proved, first from Gods having so stated it in
Scripture.
as has been mentioned. And it cannot be doubted, but that he has intended
the good of all Humane Society in it: And if so, then infallibly; and if so
also, then infallibly it is so. Religion, and Humane Society are Gods own
Ordinances; and he intends nothing that he has decreed, to hurt them. De
Natura d^or. Lib. 2.
Et enim si concedimus intelligentes esse Deos, concedimus etiam Providentes,
and rerum quidem maximarum, says Cicero: That if we grant the Gods to be
intelligent, we grant them also to be provident; and if so, then most of all as
to the greatest matters. And Homer, (...), Odyss. x

(...).
For the blessed Gods love not Evil,
But honor Justice, and the fitting works of Men.
But if it be hurtful to Religion, and Humane Society, that God has derived
the power of Princes from himself only in Scripture; then God must be said
either to have erred in the doing of it, or else to have intended the hurt of
these most excellent things: But the former of these thwarts the conclusion
above mentioned, Supra. Cap. 11. Vlt.
concerning the immutability of Gods Decrees relating to these Grand Ordinances
of his in the world.

XIX. The second Argument is from the general consent of the Civil Laws of
Countries amongst men; Secondly, from the Civil Laws of Countries, and their
having so stated it also.
which all certainly argue the consent of men who made them; and which all
cannot be judged to be intended for any thing else, but the common good: And
that whether they have been framed by the Prince himself alone, or by the
Representative of the people in any Society, as to the matter of them, and
passed into Laws by the Prince afterward. If by the Prince alone, and those
his Laws have stood for any time, his good has been inseparable (whether he
has rationally considered it, or not) from the good of Religion, and his
Society, in this matter. If by the Prince afterward Enacted into Laws, this
Community cannot be imagined to have aimed at any thing prejudicial to their
own good in it neither. But the Civil Laws of Countries, both former and later,
have all generally derived the power of Princes from God, and have taught the
Doctrine of the propositions on that part of the Question attending it. So
Romulus established it by Law (says the Cardinal Contarene, De Romans and ven.
Magistratuum inter se comparatione. N. 42.
out of Pomponius Laetus) that none should enter either upon the Chief
Magistracy, or other, Nisi Author esset Deus: So the Roman Civil Law, Deo
adjutore nostrum Gubernante Imperium, quod nobis a Caelesti Majestate traditum
est: God our Helper Governing our Empire, which is delivered to us from the
Majesty of Heaven, L. 1. De vetere Jure Enucleando, etc. Novell. ut differentes
Judices audire; etc. Constitut. 86. in Praefatione.
says Justinian to Tribonianus. And again, Ex quo nos Deus Romanorum praeposuit
Imperio, omne habemus studium universa agere ad utilitatem Subjectorum
commissaeque nobis a Deo Republicae, etc: Since the time that God has set us
up over the Empire of the Romans, we have taken all care to do all things to
the profit of our Subjects, and of the Common Weal committed to us by God. And
the like the other Emperors, and in the Old Civil Law. And the Principles
following upon this are no where, throughout the whole body of it, permitted to
be violated. The like also Plato in his Books of Laws, De Legib. Dial. 3.
taking pattern (we have reason to think) from the ancient Laws of Greece: He
would have the Sovereign power to be conferred upon the Prince by Lot. Septimum
principatum ad sortem aliquam producamus, eam Dei gratia, and felicitate quadam
contingere asserentes: The seventh and last pre-eminence let us reduce to some
Lot, affirming that to happen to any one by the Grace and Favor of God, and by
a certain peculiar felicity. And this even in his elective form of Government;
that, although the Lot was cast by men, yet the Sovereign Power was derived, in
a special manner, says he, from God. The like also is known to be the common
style of Princes at this day, in their Proclamations, Missives, Edicts, etc.
Such and such a one by the Grace of God. By the Laws of England, the King is
Reputed next to God. De Legib. and consuetud. Angliae. Lib. 1. Cap. 8. De
laudibus Leg. Angliae. Cap. 3.
Omnis quidem sub Rege, says Bracton, and ipse sub nullo, nisi tantum sub Deo:
That every one is subject to the King, and he is subject to none, but only to
God. And, Fortescue, nam cum dicat Apostolus quod omnis potestas a Domino Deo
est; Leges ab homine conditae, qui ad hoc a Domino recipit potestatem, etiam a
Deo constituuntur: Dicente Authore causarum, quicquid facit secunda, facit and
causa prima altiori, and nobiliori modo. For since the Apostle says, That all
power is from the Lord God; the Laws that are made by man, who receives power
from God for the making of them, are indeed made by God also: the Author of the
causes affirming it, That whatsoever the second cause does, the first does also
in a higher and more eminent manner: And so others. And the King is reputed to
be, Principium, Caput, and finis omnium: The beginning, the Springhead, and
the end of all things. And the like to these things also might be instanced in,
in the other Laws of Countries; especially those of Europe, as their Laws, and
Lawyers affirm, and where the Christian Profession is most generally
maintained. And where is it that any of these do derive the Sovereign Authority
from the people; or permit the propositions attending on it, which have been
mentioned? And those also that shall do so, must annex this one absurdity to
their Act in doing of it (i. e.) they must deny that there is any such thing as
a Sovereign Prince amongst men.

XX. The third Argument is to be taken from the comparison of the Evil Effects,
The third Argument, from the comparison of the evils of the cases of extreme
Tyranny, assigned by the Opponents; and what are to be expected from the
peoples part of the question its being held and taught.
which are ordinarily to be expected from the peoples part of this Question its
being held and taught; with the evils of those cases, if permitted, which our
Opponents call cases of extreme Tyranny in Princes, and in which regularly (as
they say) they concede a rising in Arms against them. And if the Evils to be
expected from the peoples part of the question it is being held and taught, be
greater then those of the cases of Tyranny assigned, and wherein, according to
the Doctrine of our Adversaries, the peoples part of the question should be put
in practice; then it must needs follow (even by our Adversaries own confession,
and according to their stating their own Case) That it is better for Religion,
and Humane Society, that the other part be held and taught, generally, and per
omnia, in Humane Societies: Let us examine these Opposites.

1. The Cases, called cases of extreme Tyranny, and assigned as such, by our
Opponents, as wherein the people should rise against Princes, depose them, etc.
are said to be cases of extreme and certain danger in the general. We may
resist, says Grotius, De Jure Belli. Lib. 1. Cap. 4. Sect. 7.
In summo certissimoque periculo: In extreme and most certain danger. Although
how that shall be judged of certainly (as it ought to be in a matter of such
weight as this is) since it is in the mind and breast of a Prince to desist
when he will from Tyranny, will not be so easily determined: But if we enquire
further, and ask of what number or quality the persons ought to be; who should
be thus in danger; it is answered.

1. That Barclay concedes a rising to any considerable part of the People;
Populo and insigni ejus parti: and afterward, Ibid:
that indiscriminatim singuli, aut pars populi minor non est damnanda. Ibid.
It is a strange thing, that Grotius, from the danger of one single person,
(and that term is not restrained neither to any certain, or definite sort of
persons, as being of such, or such a quality; but the contrary is asserted)
should state his case so, as not to stick to run the danger of a Rising: But
these then are the Cases assigned by him, and others. And although in the
general (as has been mentioned) their exclamations of, Hic Supra.. 12. circa
med.
Omnia prius tentanda, That the utmost is first to be tried, and the like, are
frequent; yet these particulars do not well accord with them. And the Effects
then to be expected from a Princes Tyranny in these cases, are these, (viz.)
the voluntary, and obstinate transgressing of his duty; the slaughter of some
one, or other single person, or of some part, either considerable, or lesser
part of the people: For that a Prince should have the mind to slaughter the
whole, or greater part of his Subjects, Grotius often acknowledges, that it is
not to be supposed, when he recites so often, Ibid. Sect. 11.
Sint quibus Imperes; Let there be those, over whom thou may Rule; And, Vix
id accidere posse in Rege mentis compote, qui uno populo Imperet: That that can
scarce happen in a King, who is well in his wits, and who Rules over one people
only. And that wish of the Roman Emperor, That he had a Sword, that would cut
off the neck of the whole Roman People at once, was but an Ebullition of
passion, and an high flown strain, proceeding from a present heat of of Fancy
prompting him to speak beyond others.

2. Let us compare then with these things the mischiefs which are ordinarily to
be expected from the peoples part of this question its being held and taught:
And those are frequent Risings; so often generally, as Ambitious, Covetous, or
the like sort of persons (of which there are always some in all Societies)
shall have a mind to Innovate: Those are also the public desolations both
amongst persons and things, which do use to be made at such Risings: Those are
the loss of the lives of Princes by massacre, of Nobles in the field: Those are
the raising Civil Wars, and that because there are opinions ordinarily for the
Princes part, as well as for the peoples, in such a clashing of affairs; and
those caused by all the sorts of motives to them, both by Conscience,
Affections and Interests, as well as any other opinions whatsoever. But the
mischiefs of a Civil War are far worse ordinarily, then any sort of Tyranny:
such are also, by all these things, the perpetual unhinging, and unsettlement
of all Humane and Divine affairs, and the like: And finally, the rendering the
Christian Religion (which shall be supposed to dictate such Risings in arms in
the cases mentioned) inconsistent with Government by all these matters. And it
is but in vain, that Grotius endeavors to secure those cases by limitations,
to be observed by them that Rise; Infra Lib. 2. Cap. 5.
since the corruptions of men (of which I shall have occasion to speak of on
purpose, and more at large hereafter) do not use to act by Rule, and logical
distinctions in the world, as was said before in the case of pretenses for
Rising: Hic supra.. 12.
and corrupt men (for whom these cases of Conscience amongst others are framed)
are supposed generally not to proceed by any thing of Conscience at all: So
then, if these evils be greater then the evils of the supposed cases of
Tyranny, (if a Prince should be permitted to act them) The Conclusion is, that
it is better both for Religion, and all humane Society, that the affirmative
part of the Question be rather held, and taught, then the negative.

XXI. Let us come to a fourth Argument for it also; The fourth Argument, from a
further comparison of things.
and that is to be taken from the comparison of which of these parts of the
question there being held and taught, has actually, and experimentally been
the most occasion of evil to Religion, and humane Society: whether the one, by
its having been the occasion of the most frequent, and most destructive
Tyrannies in Princes; or the other, by it is having produced the most frequent,
and destructive risings? And who is there, that has read Histories, and
observed this particular in humane affairs, that will not vote the destructions
by rising (both as to their quality, and number; and both in respect to divine,
and humane affairs,) to have been the greater, and more to be bewailed many to
one? Let any one compare these things generally amongst men.

XXII. The fifth and last Argument we will lay down from one more particular
Comparison; of which is best to be Governed, The fifth and last Argument, from
one more particular comparison of things.
and withheld from damnifying the public (viz.) either a Prince, if actually
exercising Tyranny, or a multitude, if up in Arms to suppress it? A Prince
exercising Tyranny, is a single person ordinarily; A multitude, and the corrupt
men in it many: A Prince is a certain definite Person; the Ambitious, or
otherwise corrupt men in a multitude many times lie hid, till their designs
intended are wrought, and ripened beyond the help and recovery of others:
However they are at all times indefinite, because no man is ordinarily to be
trusted in a Temptation. It is for the Princes damage many ways, if he should
put a Tyranny in Practice; he loses his Subjects hearts, and their persons, in
both which his strength and safety consists every way; he incurres the danger
of Risings against him, Assassinations, and the like: But the Ambitious, or
otherwise corrupt members of a multitude, are prompted by hopes of getting, and
that even the Princes Crown, which does use to be more valued by such men, then
a Crown of Stars in Heaven: And lastly, a Prince may be persuaded (if he be a
man of Conscience) by his Divines; If not by them, by others upon the account
of other respects, to desist from Tyranny; but there is no dealing with a
multitude by any of these ways.

(...). A multitude is a certain untractable thing; Hecuba. Agamemnon. Lib. 16.
and if accompanied with Treacheries, invincible, says Euripides. And, variae
sunt hominum Cupiditates and judicia, presertim multitudinis, says Guicci
ardine: That the judgments, and affections of men are various, especially those
of a Multitude. It is better then, that the Doctrine running the hazard of such
a Tyranny (and that Tyranny also being forbidden by it) be thus taught, then
that the Doctrine running the Hazard of such a rising (and that on the
contrary, as a rising, allowed of by it) be taught and practiced in humane
societies.

The General Conclusion.
XXIII. Last of all, we conclude then, from these Arguments, and circumstances
of things compared, concerning this weighty matter of the public good, and
which is proposed as the sum of all the dispute in this Question; That it is
better for it, that the Power of Princes be derived from God, then from the
people. Grotius himself, and others cry out upon the Dire effects that have
been in the world, from the Teachings the Doctrine of ordinary Risings. Quae
sententia, De jure belli. Lib. 1. cap. 3. Sect. 8.
says Grotius, quot malis causam dederit, and dare etiam number possit, penitus
Animis recepta, nemo sapiens non videt; which opinion, to how many mischiefs it
has given cause, and being thoroughly received may give daily, there is no well
advised man that sees not. And yet when they have made their distinction of
ordinary, and extraordinary Cases, they term the certain danger of any one
single person to be a case extraordinary: and he that will look into the Books
of the Canonists, Jesuits, and the like writings of the Church of Rome (from
whose Towers this shot against Princes came first into Christendom) shall find
such casuistical Divinity, such talks of Daggers, Poisons, etc. intended, and
bent against those Princes, as would make the ears of any one, considering the
weight of such matters, and sincere in Christianity, to tingle. There is to be
found the Popes Supremacy over all the World asserted; and all the propositions
that lie on the negative part of this Question, for the subverting of Temporal
Princes, who, upon any occasion, shall oppose him. So Bellarmine: That all
temporal power is De laicis, lib. 3. cap. 6.
fundamentally in the people; But that the Pope has his Et de Summo Pontif:
lib. 5. cap. 6, and 7.. Item potest. hic Supra. 7. in fin. And. 14. in princip.
indirect power in Temporals from St. Peter; as also was mentioned above out of
Covarruvias, and others. So Suarez of exemption of Clarks from the Civil Laws
of States, and the like; Defen. cont. Sect. Anglic. lib. 4. cap. 17. and cap.
9. 3) De Rege, and regis Institut. lib. 1. cap. 10.
Marian and others. So Azorius, of part. 2. lib. 11. cap. 5. Interdicti venet.
Histor. lib. 2. circa med. Saaturel. Tract. de Haeresi, and Sismate, etc. Soto
de Justit. and jure. lib. 5 Quaest. 1. Art. 3. etc.
Excommunication of Kings, of deprivation of them of their Kingdoms, after
such excommunication of the Subjects being absolved from their Oaths of
Allegiance, of their rising in Arms (such as was endeavored by the Pope in
the case of the interdiction of Venice, and has been in many other States, say
their Records) of any man's Assassinating Princes, as Heretics, and the like
things, resolved of by him, and Sautarella, and Soto, and others. And it is no
wonder if that great Italian B: pp. That styles himself the Sun (in his Canon
Law, and elsewhere) and all Temporal Princes the Moon; If he that dates his own
Spiritual Power from St. Peter, and the Temporal Power of Princes from the
People; If he that affects a Monarchy over the whole World, and wears a Triple
Crown, as representing his Allmighty power over the three great Kingdoms of
Earth, Hell, and Heaven, for the Churches good, See King James his defense of
the right of Kings, and elsewhere.
as he says (and lo thus he has improved Religion, and the Office of his
Priesthood!) If such an one maintain, or at least connive at the looseness of
such Principles, and the leudness of such persons, in the stating the
particular Cases concerning them, as has been mentioned. Last of all, that
usual saying of Pope Paul the fifth, Interdict. Venet: Histor. in princip.
that it was chiefly in his thoughts, Audaciam Magistratuum Secularium
mortificare, To mortify the bouldness of Secular Magistrates; The Doctrine
afterward, in the Case of Venice, published, and allowed of by the Court of
Rome, Ibid. lib. 4. paulo post princip.
Potestatem Principum Temporalem subordinatam esse Ecclesiasticae, eique
subjectam, That the Temporal Power of Princes was subordinate to the
Ecclesiastical, and subject to it; The banishment of the Jesuits from the
Venetian Territories, Ibid. lib. 6. prope fin. In the Dining Rome of the Kings
lodgings. See the dangerous Positions, said to be Bpp. Bancrofts, containing
the Sum of these writings and Citations.
for their abetting such like doctrines as these; and in the close of all, the
Gunpowder Treason in England (horrid to be recited) And Sr. William Wade's
Chimny piece, and Monument in the Tower of London, will be sufficient
Testimonies to these things. And in the mean time, what credit is it either for
the Scotch or English Presbytery (as is laid to their charg, and their book,
and practices are cited to testify) or others, to follow the Principles of
these Churchmen of Rome? So then, having said these things, we have asserted
our proposition first mentioned in its latitude of sense intended by us in this
discourse, and necessary for the completing of it; and have so put an end to
this difficult and important Question.

CHAP. IV.
The third Proposition also asserted (viz.) that Religion and Government being
both so appointed by God, they must needs be consistent mutually amongst men:
And that their Consistency explicated, and stated.
I. The distinctions of Government (first above mentioned) applied to it is
Consistency with Religion.

II. The distinctions also of Religion applied to it is Consistency with
Government.

III. The distinctions of the Consistency of Religion with Government further
explicated and applied.

IV. The Consistency of Religion with Government Proved;

V. First in the General.

VI. More particularly, concerning the Christian Religion in particular.

VII. Last of all, the conclusion, and consectary deduced from all these things.

The Distinctions of Government (above mentioned) applied to it is Consistency
with Religion. cap. 1.. 8, 9.
I. WE have above defined Government, both in the General, Special, and
Individual: And have said that it is to be considered either as a Faculty, or
else in the exercise of it. And when we here treat of it is consistency with
Religion, it is meant of such in the exercise of it: And that, either Totally,
or Partially; Fundamentally, or in lesser matters. So the Government of the
Gentiles, both in Church and State, was inconsistent with the Religion of the
Jews Fundamentally, and in the main particulars of it. And so the Government
of Jeroboam, the Son of Nebat (so frequently and eminently instanced in the
Scriptures to have made Israel to sin) was destructive of the particular
precepts of the peoples Sacrificing solemnly at Jerusalem, 1 Kin. 15.30. 1 Kin.
16.26, etc.
1 Kings 12.28. Whereupon the King took Counsel (says the Text) And made two
Calves of Gold: and said unto them, it is too much for you to go up to
Jerusalem, behold thy Gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the Land of
Egypt. And he set the one in Bethel, and the other put he in Dan. 1 K. Cap. 16,
17, etc
Such also was the Government of Ahab, and the Idolatrous Kings of Israel, and
of the Kings of Babylon, at the Deportation, and the like mentioned in the
Scripture. 2 K. Cap. 25.
Such also that of Antiochus Epiphanes, at the time of his Invasion; and that
of Vespatian, and Titus, at the time of their Destruction of the state of the
Jews; and the like the Governments of others, mentioned by the same Jewish
celebrated Historian. Josephus.
Such also was the Government of the Roman Emperors, in respect both to the
Jewish, Christian, and some sorts also of the Heathen Religion, both before and
after the Crucifixion of Christ. Of Tiberius in his time, of whom Suetonius
says, That Externas Caeremonias, In Tiberio.. 36.
Aegyptios, Judaicosque ritus compescuit, etc. He repressed the outward
Ceremonies of Religion, the Egyptian and Jewish Rites. And so of Claudius in
his time; of whom he says also, that Judaeos, In Claudio.. 25.
impulsore Christo, assidue tumultu ^ites, Roma expulit: He drove the Jews,
daily tumultuating, out of Rome, Christ (as he calls him) being the stirrer up
of them to it: And that, Druidarum Religionem, Ibid.
apud Gallos dirae, immanitatis, and tantum Civibus sub Augusto interdictam,
penitus abolevit: The Religion of the Druids, amongst the Galls, which was of
horrid cruelty, and prohibited only to the Citizens, under Augustus he utterly
abolished. And so lastly of Nero in his time, of whom he says also, That,
Afflicti suppliciis Christiani, In Nerone. 16.
genus hominum superstitionis novae, ac maleficiae: The Christians were
afflicted with punishments; a kind of men of an Vp-start (says he) and
mischievous superstition. And thus all of these particular Governments, either
in specie, or individuo; being in respect to these Religions, either in the
General, or in some particular Precepts of them, inconsistent with them: But
this consistency of Government with Religion, by thus illustrating it from the
contraries, I here touch upon only, as falling in my way to other things, it
not being the principal design of my Discourse, as has been before first of
all mentioned. Supra Cap. 1.. 1.


II. Religion also was above defined in like manner as Government: And I
distinguished it first into such, either in the general, The distinctions also
of Religion applied to its consistency with Government. Cap. 1.. 2.
or special, or individual: And afterward, into either True, or False: And
afterward again, I laid it down as considered either simply or relatively. In
its simple notion, I have spoken of it principally already, throughout the
second Chapter: In the Relative I shall handle it more principally both here,
and hereafter. Ibid.. 3.
And when I here treat of the consistency of Religion with Government, Ibid.. 4.
it is meant of it both in the general, and special, and individual. Ibid.. 5.
And of the True, totally, and necessarily; and of any False, necessarily also,
so far forth as it partakes of the precepts of the true, but only actually
otherwise. So the Gentile prescripts of Religion, so far forth as they did
partake either of the natural or positive prescripts of the true, did, either
as to the one, or other sort of them, consist necessarily with the lawful
particulars of their several Governments. And so the Mohammedan Religion, in
respect to the Mohammedan Government at this day. And in all Regions in the
World generally it has always been taken a care of, that they should not in
any of the Precepts of them, inconsist with Government. And, if there have been
Wars, and Over-throws of Government, and the like mischiefs at any time to
Humane Societies happening by them; it has been accidentally only, as to the
Religions themselves of the Countries, generally, in which such things have
happened, and principally from other causes. Wherefore that saying, with
application of it to this business also, has been true in all Ages; and there
are innumerable examples of the truth of it, in all Histories, and Records of
Humane Affairs; Natal. Comes. Hist. Lib. 11.
That, Nunquam fere sola Religio fuit causa Bellorum, etc. Never almost has
Religion only been the cause of Wars; But either a more loose and ample
licentiousness of living, furnished out by a semblance of Religion; or else an
immoderate affection of Ruling, or some such kind of thing; when the foulness
of desire, and the unlawful appetency of things not honest is covered over,
either by a simulation of defense of Religion, or some more honest pretense, by
which both many adherents are acquired, and many assistances flock into the
design: because there are but very few to be found, who will embrace manifest
dishonesty: And this consistency of Religion, on its part, with Government, is
the thing principally intended to be treated of by us, both here and hereafter,
throughout this whole discourse, Supra Cap. 1.. 1.
as has been also first of all mentioned.

The distinctions of the consistency of Religion with Government further
explicated and applied. Cap. 1.. 13. Ibid.. 14. Supra* Cap. 3.. 7.
III. The consistency then of Religion with Government I also defined above: And
distinguished it into either Negative or Positive. To consist totally
negatively with Government is the least thing that any Religion can do. And, if
it do not so, it will not be endured in Humane Societies, nor ever owned to be
true, and from God; since Government is Gods Ordinance (as abovesaid) and taken
by all to be intended as the great instrument for the good of all Humane
Society. But I shall here proceed further, then to these things, concerning the
True Religion; and evince it to be the property of it in particular, to consist
not only totally negatively, but also positively and eminently (as was above
mentioned) with any Lawful Government amongst men. Supra. Cap. 1.. 14, 15, 17.
Et hic. 1, 2.
And to do these two things will be our task in the remaining part of this
Chapter.

The consistency of Religion with Government proved.
IV. We proceed then to prove the total negative consistency of any True
Religion, in the general, with Government. And afterward we shall descend to
the positive and eminent consistency of the Christian Religion in particular.

V. First then, First in the general.
this necessary negative consistency of any True Religion with Government in
the general, will be evident from this Categorical Syllogism, containing the
sense of our former discourse concerning these things, (Viz.) Those things
which are appointed by God to have a being together in the World amongst men,
must needs be in themselves totally negatively consistent amongst them:

But the True Religion is so appointed by God to have such a being, together
with government in the world amongst men; Ergo, it must needs be in it self
totally negatively consistent with it amongst them.



The Minor proposition in the present Argument is not taxable; and he that will
deny the Major, and assert any two Ordinances of God whatsoever (such as any
True Religion and Government are) to be in themselves, although but in any one
single respect, and particular whatsoever, mutually inconsistent in the world;
he must needs accuse God himself of a defect in his very act of placing them
there. For, if God has placed things in the world, with an intent of their
consisting, Supra Cap. 1.. ult.
and continuance there (as was above concluded concerning Religion and
Government,) and is from most weighty and apparent Reasons evident to all that
he has done so (concerning those things) and yet they will not consist; then
we must of necessity fall to the taxing his very attributes, which were
operative in the placing them there. Where was his omnisciency, that had no
farther insight into what he did? Where was his wisdom, that could no better
contrive? Or where was his omnipotency, that could no better effect? If he were
at any time deficient in these; at that time he had not the Attributes of a
God: And if he had them not, he was no God; and if there were any time in which
he was not a God, it is impossible that at any time he should be a God; without
utter confusion denounced, by him that will say the contrary, to all the Right
Philosophy and Divinity, that ever concerned a God in the world. So that it
appears in Sun Beams, that he will enervate our present Argument, must in the
last result, remove any such thing as a Godhead out of the world: but we will
not imagine such a strain of Atheism. So then the proof of this Argument in the
general, includes the proof of the necessary total negative consistency of the
Christian Religion in particular, with any Lawful Government. And it evinceth
the like consistency of any present Lawful Government also, either in Church or
State, with the same Christian Religion, upon supposition, that the Governors,
in whose hands the exercise of such Government is, do proceed rightly, and by
right rules, in their administration of it.

Secondly, more particularly, concerning the Christian Religion in particular.
VI. We descend next then to the proof of both the positive, and eminent
consistency of the Christian Religion with the present Lawful Government in any
Society: And that either under the notion either of special or individual. And
for that,

1. That it must needs consist positively, will be evident from both its
stamping the present Lawful Government, both in Church and State, as has been
mentioned, with Divine Authority, for the rendering of it more Sacred amongst
men; and also from its teaching men to be both Good Citizens and Subjects, in
all the Duties of the second Table, which are the complete duties of Humane
Society. Many things more particularly might be mentioned: De Jure Belli. Lib.
2. Cap. 20.. 49. etc. Vid. Ibid.
But well says Grotius, concerning the whole System of the Doctrine of the
Christian Religion in the general; Nihil est in Disciplina Christiana, quod
Humanae Societati noceat, immo quod non prosit: We may be sure of that, That
there is nothing at all in any of the Precepts of the Christian Religion, which
does any ways hurt, nay, which does not help and profit Humane Society.

2. It Is positive eminent Consistency is as obvious to any man: The Christian
Religion being the very band and tie of Humane Society. For, whereas the
Governor, in his Humane Capacity, can enjoin the Duties of the second Table,
only under Temporal Penalties; God does in the Christian Religion enjoyne them
under Eternal: And, whereas the Governor, in recompense to the observation of
those Duties, can promise only Temporal Rewards; God does in the Christian
Religion, promise also Eterternal: And, whereas the Governor can take
Cognizance only of the overt, open acts of disobedience to his Commands; God
does in the Christian Religion also, take Cognizance of the very inward motions
of the heart, and first stirrings of it toward such acts of disobedience,
Eccles. 10.20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thoughts, etc. says the
Scripture: So that, who sees not, that the Christian Religion has ribb'd
Humane Society with Adamant; and is the very Cement, and Band, and Bulwark of
it, in all respects; and the Superlative, and most Eminent Help and Support to
the present Lawful Governor in any Society whatsoever?

The conclusion, and consectary deduced from all these things.
VII. And lastly then, I have but this one last and short Conclusion and
Consectary to lay down from these things: And that is, That if at any time the
Christian Religion does prove subversive of the present Lawful Government, and
by any occasion taken by men from it, in any manner of way whatsoever; it is
from the Errors of those men, and their humane mixtures obtruded upon it, and
not from any genuine Rules or Precepts of the Christian Religion it self. The
purer Sun contains no such Clouds; and the spects showed in the Jewel are but
spots of dirt. God himself, as he would never have appointed a Religion in it
self, subversive of his own Ordinance of Government; so he could not ordinarily
have expected, that the Kings and Governors of the Earth, if such, and as
rational men only, should have received it as his. We proceed then from hence,
to other things.

CHAP. V.
To whom the Charge and Right of the Preservation of the welfare of Religion,
and Government, and the consistency of Religion with Government, is committed
in Humane Societies. And of the Means necessary for the accomplishing and
preserving of it, (viz.) An Ecclesiastical Uniformity.
I. THe state of the Question.

II. The preservation of the welfare of Religion, and Government, and the
consistency of Religion with Government must needs be the Charge and Right of
some body.

III. That it is the greatest Charge of any amongst men.

IV. The Negatives stated: And first, that it is not the Charge and Right of
any private person.

V. Nor the Charge of any subordinate Magistrate.

VI. Nor the Charge of the Supreme Church Governor in any Society.

VII. The positive asserted, (viz.) to whom the Charge and Right mentioned does
belong; and that is to the Supreme Magistrate.

VIII. The Conclusive Explications of the Positive part of the Question
subjoined.

IX. The first Conclusive Explication.

X. The Second.

XI. The Third.

XII. The Fourth.

XIII. The fifth and last.

XIV. The Conclusion of the First Book.

I. HAving thus, in our due manner, The State of the Question.
evidenced Religion and Government to be the Ordinances of God; and that there
must needs be a consistency of Religion with Government; we come now last of
all to enquire, to whom the charge and right of the Preservation of these
things, and their welfare in the world does belong. And that we shall evidence:
First, Negatively; And Secondly, Positively; and subjoine some farther
Explications of this matter.

1. Then, and for the thus stating of this business: The distinction of
Religion into true, and false, is here to be recalled; and the consideration of
Government both as a Charge, and Right committed to the Governor by God, as
was also above mentioned, amongst the distinctions of Government. 2. A Charge
is to be defined; Cap. 1.. 11.
and it, and the manner of it is being committed to any man to be distinguished.
And that is the charge (here meant) of every man, which is committed to him by
God; either mediately, or immediately; either generallly, or particularly;
either more, or less eminently; as we have said; That both the Civil, and
Ecclesiastical Governors Charge is committed to them by God: and then by
virtue of a Charge it is being so committed to any man; he has a consequent
right to it, and the looking after it. And no charge can be committed to any
man ultimately, but by God only; since none else but he has the Supreme and
universal Power of the Disposition of Humane affairs. Whence that saying,
Officium perdam, and Deum vendam? And a Charge is defined under the notion of
what a man is bound in Conscience to do; Officium est, Greg: Moral. lib. 12.
Offic. lib. 1. Ibid.
quod quisque efficere debet, pro suae personae condition, says Cicero. And
nulla vitae pars; neque publicis, neque privatis; neque forensibus, neque
Domesticis in rebus; neque si tecum agas quid, neque si cum altero contrahas;
vacare officio potest; in eoque excolendo sita est vitae Honestas omnis; and in
negligendo turpitudo. That no part of a man's life; neither in public nor
private; neither in Court, nor in Household affairs; neither if thou do any
thing by thy self alone, nor if thou contract'st with another; can want matter
of duty and charge; and in the looking well after that, consists all honesty of
life; and in the neglecting of it the contrary. And a charge so committed to
any man is, either Ordinary, or Extraordinary; private, or public; either
Supreme, or Subordinate; and that either in respect to the Person, to whom such
a charge is committed; or else in respect to the thing committed to him, and
its greater or lesser dignity. And when we enquire here, to whom the charge and
right of the preservation of the welfare of Religion, and government, and
consistency of Religion with Government does belong: as to its being such a
charge, and right; we mean it of the True Religion primarily, and emphatically;
and of the preservation of it is necessary consistency; and of the false
Religion, only so far forth as it is a Politic Instrument, and better then
none at all for humane Societies (as will be more particularly instanced in
anon) and of its only actual consistency; Infra lib. 2. Cap. 2.. 1.
and of Government under the consideration of its being both such a Charge and
Right, as was mentioned. And; as to it is belonging to any one as such a charge
and right; it is meant also Supremely, and Ordinarily, in respect to the person
charged with the welfare of these things; and more particularly and eminently
as a Public Charge, and immediately from God, in respect to the thing so
committed in charge.

Religion, and Government, and the consistency of Religion with Government must
needs be the charge of somebody.
II. That this Preservation of the welfare of Religion, and Government, and of
the Consistency of Religion with Government must needs be the charge, and right
of some body in humane Societies; it is demonstrable from two Topics.

1. First, from the Considerableness of the things.

2ly, From the perpetual dangers that these things are in, both from the
infirmities and corruptions of men.

Plau^us Trin.
Novi ego hoc Saeculum, moribus quibus sit ( says he in the Comedian) malus
bonum malum
Esse vult, ut sit sui similis: Turbant, miscent mores mali: Rapax,
Avarus, Invidus, Sacrum Profanum, publicum privatum habent.
I know this Age, of what manners men are in it: The evil man would have the
good man.
To be evil, that he may be like him: The evil men Trouble, and confound all
things: the Greedy,
Covetous, envious, account that which is Sacred to be Common, and that which
is public to be private.
And therefore all Laws are made for the Correcting the enormities of these
Disturbers of the World. Romans 13.4. Oratione De falsa legate.
For he is the Minister of God; says St. Paul of the Magistrate; a revenger to
execute wrath upon him that does evil. And Demosthenes, nullus est usus
Civitatis, quae nervos, ac vires ad versus sceleratos and injustos non habet.
That there is no use of that City, which has not Nerves and strength against
wicked and unjust men. And it is impossible that either Religion, or
Government, or the Consistency of Religion with Government, in their relative
consideration, and in respect to the vitiosities, and weaknesses of men; should
ever be safe, unless some one or other be put in trust to see to the execution
of those Laws, and that the safety of these things be provided for by them.
That it is the greatest charge of any amongst men.


III. The preservation then, and maintaining of the welfare of these things is
the supreme and greatest public charge, in respect to the dignity of the
thing, of any amongst men. And that because the things given in charge are in
themselves the greatest and must considerable of any in the World. And the
Charge of the welfare of them also is comprehensive of the care of all Divine
and Humane affairs. And the Division of Affairs into Divine and Humane we
assigned to be the first and capital Division of all affairs amongst men. Supra
Cap. 1.. 1.


IV. If the negatives be enquired into then, and whose charge and right it is
not, The Negatives stated; and first, that it is not the charge of any private
person.
to look after the welfare of these things; First, it is not the charge of any
person, or persons purely private: And then it is meant, That it is not
ordinarily so: and that because the charge it self is public: for that any
public charge should ordinarily belong to a private person, as such; it would
imply a contradiction, since the public and private are opposites, and the
offices belonging to either are universally different. The offices of the
public person respect, primarily, the welfare of the multitude in common; and
of the private only that of particular Persons. Jus Publicum (says Vlpian)
est, L. Hujus Studii D. De Justitia and Jure.
quod ad Statum rei Romanae spectat; privatum est, quod ad singulorum
utilitatem pertinet. That the Public Law, and right is, That which belongs to
the state of the Commonweal: The Private, that which belongs to the welfare of
single persons. In Nicocle.
And Isocrates teaches the distinction of these things; when he commends those
orations, (...), which teach Princes how they should deal with the multitude;
and private men how they should carry them themselves toward Princes. It is
true even every private person is obliged to promote the welfare of this
public charge, by his Actions every way; But then it is under a general
consideration, and in his place, and by his particular actions as a private
person; and not upon the account of any such public charge it is being
committed to him as such. And there may also such a rare case fall out, as
wherein a private person may be obliged to put on the Magistrate: as is said of
Brutus the Consul; Florus lib. 1. cap. 9.
in respect to his being a father, in the decollation of his sons; That Exuit
Patrem, ut indueret Consulem; he put off the Father, that he might put on the
Consul.

V. In the second Place, negatively, Secondly, nor the charge of any
subordinate Magistrate.
it is not the charge of any subordinate Magistrate. And then it is meant
Supremely. And that in respect to the dignity of the person. And the reason is,
because the subordinate Magistrate has no power, but what he derives from the
supreme as the fountain of Power, as was above mentioned. But in the mean time
this does not hinder, but that the preservation of the welfare of Religion and
Government, and the consistency of Religion with Government is the subordinate
Magistrates charge less eminently, and subordinately, Cap. 4.. 6.
and as Committed to him by God mediately: and all this as he is subordinate
Magistrate; and as such the subordinate Magistrates, in their places,
generally, are obliged both to the Supreme Magistrate immediately, and to God
mediately to look after it. And if they do not execute the Laws that are made
in any Society for the preservation and promotion of the welfare of those
things, they stand accountable both to God, and the Supreme Magistrate; to the
one temporally, to the other eternally.

Thirdly, Nor the charge of the Supreme Church Governor.
VI. In the third and last place, neither is it the Charge Supreamely of any
supreme Church Governor in any Society; unless he have the Chief Magistracy,
and the Priesthood conjunct, and united in his person. Which may be, de Jure;
as will be further evidenced hereafter. Infra Lib. 2. Cap. 6.. 5.
Only the Ecclesiastical person is obliged, in the mean time, not to invade and
usurp the power of the Civil Magistrate: But yet, even in the case of such
conjunction of Offices also, the Charge mentioned belongs to such an
Ecclesiastical person supreamly only as Chief Magistrate, and not as Priest.
And the reason is, because the capacity of Civil Magistrate is Superior to
that of the Priest; Infra Lib. 2. Cap. 6.. 12, 13. and. 20.
as will be evidenced hereafter also; and then by consequence, the ordinary
power of such a person in the capacity of Ecclesiastical is not adaequate to
the Charge mentioned: But yet this does not hinder however, but that this
Ecclesiastical Person also (of what degree soever in the Sphere of Government
in the mean time) is bound in his station, both to God and the Prince, and in
the same manner, as was said of the subordinate Magistrate (the different
respects being had only to the different nature of their Offices) to promote
the good and welfare of such the Magistrates Charge.

The Positive asserted (viz.) to whom the Charge mentioned does belong, and
that is to the Supreme Magistrate. Hic Supra. 1. in fine.
VII. It being denied to these that this Charge and Right is belonging to them
supreamly and ordinarily in any Society; Let us assert positively to whom it
does so belong. And that also more particularly and eminently, and as a Public
Charge, and immediately from God, in respect to the Charge it self, as was said
above; and that is to the Supreme Magistrate: And that, as to the True Religion
primarily and emphatically; and as to the false, to be kept up rather then
none, as we said above also. And this Charge is committed to him, because he is
the Supreme Public Person.

(...),
But the King is the living Image of God:
Says Menander: And so he has Power adequate to the charge put into his hands
(i. e.) over the whole Society in Common; and in respect both to all Divine and
Humane affairs. And therefore, in the Scripture, Prayers are commanded to be
made for those that are in (Supreme) Authority in special; 1 Timothy 2.2.
That under them we may live a quiet and peaceable life in all Godliness and
Honesty. And it is the Periphrasis, Apud Homer possim.
by which the Prince of Greek Poets so often designs Kings, when he calls them
(...), The Shepherds of the People. And the Roman Consuls, that came in the
place of the Kings, were so called; Says Florus, and the Civil Law; Lib. 1.
Cap. 9. D. De Officia Consulis L. unica.
Vt consulere se Civibus suis debere meminissent, etc. That they might remember
that they ought to consult the good of their Citizens. And afterward the
Senate and people of Rome Conferred the Name of the Common Parent of the
Country on the several Emperors. So the People inscribed on the Pillar Erected
in the Forum, Apud Sueton. In Julio.. 85. and in Octavio.. 58.
to Julius Caesar, Parenti Patriae: To the Father of the Country. And the
Senate and people saluted Octavius by the Name of Pater Patriae: The Father of
the Country. And Magistratus est Medicus Civitatis; beneque praeest, qui juvat
Patriam, aut certe laedit non volens, says Thucydides; That the Magistrate is
the Physician of the City, Lib. 6.
and he does well in his Praeheminence, who helps his Country, or at least does
not willingly hurt it. Et in hoc serviunt Reges Deo, says St. Augustine, Si in
Regno suo bona jubeant, and mala prohibent; Lib. 3. super. Chrysostom.
non solum quae pertinent ad Societatem Humanam, sed quae ad Divinam
Religionem: That in this Kings do serve God in their places; if in their
Kingdoms they command good things, and forbid evil, (viz.) not only those,
which belong to Humane Society, but also to the Religion of God. So then, as
this is thus the Charge and Right of Princes, and particularly to see that
Religion be preserved in its consistency with Government; so also on the other
hand, they are obliged, both in the Court of Conscience, and in the Supreme
Court of Heaven, to see that their Government be kept in Consistency with
Religion. The Kingly Prophet calls to the Kings, and Judges of the Earth; Psalm.
2.12.
Kiss the Son least he be angry. And Christ in the New Testament; Whosoever
therefore shall break one of these least Commandments, and shall teach men so,
the same shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven. And that this is
thus on both hands, the Charge and Right of the Supreme Magistrate, it is also
further evident both from the Law of Nature, and the Divine Law, and that also
of Nations; Who, by compact and general agreement, in relation to these things,
treat only with the Supreme Magistrates of Countries, as the persons most
properly concerned in them. So in all Counsels and Synods Ecclesiastical,
Ecumenical, and others; and that even in the Papacy its self; Princes are
first solicited by admonition to Assent, and to send their Divines: And their
Ambassadors come to those Assemblies also, for the declaring, and securing of
their several Masters Rights, before the Assemblies themselves be opened, and
matters passed Authoritatively in them. The conclusive explications of the
positive part of the Question subjoined.


VIII. This then being the affirmative part in this matter; Let us come last of
all to subjoyn our further and conclusive explications of it, as was mentioned:
And that briefly.

The first conclusive, and explicatory proposition.
IX. And the first of those is, That this Charge then of the Supreme Magistrate
is Primarily and Principally to be looked after by him: And that because it is
his Supreme Charge, in respect to the dignity of the thing, and more eminently
committed to him by God; and the greatest of any that can possibly be put into
his hands in this world: it containing the sum of all Divine and Humane
Affairs, In Principe Cap. 4.
as is said. Habent Principes, quae eo pertinent, says Cicero, Varios Actus,
and conciliorum, and temporum, in summa rerum administranda; and haec gravem
curam, diligentiamque desiderat, quam ipse Princeps sustinet: That Princes have
diverse Acts both of Councels and Times, which belong to their Office, in the
administering the sum of Affairs; and this sum of all, which the Prince
sustains, requires a great care and diligence for the management of it.

The second.
X. The second Conclusive Explication is, that this great Charge of the
Magistrates is perpetually and constantly to be looked after; as the wakeful
Dragon watched over the Golden Apples of the Hesperides. And that both because
God has appointed Religion, and Government, and the Consistency of Religion
with Government, to be kept up, and maintained perpetually in the world, and so
long as mankind shall endure in it; and also because these things are
perpetually in danger, as has been mentioned. And there has been scarce any
more prevalent means then the pretense of Religion, by which innovators, in all
States, have arrived at their ends; and scarce any Civil War (which is the
worst of all Wars) but what has either been begun, or maintained by it against
the Sovereign Prince. All Histories are full of examples in this matter. And
the Sovereign Prince in any society had need beware of the like future
attempts, as Seamen of the approach of a Spoute at Sea.

The third.
XI. To these ends then there is a necessity of the Magistrates using the means
for his accomplishing them. Media ordinantur ad finem. In Gods very having
appointed the Magistrate to arrive at the end, he has employed and included the
appointment of his use of the means to that end. And those means he is obliged
to use, both as these things are his charge committed to him by God; and also
as they are his Right, and respect his own welfare particularly; and also as
they respect the welfare of his Subjects, Supra Cap. 1.. 12. and Cap. 3.. 17.
and the Common Good, which has been said to be the last end of all Humane
Society.

The fourth.
XII. The consistency of Religion (in its relative consideration) with
Government, includes the welfare both of Religion and Government, (simply and
separately taken) because by its very being rendered inconsistent with
Government (whether imprudently or maliciously, whether being used as a means
to serve men's ends or not) both it is falsified, and Government is at least
endangered, and always in some degree or other hurt, and perhaps sometimes
totally ruined. And in relation to these respects of these things, principally,
we treat of them in our following discourse.

XIII. And lastly, the means necessary to be used by the Prince, The fifth and
last conclusive explication.
for the preservation of the welfare of these things in any Society, are the
Laws of an Uniformity in Church matters, in some kind or other in such a
Society. And to prove this, and explicate what the Laws and Rights of such an
Uniformity are, The conclusion of the First Book. An earnest wish that Princes
may take that special care which they ought, to see that their Government
consist with the True Religion.
both generally and particularly, will be the great intent of what we shall say
hereafter.

XIV. In the interim we shut up this First Book, with earnest wishes and
prayers, That as God has committed it to Princes to see that Religion consist
with Government, so he would direct and inspire them to take that special care,
that it behooves them, to see that their Government also consist with the True
Religion: And that not only negatively, that it do not hurt it; but positively
and eminently, that it may eminently help it. By this they will create in their
Subjects minds, a more sacred veneration toward them; and render themselves in
their esteem, truly Gods upon Earth. By this they will procure the Divine
blessing upon the Government of themselves and their posterity; 1 K. 2.33. 1 K.
11.12, 13, and 32.36. 2 K. 8.19. 2 K. 19.34. 2 K. 20.56. etc.
as God was propitious to many future Generations, for his Servant David's sake.
By this they will deserve the praises of men to accompany them even beyond
their Graves: as the blessed Emperor Constantine (says the Church Historian)
Etiam mortuus Regnavit: Reigned even when he was dead. Eusebius. de vita Constant.
Lib. 4. Cap. 67. Ibid. Cap. 65. and 69. Sozomen. Lib. 2. Cap. 32. Eusebius Ibid.
Cap. 69. and 73.
He was washed first with the warm tears of his Nobility and People, and after
buried in a Golden Coffin; and after, his Statues at Rome, and Images in the
Coins (like the posthumous Phaenixes) sprang from his enshrined ashes. And last
of all, by this these Rulers of men will inherit the places of Kings and
Princes eternally in Heaven.

DE Jure Vniformitatis Ecclesiasticae: OR, OF THE RIGHTS Belonging to an
UNIFORMITY in CHURCHES. BOOK II.
CHAP. I.
The Relation of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity to things Sacred, further, and
more particularly distinguished. And that the Ecclesiastical Uniformity is
indicated by the Civil.
I. AN Ecclesiastical Uniformity, and the rights belonging to it more generally
treated of.

II. And first, its relation to things Sacred more particularly distinguished.

III. The more general and extrinsecal. Arguments for it to be fetched from
things Civil.

IV. The Ecclesiastical Uniformity then is indicated by the Civil, and in what
respects.

V. The conclusion of this Chapter.

An Ecclesiastical uniformity, and the Rights belonging to it more generally
treated of. Lib. 1. Cap. 1,. 1.
I. THe distinction of an Uniformity into Ecclesiastical and Civil, having been
given above; and the Supreme Public Charge, and Right of the Magistrate,
directly in relation to all Humane Affairs, and consequentially in relation to
the Ecclesiastical sort of that Uniformity, having been stated by us; we come
here to treat more generally of the Ecclesiastical Uniformity, and of the
Rights directly belonging to it.

And first, its relation to things sacred more particularly distinguished. Lib.
1. Cap. 1.. 2. Lib. 1. Cap. 1.. 19.
II. And first of all, its relation to things sacred, being more generally
distinguished of above, is here further, and more particularly to be
distinguished. And that according to the fifth distinction of the consistency
of Religion with Government above given, and which consistency it is said to be
intended principally to effect and preserve. And so that relation of it is
either fundamental, or not fundamental. Fundamental, in respect to the greater;
and not fundamental, in respect to the lesser matters of Religion.

The more general and extrinsecal Arguments for it to be fetched from things
Civil.
III. The more general and extrinsecal Arguments, for the appertaining of an
Ecclesiastical Uniformity to the well being of humane society, are to be taken
from the consideration of things Civil, and the state of them in those
Societies.

IV. The Ecclesiastical Uniformity then is indicated by the Civil, and from
diverse particular considerations of things belonging to it: And that, The
Ecclesiastical Uniformity then is indicated by the Civil; and in what respects.
1. From the Uniform Administrations of Public Justice, which do use to be
(where conveniently, and without difficulty they may) in Princes Dominions, and
from the tendency of them several ways, to the well being of those Dominions.
2. From the usual Uniformities of Language, and their benign tendency in like
manner also. 3. And from all such other Uniformities, in such other the like
things. The effects of which use to be the generating a greater union of men in
their National Combinations; the establishment of a more facile and firm amity
and peace amongst them by their so doing, and the like: And that too from the
Natural tendency of these Uniformities to these things in their way, and
according to their several modes and degrees in which they have been in
Countries. (...). Polit. Lib. 8. Cap. 1. N. 2.
But because there is one and the same end proposed by every City to its self
(says Aristotle) therefore it is evident that there is a necessity that all
should be ordered by one and the same discipline; Ibid.
And that of Common and Public Affairs there should be a Common and Public
Institution and Administration. For every Citizen (says he further) is a part
of the City; And it is appointed by a certain Law of Nature, Ibid postea.
that of the parts, and the whole, there should be a conjunct, and one only
Institution. And elsewhere, again; Polit. Lib. 5. N. 20.
Seditionis autem segetem, materiamque continet gentis, ac generis
dissimilitudo; donec ad unam similitudinem, and consensionem populus adducatur:
That the dissimilitude of Nation and Kingdom amongst a people, contains the
occasion and matter of sedition, until the people be reduced to one and the
same likeness and consent. And all Histories are full of the instances of these
things. Graecanicis Institutis (says Herodotus of the Egyptians) uti recusant,
In Euterpe, Circ. Med.
and (ut semel dicam) nullorum hominum aliorum institutis uti volunt: That they
refused to use the customs of Greece; and briefly, they would not use the
customs of any other men. And, Paenorum multae sunt, In Melpom. prope fin.
and variae nationes; quarum paucae Regi obtemperabant; pleraeque Darium
contemnebant; That of those Affricans there were many and various Nations; of
which but few did obey their King, and most did contemn Darius. Finally the
defection and breaking off of the several parts of the Roman Empire; and the
like examples of the consistency and inconsistency of Homogeneous and
Heterogeneous National Societies in other Histories and Affairs, will be
sufficient instances of these things.

V. But so much for these things here. The conclusion of this Chapter.
And we shall come to prove the beneficialness of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity
to humane societies by more intrinsecal Arguments, and from the causes and
effects of it severally, hereafter; and as we can make our way to those
matters, and the declaration of them through other things.

CHAP. II.
The Healthfulness of Religion to Humane Societies. The ordinary Causes of
Religious Contests assigned: From thence the necessity of some Unity to be
held, as to matters of Religion. The benefits of Charity and Peace ensuing upon
it; and how much they are commanded in Scripture.
I. THE Healthfulness of Religion to Government, and Civil Society, evinced.

II. Therefore all Atheism, and lesser degrees of Profaneness to be expelled
out of humane Societies.

III. Public Contentions about Religion a grand cause of these things amongst
men.

IV. The lawfulness or unlawfulness of Religious Contests stated.

V. The ordinary causes of unlawful Religious Contests assigned.

VI. The first ordinary cause of such unlawful popular contentions.

VII. The second ordinary cause.

VIII. The third ordinary cause.

IX. The fourth ordinary cause of such Religious contests.

X. From hence the necessity of some kind of Unity to be maintained in matters
of Religion.

XI. Unity the Mother of Charity and Peace.

XII. A distinction of Charity.

XIII. The benefits of Charity and Peace amongst men to the Christian Religion.

XIV. The benefits of them to Government.

XV. The benefits of them also to the consistency of Religion with Government.

XVI. And lastly, how much they are Commanded in Scripture.

AN Ecclesiastical Uniformity then relating thus to Religion, The healthfulness
of Religion, to Government and Civil Society evidenced.
and the matters of it; and being after this manner indicated by the Civil; the
healthfulness of Religion to Government, and Civil Society will be easily
acknowledged. And that whether it be of the True Religion, by its procuring the
Divine Blessing upon these things, and by its being so eminently helpful to
them otherwise, as I have said; or of any false, Supra Lib. 1. Cap. 4.. 3, 4,
and 6.
if it be but even by its accustoming men to the exercise of Conscience toward
a Deity; or so far forth as it partakes of the Natural Precepts of the True,
Lib. 1. Cap. 4.. 3. and 5.
and in its other Precepts consists with Government negatively at least, as
has been supposed; or as to its being better then none, by its procuring
temporal blessings in its way and measure from God, and in many other respects.
It Is that that Pomponius Mela says of the Druids amongst the Galls. De orbis
situ Lib. 3. Extima Galliarum Ora.
Vnum ex iis quae praecipiunt; in vulgus effluit; (videlicet) ut forent ad
Bella meliores; aeternas esse animas, vitamque alteram ad manes: That one of
those things which they did teach, did fly abroad amongst the Common people
(viz.) That they might be the more fit for War; That the souls of men were
immortal, and that there was another life to be expected in another world. And
such and the like are the natural effects of any thing, but so much as
apprehended under the notion of Religion, on the mind and actions of men: And
therefore Aristotle (and the like all other Commentators on Government)
accounts Religion to be the chief thing, without which a Civil Society cannot
subsist. Quintum vero, ac praecipuum, Polit. Lib. 7.. 41. Cap. 8.
says he (viz.) necessarium ad Civitatem) est sacrarum, ac divinarum rerum
cura, quod Sacerdotium nominant: The first and principal thing necessary for
the preservation of a City, is the care of Sacred and Divine things, which they
call the Priesthood. Ibid. Lib. 9.. 43.
And therefore he cautions further, That the Priesthood, for that very reason,
is to be committed only to fit and able persons. And these and the like things
have been acknowledged concerning Religion in all Ages, and by all wise and
discerning men. Lycurgus the ancient Lawgiver of the Lacedaemonians; when he
was asked, Why he appointed so small things, and so little of value to be
offered to the Gods (as the Law of Moses also appointed the poor woman's
Offering for purification, a pair of Turtle Doves, or two young Pigeons,
Levit. 12.8. and the like) He answered, Because we should never cease to honor
them. Plutarch. in Lycurgo. L. Veluti. F. De Justitia, and Jur. De natura
Deorum, Lib. 1.
And in the Old Civil Law, Pomponius says, that to be of some Religion is the
Law of Nations. And, Pietate adversus Deos sublata, fides etiam, and Societas
humani generis, and una excellentissima virtus Justitia tollatur necesse est,
says Cicero. That, Piety toward the Gods being taken away, it will necessarily
follow that both all Faith and Society of mankind, Pro Planc.
and together with them the most Excellent Virtue Justice, be taken away also.
And, Pietas fundamentum est omnium virtutum, parentem ut Deum vereri etc. That
Piety is the foundation of all virtues, of the honoring one's Parent as a God,
etc. And, Nunquam usquam respublica stetit sine specie aliqua Religionis, Lib.
De una Religione.
says Lipsius; Quanta igitur verae illius vis est, cujus umbra sustinet hanc
molem? That never any Commonwealth stood without some show, at least, of
Religion; How great is the force therefore of that True Religion, the very
shadow of which supports so great a weight? Eugubinus Lib. 1. Contra Vallam.
And, nihil melius in terris homines habent ipsa pietate: est enim Religio dux
in Caelum, in Terris autem fons Justitiae; qua been, beateque res humanae
Gubernantur. That men have nothing better in this world then the thing called
Piety: for it is the guide of them to Heaven, The fountain of Justice in the
Earth; and by which humane affairs are well and happily governed. And the like
all the Ancient and famous wise men of the several parts, and Ages of the word
have taught. So the Socratick Philosophers, and the later followers of Plato:
so the Ancient Caldeans; The Brachmans amongst the Indians; the Persian Magi;
The Greek Theologists; their Poets and others; all the writings and precepts of
these men have ever asserted Religion as the Soverane Balm of humane Society.
And because of this so great healthfulness of Religion it is; that all Laws,
as well as purely out of that primary respect which is due to God; have both
commanded and countenanced those things which have made to the upholding the
public esteem, and honor of it; and also have prohibited and punished all
those things, which have detracted from it in any Society. So, amongst the
Abassines; the Ceremonies of the Emperors and his Nobilities going in
Procession to the Church on certain days; Their falling down on their knees
there; Their adoring the Cross, and the like; and the People's entering not in
at any time, De Aethiopum morib: Inaliis literis Imperator. ad pontif. Roman.
Script. An. 1524. De Abassinorum rebus, lib 1. Cap. 20, 21, etc. In Confess.
fidei Aethiop. post medium. De Turcarum morib. Epitome. Epistola nuncupator.
and De Templis seu Meschitis eorum. In novo Rational. Dinor. offic. lib. 1.
cap. 6^, etc. De ritibus Eccles. Cathol. lib. 1. cap 24. Et alibi passim. vid.
Capitulare Ca^oli Mag. etc. Lib. 1. L De Confugio ad Eccles. and passim. And
Fletcher's History of Russia, Chap. 21. prop. fin. Vid. Mosen Kotsens in
Sanhedrim fol. 188. Col. 4. And Levit. 24.16. Deuteronomy. 17.2, 3, 4, 5. Deuteronomy. 13.6,
7, 8, 9, 10. Levit. 20.2, 6, 27, etc. De Repub. Hebraeor. cap. 6. and alibi. De
legib. Dial. 4.
but having first put off their Shoes; and the like many other things, for the
promotion of the popular esteem of Religion, are recited by Damianus Goes,
Godignus, Chytraeus, and others. And the like also by Georgieviz amongst the
Turks. And the like by others which are in use also in other Churches. And the
like account do De Rubeis, Durantus, and the other Rationales of the Church of
Rome give of their too numerous company of Ceremonies: and under the Law of
Moses, God himself appointed those of the Judaical Church for this end
mentioned, and such others. To this end also amongst others, have all
Privileges and Immunities been conferred on Ecclesiastics. Those so conferred
by Moses his Law, and amongst the Heathens of all Countries, and in the
Christian Church. The Code and Novels of Justinian, and the Theodosian Code are
full of them. The like are to be seen in the Laws of Charlemaine, and which
are in use at this day amongst the Russians and others, and conferred on
Churchmen, and Churches: and the like also have been the ends of the
Celebration of Public Festivals of all sorts. And lastly, this is one great
end of the Celebration of all Sabbaths (whether real, or pretended) in their
several kinds. Of the Friday's, Saturday's, and Sunday's, at this very day,
amongst the Jews, Christians, and Mahometans. And last of all, God himself
appointed Moses to exercise his very Political Government by the Divine Laws
and dictates of his own mouth: and the Persian, and Turkish Mahometans Govern
by their Alcoran pretendedly in like manner: and the Church of Rome by it is
unwritten Traditions, in a great part, at this very day. And as these things
have been Constituted for the upholding of the honor of Religion positively;
so negatively in the same manner also, have all things been prohibited which
have detracted from it. By the Divine natural Law of Moses, the Blasphemer, the
Idolater, the person having a familiar spirit, the Wizard, the Witch, and the
like, were to be stoned to death. And as Bertram and others vulgarly observe;
these weighter causes; as respecting the Civil State, as well as purely the
Ecclesiastical; were determined by the seventy, and the chief magistrate
presiding, and swaying ultimately in the determination of them. Next to Moses,
the like humane Laws are advised by Plato, in his books of Laws. He gives
Charge, That the Citizens of his Commonweal; That they may the better obey
their Governors; be instructed in the Doctrines of Gods vengeance on those
that do ill, and of his favor and good will toward them that do well. Ibid
Dial. 9.
And he condemns Sacrilege to death, and the like. If we look into the
Christian Church, Vid. Can. 69, 70, 71, 72.
in the first place those Ancient Canons called the Apostles depose, and
excommunicate either Clericks, or Laics, who should practice any Rites of the
Jews or Gentiles. So also the Roman Civil Law pronounces it to be Crimen
Publicum, a Crime against the Public. L. Nemo ea; C. De Paganis, and
Sacrificiis, and templis. L. Manichaeos seu Manichaeos; C. De Haereticis, and
Manichaeis, and Samarit. Vid. C. lib. 9. De maleficis, and Mathemat. and
Caeteris simil. L. Nullus; and L. eorum; and L. nemo; and L. multi, etc. Et
Novel. 77. in Praefat. and Cap. 1. Et Imperator. Leonis Constitut. 65, etc.
So much as to take knowledge of the Pagan Superstition: and as such a Crime it
condemns the Doctrine of the Manachees, and Donatists, and gives the reason for
it, Quia quod in Religionem divinam committitur, in omnium fertur injuriam;
because that which is committed against the Religion of God, is an Injury done
to all. So also it prohibits the Heathen Auruspices, Augurs, Soothsayers, the
Mathematicians of those times, Caldeans, Magitians, Inchanters, disturbers of
the Elements, and the like; as Moses his Law does. It forbids Blasphemy,
profane Swearing by the Hairs of the head, and the like usual Oaths of the
times, as the New Testament does. The Laws concerning these and the like
things, are to be seen up and down in the Code, and Novels, and the subsequent
parts of the Body of the Law. And the Doctors say, that as Heresy is to be
punished any where, both because the Heretic sins against God, who is every
where, and also because whithersoever he goes, retaining his obstinacy, there
still he sins; so also that it is to be punished upon both accounts, and as
a mixed fault, both against God immediately, and also the Civil Magistrate. And
the like have been the Laws of the later Christian Princes in their Dominions
generally. Disputat. lib. 1. Cap. 12.
And Machiavil spends a good part of a Chapter upon the proof of it, how much
Religion makes to the conservation of the Commonweal; And that it was the cause
of the Imperial power it is failing in Italy, because of the innovations of the
Roman Religion. And he instanceth in the Heathen Romans, Ibid cap. 13. Cap. 14.
cap. 15.
their oftentimes (although he should have added wickedly, even as to their
false Religion) using their Religion as a Politic Instrument, in the times of
Sedition at home, and Wars abroad. And the like many other things might be
said to this purpose.

Therefore all Atheism, and lesser degrees of profaneness to be expelled out of
Humane Societies. De legib. Diol. 10.
II. These things then being so, no man will doubt but that all sorts of
Atheism, and lesser degrees of profaneness whatsoever, are rightly to be
expelled out of Humane Societies; and that all the causes of these things are,
in order to it, to be removed; and the contraries to them to be established. Of
Atheists Plato assigns two grand sorts amongst men; the one the secret and
hidden Atheist; the other the open and declared. And because the Cognizance of
man cannot reach to the secret one, therefore he is necessarily to be left to
God; and the open one is to be extirpated by Humane Laws. There are also
opinions concerning the Deity which amount to as much as direct Atheism; De
legib. Dial. 10. in princip.
such Plato recites to be that of Gods not taking any care of Humane Affairs;
and that of his being easily pleased, and propitiated in case of Sin. The like
of late Grotius and others recite also, De jure belli, lib. 2. cap. 20.. 45.
instancing in these things. And other lesser degrees of Profaneness there
are, both in thought, and external Action; and the causes of both are to be
removed, although the things immediately cannot.

Public contentions about Religion a grand cause of these things amongst men.
III. Many then are the Causes of these Enormities amongst men. And, amongst
others, in an especial manner, ordinarily, all open, and public contests about
Opinions in matters of Religion. Nam Ecclesiae dissentionem quovis malo
graviorem Sentio, said Renowned Constantine; That he thought Church dissentions
to be the worst of evils to a Commonweal, and that for this very reason
mentioned amongst others. The matter of such Church contests then may be either
just, or unjust; But as to the manner of holding of either, If vulgarly and
popularly permitted, they ordinarily fail not to produce those Enormities
mentioned: and that partly through the Infirmities, and partly through the
Corruptions of men; Both which two Grand causes of all Mischiefs in Humane
Affairs will be more particularly treated of anon. Infra lib. 2. cap. 5.
The Emperor Marcianus therefore gives the very Reasons mentioned of his
forbidding these Contentions. C. De Summa Trinitate. L. nemo Clericus
Nemo Clericus, vel Militaris, vel alterius cujuslibet conditionis De fide
Christiana public, turbis Coadunatis, and Audientibus, tractare conetur in
posterum; ex hoc Tumultus, and persidiae occasionem requirens. That none,
neither Clerick, nor Military man, nor of any other condition whatsoever should
endeavor, for the future, to handle any matters of the Christian Faith, with
Companies gathered together, and hearing of them; and from thence seeking
occasion of Tumult and Treachery. And so the Emperors Leo and Athemius,
concerning those that were permitted to go forth of their Monasteries. L. Qui
in Monasteriis C. De Episcop. and Clericis.
Caveant autem hi, qui ita exibunt, ne de Religione, vel Doctrina disputent;
vel conciliabulis praesint, vel, turba concitata, simpliciorum animos seducant,
etc. But let these beware, who shall so go forth, that they do not dispute
concerning Religion or matter of Doctrine; or that they do not head private
Councels, or stir up Companies, Lib. 2. cap. 7. ad finem.
whereby to seduce the minds of the Simple, etc. And we shall come to describe,
and evidence more particularly hereafter, how much such Religious contests make
to the hurt both of Religion, and Government, and the consistency of Religion
with Government.

IV. In the interim, contentions about matters of Religion, The lawfulness or
unlawfulness of Religious contests stated.
in the general, are taken either in an ill, or good sense; and so are
accordingly, either lawful, or unlawful: And that either as to the matter
contested, as was said just now, or the manner of contesting it. And as to
either Lawful, when they make either to the confounding of Heretics; or the
clearing, and advancing of the Faith: and Unlawful, when the contrary. And so
the Imperial Laws determine in this matter. But then the respects which such
Contentions bear to Government, and Religions consistency with it, as well as
those which they bear to Religion simply taken, are to be supposed to be
understood in this determination also.

V. The causes of such ordinarily unlawful contentions then, The ordinary
causes of unlawful Religious contests assigned.
as we have mentioned, and which are ordinary and common amongst men, and
therefore proportionably to be watched over by the Governors of all Societies,
are these that follow.

VI. First of all, The first ordinary cause of such unlawful popular
contentions.
the false application of the Immortal Notion of Religion to things, (i. e.)
when they are taken, and voted to be matters of Religion in a more eminent
Notion then they deserve, and are prosecuted with zeal and violence
accordingly: And that whether imprudently, and out of Ignorance; or
maliciously, and for evil ends, it matters not; so long as, both ways, they
are so prosecuted with Zeal, and consequently such a cause of Contention. And
these Contentions about such matters of Religion (and as all other) are
ordinarily very sharp. In Confess fidei Aethiop. apud Damianum a Goes.
So Zaga Zabo in his Confession of the Ethiopian Faith, recites it concerning
the Portugals, their branding his Countrymen with the names of Jews and
Mahometans; because of some differences of theirs about Circumcision, and the
Sabbath. And Cromerus recites the like, Poloniae lib. 1. prop fin.
concerning the Russians hatred of the Romanists; Ista ut nihil commune habere
velint cum Latinis, That it is such, as that they will have nothing common with
the Latins, De omnium Gent. Morib. lib. 2. De T^rtaria.
as they call them. And Johannes Boemus Aubanus Teutonicus, concerning the
Tartars, that, Papam, Christianosque cunctos Canes appellent, they call the
Pope, Annal. Turcic. lib. prope fin. and in supplemento Annal: in quarto, circa
med. page 134, 135, 137, 138.
and all Christians Dogs. And the like Leunclavius concerning the Turkish and
Persian Mahometans, that their differences about their Prophets are the
ordinarily assigned causes of their mutual wars; That they burn the Books of
one another; call one another Heretics; and that it is a Maxim pronounced by
the Turkish Mufti, and held popularly amongst the vulgar, That it is more
acceptable to God for a Turkish Mohammedan to kill one Persian then seventy
Christians. And such as we have mentioned, are the Contentions many times in
the bowels of the same National Church, and about things either indifferent, or
dubious, or else very remote from the Fundamentals of any Religion (either True
or False,) and so accounted to be by all but those that kindle the flames about
them. Such were the differences betwixt the Sects amongst the Jews; some of
them mentioned in the New Testament. So the Pharisees used peculiar kinds of
Apparel, R. David, Sophon. 1.8.
and Habits; They would not eat till they had washed their hands, Matthew. 15.2.
They washed their Cupps, and Potts, Brazen Vessels, and Tables, Mark 7.4. They
wore broad Phylacteries, and the like. And the Sadduces and others differed
from them in such things. Joseph. De bell. jud. lib. 2. cap. 12. Philo, de vita
Contemplativa. Josep. ibid. Philo. ibid.
So the Essens wore white Garments, drank Water, bound themselves by an Oath to
preserve the names of Angels, kept seven Penticosts in the year, and the like.
The like Contentions also have been in the Christian Church; nay, they have
cost Christendom more blood, then the Martyrdomes have done. Such were the
Contentions in the Primitive times of it is prosperity, under Constantine, and
the following Emperors, and mentioned in the Catalogues of Heresies, and by
Eusebius, and others, in their Ecclesiastical Histories. Such those, about the
time of observing Easter, Eusebius. lib. 5. Cap. 22.23. Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 14.
Eusebius. ibid. cap. 24.
about the manner of Fasting; for difference in which Victor the Roman Bishop
excommunicated no less then all the Churches of Asia; and the like. Such are
those also amongst the remoter Regions of Christians at this day (viz.) the
Greek Church, the Moscovians, Russians, Jacobites of Syria, Palestine, and
other places, concerning the Celebration of the Sacrament with unleavened
bread; concerning Carved and Massy Images; the substance of Angels; and the
like. Such also have been the late Controversies nearer home about many points
in Church Government, and concerning the modes of service, and the like. But I
need not say any more for the evidencing this matter, since it is sufficiently
observable from the experience of all Ages, concerning the Heresiarks in
several Countries and Churches, when they have had any Heresy to spread, or
any ends to serve in a schism; That they have not thought they have done
enough, unless, besides the grand Heresy of their Sect, they have had also
certain differences in lesser things (cried up for greater) by which to
distinguish their parties, and to keep them at a more complete and farther
distance from others. So Mahomet, as has been mentioned, besides what he has
done in the grand assertion of his Prophetical Office, Supra Lib. 1. Cap. 2.. 7.
has distinguished himself also by many other things, from the followers of
Christ. So also the Church of Rome, besides what she has done in the
derivation of the fundamental Papal Rights from St. Peter, has distinguished
her self from other Christian Churches by other lesser matters, and the like.
And the like other instances might be given. The Disciples of Christ, in the
New Testament, have enjoined moderation and meekness, and the like, in case of
difference about such things, Phil. 4.5. Gal. 6.1. and forbidden doubtful
disputations before the weak, Romans 14.1. But men have prosecuted them with Fire
and Sword: But yet here is a distinction to be made of Doctrines inconsiderable
in themselves, and such as are made considerable by accident in any case. Such
may be the lesser Doctrines in any Church, when the Churches Lawful Authority
and respect, that is to be given to their Government, depends upon the defense
of them. Such may be also the Doctrines contested either in Churches, and more
particularly by the members of them mutually; or by Churches, and betwixt them
more publicly: But in either case, however they ought not to be so unlawfully
contested, as we have said, and to the greater prejudice of the common good of
humane affairs.

VII. In the second place; The second ordinary cause.
the second ordinary cause of such contentions amongst men, is the great
variety of opinions, that is amongst them, especially amongst the vulgar, and
more illiterate, heedless sort of men, if they come once to sit in the chair of
Judgment: And all that variety prosecuted by as various and contradictory sorts
of Zeal also. And this, both variety of opinions, and of prosecution of them
ever has been, and ever will be, when occasion is given for it: And the causes
of it shall be assigned hereafter. In the interim, while every single person
almost, Infra Lib. 2. Cap. 7.. 6. and alibi.
accompanied with such zeal, opines differently from another; it is no wonder
if the buckler be taken up on all hands, and that actual contests arise, if
opportunity be given for their arising, and it be permitted by Authority in any
Church to be so. But in the mean time, as to the Scripture, in this matter
(although some things in it be hard to be understood, (2 Pet. 3.16.) yet it
has declared (as St. Augustine says) the Doctrine necessary to Faith and
Manners, De Doctr. Christi. Lib. 2. Cap. 6.
so plainly, as that by comparing of Scriptures, and the diligent use of a man's
Reason, and of the other means which God has prescribed in this case, (for
these things are required) the natural knowledge of them may be certainly
arrived at. And any Church also is supposed, in its setting forth of any Rule,
or Canon, or Doctrines, according to its occasions, to declare the sense of
Scripture in all things in it, as plainly as it can: But however, all men are
not capable of making the due use of these, or the like means of information:
And generally they do, and ever will differ in their opinions, both concerning
these and other things.

The third ordinary cause.
VIII. Let us come to the third cause of these contentions, and that is, the
mixture of men's private passions with their zeal, in such matters of Religion;
Their passions of Pride, and Ambition, Anger, and Revenge, and the like: and
these are enough (like Phaeton's Chariot of the Sun) to set all the world on
Fire. And this mixture happens either at unawares, and men not discerning it;
and so sometimes to the very best of men; as the Divine Apostles themselves, in
their seeming zeal, in the Scripture, would have called for fire from Heaven,
as Elias did: Or else men entertain it voluntarily and knowingly; and so both
evil and good men also, through humane infirmity, and the prevalency of their
passions over them, frequently do. And in either of these cases, how much men
use to differ mutually in affection, as well as in opinion, the World
sufficiently knows. The wise man says, that, through pride comes
contention; Prove. 13.10.


And, Senec. in Thyest. Chorus.
Ira, cum magnis agitata causis,
Gratiam rupit, cecinitque bellum;
Otium tanto subitum e tumultu
Quis Deus fecit?
When Anger, being stirred up by great causes,
Has broken off all Amity, and sounded the Allarum to War;
What God is there, that has made a sudden quiet
Out of so great a Tumult?


The fourth and last ordinary cause of such Religious Contests.
IX. The fourth and last cause, ordinarily in the world, of such Religious
contests then, is yet greater then any of these; And that is, the mixture of
men's worldly interests with the defense of their opinions, (viz.) of those
their opinions, whether they be taken up only pretendedly, and in order to the
promoting of such interests, or else have any real being in men, and those
interests do mix only by the casual concurrence of affairs with the defense of
them. But yet still in either case, what more potent charms to throw men into
contentions, then those interests so mixed are? Is it not men's love to these
things, that has power to delude them into a change of their opinions? (as the
wise Author of the History of the Counsel of Trent says, Hist. Council of
Trent, Lib. 8.
That, Thus it happens, as in humane affairs, so in Religion also, that ones
credulity is changed with his interests.) And is it not it also, that has
power to make men eagerly defend them? Is it not for these interests,
especially so mixed, that men have drained their veins? And is not for these
also that they have parted even with Heaven it self? All times and Histories,
and Records of Humane affairs, are full of instances in this matter; we need
not here stand to give them.

X. From these things then it is evident, From hence the necessity of some kind
of Unity to be maintained in matters of Religion.
what a necessity there is, that in the Government of any Society whatsoever,
there should be some kind of Unity in matters of Religion, maintained amongst
men: and that both for the removal of these unlawful Religious Contests, and
the occasions given by them to such Atheism and Profaneness, as has been
mentioned; and also for the begetting of such Charity and Peace amongst men, as
may be healthful to all their Divine and Humane affairs. How much tumultuous
and popular contests about Religion, prejudice all the affairs of men, I shall
describe hereafter: Infra Lib. 2. Cap. 7.. 9, 10, 11. Ibid.. 9.
And what occasions they give to Atheism and profaneness I shall touch upon
also: And I shall here by and by give an account of the benefits of Charity and
Peace, on the contrary, to humane Societies; and how much also they are
commanded in the Scriptures. In the mean time, an Unity in matters of Religion,
is that, that all men would have in Churches, and Public Societies. All Laws
and Councels, all the public writings of Societies, and the private of
particular men have ever made mention of it, and wished it; but none yet have
sufficiently described what manner and kind of Unity this should be. The New
Civil Law mentions the promotion of it a thousand times, and in all the parts
of the body of it. And in the Code of Theodosius, Edictum, quod de unitate per
Affricanas Regiones clementia nostra direxit; per diversa proponi volumus, ut
omnibus innotescat, etc. The Edict, concerning Unity, which our clemency did
direct to be published throughout the Regions of Africa, we will have
published by the dispersing of diverse Coppies of it, that all may take notice
of it, says the Emperors Arcadius, Honorius, and Theodosius, Cod. Theodos.
Lib. 16. de Religione L. Edictum.
and the like in other places: And in other particular Laws of Countries and
Territories, although never so small. The Laws and Statutes of the City of
Geneva, take a care, That the people be kept and conserved in peace and unity,
See p. 2, 3. The manner and form of the oath, etc.
and that the Ministers do keep the purity and concord of Doctrine, and the
like. So also the Ecclesiastical Canons of Councels, and the other writings
mentioned.

XI. That then, that is to be said here concerning it, is, Unity the Mother of
Charity and Peace.
That unity in the general, is the mother of Charity, and Charity the mother of
Peace. And what kind of Unity it is, that may possibly and ordinarily be
attained to in matters of Religion amongst men, shall be hereafter evidenced.
In the mean time, Infra Lib. 2. Cap. 8.. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
it is for these reasons mentioned, and because unity is the productrix of such
excellent things to Humane Societies, that it has ever been endeavored after,
and pressed upon men by all Laws both Divine and Humane, as is said: Behold,
how good and pleasant a thing it is for Brethren to dwell together in Unity!
says the sweet singer of Israel. Psalm. 133.1, etc.
And the prosperity of Jerusalem is compared to that of a City, which is united
within it self. Psalm. 122.3. Jo. 17.11.
And it was the valedictory prayer of Christ himself for his Disciples, that
they might be one. And the Precept of St. Paul to the Ephesians, to keep the
unity of the spirit in the bond of Peace. To this purpose it is also, and for
the promoting this unity, that the Imperial Laws call the Faith, The Catholic
Faith; Vid. C. lib. 1. De Episcop. and Cler. L. Deo nobis. Ibid. De Episcopali
Audient. L. Nemo vel in foro. C. lib. 1. de summa Trinit. Epist. Joh: Pap.
Inter Claris. ibid. eodem in residuo Epist. Liquet igitur.
and the Church, The Catholic Church; and the Christian Religion, The
Catholic Religion, and the like, (viz.) for the begetting in men an unity, by
putting them in mind of their being all wholly of one and the same only Church
of God. It Is this unity that there is so frequently an express mention made of
in those Laws. Custodientes statum and unitatem sanctarum Dei Ecclesiarum;
Preserving the State, and the Unity of the holy Church of God. Et, quae apud
vos est unitas sanctarum Ecclesiarum, inturbata servabitur. And that unity of
the Holy Churches which is amongst you shall be kept undisturbed: Et ad
unitatem Ecclesiae reverti voluerint, That they would return to the Unity of
the Church. And, Deum autem, and salvatorem nostrum Jesum Christum exoramus,
quatenus vos dignetur Custodire in hac vera Religione, and unitate, etc. we
pray God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, that he would vouchsafe to keep you in
the true Religion, and unity. And as to all that Communion which is so much
mentioned upon all occasions in the Apostolical Canons, the several famous
Councels of the Primitive times, etc. That is one sort of it, which is meant,
that flows from this unity, which we have mentioned. So then, how far forth
such unity may make to unity of minds and affections amongst Christians, and to
Charity, and Peace consequent upon it; it will be declared by us hereafter more
particularly in the several places of this discourse proper to these things.

A Distinction of Charity.
XII. In the interim, Charity is twofold: 1. That which may be called Negative
(i. e.) so far forth as it may be called such, where there is only an absence
of dissension, and the causes of dissension amongst men. 2. Positive, And that
is that which proceeds from a Positive and particular union of minds and
affections. Amongst the one sorts of persons, properly; Amongst the other,
improperly, there may be said to be Charity, and Peace following upon it. And
how much it is to be wished that both these, especially this last and most
noble sort of Charity; both whether it be Christian, and as to matters of the
True Religion; or only common, and as to other things; were amongst men; we
shall next evidence from the more particular Assignation of the benefits which
such Charity and Peace will bring to the public affairs, both of Religion and
Government, and the Consistency of Religion with Government; and how much also
they are commanded in Scripture.

The benefits of Charity, and Peace amongst men to the Christian Religion. In
Homil. 11.
XIII. We shall first then instance in the benefits accruing from them to (the
Christian) Religion: and those are many every ways. Charitatis cum sit
proprium (says St. Gregory) nutrice concordiam, servare Composita, conjungere
dissociata, dirigere Prava, and virtutes caeteras perfectionis suae lumine
solidare; quisquis in ejus Radices se inserit, nec a veritate deficit, nec a
fructu inanescit. That, since it is the property of Charity to nourish Concord,
to preserve things joined together, to conjoyne things separated, to direct ill
things, and to consolidate the other virtues by the light of it is perfection;
whosoever does insert himself into it is Roots, neither does go aside from the
Truth, neither does wax barren of fruit. And the like is that of Guicciardine,
Hist. lib. 16.
concerning the mutual peace of the Christian Princes, Nihil Sanctius, nihil
magis necessarium, nihil Deo gratius communi inter Christianos Principes Pace
futurum video; Sine hac enim Religionem, Pietatem, and hominum mores in
apertissimum perniciem ruere, vel manibus tangi potest. I do not see any thing,
says he, that would be more sacred, more necessary, more acceptable to God,
then a Common Peace amongst the Christian Princes: For, without this, it may
easily be perceived, that Religion, and Piety, and the manners of men do tumble
violently into the most open destruction. Peace and Charity are those things,
which remove out of Societies all that Atheism and Profaneness, all those
infinite Scandals and offenses, which come by popular contests about Religion.
Peace and Charity are those things which are the praise and the Glory of the
outward profession of Christianity; and that both as to those that are without,
and as to those also that are within; by making both of them to think well of
that Religion which effects the Practice of such excellent things. As the
Heathens, heretofore, could cast their Eyes with admiration upon these things
in the Christian Church. Vide ut se invicem diligant, Tertull. Apologet.
ut pro alterutro mori sint parati; See how the Christians love (said they) So
that they are ready to die for one another. Peace and Charity are the things
that are so beneficial to the Practice also of the Christian Religion. They
leave the ministers in the Christian Church, at leisure to preach; and the
People at leisure to practice the Precepts of it.

(...), Bacchylides, in Paeanibus.

(...)
(...).
Peace brings forth very great Benefits to men, says he,
It is that brings it to pass, that the members of Oxen Flame
On the beautiful Altars of the Gods, and also those of the Fleecebearing sheep.
Last of all, Peace and Charity are the things, which make even to Spiritual
sanctification, and the comforts flowing from it, and distilling into Peace of
Conscience. They invite the holy Ghost from Heaven to dwell in men; who will
not ordinarily dwell where the works of the flesh are; such as are hatred,
variance, emulations, Galat. 520, 21.
wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, and such like, says the
Apostle. They fit men also for the receiving him, and all spiritual joys
accompanying him; by leaving them free to exercise divine meditation, and their
minds open to receive all these things. Spiritus enim Humanus (says St.
Augustine) nunquam vivificat membra, De Civ. Dei.
nisi fuerint unita; sic Spiritus Sanctus nunquam vivificat Ecclesiae membra,
nisi fuerint in pace unita; That the spirit of Man never Enlivens the members
of his body, unless they be united; and so neither does the spirit of God ever
enliven the members of the Church, unless they be united in Peace. Ad Martianum.
So that thus it is, as he says also elsewhere; Dilectio est pacis unda, Ros
gratiae, Charitatis Imber, Semen Concordiae, affectus Gentium, Amoris fructus,
and ad Summum dilectio Deus: That love is the spring of Peace, the dew of
Grace, the shower of Charity, the seed of concord, the affection of Nations,
the fruit of good will, and in brief, Love is God.

The benefits of them to Government. Polit. lib. 2. Cap. 2.. 16. Lib. de vertig.
XIV. The like are the benefits of these things to Government. Amicitia enim
summum Civitatibus esse bonum censemus, says Aristotle, That he thinks mutual
friendliness to be to Cities the greatest good. And, Hae dicuntur beatissimae
Respub: quae plurimo tempore in Pace vixerunt, says Zenophon; That those are
reputed to be the most happy Commonweales, which have continued the longest
time in Peace. In Julian. Orat. 1.
And, Optima est Concordia, and ut una consentiant Civitates, gentes, familiae,
etc. says Nazianzen. That Concord is the best thing in the world, and that
Cities, and Nations, and Families, etc. should agree together. Peace and
Charity are the things which are contrary to Division, Parties, Factions,
Tumults, Wars; and which prevent all those Ruins, that come by these things
to Government, and Civil Society. Nam nec privatos focos, nec Publicas leges,
nec libertatis jura clara habere potest, quem discordia, quem caedes Civium, In
Philip.
quem bellum Civil dilectat, says Cicero of Marius, and Sylla; That he cannot
account dear neither the private Families, nor the Public Laws, nor the
Rights and Liberties of his Country; whom discord, whom the Slaughter of
Citizens, whom Civil War delights. In Clio.
And the like Craesus in Herodotus, (...), etc. Neither is any man so mad
(says he) as to wish for War rather then Peace; for in Peace the Children bury
their Father; but in War the Fathers bury their Children. Peace and Charity
are those things, which maintain an Harmony in men's minds, both toward
themselves mutually, and also toward their Governors. Peace and Charity are
those things which nourish Order in the Public, and Justice in the Courts, and
Learning in the Schools and Academies; and all the Moral virtues in the mutual
Society of Neighbor and Neighbor, and which are Nurces to the welfare of
Humane Society in the Common. Finally, Peace and Charity are those things,
which bring all manner of Prosperities along with them to Common-weals. In Ps.
84.
Duae sunt Amicae, says St. Augustine; Justitia, and Pax; ipsae se Osculantur:
Si Amicam Pacis non amaveris, non te amabit ipsa Pax: That there are two
friends; Justice and Peace; and they kiss one another: And if thou do not
love the friend of Peace, neither will Peace it self love thee. And Euripides,
(...)! etc.
And how much is Peace better then War for men!
Which, first of all, is most grateful to the Muses,
And opposite to mourning, and rejoices in the increase of mankind,
And is delighted with Riches.


And the like Aristophanes, (...), etc.
O fool, fool, All these things are in Peace,
That a man may live in quiet at his Country Farm,
Free from the businesses of the Courts,
Possessing his own Yoke of Oxen, etc.
And the Historian Relates it of King Mycipsa, Salust: De bello Jugurthino.
that when he was about to die, he called his sons to him, and warned them to
be at Peace, and Unity; adding, That by Concord, small things grew to be great;
But that by Discord, great things grew to be small. And, last of all, that we
may speak what is the sum of all in this business; and that is, That the
Peace of their Societies is the last thing Temporal which all Governors aim
at in the management of their public affairs; and for the attaining of which
they themselves also are by God set up over men. See 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. and the
like places of Scripture.

XV. The like are the Benefits of these things also to the consistency of
Religion with Government. The benefits of them also to the Consistency of
Religion with Government.
Charity and Peace are those things which in themselves every way keep Religion
in it is consistency with Government; and which prevent the many occasions given
to the corruptions of men by Contests, Tumults, and Wars, and the like, to
render it inconsistent with Government. And thus then, by all these, so
considerable things, it is, that Charity and Peace are thus beneficial to the
affairs of men; and create even the Golden Age, as it were, of humane Societies.

XVI. And then, last of all, And lastly, how much they are Commanded in
Scripture.
how much are these things also commanded in the Christian Scripture? In the
Law of Moses all the offices of Charity, Love, Mercy, and Hospitality, are
strictly enjoined to be practiced in Israel, Exodus 22.21. Thou shall not vex a
stranger, nor oppress him. And verse. 22. Ye shall not afflict any widow or
fatherless child. And Levit. 19. Thou shall not defraud thy Neighbor. verse. 13.
Thou shall not go up and down as a Tale bearer. 16.
Thou shall not avenge nor bear grudg against the Children of thy people: 18.
But thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. And Deuteronomy. 22.1. Thou shall not
see thy brothers Ox, or his sheep go astray, etc. And all these and the like
particulars were enjoined in the General, in the second Table of the Ten
Commandments. And the like also in the New Testament. The Peacemakers are
pronounced Blessed, Matthew. 5.9. And love to God and our Neighbor is said to be
(causally) the fulfilling of the Law. Romans 13.10.
And Matthew. 22.37. That on these two commandments hang all the Law, and the
Prophets. And 1 John 4.8. God himself is said to be Love. And Christ sets it as
his Badg and Cognizance upon his disciples, Joh. 13.35. That by this shall all
men know them to be his Disciples, if they love one another. And 1 Pet. 3.11.
Seek Peace, and pursue it. And Heb. 12.14. Follow Peace with all men. And Romans
12.18. If it be possible, and as much as in you lies, live peaceably with all
men. Finally, Moses his second Table is Eminently confirmed in the New
Testament: and the like to these things is the whole Tenor of the Christian
Scripture. See 1 John 4.16. 1 John 4.20, 21. Joh. 15.17. Romans 12.10. Romans 13.8.
Galat. 5.14. 1 Pet. 2.22. And therefore we are bid to love our Enemies, Matthew.
5.44. And God is called the God of Peace, Isa. 9.6. Luke 2.14.
and Christ the Prince of Peace; And the Angels from Heaven proclaimed Peace
upon Earth, at his Birth; and his Disciples appointed a Kiss of Charity, and
lov-Feasts, and the like in their times, for the preservation of these things
in his Church: And all the secular Laws of Princes have ever called for Peace,
and Love, in their several Societies, upon these and the like accounts. And
although it has been used by inconsiderate men in the World, to have been
accounted coldness in Religion; if upon every trifling occasion (concerning
matters Divine) not only the private, but the public Peace also has not been
broken; yet these Scriptures, and the constitutions of Religious Princes
(according to them) will always call upon them to lay their hands upon their
hearts, and to consider of all these things, which have been mentioned; both in
relation to Religion, and Government, and their mutual consistency. God write
them in the hearts of men, especially of Christians, in all Humane Societies;
and let his Pen be the Pen of an Adamant; and let his Writing never be blotted
out.

CHAP. III.
The description of the Rights directly belonging to men in an Ecclesiastical
Uniformity. And first, of the Primitive Liberties, both Civil and
Ecclesiastical, which belong to the People. And first, of the Civil, and of its
Right of being preserved.
I. THe distribution of the Rights directly belonging to an Ecclesiastical
Uniformity.

II. The Primitive Rights of the People assigned: And first, of their Civil
Liberty.

III. Liberty in the general, defined and distinguished.

IV. Laws in the general defined and distinguished.

V. A Subject defined.

VI. And lastly, the Liberty of the Subject defined also.

VII. The worth of Liberty.

VIII. That the liberty of the Subject ought to be preserved to him in an
Ecclesiastical Uniformity.

IX. The great reason of the restraint of private persons by Law.

I. THe division of the Rights relating to the matters of an Ecclesiastical
Uniformity into such as relate to them, The distribution of the Rights directly
belonging to an Ecclesiastical Uniformity.
either directly, or by consequence, having been hinted by us above: There are
three sorts of persons, amongst whom the Rights directly relating, or belonging
to those matters, are also to be divided: And that both primitively, and
derivatively; more generally, and particularly. The first of those sorts of
persons is the Prince or Chief Magistrate in any Society; the second, the
Priest, or Ecclesiastical Ministry, as it is distinguished both from the Prince
and People; and the third and last, the People (viz.) the whole body of them,
and as it is comprehensive of all (besides the Prince) both Clericks and
Laics, in the capacity principally of Church members.

The Primitive Rights of the people assigned: and first, of their Civil Liberty.
II. We come first then to assign the Primitive and more general Rights
belonging to those sorts of persons: Of the derivative, and more particular we
shall treat hereafter. And first, the Primitive Rights of the people are to be
laid down: And those are the primitive Liberties or Latitudes which belong to
them, de Jure, and of Right, in relation to the Ecclesiastical Laws of Princes,
and their obedience to be performed to them. And those Liberties also are
either Ecclesiastical, or Civil; and we shall treat first of the Civil Liberty,
and that is, the Liberty of the Subject in any State. And we shall first unfold
what it is, and afterward evidence its right of being preserved, in the
matters of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity. Briefly.

Liberty in the general defined, and distinguished. De Jure Belli. Lib. 1. Cap.
1.. 5.
III. Grotius then rightly defines Liberty, in the absolute, and most general
notion of it, to be Potestatem in se, a power, or faculty in any man of
disposing of himself, as he pleases. But then, as it is referred to men, it
must be meant of a moral, not of a natural power; for there is no such natural
power, as has been said, in men; and such power, or faculty, may be restrained
or tied up two manner of ways; Supra Lib. 1. Cap. 3.. 10.
either by mere force, without right; or else by the exercise of a right
inherent in any one, so to restrain it; and then it is said to be restrained by
Law.

Laws in the general defined and distinguished.
IV. Laws are those things by which all Government is exercised: And they are
either Divine or Humane. The humane are those here concerned; And they are
certain binding constitutions, made by the Legislative Power in any Society.
Lex a ligando, says Aquinas, Primaesecundae quaest. 90. Art. 1.
and other Etymologists. Et sicut, per nervos corporis Physici, compago
solidatur; sic per legem, quae a ligando dicitur, corpus politicum ligatur and
servatur in unum, says Fortescue: That, as by the nerves of the natural body,
De laudib. legum Angl. Cap 10.
the whole frame of it is fastened together; So by the Law, which amongst the
Latins is derived from binding, is the political body bound together, and
preserved in Unity. And Euripides, Hecuba. Strophe. 5. Agamem. prope fin. (...).
Heu, non est mortalium qui sit liber,
Aut pecuniarum enim servus est, aut fortunae;
Aut multitudo eum Vrbis, aut leges scriptae
Urgent, ne utatur, pro arbitrio, moribus.
Alas, there is no mortal man, who is free,
For either he is a servant of money, or of fortune;
Or else the multitude of the City, or the written Laws
Urge him, so that he cannot be at liberty in his behavior.
And the Legislative Power in every society, is that, which de jure, and of
right, has the power of making such Laws.

A Subject defined.
V. A Subject is one born in a state of subjection to Laws. And, it being the
essential property of Laws to induce an obligation upon him that is in
subjection to them, it is evident, that so far forth as the Laws (according to
the diverse frames of the policies of Countries) do induce an obligation upon
any Subject, he is not, by right, at his own liberty in things.

VI. From these things then it is easily resolved, And lastly the liberty of
the Subject defined also.
what is the liberty of the Subject, in Civil things, (viz.) that liberty,
whatsoever it is, that is left to him by the Civil Laws of any society.

VII. There are two Rules in the Civil Law; that of Paulus, that, Libertas
inaestimabilis res est: Liberty is a thing inestimable. The worth of liberty.
F. de Reg. Jur. Reg. 106. F. Eodem. Reg. 209.
And that of Vlpian, Servitutem mortalitati fere comparamus: We compare
servitude almost even to death it self. So that it cannot be supposed, that the
Subject, as a member of any Society, either ought to have his liberty unjustly
entrenched upon, or else should be stated under any legal obligation to part
with his liberty, but for some weighty reasons.

VIII. That the liberty of the Subject ought to be preserved to him in an
Ecclesiastical Uniformity, That the liberty of the Subject ought to be
preserved to him in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity: D. De Justitia and Jur. Lib.
10. The great reason of the restraint of private persons by Laws. Supra Lib. 1.
Cap. 3.. 17. and Ibid.. 9. and Cap. 1.. 12. De Legibus.
it is sufficiently evident from hence, because it is his right: For he which
deprives another of his right, transgresses against the Law of Justice.
Justitia est constans and perpetua voluntas jus suum unicuique tribuens, says
Vlpian: That, Justice is a constant and perpetual will, affording to every man
his right.

IX. And the just restraint of private persons, in the mean time, by Law, is
for the common good, the great end of all humane society, as has been
mentioned; and in which the good of every one of those private persons is
supposed to be included. (...), says Crysippus, That Law is the Queen of all
divine and humane affairs. And the Hebrews have a proverbial saying, Remember
to pray for the Kingdom; for if there were not Public Authority, a man would
swallow down his Neighbor, as the great fishes do the small. And for this
reason, amongst others, all Laws and Customs of Nations in the world have ever
taken a greater care of, and had a more solemn respect to the persons of
Supreme Governors: They have celebrated their birthdays; they have appointed
them Guards; they have punished treason with the extremest tortures, and most
exemplary kinds of death; and the like. And it is the principal immediate
meaning of the Promise annexed to the Fifth Commandment in the Tables of Moses;
that Israel should honor and obey their several succeeding Sovereign Princes,
as their political Parents; That their days might be long in the Land of
Canaan, which God had bestowed upon them, as such a society. And great are the
benefits which men enjoy by Laws, (viz.) the security of their Lives,
Liberties, and Estates; and as appears from the desperate state of a man
outlawed, as Bracton mentions concerning such an one in England. The same,
says he, Lib. 3. Cap. 13.
who of late has been usually called Vtlaugh, was heretofore called
Friendless-man; Nam forisfacit Patriam, and Regnum; item forisfacit amicos, and
omnia quae pacis sunt, and ea quae legis sunt, and omnia quae juris sunt, and
possessionis, and actionem; and caput gerit lupinum, ita ut ab omnibus
interfici poterit: For he puts himself out of doors from his Country, and the
Kingdom, and from the benefit of his friends, and the peace, the Law, and all
right, and possession, and any action at Law whatsoever; and he wears a Wolves
head, so that any one may kill him.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Primitive Ecclesiastical and Spiritual Liberties, which belong to the
People in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity: And of the several Obligations, and
Rights, relating to them.
I. THe Primitive Ecclesiastical, and Spiritual Liberties of the people
described and asserted.

II. The three sorts of them assigned.

III. Christian Liberty defined and distinguished.

IV. Liberty of Judgment distinguished and defined.

V. The Liberty of exercising men's judgment of discerning asserted.

VI. The due limitation and restraint of the same.

VII. Liberty of outward actions ought to be regulated by Humane Laws.

VIII. The concession of the use of the means of Grace, in any Christian
Church, necessary to the attaining to the principal part of the purchased
Christian Liberty.

IX. The concession of the use of the means of knowledge in any Christian
Church, necessary also to the exercise of men's judgment of discerning.

X. What the ordinary means of Knowledge and Grace are.

XI. That the Bible ought to be conceded to the Laity.

XII. The Public Ordinances also ought to be Celebrated in the Vulgar Tongue.

1. THe Civil Liberty of the people then in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity, being
thus described and asserted; The Primitive Ecclesiastical and Spiritual
Liberties of the people described and asserted.
we come next to the Primitive Ecclesiastical and Spiritual Liberties belonging
in like manner to them; and to the describing and asserting of them in their
due manner, and of the several Obligations and Rights relating to them.

The three sorts of them assigned.
II. And there are three sorts of Ecclesiastical Liberty, concerning men in an
Ecclesiastical Uniformity: And those are, their Christian liberty, their
liberty of Judgment, and their liberty of Profession, and outward action.

Christian liberty defined and distinguished. In compendio, etc. loco, de
liberate Christiana. and vid. Petri Martyr. locos commun. etc.
III. And first of all, Christian Liberty is a purchased thing; a thing
purchased for Christians, as a privilege, by the merits of Christ, and
therefore belonging to them only as Christians. And it consists, says Zanchy,
and other Theologists in their common places concerning it, in freedom from the
curse of the Law, and from the burden and yoke of it, both Moral and
Ceremonial; and from the particular effects and consequences reduceable to
these generals: and therefore belongs to Christians, partly as such by
profession, and partly as such by special Grace: But, it being a thing wholly
spiritual and internal, it comes not under the reach and cognizance of Humane
Laws, and so cannot possibly either be diminished, or taken away by men, nor
from men, while Christians. And therefore the complaints, many times thrown
about amongst the inconsiderate people by Innovators in the Christian Churches,
and Common-Weals, that Governors go about to rob them of their Christian
Liberty, when they only limit them by due restraints, are in themselves vain
and causless; neither is it possible that Christian Liberty should immediately
and in its self, any ways concern the good or evil of Humane Society.

Liberty of judgment distinguished and defined.
IV. Liberty of Judgment, in matters of Religion, comes under a twofold
distinction. First, it is distinguished according to the two different sorts of
objects of the intellectual faculty in man: And so it is,

1. That of the practical judgment, in relation to actions, and things to be
done.

2. That of the speculative, in relation to things to be believed; and those
either matters of Faith, or matters of Opinion, as those terms are ordinarily
understood by Divines.

Secondly, it is to be distinguished either in respect to the Obligation lying
upon the intellectual faculty, and consequently on the will, to assent and
consent to things; (to assent to things speculative, to consent to things
practical) or else in respect to the bare exercise and employment of it, in
order to the fixing such assent and consent mentioned. And the first of these
is ordinarily called, Liberty of Conscience; the second, Liberty of the
Judgment of discerning. Liberty of Conscience, so taken, respects principally
matters practical; and so it consists in conscience, it being free from
obligation to any thing, except the commands of God. And that it is so free,
says the Scripture, James 4.12. Romans 14.1. And those commands of God are either
mediate, or immediate. And liberty of Judgment of discerning, respects both
matters practical and speculative universally; and consists in its being free
from any prohibition of its being exercised about those things. But still both
these sorts of liberty, being things internal, they also cannot possibly be
diminished, nor taken away by man, neither do they in themselves concern Humane
Society.

V. That this liberty of exercising the Judgment of discerning, The liberty of
exercising men's judgment of discerning asserted.
as it is largely taken, and in the general, about all matters of Religion, is,
and always has been conceded by God to men; it is evident both from the light
of Nature, and from the Divine Law: And the use and enjoyment of it is a grand
natural right belonging to men.

First, it is evident from the light of nature; in that God and Nature have
endued man with such Judgment of discretion, for this very end, that he might
use and exercise it in all things indefinitely: And so upon that account he is
obliged to do it, wheresoever occasion requires. And if in all things that
concerns him and his welfare, then in matters of Religion especially; or else
such judgment should be bestowed, as to those most weighty things, upon him in
vain. It is the saying of Cicero, De Not. Deor. Lib. 3. in princip.
Cum autem suo cuique judicio sit utendum, difficile est factu me id sentire
quod tu velis; That, since every one is appointed to use his own judgment, it
is a hard thing for me to think just what you would have me to think. And
Plutarch, In Timole onte:
Oportet non modo ut quod agitur sit honestum, sed ut firma and constans adsit
persuasio: It behooves us to look to it, that not only what we do be honest, but
that also there be in us a firm and constant persuasion of the honesty of it.
And Pliny, Quod dubitas, ne feceris: Lib. 1. Epist. 29. Strom. Lib. 1.
That which thou doubtest of, do not do. And Clemens Alexandrinus, Veritatis
amator, Plato, veluti a Deo incitatus, dixit, ego sum ejusmodi, ut nulli alii
credam, nisi rationi; quae mihi consideranti optima visa est: That, the lover
of Truth, Plato, as it were inspired by God, said, I am of that mind to believe
none else but Reason, which to me considering, seems to be the best.

Secondly, from the Divine Law, in that it does every where advise and command
the use of such judgment of discerning in matters of Religion to men, and where
they properly concern them. See 1 These. 5.21. Prove all things, hold fast that
which is good. And 1 Jo. 4.1. Believe not every spirit; but try the spirits,
whether they are of God. And 1 Pet. 3.15. Be ready always to render a reason of
that hope that is in you. And Mat. 24.4. See that no man seduce you. And Luke
12.57. Why do ye not of your selves judge what is right? All which, and the
like Texts, if they do not advise men to make use of their Reason for the
choice of their Religion; Against Knot. 1 Part. Chap 2.. 116.
then I must confess my self (says Mr. Chillingworth) to understand nothing.

VI. But yet this liberty of the use, The due limitation, and restraint of the
same.
and exercise of men's judgment of discerning in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity
is appointed to receive (as all other things in their several respects they
bear to the good of humane affairs) its due and just limitations: And that in
relation both to persons and things. The distinction of persons here concerning
it, is, that of men divided into the vulgar, and more intelligent. And this
distinction of them is common to all Societies. The distinction of things, Hic
supra. 2. Supra Lib. 2. Cap. 1.. 7.
and matters of Religion, are partly those here already mentioned; and partly
heretofore (viz.) of Doctrines, into Doctrines of Belief, and Doctrines of
manners: And those of Belief, into Doctrines of Faith, and Doctrines of
Opinion: And both those of Belief and Practice, either into Doctrines more or
less Fundamental; and consequently either more or less concerning the Good of
men; and then no wonder if consequently also, either more plainly or more
obscurely revealed in Scripture: And those also concerning the good of men,
either so concerning it ordinarily, and in themselves; or else by accident, and
in some particular case; and as to some particular persons: And that good also
either their temporal, in this world, in a less eminent notion; or their
eternal in another, in a more eminent. And, according to these distinctions
both of persons and things, is the use of this liberty in matters of Religion,
in all Societies to be limited: And that as it respects the last end, which was
mentioned, of all Society, the common good of Humane Affairs: and that is, that
to persons intelligent, and who are sufficient to judge of such things, God and
Nature have allowed the liberty of the ordinary exercise of their judgment of
discerning universally, and according to the latitude of its adequate object,
and in relation to all the sorts of Doctrines mentioned; and that for many
reasons, relating both to the good of Religion and Government, and the
Consistency of Religion with Government: But to the Vulgar, and persons
insufficient actually, Infra Lib. 3. Cap. 13..
and ordinarily not so, as shall be more particularly declared hereafter.

Liberty of outward actions ought to be regulated by Humane Laws.
VII. Liberty of Profession, and outward actions, as to matters of Religion, is
a thing clearly different from these two sorts of Liberty already mentioned.
And because the use of it, immediately, and in it self, comes under the
cognizance of men; and in its effects also, reaches to their persons and
affairs, therefore it ought to be regulated by Humane Laws. And it is to be
allowed, or not allowed by the Chief Magistrate, and so consequently used, or
not used by private persons in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity, according to the
present circumstances of things; and as it makes, or makes not to the Glory of
God, and good of our Neighbor, as a member of all Humane Society, (i. e.) To
the welfare of Religion or Government, or the Consistency of Religion with
Government.

This liberty of Profession, and outward Actions, as to matters of Religion, is
that which has been used in all Ages, to have been falsely cried up by corrupt
men, either for Christian Liberty, or liberty of Conscience, according as
either would serve their turns, when they have affected any Innovations or
Change of Government, either Ecclesiastical or Civil in any Society. And
liberty of divulging men's Judgments or Opinions in matters of Religion, is one
maine part of this liberty of outward actions.

VIII. The principal part of the purchased Christian Liberty, (viz.) The
freedom from the Guilt of Sin, The concession of the use of the means of
Grace, in any Christian Church, necessary to the attaining to the principal
part of the purchased Christian Liberty. Hic supra. 1.
the Curse of the Law, etc. cannot be attained to, but by a man's being endued
from God with special Grace; because that is the condition of the Covenant of
Grace in the Gospel, belonging necessarily, as is said, to the attaining to it.
And therefore it is evident, that the use of the means of Grace, by which such
Grace is ordinarily to be attained, ought by the Chief Magistrate in an
Ecclesiastical Uniformity to be conceded to the people. And they have a Right
to it both by the Natural and Divine Law: By the Natural, as the means is
necessary to the end in the general: and by the Divine, as those particular
means are appointed by it, as necessary to that particular end. Faith comes by
hearing, says the New Testament, Romans 10.17.
and Hearing by the word of God. This Faith meant there, is the Fundamental
Grace of a Christian, his primum vivens, and ultimum moriens; and by hearing
the Word of God is meant, the use of any of the means of Grace.

IX. Knowledge, in the Doctrines of Christianity, The concession of the use of
the means of Knowledge in any Christian Church, necessary also to the exercise
of men's judgment of discerning.
is also necessary to the exercising a man's Judgment of discerning about them,
because by Knowledge it is, that he distinguishes of things; and the things
must be known that are to be judged of: And therefore it is evident also from
hence, that the means of Knowledge, in the Christian Religion (without which
ordinarily such Knowledge cannot be attained to) ought in like manner, to be
conceded to the people by the Chief Governor in any Church; and they have a
right to them also by the two Laws, both the Natural, and the Divine; by the
first of them primarily and more generally; and by the second secondarily, and
more particularly.

X. The ordinary means of Knowledge and Grace here meant, What the ordinary
means of Knowledge and Grace are.
are those things which are appointed by God and Nature, for the ordinary
obtaining of them: And therefore they are commonly called the Ordinances or
Appointments of God in the Christian Church, in respect to them. Such are
especially his Public Ordinances of Prayer, reading the Scriptures, and
singing of Psalms, or Hymns, Preaching, and the like: Such are also the like
things to be made use of in private, (viz.) the Bible especially, and other
good Books in the vulgar Tongue, to be read, thought on, conferred about, and
the like.

That the Bible ought to be conceded to the Lai^y.
XI. That the Bible ought, in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity, to be conceded to
the Laity in common, to be made use of by them to these ends mentioned; and
notwithstanding that to the grosser and more insufficient part of them, the use
of their judgment of discerning is not actually, ordinarily, and universally
by God, and Nature, conceded to them, as was said but now; Hic supra. 4.
It is evident from the Bible it self, and the Divine Law of God and Christ
contained in it. In the Old Testament, the use of it was so commanded to the
Laity amongst the Jews, Deuteronomy. 6.6. And these words, which I commanded thee this
day, shall be in their heart; and thou shall teach them diligently unto thy
Children; and shall talk of them by the way; and when thou sit in thy
House, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up, etc. And in the New
Testament, the same was commanded also, John 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for
in them ye hope to have Eternal Life, and they are they which testify of me.
And, if this be not so, why was the Old Testament written in Hebrew, the vulgar
Language of the Jewish Nation? And why was the New Testament written in the
Greek, the Language most vulgar also, to those Countries in which it was first
written and taught? Per Europam, De veritate Christianae Relig. Lib. 3.. 15.
Asiam, and Aegyptum; quibus in locis Graecus Sermo vigebat, says Grotius:
Throughout Europe, Asia, and Egypt; in which places the Greek Language did
then flourish. And so also both of the Testaments continue in those places, and
to those people, to whom those Languages, and so much of the ancient purity of
them as is preserved, are common to this day, for ought any Revelation that
there is from Heaven to the contrary. And the unwritten traditions (whether in
the Romish, or any other part of the Christian Church) for the Licentiating of
the Bible, and which stand in direct opposition to the plain written Scripture
in these things, are not rationally to be believed.

The Public Ordinances also ought to be celebrated in the vulgar Tongue.
Poloniae Lib. 1. prop. fin.
XII. And lastly, that the Public Divine Service, and the use of the Ordinances
of God in the Churches, in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity, ought also to be in
the vulgar Tongue (so as Cromerus says it is with the Russians, and Chytraeus
with the Armenians, the Waldenses, and others) it is as evident. It is the
saying of Padre Paul the Venetian (although himself also in Communion with the
Church of Rome) in his History of the Council of Trent; That, In Oratione, cum
post reditum ex Austria, etc. Circa Med. De Armeniis. Ibid. in Boemia prope
fin. Lib. 6. Fol 578
he that would know what Language is to be used in the Church, needs only to
read the fourteenth Chapter of the first to the Corinthians; and it will
sufficiently inform him, though his mind be never so much prepossessed with a
contrary opinion. Thus then for these things.

CHAP. V.
A more particular consideration of the two Grand Causes of all Mischiefs in
Humane Affairs, (viz.) the Weaknesses, and Corruptions of men: And more
particularly of their Influence on the Public Charge of the Magistrate, the
thing to be preserved ultimately by an Ecclesiastical Uniformity.
I. THE Causes of all Mischiefs to the Public Charge of the Magistrate
distinguished.

II. The Persons ordinarily guilty of the Faults of Imprudence.

III. Their guilt evidenced.

IV. Their particular faults instanced in, in the particulars of the
Magistrates.

V. The frequency of their errors and offenses in this kind.

VI. The persons ordinarily guilty of the Faults of Malice.

VII. The causes exciting them to the commission of such faults.

VIII. The impetuousness and violence of those exciting Causes.

IX. Certain Doctrines in the Christian Religion made use of by these Persons
for the promotion of their several ends.

X. Of all things in the world the Charge of the Magistrate is most likely to
be invaded by them.

XI. Of all Persons in the world the Person of the Magistrate is most likely to
be invaded by them also.

XII. The Conclusion drawn from all these things.

I. THe Divines distinguish all sins committed against God, The causes of all
mischiefs to the Public charge of the Magistrate distinguished.
into voluntary and involuntary. The involuntary are those which are committed
imprudently, and without knowledge and intention; and the voluntary those which
are committed knowingly and maliciously. The same distinction is here to be
given of all faults committed in Humane Affairs, as has been hinted already
more then once: And more particularly against the public charge of the
Magistrate in an Ecclesiastical uniformity. Lib. de virtutibus Juv. Sat. 1.
Imprudentia rationis est vitium male vivendi causa, says Aristotle; That
Imprudence is a fault of men's reason, and a cause of their ill living. And that
of the Poet may be ordinarily applied to every Age* Nil erit ulterius quod
nostris moribus addat
Posteritas; eadem capient facientque minores.
Omne in praecipiti vitium stetit --
That there will be nothing farther for Posterity to add
To our manners; the younger will receive and do the same things.
Every vice is readily practiced --


And although it be true in both these Cases, what the Schools say in
Divinity, that -- Veniam dabit ignorantia Culpae; That, Ignorance in the Person
offending is one thing, which may excuse from guilt, as to the offense it
self, either in tanto, or in toto: Yet however the outward effects and
consequences of both these sorts of offenses against the charge of the
Magistrate, are those things which are to be taken cognizance of, and
considered principally by Humane Laws. And it follows then, that in respect
to the mischeifs done by them, either sort of offenses may be either more or
less equally heinous; and so as that both of them are to be watched over by the
chief Magistrate in any Society. Saepe honestas rerum causas, Hist. lib. 1.
Orat. Contra Ctesiphont.
inadhibias in Judicium, perniciosi exitus consequuntur, says Tacitus. That
oftentimes pernicious ends do attend honest causes of things, unless you
consider how to prevent them. And Aeschines, improbum ingenium, magnam
potestatem adeptum, publicas importat Calamitates: That a Mischievous wit,
having attained to great power, brings public calamities upon men.

II. The faults of Imprudence then are the first in order here to be treated
of. And the Persons ordinarily guilty of them in any Society are those, The
Persons ordinarily guilty of the faults of imprudence.
who in all Writings and Ages have been loaded with so many Epithets designing
that guilt of theirs; (viz.) Prophanum, Rude, Imperitum, Ignobile vulgus; The
Barbarous, Rude, Unskillful and Ignoble Common people.

Their guilt Evidenced.
III. Their being ordinarily subject to this kind of offenses is evident from
two things. 1. From their own aptness to run into such, and all other sorts of
faults, and Errors. 2. From their easiness to be lead into them by others.

1. Their own aptness proceeds from their Ignorance, Heedlesness, and
unskilfulness in Affairs, and the like, in all Writings deservedly Attributed
unto them.

2. They are also Consequently as easily led by others. And that 1. By Shows.
2ly; By Custom: And that also by reason of their Heedlessness, Simplicity, and
Foolishness mentioned. Wherefore they are rightly called a body without a
Breast. P. Aemyl. lib. 8.
And Nihil est facilius, Declam. 11.
says Quintilian, quam in quemlibet affectum movere populum; That nothing is
more easy, ^hen any ways to affect the People. And Plebs suapte natura, Hist.
lib. 17.
says Guicciar^^ne, semper novarum rerum cupidicum facile vanis erroribus and
falsis persuasionibus repleatur, ad concitantis arbitrium, ut maris stuctus a
ventis impellitur. That the Common People being by their own nature desirous of
new things, seeing they are easily filled with vain errors, and false
persuasions, they are driven along at the pleasure of him that stirrs them, as
the floods of the Sea by the wind. Ad Caesar.
And the like is that of Salust: Multitudo vulgi more magis quam Judicio post
alium alius quasi prudentiorem sequitur; That the multitude of the Common
people, by Custom more then by Judgment, follows the one after another, as if
he were in the mean time the wiser.

Their particular faults instanced in, in the particulars of the Magistrates
Charge.
IV. We will farther instance a little in their more particular faults,
respecting the particulars of the Magistrates charge mentioned.

1. As to Religion: And their faults in respect to it have been evident in all
Churches, and Religions. How easy they have been to admit of any thing, any
the most absurd deceits, and Impostures, under the Sacred Notion of Worship,
and Divine precept! So in the Ancient Heathen Religion, and as the Scripture
Records Testify, they worshipped Stocks and Stones, (i. e.) not only
Relatively; but the vulgar, those very things for Gods.

Horat. Sermon. Lib. 1. Sat, 8.
Cum faber incertus Scamnum faceretne Priapum,
Maluit esse Deum --
When the workman uncertain whether he should make a Form, or Priapus,
Would rather have it to be a God. --
They held for Tenants all the other the most incongruous Precepts of their
Religon: and were easily led, either by their Priests, or others, to the
holding of them. The like in the Religion of the Jews at this day: They have
the Doctrines of their Religion delivered to them concerning the days of their
Messiah; That then they shall have a sumptuous Banquet provided for them (viz.)
out of a Bull of the Mountains, created and fatted for this very end, which
shall be able to eat up the Grass of a thousand Mountains in one day; and every
night it shall grow up again. And out of the Fish Leviathan, and the Bird
Juckna, one Egg of which is of that Bigness, that, if by chance it were cast
out of the nest, it were enough to beat down three hundred Cedars, and to drown
with it is liquor Sixty Villages. The like Doctrine they have concerning other
things. And although Menasse Ben Israel, and others, their later more learned
Rabbis, De Resurectione lib. 11. cap. 19.
interpret these things in a Parabolical and Spiritual sense; yet the Common
People in all Ages have made no Bones to swallow down the belief of the letter
of them, and to take it (like the Mahometan's Paradise) for their happiness in
another World. The like also in the Religion of the Turks: Avierus. lib. 2.
cap. 12. Johan Leo lib. 3. cap. 12. Aphric.
Mahomet had but his Alcoran bound up in a handsome Volume, and caused a Wild
Ass to be taken, and the book to be tied about his neck; and as he Preached,
upon a sudden fell into a Rapture, as if something had been revealed to him
from Heaven, and so presently brake out, and told the people, That God had sent
them a Written Law from Heaven, and let them go to such a desert, and they
should find it tied about an Asses neck; and they presently received it. And as
for their Reward, for the observation of his Law, he delivered to them the low
and homely Parable of the Ramm, Bernard. in Rosar. part. 1. Sermon. 10.
That at the end of the world he should be transformed into the likeness of a
mighty Ramm; and all behung with Locks, and long flieces of Wool; and that they
should be as Fleaes sheltering themselves in them; and that he would give a
leap into heaven, and so convey them all thither. And these things still as
matters of Religion and Faith, were so allowed well enough, even in their gross
and literal sense, by the simple people. Last of all the Christian Religion
also is not free from the mixture of the like gross impostures in several parts
of the World, where it is professed. He that will take a view of the wild
practices of the late Anabaptists in Germany; of the deceipts and fopperies of
Rome; of Muncer's laughing, and crying out, (when he was pulled with red hot
Pincers for deceiving the People) that they would have it so; of the weepings
and Miracles of Images in the Romish Church; of the Indulgences and Sales of
Pardons up and down in the streets, and market places of Spain, and Italy; and
the like things; will quickly acknowledge it. And other Eastern Churches have
the like in them also. And finally, abundance of these things are at this day
experimented upon the simple people in other Religions also. The Turkish and
Persian Mahometans; the several sorts of the Gentues or Gentiles dispersed up
and down in all the Provinces of India, both within and without Ganges, the
vast Kingdom of China, the Isle of Japan, and the like Eastern Countries,
ordinarily described by Historians and Geographers; are all of them great
instances of these things. Their Bramines, or Priests, teach them the
Pythagorean Doctrine of Transmigration of Souls; and they nourish Apes and
Monkies to receive them at their Death. They teach the women to be voluntarily
burnt or buried alive at the Funerals of their Husbands; and they also being so
taught, contend earnestly amongst themselves which of them shall take that
cruel lot; and so are zealous Suicides. And the like other things, are recited
concerning them, and their Customs also heretofore, Vid. Polyhist: Cap. 65. De
India.
by Julius Solinus and others. And any the like Doctrines which their Priests
deliver to them are as easily digested by the simple vulgar. So that thus it is
with the vulgar, as to the first part of the Magistrates Charge, they being
weak and fit to be lead. And this is yet further observable concerning them,
that they are so always ruled by Shows and Customs; That when any where
there happens a Change of Religion (and be the change of it in it self, never
so absurd, and never so much opposed by them at it is first setting up; yet) if
it be but accompanied with fair shows, and good pretenses, Custom, sometimes
in a very little time, but always ordinarily in one Age, will make any
Religion current with them.

2. The like Errors they are apt to run and be led into also in respect to
Government, either Ecclesiastical or Civil; either of themselves, or by these
Pretenses, and Custom. The Greek and Roman Histories, in the several mutations
and hazards of their Governments, are full of examples in this kind. And the
People still have been drawn either to obedience by their Governors; or to
Rebellion by the Leaders of Factions, by these things. And the pretenses of
Reformation, and liberty of Conscience, and Christian liberty, as to matters of
Religion, and of liberty of the Subject in matters Civil, have been the common
Lures of all Innovators, by which they have drawn them to them in all Ages and
Societies. So in the Sacred Records, and under the Government of Israel; the
people oftentimes ran themselves into Murmurings, Tumults, and the like, Vid.
Exodus 14.10, 11. Exodus 16.2, 3. Exodus 17.2, 3. Exodus 32.1, and 4. Numb. 14.1,
2, 3 4.5, 6, etc. Number 16 1, 2, 3. 1 Samuel 15.1, 2, 3.4, 5, 6. In Clio.
against Moses and Aaron, their Church and State Governors. And although the
Politicians use to say, That a multitude, without some one to lead them, is not
to be esteemed of; yet when they are either in such actual madness, or in a
disposition to it, it is seldom that there wants some head or other to lead
them. So also the company of Corah were led away by him, under Pretense of
Religion; and in David's time the followers of Absalon by him, under the
pretense of Liberty of the Subject. So Herodotus recites it concerning
Pisistratus, that he recovered his Tyranny, which he had lost, at Athens, by
putting a Woman, one Phya, into the Habit of the Goddess Minerva, and by having
her driven along the streets in a Chariot to the Temple of the Goddess by some
crying before her, O ye Athenians receive again Pisistratus, whom Minerva her
self brings back to you! and the people presently performed Divine Honors to
the Woman, and received Pisistratus. So also the Roman Senate, in Livie, Decod.
1. lib. 3.
when the People were in Sedition about the Lex Terentilla, recalled them, by
telling them out of the Sybilline Oracle, That unless they abstained they
should that year lose their Liberty. The like is said of Minos King of Crete,
concerning his betaking himself into retirements, and coming forth and
dictating his Laws, as from the Gods. The like of Licurgus his consulting
Apollo's Oracle; and of Zaleucus amongst the Locrians. The like also did
Camillus the Dictator in his Seige of Veii: Livius. Dec. 1. lib. 5.
The Soldiers being weary and ready to depart; the Albanian Lake swelling
above his banks; he interpreted the Oracle sent from Delphos concerning it,
that then they should win the City. He marches out before the Soldiers, And,
Tuo ductu^, inquit, Pythice Apollo; tuoque numine instinctus, pergo ad delendam
urbem Veios: Under thy conduct, says he, O Pythian Apollo; and being inspired
by thy Deity, I go forth to the razing of the City Veii. And so he wan the
City. The like also is recorded of Scipio Africanus, Apud Live. Dec. 3. lib. 6.
that he accustomed himself to deceive the multitude, even from his youth: and
that he never went about any public or private affairs, before he had entered
alone into the Capitol, and sat there for some time; and he used this all his
life; and at his coming forth, the multitude obeyed his words as Oracles, and
at the last accounted him a son of the Gods. The like is said of Quintus
Sertorius his leading a White Heart along with him as his Instructress from the
Gods: And of L. Sylla his lifting up a little Image of Apollo, sent to him, as
he said, from Delphos, and in the sight of the Soldiers, so often as he came
to fight a Battle, he praying to him to hasten his promised Victory. The like
is said in the Mahumetan Annals of Mustapha, his leading a Sedition by feigning
himself a Prophet: Apud Leunclav: Annal. Turci. Paulo post princip. n. 79.
ibid. paulo post. n. 92. Ibid. in Suplement. Annal. prop. med. n. 1576. Fol.
43. lib 1.
Of Amurat his feigning his War to be given him in command from Heaven: Of
the Turks being stirred up against the Persians by the Interpretations of
Dreams, and the like. The like also is said of Charles of Burbon, General of
the Emperors Army in Lombardy, in the late History of the Council of Trent:
That when his Soldiers wanted pay, he caused a Halter to be carried near his
colors, saying, that with that he would hang the Pope; and by that slight he
overcame that and other difficulties. And last of all, the like practices were
in the late Civil Wars in England: In the beginning of them, Versutissimi
Homines, says the Historian, De Religione actum; Dr. Georg. Bateus; In Elencho
motuum: part 1. p. 16.
de liberate publica conclamatum; leges in summo periculo versari passim
clamitant: That there were some Crafty men, who did noise it up and down, that
Religion was destroyed; the Public Liberty lost; That the Laws were in
extremest peril. And afterward Cromwell the Usurper was said to be wont to go
aside from his Council, to seek God, as he said, for a Resolution. And he
blinded even the weaker sort of them also by it: And he had his State Divines,
to put the fair Glosses of Heroic motions of the Spirit upon his fowlest
Actions, and the like. Thus then it is with the people in respect to matters of
Government also; and where such sleights are made use of, if they be well
managed, and there be opportunities given, they seldom fail of prevailing
with them.

3. The like errors are the multitude thus subject to also, in respect to
matters concerning the Consistency of Religion with Government.

The frequency of their Errors and Offenses in this kind.
V. And lastly; And that we may sum up all; how frequently have all these
things concerning the heedless multitude been in the World? All Chronicles of
times and Histories of Humane Affairs are full of the Presidents and Examples
of them. The more honest and sober of the Greek and Roman Orators heretofore
always complained of the peoples wilfulness in being deceived. So Demosthenes;
Orat. Pro. Ctesi. phonte.
(...). That while the Common People and multitude did not foresee things to
come, it was beguiled by Tranquillity of life, Ibid.
and daily Idleness. And Again, Itaque multitudini hoc usu venit, ut, pro
infinita illa and intempestiva desidia atque ignavia, libertatem amitteret:
Therefore this is common to the Multitude, by reason of it is infinite and
unreasonable sloth, and dullness, to lose it is liberty. Orat. De falsa Legate.
And elsewhere, Populus sane turba est, and res omnium instabilissima, atque
imprudentissima; ut in mari fluxus flexibilis and inquietus, qui ut contingit
agitatus, alius venit, alius recessit, ac nemo reipub: curam gerit, immo ne
meminit quidem: That the people indeed is a Rout, and the most unstable and
imprudent of all things; being flexible and unquiet as a Wave in the Sea;
which, as it happens, being driven up and down, one comes, and another goes,
and no body takes any care for the Commonweal, no not so much as thinks of it.
In Panathenaico. Ibid. in princip.
So also Isocrates Satyrically told the Athenians; That two things there were
that prevailed most in Cities, A great Voice, and Boldness: And that the Common
People liked more those that would tell them Lies, and Stories, then the things
belonging to their Welfare, Orat. de pace.
and Safety. And, (...); That they praised Varlets ascending Oratories, and
valued Sots more then Sober men, and Madmen more then those that were Wise;
and that no sort of men were more mischeivous to a multitude then wicked and
Tribunitian Orators. And the like were the Complaints amongst the Romans: Pro
Rosc. Com.
Sic est vulgus, says Cicero, ex veritate pauca, ex opinione multa estimat: So
is the Common People, it esteems of few things according to Truth, but of most
things according to opinion. And the like have been the everlasting complaints
of all times and places in the World. So that thus it is with the People. And
as Plato says of man, That he is the Sport of God; So have these been in
respect to these things, the Scorn and Sport of Impostors.

VI. The Persons ordinarily guilty then of voluntary Offenses, The Persons
ordinarily guilty of the Faults of Malice.
and the faults of malice against the public charge of the Magistrate, are the
other sort of men (viz.) wicked and cunning men, Demagogues, Heresiarks in
matters of Religion, and Ringleaders of Sedition in matters Civil: And these
ordinarily such who are partly Profane, either to lesser or greater degrees of
Profaneness; and partly Atheists and downright Contemners of a Deity, and so
have no sense of Conscience or Duty upon them, either toward God or Man. The
Profane Persons, some of them are such to such a degree, that they deserve the
name of Practical Atheists. And the others are speculative Atheists: and that
such there are, and always have been in all Societies, it is abundantly
evident. The Practices of men, and such as we shall here forthwith mention,
Polit. lib. 5. cap. 4.. 27.
show it daily. And Aristotle says, Itaque viri boni and virtute praestantes
Seditionem non faciunt, cum multis enim improbis comparati valde pauci fuerint.
Therefore good men, and such as excel in virtue, are not those who make a
Sedition, seeing that it will be found that they are but very few, if they may
be compared with wicked men. And Plato in his books of Laws taxed the Atheists
of old; Dial. 10.
That they were wont to say scoffingly amongst the Heathens, that not the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, who were worshipped; but that the Earth and Stones were the
Gods. And, Ibid.
Quomodo non commotus Deos esse aliquis disserat? How can a man dispute against
such Persons, says he, but with anger? Vid. Suetonium Incaligula, etc. Juv.
Satyr. 3.
Some of the Roman Emperors in their times laughed at Religion. And the Acute
Satyrist describes the Tenants of such men: Sunt qui in fortunae jam casibus
omnia ponunt,
Et nullo credunt mundum rectore moveri,
Natura volvente vices and Lucis and Anni;
Atque ideo intrepidi quaecunque Altaria tangunt.
There are those now, who attribute all to Chance and Fortune,
And do believe the World to be moved by no Guide,
Nature turning about the Course both of the Days and Year,
And therefore they approach to any Altars without any fear or respect to them.


VII. The things that excite and stir up these Persons also to the Commission
of such faults against the Charge of the Magistrate are their several Lusts and
Corruptions, The Causes exciting them to the Commission of such Faults.
(viz.) Those which have Temporal interests, and the adored things of this
World for their Proper Objects. And those vicious Passions, and Corruptions
are, either such as respect the things and Affairs (according as they are
diversely valued) or else the Persons of men. The things of this world
ordinarily valued by men in the first place are Riches: And the wise man gives
the reason of it, Eccles. 10.19.
because they answer all things: And the particular Lust in men, the proper
object of which they are, is Covetousness. The things valued in the second
place accordingly are Honors and Reputation, esteem, a name, and the like: And
they are the proper Objects of the Lusts of Pride, and Ambition. And these two
sorts of Corruptions are the principal of these causes exciting men to the
Commission of such faults against the Magistrates charge mentioned. At vero
frauds prope modum omnes, atque injuriae, quae quidem Consilio and voluntate
susceptae sint, ab Ambitione and Avaritia proficiscuntur, Polit. lib. 2. Cap.
7.. 5.
says Aristotle; That indeed for the most part all Deceipts, and Injuries,
which are undertaken by Consultation, and voluntarily, do proceed from Ambition
and Avarice. And then the things valued in the third and last place are
Pleasures; and they are the proper Objects of voluptuousness, according as it
is variously diversified. But yet several men have these evil passions more or
less severally ruling in them, according to their several Tempers, Occasions,
given for the acting of them, and the like. The second sort of Lusts, and such
as respect the Persons of Men, are Envy, Anger, Malice, Revenge, and other
such, which do use to vomit forth their Rage and Poison against others, as is
more generally hinted above. Lib. 1. Cap. 3.. 2. in fine. The impetuousness,
and violence of these exciting causes. 1 These. 4.5. Apud Sueton. in Nerone.


VIII. The impetuousness and violence of these corruptions is famously known in
the World. The Word of God calls it (...), the passionateness of Lust. And the
writings of all men, and the Experiences of all Ages have attested the same.
Occidat modo imperet, said Nero's mother of her Son; That he should kill her,
if he would, so that he might but be Emperor. And hoc est illud minimum
Punctulum, says Seneca of the Earth, quod ferro and igne dividitur; That it is
that very little point which is divided by Fire and Sword amongst men. And
therefore Temporal Interests are by Elegant Causin rightly called, Holy Court
Tom. 4. Trent. 1.. 3. Certain Doctrines in the Christian Religion made use of
by these Persons for the Promotion of their several ends.
The fifth Gospel of men in this World.

IX. There are certain Doctrines in the Christian Religion, which are indeed of
great moment as to the spiritual man, but are disputed variously by the several
subdivided Professions in the Christian Church; and those are the Doctrines of
Special Grace, Spiritual blindness, the enmity of the natural man, and the
like. And these are those which have been principally made use of in all Ages,
by the several Heresiarks and Ring leaders of Sedition, for the promoting of
their several ends in the Christian Societies. They have as. serted and reputed
their parties only to have had special Grace, and others to have been Carnal
men: And if those others have not seen any reason for their ways, they have
said it has been, because they were spiritually blind: and have been ready to
apply that of the Apostle to their Case, if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to
them that are lost. And if those others have made any opposition against them,
they have said it was from their natural enmity to Godliness. And hence it is
that the way concerning these Doctrines, amongst us now vulgarily called
Arminian, has been by some Christian Churches countenanced and asserted, or at
least not much discountenanced, nor contradicted. The Church of Rome has
solemnly professed it, and the main of it. And the Church of England (amongst
others called reformed) has in the Rubricks of her present Liturgy asserted
universal Grace to be bestowed in Baptism: See the Order for the
Administration of Public Baptism. In Rubrica ad fin.
And has not in Terminis contradicted the Arminian way in her Public Canon of
Doctrines: And has suffered the debates concerning it, to be ventilated in her
Universities. And as to these Doctrines, and so far forth as they are
concerned here, certainly that way of Tenent concerning them is to be looked
upon as truth, and as intended by the Scripture, and accordingly to be chosen
by all Churches, which tends least to Division, and most to the Promotion of
the welfare of the Public Charge of the Magistrate in an Ecclesiastical
Uniformity.

X. In the mean time, of all things in the world the Charge of the Magistrate
is most likely to be invaded by these Lusts of men, Of all things in the World
the Charge of the magistrate is most likely to be invaded by them.
which have been mentioned, in any Society: and that because the places of
Supreme Governors are always accompanied in the most eminent manner, with the
great Adored Tria's of Riches, Honors, and Pleasures; or at least are so
commonly deemed to be: and so the places of all other Governors also gradually
and proportionably both in Church and State: and the making use of the
pretenses of Religion, and the rendering it inconsistent with Government, is a
most potent means for the wresting of a Governors Power out of his hands. And
the Heresiarks ordinarily in this Case, as in all other, are Ecclesiastics, or
Churchmen; for so says the Scripture it self, as to matters concerning
Religion; That from the Prophets is Profaneness gone forth into all the Land:
Jer. 23.15.
And they are those that make all the stir in the World about these things.
Such Heresiarks heretofore in the primitive times of the Christian Church were
Donatus, Arrius, Sabellius, Servetus, Samosatenus, and the like mentioned in
the Catalogues of Heresies, and Ecclesiastical Histories; and interdicted by
the Code of Justinian, Vid. C. Titulis De Hereticis and manichaeis. De Judaeis
etc. Et passim alibi.
and other parts of the new Civil Law. The Ringleaders of Sedition immediately
in matters Civil (and whether taking occasion from these matters of Religion or
other things) ordinarily are Laics: and those aiming at the Supreme
Magistrates Throne, and the things that are so Gay in their Eyes belonging to
it. And what is it that men will not do for a Kingdom? Tullia, says the Roman
Historian, Livius. Decad. 1. lib. 1.
stuck not to be the murtheress of her own Father, and to drive her Goar-blood
Chariot over his dead Body lying in the way to her Palace, that she might
salute her Husband King in his stead. And it is recited concerning Julius
Caesar, Apud Su^ton: In Julio.
that he was wont always to have in his mouth these two Verses of Euripides,
which he himself thus rendered, says the Historian.

Nam si violandum est Jus, regnandi causa
Violandum est; aliis rebus pietatem colas.
For if Right be to be violated, for a kingdoms sakes --
It is to be violated; in other things follow after piety.
Of all Persons in the World the Person of the Magistrate is most likely to be
invaded by them also.
XI. Of all Persons in the world also the Person of the supreme Magistrate is
most likely to be invaded by the other sort of Corruptions, conversant, as was
said, about the Persons of men. And so the Persons of all other Governors also
gradually, and Proportionally, both in Church and State: and that because
Governors of all sorts, and especially the supreme, are the public Persons
that have to do with all sorts of men, the life of the Laws, and the cause of
the Execution of them, the Formers of the Tempers of times, and those that
cross the grain of such as like not their Government. And then it is no wonder,
if upon a thousand occasions there be the Spirits of malcontents rising up
against them in all Societies. The Conclusion drawn from all these things.


XII. Last of all then. All these things being so, we must come to lay down but
this one Conclusion from them: And that is, That how much reason then is there
for the Supreme Magistrate in every Society to take all care possible, and to
use all due means, for the securing his Charge from both these sorts of
mischiefs which we have mentioned, (viz.) Those which it is subject to both
from the faults of Imprudence, and faults of Malice? and if he do not do it, he
cannot be said to discharge his Trust, either toward God or toward his
People, either toward God in respect of his duty, or toward his People in
respect of their welfare and common good of his Society. And this Supreme and
Public Charge of his also is the thing ultimately to be preserved by an
Ecclesiastical Uniformity.

CHAP. VI.
The more general Description of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Powers; and which
belong to the Chief Magistrate, and Ecclesiastical Ministry, as their distinct
Rights in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity.
I. THe First and Capital Distinction of the Persons concerned in Government.

II. The Christian Church, and Civil State, are distinct Societies.

III. The necessity of difference of Order and Power in Governors.

IV. The distinction of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Powers flows from the
Divine Appointment, according to the different quality of the affairs about
which they are Conversant.

V. The Question stated, Whether Churchmen may have to do in the
Administration of Civil Affairs?

VI. A Caution subjoined.

VII. The necessity of difference of Orders and Degrees of Churchmen, and
Ecclesiastical Persons in any Church-Society.

VIII. The several Orders and Degrees of Ecclesiastical Persons mentioned in
the Christian Scriptures; and the Churches Power of varying concerning them.

IX. The Rights and Powers belonging to the Ecclesiastical Persons as such.

X: Erastus answered.

XI. The Character of the Ecclesiastical Persons Function is Indelible.

XII. The necessity of some Supreme amongst men.

XIII. The Supreme Person defined as to his Political Qualification.

XIV. And as to his Person, and that is the Civil Magistrate.

XV. This Supreme Power is committed to him by God as Creator and Conserver of
all things. And what is the extent of such Power.

XVI. For the discharge of his Trust in the exercise of such Power there is a
necessity of his having an Indirect Power in Spirituals, as a branch of such
supreme Power conceded to him. And the extent of such Indirect Power.

XVII. That this Indirect Power is his Right, both by the Law of Nature, and
Nations, and the Divine Law.

XVIII. First, by the Law Natural.

XIX. Secondly, by the Divine Law.

XX. Thirdly, and lastly, by the Law of Nations also.

XXI. The Question Answered, Why the Ecclesiastical persons as such should not
have Supremacy over all.

XXII. By the Magistrate's Indirect Power in Spirituals he is appointed to be a
Foster-father to the Church.

XXIII. The Supreme Magistrate may commit the exercise of this Indirect Power
in Spirituals to others.

The first and Capital Distinction of the Persons concerned in Government.
Supra lib. 1. Cap. 3.. 5.
1. HAving already distinguished Government in the general into Ecclesiastical,
and Civil, we come here to distinguish the Powers more generally belonging to
each of those sorts of Government as their Rights, both in relation to all
Humane Society, and also more particularly to an Ecclesiastical Uniformity. And
the Persons concerned in those powers differently are the King and Priest; who
betwixt them rule the world, as men in it are members either of the Church or
State. Duo sunt, Part prima distinct. 96. Rubric: Autoritas Sacra etc.
Imperator Auguste (says Pope Gelasius (in the Decretum to the Emperor)
quibus Principaliter hic mundus regitur; Authoritas Sacra Pontificium, and
Regalis Potestas. There are two things, O Magnificent Emperor, by which this
World is Principally governed; the sacred Authority of the Chief Bishop, and
the Kings Power.

The Christian Church and Civil State are distinct Societies.
II. The Christian Church, and Civil-State, are in themselves distinct, and
different Societies; and so they ought to be esteemed to be in every
Ecclesiastical Uniformity; the one being a Civil, and the other a Spiritual
Conjunction of men: and God who has appointed them both to have a being and
continuance in the World, has also appointed distinct Governors and
Governments for them: Or else, The necessity of difference of Order and Power
in Governors.
if it were not so (Government being necessary to Society) they could not both
subsist and continue apart in the World. But it is not only convenient, but
necessary for the Benefit and well-being of mankind in relation to them both,
that they should be in a Capacity so to subsist; and De facto they have so
subsisted.

III. The difference of Order and Power in Governors is a thing necessary to
the being of all Governments of these greater Societies. Exodus 18.13, 14, 15,
16, 17, etc. F. de Excusationibus Tutelarum, and Temporibus eorum, L.
Excusantur.
And that because neither is one man able to execute all offices in such
Societies, nor can many men so execute them, either the same Persons at diverse
times, or else diverse persons at the same time, without a difference and
variety in their several Capacities, both in respect to order and power,
according to the different nature and quality of their Affairs belonging
necessarily to those Offices. Jethro's advice to Moses was to divide the
burden of his Government amongst his deputed officers; The distinction of the
Civil and Ecclesiastical Powers flows from the Divine appointment, according
to the different qualities of those Affairs about which they are conversant.
Polit. lib. 4. cap. 15. in princip. ibid. vid. History of the Inquisition Chap.
28.
because himself alone was not able to bear it. And the Roman Civil Law
suffered not four Guardianships at once to be laid upon one man. And all Humane
affairs are necessarily of a more or less eminent quality, according to the
diverse respects they have to things and Persons in the World.

IV. The distinction and proper extent of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Powers
and Rights of Government in any Society, flows each of them from the
appointment of God, according to the distinct nature and quality of the things
and affairs in which they have to do, and in which it is necessary that they
should have to do for the support of their distinct and several Societies.
Sacerdotes (says Aristotle) Genus sunt quoddam Ministrorum a Civilibus
Magistratibus (scil. ex natura rei) restinguendum and separandum; That Priests
are a certain kind of Ministers (viz.) from the nature of their Office) to be
distinguished and separated from the Civil Magistrates. And God whose works are
perfect (says Padre Paul) and who is the Author of all Principalities, gives
to every one so much Power as is necessary for his governing well. And these
Powers in all Societies, and the Ecclesiastical Uniformity of them, act either
in Conjunction one with another, as when Religion is National, and the Church
incorporate into the State; or else separately one from the other, as in the
contrary case: But yet still the Ecclesiastical power ought to Act so as in
subordination to the Civil, and according to the will of God. And that these
Powers are always, and more particularly in every Ecclesiastical uniformity,
to be preserved distinct by the appointment of God, and according to the
different qualities of their Affairs, it is evident from the Universal Consent
of all Laws and Nations that ever have been in the World. So in the Polity of
the Patriarks, and first men in the World. The Priestly office, and the office
of the Civil Magistrate (although united in one Person (as has been said) were
ever reckoned as distinct, Supra lib. 1. cap. 3.. 4.
and were conversant about distinct sorts of affairs. Sacerdoti functum fuisse
Adamum dubium non est, tum in recipiendis, atque offerendis Sacrificiis, etc.
says Bertram: De Repub: Hebraeor. ca. 2.
It is no doubt but that Adam did discharge the Priestly Office, and that both
in his receiving and offering Sacrifices. And so of Noah: Ibid.
Noachus ex Arca egressus, ad Pristinos Ritus divini Culius redit; eosque apud
suos omnes nondum dispersos exercuit. That Noah being come out of the Ark,
returned to the Ancient Rites of Divine Worship; Ibid.
and exercised them in his Family before it was dispersed. And so of Abraham as
Priest also: Abrahamum sacrificasse apparet ex Genesis 15.19. and 22.2, 7, 9, and
13. Abrahamum docuisse apparet ex Genesis 18.19. atque adeo Prophetam fuisse ex
Genesis 20.7. Genesis 15.19, etc. That Abraham Sacrificed it appears out of Genesis
15.19. and 22.2, 7, 9, and 13. And that he taught also it appears out of Genesis
18.19. And that he also was a Prophet, out of Genesis 20.7. So that they still as
Priests did the work of the Priestly Office. So also in the Polity of Israel in
the wilderness: God himself established and assigned particularly the distinct
office and affairs of Moses and Aaron. Exodus 40.13, 14. Numb. 8.1, 2, 3, 4,
etc. Numb. 1.49. Number. 3.15. Numb. 1.53. In loc.
And therefore Aaron and his Sons were anointed solemnly to their office. And
the Tribe of Levi was not mustered with the other Tribes: And they only were to
Pitch their Tents about the Tabernacle. And the Hebrews do observe on Numb.
3.38. that there is a pause or distinction betwixt the names of Moses and
Aaron; To signify (says Baal Hatturim) That Moses pitched in one place by
himself, and Aaron and his Sons in another place by themselves. And so was it
also afterward in Canaan, and all along downwards in the Generations of
Israel, while they held any National Communion in one settled Society. The like
also was ever amongst the Gentiles. So amongst the Greeks they had their (...)
or (...), Meursius Elousin. cap. 13:
Those that prescribed what they were to do ordinarily in holy things; like the
High Priest in Israel, and the Bishops in the Christian Church. Anthenio.
Comaed. lib. 14. p. 661. Aristoph. in Plut. page 71.
They had their (...), and (...), and (...), Their Priests in the great
Mysteries, Their ordinary Ministers and attenders at their Altars, answerable
to such also in the Jewish and Christian Churches. Nay, they had also even
their (...), Their Sweepers and keepers of their Temples: And all these
appropriated to the businesses of their several Functions in holy things. So
also amongst the Romans: Romulus himself Instituted the College of Augures
(says Pomponius Laetus) And after him Numa, Cap. De Augur.
and many other Orders of Priests. The two Orders of the Salii, In Numa.
and Feciales, as Plutarch mentions: And the Flamines, and others are vulgarly
known. So also the Druides amongst the Galls, mentioned by Pomponius Mela, De
Orbis Situ; lib. 3.
and others. And the Gymnosophystae amongst the Indians mentioned by Julius
Solinus also, and others. And all these were appropriated also to the
businesses of their several offices. The like also have been the Orders and
Offices in the Christian Church, and which are recorded in both Laws, and the
Ecclesiastical Histories. The Patriarks, Metropolitans, Archbishops, Priests,
and Deacons; and the other inferior Church Officers. And by the Laws of the
Emperors they also were determined to be a distinct Body from the Laity; and
in their several Stations had the peculiar assignation of the Church businesses
to their management; and as Churchmen were excluded from the ordinary
management of other matters, as not being the Proper business of their
Function. So the Emperors Honorius and Theodosius. C. De Episc. Et Cler. L.
Placet.
Placet nostrae Clementiae, ut nihil commune Clerici cum publicis actionibus,
vel ad Curiam pertinentibus, cujus Corpori non sunt annexi, habeant. Vid. C. De
Episcop. and Cler. l. nullus Episcopus. Et l. Cum Clericis in Judicium. Et l.
Causa quae fit, and L. Clericus quoque etc.

Et De Episcopali Audient. l. Episcopale Judicium. Et l. Sancimus ut nemo, etc.
Et Novell: Constitut. 383 etc. vid. Capit. Caroli magni, and Ludovici Pii, etc.

Lib. 6. ut Clerici Judices saecular. non adeant. Et lib. 5. ut nemo audat, etc.

Et ut Clericus vel Monachus, etc. Et lib. 7. ut nullus Clericus, vel Abbas,
etc. Et de his qui sine jussione Episcopi, etc. Poloniae lib. 2: circa med. and
infra.

Ecclesiae Anglicanae Politeia Tab. 2. and Tab. 2. ^.


It pleases our Clemency that Clericks should have nothing to do in common
with public Actions, and such as belong to the Civil Court, to the Body of
which they are not annexed. And they had also their Ecclesiastical Courts, and
proper Tribunals, before which only (ordinarily) and first of all they were to
be summoned; as is to be seen in the several Laws in the Code, and Novels of
Justinian, under the Titles, De Episcopis and Clericis; De Episcopali
Audientia; ut Clerici apud proprios Episcopos primum Conveniantur; and the
like. And so also in the Ecclesiastical Histories, the Canons of Councels, and
the several parts of the Canon Law, down all along the Ages of the Church. And
the like also in the Theodosian Code, and the several later and more particular
Laws of Countries. In the Code, in the sixteenth Book, under the Title, De
Episcopis, Ecclesiis, and Clericis, and in other places. And the Laws of
Charlemain, Ludovicus Pius, Carolus Cabvus, and others do every where appoint
the same. And the like Cromerus recites of Poland: Est autem judiciorum
Ecclesiasticorum sum a penes Episcopos, says he, Quorum vices gerunt ii, quos
vocant Vicarios in Spiritualibus, Cancellarii, and Officiales; inter quos unus
qui est primarius generalis appellatur; Caeteri foranei, etc. That the sum of
all Ecclesiastical Judgments is in the Power of the Bishops; whose places they
do supply whom they call Vicars in Spirituals, Chancellors, and Officials;
amongst whom one who is the Chief is called the Vicar General; The others are
proper to their several Courts. And last of all, the like recites Doctor Cousin,
the Dean of the Arches, concerning the Constitutions of England. And so runs
the whole Series generally of the Laws and practices of all other Countries.
And it is but natural that businesses of a Calling should be referred to men of
a Calling, even in the inferior and more particular vocations in Societies;
and that those vocations should be distinguished and differenced according to
the different nature and quality of their Affairs.

The Question Stated, whether Churchmen may have to do in the Administration of
Civil affairs? Lib. 1. Cap. 5.. 6.
V. Here then is a great Question arising, (viz.) Whether Churchmen may at all
intermix in the administration of Temporal affairs in any Society? We affirm
the Question. And but that it may be so in some Cases, and for some reasons,
neither the Law of Nature, nor the Divine Law, either Mosaical or Evangelical,
nor the Civil Laws and Customs of Nations do contradict: as we have said
already, That the same Person may de Jure bear the office of Supreme Priest and
King. And 1. First, as to the Light of Nature; if the Ecclesiastical Person be
considered as a member of Humane Society in the general, and so as standing in
a Civil, as well as an Ecclesiastical capacity, it no way contradicts it. Nay,
so far forth as his intermixing in Civil administrations may make to the good
of humane Society, and particularly to the Consistency of Religion with
Government, and the preservation of it; and that either by the employment of
eminent abilities in Ecclesiastics, or else by the maintaining any ways Amity
and a Charitative Correspondence betwixt the Ecclesiastics and Laics in any
Community, or by it is promoting the distribution of Justice to both Sorts of
Persons in the Courts, or the like; it prompts to it, and pro hic and nunc, it
commands it. The Administration of Justice is one of the Principal Pillars of
all Common-weals: and a charitative Communion betwixt the two States of Laics
and Ecclesiastics has been ever endeavored and wished for by the Laws and
Constitutions and advices of all Princes within their Territories. Vt Episcopi
and Comites Concordes sint, In additionibus ad Copit. Caroli Magni. Additione
4. De Concordia. Episcopor. et Commit.
and Comites eorumque ministri Episcopis atque eorum Ministris in omnibus
adjutores existant, says Ludovicus the fourth of France, in his Constitutions
appointed by him to be published as such, by Erchembaldus his Chancellor: That
his mind and desire was, That the Bishops and Noble men should be friendly one
to another, and that the Noble men and their Retinues should be any ways
assisting to the Bishops and their Retinues. Polon. lib. 2. Inframed.
And in the Kingdom of Poland, says Cromerus, Publicum inter Sacrum and
Militarem sive Equestrem ordinem Controversiarum arbitrium atque transactio
penes Regem est: That the transaction and determination of public
controversies betwixt the Sacred and Military or Civil Orders, De Procuranda
Indorum Salute. lib. 3. cap. 24.
is reserved to the King. And it is the saying of Acosta; That as a means for
the converting the Indians to Christianity, Superest tantum and Civilem omnem
potestatem admoneamus, ut in administranda Repub: Indorum, cum Ecclesiastica
germane conjungatur: It remains only that we admonish the whole Civil power,
that in the Governing the Commonwealth of the Indians, it be joined friendlily
with the Ecclesiastical. And but that the intermixture of both Laics in
Ecclesiastical affairs (which they as Laics are capable of Administering) and
of Ecclesiastics in Temporal, may be for the subsequent Reasons a means of
promoting these things, it will not be doubted of by him that considers how
many times Ecclesiastics are of Eminent abilities in Civil affairs; and how a
Total, or but more ordinary separating in Colloquies and Affairs amongst men in
the same Society (and those men being considered as infirm) will beget a
consequent separating in affections; And lastly, how men of a faculty and
distinct vocation in the World (considered as subject to Corruptions) are apt
to be partial to one another in matters of judicature. Many more things might
be here said. But there is one Exception to be made to all these things, and
which the Ecclesiastics are to be cautioned against; and that is, that while
they serve the Law of Nature in the performance of these Offices mentioned to
Government and humane Society, they do not in the mean time wrong Religion in
the (causless and careless) neglect of other offices and duties, which de facto
they may be obliged to, and which may be belonging to their spiritual Function.
And this ought to be heeded, because the discharge and affairs of that Function
are of great moment, and worthy the employment of Angels. Lib. 1. cap. 4:. 5,
6, 7.


2. The Divine Law then is not to be supposed to contradict the Law of Nature
in those things; since the Christian Religion (as has been said) is every way
a friend to humane Society, and the consistency of Religion with Government, by
which such Society may be maintained. De imperio Sum. pot. Cap. 2.. 6.
That which by some is thought inconvenient in this particular, and upon which
by Grotius, so great a weight is laid, that the same person cannot without
desultory lightness put on the behavior of a Magistrate or Civil Officer, and
of a Clergyman also (such as is described in the New Testament), is not so much
to be regarded; because by a man considering it, and the ductileness of Humane
Nature to consent to things when accustomed to them, and the diverse States of
Humane affairs in the several Societies in the World, it will be found that a
prudent man may sustain the person of both these at diverse times, without any
such absurdity in manners, or however at least as may be a cause of evil
parallel to the good he may otherwise do by sustaining both these sorts of
offices. And as to those New Testament Precepts; 2 Timothy 2.4.
Of a Minister of Jesus Christ his not entangling himself with the affairs of
this Life; His giving himself wholly to these things, and the like: 1 Timothy 4.15.
Persons and times are to be distinguished, and due interpretations are to be
added to the Texts. As to Persons, those that are Novices in the Spiritual
Function are to be distinguished from those that are not. As to Times, the
Times of Christianity it is being newly a planting, and of it is being for a long
time established in a Church, together with plenty of Ministers and
Assistances, and less difficulties to be encountered with, and the like, are to
be distinguished also. And as to Interpretations, the Rules of Prudence and
general Equity are to be adhibited: And then no man, by any Law or precept
whatsoever is bound to apply himself so wholly to the business of any Function,
but that times and Vacations for the Performance of other due Offices, 1 These.
5.16, 17.
as occasion requires, are allowed. We are bid rejoice evermore, and pray
without ceasing, and the like: Yet those Precepts, in respect to many other
things, are in this manner to be Interpreted. So that those that ordinarily
say, That Religion and the Function of the Ministry deserve and require the
whole man; if they mean Primarily and in respect to the intention of the mind,
as employed in the Acts of either, they say truly: But if in this sense we have
mentioned, they speak only popularly, but not Truly. Neither do they consider
in the mean time, that the serving those Offices of Humane Society mentioned,
is a grand and general precept of Religion.

3. Last of all, as to the Laws and Customs of Nations; they have very
constantly voted for what we have affirmed also. We will begin with the
Theocracy of Israel. And although it be True that they had their stated
distinct Courts both Ecclesiastical and Civil; and God did ever distinguish the
Office of the Priest and Magistrate, and admitted none of the Laity under pain
of death to meddle with matters proper to the offices of Churchmen, either
Priests or Levites; as is evident from the Case of Corah and his Company, Numb.
16.8, 9, 10, 31, 32. and from Numb. 18.7. and Numb. 1.51. and other the like
Texts; yet we shall often find also, that in matters of Council and Judicature,
and exercise of Government, and the like, (which concern the Common-good of
Humane Society) there was an Intermixture of both Laity and Churchmen. So the
supreme Charge of the People was committed jointly to Aaron and Hur, a
Churchman and Statesman, while Moses was absent in the Mount; Exodus 24.14. And
this was before the Institution of Vrim and Thummim (See Exodus 28.30) and the
High Priests special way of passing a Divine Judgment by that; as also the same
intermixture both of the Highpriests and other Priests in Temporal matters was
usual after the Loss and Cessation of that way, See Ezra 2.63. Nehem. 6.65.
at the Captivity of Babylon. So also the High Priest sat in the great
Synedrion, or Kings great Council in Israel. Vid. Talmud. Bab. in Sanhedrin.
Chapter 1. And Maimony in Sanhedr. C. 1.. 3, 4, 5. And Number. 11.16, 17. De Repub.
Hebraeor. Cap. 6. De Jure Regni. Hebraeor. Theorem. 2.
Their ordinary Number was Seaventy, by Gods own Institution; The chief
Magistrate did Preside; And, Summus vero Sacerdos (says Bertram) de Jure
responsurus, erat Septuagesimus secundus; That the Chief Priest, appointed to
give in his vote also, was the Seventy Second. And, propter votorum libertatem
non admittebatur Rex (says Schickardus out of Maimonides) in Collegium Senatus
(excepto Davide) at Pontifices, and Prophetae, Caeteris paribus, recipiebantur.
That, for liberties sake of voting, the King was not admitted into the College
of the Senate, except it were David; but the Chief Priests and Prophets, if it
were convenient in respect of things, were received. So that the High Priest
(not necessarily, but if he were a man able, and faithful in affairs) and the
Prophets also were often admitted to it. So we find the Priests and Levites
mentioned, together with the Judges that should be in those days, for the
determination of Civil Causes, by Moses, Exodus 17.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. And
Controversies of Murder, and the like to be tried by the Priests, Deuteronomy. 21.5.
And in David's time, when he gave up the Kingdom to Solomon, he called the
Priests and Levites as Officers and Judges before him, 1 Chronicles. 22.2, 4. And in
Jehoshaphat's Reformation, 2 Chronicles. 19.5. He set Judges in the Land throughout
all the fenced Cities of Judah, City by City. And verse. 8. Moreover in
Jerusalem did he set of the Levites, and of the Priests, and of the Chief of
the Fathers, for the Judgment of the Lord, and for Controversies, when they
returned to Jerusalem. So we find the Chief Priests and Elders often conjoyning
in the New Testament, Math. 21.23. Math. 26.3. etc. And Josephus says,
Antiquitat. lib. 4. cap. 8.
that formerly in every City there were seven Judges, and for each of them two
Levites, who in conjunction one with another made up the several Benches of
their Cities. Thus then it was in Israel. And the like were the Customs of the
Gentiles concerning these things; if any one will look into the Greek and Roman
Histories, and other the like writings. And the like have been also in the
Christian Church: The Apostles at their first planting of Christianity, nor
their Successors along time after, were not a Church Incorporated into the
State: But the Laws and Customs of the first Christian Emperors went in the
same Tract which we have mentioned; and that for the very reasons mentioned
also: as is to be seen in the many places of the Code, and Novels of Justinian,
the Theodosian Code, and other Monuments of these things. See the Titles, De
Judiciis; De Nuptiis; etc. in the Code of Justinian. And, ut differentes
Judices interpellantium allegationes, etc. in the Novels, and the like in other
Monuments. The like also are the usages abroad, both of late and at this day in
the world up and down. Clergymen, if of ability, are great Officers to
Princes, and of Council to them, and the like. So amongst the Abassine
Christians: De Aethiop. Morib; sub. aliis literis ejusd. David: Aethiop. Imp.
etc. De Abasinor. Rebus. lib. 1. Cap. 13, 14: and alibi. In Confessione fidei
Aethiop. ad finem. De omnium Gent. Morib. Lib. 1. De Aethiopia, etc. Ibid. De
Egypt. Cap. 19.
Zaga Zabo one of their Bishops, says Damianus a Goes, was that Emperors
Ambassador to John the Third of Portugal, and others; and the like things are
recited concerning their Clergy-mens being of Council to the Emperor, by
Godignus and others. And the same Zaga Zabo in Chytraeus calls himself
Episcopus, and Sacerdos, ac Bugana Raz, nempe Pro-rex provinciae, quae Bugana
dicitur: A Bishop and Priest; and Bugana Raz, (i. e.) a Viceroy of the
Province, which is called Bugana. And Johannes Boemius recites it, that of old
it was the Custom of the Aethiopians to create one of their Priests King; Quem
ubi regem creaverint, veluti numen insit, etc. Whom when they had created King,
as if there were a Deity in him, etc. And the like he recites also concerning
the Aethiopians their neighbors, and their Priests using to be of their Kings
Councels. The like other things are every where abroad at this day. De Romans and
Ven. magistratuum inter se Comparatione. N 41. Ibid. N 30.
The Cardinal Contarene says of the Venetian State, Sed and in Statu
Ecclesiastico sunt plures Ordines militum; Alii album amictum gestantes, etc.
But also in the Ecclesiastical state there are several orders of Knights; some
wearing White Apparel, etc. And he endowes the Cardinals of the Roman Sea with
the Secular Titles of Illustres, and Illustrissimi; Illustrious, and most
Illustrious, and the like: And that according to the Doctrine of Jason, and
Decius, and other Canonists of the same Church. The like says Cromerus of
Poland: Poloniae lib. 2. paulo post princip.
That the Kings Council there consists partly of Ecclesiastics, and partly of
Seculars: And that from of the old Ecclesiastics are, Archiepiscopi duo,
septem Episcopi; Two Archbishops, and Seven Bishops. The Seculars, others the
Nobles, and Chief of the Realm: and all these hold their places with certain
Honors and Immunities annexed to them during life. Ibid. post.
And, Archiepiscopus Guesnensis perpetua quadam Pontificis maximi Legatione
fungitur, and Legatus natus sedis Apostolicae appellatur: Ibid. etiam.
And, Habet etiam primatus honorem ab eadem Sede; absque eo quod est antiquo
gentis Instituto, and praerogativa Primas Regni, and Princeps Senatus. The
Archbishop of Guesna is a perpetual Legate of the Pope, and is called the
Legate born of the Apostolic Sea: He has also the Honor of a Primate from
the same Sea: Besides that by Ancient custom of the Nation, and Prerogative,
he is the Primate of the Kingdom, Ibid. ad fin.
and President and Prince of the Senate. And the like says he of the Senate
and Great Counsel of Prussia afterward. And if we go farther, the like course
is held in the Turks and Persians, and other the great Eastern Princes Affairs.
Amongst the Turks, the Chief Mufti sits in the Divano. And the like amongst
others. And last of all, the like Course is held also in the Generality of the
Territories of the more Westerly European Princes. In Spain the Archbishop of
Toledo is Chancellor of Castile, In Hispania. Lib. 6. de bell. Gallic.
says Damianus a Goes. In France and Britain (as Caesar says of old) the
Druids were both their Priests and Judges in all sorts of Causes: So, at this
day, in France the Twelve Peers of France are Six of them Bishops, and Six of
them Nobles: And of the Bishops, three Bishops and Dukes, and three Bishops and
Counts: And so the Courts consist, partly of Clergy, and partly of Laymen. And
lastly, In England the Archbishop of Canterbury, Dicitur Primus Par Regni,
Ecclesiae Anglie. Politeia. Tab. 2. A.
Is said to be the first Peer of the Realm, says Doctor Cousin. And the other
Bishops have their Baronies annexed to their Bishoprics, and are sometimes,
several of them, of Council to the King; and sit as one State in Parliament,
and the like. And as this Course is thus generally held amongst Nations, as to
the greater sort of Clerg-ymen; so as to the lesser and more inferior also
proportionably. So that thus then, and with these Cautions, and for these ends
which we have mentioned, The Supreme Magistrate in any Society may commit the
discharge of Civil Offices to Churchmen: and they also may lawfully discharge
them. And since they as well as others are numbers of Humane Society in the
Common, as has been said, there can be no sufficient reason rendered why they
also should not be under a general obligation to serve in that Capacity: and he
that shall assert and maintain the Contrary, shall do it against the several
Laws and Practices of Nature and Nations which we have mentioned.

VI. In the mean time then their due respects are always also to be preserved
and performed to the other estates in any Society: A Caution subjoined.
To the Nobility, who are umbrae Regis, and Pares Regni; the Shadows of the
Sovereign Prince, and Peers of the Realm: And to the Gentry, or second
Nobles, secondarily, and in their places also. We presume not to admonish
Princes and Governors in this particular, who understand their own affairs so
well as to be careful to keep the estates of their Territories in their due
Poize one toward another: And both Laics and Churchmen in their several
degrees, and while thus intermixed in Offices, are to be mindful of the several
respects to be performed to each other. And it is never well, and as it should
be in any Society whatsoever, till all these three Estates have their due and
mutual respects performed to them, both by the Soverain Prince, and by
themselves toward each other.

VII. As we have said, The necessity of difference of Orders, and degrees of
Churchmen, and Ecclesiastical persons in any Church Society.

The several Orders and Degrees of Ecclesiastical persons mentioned in the
Christian Scriptures, and the Churches power of varying concerning them.

Vid. Canones Apostolor. Can. 35, etc. Council. Antioc. Can. 9. Et Council.
Nicaen. Prim. Can. 6. etc. Decr^ti part. 1. distinct: 21, 23, 25, 79 etc. Et
Bezam in Matthew. 2.4. Grot. in Math. 2.5.

Spanhem. in Dub. Evangel. Gerhard. in Harmon.

And Bp. Andrews his Summary of the Government both of the Old and New
Testament.


That there must of necessity be diverse degrees, and orders of Governors in
the general in any Society; so here we say further and more particularly, that
for the same Reasons also there must of necessity be diverse Orders and Degrees
of Church Governors, and Ecclesiastical Persons and Officers belonging to them
in every Church-Society, and Ecclesiastical Uniformity. So there were always
amongst the Heathens, in their Church Societies, as we have partly already
mentioned, and as is to be seen in the several Heathen Histories and relations
of these things: And so there must of necessity be in all other Churches.

VIII. As to the Christian Church, there are diverse sorts and degrees of Church
Governors and Ecclesiastical Persons mentioned in the Scriptures, both of the
Old and New Testament, and asserted by all the Ancient Councels, the Canon Law,
the generality of Interpreters of Scripture, and the like. Let the Canons of
the Apostles; The Councels of Antioch, of Nice; The several distinctions in the
Decretum, etc. be looked into. And there are diverse Powers also necessarily
belonging to these diverse Orders of Churchmen, according to the diverse Nature
and Quality of the Affairs proper to their Offices. In the Old Testament there
are mentioned Highpriests, Priests of the second Order (2 Kin. 23.4.) or
Priests simply taken, Levites, and others. In the New, Apostles, Evangelists,
Bishops, Presbiters, or Priests, Deacons, and others. In the Old Testament
these Church Officers were perpetually fixed to their several particular
Employments. And although in those days the Old Testament Church-Polity was
intended only for the Kingdom of Israel, and the Laws both of the Church and
State were suited one to another, and fixed thus for ever by God himself; yet
it was left to Humane Prudence to vary still in Circumstances and indifferent
things concerning the Ecclesiastical Polity, according as the present state of
Affairs might at any time require, the substance of that Polity ever remaining.
So in Moses, Joshua's, David's, Nehemiah's, and others times: And so there was
a necessity, from the vicissitudes of Affairs, that God had appointed to be in
that Church, as well as in the rest of the World, that it should be. In the New
Testament, the standing ordinary Church Officers were appointed to be perpetual
also. The Ordinary were those whose Offices were ordinarily necessary for the
well being of the Christian Church; the extraordinary those who were appointed
pro Tempore, and as the present state of affairs in the first times did
require. And that the Platform of the perpetual and ordinary Offices of
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, was derived and taken from the Pattern of
Highpriests, Priests, and Levites in the Old Testament, it will not at all be
doubted by him that considers the Circumstances attending those things, and the
Parity betwixt them. And last of all; if the Jews Church, which was settled
under one perpetual Government, and confined to one only Nation, had Power to
vary however according to the occasions of times, in Circumstances and things
indifferent, concerning their ordinary Church Officers of Ecclesiastical
Polity; then much more for the same Reasons, has the Christian Church such
power to vary, which is laid open to be set up in all Nations, and appointed to
consist, as to these Circumstances and things Indifferent, with the several
sorts of the Civil Policies of those Nations and Countries.

The Rights and powers belonging to the Ecclesiastical Persons as such.
IX. The Church Governors and Ministers, in every Christian Church, and the
Uniformity of it, have a full power, and distinct Right from Christ of doing
all things (properly) as is said) belonging to them, and as such in their
several Capacities in the Church, (viz.) Of Ministry, Jurisdiction, and Order,
as they are usually called. And as also the Divine Law of Christ says
concerning them; and all Decrees, Canons of Councels, and Ecclesiastical
Constitutions derivatively from it. Of Ministry (i. e.) Of Preaching,
Administering the Sacraments, and dispencing all matters of Doctrine. Of
Jurisdiction (i. e.) Of commanding, forbidding, inflicting Penalties, executing
Ecclesiastical Censures, and dispencing all matters of discipline. And lastly,
of Order (i. e.) of ordaining others to succeed them in their several Functions
in the World. And so says the Scripture, Matthew. 28.18, 19, 20. That Christ
gave Power to his Apostles, and their Successors in the Ministry, to go forth
and teach all Nations, See also Ephesians. 4.7, 8, 11, 12, 13, etc. And 2 Cor. 5 20.
1 Cor. 4.1, 2, 3, 4. Heb. 13.17. Mark. 16.15, 16. Luke 24.47, 48.

See also Matt. 16.19. Math. 18.18. Luke 10.2.11, 16, etc. See also the 1 Timothy
5.22. 1 Timothy 4.14. Tit. 1.5, 6. etc. Vid. Can. 64. apud Carranzam, in Summa
Concilior. Vid. Can. 4. ibid. Vid. Canon. Apost. Can. 1.2.


Baptising them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, etc. And the like concerning matters of Discipline, John 20.23.
Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whosesoever sins ye
retain, they are retained. And the like also concerning Orders. See Acts 1.23,
24, 25, 26. And Acts 14.23. And the like also, say the several Councels
derivatively from the Scriptures concerning these things. So the sixth General
Council of Constantinople in the 64 Canon: Non oportet Laicum public
disputare, vel docere; sed Ordini a Domino tradito cedere, and aurem iis, qui
docendi gratiam acceperint, apperire, and Divina ab iis doceri: That it does
not behove a Laick to dispute publicly, or to teach; but to give place to the
Order delivered from the Lord; and to open the Ear to those who have received
the Grace of Teaching, and to be taught by them Divine things. So also in the
Nicaene Council of three hundred and eighteen Bishops, under Constantine, in
the fourth Canon concerning the Ordination of a Bishop. And in the Apostolical
Canons; in the first and second Canons concerning the Ordination of the other
degrees of Ecclesiastics: and the like in all other Ecclesiastical
Constitutions, generally down all along the Ages of the Church. Vid. Clement.
Roman. Apostolic. Constitut. lib. 2. cap. 20, 30, 31, etc. lib. 3. cap. 10, 11,
etc.
Let the Apostolical Constitutions of Clemens Romanus be looked into: And the
several Titles in the Sextum, Clementines, and other parts of the Canon Law,
concerning the Sentence of Excommunication, and the other Censures of the
Church, and the pronouncing of them. And these more general Powers and Rights
are those, which according to the Nature of them, and the vote of all these
things, do only properly and externally belong to the Ecclesiastics as such;
as the like also they have in all particulars whatsoever (whether the Church be
Incorporate into the State, or not Incorporate into the State in any Community)
that are necessary, as to them, for the support and preservation of their
Ecclesiastical Society. And this is a grand Right both Natural and Divine
belonging ordinarily to them as Governors in such a Society: and he that shall
deny them such Power, must say, that God has denied them the means to the end;
that he has committed the preservation and support of the Church to them as
Governors and Ministers of it, and yet that he has denied the power of doing
those things which are necessary for such the preservation of it.

But yet by these means necessarily to be granted to them, we are to be
supposed to mean spiritual and lawful means: De potestat. Civili, and
Ecclesiast. cap. 3. ad fin.

Vid. De Imperiosum. pot. cap. 3.. 6. 14. Supra lib. 1. cap. 3,. 20.


And in no case particularly that of rising in Arms against the present Lawful
Magistrate: that would be with Peter to take a Sword in an unlawful way (says
Triglaudius) and that is not committed to them; and that is against Humane
Laws, and Divine, and the Law of Nature, etc. says Grotius: Although
elsewhere he permit it, even to any single person, in case of extreme danger,
to Rise, as we have said heretofore.

Erastus Answered. In Thesibus. vid. These. 74. et alibi.
X. Erastus has here of late started a Question, by his denial of any need of
Church Censures their being executed by Clergymen, under a Christian
Magistrate. But he is to be answered with their being a purely Spiritual
punishment, and inflicted in a Spiritual way, and for Spiritual ends; and
therefore that, in the Nature and Quality of the thing, they do properly belong
to Spiritual Persons, to use as a means for the support of their Spiritual
Society, and according to the appointment of Christ. And this is to be observed
farther; That, notwithstanding his seemingly favorable advice given to
Magistrates in this particular, yet no Magistrate since the time of his Writing
has followed it. And it will be found true by any one that considers thoroughly
of these things (and as I have partly hinted already,) That he that shall so
far adventure to confound Divine Affairs with Humane, as to put the business
proper to the Function of the Ministry into the hands of the Laity, to be
managed Authoritatively by them, shall do that which shall tend to the taking
away the standing Ordinance of the very Ministerial Function it self, and even
of all Religion also whatsoever in the end: especially, if he shall make such
confusion in this particular of inflicting Penalties; which, according to the
different kinds of Penalties here pointed at, is one Right necessarily
belonging to the support of any Government or Society whatsoever, either
Ecclesiastical or Civil.

The Character of the Ecclesiastical person's Function is Indelible.
XI. Last of all, on the part of the Ecclesiastical Persons; the Character also
of their Offices, impressed upon them in their first Ordination to them, is
indelible, as to any Humane Power. It is in the Power of man to suspend,
degrade, or depose them from the actual execution and discharge of their
several Offices, as all Laws and Practices of the World (except that of the
Papal only) have constantly affirmed: but God only at first invested them with
the Habitual Power belonging to their several Offices, and he only can take
them away from them again. These things then being thus stated, and described
on the Ecclesiastical Persons part; I come next to the part of the Civil
Magistrate, and to the Rights and Powers belonging to him as such, and which
are here concerned also.

The necessity of some supreme amongst men.
XII. On the part of the Civil Magistrate then; first of all, this is certain,
that both in relation to all Humane Affairs more generally, and in every
Ecclesiastical Uniformity more particularly, there must of necessity be some
supreme amongst men in every Society. For, what from Nature the Philosophers
say notionally, and in the general, Averro's Metaph. 5. Tom. 6.
That, Ordo nan datur nisi cum relatione ad aliquid primum; there is no order
of things, but with relation to some first: The same also, from Art, say the
Politicians practically, and in particular concerning Humane Society; that the
order of Persons to be observed in every Society of men, must necessarily
terminate in some Supreme in that Society.

XIII. He then is Supreme in every Society, The Supreme person defined, as to
his Political Qualification.
who has the Supreme Jurisdiction over all others in that Society. And
Jurisdiction is defined by the Civilians to be, Potestatem Juris dicendi, A
power of giving Law to others.

XIV. The Person, Vid. F. Si qui Jus dicenti non obtemperaverit. L. unica. Is
videtur. and alibi. And as to his person; and that is the Civil Magistrate.
Supra lib. 1. ca. 1.. 11. Supra lib. 1. Cap. 1.. 10. And Lib. 1. cap. 3.. 9.
and. 10, 11, 12, etc. Lib. 1.
who has this supreme power of Jurisdiction over all, is the Civil Magistrate,
but now mentioned. And such Power he has as his Right belonging to him, as is
above distinguished. I have above rejected that part of the distinction of such
Power it is being taken only Actually, and for the exercise and Administration
of it. And I here affirm it concerning the Civil Magistrate, and it is being a
habit and faculty fundamentally belonging to him. And as to the kind of the
Magistrate possessing it, it is meant also, not of a Feudatory, or Prince under
a Prince in any Society. Such as the Prytanes of Athens (says Pausanias) were
under the Senate: And the Kings of Vid. Plut. in Lycurgo.
Lacedaemon in the time of the Senate set up by Lycurgus: And that Senate also
it self afterward in the time of the Ephori: Such also as the Roman Vid. Tit.
Livium. Dec. 1. lib. 1. 2. etc. Et D. De Orig. Jur. Civil. etc. L.
necessarium.. Exactis deinde Regibus. Et Capta deinde fardinia. Et Rosin Antiq.
Romans l. 7. c. 9.
Consuls were that succeeded the Kings: And the Provincial Vid. Tit. Livium.
Dec. 1. lib. 1. 2. etc. Et D. De Orig. Jur. Civil. etc. L. necessarium..
Exactis deinde Regibus. Et Capta deinde fardinia. Et Rosin Antiq. Romans l. 7. c.
9.
Praetors in the time of the Emperors: And the Princes of Germany at this day;
who, by the Et Vide Ordines Camer. Imper. p 2. Tit. 34, 35. and alibi.
Orders of the Imperial Chamber, are capitally questionable by the Emperor in
the Chamber of Spires. But it is meant of a Sovereign Prince, such as the first
Vid. T. Live. Dec 1. lib. 1. D. eodem.. Quod ad magistratus attinet etc.
Kings were amongst the Romans, and the Vid. T. Live. Dec 1. lib. 1. D. eodem..
Quod ad magistratus attinet etc.
Emperors afterward; upon whom, by the Vid. D. De Constitutionibus Principum
l. 1. 1 and Institut. De Jur. Naturali, Gent. and Civili.
Lex Regia particularly, all the Soverainty was devolved. And such as the
several Kings of England, Sweden, Spain, Denmark, and of other the like
Territories in Europe at this day are, and by their several Lawyers of their
Countries are affirmed and acknowledged to be. And there are they who are next
to God in Humane Societies (as was said more generally above) and L. 1. Cap.
3.. 17. and deinceps.
above the reach of all Men, and Laws, so far forth as may tend to the holding
the Right of their Soverainty, as was hinted Lib. 1. Cap. 3. 17.
above also. Princeps legibus solutus est, says D De legib: and Senatus
Consultis, etc. L. Princeps
Vlpian; That the Prince is at liberty from the Laws. And, Cum nihil in Terris
majus aut excelsius Majestate Regum, post Deum immortalem cogitari possit,
says De Repub. 1. cap. 10. in princip.
Bodine; Since nothing can be thought of, which is greater or higher in the
Earth, then the Majesty of Kings, next to God Immortal. And the consent of all
Nations generally has established this Right upon Sovereign Princes. So says
De Aethiop. Morib. Et in Confess. fidei Zaga Zabo prope fin.
Damianus of the Emperor Preister, or Precious John; and of his Superiority
over the Patriarch of his Country. The like De praesenti Turcici Imperii Statu,
and Relig. Graecor. and alibi. Pandect. Hist. Turc. Gradus Legis, etc. 34. and
alibi. De Sacerdotibus eorum. De Obedientia quam Turcae suo Regi praestari
Coguntur, etc.
Chytraeus, De praesenti Turcici Imperii Statu, and Relig. Graecor. and alibi.
Pandect. Hist. Turc. Gradus Legis, etc. 34. and alibi. De Sacerdotibus eorum.
De Obedientia quam Turcae suo Regi praestari Coguntur, etc.
Leunclavius, De praesenti Turcici Imperii Statu, and Relig. Graecor. and
alibi. Pandect. Hist. Turc. Gradus Legis, etc. 34. and alibi. De Sacerdotibus
eorum. De Obedientia quam Turcae suo Regi praestari Coguntur, etc.
Georgieviz, and others of the Grand-Senior in respect to the chief Mufti at
Constantinople. The like also In his History of Russia. Chap. 21. Of their
Ecclesiastical State, etc.
Fletcher the Englishman of the Emperor of Muscovy in respect to his
Patriarch, late of Mosco, but before of Constantinople, or Sio, as he was
styled. And De Venetor. Repub. lib. 3. circa. med.
Contarecius of the Council of Teun at Venice, in respect to their Clergy. And
so others concerning the Supreme Magistrates of other Countries: Even the Sea
Chap. 3. etc.
Corpus disciplinae, of the States of Holland: and See p. 1, 2. etc.
the Laws and Statutes of Geneva, of the Magistracy of that Tertitory. And
finally, so says Dr. Ecclesiae Anglicanae Politeia. Tab. 1. A.
Cousin, and the Sea An. 35. Hen. 8. An 11 Edw. 6. An. 1. Eliz. etc.
Statute Law of England concerning the Supremacy of the most Potent Kings of
England. Last of all, this has been acknowledged by all Ages and Societies
generally, excepting only by the great Bishop and Prince of Rome, and his
Doctors Chairs; and those others of the Christian parts of Europe dissenting
from him, and called Reformed, whosoever of them they have been, that have set
the Ecclesiastical Synods and Consistories above the Temporal Authority, and so
in fact have depressed it, although in word they have professed the contrary.

This Supreme Power is committed to him by God as Creator, and Conserver of all
things; and what is the extent of such power. Supra lib. 1. cap. 5.. 7. Et
deinceps.
XV. This Supreme Power of Jurisdiction over all is committed to the Supreme
Magistrate by God as Creator and Conserver of all things: and that also to that
very end, that by the due exercise and employment of such his Power he may
conserve all those things in their welfare which are committed to his Charge:
and the things committed to his charge in his way and capacity, and more
particularly in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity, are, Religion, and Government,
and the consistency of both these with each other, as is above said
assertorily, and here explicatorily. So that he is appointed to be both Pater
Patriae, the father of the Country, in respect to Civil things; And Custos
utriusque Tabulae, The keeper of both Moses his Tables, in respect to things
Divine.

For the Discharge of his trust in the exercise of such power, there is a
necessity of his having an Indirect power in Spirituals, as a Branch of such
Supreme Power conceded to himreversed; and the extent of such indirect power.
hic Supra.. 9.
XVI. For the discharge of this trust reposed in him by God, there is a
necessity of his having an Indirect Power in Spirituals, as a Branch of his
Supreme Power of Jurisdiction over all conceded to him. And this is a great
Right belonging to him, and such as is principally necessary for the discharge
of his Trust mentioned in every Ecclesiastical Uniformity: And this is is
usually called his external Power; in contradistinction to the Ecclesiastical
Persons Internal power (but now mentioned also) in the Church and Church
affairs: And the extent of it is to the doing of all things

1. Negatively; which are not the matters properly belonging to the
Ecclesiastical Persons function. And secondly positively; which are necessary
for the discharge of the Trust reposed in the Civil Magistrate. And if any man
have a mind to take a farther view of the particulars included in this General,
let him look into the Canon Law. For, Mutatis mutandis, in whatsoever matters
the Pope there claims an indirect Power in Temporals for the support of his
Pontifical Greatness, in matters answerable, on the Magistrates part, and
according to his Occasions does it belong justly to him to have an Indirect
Power in Spirituals in any Society.

XVII. That this indirect power is his Right, both by the Law of Nature, and
Nations, and the Divine Law.
And this Indirect Power in spirituals is a Right belonging to the Supreme
Magistrate in the General, both by the Laws Natural, and Divine, and by that
of Nations also: and has in all Ages, and by all particular Laws of
Countries, and Practices of men, been ever granted to him; excepting where the
Ecclesiastical Person as such has unjustly usurped the Authority of the Civil
Magistrate, and constituted himself as Supreme amongst men, as in the Case of
Rome.

XVIII. That it belongs to the Civil Magistrate by the Law Natural, it is
evident from hence; First, by the Law Natural.
because he that shall deny such a Power to him, must either deny every part of
that which we have mentioned, yea, even the Civil part of the things also, to
be his Charge, and that with an unheard of falsity, or else must deny him the
means of preserving the welfare of his Charge (i. e.) must deny him the means
necessary to the end, and that with a more then tolerable absurdity. For to
what purpose shall God commit to the Magistrates Charge the welfare of
Religion, and of the present Lawful Government, and of the consistency of
Religion with the present lawful Government, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, (as
he has done) if he shall not in the mean time grant him the means necessary
for the attaining this end, and which he himself has in the Nature of things
appointed to be used for the attaining to it? Truly this cannot be rationally
answered: And that such an indirect Power in Spirituals, as we have mentioned,
is a means necessary to the attaining this end, it will be evident to any one
who shall consider the Infirmities and Corruptions of men, and by how many
thousand pretenses and occasions taken from matters spiritual both all Divine
and Humane Affairs in any Society may be disturbed, and utterly confounded. And
if any other then besides the Civil Magistrate shall have the Possession of
this Indirect Power in Spirituals, and not the Civil Magistrate himself for his
occasions, how shall he be capacitated to look to his charge mentioned? That
would be a most imperfect Government (says Padre Paulo, History of the
Inquisition. Chap. 29.
in this business) which in it self should not have a means to provide for
things necessary, but should stay for a Remedy from him that should give it
according to his proper interests (as (the Infirmities and Corruptions of men
being considered) will be supposed concerning others in this matter) and not
according to the public necessity. Ibid.
In his considerations upon the censure of Pope Paul the fifth against the
Commonwealth of Venice, in 4to, page 31.
And, says he farther, the opportunity of having power to work after one's own
Phansy, may cause a Saint to overrun his course; and when a Potentate has not
the favor of him that commands in Ecclesiastical Causes, Religion is made a
Pretext to oppress him. And says he also elsewhere, Nature in all her final
drifts gives such faculties and Powers as are necessary for the attaining the
same: And shall God set down an end and Commandment which cannot be executed,
without the favor of men? this is too great an inconvenience. And such then
must be the Case of Princes in this business, in respect to the preservation of
the welfare of their charge, yea, even of that very part of it which consists
in Affairs purely Civil, and so belongs primarily and most properly to them,
and to be looked after by them in the world (or else nothing at all does so) if
such Power as we have mentioned be not conceded; and whether it may be either
any suhordinate Magistrate, or any Ecclesiastical Person, or any other person
whatsoever who shall usurp it from him?

Secondly, by the Divine Law.
XIX. That this indirect power in spirituals is conceded to the Civil Magistrate
also by the Divine Natural Law, it is as evident from the Concession of it by
God to the Patriarks and others of Old; and to Moses, and all the succeeding
Kings of Israel afterward, throughout all the several Ages of the Old
Testament. And in the new we are bid to pray for Kings and all that are in
Authority, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2.
that we may lead a peaceable and quiet life in all Godliness and Honesty, and
the like needless to be recited.

Thirdly, and lastly, by the Law of Nations also.
XX. In the third and last place then, let us see what the Law of Nations has
been in this particular; and that in both the acceptations of it, both as that
Law is taken properly, and improperly.

1. Properly. And as to that it has been a general compact of mankind ever to
treat with the Sovereign Princes of Countries about the state of their
Religion. So in the Convocating of the Divines of the several Countries to the
Ecumenical Councels, in the Europian Parts of Christendom, yea even in the
times and places of the greatest Papal usurpation; and the like.

2. Improperly. And as to that let us view the Laws, and practices of
Countries within themselves, and in their separate Capacities in respect to
others.

1. It is to this purpose, and for the retaining with more Solemnity the
investiture of this Power in Princes, amongst other respects, that the same
person has been so frequently both King and Priest in so many Ages, and
Societies in the World. Let us look first amongst the Hebrews. I have recited
formerly the Tradition amongst them, of the first heads of Families, their
being both Kings and Priests to those that were subject to them. And afterward
when they grew into a settled community under Moses, Moses their first Captain
that brought them out of Egypt was both King and Priest, Psalm. 99.6. And so
also it was usual with them afterward, for the same person to be both
High Priest and chief Magistrate. And here is again another Error and
non-concluding argument of Grotius concerning these things; affirming that, De
Imper. cap. 2.. 5.
after Moses his time, the Coalescence of the chief Preist-hood and Supreme
Magistracy in one Person in Israel was forbidden by a Positive Law of God: And
that because the Priesthood was restrained only to the Sons of Aaron; and so a
stranger might not come nigh it. But what of that? although a stranger might
not assume the Priesthood, yet does this argue, that a Priest might not assume
the chief Magistracy? surely no. And therefore the instance of Ozias his being
prohibited to meddle with the matters proper to the Priestly Function given by
him, is not pertinent. 2 Chronicles. 26.17. Ibid.
And what thought he of Eli, and Samuel (See 1 Samuel 2.22, 27, 28. and Cap.
4.18. and 1 Samuel 7.15, etc.) and others afterward? were not they both Chief
Magistrates and Priests at the same time in Israel? Let Josephus be consulted
concerning these things; Antiquitat l. 5. cap. 12. Ibid. lib. 6. cap. 2.
and he says, that it was from Eli's Throne of Majesty that he fell down and
brake his neck, when he died. And he quotes also Samuels speech, which he made
to the Israelites as their General, at his expedition against the Philistines,
and his constituting Laws and Courts amongst them afterward as their Supreme
Magistrate. Neither does Skickardus, nor others, who write of the things which
did incapacitate any man from being King of Israel, mention any such thing as
the Priesthood amongst them. And if the Testimony of Heathen History may be
any thing in this business, then, Post Mosen etiam filius ejus Arvas, Sacerdos
Sacris Aegyptiis, Justin. lib. 36.
mox Rex creatur, says the Epitomizer of Trogus; That after Moses also his
Sons Arvas, a Priest in the Egyptian Rites, was Created King. Semperque exinde
hic mos apud Judaeos fuit, ut eosdem reges and Sacerdotes haberent; quorum
justitia Religione permixta incredibile quantum coaluere. And from thenceforth
it was always a Custom amongst the Jews to have the same Persons both Kings
and Priests; whose Justice being mixed with Religion, it is incredible how well
they did together. So that thus, not only de facto, but de Jure, it was in
Israel. Let us pass then from the Jews to the Heathens in this business: As to
whom first, Divine Plato deserves to be heard. Apud Aegyptos (says he) non
licet Regem absque Sacerdotio imperare, De Regno circa Med.
etc. That amongst the Egyptians it was not Lawful for any one to Reign as
King; unless he were Priest also. Nay, if any of another Nation did by chance
usurp the Kingdom by force, he was constrained, after the usurpation of the
kingdom, to be initiated in holy Orders; that so at length he might be both
King and Priest. Besides (says he farther) Thou shall find, that in most of
the Cities of the Greeks, the chief Sacrifices of the Divine Worship are
committed to the Magistrate to be offered up by him. And also amongst you
(says he to his Hospes in the Dialogue) we may especially take notice of that;
for they say there, that to the King being Created by Lot, those of the Ancient
Sacrifices which are most Solemn and accustomed to the Country are committed
to be offered: thus Plato. And the like says Herodotus, and Diodorus of other
Ancient Nations; Aenead. lib. 3.
and Virgil of Anius Rex Anius, Rex idem Hominum, Phaebique Sacerdos:
King Anius, the same both King of men, and Priest of Apollo.
And amongst the Romans Plutarch recites it of Numa, In Numa.
that he first erected the College Pontifical; and that he himself was the
first Pontifex that ever was. Decad. 1. lib. 1.
And Livie says of him, Tum Sacerdotibus creandis animum adjecit, quanquam
ipse plurima Sacra obibat, ea maxim quae nunc ad Dialem Flaminem pertinent:
That then he applied his mind to the Creation of Priests; although he himself
did perform the most of Sacred Rites, especially those which do now belong to
the Flamen Dialis or Priest of Jupiter. Decad. 1. lib. 2.
And he says elsewhere also of the following Kings; Quia quaedam publica sacra
per ipsos Reges factata erant; because certain public holy Rites were
performed by the Kings themselves. Lib. 54. In Octavio, Sect. 31. In Julio,
Sect. 13. Anastas. Germon. De Sacris Immunit. lib. 1. cap. 9. n. 3.
And at the coming in of the Emperors, Dio-Cassius, and Suetonius recite it of
Augustus, that he was consecrated High Priest. And Suetonius of Julius, that,
before Augustus his time, Pontificatum Maximum petiit, He sought the Office of
Chief-Priest. And of the succeeding Emperors it is said also; that from
Augustus to Gratianus, all would be consecrated and called Pontifices Maximi,
as well as Imperatores; Highpriests, as well as Emperors. Hist. Eccles. lib.
8. cap. 29.
And Maximinus in Eusebius styles himself Pontifex Maximus, amongst the Rest of
his Titles: and many more Records there are of these things. Last of all, Let
us descend to the Christian Church. Martyrologiae 22. August. v. Timothei.
And of the Christian Emperors, says Baronius, That although for the Heathen
Roman Religions sake they took not upon them the Name of Pontifices Maximi, as
the Heathen Roman Emperors did; yet they suffered themselves to be inscribed by
that Name in their Coins, and to be called so in their Panegyricks, and the
like Elogies made in their praise. And at this day, both of the Princes of
Germany and others in Christendom, there are several who are both Magistrates
and Priests in their Dominions. Vid. Bald. Cons. 353 lib. 1. Panarmitan. Cons.
82. n. 4. lib 1. and Cons. 61. lib. 1.
And what the Great Bishop of Rome is, it is eminently known; of whom Baldus,
Panormitanus and others his Canonists do Affirm; That he is Supreme Lord in
his Temporal Dominions: and that he has a Right of Creating Nobles, and of
doing all things which Kings do in their Kingdoms: and whether this be likely
to accrue to him by Succession from St. Peter, and as Universal Pastor, we
leave it to others to Open. Finally, Every Prince, whosoever he be, if he
intend to hold his Dominions, must of necessity and in many things be Supreme
Priest in effect, although he be not so by Actual Consecration.

2. The express Laws of Countries have ever conceded the same indirect Power
in Spirituals to Princes. Epist. 8.
Such would Plato in his Epistles have granted to them: And up and down in many
particulars in his Books of Laws. Polit. lib. 6. cap. 8. n. 41.
And Aristotle distinguishes his Chief Magistrate into the Civil and the
Divine Magistrate. And he denominates him the Divine from hence, because of the
Inspection he is to have over the matters of Religion, within his Territories.
By the Judicial Law of Moses, the Kings of Israel had the same Power: God gave
to Moses both the Judicial, Ceremonial, and Moral Law; and appointed him to be
Supreme Conserver of them all. And we gave instances of the like concerning the
succeeding Chief Governors of Israel, just now, in our mention made of the Law
of Israel under the Notion of a Divine Law. And Schickardus says, In Jure
Regio Hebraeor. cap. 1. Theor. 2. prope prin.
that the Sanhedrim, or Kings Great Council in Israel, Cognoscebat praecipue
tantum de rebus magnis; Religionem* and Rempublicam attinentibus, v. g. de
controversiis legalibus, anno Intercalari, Pseudoprophetis, Apostatis,
Excommunicandis, etc. did take Cognizance chiefly only of great matters,
belonging to Religion, and the common weal; As for Example, Of Controversies
concerning the Law, of the Sabbatical year, Of false Prophets, Apostates; of
Persons to be excommunicated, and cut off from Israel, and the like. And this
we say it was necessary for them also to do, as well for the Conservation of
the Civil State, as of Gods True Religion in Israel. The Laws of other Nations
were ever the same. Let the lives of Theseus, and Solon, and other Greeks be
looked upon in Plutarch. Let the Histories of Herodotus, Thucidides, Suidas,
and others be consulted, both concerning the Assyrian, Persian, and Greek
Monarchies, and the Laws and Customs of the several Particular Countries made
mention of by them. And amongst the Romans, says Dio, Lib. 2.
That Romulus did establish it by a Law (before Numa's time, just now
mentioned) That the Senators amongst other things, Lib. 7. cap. 2.
should be appointed to take care of the matters of Religion. And Orosius
recites the remarkable passage of the Senates refusing (in Tiberius his time,
and long afterward) Christ to be enrolled amongst their Gods; because it had
not first, and according to custom, been brought before them to determine
whether his sort of Religion should be permitted in the Empire: And therefore
by an Edict they forthwith banished the Christians out of the City. The Roman
Civil Law speaks in the very same Language, and that throughout the whole body
of it; both in the Old Pandects, F. De Justit. and Jur. l. 1 Hujus Studii.
and the later Code and Novels of Justinian. In the very first Law of the Old
Pandects, or digests, Jus Publicum, says Vlpian, in Sacris, Sacerdotibus, F.
De legibus and Senatus-Consultis. L. Nam. and Demosthenes, ad finem. D. De ritu
nuptiorum. Et De Donationibus inter virum and uxorem, etc.
and Magistratibus, consistit; that the Public Law and Rights did Consist in
Holy things, in Priests, and Magistrates. And the like afterward Martianus,
and others. Finally, let but the Titles in the digests, De Feriis and
Dilationibus, etc. And De mortuo inferendo, and Sepulchro aedificando: and
where the Degrees prohibited in Marriage are Treated of; and the like Laws and
Titles in other places concerning many particulars belonging to Divine affairs,
be consulted. Let but the particular Laws made by the several Tribunes
mentioned by Cicero, Orat. Pro Domo sua ad Pontifi^es. Philip. 1. Agrar. 2.
and others, be viewed; The Lex Papiria; The Lex Roscia; The Lex Domitia, and
the like. And, as to the Code and Novels, if there be one Law concerning Divine
Affairs in the Digests, every one knows that there be an hundred to that one
in the others: The Code and Novels being taken up, a man may say, almost wholly
in settling the Affairs of the Christian Church under the Emperors. So that
thus then it has been heretofore, as to the more celebrated Records of Humane
Affairs. And as to the times since in the Christian Church, Anonymi Officium
Magistratus Christiani, etc. Hagae Comitis. Anno MDCLXII.
let but the one Anonymous Author, in his Collections out of the Centuriators
of Magdeburg, and other Ecclesiastical Histories, and Writers, be consulted.
And if we look into the present Laws of Countries in the World, either in
Europe, or other parts; both where it is Christian, and where it is not; there
is an Universal Concession of this Indirect Power in Spirituals to Princes by
the Laws and Tenor of the Laws of all their Countries. De Aethiopum morib*
In Literis imperator: ad Pontif-Rom. passim.
So it is the Imperial Style of Precious John in Africa, to call himself
amongst the rest of his Titles, Columna fidei, The Pillar of the Faith, says
Damianus. And the Author mentions the Ancient Institutions of the Queen of
Sheba, who journied to Solomon; that Women also should be circumcised, and the
like. Ibid. in Confess. fidei Zaga Zabo, circa med. and alibi. Poloniae lib. 2.
prope med. and alibi.
The like says Cromerus concerning the King of Poland, in Europe, his
nominating the Bishops of his Dominions, and commending them to the Pope to be
approved of by him, and so in other such particulars also. Finally, let the
Histories of Russia; let the Laws of France; let the Annals and Records of the
Grand Seniors affairs; let the Low Countries Corpus Disciplinae; and the very
Laws and Statutes of Geneva, or any other the Civil Laws of particular
Countries and Relations of their public Affairs be consulted; and see if they
do not all universally concede this power in Spirituals to the Magistrate,
excepting only where the Churchman in his own name as such holds the Supremacy;
as in the profound Polity of the Magnificent Bishop of Rome, not to be
paralleld by any Records of the former times in the World. And indeed it is no
wonder if all Laws generally do thus concede this Power, since as we have said
concerning it, and that also in the Latitude of it mentioned, that no Prince
can possibly subsist without it. In the interim, there have been some in all
Ages who would undertake to limit Princes to the not meddling in such or such
Spirituals, apparently necessary for them to meddle in. But if men in the
capacity of Subjects, will undertake to prescribe to Princes in such things; it
is not the Princes any longer, but they that must govern the World.

3. And last of all we come to instance in the Practices of men (i. e.) in
those things which we here call so as contradistinct to the other matters of
Fact already mentioned. And those are such Practices in this matter, as whereby
Princes have plainly evidenced, that they must hold this Power in their hands
in matters requisite, or else quit their Soverainty and Dominion over their
Countries. And for this I shall look no further then to those Princes in
Europe, which hold Communion with the Church of Rome: who all of them, although
they suffer the noise that the Pope makes of his Supremacy over them; yet when
it comes to Trial, will not by any means grant it him in their Practice. There
have been two famous, and notable examples in this matter, that have appeared
of late days. The first is, that of the State of Venice in the case of it is
interdiction by Pope Paul the Fifth; in which case all the Princes in their
several Countries, and their Ambassadors, both at Venice and in the Court of
Rome it self, (those who were Residentiaries there) declaimed against the Pope.
At Venice, says Paulus Venetus, Historia Interdict. Venet. lib. 1. prope fin.
while the distance was yet growing betwixt his Holiness and the State, were
the imperial French and Spanish Ambassadors; and they openly voted against the
Popes usurpations in the Church matters, laid claim to by him. In the Court of
Rome; when the Monitory was there afterward published against the State; the
Residentiaries then present, says he also, were, Ibid. lib. 2. in princip.
the Marquess of Castile from his Imperial Majesty; Alincurius, from the most
Christian King; The Count of Verva, from the Duke of Savoy; and all these
endeavored with great earnestness, and even to the growing of hot words
betwixt them, with the Pope, for either the quite taking away, or else the
Prorogation of the Monitory: And they held Correspondence, after the
Publication of it, by frequent visits and conferences with the Ambassadors of
the State. The Princes themselves also, who in their several Countries
disgusted it, and declared against it, were, the King of Poland; who, Ibid.
Vid. lib. 2. paulo post princip.
when the Popes Nuncio solicited for the Publication of the Monitory in his
Dominions, gave him an abrupt repulse. After him the Emperor; who, both in his
own Person, and by his Ministers, sided with the Venetian State, and advised
the Nuncio, that some temper might be found out for the business: and the like.
In the next place, the Catholic King, and his Court; so soon as ever they knew
the matter, were presently sensible that that was a doing which equally
concerned all Princes, etc. In France, that King also amongst other things,
advised the Nuncio there to a Composure. What the sense of England, and
Holland, and such other Protestant Princes was, is to be presumed, and not here
pertinent to be recited. But the like entertainment that this affair had with
these Catholic Princes mentioned, had it also with all others. With the Great
Duke of Florence; The Viceroy of Naples; the Count of Millaine; the Dukes of
Mantua and Mutina; and the like. So that thus these Princes and their
Ambassadors would by no means endure any such thing as the Invasion of this
Indirect Power mentioned in Spirituals. The other great instance in this
business were the Transactions of the late Council of Trent: See the History
of the Council of Trent. Passim.
Where also the Ambassadors of Princes would not suffer any thing derogatory
from the Laws of their Countries, and their several Masters Supreme
Authorities (which they (really) held about Sacred things) to be passed into
Canons. And the Prelates and Divines also of those Countries (most of them)
complied no better with his Holiness. Let the Actions of Five-Churches, and
others, be viewed. These two comprehensive instances then being given; let us
pass from hence a little further to the more particular affairs of Princes. Let
the Commonwealth of Venice, in the matter of the Inquisition, be considered
of. It has laid several Laws, and Restrictions upon that Office, and the
Jurisdictions belonging to it within their Territories, to this purpose, and
notwithstanding the Pope's thundering against them, as is to be seen in the
Reasons of their so doing set forth by the Impartial hand of Father Paul in his
History of the Inquisition, See the History of the Inquisition. Passim.
but now and sometimes heretofore mentioned. The Kings of France, the
Emperors, and others, have oftentimes in like manner maintained this their
power against the Pope. It Is that the Sorbon so often now adays threaten him
with, determining on the part of their King. And the further instances of these
things are to be seen in the Collections of Records made concerning them by the
Royal hand of the late wise King James of England. The very Inquisition of
Spain holds the like course: It has its own Laws and proper Customs by which
it is Governed; See King James his Defense of the Right of Kings. Passim. See,
the History of the Inquisition. cap. 28. and cap. 6. Ibid. In the Preface.
Neither is it altered, or receives new Orders from Rome; and there is an
account given of all things treated of within the State to the King; and advice
sent no whither else; and the King always names an Inquisitor General
throughout all his Kingdoms, to have inspection over that office, to the Pope:
and his Holiness does confirm him; and he being confirmed names the particular
inquisitors in every place, which nevertheless cannot enter into their Charge,
without the Kings Approbation. Thus then both the most Christian, and the most
Catholic King; and be they who they will, and let the Pope call them by what
names he will, and be they in never so strict a League and Amity with, and
professed subjection to the Church of Rome; yet still I say thus all of them
deal in respect to this indirect power in Spirituals. As has been already
said, The shadow of it may be connived at in another, but the reality and
substance of it has been of necessity always retained in the Princes
themselves. Lastly, The Inquisitors of Italy it self do particularly send word
to Rome by every Post, Ibid. cap. 6.
what is done within their Office: And we must conclude, that if it were not
so, neither that part of his Holiness his Person, which is the Temporal Prince;
nor that part of it neither, which is the Roman Pontifex, could be able long in
either of their Capacities to support it self against it is own inquisitors. And
it is no wonder then that other Temporal Princes, whose Dominions are distinct
from those of the Sea of Rome, and the Lands of the Church, have not admitted
of the Inquisition generally; but by compact in the Original and first
admission of it. Thus then; De Episcopatu ^onstantini Magni. In praefat.
Si Magistratui (says Vedelius) eripiatur potestas Ecclesiastica (as he calls
it) non integer amplius Magistratus, sed ex part tantum erit: That if this
indirect power in Spirituals be taken away from the Supreme Magistrate, he
shall be no more an whole, but only half a Magistrate in his Society. And what
Constantine told his Bishops, will be found everlastingly True; (...), etc.
Apud Eusebius. lib. 4. De vita Constable. ant. cap. 24.
That they were constituted Overseers or Bishops by God in their more
particular kind and capacity within the Church; and he in his more general way
and kind also, as he stood in his capacity more without the Church. And this is
that grand Branch of the Magistrates Supreme Power over all, here to be
asserted, and which is one main Pillar of this Discourse.

XXI. The Question, The Question answered, why the Ecclesiastical person as
such should not have Supremacy over all?
or Querie that is here made then by the Roman Canonists, and others, (viz.)
Why the Ecclesiastical Person; for the Churches sake committed more
particularly and immediately to him; should not have Supremacy over all, and the
contrary indirect power in Temporals as a Branch of it, and so consequently
belonging to him, as well as the Temporal Magistrate the like Supremacy, and
this consequent indirect power in Spirituals, which we have mentioned? will be,
after these previous considerations laid down, the more plausibly and easily
answered by us. In the interim, this Supreme Jurisdiction over all in
Churchmen is the thing driven at by the Doctrines of two sorts of Persons in
the Christian Church, (viz.) The Chair and Conclave of Rome; and aspiring
Consistories and Synods of Presbytery, as they are stated and desired by some:
And by both these, if not professedly, yet at least in the issue and effect of
things, as has been said already. But we come to give only three weighty
reasons for the Civil Magistrates Supremacy. And those are: 1. Because the
natural intent of the Civil Magistrates office imports it; Which primarily is
the conservation of Humane Society (specifically taken, and as contradistinct
to Church Society) and the governing men in their primary capacity of men. But
Humane Society is the foundation of all Church Society; and without which that
Church Society cannot subsist. And the Ecclesiastical Person governs men only
in their secondary and additional Capacity of Church Members, or Christians,
where the Christian Religion is professed. And therefore the Supremacy, from
the nature of things, inevitably and necessarily belongs to him, who governs
men in their Supreme and first Capacity. Contra parmen. lib. 3.
Non enim Respublica est in Ecclesia, sed Ecclesia in Respublica, says Optatus
Milevitanus; The State is not in the Church, but the Church in the State. And
Aristotle; Polet. lib. 3. cap. 1. n. 5.
Atqui ridiculum fuerit and absurdum putare ut ii Magistratu careant, qui sint
Authoritate summa praediti; That it would be a ridiculous thing and absurd, to
think that they should want a Magistracy, who are endued with the Supreme
Authority. Ibid. lib. 3 cap. 4. n. 26. in princip.
And elsewhere; Maximus autem ubique Magistratus aestimatur, civitatis
administratione, quae nihil aliud est quam ipsa Respublica; That the Magistrate
was accounted every where to be the uppermost in the Administration of the
City, which is nothing else but the Commonweal. And so all that proceed by
the light of Nature. For the Superiority of the Ecclesiastic, neither in all
Humane Affairs, nor consequently in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity, was never
known, nor heard of in the World, for ought appears by any extant Monuments of
Humane Affairs, 'till the claim laid to it by the Popedom, and that by virtue
of the pretended Divine Law on it is side. 2ly, The Divine Natural Law of God
has constituted the Civil Magistrate as Supreme over all accordingly also. And
so it was upon the account of the first Fathers being Fathers; that they had by
that Law, and the voice of God from Heaven (as was said above) Dominion and
Rule over their Children. Lib. 1. Chap. 3..
And it was upon the account of Moses his being Civil Magistrate, that he was
constituted Supreme over all Israel. And so it was also in the succeeding
Judges and Kings of Israel. And the Prophets called Kings the Nursing Fathers,
and Queens the Nursing Mothers of the Church. Isa. 49.23. And cap. 60.13.16.
etc.
And the like accordingly in the New Testament. Christ himself, the eternal
Head of his Church, and who is above all Principalities and Powers in Heavenly
places, Matthew 17.24, 25, 26, 27. Matthew. 22.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. Mark. 12.14.
Romans 13.4. 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. Lib. 1. cap. 3.. 12. 1 Pet. 2.13.
paid Tribute to Caesar, and taught his Disciples that Lesson. And St. Paul
lays down the Universal good of mankind as the end of the Civil Magistrate his
executing of his Office; and exhorts that Prayers and Supplications be made,
first of all for Kings; that under them we may live a quiet and peaceable life
in all Godliness and Honesty. And St. Peter (as was said above) calls Kings the
Supreme amongst men. And in all these and the like instances and places of both
Testaments, there is a concession of the Supremacy in Humane Societies, either
express, or supposedly made to the Civil Magistrate.

3. The third and last Argument for it is from the consequences of the
contrary, in respect to the Civil Magistrates Office. For, let but the
Ecclesiastical Person be once constituted as Supreme, and then presently he
will, and must of necessity claim an indirect Power in Temporals, sufficient
for the supporting of that his Supremacy. It Is the very thing which is done by
the Roman Pontife^ at this day; Vid. De pontif. Romans lib. 5. Cap. 5.6, etc.
and which is maintained by Bellarmine, and the other Champions of that Sea:
and then, this indirect power in Temporals being conceded to him, it will give
him ability of invading the Office of the Civil Magistrate. And then, the
corruptions of men being considered; and the Mundane Honors and interests
which belongs to the Office of the Magistrate (as was mentioned above) being
proposed as a Temptation to the Ecclesiastical Person; lib. 2. cap. 4.. 7, 8, 9.
he will be always converting into the Civil Magistrate, and injuriously
usurping the Temporal Splendors of his office; Nay, he must of necessity
possess them, for the support of his Ecclesiastical Supremacy: and so in the
end the very Office it self of the Civil Magistrate will be quite extinguished
and swallowed up by the Supremacy of the Ecclesiastics. In his Defense of the
Right of Kings.
An instance of these things is to be seen also in the Bishop of Rome. King
James objects to him; that at the first he was but the poor parish Priest of
his Church in Rome; but that now he was grown to a Supremacy over Kings, an
Universal Pastorship, etc. And this is also farther to be observed concerning
him; that although he possesses all the splendors belonging to the office of
the Civil Magistrate, (He dispenses the great Offices of State; he is served
in a more magnificent manner then most Temporal Princes in the World,) yet
scarce any such thing as the Supreme Civil Magistrates Office is owned to be
sustained by his Person; but all is absurdly, and against the nature of things,
given out as belonging to him one way or other at least, principally as St.
Peter's Successor. But now on the contrary; if the Civil Magistrate hold the
Supremacy, there is no such danger of the like perpetual injury, and of his
usurping, or extinguishing the Ecclesiastcal Persons Office: There being no
such worldly splendors belonging to it, neither superior nor equal to those of
the Magistraties own Office, to be a temptation to him to usurp it. So then,
this distinct order of Persons and Power, which has been mentioned, and which
is appointed by God and Nature, being preserved and kept up in the World, and
particularly in the Uniformity of Churches, there will follow no such confusion
of things, nor destruction of the right and natural order of them, appointed
for the governing of the World, and the welfare of mankind in all Ages, as has
been mentioned; but if the contrary disorder be attempted, the contrary
confusions and absurdity in things accordingly will necessarily follow. By the
Magistrates indirect Power in Spirituals, he is appointed to be Foster-father
to the Church. Is. 49.23. Prove 8.15, 16. Psalm. 2.12. Dan. 2.31. The Supreme
Magistrate may commit the exercise of this Indirect Power in Spirituals to
others.


XXII. In the interim, by this the Magistrates indirect Power in Spirituals,
which I have here all along mentioned, he is appointed by God to be a Nursing
Father to the Church: Which he should never forget to be; considering that it
is by God that Kings Reign, and by him that Princes distribute Justice: He
should kiss the Son, least he be angry; or else he, that has broken in pieces
the Head of Gold, the Brass, and the Iron, and put a period to the greatest
Monarchs in the World, can also in a moment put a period to any temporal
Princes power whatsoever.

XXIII. Last of all; the Supreme Magistrate in any Ecclesiastical Uniformity
may commit the exercise of this his Indirect power in Spirituals to the
Governors of the Church under him: And there is a necessity of his acting by
others in this kind, as well as in any other; because himself is not able to
bear the whole burden alone. And the more directly things tend toward the
nature of purely spirituals; and the more nearly by consequence that they
concern the Church; the more fit it is, that, where the Church is Incorporate
into the State, they should be put into the hands of Churchmen to manage; the
respects only, which have been mentioned, Hic Supra.. 5.
being kept up to humane Society in the mean time. So then, to Churchmen
principally they should be committed in Ordinary: The power of inspection over
the Churchmen being only reserved to the Prince himself, and the Liberty of
Appeals to him from them, in any case happening, being granted to the Subject.
And this is the case of the Church Governors, and the Index Ordinarius, or
Ordinary in England. And of the like also in other Churches.

CHAP. VII.
The Proposition asserted, that, Humane Condition in this World being
considered, there can be no such thing indulged (really) in any State or Common
Society of men, as a loose and open Toleration of venting and disseminating of
Opinions in matters of Religion, without deadly Feuds and Contentions in that
Society, and the dissolution of it in the end by those Feuds, and men's falling
together by the Ears, and to War one with another. The dispraise of such and
the like Feuds, and Contentions: And how they make to the hurt of Religion, and
also of Government, and also of the consistency of Religion with Government;
and how much they are forbidden in Scripture. The Conclusion drawn from all
these things.
I. FIrst, What is meant by an Opinion in matters of Religion, explained.

II. What is meant by a loose and open toleration of divulging such Opinions,
explained also.

III. The things here to be considered of, as accompanying Humane Condition in
the World, assigned.

IV. The proof of the main Proposition from three Considerations of things.

V. First, from the Aptness of men to entertain opinions in matters of Religion.

VI. Secondly, From the infinite variety of these Opinions amongst them.

VII. Lastly, From the Array in which they go forth to the propagating and
defending of these their opinions.

VIII. The more particular mischeifs of Opinion-Contests to the affairs of
Humane Societies.

IX. First, To Religion.

X. Secondly, To Government.

XI. Thirdly, To the Consistency of Religion with Government.

XII. And Lastly, How much they are forbidden also in Scripture.

XIII. The general Conclusion subjoined to all these things.

What is meant by an Opinion in matters of Religion, explained. Supra lib. 2.
Cap. 1.. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
I. THe Causes of men's contesting their Opinions in matters of Religion being
above described, we come here to describe the effects of their divulging and
such their consequent contesting of them in any Society: And those we do assign
to be deadly Feuds and Wars amongst men, and finally by them the ruin and
confusion of any such Society. First of all then we shall explicate what we
mean here by an Opinion it self in matters of Religion. And an opinion is taken
either properly, De Repub: Dial. 5. ad finem.
or improperly: And strictly taken in the General says Plato (...), etc. It is
a middle thing betwixt ignorance and knowledge: And that because of the
doubtfulness of the mind in assenting to the particular matter of such an
opinion. And, if we farther distinguish it, it is taken either effectively, for
the weak and doubtful assent of the mind it self to any Proposition; and so,
Est actus Intellectus declinantis in unam partem contradictionis cum formidine
alterius, Secunda Secundae Quaest. 1. Art. 4.
says Aquinas; That it is an act of the intellect inclining to one part of the
contradiction with a fear of the other its being true also. Or else,
objectively, for that sense of the Proposition which is so assented to. But we
understand not an Opinion here in this proper sense of it; but improperly, and
more largely; and that is for any Judgment whatsoever held by men concerning
things in matters of Religion. And the Truth is; The vulgar heads amongst men
(in Relation to whom principally we mention contesting of opinions up and down
in this discourse) do seldom entertain any Judgment in matters of Religion
purely probably, and opinionatively, as the Term is properly taken: But,
partly from the shortness of their own Eyesight, and their want of farther
insight into things, and Arguments pro and con concerning them; and partly from
the little experience they have of the uncertainty and difficulty of many
matters of Knowledge and Study, and how many times men do upon farther search
and trial of both sides recant their first thoughts concerning them; and partly
from the influence which the present sense they have of things has upon them,
especially the Sacred Notion of Religion accompanying it and overbearing them:
from these and the like causes they judge all things that they have but any
notion and apprehension of, to be certain, and as if there were no opposition
to be made against them; and that because they have none to make themselves.
And these are the common Rout, who have ordinarily these Judgments and
Opinions sowed (as a man would sow seed in a field) upon any occasion amongst
them; and who are accordingly also hissed on by others to the contesting of
them. In the mean time they who are of deeper and abler heads in any Society,
and who ordinarily see cause in most things to be of more Temper; either, the
one sort of them, they do charitatively and honestly acquiesce, and think that
by doing so they do their duty (for it is most certain that (as Mr.
Chillingworth says) there be many things in Religion, Against Knot.
the certainty of which will not be known 'till the day of Judgment, nor is it
any great matter whether it be or not.) Or else the other sort of them, like
cunning men, Heresiarks, and Ringleaders of Sedition (as we mentioned above)
they do gather a company with Corah, Lib. 2. cap. 4.. 6. etc.
and muster them up in the defense of the opinions entertained by them, even to
public Feuds and Wars themselves, and the other dire effects of these things
just now pointed at by us. So then, such a Judgment of men in matters of
Religion, so confided in by the one sort of those mentioned, and so ordinarily
made use of by the other, is that which we here first of all more expressly, and
hereafter in like manner frequently call an Opinion.

II. We shall explicate also, What is meant by a loose and open toleration of
divulging such opinions, explicated also.
what we mean by a loose and open toleration of men's venting and divulging such
their Opinions. And by it is meant a Toleration, over which there is no
restriction, nor Government held at all, by the Governors either in Church or
State in any Society: No not so much as by a private underhand ballancing of
those opinions which are suffered so to be vented and disseminated. And this
kind of toleration is it also, which we do oppose to that kind of unity in
matters of Religion, Lib. 2. cap. 1.. 9, 10. Infra Lib. 2. cap. 8.. 5, 6, etc.
which is above mentioned: and which unity will be interpreted to be the same
with an Ecclesiastical Uniformity, which will be mentioned hereafter, and
treated of more particularly in the Third and last Book belonging to the Body
of this Discourse. And this Toleration it is, which we do here affirm, cannot
(the condition of men in the world being considered) be permitted in any
Society, without those dire and dreadful effects mentioned following upon it.

III. The things to be here considered of, as accompanying Humane Condition in
the World, assigned. Lib. 2. cap. 4.. 1, 2, 6, etc. Lib. 2. cap. 1.. 4, 5, 6,
7, 8.
The things to be here considered of then as accompanying humane Condition in
the World, and in order to the proof of our proposition by and by from the
consideration of them, are more generally the two grand Causes of all mischiefs
in humane affairs mentioned by us above, (viz.) The Infirmities and Corruptions
of men; and more particularly, the ordinary causes of Religious contests
assigned (as we said just now) above also. And that whether they proceed from
either of those more general causes in men.

IV. We descend then from these things to the proof of our maine proposition;
The proof of the main Proposition from three Considerations of things.
That it is impossible for any purely loose toleration of divulging of opinions
to be permitted in any Society, without the destructive effects mentioned to be
consequent upon it: and that I shall prove from these three considerations of
things in conjunction one with another.

First, from the aptness of men to entertain opinions in matters of Religion.
V. First of all, from the aptness and readiness of men to hearken after and
conceive and entertain opinions in matters of Religion. It is true, in relation
to all affairs in the World whatsoever, That Humane Nature is greedy of News,
and delights to know any thing which is Rare and Curious: Pythagoras olim quid
senserit, and quid acutus
Chrysippus, vel quid Priscus Anaxagoras.
Scire etiam quid Protagoras, Zenoque, Platoque
Tradiderint, and quid Magnus Aristotle's.
Scire etiam quotnam fuerint Bacchique Jovesque etc.
What Pythagoras thought heretofore, and what acute
Chrysippus, or what Ancient Anaxagoras.
To know also what Protagoras, and Zeno, and Plato
Did deliver, and what Great Aristotle.
To know also how many Bacchuses and Jupiters there were, etc.
And if so in all other matters, then much more in matters of Religion; which,
some of them, do indeed, most of all things in the World, concern men, and
belong to them to know, (viz.) such as are Fundamental, and necessary to their
eternal welfare in another world, and others which pro hic and nunc are either
in a lesser or greater degree requisite. But the vulgar amongst men do use to
entertain all things that bare but the name of matters of Religion, and are
cried up amongst men for such, under these Notions; and be they otherwise never
so purely speculative, or dubious, or not enjoined in Scripture, or any ways
remote from the Foundation, and the like, and so impertinent for them to be so
sollicitously busied about: And no wonder then, if they desire to know them,
and are so ready to entertain Opinions concerning them. Secondly, from the
infinite variety of these opinions amongst them.


VI. Let us add to this the consideration of the numerous multiplication and
increase of these Opinions in men, which does follow upon their thus greedily
harkning after the entertaining them. Scarce any thing is ever brought into
question, but there are presently several Opinions formed concerning it; and
those presently are again divided, and subdivided by the variety of Heads
amongst men.

Quot Capitum vivunt, Horat. Sermon. lib. 2. Satyr. 1.
totidem studiorum
Millia. -- And
Mill hominum species, and rerum discolor usus. Pers. Satyr. 5.

Velle suum cuique est, nec voto vivitur uno.
As many heads as are amongst men, so many thousand there are of minds. And
There are a thousand diversities of men, and a variously different use of
things.
Every one has his will, neither do men live with one sort of Wish.
And this variety of Opinions amongst men will not at all be wondered at, if we
look but to that infinite variety which is in Nature in all things whatsoever.
And, as in all other things, so in the natural and ordinary causes of men's
forming their Opinions. And those Natural and Ordinary causes become necessary
also, Positis debitis circumstantiis, and the circumstances attending men's
several cases being weighed as belonging to them. Such natural causes of men's
varieties of Opinions in matters of Religion, and those so necessary, as is
said, (and where there is otherwise no special direction of God) are a thousand
things in the World. Their Masters, their Books, their Companies, their
Interests, their Constitutions, their Educations, their varieties of Tempers
and Distempers, their degrees of light and understanding, and other the like
things in all the infinite particulars of them; and all of them operating
diversely in men. The experience of all Ages will justify these things: and
particularly the Histories and Monuments of the Christian Church have been a
large Comment upon the Truth of them. How many diversities of Judgments have
there been? and all of them accounted Heresies by the mutually contesting
parties in matters of the Christian Religion: In the Histories of Eusebius, and
others; in the Catalogues of Epiphanius, Philastrius, St. Augustine, and the
like Writings, it is to be seen. And how have these been diversified over and
over again, in several Ages and Countries, ten thousand times amongst men. So
that we need look no further for the illustrating of this second consideration,
then from these causes mentioned to their effects, and from the effects back
again to their Causes.

VII. In the third and last place (for the proof of our Proposition) Let us go
but one step farther, Lastly, from the array in which they go forth to the
propagating and defending of these their Opinions.
and add to both these also the consideration of the several qualities in
which men come forth in Array, as it were to the Venting, Propagating, and
defending of these their Opinions, when thus entertained by them: and those are
accordingly as they are accompanied either with the general Causes of all
mischiefs in Humane Affairs, or else with the more particular Causes of
Religious Contests: Hic Supra.. 3.
And both these, such as were mentioned by us just now; and so some come forth
accompanied with their corruptions, cunning, self ends, and worldly designs;
Others with their infirmities, weaknesses, and indiscretions: the one sort of
them being weak in Judgment, and fit to be led, and distinguishing neither of
times, nor persons, nor things; neither considering from whence things proceed,
nor whither they tend; and the other sort leading them (if they do not run fast
enough of themselves) to the accomplishing their several designs of Envy,
Anger, Hatred, Malice, Ambition, Avarice, etc. although in the interim, as to
the public, it be even to the ruin of all Humane Society. And in the like
manner are these contestors of opinions accompanied also with the particular
causes of such their contesting them; Those ordinary ones which have been
mentioned, and the like others, and so some come forth accompanied with their
hot fiery vehemence of mistaken Zeal, proceeding from the potent influence of
the unduly fixed and immortal notion of Religion on their minds, and having an
appetite to burn up all like stubble as it were that comes in their way: Others
with the mixture of their private Passions, together with their indiscretion
and furious Zeal: Others with the mixture also of their adored worldly
interests, together with all these things. And although perhaps the weaker
sorts of these contestors discern not, even in themselves, the private and
subtle mixtures of these baser things in the mean time; yet however the
effects of them are never the less direful to humane affairs. And now the great
varieties and numbers of the mutual Thwartings of men's Opinions, which use to
be in the World, being considered in conjunction with these things; if all
these things thus in conjunction one with another, be not enough to bring any
Community under Heaven to the distempers and ruins which we have mentioned, if
the swing of them be permitted; Then Sphinx aliud fingat, Let any man assign,
if he can, any more certain and effectual causes of those Distempers and Ruins,
even in the Civil part of Humane Affairs, and where the potent influence of
Religion (mentioned) is not in Conjunction with them. And if there be an open
loose toleration of these things, where can they or will they stop, but at the
Sword, which is the fatal and last way of determining all Controversies amongst
men. And if any toleration whatsoever proceed but so far as to the
predominating of these things, then 'twill be found experimented too late, That
the Tumultuous multitude and interests of men, when in such a Posture, are not
to be ruled; and then either one party must prevail and be uppermost, and
oppress all the rest, and reduce them to a conformity to such Laws to be held
over their opinions, as they shall think fit, and then the loose Toleration is
at an end; or else all must persist to contend mutually to their final ruin,
and confusion. Instances, in these things, there are innumerable, if a man will
but look into the Monuments of Humane Affairs. In Euthyphrone vel de
Sanctitate, in princip.
Quae sunt igitur ea (says Plato) de quibus cum dissentimus, nec judicare
facile possumus, inimici efficimur, and Iracimur? Why, Sunt justum and
injustum, pulchrum and turpe, bonumque and malum: Haec sunt (says he) de
quibus, cum dissentimus, nec possumus ad sufficiens horum judicium pervenire;
Hosts efficimur quoties efficimur, and ego and tu, ac demum homines universi.
What are those things, about which when we disagree, nor can easily judge of
them, we become enemies one to another, and are Angry? Why, they are just and
unjust, fair and fowl, good and evil; These are the things, about which, when
we disagree, nor can come to a sufficient Judgment of them, we are very often
made Enemies one to another, both I and thou, and in fine the universality of
men. And it is that which Herodotus says of the Thracians; In Terpsichore. ad
princip.
Gens Thracum secundum Indos omnium maxima est; Quae, si aut unius imperio
regeretur, aut idem sentiret; ut mea fert opinio, inexpugnabitis foret, and
omnium gentium multo validissima: sed quia id arduum illis est, and nulla
ratione contingere potest, ideo imbecilles sunt. That the Nation of the
Thracians according to the Indians is the greatest of all; which if either it
had been governed by the Empire of one, or else could have but been of the same
mind; that his opinion was that it would have been invincible, and the most
potent of all Nations; but because that was very hard to effect, nor could not
by any means be brought to pass, that they should be so, therefore they were
inconsiderable and weak. But let us look into the Church Histories, both of the
Christians and of the Jews. It was Jeroboams policy (1 Kings 12.26, 27.) for
the dividing Israel from Judah, First to divide them in their Religion; and
then he was sure they would not cement again. Indeed the Jews and Samaritans
differed in some things fundamentally, and to such a degree, as might deserve
contention: In other things but only triflingly, Vid. Epiphan. Tom. 1. lib. 1.
Haeres. 4. See Weemes his Christian Synagogue, page 147. and Jo. 4 9.
and for little cause, especially in the after Ages and later times of their
separation: and yet their hatreds and implacable differences arose betwixt them
in all things, and even beyond any due limits. The Jews would not at all
converse with the Samaritans, nor eat with them, nor wear the same Apparel, nor
write the same Character: The worst they thought they could say of Christ, was,
that he was a Samaritan, and had a Devil: They excommunicated them yearly by
sound of Trumpet; Vid: Drusium de Trib. Sect. lib. 3. cap. 11. ex Ilmedenus
They cursed them in nomine Tetragrammato, In the Name Jehovah; They sealed
their Curses on Tables, and sent them throughout all Israel. In the like kind
has their dealing been with us Christians, as it was with their Neighbors the
Samaritans. They call us Goijm, The Abominable; and Christ, the Hanged God,
etc. And if we look into the Christian Church, the like have been the bitter
Feuds amongst Christians themselves; even amongst those that have been of one
Civil Community and Conjunction, and have professed to have been of one and the
same Church of Christ. The Church Histories are full of these things in all
times and Ages, where opportunities of them have been given. Hist. Ecclesiast.
lib 2. cap. 22. and 26. Ibid. Cap. 23.
The Historian Socrates is witness, what wrackings of Joints, sales of Estates,
Banishments, Deaths, etc. were inflicted by one party upon another; how they
contested their Judgments and Opinions with Fire, and Stripes, even to
egregious Cruelties, and the Barbarous depriving one another dead bodies of
Burial, and to the Mutilating, and Banishing, and Murdering the Ministers of
Churches, Ibi. cap. 30.
and the like; how they gagged the mouths of them that would not communicate
with them in the Sacrament, and forced the Sacramental Bread and Wine down
their Throats, and stretched forth the Women's Breasts with Instruments, and and
Pincers, and Sawed them off; Others they burnt off with red hot Irons, and Eggs
made burning hot in the Fire, and the like: How they pulled down the Churches
of some, Ibid. Vid.
made the others swim with blood, and the like. It is a shame, and would irke
any one to read of these and the like things: and all these, and many more such
have been the effects of the contesting of Judgments, even in the Primitive
Christian Societies. Finally, the several Martyrologies of Countries contain
these things in Folio. The late Sacred flames and intestine Wars of Germany,
France, Ireland, England, and other Territories have been recent and fresh
examples of them. And in all these, the predominating Causes of men's contesting
their Opinions (which I have above mentioned) have run away with them
furiously, and put the several Societies into a flame. And thus is the proof of
the Proposition.

The more particular mischeifs of Opinion Contests to the Affairs of Humane
Societies. Supra. lib. 2. cap. 1.. 12, 13, 14, 15.
VIII. So then, as I have above more particularly described the benefits of that
Charity and Peace, which accrue to Humane Affairs from that opposite Unity
which may ordinarily be held in matters of Religion; so here I shall in like
manner describe also those mischeifs that flow from these Dissentions, and
public contesting of Judgments, which are the effects of this loose toleration
in the same matters, and how much also they are forbidden in Scripture.

First, to Religion.
IX. First then, how much they make to the hurt of all Religion whatsoever
(which Feuds, Wars, and popular Contests always prejudice more or less) but
in an especial manner to the hurt of the Christian Religion, which we still
eminently refer to: And as to that, they create Atheism, and Profaneness, and
all manner of Scandals and Offenses amongst men; They blemish the Christian
Profession, both as to those that are without, and as to those that are within;
they drive both of them from the very Profession (either of them in any serious
manner) of the Christian Religion; which they think (from their beholding them
amongst Christians) maintains so ill things, as such bitter and passionate
Feuds and Contentions are. The Jews have a saying, That the Christians
predicate their Messiah to be the Prince of Peace; but that they themselves are
ever at Wars: As if (like to what is said of Semiramis) they carried a Dove
in their Banners, but with a bloody Sword in his Beak. And it is a true saying
of the Lord Verulam, See, his Essays. Ess. 3. of Unity of Religion.
and which the several Ages of the Church will testify to, that, in respect to
Scandals and Offenses, Heresies and Schisms have done by far more harm in the
Church, then corruption of manners. Alike hurtful also these contentions and
Opinion-Feuds are to the Practice of the Christian Religion. And briefly,
whatsoever benefits we have recited above to accrue by Charity and Peace to it,
Lib. 2. Cap. 1.. 12, 13, 14, 15.
the contrary mischiefs in every respect we do assert here to accrue to it by
these Contentions. Instances and evidences of these things there have been ever
abundance, if I should stand to recite them. Apud Socrat. Hist. Ecclesiast.
Lib. 1 cap. 5. In his Politics. lib. 2. cap. 8.
It was not for nothing that Famous Constantine burnt the Bills of Complaint,
that were brought to him by the Ministers in his time in the Christian Church.
And it is the saying of Contzen the Jesuit, That all open Disputes amongst the
Vulgar, concerning either Points of Religion or Government, do weaken the
Authority of such Points, at least by bringing them into doubt with men. And
the late Civil Wars of France were a great instance of these things: See, his
History in the first and second Books, and elsewhere.
the Wars lasted about fifty years, and there were (says Davila) the
Religious names of Lutherans and Calvinists, Hugonots and Catholics, and the
like, to lead the front of them. And it was said in a Proverb about Italy, and
in other Countries, at the end of them, That the Civil wars of France had
made a Million of Atheists, and thirty thousand Witches.

X. The like are the mischiefs also of these Opinion-Contests to Government,
both in Church and State, in their several Spheres: Secondly, To Government.
They bring all the mischeifs, and make, all those several ways, to the
hurting of the present lawful Governors and Government, which are contrary to
the benefits, and to those several ways by which those benefits accrue to them
by the Charity and Peace above mentioned. (...), says Aristotle; Polit. lib.
5. cap. 3. n 17. Thirdly, to the Consistency of Religion with Government. And
lastly, how much they are forbidden also in Scripture.
That the States of Common-weals are sometimes changed without Sedition, (viz.)
by Contention.

XI. And in like manner do they make to the hurt of the consistency of Religion
with Government.

XII. And last of all, in like manner also are they forbidden in Scripture, and
in both parts of the Divine Law of God. See Deuteronomy. 7.2, 3, 4. Deuteronomy. 12.2, 3.
Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Prove. 6.19. and 17.11. and 18.6.
and 30.33. and Matthew. 12.25. Romans 16.17. 1 Cor. 1.10, 11. The General
conclusion subjoined to all these things.


XIII. We have then further but one consectary and conclusion to subjoyn to
these things here in the end of this Chapter; and that is, that if it be so
then, that that Charity and Peace which we have mentioned, make so much to the
welfare of the Public Charge of the Magistrate, and are so much commanded in
Scripture, and that the contrary contentions hurt so much the same Public
Charge, and are so much on the contrary prohibited; then in how great a measure
is it the Duty of the Supreme Magistrate, and all Governors under him, both in
Church and State, in their several Stations in every Society, to take all care
possible, and to use all lawful means that their affairs will permit, for the
preventing and the removal of the one sort, and for the cherishing and
promotion of the other sort of these things, in respect to their several
Societies, Vid. D. Ad legem Juliam, De vi publica. l. 3. and l. 1. etc. Et D.
De poenis L. siquis aliquid fecerit; and L. si quis aliquid ex Metallo.
Authors. Et D. De. Re Militari. L. ult. Et D. De operibus Publicis. L. opus
novum privato. Et C. De Episcop. and Cler. L. Quicunque residentibus. Et De
Pagans and sacrificiis, et Templis. L. Christianis qui vero sunt. Et C. De his
qui ad Ecclesiam Confugiunt, etc. L. Hac valitura. et Ad Legem Juliam
Majestatis. L. quisquius. Et vid. Novel. Constitut. 17. L. Deinde Conversus. Et
L. neque occasion, etc. Et sic in aliis Legum Codicibus; et legibus, passim
ubicunque in orb Conditu.
and for the welfare of the members of them. It is upon the accounts mentioned,
that all Laws have ever had these respects to these things. And certainly he
that will deny the evidence of this Conclusion, must deny light to the Sun.

CHAP. VIII.
The two Propositions asserted, (viz.) 1. That there must of necessity be some
Doctrine, or Body of Doctrines, for profession of assent to be made to; and
some form or way of worship, to be used in Common; and both these as a
Foundation for a medium or common means of procuring a charitative Communion
amongst men in matters of Religion in any Society. 2. That there must of
necessity also be a restraint held upon men's venting of their Opinions, as a
means for the preventing and removal of Religious Contests; and both these
sorts of means to be used to these ends by the Chief Governor, or Governors
in such Society.
I. THe Assignation of the means for the procuring, a Charitative Communion,
and for the preventing Contentions, as to matters of Religion, in Humane
Societies.

II. And first, in order to the Assignation of the Means for the procuring such
a Charitative Communion: The matters of Religion Distinguished.

III. Those matters of Religion also Assigned, in Relation to which such a
Charitative Communion is to be held.

IV. The state of the case concerning the holding that Charitative Communion in
relation to them.

V. The Unity necessary to the holding of it, described.

VI. That Unity distinguished.

VII. The Internal Unity defined, and applied to the holding of that
Charitative Communion.

VIII. Nothing Internal can be a Medium for such a Charitative Communion
amongst men.

IX. The External Unity described and distinguished diversely.

X. The more general Assignation of it as the Great Ordinary and stated Medium
for the holding such a Charitative Communion.

XI. The more particular Assignation of it as such also.

XII. The great secondary Medium, for the holding of such Charitative
Communion, assigned also.

XIII. The things Fundamentally necessary to the being of these Mediums
assigned; and the proof of the First Proposition following upon it.

XIV. An Appendant Question resolved.

XV. The Proof of the Second Proposition also.

XVI. The general Conclusion subjoined to all these things.

The Assignation of the means for the procuring a Charitative Communion, and
for the preventing contentions as to matters of Religion in Humane Societies.
Supra lib. 2. cap. 1.. 12, 13, 14, 15. Lib. 2. cap 6. 8, 9, 10, 11.
I. HAving above described the benefits of Charity and Peace to Humane
Societies, and evidenced the necessity of some kind of Unity as to matters of
Religion to be held amongst men in order to them; and having also described the
mischeifs of Opinion-Feuds and Contentions on the contrary, and evidenced their
being the effect of a loose and open toleration of the venting of such
opinions; I come here to assign the Means, as for the preventing the one
sort, so also for the procuring the other sort of these things in such
Societies.

And first, in order to the Assignation of the means for the procuring such a
Charitative; Communion; the matters of Religion Distinguished. Supra lib. 2.
cap. 1. 12.
II. And first of all then; in order to our Assignation of the means for the
procuring positive Charity, and the most proper sort of Peace (as was above
mentioned) flowing from it, we must distinguish of the matters of Religion
which those things have a respect to: And all such matters of Religion are
either matters of Doctrine, or matters of Worship.

Those matters of Religion also assigned in relation to which such a
Charitative Communion is to be held.
III. About these then, and under these Notions, as all the Opinions mentioned
are framed and contested, so all hearty Charity and Peace does use to be held.
And if there be not such Peace and Charity held, and the means used for the
holding of them, the contrary Contentions about them will follow in Humane
Societies; At least the vulgar lie open to be led actually into them by any
Heresiark, Supra lib. 2. cap. 6. in princip. passim. Ibid. 1.
or Ringleader of Sedition at any time; Their Property (which was mentioned) of
judging all their Notions in Religion to be certain, being considered. But if
there be such an hearty Charity and Peace held concerning these matters; then
there are no matters of Religion coming under any other Notions whatsoever,
from whence Contentions any ways dangerous to the public weal need to be
feared. And these things are evident from all times and Histories in the World:
Let the Church affairs of the Jews, Gentiles, Christians, and Mahometans, be
looked into. Finally, it is no wonder if it be so, since all matters, both of
belief and practice in any Religion, whatsoever, which lead to the Eternal
Salvation of men in another world, come under one of these Notions, either of
Doctrine or Worship, as is said. And as there is nothing in the whole being of
things, which will more divide men, then Contentions about these things, (as
has been several times already hinted) so there is nothing which will more
closely cement and unite them, then a Charitative Communion about these things
also. Experience has always testified it.

IV. Doctrines then in matters of Religion are either Written, The State of the
case concerning the holding that Charitative Communion in relation to them.
or unwritten and Traditional: And such a Charitative communion may be held in
respect to either of them. But because writing is, and always has been the
more ordinary way of the Conservation of Things and Records amongst men; and
therefore the written sort of these Doctrines are more ordinarily found in all
Churches and Humane Societies; for this reason it is, that we here intend the
Peace and Charity mentioned to be held principally concerning them. Worship
also is either Public or Private: And because men are supposed to be reserved
and more separate in their private Divine Worship (or else such Worship will
not bear the Notion of Private) Therefore it is that such mutual Peace and
Charity is here intended to be held concerning the Public Divine Worship also;
and that whether more or less principally, according as it is more or less
Public, and may from the more or less common use of it be so styled.

V. It was said above, That Unity was the mother of all Charity. The Unity
necessary to the holding of it, Described. Lib. 2. Cap. 1.. 11. Ibid. That
Unity Distinguished. The Internal Unity Defined and applied to the holding of
that Charitative communion. Nothing internal can be a medium for such a
Charitative Communion amongst men.
And so consequently it is to be supposed here, That there must be some kind of
unity as to these matters of Religion, for the holding of this Peace and
Charity mentioned amongst men. And what this kind of unity was, we said, we
should here describe also.

VI. All the possible unity then that is to be held in matters of Religion
amongst men, is either Internal, or External.

VII. The Internal unity is that which is held in respect to Inward Acts of the
mind; and those of them that are here primarily concerned, and as respecting
Doctrines and Worship in matters of Religion as their object, are either
Assent, or Dissent, or the middle thing, doubting about them.

VIII. Nothing Internal can possibly be of it self, and immediately, a medium
or means for the procuring a Charitative Communion amongst men in any matters
whatsoever; And so then, not in matters of Religion: And that because inward
Acts of themselves come not under the cognizance of men: they not affecting
their senses, and so cannot affect them. Acts 15.8. and 1.24. etc.
(...), That God is the searcher of hearts, and the like, says the Christian
Scripture: And therefore, Cogitationis paenam mereri neminem, That no man
deserves punishment for thoughts, is the voice not only of the Roman Civil Law,
D. De Reg. jur. Reg. 195.
but of all Humane Laws whatsoever. And, Expressa nocent, non expressa non
nocent, says Modestinus; That things outwardly expressed hurt; but that things
not outwardly expressed do not hurt. A real Union and Communion there may be,
it is true, in such inward things: But that cannot become charitative and
promotive of Peace amongst men, any farther then it is outwardly signified.
Besides we enquire here concerning a stated and ordinary Medium for the
procuring of such a Charitative Communion amongst them.

The external Unity Described, and distinguished diversely.
IX. So then, all external unity that is possible to be held by men in the
matters of Religion mentioned, is in Relation to external Profession; and that
as it respects such matters under the abovesaid Notions, either of Doctrines or
Worship: And both of them, as they are matters, either of Belief or Practice:
And in relation to all these, as such external profession includes and
supposes ordinarily, and is so taken to suppose either the Inward Acts of the
mind as the Causes of it, and in order to it, or else the outward Acts of the
Body, as the effects of it and consequent upon it. The Inward Acts of the mind,
(viz.) Primarily, Assent, Dissent, or Doubting (i. e.) those above mentioned of
the Intellectual or Prime Faculty of the Soul, concerned as leading the Front
in men in these and all other things. And secondarily, consent, and the like
Acts of the Will and the Affections consequent upon them: and the outward Acts
of the Body in relation to Doctrines or Practice; in relation to Worship, the
use of it, and the like.

The more general assignation of it as the great ordinary and stated medium for
the holding such a Charitative Communion.
X. And this unity of External Profession now is it, which thus generally
respects all these things, and also incurres into the Senses; and therefore
comes under Humane Cognizance; and also is possibly and ordinarily to be held
in the matters mentioned amongst men; and also is operative in them of mutual
affection; and therefore for all these reasons is fit (and assigned by us here
as such) to be an ordinary stated Medium for the procuring such a Charitative
Communion, as has been mentioned in any Society.

The more particular assignation of it as such also.
XI. And because some Religion or other is supposed to have a being, and to be
approved of and assented to always in all Humane Societies: And because the
medium here to be mentioned, ought of its self, and in it is own Nature, to tend
totally and evidently to the Peace and Charity which it is assigned as a medium
of* therefore amongst all the sorts of External Profession mentioned, in
respect to the Inward Acts of mind, it is Profession of Assent only (either to
matters of Doctrine or Worship, either Practical or Speculative) which is here
primarily to be looked upon as such a stated medium for the Communion
mentioned; and the outward practice of Doctrines, or use of Worship, are to be
looked upon as Testimonial to it.

XII. Yet because public Worship is the most solemn way, The great secondary
medium, for the holding of such charitative Communion, assigned also.
next to this General and Universal Profession, of men's external concurrence in
matters of Religion; and because the Sabboths, and other times of such Public
Worship (both Stated, and Occasional) recurre so frequently as they do, and
ever have done in all Religions; and also because the use of such Public
Worship, and men conjunct partaking in it, are at the times of it the things
they are immediately and most sensibly concerned in, and so they are for the
present the most sensibly affected by them, and afterward also proportionably
by their subsequent influence on them: And for all these Reasons they are very
prevalent to work Unity, and mutual Charity and Peace, as to the matters of
Religion mentioned in men (and it is not so in men's separate and disjunct
Practices of any Duties whatsoever) therefore the unity of the use of such
Public Worship in all Societies, deserves, both in its self, and as it relates
backwards to, and includes in it ordinarily such profession as is mentioned,
to be looked upon by us, and assigned also as the great secondary medium for
such Charitative Communion amongst men; and as a Testimonial to profession, we
shall farther handle it hereafter. Infra lib. 3. cap. 11.. 4. The things
fundamentaly necessary to the being of these mediums, assigned. And the Proof
of the first proposition following upon it.


XIII. Last of all then, that there may be an Unity of this Profession, and of
the Use of the public Worship mentioned, and that both may be one in any
Society; it is evident, that the objects of them, and the things which they are
conversant about as such unities, (viz.) The Doctrine or body of Doctrines, and
the form or way of worship mentioned, must of necessity be One also: And that
because the Acts of Profession, and the use of Public Worship mentioned, as to
the kinds of them, are necessarily determined and specified by these their
objects; so that this is fundamentally necessary in this matter. And thus then,
and by these several steps of our Progression we are here at last arrived at
the proof of our first proposition here to be asserted, (viz.) That there must
of necessity be some one Doctrine or Body of Doctrines for profession of assent
to be made to; and some one form or way of public Worship to be used in
Common; and both these as a foundation for a medium or common means of
procuring one Charitative Communion amongst men in the matters of Religion in
any Society: And by these means then it is, that the positive Consistency of
Religion with Government, which has been mentioned, is to be effected. Supra
Lib. 1. Cap. 1.. 4.
And this positive Charity, which they are efficient of, includes in it the
Negative. And by these things also, as they are external, Religion has an
influence immediately upon Government, as was above also first of all mentioned
in the Body of distinctions concerning these things. Supra ibid.. 17. An
Appendant question resolved.


XIV. Here is but one question then to be resolved, as an Appendix to these
things: And that is, Whether, notwithstanding that there be a variety of some
such Doctrines or ways of Worship permitted, and consequently a variety of
Communions held as to them in any Church; yet however, that there may not be
some one communion held as to others, sufficient for the Public Peace in the
mean time?

The answer is Affirmatively, that they may be so: And the world is full of
Presidents in the case, according to the diverse respects of several things to
it, and the diversities of the occasions and necessities of Societies. But then
this inconvenience will follow, that under those diversities of communions held
as to some of those things, the people lie more open and ready, either to fall
into any sort of fractions (dangerous to the Public) of themselves, or else to
be led away by others: Which thing, if the present occasions of Societies will
permit, would be avoided by all Governors. And generally the means used to as
much Unity as may be, and as the Consistency of Government with Religion, and
the common condition of other Humane Affairs will permit in matters of
Religion, is best and most healthful for all Societies. Upon this account it
is, That the voluntary Reductions of Societies, and when they have made them
purely by choice and good deliberation, have been always generally this way.

Vid. Decret. Secundae Sessionis Council. Trident.
The first thing that the Council of Trent did as a Council, it was to confirm
the Creed or Confession of Faith used in the Roman Church, and in which all
were to agree: And the Reductions of that Church generally have been, even to
extremes, this way. The Church of England in her matters of Worship, See
concerning the Church Service; prefac'd to the Liturgy.
have reduced the several different uses of Salisbury, Hereford, Lincoln, etc.
to one only. And the Canons and Decrees of Ecclesiastical Synods and Councels,
that have been in other times and Churches in these matters, are frequently to
be seen.

The proof of the second Proposition also.
XV. Our second Proposition then comes next to be proved, in relation to the
removal of Religious Contests, and the procuring negative Charity, and that
improper sort of Peace (at least) which follows upon it. And that briefly; for
that there must of necessity be a restraint held upon men's venting and
Disseminating of their Opinions, in relation to the effecting these things; it
is sufficiently evident from hence; because there is no middle thing betwixt
this holding some kind of restraint, or other, upon men's venting their
opinions, Supra lib. 2. Cop. 6.. 2. etc.
whereby these things may be effected, and the loose and open toleration of
such the venting of them which we have mentioned, and whereby all those
mischiefs which such a restraint aims at the preventing of, follow upon Humane
Societies. So that, where there is a mixture of diverse Professions in any
Society; either some such restraint, fortified with Penal Sanctions, must keep
men from breaking the Peace by such their Opinion-Contests, or else there is
nothing remaining besides in tota rerum Natura for the doing of it. And hence
it is that all Laws have ever taken their last sanctuary at this restraint for
the conciliating of the public Peace in these matters. The Laws concerning
the Deposition and Silencing of Anthemius, Severus, Petrus, and others, may be
looked into in the Novels of Justinian. Anth. Coll. 4. Tit. 20. Nov. Constit.
42. passim.
And the like in other the like Books of Laws, and occasions of Countries. And
although it be true, that a bare toleration and forbearance of one another
mutually, as to opinion-feuds, may perhaps possibly be forced upon men by their
own necessities in any Society (at least for sometime, and while the sense of
their own miseries brought upon themselves by such their Opinion-Contests at
any time is working them to a better Disposition of mind, and condition in
respect to the Publick-weal) yet however that is seldom; and when it is,
detracts not at all from these things; since such a necessity, in such a case,
as in the place of a Magistrate, or chief Governor, and effectually causes
men both to hold such a restraint over themselves, and at last, from the sense
of their own Calamities, to yield to have it held over them by others. The late
confusions in England, and their suggesting evidently to the contesting parties
the necessity of their reception of their Rightful Sovereign to govern them
again, was a great instance of these things.

XVI. In the last place then, The general Conclusion subjoined to to all these
things.
we have only one general Conclusion to subjoyne here to all these things: And
that is, that, if it be so that these are the only great and stated means which
we have mentioned, for the thus procuring Charity and removal of Contentions;
then who shall deny the use of them to the Chief Governor in any Society for
the effecting these things? shall it not be Lawful, nay, necessary for him, as
his Duty, and as his Government is a Charge committed to him by God, Lib. 1.
cap. 1.. 11.
as well as upon the account of its being barely his right to hold it (as was
above first of all distinguished) to propose and enjoin such an Unity of
Profession and Use of Public Worship, so far forth as his affairs will
permit; and that for the promotion of Christian Charity in the true Christian
Church, or else of Common Charity amongst men, if in a false Church of any
other Religion? Or else however, to hold a restraint upon the irregular venting
of Opinions to the breach of the Peace? Who will deny it? We conclude then,
that the faculty of doing these things, is a Fundamental, and a very principal
part of the Magistrates Indirect Power in Spirituals; and a Right belonging to
him, in every Ecclesiastical Uniformity, and in the several particulars of it,
by the same General and Original Law of Nature, which dictates the very being
and welfare of Humane Society, and upon which all Church Society is founded.
And as it thus belongs to him in his way, Summo Jure, where the Church is
National; so also to the principal Church Governor, in his way also, where the
Church is secluded.

CHAP. IX.
Hence the way of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity (viz.) in outward Profession,
and Public Worship, has been always endeavored, and made use of by the
Governors of all Societies, in their different ways; and that from the
dictates of the Laws of Nature and Nations, and the Divine Law approving of
it, and leading them to it.
I. THe Practices of men concerning their making use of an Ecclesiastical
Uniformity derivative from their correspondent Principles.

II. The Application of the matters of Religion, and of the External Unities
which have been mentioned, to an Ecclesiastical Uniformity.

III. Such an Uniformity Distinguished.

IV. It is convenient that there be also an Uniformity in Discipline and
Ceremonies held in Churches.

V. The grounds and reasons of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity.

VI: The two Grand instruments of it.

VII. Diverse have been the sorts of Ecclesiastical Uniformity in diverse
Societies.

VIII. But still some kind or other of it has been endeavored and made use of
in all Societies; and the Practices of those Societies, and the Principles
leading them to them assigned.

IX: The first of those Principles, the light of Nature.

X. The second of those Principles, the Divine Law.

XI. The Practices of Societies also assigned.

XII. First, from the Determinations of Councels held in the Christian Church.

XIII. Secondly, from the Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws of Countries.

XIV. Last of all, where this Uniformity has been but in part, or in small
measures, the Governors of Societies still, as Controversies have arisen, have
been forced to come to farther degrees of it.

The Practices of men concerning their making use of an Ecclesiastical
Uniformity, derivative from their correspondent principles. The Application of
the matters of Religion, and of the external unities which have been mentioned
to an Ecclesiastical Uniformity. lib. 1. cap. 1.. 1. Such an Uniformity
Distinguished.
I. THus have been the speculative Principles concerning an Ecclesiastical
Uniformity. We come here principally to produce the suitable Practices of men,
and such as have been derivative from the correspondent Principles; and
immediately and directly conversant about their making use of it in Societies.

II. An Uniformity then in the General having been above first of all defined
to be an Unity of the external form of things; the matters of Religion, in
relation to which, and under the notions of which as such, such an
Ecclesiastical Uniformity is to be held, have been assigned to be those of
Doctrine and Worship: and the external unities, which such an Uniformity is to
consist of, have been assigned also to be those of Profession (of assent) in
respect to Doctrines, and of the use of Worship in respect to such worship. And
this is the more general application of these things to such an Uniformity.

III. An Uniformity then in Churches, is either Positive or Negative. The
Positive is that which is so Denominated from its consisting in the positive
Unities mentioned; and therefore is most properly called an Uniformity in the
subject matters of them, and is productive of the positive and most proper sort
of Peace and Charity mentioned accordingly. The Negative is that, which
consists in men's not divulging of their Opinions to the breach of the Peace,
and the hurt of Religion or Government, or their mutual Consistency; and it is
therefore called Negative, and is the improper part of this Uniformity; and is
productive only of the negative and improper sort of Peace and Charity
mentioned accordingly also.

It is convenient, that there be also an Uniformity in Discipline, and
Ceremonies, held in Churches.
IV. It is convenient, that in the same National Church and Territories of
Princes there be an Uniformity held also of Discipline (the Archeus, or keeper
of all these things mentioned) and Ceremonies (the customary Adjuncts of the
public worship) and both of which are many times so much contested under the
notions of Doctrinals and Worship it self. An one uniforme partaking of men in
these things, will, if it be but by the influence of custom upon them, further
complete and help to promote their charitative Communion: And also the more
secure the people from being led into Factions about them. And that by it is
rendering them a Subject not so easily capable of those factious impressions,
which have been mentioned: and this Uniformity in these things is here laid
down as an Appendix and Adjunct to the main and Principal Ecclesiastical
Uniformity mentioned also.

V. The grounds and reasons then of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity, and those
things, The grounds and reasons of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity.
the procuring of which is the cause of Constituting it, and which it aims at
as it is End, and Effects, have been already mentioned and treated of in their
several places, and that partly separately, and partly applicatorily: And those
ends of it are the greatest that can possibly be aimed at in the Affairs of
Humane Societies, (viz.) more generally, the preservation of the welfare of the
Magistrates Charge above mentioned, (viz.) Religion, Lib. 1. cap. 5.. 7. and
alibi.
and Government, and the Consistency of Religion with Government; and more
particularly, the procuring of the Public Peace and Charity, and the removal
of Contentions in order to these things.

VI. The two grand Instruments of the positive and proper part of this
Uniformity also have been at least implicitly asserted to be a Canon of
Doctrines and Liturgy, both vulgarly so called, The two grand Instruments of
it. Lib. 2. cap. 7.. 13.
and comprehended above under the more general notions of some one Doctrine or
Body of Doctrines, and some one form or way of public worship: And of both
which more particularly hereafter.

VII. Diverse also have been the sorts and kinds of Ecclesiastical uniformity
which have been made use of and settled in diverse Societies. Some have been
faulty, and in the extreme: some, Diverse have been the sorts of Ecclesiastical
Uniformity in diverse Societies.
although not so, yet have been more comprehensive of things enjoined by them,
some less; some have been Comprehensive of one sort of those things, and some
of another; and in some Societies there has been only the negative part of
such an Uniformity.

VIII. But yet still some kind of this Ecclesiastical Uniformity or other has
been always endeavored and made use of by the Governors of all Societies in
their different ways. But still some kind or other of it has been
endeavored, and made use of in all Societies. And the Practices of those
Societies, and the Principles, leading them to them, Assigned. The first of
those Principles, the Light of Nature.
And because the practices of these Societies have further evidenced the
perpetual and fundamental necessity of this Uniformity, it is being used as a
means to the ends of it, which have been mentioned; I shall therefore here
assign some principal instances of those practices, and the correspondent
Principles also which have led me to them.

IX. In the first place then, The first Principle has been the Universal light
of Nature, which upon the grounds and reasons which have been mentioned, has
led men to the use and Practice of this Ecclesiastical Uniformity: And the sway
of this Principle also has been proportionable to the Latitude of it is
dominion in them. Let the Times and Histories in the world be enquired into
concerning it.

The second of those Principles, the Divine Law.
X. The second also, answerable to this, has been the Divine Natural Law: And
that of both Testaments, both in the Jewish and Christian Church. The Jewish
Church was constituted in a national way by God himself; Although diversely, at
diverse times, and in diverse manners, and according to the various condition of
it. But yet still God settled it, in respect to the matters of Religion
mentioned, so far forth as at any time concerned, either it is present or
perpetual occasions as to him, and left the rest to the Chief Magistrate to do
pro tempore, and according to it is emergent occasions. So, at it is first coming
out of Egypt, the Scripture settlements that God gave it were in respect to
Doctrines for profession of assent to be made to; he enjoined them the two
Tables of Moses, Exodus 20. and ^ap. 32.15. etc.
and the several more particular explications of those generals afterward
dispersed throughout the Books of Moses: And these were also partly Ceremonial
and Positive, as well as Natural. And in respect to the uniforme use of
Worship, Exodus 25.8, 9, etc. Levit. cap. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc.
he enjoined them the service of the Tabernacle, the two Sacraments of
Circumcision and the Passe-over, the several perpetual Sabboths and Festivals
in Israel, and the like: And this was not all, but he took care for the
perpetual conservation of these Unities of Profession and Worship in that
Society also. He enjoined his Commandments to be worn in Phylacteries upon
their hands, and between their Eyes, as the Doctors construed that Law. Exodus
13.19. with Matthew. 23.5. etc. vid. Maimonid. in Tephil. cap. 4.. 3. Mos.
Kotseus. fol. 104. fol. 3. etc. Exodus 23.13. Ex. 20.24. Levit. 21.5. etc.
He prohibited all partaking in the Worship of the other Nations of the World,
nay, the so much as naming their Gods, the making Altars, or using Ceremonies,
but like to theirs, and the like. He suffered no Gentile to dwell amongst them,
but such an one as was of one of the sorts of Proselites, as they also
construed his Law. Nay, they used the Proverb concerning them, even in their
ordinary Conversation, vel ad Decimam usque Generationem a Proselytis Cave,
That they were to beware of Proselites even to the tenth Generation. And these
and the like things by their Magistrates were continued afterward to Israel,
at their settling in Canaan in the time of their Temple Service, and the like.
If we look into the New Testament, the Christian Church was not National for
some Centuries of years after it is first founding by the Savior of the World:
And the condition of it was to be altogether different from that of the Jews
before. And the Scripture Mediums advised to generally, for the effecting the
unities mentioned, were accordingly, and those under the general notions of
men's Coherence as Christians, and the like. And the uniting them also, after
those perpetual mediums settled in more particular ways was left, either to
their chief Magistrates or Church Governors, according as that Church should
come to grow, or be settled amongst the Nations afterward. So our Savior
himself, in the respects mentioned also amongst others, commanded his Disciples
to be one. So his Apostles afterward in their Writings, proposed him the
Common Savior, as the foundation for all to cohere in: So we being many are
one Body in Christ, Romans 12.5.
says the Apostle of the Gentiles. And the God of Patience grant you to be
like minded one toward another, according to Christ Jesus. Romans 15.5.
And, but to us there is one God, and one Lord Jesus. And, 1 Cor. 8.6. 1 Cor.
12.13. Galat. 3.28.
For by one spirit we are all Baptized into one Body. And, there is neither Jew
nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female,
for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. And, Colos. 3.15.
let the Peace of God rule in your hearts, to which also ye are called in one
Body. And so the whole current of the New Testament runs in this matter. And
last of all, endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace,
says the great Apostle St. Paul further. Ephesians 4.3. Ibid. ver. 4, 5, 6.
And how so? why, There is one Body, and one Spirit, even as ye are called in
one hope of your Calling, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father
of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all. The Scotch Divines,
to Archbishop Spotswood, Vid. De Pace inter Evangelicos procuranda, etc. Anno
1637. in princip. in loc,
call these Doctrinals Septem unitatis vincula, etc. And which should be so
many incentives to Charity and Peace; and so Calvin, and others. But then they
can be so only to men in common as Christians. But this is not sufficient to
hold them together in their more particular associations. Thus these two Grand
Principles then of the Natural and Divine Law have led men to the practice of
these Unities mentioned, and so have accordingly dictated and approved of this
Ecclesiastical Uniformity. And if men have opposed it at any time, where it
has been just and lawful; it has been either from their weaknesses or
corruptions, as has been mentioned; it has been either from their ignorance,
or Ambition, or Intemperate desire of Liberty, or the like; when men have
considered themselves in an absolute notion, and not as members of a Society,
of a Christian, or other Church Incorporate into a State.

XI. We come next then (these things being said) to assign the Practices of
men also in this matter: The practices of Societies also Assigned.
And they will be evident from the principal Instances mentioned to be given in
it. And for the assignation of them we will take into consideration, 1. The
Ecclesiastical Synods and Councels held in the Christian Church apart by
themselves. 2. The several Civil Laws and Constitutions, both of it and of
other Ages and Countries. And the consideration of these things will evidence
the consent of Nations also in this matter.

XII. In the first place then, for the Councels; First from the determination
of Councels held in the Christian Church. Acts 15.6. etc.
and these we shall find to have been very frequent in the injunction of these
matters of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity. We will begin with the first Council
held by the Apostles themselves, and mentioned in the Scripture: and in it
they, upon a Contest arising, prescribed a Body of Doctrines proportionable to
the present occasions for Profession of assent and consequent practice to be
yielded to, Verse. 20.29.
(viz.) That the converted Gentile should abstain from Pollutions of Idols,
and from Blood, Vid. Canon 38. Apud Carranzam, in summa Council.

Vid. Can. 15. apud Carranzam in summa Council.

Vid. Can. 20. De flectendo Genua. vid. Socrat. Hyst. Ecclesiast. lib. 1. cap.
5. ibid. vid. Vid. Can. 2, 3, 5, 20, etc. Apud Justell. Codin. Canon.

Vid. Council. Laod. Can. 18. and Afric. Can. 103. and Council. Carthag. 3. Can.
23. and Council. Milev. 2. Can. 12. vid. Council. Tolet. 4. Can. 2. Vid. Council.
Tolet. 6. Can. 3. Council. Constantinop. 6. Can. 62.

Vid. etiam Council. Nicaen. 2. Actionem 7. sub fine. Et ejusdem Synod. Can. 9.
Et, Lateran. Council. Can. 3. etc. apud Carranz: De Pace inter Evangel.
procurand: etc. 1637 in princi. See the Confession of Faith, etc.

And the Act of the General Assembly, etc. prefac'd to it. And the Directory,
and the Advice of etc. concerning Church Government, etc. annexed to it.


and from things strangled, and from Fornication. Let us pass on from hence to
the Canons called the Apostles. The thirty eighth Canon appoints Councels to be
Celebrated (in those first times of the Christian Church) twice every year; ut
Dogmata Pietatis explorent, and emergentes Ecclesiasticas contentiones
amoveant; That they might search into the Doctrines of Piety, and more emergent
Ecclesiastical Contentions. We will go unto the first Nicene Council, when the
Christian Church began to be National under Famous Constantine: And there we
have Seditions, and Tumults, and perturbations in the Church forbidden by a
Disciplinary Canon: There we have also one Uniforme Posture of Body, commanded
in Prayer, to be observed by all the Churches: There we have also the so well
known Word (...) proposed, and enjoined, for all to profess assent to; and the
Famous Nicene Creed, or Confession of Faith, to be subscribed to. We will go on
further, to the Council of Antioch. The first Canon of it is for the Uniforme
Observation of Easter: And several of the following Canons were shaped for the
cutting off occasions of Contentions in that Church. Let us go on to other the
like Councels: We shall find, in several, Forms of Liturgies appointed to be
approved of by those Councels, and to be proposed and enjoined to the Churches.
Let us go on to others: We shall find one form of singing, of Praying, of
using other Customs and Ceremonies, and that throughout all the Churches of
one and the same Nation; and that also because the Congregations and Churches
contained in the Nation were all of the same National Religion. We shall find
also those of diverse Professions ordained to be prohibited, and the Feasts and
Rites of the Gentiles not to be tolerated, and many other the like Canons, in
many particulars, tending all to the uniting men to one Profession, and to the
cutting off occasions of contests in matters of Religion, as might be more
particularly mentioned. And thus then the Christian Church, as it grew in Age
and Settlement in diverse places, grew on also to further degrees of Uniformity.
Finally, as it has been of Old, so of late: All Pacificators would have some
kind of Uniformity or other. The Scotch Ministers themselves, in their Advice
(mentioned) to Arch Bishop Spotswood for the procuring Peace in the Church,
would have an Uniformity. And in England, the very Covenant Synod at
Westminster (and they also, as by their Covenant, they say, they were bound,
and in Conjunction with the General Assembly of Scotch Divines at Edinburgh)
were for an Uniformity: And they intended their Printed Confession of Faith,
and their Directory for Public Worship, and their Advice concerning Church
Government to the then Lords and Commons sitting in the Houses of Parliament,
for the effecting that very thing. Thus then has this Uniformity been the
common vote of the Divinity Chair throughout all Ages in the Christian Church.
And he that will see further, Vid. lib. 1. Constable. 6. and lib. 2. cap. 54.56.
and lib. 2. cap. 1, 2. and lib. 7. cap. 34, 35, etc.

Secondly; from the Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws of Countries.


may look into the Apostolical Constitutions of Clemens Romanus, and many other
Ecclesiastical Records and Monuments, that bear witness in this matter.

XIII. Let us come also to the Civil Laws and Constitutions of Countries in
the same matter. And we will begin first with those of Israel, in their
unparalleled Theocracy. And God himself appointed in it his several forms both
of Doctrine and Worship, as has been mentioned. Nay, Miracles themselves were
not to be believed against them, and the establishment of them, Hic supra modo.
10. Lib. 1. cap. 2.. 14. vid.
as was above mentioned upon another occasion. And they had also their ordinary
Ecclesiastical Conventions, and Synods, for the determination of emergent
Controversies concerning these things, and the chief Magistrate making use of
them to that End: and many more particulars might be mentioned. After Israel
follow the Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws and Constitutions of all Nations in
like manner, and so far forth as there are Records left concerning them. In the
Assyrian and Persian Monarchies, amongst the Trojans, and diverse other Nations,
we find the mention of their Country Gods, peculiar to them severally; and of
their Forms of Doctrines, and set Prayers, and Sacrifices, and customary Rites
and Ceremonies appropriate to them also: And no wonder, since the dictates of
the common Humane Nature always suggested to them these things, for the
settling of their Religion in a National way. Amongst the Greeks the like
instances are every where to be found also. Equ. p. 300. A.
The Athenians were wont to swear by their Twelve Gods (says Aristophanes)
whom they had in special Honor: They had their set Sacrifices, and Services;
their Solemn Festivals, and the like, appropriate both to these Gods and
others, as is to be seen in the dispersed Testimonies concerning these things
up and down in the several Histories, Poets, Orators, and other the like
Writers of Greece. Vid. Dial. 7. prope med. and alibi.

Ibid. vid.


And Plato in his Books of Laws, gives us a perfect pattern of an
Ecclesiastical Uniformity; and such an one as deserves to be heeded, amongst
other things in his Writings. He would have the Sacred Hymns, and Quires; he
would have the Festivals, and times of them; he would have the Sacrifices, and
the fitting of all these things to them, to be at the appointment of Public
Authority in his Commonweal. He would have no varying in the least from these
Prescriptions; no speaking against them, no more then against other Laws
amongst the People; no mixtures. of any man's private fancies together with
them, or the like, at all to be permitted. And finally, Ibid.
he tells us that these and the like things were according to the Ordinary
Constitutions of the Cities of Greece. In nostris Civitatibus firm omnibus, ut
breviter dicam, hoc ita fit. Let us go on then from the Greeks to the Romans:
And amongst them also still we shall find the like things enjoined. We have
spoken of their City Divinity which was appointed by the Magistrate. Supra lib.
1. cap. 2.. 5.
And Tertium Genus est, inquit Varro, quod in Vrbibus Cives, maxim Sacerdotes
nosse atque administrare oportet. In quo est, quos Deos public colere, quae
sacra and sacrificia facere quemque par sit, De Civ. Dei. lib. 6. cap. 5.
and the like says St. Augustine. That Varro said, that the third kind of
Divinity was that which it behooved the Citizens in their Cities, most of all
the Priests, to have knowledge of, and to administer. In which was contained
what Gods it was fit for every one to worship publicly, what holy Rites to
perform, what Sacrifices to offer up. Lib. 1.
And Dionysius Halicarnasseus tells a notable Story of Numa Pompilius at his
bringing in of his Prescript of Religion amongst them: That, for the
suppressing of Controversies about Opinions, and upon the arising of any such
amongst Parties; he appointed that the contesting Parties should be bound to go
to the Temple of Faith, and there to swear with certain great Ceremonies upon
the Truths of the Points of their Contentions. And briefly, he that will look
further, for these matters of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity, into the Roman
Writers of all sorts, shall find them every where up and down, though not under
the notion of such, dispersed in them. From the Heathens then, let us pass next
to the Mahometans, and to the like matters also amongst them. And they have
this Uniformity amongst them, and that even to extremes, in their way; as will
be mentioned in the places more particularly proper to these matters hereafter.
And last of all then, let us recite but some of those numerous Constitutions
that have been in the Christian Church concerning the establishment of this
Uniformity also, and that both in the former and later times and regiments of
Countries. We will begin with the Constitutions of the new Civil Law. In the
Code and Novels of Justinian there are infinite of these sorts of particulars.
Vid. C. De Summa Trin. etc. L. Curctos. Et. Hanc Leg m sequentes; vid Ibid L.
Nullus Haereti^is. Et. Is autem.. Qui vero.
The very first Law in the Code prescribes the Religion of the Empire, and
commands Christians to take upon them the name of Catholic, and to account all
of other Professions to be madmen, and Heretics, and the like. The next Law
under the same. Title, sets down the Nicene Creed as a Canon of Doctrines to be
assented to; and commands them to be excommunicated that embrace it not; and
appoints them to be removed from the Cities and Towns. And if we look but a
little further, to the Law Sancimus igitur, their writings are sentenced to be
burnt, and the particular Sect of the Nestorians are cast out of the Church and
Anathematized, and none are be found with any of their Books in their hands
under pain of death it self: if we look onward, the like particulars we shall
find still established. That none speak publicly against the Doctrine
established by the Imperial National Synods; That none side with the Nestorians
or Eutycheans; that the Apollinarians be Anathematized, together with others;
that the Four Councels (viz.) of Nice, of the Imperial City, of Ephesus,. 1.
vid. sub L. Decere. Ibid. De Sam. Trin. L Nemo Cleri^us. L. Cum Salvato^em.
ibid.. 4. ibid. L. Cu^^ velimus,. per omnia.. Nullus Itaque, and alibi. ibid.
L. Inter Claras.. Omnes vero, and peimus ergo, etc. L. liquet igitur, in
residuo Epist. Papae, vid. De Sacrosanctis Ecclesiis. De Episcop. and Cleric.
L. Sed Novo. ibid. L. Statuimus. ibid. L. Sacris Canonibus. Vid. De Ecclesiis
Constitut. in Africa. Vid. de depositione Anthimi, etc. in praefat. Ibid. cap.
1: Vid. De privilegiis Dotis, etc. In praefat. Anth. Coll. 9. Tit. 14. Constable.
131. cap. 1. Constit. 137. In praefat. Ibid. cap. 1. Lib. 16. Tit. 4. and Tit.
5.
and Calcedon be received; that no muttions in the least be made in these
matters; That the State and Unity of the Churches be preserved that those
things be spoken which make for Peace; and that there be made a Regular
Uniforme Profession. Let us look to the next Title, we shall still find the
like things. Let us look on; and Letanies are prohibited to be made by Laymen;
the Church Constitutions and Canonical Sanctions are appointed to be observed,
and that to no less degree then the Imperial Civil Laws. Finally, it would be
infinite to recite all the Particulars that are dispersed up and down in the
Code, to these and the like purposes and intents. He that will may view them.
Let us proceed from it to the Novels; And there are still the like, and almost
the like number of Laws. In the 38 Constitution the Arrians in Africa are
confiscated, and their goods given to the Churches. An Heretic is prohibited
to Baptize, or to bear any Office in the Commonweal, or to have any House of
Prayer. In the 42 Constitution Nestorius, Eutyches, Arrius, Macedonius,
Eunomius, and others, are deposed. And the offense of Anthinus against the
Ecclesiastical Canons is made mention of. And afterward he is banished from
the imperial City or any other Great City, that there might be Peace amongst
the People, and he might not spread his interdicted Opinions, and the like. If
we go on, in the 109 Constitution, all are styled Heriticks who are not of the
Imperial Catholic and Apostolic Church. If we go on still, the four Councels
(but now mentioned) are again appointed to be recieved. And if we go on
further; it is argued, that if the Civil Laws, which respect men's outward
Security, are to be observed; then how much more the Ecclesiastical Canons
which respect ^^e health of their Souls? and afterward, the Peoples not having
learnt their Liturgies is taxed: and the like. Finally, many more the like
Laws might be recited. Let us pass then from these Volumes of Laws, to the
Code of Theodosius: And that proceeds also in the like manner in these things.
Let the Titles, De his qui super Religione contendunt; De Haereticis; in the 16
Book; and the like in other Books of it be consulted. Let us go on from it to
the Body of the Canon Law. In the several parts of the Decretum; in the Sextum,
Clementines, and Extravagants, up and down, no man will doubt, but that the
Roman Uniformity, and the Customs and Laws of that Church are enjoined. It
would be too needlessly tedious to make a particular recital of these matters.
Last of all, the like also are the present Laws of the other Christian
Churches abroad in the world. The Canon Law is taught in their Academies, and
many of it is Decrees and Constitutions, tending to these things which we have
mentioned, See the Laws and Statutes in quarto page 9. Ibid. vid.
are made use of for the regiment of those Churches. The very Statutes of
Geneva will have no strange or false Opinions, against the Doctrine received,
to be admitted; will not allow of Negligence in coming to Church, to the
contempt of the Communion of the Faithful, See the Discipline of the Kirk, Edit
Anno 1641. and alibi. See in his Life By J. H. p. 188. Land. 63.
and the like. And the like Church orders are to be found in the Corpus
Disciplinae, and amongst the Low Country Churches, in the Discipline of the
Kirk of Scotland, and amongst its prescriptions. And finally, in the very
humble Petition and advice presented in the late times of usurpation, to Oliver
Cromwell in England, when he was coming toward his desired sitting down in the
Throne: In which was proposed a Confession of Faith to be assented to (in
matters of Religion) and to be recommended to the People. And thus then all
these things will sufficiently evidence, how all mankind has conspired
Universally in it is Laws and Constitutions in Societies, toward this
Ecclesiastical Uniformity, and for those intents and ends which we have
mentioned.

Last of all, where this Uniformity has been but in part, or in small measure,
the Governors of Societies still, as Controversies have arisen, have been
forced to come to further degrees of it.
XIV. In the last Place then, this one thing is further observable, that,
wheresoever this Uniformity has been, either but in the Negative and improper
part of it, or else but in some small measures of the Positive; there still,
according as Controversies in Religion dangerous to the Public have arisen,
Princes have been forced to come to further degrees of it. It may be at the
first foundings of Religions, or Churches, those Churches have not been capable
of any great degrees of it; at least not in the way of National Churches, as
was the Case of the Primo-Primitive and Apostolical Christian Church. It may be
also otherwise, that, for Causes concerning Civil and Humane Society (which is
the foundation of all Religions) Diversities of Professions have been, for a
longer or lesser time, to a greater or lesser degree, tolerated in some
Countries, as in Holland, Poland, and other Territories at this day, and
through the necessities of their several States. But yet ^till, and whatsoever
Causes there may any where be of the want of the further degrees of this
Uniformity; all Governors have been forced to take sanctuary at it, and those
further degrees of it, where Religious Controversies have arisen, and for the
allaying the furious heats of them, and the begetting a charitative composure
amongst men. Vid. Praefationem ad Acta Synodi Dordrect.
This was the late Case in the calling the Synod of Dort in Holland, and as the
States themselves acknowledg^. And the like other Cases also are every where to
be found up and down in other Ages and Countries.

CHAP. X.
What are the Extremes in respect to this Ecclesiastical Uniformity: And what
are the faultinesses in it.
I. THe Extremes in respect to an Ecclesiastical Uniformity distinguished.

II. The Extremes of too much looseness assigned.

III. The extremes also of too much strictness assigned.

IV. The Faultiness in such an Uniformity assigned also.

V. The first of them.

VI. The Second.

VII. The Third.

VIII. The fourth and last sort of faultiness.

THis only Natural way then of settling Church Affairs amongst men being thus
described, The extremes* in respect to an Ecclesiastical Uniformity ^
Distinguished.
and recommended to Practice; let us come next to contradistinguish it to it is
extremes, and to set down the faultiness which may possibly be in it in any
Society. And those extremes (as all other in respect to other matters are) are
those that lie on both sides of it (i. e.) 1. Those of too much looseness; and
2. Of two much Strictness.

II. First, Those of too much looseness are, The extremes of too much Looseness
Assigned. Lib. 2. cap. 6.. 2. and. 4, 5, 6. etc. Ibid.. 2.
1. The loose open Toleration of venting of Opinions, which has been
heretofore mentioned and avouched to be finally destructive both to Religion
and Government, and the consistency of Religion with Government. 2. The way of
Governing Church Matters by ballancing of Opinions (i. e.) by such an underhand
ballancing of them, as has been heretofore hinted at also: And which, because
it partakes not neither in the nature, nor in the drift and ends of an
Ecclesiastical Uniformity so as to deserve to be accounted any part of it;
therefore we here reckon it as one of these extremes. Besides, the properties
of it are, collusion with men in so great matters as those are, in which it
pretends an open Toleration, but privately practices a restraint; and in like
manner also the Princes falsifying his Trust to God by his suffering all common
Charity and Peace to be broken; and which he is so much bound by the Divine Law
to preserve; Deu^. 24.11.16. etc.
and by his owning no Profession of Christ in his way before men, but
tolerating openly, and ballancing together with other things all manner of
Errors, Blasphemies, and Atheism it self, in his practicing the latitude of
it; and which things the Judicial or Civil Laws of Israel did, and all Laws
whatsoever of other Societies are bound to prohibit. And lastly, this
ballancing of Opinions cannot be artificially managed without perpetual
difficulty to the Governor, and every days danger of sudden eruptions of the
more numerous and prevalent party into a Flame. And for these and the like
reasons, it is then, That it has never ordinarily been made use of by settled
Governors in any Societies, nor by any others upon pure choice at any time,
but only by Innovators in States, and Usurpers of Supreme Authority; That while
they were stealing up the more securely to the Helm, they might busy others
about picking of their Bones, and ineffably amuse the vulgar.

The Extreme also of too much strictness assigned. Lib. 2. cap. 6. 5. 6, etc.
Infra. lib. 3. cap. 3. ^. 2, 3 Infra ibid. 3. 4, 5, 6, 7.
III. There is one extreme also of too much strictness, on the other hand: and
that is the pressing upon men an universal inward unity of Opinion, which,
besides that it is impossible to effect for the Reasons above given, and as
shall be hereafter mentioned, is not neither a means of it self, for the
generating Peace and Charity amongst men. And the Reasons also why it may not
be pressed by the Magistrate upon any Society, and how far forth it may not,
shall be given an account of hereafter.

The faultiness in such an Uniformity Assigned also.
IV. These extremes then being thus assigned, we come also to assign the
faultiness in such an Uniformity, (i. e.) Those Indebita, and things taxable in
it, by which it may become accidentally hurtful, either to Religion or
Government, or the consistency of each with other: And those are,

The first of them.
V. First of all, when it reaches not the Governors occasions in any Society,
and in respect to the securing his supreme public right and Charge: For so it
ought to do, because it is a means and instrument appointed by God and Nature
for the securing of it.

The Second.
VI. When the Magistrates Authority pressing such an Uniformity is urged under
the Notion of Divine, and his Determination even in all matters whatsoever is
by consequence stated formally as the will of God. See Dominion Cap. 12. Art.
2. And Religion Cap. 16. Art. 13, 14, 15, 16, etc. And Cap. 12. Art. 17, 18,
etc.
This is the Assertion of Mr. Hobbs of Malmesbury, up and down in his
Philosophical Rudiments, that it should be so. But it consists not with the
Divine Law of Christ, wherein it is not revealed, That God has committed it to
any man or Angel ordinarily to prescribe precepts of Religion, but has
reserved that Royalty immediately to himself. Indeed the Chair of Rome has
bidden fairly in this matter, by the allegation of an infallibility its being
annexed to it. But concerning an infallible Interpreter in Churches; It
deserves to be considered whether such a thing be not for the most part
needless in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity, since in the thoughts of knowing men
there will be in most things no more unity of Opinion about such
Interpretations then others, and also whether it be convenient for the state of
Humane Affairs in this World, and that upon several accounts. And if the
pretense of it be intended to amuse the vulgar, that is not Honest. But
briefly, since the Divine Law of Christ has not appointed it to any man to
prescribe Religious precepts, neither Originally, nor by Interpretation, we
must conclude, that it is not so convenient for Humane Societies, that there
should be such an infallible interpretership constituted and established in
them.

VII. The third sort of faultiness in such an Uniformity is, The Third.
when it is excessively comprehensive of things pressed in it. And so it may
be, 1. Qualitatively, 2. Quantitatively. 1. Qualitatively, (viz.) when it
comprehends things simply and in themselves wicked and sinful, and proposes and
enjoins them either to be believed or practiced accordingly. But then this is
to be understood of such things as are simply, and in themselves so as we say;
and not of things becoming so by accident. For, because nothing is so good and
lawful in it self, but that it may become sinful by accident; and because also
Cases in which such things may become so are infinite, and cannot be foreseen
by Humane Prudence or Circumspection; therefore it is that Humane Laws, in the
framing of them by the Legislative Authority, have no respect to such things,
and as concerned in the Cases in which they may so become. Jura Constitui
oportet (ut dixit Theophrastus) in iis quae (...) accidunt; non in iis quae
(...); says Pomponius in the Civil Law; That Laws are to be Constituted (as
Theophrastus said) in those things and Cases which happen out for the most
part; and not in those which come to pass but seldom. And Celsus, ex iis, F.
De legibus and Senatus consult, etc. L. Jura Constitui. Ibid. L. 4. Vid. D. Si
quis Cautionibus etc. Bart. in L. simili modo. Et D. Mandati vel contra, in L.
and Austoni: item Bartus, etc. De legibus Dial. 4 paulo post prin. Ibid. post.
quae forte uno aliquo casu accidere possunt, Jura non constituuntur; That
Laws are not constituted in those matters which may perhaps happen out in one
single Case. And the several Cases upon the Laws are explicated and determined
by the Doctors accordingly. And lastly, Plato, dicturus eram nullum unquam
hominum aliquid lege sancire, sed fortunas casusque varios incidentes leges
nobis per omnia far. I was about to say that no man at any time does
establish any thing by Law, but that accidents and various chances falling on
us do give Law to us in all things. And in Conclusion, Deum quidem omnia, and
fortunam oportunitatemque simul cum Deo Cuncta Humana Gubernare: That God truly
does govern all things, and all Humane Affairs Fortune and Opportunity together
with God. 2. Quantitatively, when it proposes and enjoynes a greater number of
things indifferent, and as adjuncts of Worship then is convenient. There have
been always, and ought to be, and must needs be some Ceremonies in all
Churches; in the Jews, the Heathens, the Christians, and Mahometans Churches,
and are at this day, as is to be seen in the several Records concerning these
things. But then the Ceremonies of Humane Constitution, ought not to be to such
a number, in any Church, as to eat up the Divine service it self, and to take
up more room then the immediate Worship of God. In this kind it is that the
Uniformity of the Church of Rome is so faulty. The Ceremonial Law, as the Jews
say themselves, amongst the other Laws of Israel, was never intended by Gods
Prescription of it to oblige the Gentiles. And the New Testament, the proper
Prescript of the Christian Religion, reversed it amongst the Jews themselves
also. But the Chair of Rome, in it is introduction of such a number of
Ceremonies into Divine service, pretends the imitation of Moses, and that upon
the same account of Divine Authority also, although in another kind; but
intends really the Reformation of St. Paul, and of the Christian Prescript of
Religion, which perhaps it thinks consists of too many and too expressly of
Doctrinals; but not enough, nor enough expressly of Ceremonials.

The fourth, and last sort of faultiness.
VIII. The fourth and last sort of faultiness then in this Ecclesiastical
Uniformity is, when it takes away the means of knowledge, and the means of Grace
from amongst the People, and such as ought ordinarily to be conceded to them,
and are their Natural and Divine Rights, and that in relation to those several
ends which have been above mentioned. Supra lib. 2. cap. 3.. 6, 7, 8, etc. Vid.
Alcoranum Azoara. 13. etc. De Origin Imp. Turc. and De Turc. morib. Epit. cap.
De Sacerdotibus eorum. De Abassinor. reb. lib. 1. cap. 22.
Such is the practice of the Mohammedan, in his way of Religion, prohibiting the
Alcoran to be read by the Common People, and suppressing Universities, and the
ordinary use of Books, and the like. Apud illos sane nullos vidi Typographos,
sed Chartam optime parant, says Georgieviz; That amongst them he saw no
Printers, but they make excellent Paper, and the like. Such also is the
practice of diverse Churches of Christians. Of the Abassines, Sacra omnia partim
Chaldaeo, partim Aethiopico continentur Idiomite, says Godignus That all their
Holy Rites are contained partly in the Chaldee, partly in the Ethiopick
Dialect. And Praeter libros divinos, easque quibus continentur Sacra, alii non
sunt, nisi quos habent regiis opibus praefecti, ut accepti and expensi rations
constent, Ibid. cap. 12. in fine.
says he elsewhere: That besides the Books of God, and those in which their
Sacred Rites are contained, there are none other; unless it be those which the
Emperors Treasurers have for the keeping of their Accounts. In Literis
Wenceslai Budonizii, etc. D. Davidi Chytraeo, in princip.
And so of the Greek Church, Omnia enim Sacra eorum lingua Antiqua, neque a
Sacerdotibus, neque a populo intellecta peraguntur, says Chytraeus: That all
their Divine Services are performed in the Ancient Tongue, which is not
understood neither by the Priests, nor People. And so also amongst the
Russians: Hist. of Russia, vid. cap. 21, circa med. and alibi.
Neither their Priests, nor Bishops making any further use of any kind of
Learning; no not of the Scriptures themselves; save to Read, and to Sing them,
and their Divine Service, and the like says Fletcher in his History. And last
of all, such also is the Practice of Rome, and of the Churches diversely in her
Communion. She commands her Liturgies to be celebrated in Latin, and the
like unknown tongues. Etsi missa magnam contineat Populi fidelis eruditionem,
non tamen expedire visum est Patribus ut vulgari lingua passim celebraretur,
say the Tridentine Fathers. Council. Triden. Sessione 6. cap. 8.
Although the Mass contain in it much instruction of the faithful people, yet
however that it did not seem to be expedient to the Fathers that it should be
celebrated up and down in the Churches in the vulgar tongue. And so also, she
not permitting the Bible to be read ordinarily by the People, nor by any
Laics, unless they be Licensed. Laying hold also, by the Inquisition in Spain,
and other places, upon all Books in the vulgar tongue, and upon open
Discourses and Disputes about Religion, and establishing the Doctrines of
implicit Faith, general devotion, blind obedience, and the like.

CHAP. XI.
From whence the Just Measures of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity are to be taken.
And of the more particular Rights and Liberties relating to them.
I. THe Rules of distributive Justice assigned, from whence the Just Measures
of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity are to be taken.

II. The Persons who have the right of framing it accordingly.

III. When they have used their best Judgment for the doing of it, they have
done their duties.

IV. Certain more particular Rights belonging to them in this matter.

V. In the interim, obedience is due to them from private Persons.

VI. And last of all, certain Liberties belonging to those private persons
also, in relation to their performance of that Obedience.

The Rules of Distributive Justice assigned, from whence the just measures of
an Ecclesiastical Uniformity are to be taken.
I. HAving said these things then, I come here last of all to assert the Just
Measures of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity; and from whence they are to be taken.
And that is, from it is affording to all their Rights, (viz.) those which have
been heretofore mentioned, either more generally or more particularly: To God
his Right, in it is crossing none of his commands, but assisting to the
performance of them: To the Supreme Magistrate his Right; in it is being
proportioned to his occasions, and the discharge of his Trust: To the Church
Governors also, in their way, their Rights; by it is affording to them the like
means of the discharge of their Functions in their several places and
capacities: To the private Christian his Right; by it is preserving to him the
enjoyment of his Christian Liberty, and the use of his liberty of Conscience
and Judgment of discerning: To the Subject also his Rights by it is enjoining
nothing upon him but by lawful Legislative Authority: And last of all, to all
these their Rights, both mixtly and in their several respects, by it is cutting
off occasions of Contentions, and of corrupt wicked men's abusing and invading
these Things and Persons severally, to the disorder and destruction of Humane
Societies, and the welfare of them. And this is the Golden mean in such an
Ecclesiastical Uniformity. And these are the more general Rules of distributive
Justice, which are to be observed by all Princes and Governors in their due
framing of it.

II. The Supreme Governors in any Society have the only Supreme Power and
Right of the thus framing this Uniformity: The Persons who have the Right of
framing it accordingly.
and that more generally and mediately by virtue of their Supreme Power over
all, and in relation to their Public Charge supremely committed to them, and
more particularly and immediately, as it is a part of their Indirect Power in
Spirituals.

III. And when they have used their best judgment, When they have used their
best Judgment for their doing of it, they have done their duties.
and taken their best care about their thus framing of it, they have done their
Duties, and discharged their trust in it both to God, Conscience, and their
People. And that because their own judgment of discerning, conversant in their
own Affairs, is their only ordinary and possible directrix for their proceeding
in this matter, as well as in any others. And all lawful Governors in the
ranking their Notions concerning the frame and body of Humane Affairs, are
supposed, either by themselves or Assistance, to be sufficient for the
discharge of their Trust.

IV. There are certain more particular Rights and Powers which belong to these
Governors of Humane Societies, Certain more particular Rights belonging to
them in this matter. In the interim, obedience is due to them from private
persons.
for the retaining of this their more general Right in this matter. But these
will be asserted hereafter in the places proper to them.

V. In the interim; when by the employment of this Care these Governors have
thus once established this their Uniformity in their several Societies, private
Persons are not to intermeddle in their Province, and to the detriment of their
Affairs any ways: But it is left to them either to obey actively; or else not
to disobey, but to acquiesce passively: And that also only where there may
perhaps be just reason, as to them, for their nonperformance of their active
obedience, and in no other case whatsoever. And these are the voices of all
Laws and wise men in this matter. D. De legibus, and Senatus consult. L. 6.
Legis virtus haec est, imperare, vetare, permittere, punere, says Modestinus
the Civilian; That this is the force of a Law, to command, to forbid, to
permit, to punish. And and ideo, de iis quae primo constituuntur, aut
interpretatione aut constitutione optimi Principis certius statuendum est,
says Julianus: Ibid. L. Et ideo.
That therefore in those things which are first of all constituted, we must
determine more certainly either by the interpretation or constitution of the
most excellent Prince. Et L. Non omnium.
And non omnium, quae a majoribus constituta sunt, ratio reddi potest: That
there cannot be a reason given of all things which are constituted by our
Ancestors. And, Et ideo rations eorum quae constituuntur inquiri non oportet:
alioqui multa ex iis quae certa sunt subverterenter: That therefore the reason
of those things which are constituted ought not to be asked for; otherwise many
of those things which are certain would be subverted, Ibid. L. and. ideo
Rations.
says Neratius. And Tacitus, principi summum rerum judicium Dii dederunt;
subditis obsequii gloria relicta est. Annal. 3.
That the Gods have conceded the Supreme Judgment of Affairs to the Prince;
and the glory of obedience is left to the Subject. And Gellius, Media igitur
Sententia optima atque tutissima visa est; quaedam esse parendum, quaedam non
obsequendum: That the middle sort of advice seems to be best and most safe;
that, as to some things, we ought to obey, and as to others only not to be so
pliant to Obedience. And it is the outcry of Medea in Euripides In Medea.
(...). paulo post princip.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) --
O thou great Themis! and venerable Diana!
Ye see what I suffer: Who with great Oaths
Ibid. paulo post. (...).
Have bound my accursed
Husband -- And afterward,
Oportet autem Hospitem valde se accommodare Civitati.
Neque laudo Civem, qui contumax existens
Molestus est civibus, propter imperitiam, ac insolentiam.
But it behooves a stranger very much to accommodate himself to the City.
Neither do I commend a Citizen, who being obstinate
Is troublesome to the Citizens, because of his Ignorance, and Insolence.


And last of all, certain liberties belonging to those private persons also, in
relation to their performance of that Obedience.
VI. Last of all then, there are also certain derivative Latitudes and Liberties
which belong to these private Persons in relation to their performance of
obedience to these establishments of Princes, and which are their derivative
Rights in this matter: But these also shall be more particularly asserted, and
unfolded hereafter in the places proper to them.

DE Jure Vniformitatis Ecclesiasticae: OR, OF THE RIGHTS Belonging to an
UNIFORMITY in CHURCHES. BOOK III.
CHAP. I.
Of the two Grand Instruments of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity, (viz.) A Canon
of Doctrines, and a Liturgy framed according to it.
I. THe Prescript of the Christian Religion has been most vexed by Contests:
And the greater necessity of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity, and of this work,
deduced from it.

II. A Canon of Doctrines defined and distinguished.

III. The state of the Case concerning its being the Primary and Principal of
the two Grand Instruments in an Uniformity.

IV. A Liturgy defined and distinguished also.

V. It is convenient, that where a Liturgy is used, there be as few other sorts
of Public Services permitted to accompany it as may be.

VI. The Liturgy also ought to be conformed to the Canon of Doctrines.

VII. The Heathen, Jewish, and Apostolical Liturgies contested.

VIII. The present Liturgies that are abroad in the world.

IX. The History of the English Uniformity, and of its Canon of Doctrine and
Liturgy.

X. Some appendant Questions concerning a Canon of Doctrines and Liturgy
resolved.

XI. The First Question.

XII. The Second.

XIII. The Third.

XIV. The Fourth.

XV. The Fifth.

XVI. The Sixth.

XVII. The seventh and last.

The prescript of the Christian Religion has been most vexed by contests. And
the greater necessity of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity, and of this work,
deduced from it.
I. THe Prescript of the Christian Religion is the best of any that ever has
been in the World, (i. e.) the most consisting of Doctrines, and explicatory of
the particular Precepts of the Law of Nature; and consequently, the most
perfectly directive of men in their way to Heaven, and as members of Humane
Society. And yet (through the weaknesses and corruptions of men) there has
none been the subject of more contentions: Men having wire-drawn the doctrinal
Texts of it, and every Sect and Heresy having suited them to their own turns,
and all having applied that and the like Texts of the Apostle to their times,
and in respect to their Opinions, and the opposers of them, that there must
also be heresies amongst you, 1 Cor. 11.19.
that they which are approved may be made manifest among you: Which things show
the greater necessity of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity in the Christian Church,
and of this work, for the explicating and unfolding of it, and the rights
belonging to it. I come then here in this third and last Book to treat more
particularly of that Uniformity, and that in a special manner of the two grand
instruments of it, (viz.) a Canon of Doctrines, and a Liturgy framed according
to it.

A Canon of Doctrines defined and distinguished.
II. And, first of all, that which is meant here by a Canon of Doctrines, is, a
Rule or Standard of Doctrines, exhibited and propounded for profession of
assent to be made to, in any Church. And such a Canon is either written, or
else unwritten and traditional. And the written is either Systematical, and
collected unto one body of Doctrines, The state of the case concerning its
being the primary and principal of the two grand instruments in an Uniformity.
Lib. 2. Cap. 7.. 4.
or else diffused and dispersed amongst other things. And either of these may
be either Humane or Divine: The Humane is that which is exhibited and
propounded as such by Humane Authority; the Divine, by Divine Authority.

III. This Canon of Doctrine is the primary and principal of these two grand
Instruments of an Uniformity. And, in our stating of it so, we mean it also
principally and ordinarily of a written, Systematical, and Humane Canon, and
not of the contrary. And that because the traditional sort of Doctrines are
less ordinarily found in Churches, as has been heretofore mentioned; and also
because the Systematical Humane Canon, is the only Natural way for the
procuring positive Peace and Charity in matters contested, as has been hinted
also, and shall hereafter be more expressly asserted. It is true, that it were
better that their serving one and the same God, or any the like fundamental
single Doctrine (if it might be) and although not with the allowance of
salvation perhaps to one another from him) were a foundation for a medium of
charitative communion betwixt Turk and Jew inhabiting in the same
Neighborhood of Amsterdam, or any the like part of a Society, then that all
Peace and Charity in matters of Religion should be utterly broken: But where
there is a National Church, and where the Governor would procure any sort of
positive Charity, either Christian or common, and any tolerable degree and
measure of it amongst his People, he must come to a more large and Systematical
Canon of Doctrines.

IV. We come then to define also what we mean by a Liturgy, A Liturgy defined,
and distinguished also.
the second of these main instruments in this Uniformity. And, by the use and
customary application of the word, in this Case, That which is vulgarly meant
by it also, is more generally, any public form of Divine Service, and more
specially and particularly such a public form of Prayer to be used in Divine
Service, and at the several occasions of it. And so, that which prescribes the
matter only of the Public Divine Service, is called a Directory; and that
which prescribes the Form also a Liturgy; and that which is bounded by the
prescription of neither, is purely an extemporary service.

V. It is convenient, It is convenient that where a Liturgy is used, there be
as few other sorts of public Services permitted to accompany it as may be.
that where there is a stated Liturgy made use of in any Church, there be as
few other sorts of Services, either extemporary or directive permitted, as may
be: And that not only because those other sorts of Services accompanying it,
should not come into competition with the Authorized Liturgy, in the wild
esteem of the people; but also for many other Reasons which might be mentioned.
And this is to be construed more principally of services of the same kind, and
less principally also of Services of diverse kinds. The Church of England in
this case, has contented her self, ad minimum, See the Constitutions and
Canons Ecclesiastical.
with the prescription of a Directory in the particular of Public Prayer
before the Sermon, and with advice, that it should be performed as briefly as
conveniently may be. And the like have been the constitutions in other Churches.

VI. The Liturgy also in any Church ought to be composed and framed according
to the mind and tenor of the Canon of Doctrines. And that because it is one
Office of such a Liturgy, The Liturgy also ought to be conformed to the Canon
of Doctrines.
in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity, to exhibit to the people the doctrine taught
in any National Church, and by its so doing to instruct them, from their
ordinary use of it, in those Doctrines of the Christian Religion.

The Heathen, Jewish and Apostolical Liturgies contested.
VII. Amongst the several instruments of the Uniformities that have been
heretofore in the world, the Liturgies of all the three first Celebrated
professions of Religion have been more especially contested: And that the
Heathen Liturgies in their circumstantials, but the Jewish and Apostolical
Liturgies of the Christian Church, in the substance and very being of them. As
to the Heathen Liturgies, it has been alleged, that they ought not to be
accounted of as exemplary to Christians: But the allegation has erred, in
sensu composito; for although it be true that they ought not to be accounted of
as such Quatenus Heathen Liturgies, yet it does not follow, but that however,
and the light of Nature upon the grounds heretofore mentioned warranting it,
they ought to be accounted of as such Quatenus Liturgies. But the Jewish and
Apostolical Liturgies have born the principal brunt of the contest. As to the
Jewish State, the occasions of it were twofold; either Eternal or Temporary.
The Eternal were in relation to its defense against Heathenism, and the Nations
of that Profession round about it. The temporary in this case were in relation
to Domestic Schisms, and the mischiefs accruing to the public from them. And
the constitutions in it concerning both these, were either Divine or Humane. As
to its Eternal occasions, and the serving of them, I look upon the first Table
of Moses, as evidently directing to a Canon of Doctrines. And as to its
temporary occasions, and the serving of them, I look upon the Scriptural
Temple-Service, and the like prescript forms of Ceremonials in any of their
times, as standing in one part of the place of a Liturgy. And these were the
apparent Divine Constitutions concerning these matters. But if it be enquired
farther and more particularly, either what were the Divine or Humane
Constitutions, either concerning the temporary or eternal occasions of Israel,
either as to its Temple or Synagogue Service; in most things it is very hard
certainly to determine. That God approved of a form of Prayer as lawful in
Israel, it is evident from the customary Prayer of Moses (Number. 10.35, 36.) at
the setting forward and resting of the Ark; and from many other particulars
which might be mentioned. And that there were forms of singing, and of other
Services used, both in the Temple, and in the Synagogues, it is evident, both
from the ordinary use of David's Psalms, and of the Hymns of Asaph the Seer as
such (see 2 Chronicles. 29.30.) and from the stated Sections and Lectures of the
Law, noted in the Hebrew Text, and appointed to be read in the Synagogues by
course upon every Sabbath throughout the year; and from other particulars also
which might be mentioned. And but that there was a Liturgy, taken in a special
sense, in use also, (i. e.) some body of set forms of Prayer appropriated to
both these sorts of services, there is no reason in the world to doubt of it.
But that God should compose and constitute such a Liturgy at the first founding
of the other Laws of that Society, and with injunction of it upon future Ages,
it could not rationally be expected, the variety of occasions of that Society
being considered, and which such a Liturgy was temporarily to be stinted to.
And however, because such his composing and constituting of it, or any part of
it, is not mentioned in Scripture, nor in any other Humane Records of that
Church that are extant, and perhaps of such certainty as may be required, it is
no Argument at all, that therefore there was never such a one, or so
constituted. That there should be Synagogues in all the particular Parishes,
and lesser Divisions in Israel, who will doubt but that it was approved of by
God: But yet we find no mention o^ them in Scripture, and as constituted by any
Divine Law: What wonder then if not of the Liturgies to be used in them? The
sum of all is, That the Records of that Church, both Humane and Divine, are in
part at least lost and defective: The Divine, although not as to fundamentals
of Religion, yet as to many other things; and the providence of God is
acknowledged, in the mean time, to be sufficiently salv'd by the assertion: And
the Humane almost totally, and in every part of them. And so then we must be
content to acquiesce in Rabbinical traditions, and things of the like credit,
and in that number of them that is to be found extant also. The like almost is
the condition of the first Ages of the Christian Church: There are but very few
Records of its Affairs of those times remaining. That the Apostles constituted
Liturgies, there is reason to believe, although theirs were not National
Churches, but yet not with injunction of them neither upon future Ages. That
the Creed commonly called the Apostles, was framed for general assent, and
profession of assent also to be made to it, we have it from the general fame
and tradition of the Christian Churches. And that a form of Prayer was approved
of, it is evident from the use of such by Christ himself in his Agony, Mat.
26.44. Luke 11.2.
and from his teaching his own Prayer to his Apostles as a form; and concerning
some of the petitions of which, some Critics say, and not improbably, that he
derived them from some public forms then extant amongst the Jews: And diverse
other things might be mentioned. But still, and all these things being
considered, we do not see any reason at all for any absolute denial of the
being of Liturgies, either in the Jewish or Apostolical Christian Churches.

VIII. In the interim, The present Liturgies that are abroad in the world.
we come to the assignation of the present Liturgies that are abroad in the
World. And as the Canons of Doctrines every where are actually conceded; so
they are supposed to be conceded, since there is no being for any such thing as
Religion in any Church without some one sort of Canon, or other of those that
have been mentioned necessarily co-existent with it; and since there is no
being for any positive peace and charity in matters of Religion ordinarily,
without such a Systematical Canon, as has been mentioned also; and that also
established either tacitly or expressly by the Authority of the Superior.
Liturgy then (taken either in a general or special sense) is dispersed at
present over the whole face of the Earth. Amongst the Gentues or Gentiles, the
Eastern Histories relate its being made use of every where. Amongst the Jews
also it is used in like manner, as is evident from the Editions of their
Public Prayers in Hebrew, Printed by themselves both at Venice and in Polonia;
and as is recorded by Manasse Ben Israel, In his Vindiciae Judaeorum. 3 He
Turcar. Ritu etc. C. De templis seu Meschitis eorum. Pandect. Hist. Turc. C.
gradus Legis. etc. Et C. Cudsimubar. etc. p. 243. and 431. in Quarto* De
Aethionum morib. in Confess. Zagazabo. passim.

De Abassinor. Rebus Lib. 1. Cap. 22. and alibi.

Vid. Orat. cum post reditum ex Austria, etc. circ. med.


late in England, and by diverse others. The like also is amongst the
Mahumetans, and is testified to by Georgieviz, Leunclavius, and others. And
lastly, and in a more special manner, the like is in use every where in the
Christian Churches. We will begin with the Abassines, or Ethiopian Christians:
And their confession of Faith, and forms of Prayer, and of other public
services, are recited by Danianus a Goes, Godignus, and others. Let us go on
from them to the Churches in Asia; and as to them, the forms of Doctrines and
Liturgies of the Syrians, Georgians, Armenians, Nestorians, Jacobites, and
others, are recited by Chytraeus, in his Oration after his Return out of
Austria; and by the several Authors mentioned by Mr. Brerewood, to that
purpose, and others. Let us proceed from them to the other part of the
Christian Churches, lately extant in the West Indies: And we may expect them to
be conformed to the Roman or other Professions who have subjected them to them.
And last of all, let us come into Europe, and particularize these matters of
the Christian Churches there: And first, in the Roman Church, and the Dominions
and Territories of Princes holding communion with it; and so far forth as their
affairs severally will permit, In his enquiries of the diverse sorts and sects
of Christians, etc. and of the several Languages wherein the Liturgies, etc
passim.
we need not doubt of the existence of suitable forms of Doctrines, and
Liturgies framed according to them. So in the several Principalities of Italy,
in the Romish parts of the Empire; in the Kingdoms of Spain and Portugal, and
the like. Next to that follows the Greek Church to be considered; That is to
say, the Christian Churches now remaining in Greece, and the Territories of
that Communion adjacent and belonging to it: And we are assured of their
Horologies, Liturgies, Letanies, In Oratione post reditum ex Austria, etc. in
princip.
Masses, and the like, and of their Doctrines according to which these things
are framed by Chytraeus, and others. Next to them let us pass on to the Russe
Church, it holding communion for the most part with them: And their Doctrines,
and Liturgical forms are described also by Fletcher, In his Hist. of Russia.
Cap. 22, 23, etc. De Russorum Religione. in Epist. ad D. Chytrae.
Paulus Oderborinus, and others. And, last of all, let us come to the more
North-West Churches, called Protestant: And in them also, even in those of them
that have separated farthest from the Church of Rome, we shall find, according
to the several proportions which their affairs bear to them, these things. So
in the Church of Geneva, The Laws and Statutes Lee the Laws and Statutes in
Princip.
appoint their Evangelical Ministers to protest to receive and retain the
Doctrines approved in the Church, before they be admitted to the Ministry. And
in the Oath taken by them before the Syndieques and Council, Ibid. Paulo post
and p. 9. sub Tit. Here follows the persons, etc.
they are obliged to conserve and keep the Unity and Concord of Doctrine; and,
if any differences therein happen, to refer them finally to the Magistrate, and
the like. And although they prescribe a Directory only (both for their Church
and Family Prayers) in some particulars, Ibid. in fine. In the third
Proclamation.

Ibid. sub Tit. The order which ought, etc.


and as expecting by that sufficiently to provide for the Peace of their Little
Territories, yet of necessity they prescribe a form in other particulars; and
they no where declare against the use of Liturgy by other Churches. The like is
to be observed in the Churches of the Low Countries, the Ministers are
appointed to subscribe The confession of Faith, and the Catechism used and
authorized in the Reformed Churches of the United Provinces, See the Corpus
Disciplinae. Cap. 1. in princip.

Cap. 4. in princip. Postea p. 12, 13, 14, etc.


and also the doctrinal Decrees of the Synod of Dordrecht, in the Year 1619,
and to submit themselves to the Synod. And the Corpus Disciplinae sets down
also their directive prescriptions for the celebrating of Divine Service; and
the forms of Prayer, and of other things, for the administration of Baptism,
and the performance of other Offices in the Church. The like to these things
also were those said to be presented to the High Court of Parliament for the
Reforming of the Church of Scotland not long since. In the pattern of
Reformation, See the Reformation of the Discipline and service of the Church,
etc. Edit. London, 1643.
was set down the confession of Faith, used in the English Congregation at
Geneva, to be assented to; and the prescript forms of Common Prayer, and of
other things, to be used in the Public Divine Service. And the like things are
to be observed in the publication of the Doctrine and Discipline of the same
Kirk. Printed by Robert Young, Anno 1641. See the first Book of Discipline, for
prophesying, etc. and alibi.
Curiosity of bringing in strange Doctrine is to be noted, and the like. And
last of all, the like things are in use in the present Church of England. The
Canon of Doctrine in that Church, is that body of Doctrines which is ordinarily
called the nine and thirty Articles, and the Liturgy is framed according to it.

IX. The History of the English Uniformity, and of its Canon of Doctrines and
Liturgy, is here worthy the noting briefly, The History of the English
Uniformity, and of its Canon of Doctrines and Liturgy. See the Praeface to
Rogers on the 39. Articles.
and by those that will the better understand the affairs of it. The present
Uniformity for the most part of it was at first set up by godly, able, and
impartial men in the time of King Edward the sixth. And they had this advantage
at their then departing from the Uniformity of the Church of Rome, That the
Public Affairs of the Kingdom, and the present state of them, did permit
their fixing in a mean, and betwixt the extremes in this matter: And they
endeavored it accordingly, and have left their posterity to Glory in it to
this day. They were the words of a King, who suffered Martyrdom in the defense
of the English Church, and the Religion established in it, and left this Advice
and Testimony behind him to his present Royal Successor in the Throne; See his
Letter to the Prince of Wales.
I have tried it, and after much search and many disputes, have concluded it to
be the best in the world, not only in the community as Christian, but also in
the special Notion, as reformed, keeping the middle way between the pomp of
superstitious Tyranny, and the meanness of fantastic Anarchy. And many the
like Testimonies in this matter of meaner persons might be added. After the
days of Edward the sixth, and in the time of Queen Mary, this Uniformity being
intermitted, at the coming of Queen Elizabeth to the Throne, it was again
revived and promoted. In her days first began the Domestic oppositions of
some of those of the Reformed Profession to be made against it: And they
quickly were made Popular; and the Effects of them are felt to this very day.
The Grand Posts of Controversy have been, the Episcopacy, the Liturgy, and the
Ceremonies: And the two latter, it is evident, in order to the subversion of
the former. And the Original of those oppositions made against them is judged
by wise men to have proceeded from impressions received abroad by some of Queen
Mary's Exiles, and especially at Geneva. So says the wise and moderate
Discourse, Reprinted in the year, 1641. and Vid. p. 42.
said to be the Lord Bacons: The fourth and last occasion, says he, of these
Controversies, is the partial affectation and imitation of Foreign Churches.
For many of our men, during the time of Persecution, and since, having been
conversant in Churches abroad, and received a great impression of the
Government there Ordained, have violently sought to intrude the same upon our
Church, etc. Vid. passim. And first published, Anno 1575. and reprinted, 1642.
See the first and second Admonitions. Aano 1573. Supra Lib. 2. Cap. 1.. 6, 7,
8, 9.

The Authors of them being Imprisoned. See the Admonitions, and Answer.

See his modest and reasonable Examination, etc. Cap. 1. p. 21. etc.

See Mr. Sprints Cassander Anglicanus, p. 1^3. and his Reply annexed. p. 269.


And the History of these men's Conversation abroad is to be seen much of it in
the Book called, The Troubles at Frankford. These Oppositions then being thus
once made, and made popular, innumerable Pamphlets, in the said Queens days,
flew about: And amongst others, those of the greatest note were the two
Admonitions to the Parliament. The Fallacies, and other faults of the first of
which, were discovered by Dr. Whitgift in his Printed Answer to it. And all
these things being thus on foot, the ordinary causes of such Religious
contests, (heretofore in this Discourse mentioned) must needs be supposed to
work together with them on both sides, (viz.) the Vulgars mistakes in Religion,
the collision of passions (like Flints striking fire out of one another) the
mixture of worldly interests, and the like; and the weaknesses and corruptions
of men were the oil to all these flames. Till the days of King James, then
these oppositions still grew on. The opponents admonitions had been rejected
before by Queen Elizabeth's Parliament; the fallacies of them (as is said)
discovered; their making their Discipline a third Note of a Church derided with
anger, by Dr. Covel, and others, and the like. And in the King's time, they
were further told, That Omnis mutatio periculosa, and plena scandalis: That,
the least change, as things stood, was dangerous, and would be full of scandal
to Authority, and the like. See the Conference at Hampton Court.
And the King himself had a conference with some of the heads of them at
Hampton Court. And certainly it will always hold true, That, things settled by
the deep and deliberate considerations of former times, although the bottom
Reasons of them may not presently appear to all, are not to be easily altered.
Last of all, in the time of King Charles the First, the opponents were still
further told in Parliament, that their Discipline would not consist with
Monarchy; That Episcopacy, being at least lawful, See the Lord Digbies speech
in the house of Commons, Anno 1641.
there was no reason for its being abolished, and the like. But all this, and
the English Uniformity its having passed the Test of so many Kings,
Parliaments, Councels, Convocations, etc. would not suffice. Till at last, the
people having been all this while tampered with by the Opponents, and put into
a disposition to Sedition and War; from these Religious contests sprang Rising
in Arms, and the confusions and miseries following upon it. And at last, when
that Heroic Martyr King himself told the Opponents, See (...), and his Answers
to the Ministers in the Isle of Wight.
that the abolishing of Episcopacy was against his Coronation Oath, and the
like, yet all this would not suffice. Which of the opponents, in these heats,
were led by principles of Conscience. and which not, the searcher of hearts
knows. But thus still has the present, and at first well settled English
Uniformity passed the Test, and been Established, and Authority has claimed
its undoubted Right of the establishing of it. And it is pity, that a Church
so well and temperately settled should be disturbed. The like to this of the
Uniformity in the general has been the more particular History of the Canon of
Doctrines also and Liturgy, both as to the original and traduction of them. The
Canon of Doctrine, for the most part of it, was contrived and composed also in
the time of King Edward the sixth, and by the advice of his Divines, and at the
special instances and instigation of the Holy and Reverend Archbishop Cranmer,
See the Preface to Rogers his 39 Articles. See Rogers, Ibid. p. 4 ibid. p. 5.
and the Statutes 13. Eliz.
who afterward sealed it with his blood. Afterward it was revised and somewhat
augmented in the days of Queen Elizabeth, and allowed of again by a
Convocation in the Year 1562. and afterward confirmed by Act of Parliament,
and subscription was required to it in the Year 1571. As also it has been ever
since. The first Admonition to the Parliament in Queen Elizabeth's days
approved of the doctrinal part of it in the maine, though not in the
Disciplinary. See the first Admonition, second part, Art. 3.

See first Admonition, Ib. See a part of the Register. A brief Answer to the
principal points, etc.


But yet the Doctrinal part has not wholly escaped the shot neither. By the
first dissenters mentioned, it was taxed favorably, and but in a point or two.
By others afterward in more things, and with greater severity: Partly by a
rigid Interpretation of Phrases, partly by a flat contradiction of Doctrine.
And by others since, as being in many things doubtful and defective. But the
truth is, the frame and composition of it is very cautious and wary: and it
includes an ordinary competent and sufficient number of Doctrines for the
preserving the purity of Religion and Peace of any Church: And in some
particulars, relating to these things, it will be instanced in, as it falls in
the way hereafter. Last of all, we come to the Liturgy, which is of the same
original date together with the Uniformity it self; and has for the most part
passed the Times and former Tests together with it; and is composed of ancient
forms used in the Primitive Church, and contains the several sorts of things
which are pertinent to the variety of Christian occasions, (viz.) Texts of
Scripture, exhortations to Repentance, Prayers, Hymns, Psalms, Lessons,
Doxologies, Creeds, Thanks-givings, and the like. And the Reasons and Intents
of all which, See a defense of the Liturgy. Edit. Land. 1630. and alibi.
dispersed throughout the several parts and Offices of it, may be seen in the
writings of those that have given an account of them formerly; and of late
Queen Mary's Martyrs dyed in defense of it, amongst other things. It was
defended zealously by one part of the then Exiles at Frankford, See the
troubles at Frankford, p. 16, 19, 23, 223, etc. See Cassander Anglicanus. p.
123. etc. And the view of the new Directory, (said to be Dr. Hammonds) p. 17,
79, etc. See Smectymnuus, Sect. 2. Quere 1. etc. The sober and temperate
discourse, Chap. 8, 9, 11, 12, etc. See certain considerations, etc. said to
be the Lord Bacons, in Quarto p. 23. See, A view of the New Directory, etc. The
Preface,. 3.
while opposed by the other. It has been approved of openly by several late
Learned men of other Reformed Churches. There are amongst others, two more
solemn collections made of the Objections against it; most of them being old
Objections new dressed: And the one of those Collections being entitled,
Smectymnuus, made in the heats just preceding the late Civil Wars; and the
other, the sober and temperate Discourse, made in the first nick of expectation
of a late Tolleration since his present Majesty's Happy Return. The most of the
Objections are not of that weight as to deserve any staid consideration; and
all of them (being weighed according to the Rules and Laws of an Ecclesiastical
Uniformity) are, I think, evidently invalid. I will end this Narration with the
verdicts of two Learned men to this purpose; The one a great Statesman in his
time, and the other as able a Churchman in his; The one is the Lord Bacon, and
the other the late Dr. Hammond: The Lord Bacons Verdict is this; For the
particular exceptions to the Liturgy, inform as now it stands, I think diverse
of them, allowing they were just, yet seem they not to be weighty, otherwise
then that nothing ought to be accounted light in matters of Religion. The
Doctor's is this; Ever since the reproaches of men, says he, have taken
confidence to vent themselves against this Book, there has nothing but Air
and Vapor been vomited out against it: Objections of little force to conclude
any thing, but only the resolute Contumacious either ignorance or malice of the
Objectors.

Some appendant Questions concerning a Canon of Doctrines, and Liturgy,
resolved.
X. These things being thus more particularly said, we come here again to
expatiate into the general; and in the last place to subjoyn several Questione
concerning the two grand Instruments of an Uniformity as such: And the
resolution of which belongs, either more expressly or implicitly, to the things
already mentioned concerning them.

XI. In the first place then, the first of them is, The first Question.
Whether a traditional and more ceremonial, or else a written and more
doctrinal prescript of Religion be in its self least subject to popular
contests? And as to it, it is answered affirmatively, concerning the former of
these; That it is, in it self, least subject to be popularly contested. And the
reasons of it are, because a Traditional Prescript is more remote from the
peoples view, and so far forth as it is Ceremonial, but secondarily and
mediately doctrinal. But then it is purely at the good pleasure of God, whether
he will constitute such an one for his prescript of the True Religion, or not,
and when such an one is constituted by men, it is but a double Artifice. And
God, bebecause the Light of the Gospel, and the increase of Knowledge under it,
was to be displayed, has constituted the Christian prescript almost totally
Doctrinal: And, writings being the more certain way for the conservation of
things, he has constituted his prescript also perpetually written; And has
left it to Humane Prudence, pro hic and nunc, and according to the diverse
occasions of Societies, to secure it from noxious vulgar contestations by the
Laws of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity.

XII. The second Question is, whether the Scripture, The Second.
the Original Divine Canon, be not sufficient, and such, as in its place, for
the attaining the ends of an Ecclesiasticol Uniformity? The answer is, No. And
yet it detracts not at all from the Honor of the Scripture, but only argues
the weakness of men amongst whom it has its being. For the Christian Scripture
being large, and full of many and dispersed, and diversely clothed assertions
concerning the same things, it is evident that it wants a skilful and
industrious explication: Or else we will put the case in common concerning any
pretendedly Original Divino Canon, as well as it, constituted in any Society
whatsoever. And still it will hold, that when controversies arise concerning
it, a living Judge with his Humane systematical Canon, is the only natural way
for the ordinary composing of them.

XIII. We come to the Third The Third.
Question; and that is, whether the same specifical Ordinances only, and
extemporary Public Services; or else however the performance of the the
Public Divine Services in any National Church in the way of Directory, may not
be, in some sort, sufficient for the preservation of the Public Peace in that
Church? The answer is, Yes: But not so sufficient as a Liturgy. Lib. 2. Cap.
7.. 14.
For, as was said above in the Question of the like nature concerning varieties
of Communions as to some things permitted in any Church; so here also it is to
be said, That either under a Directory, or extemporary Public Services, the
people will lie more open and ready either to fall into any sort of Religious
Factions of themselves, or else to be led into them by others. And, all
Governors being bound to use all lawful means for the procuring of as much
Peace and Christian Charity as may be amongst their people; and a Liturgy being
none of the extremes in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity, but in the vulgar tongue
being in it self lawful, there is no reason in the world, but that it should
take place where it may, and where the Public Affairs will bear it, before
either of the two other sorts of Services.

XIV. The fourth The Fourth.
appendant Question is, whether a Liturgy do not transgress the Rules of
Scripture Constitutions, in hindering and laying a restraint upon the use of
Spiritual Gifts to be exercised in public by the Ministers, or Spiritual
Conducts in the performance of Divine Service in any Christian Church? The
answer to it also is, No. And the state of this case is this.

1. The Supreme Magistrate, in any Society, has in the general the power over
the use of the Gifts of all Spiritual Persons in Public: And it is one
particular part of his Indirect Power in Spirituals; and necessary also to the
preservation of the welfare of his Supreme Public Charge. Since it is evident,
both in it self, and from the experience of all Ages, that by the undue use of
those Gifts, if it be permitted, either Religion or Government, or the
consistency of Religion with Government, may be ruined in any Society. And upon
these accounts it is, that this Power of restraint over the use of these Gifts
has been ever claimed, and made use of by all Princes accordingly: And he that
shall deny it them, shall deny them the means to the end.

2. The Scriptural end of the use of all such Gifts, is, for the public good
and edification of the Church: For so says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 12.7. But the
manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal (i. e.) ut
Ecclesia fructum inde percipiat, In Loc.
says Calvin, and so others.

3. The Gifts here principally concerned, and of which the use is to be made,
are those of Knowledge, Invention, and Elocution. And if these are made use of,
either in Extemporary or Directorial Services; so are they made use of also in
the use of a Liturgy. The Knowledge, Wisdom, and Invention of those that
composed it, in the composure of it; and the Elocution of him that is employed
in the use of it, in that his actual using of it.

The immediate effects of the use of these Ministerial Gifts in a Christian
Church, are either ordinary and natural, or else extraordinary and
supernatural. The ordinary are the generating of Natural knowledge and
affections in others; the extraordinary, the opposite. And if the generating
these extraordinary effects of Sanctification may be expected to accompany the
use of either of the two sorts of the mentioned services: so also it may be
expected to accompany the due use of a Liturgy, and that at least in an equal
manner, for ought appears either from the Divine or Natural Law, either from
any general or particular precepts of them, or any promise of God annexed to
them; especially it being considered, how much the use of a Liturgy tends to
the excluding of Schisms and Heresies, and to the generating of Christian
Unity, and Charity, and Peace, (which are the consequential effects of such an
use of it) more at least then the use either of a Directory, or Extemporary
Service does.

5. And Lastly, the conclusion in this matter then is evident from these
positions and comparisons of things; That the use of Ministerial Spiritual
Gifts in the way of a Liturgy (all things being considered which belong to the
Case) may be expected to be of more benefit to any Church, and the Community in
it, then the use of those gifts in the other ways mentioned. The complaints
then in this matter are unjust, That by the use of a Liturgy in a Church, men
are abridg'd of their Christian Liberty (a part of which the use of men's gifts
in Public is not; but it is one sort of outward actions.) And so also, that
the free use of their gifts is restrained, and the like. It is true, variety
and novelty delight Humane Nature: And, the more remote from Forms, Public
Services in Religion are, the more, upon those accounts, they are apt to take
the vulgar, and to seem, diversely, to them as Lovely Songs, and the like: And
therefore they are the fitter Instruments for any Heresiark to make use of. But
he that will either settle a Church in the capacity of a Governor, or else
state his Case of Conscience aright^ in this matter in the capacity of a
private person, must consider the consequences of these things.

XV. The like to this also is the Question, The Fifth.
Whether a Liturgy may be used with so much attention of mind, and equal
degrees of affection, as a Directorical, or Extemporary Service? But the
Question is not rightly put, to argue the simple unlawfulness of a Liturgy: For,

1. Which of these two sorts of Services, either Liturgical, or Non-Liturgical
may be attended at any time, with the greater degrees of these things, it is
uncertain, according to men's several degrees of endowment with those spiritual
gifts we mentioned just now. If their invention of matter and elocution be so
prompt, as that it does not take up their minds more then either the reading or
the saying of a Liturgy by heart (perhaps after a frequent and continued use of
it) then a Non-Liturgical Service may exceed, otherwise not. And as to the
phrase of a Liturgy in this matter, and its being Spiritual: In some places it
ought to attend comprehension of sense, and Doctrinals, and Gravity and solemn
weightinesse of phrase (to poise the mind in the use of it) as well as
altogether that which is affectionate, or may be deemed Spiritual. So the
English Liturgy does; And so does even the Scripture it self. And last of all,
if the employment of the mind may be supposed to be more Spiritual, and within
its self in the use of a Non-Liturgical, then of a Liturgical Service; it
returns to this, That in a Non-Liturgical Service the invention, as it were,
hunts out for some present either phrase or matter, which the eye has formerly
read; and in a Liturgy the apprehension attends upon either the eyes present
reading, or the heart and memories present dictating to it. And so, what
advantage may be from hence, except on the Liturgies part, we do not see. It is
true, men are apt not to be so mindful of their employing their affections and
attention of mind in the use of a Liturgy, as in Services, where the faculty of
invention is necessarily put upon action: But then that is their own fault, and
not the fault of the Liturgy.

2. But we will suppose the Concession of Liturgies not being, in the simple
use of it, so capable of these things. And yet however this does not conclude
rightly for the either unlawfulness, or so much as inconveniency of a Liturgy:
Since all this, and a great deal more, will be abundantly recompensed to any
Church by its being in its self such a means of Unity and Peace, as has been
mentioned: So that thus then, and notwithstanding these exceptions to be made
against it, it does not follow, but that a Canon of Doctrines and Liturgy, and
in that kind of them and manner, as they are here asserted by us, are the two
grand instruments of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity: And that a Liturgy, Secundum
debitum Rationis, and where affairs will permit, is in its self to be preferred
before either a Directory, or Extemporary Services. We come then but to two
more Questions or Queries, secondarily concerning these things, and so we shall
conclude this Chapter.

The Sixth.
XVI. The sixth then, and first of these Questions or Queries, is, What are the
Rules that are to be proceeded by in the alteration of an Uniformity, Lib. 2.
Cap. ult.. 1.
and of these two grand instruments of it? And those are the very same that we
said above were to be proceeded by in the first framing of it; and the mention
of which is here to be recalled (viz.) That the rights of all be preserved;
that to God his right be preserved, by its crossing none of his Commands, but
assisting to the performance of them: To the Supreme Magistrate his Right, by
its being proportioned to his occasions, and the discharge of his trust: To the
Church Governors also in their way, their Rights, by its affording to them the
like means of the discharge of their function in their several places and
capacities: To the private Christian his Right, by its preserving to him the
enjoyment of his Christian Liberty, and the use of his Liberty of Conscience,
and judgment of discerning: To the Subject also his Rights, by its enjoining
nothing upon him but by Lawful Legislative Authority: And last of all, to all
these their Rights, both mixtly, and in their several respects, by its cutting
off occasions of contentions, and of corrupt wicked men's abusing and invading
these things and persons severally, to the disorder and destruction of Humane
Societies and the welfare of them. And these things are to be heeded by all
Princes, and Synods of Divines in this matter. And these general Rules are to
be applied to all particular Cases. And although perhaps many times, especially
in times of present Factions in Societies, there may be discontents arising,
and fomented, and cries made of scandals and offenses given by such Princes
proceedings, and the like, yet they ought not to heed those things, so as to
cause them at all to depart from these rules of distributive Justice in this
affair.

XVII. In the last place then, the last Question or Querie, The seventh and
last.
is, Why so great a latitude in preaching (i. e.) upon voluntary choice of
Texts and Subjects, and with men's own immediate invention of the matter on
them, is to be left open; where notwithstanding perhaps other Public Services
are stinted and restrained, either by the use of a Form and Liturgy, or else by
a more immediate and particular Directory? And the Answer to this also, is;
That,

1. Such Preaching is to be kept open for great and weighty Reasons, both
special to Christian Churches, and Common to others, and both concerning
Religion and Government, and the consistency of each with other. As to
Religion, it is the Ordinance of God: And as to the Religious ends of the use
and exercise of it, it is appointed both for the propagation of Religion
abroad, and for the more particular occasional instruction of the members of
any Church at home. As to Government, it is appointed to serve the just ends
and emergent occasions of it also: And so of the consistency of each of these
with the other.

2. And for these and the like more particular Reasons, it is, That it has
ever ordinarily been kept open in all Churches. De rebus and Imper. Lusitanor.
ad Paulum Jovium Discept.
Damianus a Goes Recites it concerning the Foreign Plantations and Dominions
of the Portugals; In quibus Regnis multi ad ipsam Religionis veritatem a
nostris Concionatoribus perducti sunt: In which Territories many are brought
over to the truth of Religion by our Preachers, says he. And Georgievez, De
Turcar. Ritu, etc. de Templis seu Meschiteorum.
concerning the Turks: Sacerdos illorum suggestum ascendit, and ad duos
circiter horas Concionatur: That their Priest goes up into the Pulpit, and
Preaches for about two hours time. And afterward of the Christian
Tributaries, Concio, and Annunciandi Evangelii munus plane interdicitur: That
Sermons, De afflict. Christian. Quae conditio de bellator: De gradibus
Episcopo. in Graecia, etc.
and the making use of the Office of Public Preaching the Gospel, is utterly
forbidden to them. Yet Chytraeus, of the Constantinopolitan Greeks, Conciones
omnino ipsis habere licet: That it is lawful for them to have Sermons. The like
says he, and others of the Russians, and others. And in the Roman Churches,
amongst their extremes of strictness in their Uniformities, yet their preaching
is adorned with the gifts and abilities of their Clergymen.

3. Yet notwithstanding the use of such Preaching in any Church, may upon some
occasions of moment requiring it, not only be made less frequent, but also for
some time totally omitted: For, although the Public Ordinances of God in
matters of Religion do, as such, oblige to the use of them Semper, and always,
yet none of them simply ad semper, and at all times, as the usual distinction
in Divinity is. And Preaching, being in it self capable of being so far abused
by corrupt wicked men in any Society, as to be made the most potent and
prevailing instrument, not only of the disturbing, but also of the utter
ruining and confounding the affairs of such Society; where such a case may
perhaps fall out, the use of that one Ordinance, either in tanto or in toto,
either in the whole or in part, either for a longer or lesser time, may and
ought to give place to the procuring the welfare of all the other Ordinances
of God, See, A summary view, Edit. Oxford, Anno 1641.
either Civil or Religious. Bishop Andrews, in his short Description of the
Church-Governments of both Testaments, relates it concerning the Muscovian
Emperor; That, being weary of the infinite strifes and contentions amongst
Preachers, and by their occasions amongst others, he forbad preaching utterly
throughout all his Dominions; and instead thereof, Commanded certain Sermons of
the Greek and Latin Fathers to be Translated, and them to be read in Public
Assemblies, without the adding of a word of men's own thereunto, upon pain of
death. But it were to be wished that no such occasions might be given to
Governors.

4. And lastly; this however is to be said in the General, that the use of all
preaching, as well as of the other Public Religious Ordinances, is to be so
modifyed and proportioned, as that it may consist every way, and in its place,
with the use of the other Religious Ordinances, and with the welfare of the
whole charge of the Magistrate in any Society. And to this end it is that all
those Laws of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity, which are used diversely and
according to the diverse occasions and constitutions of Churches, are every
where laid upon it. Sometimes the more ordinary and general matter of
preaching, (viz.) the matters of necessary belief and of practical Godliness
are prescribed in the way of more general direction: Lib. 1. De praedicatione
Episcoporum and Presbyterorum.
So in the Laws of Charlemain, Primo omnium praedicandum est omnibus
generaliter, etc. That, First of all, it is to be preached to all generally. So
in the late Letter of his present Majesty of England to the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, and the like. Sometimes again Forms of Homilies are appointed to be
used, together with the greater Latitudes in preaching, especially by either
weak or unpeaceable men. In the Roman Church, and since the breach made upon it
by the dexterity of the late Reformers in preaching, Vid. Rationale Div. Off.
Li. 4. De Praedicatione. Et Novum Rationale. Lib 2. De Praedicatiane. Et, de
ritibus Eccles. Cathol in princip. and alibi.
they have brought the vulgar to esteem going to a Sermon only as a matter of
convenience, and such as is left free to men's pleasures and opportunities,
without imputation of sin: And Durandi, durandus de Rubeis, and the other Roman
Rationales lay down directions for the using of preaching aright. And lastly,
all Churches whatsoever agree in this, that they prohibit the Public Peace to
be broken by it.

CHAP. II.
What are the General ends of such a Canon of Doctrines and Liturgy in any
National Church?
I. A National Church distinguished.

II. A National Church is ordinarily supposed to an Ecclesiastical Uniformity.

III. The Ends of a Canon of Doctrines and Liturgy distinguished.

IV. The General Ends of such a Canon of Doctrines and Liturgy in any National
Church assigned.

V. An Objection answered.

A National Church distinguished. Supra Lib. 1. Cap. 1.. 6.
I. THe more general distinction of a National Church being given above, we come
here to the more special notion of it: And so it is, either representative, or
diffused. The diffused is that which includes the whole Profession of any
Nation dispersedly taken. The representative, that which consists of some
select persons of that Profession, collected and called together: And there are
the same grounds in Nature for a Church Representative, which there are for any
other representative of the people in Civil matters whatsoever, (viz.) the
wisdom and knowledge of some in all Societies above others; and either the
difficulty or impossibility of calling the whole Society together. All are not
fit for Council to Princes; and the most of men are born to be Ruled, and not
to Rule. And, Deinde, quia difficile plebs convenire caepit, populus certe
multo difficilius, in tanta turba hominum necessitas ipsa curam Reipublicae ad
Senatum deduxit, D. de Origin Juris Lib. 2. deinde quia.
says Pomponius of the Roman State: That, afterward, because the Common
People began difficultly to come together, and the whole body of the people
truly much more difficultly; in so great a company of men, necessity it self
devolved the care of the Commonweal upon the Senate. And as this notion of a
Church representative is thus warranted by Nature; So it is not contradicted by
Scripture, nor by any necessary appropriation of the Original Word, (...), in
the New Testament. But as to those that require a president of a National
Church to be given in the New Testament, it is ridiculous; the Christian Church
then not being national, nor in an ordinary capacity to be so. A Church
representative is again either compounded only of Clergymen, and the Prince
by virtue of his Indirect Power in Spirituals presiding, (and then it is called
a National Synod, or Convocation of Divines) or both of Clericks and Laics,
and the Prince by Virtue of his Supreme Power over all presiding: And both
these, according to the occasions of Princes, and the nature of the affairs
committed to them to handle. But it is the notion of a Church National
diffused, which is, and will be principally concerned both here and hereafter.

II. A National Church is ordinarily supposed to an Ecclesiastical Uniformity.
A National Church is ordinarily supposed to an Ecclesiastical Uniformity.
Because the Chief Magistrate in every National Society has the Right of
settling it; and is ordinarily supposed to have some National Religion
established within his Society; and so is the Supreme Head upon Earth of his
own Church so established. And hence it is, that every such National Church is
independent upon any other, and not at all obliged to the observance of the
constitutions of it as such, and concerning indifferent things; but is to frame
and order all things within it self, according to its own proper occasions. And
those that do constitute the Headship upon Earth in such a Church in the
Ecclesiastical Synods, called Presbyterial, do make way (the corruptions of men
being considered) for the Ecclesiastical persons invading the Office of the
Civil Magistrate, and converting clearly into a Pope in the end. The ends of a
Canon of Doctrines and Liturgy distinguished.


III. The ends intended in a Canon of Doctrines and Liturgy, in such a National
Church, are either general, or particular: And the particular ends are either
mediate or immediate: and both do bear the notion of means toward the general
and last ends: And those are they which are here first to be assigned.

IV. The general ends then of such a Canon of Doctrines and Liturgy in any
National Church, The general ends of such a Canon of Doctrines and Liturgy, in
any National Church assigned. Supra Lib. 2. Cap. 8.. 5. An Objection answered*
and since they are the two Grand Instruments of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity,
are the same that have been heretofore assigned as the general ends of such an
Uniformity, (viz.) the preservation of the welfare of Religion and Government,
and of the consistency of Religion with Government.

V. But here occurs an Objection then: That, this is the reducing Religion to
Government: And why is not Government as well to be reduced to Religion!

Answ. It has been several times heretofore said, that it is so to be reduced
to Religion; and the Governors obligation in this particular, both in the
Court of Conscience, and in the Court of Heaven, has been mentioned: But in
the mean time the Christian Religion needs no reduction, by any Humane Arm, to
Government, since it consists with it, not only necessarily by a total
negative consistency, but also positively and eminently, as has been
heretofore declared. Lib. 1. Cap. 4.. 5, 6.
And it is none of the intent neither of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity in the
general, nor of the two Grand Instruments of it in particular, to make a
Reduction of the right precepts of Religion to any unjust Rules of Government;
but only to reduce the errors and extravigancies of men in matters of Religion
to Gods Ordinance of Government.

CHAP. III.
What are the more particular aims or ends of the Canon of Doctrines and
Liturgy in order to these three Generals.
I. THe more particular ends of the Canon of Doctrines and Liturgy described.

II. First negatively, as to an Universal inward Unity of Opinion, and the
reasons of it.

III. The first Reason.

IV. The Second.

V. The Third.

VI. The Fourth.

VII. The Fifth and last.

VIII. Secondly, positively; and that is, as to those ends, both mediate and
immediate.

IX. First, what are those immediate ends in order to the first general end of
them.

X. The first of them, in respect to each of them distinctly.

XI. The second, in respect to both of them mixtly.

XII. The third and last.

XIII. What are those more particular immediate ends, in order to the two last
general ends of such a Canon and Liturgy also?

XIV. The more particular mediate ends of them also assigned.

XV. The first of them, in respect to the three generals, and to each of the
Canon and Liturgy distinctly.

XVI. The Second.

XVII. The Third and last.

XVIII. Two appendant Questions resolved.

XIX. The first of them.

XX. The Second.

The more particular ends of the Canon of doctrines and Liturgy described.
I. THese general ends of the Canon of Doctrines and Liturgy then being thus
described, I come next to describe the more particular ends of them also: And
that first negatively, and secondly positively.

II. First of all negatively; First negatively, as to an Universal inward unity
of opinion, and the reasons of it.
And so an Universal inward Unity of opinion (the pressing of which upon men
was abovesaid to be an extreme of strictness in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity)
is none of the ends of them. And such an Unity of opinion in men, and as to the
notions they have of things, is either mediate or immediate: And it is an
universal Unity in the next and immediate notions that they have of those
things, which is here denied to be any of the ends of the Canon of Doctrines
and Liturgy in a National Church. And that for the reasons following.

The first reason.
III. First, because such an inward Unity of opinion in men is impossible (i.
e.) ordinarily, and the causes of men's variety of Opinions (which were above
assigned) being considered. Lib. 2. Cap. 6.. 6.
Absolute unity, even in Doctrines of Faith, is said, by the Scripture it self,
to be proper to men's condition only in Heaven, Ephesians. 4.13. And the causes
mentioned of men's variety of Opinions, being ordinary and natural; he that will
reduce them to the contrary absolute Unity, must first of all change even
Humane Nature it self within them, and alter them any more from being men.

The Second.
IV. Secondly, because inward Opinions touch not the Magistrates Province of
Government (.i e.) of themselves, and unless they be vented. But the Public
welfare of Religion and Government, and the consistency of each with either,
are the Public charge of the Magistrate, and the securing of them is the
general aim of the Canon and Liturgy: And the effects of men's irregular
divulging of their opinions, are the things from which they are to be secured.
It Is the publication of wicked Opinions which is condemned by all Humane Laws.
Vid. Can. 9.44, 59, 63, etc.
So the Apostolical Canons condemn the outward Acts of separation. And the Law
concerning Authimus taxes the divulged Speeches of Nestorius and Eutiches.
Novel. 42. Cap. 1. prope fin.
And Plato in his Tenth of Laws, finds fault with those who speak openly
against the Gods and their Worship. And, Horat. Carm. Lib. 3. Ode. 2.
-- Vetabo, qui Cereris Sacrum
Vulgarit Arcanae, sub iisdem
Sit trabibus, fragilemque mecum
Solvat faselum. --
I will not suffer him, who shall divulge the Holy Rites
Of mystical Ceres, to be with me under the same
Roof, or in the same Voyage
At Sea. --


V. Doctrines, expressed in general terms only in the Scripture, The Third.
ought to be expressed in such general terms also in the Canon and Liturgy;
Infra Cap.
And that because they in such things ought to be regulated by Scripture, as
will be hereafter said: And then the very generality of the terms, in the Canon
and Liturgy, intimates a liberty of men's variation in their next and immediate
notions about them. Such is the doctrine of Christ's descent into Hell, See
Article 3.
in the English Canon of Doctrines. Nay, and even in the things most
particularly declared by any Canon, on its part, it does not tie men on their
part, to any one only particular and immediate conception concerning them, as
shall be also hereafter evidenced. Infra Cap.


VI. Men's private Opinions cannot come under the Magistrates Cognizance,
because he cannot know the thoughts: The Fourth.
And therefore it is impertinent for him to intend his Canon and Liturgy for
the immediate restraint of them. Wherefore, Cogitationis paenam nemo patitur,
says Vlpian; That none suffer punishment of thought. F. De paenis Lib. 18.

Ibid. De injuriis and famosis Libel. L. Item apud.. 8.


And in the case of slander, Non omne maledictum convitium esse, sed id solum
quod cum vociferatione dictum est: That every evil Speech is not presently a
slander, but that only which is uttered with outcry and aloud.

VII. In the first and last place, The Fifth and last.
no mortal man has any right to oblige another to any particular senses
propounded by him in any doctrines of Religion. God himself does not oblige men
to impossibilities in Scripture; much less is any man invested with power,
either of himself, or by any other, to do it. Secondly, positively, and that as
to those ends, both mediate and immediate.

What are those immediate ends in order to the first general end of them. The
first of them, in respect to each of them distinctly.




VIII. This being then not the intent of the Canon and Liturgy in order to
their general ends, I come positively to assign what are the more particular
aims and intents of them: And that both mediately and immediately.

IX. First, What are the more immediate ends of them in order to the
preservation of the public welfare of Religion. And those are,

X. First of all, in respect to each of them distinctly:

1. In respect to the Canon of Doctrines, the first of this sort of ends of it
is, To exhibit a summary of the Doctrines of the Christian Religion; and that
both as a confession of Faith in respect primarily to the Church National
Representative, and also as a Standard or Rule of Doctrine in respect to the
Church National diffused.

2. In respect to the Liturgy): And the first of this sort of ends of it also
is, to be the ordinary instrument of Public Devotion, and Divine Service and
Worship; and that both in respect to its instructing of the people in any of
the Doctrines of the Canon, it being framed according to it; and also in
respect to its performing any of the other Offices tending to the exciting of
Piety and Affection in Relation to the practice of those Doctrines. Such are
the Offices which the Scripture it self performs in relation to these ends, 2 Timothy 3.16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for
Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, etc.
And such also are the Offices that the Liturgy performs, by its forms of
Exhortations, confessions of Sins, petitions to Heaven, and the like prescribed
by it; and also by its suitable Ceremonies, of diversities of postures of body,
earnestness or humbleness of voice, and the like, annexed to them, and enjoined
to be used either by the Priest or People at the performance of these things.

The second in respect to both of them mixtly.

Lib. 2. Cap. 1.. 13. and 16.


XI. The second of this sort of ends relates to both the Canon and Liturgy
mixtly, and that is, the maintaining of Charity and Peace in the National
Church, (viz.) as such Charity and Peace (as has been said above) make so much
to the benefit of Religion, and are so much commanded in Scripture; And which
(were they to be bought) were rather to be purchased with essence of Gold, then
that they should be wanting in any Church.

The third and last.
XII. The like also is the third and last end of them; and that is, the
preventing and removal of contentions in relation to matters of Religion: Lib.
2. Cap. 6.. 9. and 12.
And which contentions and opinion-feuds have been above also asserted to be so
much hurtful to Religion, and so much forbidden in Scripture.

What are those more particular immediate ends, in order to the two last
general ends, of such a Canon and Liturgy also.
XIII. The like also, only under somewhat other considerations, are the more
particular immediate ends of the Canon and Liturgy, in order to the
preservation of the welfare of Government, and the consistency of Religion with
it, (viz.) the Canons exhibiting any Doctrines of Religion concerning either of
them, and as making to the securing the welfare of either of them: And the
Liturgies instructing in them, and exhorting to them, and the like. And both of
them mixtly, their maintaining Charity and Peace, and removing contentions; the
one of these sorts of things as hurtful, and the other as beneficial to either
of them also.

The more particular mediate ends of them also assigned. The first of them, in
respect to all the three generals, and to each of the Canon and Liturgy,
distinctly.
XIV. These then being the more particular immediate ends of the Canon and
Liturgy, the mediate follow: And these also are,

XV. First, in respect to each of them distinctly, the Authorizing the
Doctrines of the Canon to be taught, and the Forms of the Liturgy to be used:
And that both of them, in respect to the yet more mediate and particular ends,
and in relation to their accomplishing all their three General, (viz.) that the
means of Knowledge and Grace may be afforded to the people: And that they may
be instructed in the Doctrines concerning Government, and the consistency of
Religion with it. For, the Canon and Liturgy being thus each of them authorized
and enjoined by the Magistrate; that which will follow will be, that they will
be made use of by the National Church, and opened and taught to the people at
the Public Ordinances, and the Doctrines of them will be treated of more at
large in Homilies, Catechisms, good Books, Pieces of practice and devotion (for
private and retired use) and the like: And by these means, the due respects
will be kept up to Government, and the consistency of Religion with it will be
preserved; And the salvation of souls will be provided for, and the Life and
Power of Godliness succored. Truly souls are precious and of infinite value,
both in themselves, and also in respect to their sublime capacity and
immortality in another world: they are like the pieces of Silver which the
woman sought for with a candle in the Gospel. And, as Toledo said to the Legate
from Rome in the Council of Trent upon occasion, That, He had heard it often
preached, that the saving of one Soul was so dear to Christ, See, Hist. of the
Council of Trent. Lib. 4. prope fin.
that he would descend again and suffer on the Cross to gain it. But in the
mean time, an Ecclesiastical Uniformity, while it lays but the due restraints
upon these things which we have mentioned (according to the diverse exigencies
and occasions of Countries) is unjustly accused of suppressing the power of
Godliness.

XVI. The second The Second.
of these mediate ends is, in respect to both the Canon and Liturgy distinctly
also, (viz.) the obliging men to the public profession, in respect to the
Doctrines contained in the Canon, and to the use of the publicly authorized
Forms, in respect to the Liturgy: And both these for the procuring of that
Peace and Charity, the great medium for the procuring of which such an Unity of
profession, and of the use of public worship, Lib: 2. Cap. 7.. 9, 10, 11, 12.
were said to be above; and which Peace and Charity are so beneficial both to
Religion and Government, and the consistency of Religion with Government (as
was said above also) and so much commanded in Scripture. And it is certain,
Lib. 2. Cap. 1.. 13, 14, 15, 16.
that not only an unity of profession, but also a customary use of the very
oneness of words and syllables in a Liturgy, is (in the respect which it has
to Humane Nature) promotive of Charity. There is a notable relation in Plutarch
to this purpose, concerning a crafty King, De Iside and Osirid.
Who guessing at his Enemies the Egyptians, their being too strong for him, if
they agreed in their minds and Councels, and should band together, took this
course; He enjoined each Country to worship diverse Beasts, which were enemies
by Nature, and would prey upon each other. And the effect of it was this, That,
Whilst every one defended his Beast, at last it came to pass, that by the
enmity of their Beasts, the people themselves at unawares became such enemies
one to another, that he easily subdued them.

XVII. Last of all, The Third and last.
the third and last of these mediate ends of the Canon and Liturgy are, in
respect to each of them distinctly also: And that is, in respect to the Canon
its restraining men from the open divulging of their Opinions in order to the
contesting them; and in respect to the Liturgy, the restraining them from the
use of diverse sorts of worship; and both these in order to the preventing and
removal of contentions, for the preventing of which such a restraint was above
assigned to be the only necessary means; Lib. 2. Cap. 7.. 15. Lib. 2. Cap. 6..
9, 10, 11, 12.
and which were said to be every ways so hurtful both to Religion and
Government, and the consistency of Religion with Government; and so much also
forbidden in Scripture.

Two appendant Questions resolved.
XVIII. Here then come to be debated the several particulars concerning a
restraint its being laid upon the use of the Sacred Ordinances of God. We shall
only absolve two Questions or Queries concerning them.

1. Concerning the manner of using them in Public.

2. Concerning the simple use of them more privately.

The first of them.
XIX. First, in what manner in the general they are to be made use of in the
public; and what are the circumstances that are to attend such the use of
them; and particularly to what degree the use of them is to be extended, (viz.)
of what length the ordinary prescript form of Divine Service, and the other
Offices in the Liturgy, ought to be; how frequently Preaching or Sermons are to
intervene, and be had, either on the more solemn stated Sabbaths, or other
Festivals, or on any other the like days of public convening in any Church?

Answ. 1. Circumstances, attending the Ordinances of God, and the manner of
using them, are ordinarily said to be of two sorts; either natural, or
voluntary and instituted. The Natural are only secondarily and dependently so,
(i. e.) such as are taken Naturally to cohere with things only in relation to
their being, according to the received customs of any Country. The voluntary
are those which are instituted more ad libitum; and if they be thoroughly
considered, they rather are to be said to differ only in degree, then in kind
(in this matter) from the former: Both because they are supposed to be suitable
to the things signified and meant by them, and also because there is always
supposed to be a reason for the Humane appointment of whatsoever circumstances
shall attend so weighty matters as the Sacred Ordinances of God.

2. The particular ways and manner in which the Ordinances of God (the means
of Knowledge and Grace mentioned) are to be used (and as attended with these
circumstances) in any Church, are left undetermined in the Divine Law of the
Christian Religion. And there are only the general Rules laid down concerning
all such things in the external regiment of the Church, (viz.) of doing all
things decently and in order, 1 Cor. 14.40. and 26.
to edification; of serving God with reverence and Godly fear, and the like.
But the modification of these generals, when reduced into particulars, is left
to the diverse conditions and occasions of particular Churches, pro hic and
nunc, and according to present circumstances of affairs. And it was impossible
that it should have been left otherwise, considering the diversities of the
necessities of Countries every way, and that the Christian Church was intended
to be spread over all the world.

3. The putting these matters into form then in every society is left supreamly
and principally to the Supreme Magistrate: And he has a right to the doing of
it, as he is the person who ought to have the framing of the Ecclesiastical
Uniformity in his Society (as was above mentioned) partly by virtue of his
Supreme Power over all, and partly by virtue of his indirect power in
Spirituals. Vid. Lib. 2. Cap. 10. 2. and 4.
Hence the diversities of customs and ceremonies attending the Divine Service
in diverse Churches. Hence the Canonical hours, and the like: Only the
Magistrate is to see that his Divines, assisting him, or any others, do take a
special care, that according to the general Rules of the Divine Law mentioned,
all things be done to the promotion of the welfare both of Religion and
Government, and the consistency of each with either in this matter. And it is
convenient that there be one only form of using these things (suitable to the
other parts of the Ecclesiastical Uniformity) throughout the Princes Dominions.
And it is of great moment, that there be also Uniform Vogues or Voices, made to
pass currantly amongst the people, concerning the observance of all of them.

XX. The second The Second.
Question or Querie then, is, concerning the simple use of these Ordinances of
God more privately, and that in respect to the great matter of the Conventus,
or Conventiculi, the lesser meetings in houses or Conventicles, as they are
called at this day in England, (viz.) Whether, and how far forth such
Convenings are Lawful, and accordingly to be permitted by the Prince in any
Society?

Answ. 1. In the first place, there is no doubt but that Prayer and Preaching,
and the like exercises of Religion, which are made use of in those
Conventicles, are in themselves the Ordinances of God. So that that need not to
be pleaded for them with so great and popular a cry made amongst the vulgar as
it uses to be (and has been in England) by the supporters of them.

2. But then all the Question, is, concerning the use of them in such a way;
whether, when so used, they are to be looked upon as lawfully used, and as
continuing to be the Ordinances of God? Truly this case (as all others) is to
be judged from the diversities of circumstances attending it. Things in
themselves may be good, but by the abuse of them made evil. Things in
themselves may be the Ordinances of God; but by the use of them in such or such
a way, turned into the Engines of men to work their designs by. It was a case
like to this which was disputed against Pope Paul the fifth, by the Reputed
Father Paul the Venetian: The State of Venice, See in his Answer to the Bopes
Bull. Page 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. etc.
it seems amongst other things, finding the building of Churches, Monasteries,
and the like, at men's pleasure within her Territories, to be inconvenient and
dangerous to the Public, because of the multitudes of strangers who did resort
to use and inhabit them, and the like; and who were contrary in their customs
of Life, and had ends diverse from those of the Commonwealth; Upon this the
State made a Law, That none should build any of those Religious places without
License. P. 17. Ibid.
And who will not marvel (says Father Paul) to hear it objected against this
Law, that to build such Religious Houses, it is in it self no wicked Act? As
though a work of its own nature, and in it self good, if it be performed
without due circumstances, were not vicious, and did not deserve Chastisement:
Not from the Matter or Object only, Ethic. 2. Cap. 6.
(says Aristotle) and after him all the Divines) is an action construed, but
from the integrity of all the circumstances. The like prohibitions to this also
are to be found in all Laws. De operibus publicis, L. opus.
Opus novum privato etiam sine Principis Authoritate facere licet, says Macer
the Civilian in the old Pandects: That it was lawful for a private man to erect
any new work without the leave of the Prince first obtained: But, Praeterquam
si ad aemulationem alterius Civitatis pertineat, vel materiam Seditionis
praebeat: Only excepting it should perhaps tend to emulation betwixt Cities, or
afford matter of Sedition, Novel. 67. in Tit.
or the like. And in the Novels of Justinian, in the Title, Vt nullus fabricet
Oratorii domos, praeter voluntatem Episcopi, etc. And elsewhere frequently the
building of Monastries and Churches, Ibid. Constit. 5. Cap. 1. and alibi.
and the like, is forbidden, before License obtained from the Bishop,
consecrating of the ground by him, and such other things to be performed. C. De
sacro sanct. Eccles. L. Quoniam in plerisque Decret. tertia part. distinct. 1.
Capit. Lib. 5. l. 229. and 230, etc.
And in the Code, the like is the Law of prohibiting any one to make Jesus
Christ his Heir, without the observance of due circumstances in it. And, in the
body of the Canon Law, the Rubric De Consecratione, in the Decretum, and the
like may be viewed. And the like things are to be found in the Laws of
Charlemaine, and of others. And, last of all, the like to these cases now is
the case of prohibiting Conventicles in any Princes Dominions.

3. The general Rule then from whence the goodness or evil of the circumstances
accompanying them, in this case, is to be judged of, is, their tending either
to the hurt or benefit of the Public Charge of the Magistrate: If they tend to
the hurt of it, it makes them unlawful; if otherwise, the contrary. And the
circumstances accompanying them, may tend so evidently and eminently to the
hurt of that charge, that it cannot by any means be preserved without the
suppression of them. Let us but weigh the present case in England. Suppose they
are kept up in any Society, in a time of Parties or Factions stirring in it.
Suppose those Factions only keep them up. Suppose that the very Fame and Repute
of those persons who perform the Acts of Praying and Preaching at them do work
upon the others who frequent them to be of their Parties; as it will most
certainly do, and prevail mightily with the weaker sort of men, although those
who are the Orators do not neither so directly or expressly Pray or Preach up
their Parties in the mean time. Suppose yet further, that these Parties
separate from the Public Ordinances, or National way of Administration of
Religion in any Society. Suppose that they have avowedly and openly declared
their intents of altering the present Lawful and Established Government, either
in Church or State; and so evidently these meetings tend to the public
contesting of opinions, and the utter breach of the Peace both in Church and
State, and to the overthrow of the present Lawful Established Government in
both. Suppose that the Public Magistrate has had this long experience of
them, that they have been kept up for nothing else in the bottom, or by any of
the heads of those Parties, and have tended to nothing else. Suppose yet again
that they are kept up at the time of the administration of the Public
Ordinances. in the Church, and do withdraw men from the partaking in them.
Suppose lastly, that upon these and the like considerations they are strictly
prohibited by Lawful Authority, and Laws made by it. Certainly these things
being weighed, no considerate man will concede such meetings to be lawful, and
the prayer and preaching that is used in them to be used in a due way, and to
be attended with right circumstances in the use of them. In vain then are the
convenings of the Apostles and Primitive Christians in Houses (who had a
special command from Heaven (as Abraham had for the sacrificing his Son) for
the setting up of the Christian Religion by such ways at that time) alleged
for these meetings, and the justification of them; and the case of which is far
otherwise, in the circumstances belonging to them.

4. If the case of these meetings then may be so, the Supreme Magistrate is the
person who has the Supreme Right of Judging concerning them, and of laying a
restraint upon the use of the Ordinances of God in them: And that by virtue of
his indirect power in spirituals. Lib. 3. Cap. ^,. 14.
And what was said above concerning the manner of using spiritual gifts in
public; the same is to be said here concerning the simple and more private use
of these Ordinances of God in these meetings: That he that shall deny to the
Civil Magistrate this his Natural Right of laying a restraint upon them, shall
deny to him the means to the end, and leave him destitute of the faculties
necessary for the preservation of his public charge, and the welfare of it.

5. Yet however it may be also, that sometimes these meetings may be innocent,
nay, promotive of the welfare of Religion: And the Magistrates Government, by
his suppressing of them, may inconsist with Religion. And therefore it is, that
sometimes they have been permitted by the Laws of Countries: Nec suspecti esse
debent caetus proborum hominum, and qui latere non quaerunt nisi cogantur, De
Jure Ec^^i. L. 2. Cap. 20,. 49.
says Grotius: That neither yet ought the convenings of honest men to be
suspected, and who seek not to lie hid, unless being compelled to it. And,
Sacerdotes in quibuslibet aedibus sacrificandi, Deique Arcana enarrandi
facultatem habeant, In Novellis Constit. Constable. 4. ad fin.
says the Emperor Leo: That the Priests should have liberty of offering their
Spiritual Sacrifices, and of declaring the secrets of God in any houses
whatsoever. And in the Digests, D. de Collegiis. and corporibus, L. 1.
Marcianus: Sed Religionis causa (milites) coire non prohibentur, dum tamen per
hoc non fiat contra Senatus consultum, quo illicita Collegia arcentur: That
Soldiers were not prohibited to come together for the sake of exercise of
Religion; yet however while by this nothing was done contrary to the decree of
the Senate, by which unlawful meetings were forbidden. And the like other Laws
might be recited: But then

6. And lastly, because these meetings do in themselves afford so great and
ready an opportunity to Heresiarks and Ringleaders of Sedition to promote
their several designs by: And because also, that by reason of the corruptions
of men (which will scarce temper themselves from attempting mischievous
practices, when such opportunities are afforded) and other the ordinary
concomitants of these meetings, they are seldom found to be innocent; therefore
it is that all Laws and Advices in Policy (ordinarily) have prohibited them.
And that either simply and in themselves, or else as being de facto mischievous
to Common-Weals. So if we will look amongst the Greeks and Romans, the Laws
and Councels of the Christian Church, of the more ancient or modern Ages of it.
Amongst the Greeks, Prope fin.
first of all Plato, in his Tenth of Laws: Sit autem Lex hujusmodi, says he,
simpliciter cunctis imposita; Sacella nemo in privata domo habeat: Cum vero
animum quis ad sacrificandum induxerit, ad publica sacrificaturus accedat, etc.
That there should be some such kind of Law imposed upon all without exception;
That none should have any lesser Chapels in any private house: And when any
had a mind to offer Sacrifice, that he should go and Sacrifice at the public
places of worship. The like Isocrates in his second Oration to Nicocles. Prope
fin.
(...), etc. Make no Fraternities, nor Assemblies, without my Authority: For
such kind of conspiracies, as they are of great moment in other sorts of
Policies, so in Monarchy they are dangerous. And so others amongst the Romans.
Vid. Fragment. 12 Tab. Annex. Cod. Theodos.
It is reputed for one of the Actions derived from the Laws of the Ten Tables:
Si quis. nox. in. Vrbe. caetus. agitasit. capital. esto: If any man shall
gather together Companies by night in the City, let it be a capital offense.
And in the body of the Civil Law, Sacra loca ea sunt quae public dedicata
sunt, F. De Rerum divisione and qualitat. L. 9. ^. 1. and 2.
sive in Agro, sive in Civitate sunt, says Vlpian: That those are holy places
which are publicly consecrated, whether they be in the Country, or in the
City. And, Sciendum est locum publicum tunc sacrum fieri posse, cum princeps
eum dedicaverat vel dedicandi dederit potestatem: That we must know that a
public place is then made holy, when the Prince has Consecrated it, or else
given power of consecrating it. And again, Divus Severus rescripsit, etiam eos,
Ibid. De Offic. Praefecti Vrb. L. 1. in sin.
qui illicitum Collegium cogisse dicuntur, apud praefectum urbis accusandos
esse: That the Emperor Severus wrought back, that those that were said to
gather together an unlawful Company, were to be accused before the Governor of
the City. And after him Cajus, Neque Societas, neque Collegium, Ibid. Quod
cuju^que universitatis nomine, vel contra eam agatur. L. 1. De extraordinariis
criminibus. L. sub praetextu.
neque hujusmodi corpus passim omnibus haberi conceditur: That it was not
conceded to all alike to have either a Society, or Company, or any such kind of
fellowship incorporate. And again Vlpian, Sub praetextu Religionis, vel sub
specie solvendi voti caetus illicitos nec a veteranis temptari oportet: That
unlawful meetings, under pretense of Religion, or under the color of paying
vows, were not to be attempted, no not by the old Soldiers themselves. And the
like others. In Corp. Jur. Civil.
If we look into the Laws and Councels of the Christian Church, it is the 30th
of the Apostolical Canons: Si quis Presbyter, proprium aspernans Episcopum,
seorsum Conventicula egerit, etc. deponitur: That if any Priest, despising his
own Bishop, should hold Conventicles apart by himself, etc. he should be
deposed. And again, Can. 63.
Si quis Clericus aut Laicus Synagogum Judaeorum, aut Haereticorum
conventiculum ingressus fuerit, ut preces cum illis conjungat, deponitor, and a
communione secluditor: That if any either Clerick or Laick should go into a
Synagogue of the Jews, or a Conventicle of Heretics, that he might join in
prayer together with them, he should be deposed, and, excommunicated. And
again, Si quis, etc. cum Judaeis jejunacerit, Can. 69.
aut communem festum diem cum ipsis egerit, etc. deponitor, si Laicus a
communione segregator: That if any one should fast with the Jews, or celebrate
any solemn festival with them, or the like, Vid. C. De summa Trin. L. nullus,
etc. Et, de Episcop. and Cler. l. Conventicula, etc. Et de Hereticis, and
Manich. L. Cuncti heretici. Et L. Arriani and Macedoniani, and L. damnato and
L. quicunque in hac Sacra Vrbe, etc. Et Novel. Constitut. 67. Cap. 1. etc. Et
Constit. 131. Cap 8. and cap. 14. and constit. 132. in praefat. etc. Et Feudor.
lib. 2. Tit. 53. etc. Vid. De Cret. Part. 1. Distin. 17. and alibi. Et part. 3.
distinct 1. and alibi.
he should be deposed, and if he were a Laick, that he should be
excommunicated. In the Code and Novels also of Justinian, and the other parts
of the new Civil Law, infinite are the particular Laws made against
Conventicles. They are called so by way of reproach, they are prohibited under
the penalty of forfeiture of the houses in which they were kept, and the like.
The body of the Canon Law, we may be sure, concurs with the Civil in this
matter: Both in the Decretum, the Extravagants, and other parts of it. And the
like Laws are to be found in the Theodosian Code; and the like Canons in
Councels. In the Council of Antioch, the fifth Canon. In that of Laodicea,
Canon the 9th. In the fourth of Carthage, Can. 71. and the like. And last of
all, the like are the more modern Laws and Constitutions of Countries. Boterus
gives the Directions, Quomodo Rebellium conventicula impediantur: How the
lesser Convenings of Rebels may be hindered. And, in the Laws of Charlemaine,
many are the like provisions made against such kinds of meetings. And in the
very Statutes of Geneva, The Captain General shall be diligent (says the
Statute) and vigilant over all the Town: He shall gather no assembly suspect,
nor make any Conventicle which may be a preparative to Sedition, Tumult, or
Mutiny, etc. And again, If any do perceive any manner of practice, Et
extravagant. commun. Lib. 1. De Treuga et pace prope sin. Et Lib. 3. de
reliquin et venerat. Sanctor. Cap. 2. etc. Vide Cod. Theodos. Lib. 16. De
Haereticis. Tit. 5. Nullus Haereticis, etc. Vid. Council. Ancyran. Can. 18. and
Council. Antioch. Can. 5. and Laodic. Can. 9. and Carthag. 4. Can. 71, etc. Apud
Carranz. Vid. de Politia illust. lib. 5. Cap. 7. Vid. Capitulare Lib. 5. L. 3.
and L. 118. and L. 230. and lib. 6. 101. 198, etc. See the laws and Statutes.
p. 22. Of the Office of the Captains, etc. and p. 37. the preservation, etc.
See Sir Edw. Turners Speech to the King, Anno 1664. See the Ecclesiastical
Canons, Can. 72. And certain considerations, etc. said to be the Lord Bacons.
p. 29, 30.
or conspiracy against the Principality of this City, or against the Word of
God, etc. And in the last place, in England, the Speaker of the House of
Commons in this present Parliament, in one of his late Speeches to the King,
has called the Conventicles held there, The Seminaries of the Divisions in
England. And it was upon the accounts that have been mentioned, that the
Meetings heretofore, called Prophesyings in England, were prohibited also by
Authority. And thus then for this Second Question.

CHAP. IV.
Of the inward Unity of Assent, which is supposed to the outward Unity of
Profession, and use of Public Worship in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity.
I. THe great weight of the things contained in this Chapter.

II. The immediate inward Unity of Assent denied to be the kind of assent here
to be mentioned.

III. Yet there may be such an Unity of Assent in men in part.

IV. But yet this is not the kind of it, that is to be fixed upon here, neither.

V. The Positive stated, and what this kind of such Assent is.

VI. The Third Notions assigned, in which it is to terminate.

VII. The Reasons why it is here to be fixed upon.

VIII. Two cautions subjoined to this the fixation of it.

IX. The first of them.

X. The Second.

XI. The conclusion drawn from these things.

XII. Two appendant Questions resolved.

XIII. The first of them.

XIV. The Second.

I. THat which is the main drift and scope of this Chapter, The great weight of
the things contained in this Chapter.
is of great moment toward the pacification and satisfaction of Conscience, in
its submission to the Ecclesiastical Laws of Princes, (viz.) the assignation of
what kind of assent it is that is supposed to the external profession and use
of things, either in respect to matters of Doctrine, An immediate inward unity
of assent denied to be the kind of assent here to be mentioned.. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7. Lib. 2. Cap. 7.. 9, 11, 12.
or Worship and Practice, in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity.

II. An immediate inward unity of assent then being denied in the former
Chapter, and denied to be that kind of assent in man which was said (above) to
be supposed to the External Acts of profession and use of public worship; it
is evident that it is not it which is here to be assigned and fixed upon as a
sufficient ground for such profession, and use or practice of things.

Yet there may be such an unity of assent in men in part.
III. But although such an universal inward unity of assent is not ordinarily
possible, nor to be expected to be in men; yet however it does not from thence
follow, but that there may be such an unity in them in part (i. e.) in respect
to some things, whether matters of belief or practice, and in some notions that
they have concerning those things. Things may be perhaps so plainly and
particularly expressed, (as is the case of the fundamentals of the Christian
Religion) or else there may be the same causes of the same immediate notions of
things, cooperating in several persons at the same time, and as to some
things. And these things are possible in Nature.

But yet this is not the kind of it, that is to be fixed upon here neither.
Lib. 2. Cap. 7,. 8. in fin.
IV. But because (as was said above) that such a profession and use of worship
was enquired after, as might be an ordinary stated medium for procuring a
charitative communion amongst men; and because the assent supposed to both of
them ought to be proportionable and adequate to the universality of them both:
And because this Unity of assent (here mentioned) is also but partial, either
as to things, or persons, and but accidental, either as to those things, or
persons, or times, and cases up and down in the world; therefore it is, that
this is not the kind of unity of ascent, which is here to be fixed upon neither.

The positive stated, and what that kind of such assent is.
V. So then we come to the positive stating of it; and that is, that the kind of
inward unity of assent, which is supposed to the outward unity of profession,
and use of public worship in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity in any national
Church, is, an inward unity of assent in aliquo tertio, and in some third
notions concerning things.

The third notions assigned, in which it is to terminate.
VI. And those third notions then, in which such ascent is to terminate, are,
those of the Truth and Lawfulness of things. Of the truth of them, in respect
to the Canon of Doctrines, and the matters of Doctrine, which profession of
assent is to be made to; And of the lawfulness of them, in respect to the use
of the Liturgy, and the matters of Worship and Practice, in the use and
practice of which, Lib. 2. cap, 7.. 12. in fin.
such profession of ascent was said (above) to be involved also. And this is
all the kind of assent then, which is supposed by Princes to be given by men to
their Ecclesiastical Laws (viz.) that they should believe the Doctrines of
their National Church to be true, and their Public Worship to be Lawful. And
this Concession of Princes is one of the most principal of those derivative
Latitudes or Liberties which were said above to belong to private persons in
relation to their performance of obedience to the Ecclesiastical Establishments
of those Princes, Lib. 2. cap. 11.. 6.
and to be also the derivative rights of those private persons in that matter.
And, as to the more particular, and next, and immediate notions, under which
those private persons think either of these sorts of things, either Doctrines
or Worship, to be so, either true or lawful; Princes meddle not with them, nor
look not upon them as in themselves belonging to their Province.

VII. The great reason then why this kind of inward assent, The Reason why it
is here to be fixed upon.
is it which is here thus to be fixed upon, is, because it has all the
properties which such an assent (viz.) as must stand in its place in an
Ecclesiastical Uniformity) ought to have; And those are,

1. It permits to men their Liberty of Conscience, and of the ordinary exercise
of their judgment of discerning (which were asserted as their primitive
Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Rights above) and also their humane necessity of
variety in their opinions and immediate notions concerning things, Lib. 2. Cap.
3.. 2, 3, etc.
which has been above also more then once asserted.

2. It is therefore both lawful, Lib. 2. Cap. 1.. 7. and Cap. 6.. 6. Vid. and
alibi.
as supposed by the Magistrate to the external profession, and also ordinarily
and universally possible, in respect to the members of his Society, and the
external profession, its being an ordinary stated medium for charity amongst
them. And,

3. And lastly, it is therefore also, and as it is so every ways lawful in its
self, and ordinarily possible, a ground sufficient, both in respect to God and
Conscience, for men's making such an outward profession (of assent) to
Doctrines, and for their using the national worship.

VIII. This assent then to these third notions of things being that kind of it
which men are thus generally supposed to unite in; Two cautions subjoyned to
this the fixation of it.
there are only two cautions here further to be subjoyned to this our
assignation of it as such: And those are,

IX. First of all, The first of them.
the first respecting the positive part of an Uniformity, and men's making the
external profession mentioned; and that is, That in order to the making of it,
they collect rationally and according to the due Rules of Interpretation (laid
down hereafter) and not absurdly and carelessly concerning their immediate
notions of things. For otherwise, it is trifling with God, Infra Cap. 8.
and colluding with Conscience, if men shall not do their duties in this
business.

X. The second respecting the negative part of an Uniformity, The Second.
and men's not injuring the charge of the Magistrate by their opinion-feuds, and
breach of the peace by them; and that is also, That although perhaps they may
variously differ in their immediate notions which they have of things, yet that
they do not in the mean time divulge those their differences however any way to
their such breaking of the peace and public contesting of opinions as is
mentioned. The Scripture says, Romans 14.4.
To his own Master every man stands or falls; and therefore, Who art thou
that judge another man's Servant? And if a man will perform the good and
charitable office of instructing others aright, it must be done with Meekness,
Love, Humility, and the like; and there is no room here for men's venting their
irregular passions, and mistaken zeal, and their calling for fire from Heaven,
as the Apostles said Elias did.

The conclusion drawn from these things.
XI. In the last place then, if the things here mentioned in this Chapter were
duly thought upon, and if the use of them were made aright, and as it ought to
be in Churches, and according to their variety of occasions, and by all in
their several places; How little of that murmuring would there be against
Princes and Churchmen, and their Ecclesiastical Laws? How little of that
complaining of oppression of conscience, and the like, which is many times so
frequent abroad in the world?

Two appendant questions resolved.
XII. These things then being said, two Questions or Queries appendant to them
are here last of all to be resolved: And those are;

1. In relation to the outward acts of profession, and the use of Public
Worship, their being regulated by Humane Laws; and where some one or more
persons may be supposed to be, who are of such a profession, as is outwardly
secluded from being at all made in any Society, and which may perhaps so differ
in the kind of it, either more generally or particularly, from the national
profession, as that it is contradictorily opposite to it, and so inconsistent
with it under any notion whatsoever.

2. The second is, in relation to the defense of the True Faith, and that by
contending for it.

The first of them.
XIII. First then, How far forth the Magistrate may de Jure compel men in the
case mentioned, to unite with the national profession?

Answ. 1. Negatively, and on the peoples part, he may compel them universally
and absolutely not to make the contrary profession of any false Religion: And
so he may compel them also generally and limitedly, and where his public
occasions do require it, not to make the profession of the true Religion to
such or such degrees of solemnity: and they are bound to obey, where no special
reason obliges to the contrary, say the Casuists, and all the Divines. And the
reasons of these things are evident, both from the Law of Nature, and the
Divine Law. From the Law of Nature, because it is not the intent of the true
Religion at any time, by the same act of profession more to hurt humane Society
then to benefit it self. And from the Divine Law; See Mat. 10.16. to 23. Mat.
12.15, 16. Mat. 14.13. Jo. 10.39, 40. Acts 9.25. etc.

2. Negatively, on the Magistrates part; he may not compel them in a direct and
alsolute sense to the positive act of uniting with the national profession; and
that because the concession of such right of compulsion in him, includes
concession of Sin: And they ought not neither to be compelled by him, either
where the national Religion is false, and so the act of profession of it is
sinful in its self, or elsewhere it is against Conscience with them, and so
that act is sinful by accident: And therefore the Primitive Councels of the
Christian Church enjoined repentance and other spiritual punishments in the
case of Sacrificing to Idols, eating in their Temples, and the like, and that
whether through compulsion or otherwise: So the Ancyran Councels, Can. 8. and
Can. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, Council. Ancyran. apud Carranz. Vid.
and so others.

3. And Lastly, and positively, in respect to both the Magistrate and the
People: But yet the Magistrate, on his part, may compel them on their part, in
an elective and relative sense (i. e.) either to change the soil, or suffer
present penalties, even to Martyrdom, and death it self, Lib. 1. Cap. 1.. 8.
if he see cause (as was above in the beginning of this discourse employed) or
else to unite with the National Profession. And this is practiced, and has
ever been in all Societies, and is a Right necessary to the support of the
welfare of the Magistrates Charge, and belongs to him by virtue of his Supreme
Power over all; and both by the Law Natural and Divine; by the first primarily
and fundamentally; and by the second, secondarily, and by consent: And that
also because it is the only natural way for securing the Magistrates Charge,
there being no room for any effect to be expected from Church censures in this
Case. Quid Ecclesia? says Beza, Nempe ex verbo Dei, De Haereticis magistratu
puniend. Arg. 1. In confirm. propros. Quaest.
si infaelix ille corrigi alia ratione non potuerit; Satanae eum tradet, ut
discat non blasphemare. Ille contra sese libens, and ultro ab Ecclesia
sejunget. Esto igitur in Ecclesia Magistratus Christianus. What can the Church
do (viz.) according to the direction of the Word of God, if that unhappy person
may not be otherwise amended? it will deliver him to Satan, that he may learn
not to blaspheme. He on the contrary willingly, and of his own accord, will
separate himself from the Church. Let there be therefore in the Church a
Christian Magistrate.

XIV. The second The Second.
Question or Querie, is, How far forth the Faith once delivered to the Church
ought to be contended for?

Answ. 1. The terms of the question, suppose it to be the Faith indeed, which
is contended for; for else it is in it self either thankless, or sinful, to
contend for it.

2. This Question is to be determined according to the more general
determination of the lawfulness or unlawfulness of Religious Contests above
stated: And that is, Lib. 2. Cap. 1.. 4.
so far forth as it does make to the hurt of any part of the charge of the
Magistrate; and that either simply or comparatively, it ought not to be
contended for. And the Reasons for this are evident (viz.) because the
Christian Religion is not supposed to command any thing as a duty, which may
render either it hurtful to it self, or else to Humane Society.

3. And Lastly: The affirmitive then is implied in this Negative; That so far
forth as it makes to the benefit of the Magistrates Charge, it may and ought to
be contended for. And these general Rules are to be applied to all particular
cases. But yet because all public contentions are ordinarily dangerous, and
men do seldom proceed regularly, and as they ought to do, in these Religious
Contests; therefore it is that, both in their venting and managing of them,
they do use to be the more narrowly watched over by the Laws of all
Ecclesiastical Uniformities.

CHAP. V.
How the Canon and Liturgy ought to be Composed, in order to their answering to
their General Ends.
I. A Due care ought to be taken in the composing of the Canon and Liturgy, in
order to their serving their general ends.

II. The first Rule to be observed in it, as to the matter of them.

III. The Second.

IV. The first also to be observed, as to the manner of the composing of them;
and that in order to their being true and lawful.

V. The Second.

VI. The case concerning the Princes having power of prohibiting Heretical
Synods determined.

VII. The first Rule to be observed in the composing the Canon and Liturgy, in
relation to the number of Doctrines, or sub-alternate kinds of forms which they
consist of.

VIII The Second.

IX. The last Rule to be observed in the Composition of this the Canon and
Liturgy.

I. THe Canon of Doctrines and Liturgy, A due care ought to be taken in the
composing of the Canon and Liturgy, in order to their serving to their general
ends.
being of so great moment as has been mentioned; it cannot be thought but that
a due and proportionable care ought to be taken in the composing of them: And
that both as to the matter and manner of their composition: And as to both, in
relation to their serving to their general ends. And what those Rules are then
that are requisite to be observed in the composition of them accordingly, we
come here to describe.

II. And because the third notions of True and Lawful, The first Rule to be
observed in it, as to the matter of them.
are those under which the national assent is supposed to be given to them;
Therefore that is the first Rule that is to be observed as to the matter of
them, That all due care be taken, that the Doctrines of the Canon be true, and
that the forms of the Liturgy be lawful to be used. And this principally for
Religions sake, and either as to the procuring or preservation of the welfare
of it.

The Second.
III. As to the quantity and number of Doctrines that is to be comprehended in
the Canon, it ought to be regulated according to the occasions of Churches; as
has been hinted sometimes heretofore: And that because, the public good, and
the welfare of the charge of the Magistrate, being the last and general end of
the whole Uniformity it self, and of all instruments of it whatsoever; it must
of necessity follow, that the occasions of it are to be served by the Canon in
this matter. And the occasions of Churches relating to the whole charge of the
Magistrate are either common and ordinary; and in Answer to them, a number of
Doctrines sufficient for the ordinary preservation of the welfare of that
charge should be set forth in the Canon: Or else they are special and
extraordinary; and then the special cases are also severally to be respected.
And the like to this also, Mutatis mutandis, is to be said concerning the
matter of the Liturgy, either as to the quantity, or subalternate and
subordinate kinds of it. And whether it consist most either of Prayers, Hymns,
Creeds, Lessons, or the like.

The first also to be observed, as to the manner of the composing of them, and
that in order to their being true and lawful.
IV. We come then next to the manner of the composing these two grand
instruments of an Uniformity; and in relation to that, first of all, in order
to the Canon and Liturgy, their being true and lawful. And the first Rule to be
observed as to that, is, That they be regulated by Scripture: And by it, either
as to the positive or natural laws of God contained in it: And as to either of
them, either by what is expressed in it, or else only employed and deduced by
right reason, and rational collection from it. And thus both of them are to be
regulated, both as to the nature of the terms (whether more general or
particular) that things are expressed in, or else as to the sense or importance
of them, where diverse Texts and Phrases concerning the same things contribute
necessarily and mutually (like candles) to the lightning one another. And so
also, as to the phrase and style in which things are expressed, both in the
Canon and Liturgy. In the forming of which a great deal of knowledge and
wisdom, and prudence is to be made use of, according to the diversities of the
occasions of Churches and Countries (I mean principally as to the Liturgy) and
the like.

The Second.
V. The ordinary way then for the accomplishing these and all such things, is,
By the making use of a Synod of Divines; which because it is the last way of
finding out truth in this world in matters of Religion; therefore nature
directs to the use of it (i. e.) generally and ordinarily, and where there is
not some special and present reason against it in any Princes Dominions. And
this has always ordinarily been the way used for the accomplishing such
matters in all Ages of the Christian Church, and in all Times and Countries
down along the Ages of the world. Innumerable examples might be given of it:
And this Synod of Divines has thus in the general, and as such, an antecedent
and natural right more properly to the handling of such matters before they are
convened: And also such a subsequent right, both upon that account, and also
more determinately and particularly, by virtue of the power convening them,
when they are so convened. And upon these and the like accounts it is, that the
use of them ordinarily has been established, and asserted by the Civil Laws of
Countries: and that they, when sitting, have been accounted as the Church
National representative (as in England, and according to the Laws and
Ecclesiastical Constitutions of that Country, although their consultations
nevertheless are not laid as Laws upon the People, unless first approved of in
Parliament, and stamped as such with the Royal Assent;) and therefore it is
usual also for the Prince, either by himself alone, or else together with some
of the Representatives of his other Estates, to come into conjunction with
them; and that they and he be both of them conjunctly called by the same name
of the Church, (viz.) the Church National Representative. And it is profitable
for Societies that it be so (i. e.) that their Ecclesiastical Constitutions
(and whether purely or only mixtly such) may come under the more sacred notion
to the people, and so have the better obedience performed to them: Neither has
this any thing of dolus malus in it of it self, and so long as the
constitutions mentioned are lawful. In the mean time the Rights of the Prince,
in relation to this Synod, are always, and in every National Church to be
preserved: and that more particularly for the sake of the consistency of
Religion with Government. And the Prince has the Right;

1. Of convening them.

2. Of governing them and their actions, when sitting; whether it be negatively
in respect to them, and so as that they shall not do any thing prejudicial to
the welfare of his charge; or else positively as to him, and so as that the
validity of that which they shall do, and which it shall have from any Humane
Authority in the National Church, shall be by virtue ultimately only of his
approbation of it.

And then, Thirdly and Lastly, he has the right also of dismissing and
dissolving them, when he sees occasion. And these Rights and Powers of Princes
are dictated by nature, Lib. 2 Cap. 11:. 2. and 4.
and are some of the more particular rights (above mentioned) which belong to
them for the retaining of their more general right of the framing an
Uniformity, Vid. Exord. ad Council. Agathens. Synod^ Calcedon. Action: 1. and
Tolet. quarti exord. and Nicaen. 2. Exord. Et Council. Milev. Can. 11. and
Constantinop. s^xti generalis action. 1. and Agathens. Can. 40. etc. Et Milev.
Can. 11. apud Carranz. etc. See the Government and order of the Church of
Scotland; Printed, An. MDCXLI. p. 146. etc. p. 56. etc. p. 66. etc. in quarto.
And the 1. Admonition. Paragraph. Let us come now to the third part, etc. Et
deinceps. And second Admoni. 1. 7, 8, 9, 10, etc. and 14. 29, 44, 46, 47, etc.
and alibi. And the late Assemblies Confession of Faith, Edit. 51. Cap. 3. and
alibi.

Polit. Lib. 3. in princip.

Vid. de Legib. Dial. 12. prope fin. and alibi.


and have been always really exercised by them in the Christian Church, as is
to be seen in the Sessions of the several Councels, and in the relations given
of them by the Ecclesiastical Histories, and the like: And the exercise of them
is necessary for the securing of their Public charge. The usurpations then of
the Triple Crown in this business are evidently unjust: And so are those of the
Scotch and English Presbytery also, who in their desired Government and Order
of their Churches, in their Admonitions to the Parliament, in their Confession
of Faith, and elsewhere, have claimed the powers mentioned, as due to them in
like manner. And the thus claiming these powers directly tends to the
Ecclesiastical persons possessing the Supremacy, and converting into a Pope.
Last of all, if the Prince at any time shall see cause to consult with such as
are not Ecclesiastical persons about Ecclesiastical matters; those persons
ought to be such as are of sufficient and fitting abilities for the
deliberating upon such sacred and weighty matters: (...): For as it behooves a
Physician to give an account in matters of physic amongst physicians; so does
it behove others also to do the like in the like things of their profession,
says Aristotle. And Plato in his Commonweal, would have a Sanctius Collegium,
Some more venerable convention of persons of integrity and knowledge, and
experience, and age, and none less then thirty years old, for the defense and
safe-guarding even of his common and ordinary laws.

VI. The Case then concerning the Princes having power of prohibiting Heretical
Synods, is from hence easily to be determined: For if they shall have a right
of sitting, and of making what Constitutions they please, and of framing what
Doctrines they please, and the like; (although they are not under the notion of
having public Authority on their side) yet if they shall but make use of the
immortal notion of Religion any way for the persuading men of the truth and
goodness of these things, and shall be left at liberty to do it; Who is there
amongst Princes that shall be able to stand, or to secure the welfare of any
part of his charge in the mean time? Wherefore the Magistrates Right of
prohibiting and suppressing these conventions of men is in the same manner
dictated by Nature, as we said of the rights of ordering his own National Synod
just now. The case concerning the Princes having power of prohibiting Heretical
Synods determined.
And it belongs to him partly by virtue of his indirect power in Spirituals,
and partly by virtue of his Supreme Power over all. And in the strain of these
things run the Imperial Laws. Haeretici synacteria, seu collectas facere non
possunt, aut parasynaxes, aut Synodos, aut ordinationes, aut baptismata, aut
exarchos habere, aut paternitates, seu abatias, aut defensiones instituere, aut
curare seu administrare villas, per seipsos, aut per interpositas personas, aut
quid probibitorum facere: Qui transgressus haec fuerit ultimum supplicium luit,
C. de Haeret. and Manichae. L. Haeretici Synacteria.
says the Emperor Justinus: That, Heretics could not make gatherings
together, or collections, or have conventions, or synods, or ordinations, or
baptisms, or presidents over them, or institute paternities, or abacies, or
defensions of Societies, or take care of, or administer the Government of
Towns, either by themselves or by others, or do any of those things which were
prohibited them: and he which did transgress these things was to suffer death.
And again, Haeretici, communicantes, aut synaxes, aut baptismata facientes,
puniuntur ut qui Leges transgrediuntur: and qui domos ipsi^ ad hoc praebent,
jam sancitis paenis subjiciuntur: Soli Orthodoxi, intra sacra septa habentes
Ergasteria, utuntur privilegiis: That Heretics, C. Eodem L. Haeretici
Communicantes.
either communicating or making Assemblies or Baptisms, were punished as those
who did transgress the Laws: And those who did afford them houses for those
ends, were subjected to the established punishments: And only those who were
Oxthodox, and had their places of commerce within the due bounds, did enjoy the
privileges, and the like. And last of all, if it be asked here, which are
Haeretical Synods? Truly that must of necessity, from his right of prohibiting
them, be left to the Supreme Magistrate in every Country to determine. And
although it be from the connotation of the terms, that that Synod only is in it
self Heretical, which any ways tends to the promoting of Heresy; yet the
Chief Magistrate ordinarily determines every Synod to be so, which he judges to
be so, and which in such a way (as he deemeth) separates from his national
Church. And it cannot be helped, but that it must be so: Neither, rebus sic
stantibus, and as things stand in the world, is there any other temper, or
general fixation to be found out for the Governors of Humane Societies in this
business? And the Universal Government of them, and the Supreme swaying of
their affairs in the mean time, is to be left to the Divine Providence, to
order it as it shall please; and men are to acquiesce in a due manner under
them, and with prayers and supplications for them.

VII. We come then next to the Rules to be observed in the manner of composing
the Canon and Liturgy, The first Rule to be observed in the composing the Canon
and Liturgy, in relation to the number of doctrines, or subalternate kinds of
forms which they consist of.
which relate to the number of Doctrines, or subalternate kinds of forms, which
they are to consist of: And the first of them is, That the Magistrates and
Churches Power of enjoining indifferent things (as adjuncts of public Worship,
and Rites and customary Ceremonies peculiar to such or such a National Church)
be conceded to them: And that in relation to the welfare both of Religion and
Government; and therefore it ought accordingly to be conceded to them: That
they may assert them, or propound and enjoin them to be used, either in the
Canon or Liturgy in either of their capacities. And this right belongs to the
Magistrate, and Church National representative made use of by him in either of
those ways which we have mentioned; and is one of the more particular rights
belonging to the Magistrate Supreamly, and in his way, for the support of his
more general right of the framing his Uniformity. And the Magistrate has
always, and in all Churches retained this right, and that in the latitude of
it, and in both its parts, both that of prohibiting, as well as of enjoining
such and such things to be used, as the adjuncts of Divine Worship. So amongst
the Romans, It is recorded as one of the Laws of the twelve Tables. Mulieres.
Genas. ne. radunto. faciem. ne. carpunto. neve. lesum. funeris. ergo. habento.
In fragment. 12. Tab. propo fin.
Let not the Women cut their cheeks, nor tear their face, nor make the
prohibited lamentation at funerals: The same things which were forbidden, upon
somewhat more particular accounts, by Moses his Law before. The like
constitutions about sacred things are to be found amongst the Turks at this
day. Prope Med. C. 1566. Prope Med. 98. and alibi. De turcarum ritu, etc. Capit.
Let Leunclavius in his Supplimentum Annalium, in his Pandects Historiae
Turcicae, Georgieviz, and others be looked into. And those that do not
constitute an Uniformity in these things in their Churches, it must needs be
acknowledged that they leave the people more open to the contesting of them
upon any occasion, and that they observe not so good order, and so congruous to
Humane Nature in matters of Religion, as those that do otherwise. Chap 3. Of
the Lords Supper.
So in the Corpus Disciplinae, where it is said to be left free to every one,
either to stand, go, or sit, at the receiving of the Lords Supper. And as to
those Magistrates that do not at all actually exercise this right of theirs;
let them take heed, that in the mean time they do not in effect, and in the
esteem of the people lose it: And that, in the end, it do not come to be
positively denied them. In the interim, Ceremonies or customary adjuncts of
Divine Worship are of diverts sorts in any National Church. They are either
ordinary, or extraordinary; they are either more or less pompous, and
accompanied with outward splendour; they are either traditional, and merely
customary, or else established by written Law, and the like. And concerning the
customary ones, those Rules and Responses of the Law are to be observed in all
Churches both pro and con (viz.) Quod initio vitiosum est, F. De Reg. jur. Reg.
28. F. de legibus and Senatus Consult. Lib. 13. and eodem. L. 32.
non potest tracta temporis convalescere: That that which was faulty at first,
cannot by any tract of time get force. And, Quod vero contra rationem juris
receptum est, non est producendum ad consequentiam: That, that which is
received against the mind of the Law, is not to be brought into consequence.
And, Diuturna consuetudo, pro Jure and Lege, in iis quae non ex scripto
descendunt, observari solet: That a continued custom, in those things which
are not from written Law, is wont to be observed as Right and Law. Of what sort
soever these ceremonies be then, the due Rules belonging to the adjoining them
to the Divine Worship, ought also to be observed in such the adjunction of
them: And those are either more general, or more particular; the more general
are, That the quantity and number of them do not exceed, Lib. 2. Cap. 9.. 7.
which was reprehended as an extreme in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity above:
That they be not constituted as parts of worship, neither by assertion, nor in
effect. That they be grave, and according to the weight of those holy things
which they accompany. That they be suitable to the several and particular
applications of them, and the like. And the more particular Rules are to be
varied according to the several, either stated or emergent occasions of
Churches. Finally, both the more general and more particular are all of them to
be measured by this one most general Rule, and that is, That they be no ways
prejudicial to any part of the Magistrates charge, either to Religion or
Government, or their mutual consistency. And these are the Rules which all
Churches ought to proceed by, and which the Christian Churches profess to
proceed by in this business. So those late called Reformed, in their several
Confessions. In the latter Helvetian; Proinde Judaismum videmur reducere aut
restituere, Sectione 17. de ritibus, Ceremoniis, and mediis. In Helvetica
Posteriore.
si in Ecclesia, ad morem veteris Ecclesiae, Caeremonias Ritusve
multiplicaremus, etc. We seem then to reduce and bring back Judaism again, if
in the Church, according to the manner of the ancient Church, we should
multiply Ceremonies or Religious Rites. So also the Bohemian: Ibid. in Bohemica.
Omnino autem cum hac cautione servare ea oportet, intraque has metas
continere, ne pro fundamentis quibus salus nitatur, aut pro cultu, qui a Deo
sine ullo discrimine constitutus sit, habeantur. Neve magis aut arctius quam
mandata Dei conscientias hominum obstringant, and his ^e se efferendo
praeferant, etc. But it behooves us to observe those things in any wise, with
this caution, and to contain them within these bounds, (viz.) That they be not
accounted fundamentals upon which salvation depends, or for worship, which
without any difference is constituted by God, nor that they do not bind the
Consciences of men more and more strictly then the Commands of God, and lift
themselves up above them. And the like the others, and the other Christian
Churches (even that of Rome also) in their several ways, and under their
different notions. In the Preface.
And the present Church of England in its Prefatories to the Liturgy; The
particular forms of Divine Worship, and the Rites and Ceremonies appointed to
be used therein, being things in their own nature indifferent and alterable,
and so acknowledged; it is but reasonable, that upon weighty and important
considerations, according to the various exigency of times and occasions, such
changes and alterations should be made therein, as to those that are in place
of Authority should from time to time seem either necessary or expedient. And
again, Vid. Of Ceremonies, why some be abolished, and some retained. Ibid.
Some Ceremonies are put away, because the great excess and multitude of them
has so increased, etc. And afterward, and moreover the other which remain be
neither dark nor dumb Ceremonies, but are so set forth, that every man may
understand what they do mean, and to what use they do serve: and the like. In
the next place then, the ends for which these Ceremonies and Circumstances
attending the Public Worship are usually, and ought to be appointed, are
evident, both from Scripture and otherwise. In the Scripture the direction is
given, that all things that are done in men's external deportment in the Church,
be done to edification, and decently, and in order, and the like. The meaning
of it is, to the welfare of the public charge of the Magistrate, in all the
parts of it, primarily those of Religion and Government simply taken. And the
same reasons, either more generally or particularly are assigned, for the
constitution of such Ceremonies and external actions to be used, up and down in
the humane writings of the several Christian Churches: So, the Roman
Rationales; Ecclesia utitur caeremoniis, non quod in his externis (si desit
spiritus) fiduciam reponi velit; sed utitur caeremoniis velut quibusdam
visibilibus signis, In novo Rationale. Lib. 2. Cap. 6. in princip.
and stimulis Religionis non coniemnendis, says De Rubeis; That the Church
uses Ceremonies, not that it would have any confidence to be put in these
external things, if the spirit be wanting to them: But it uses Ceremonies as
certain visible signs and spurs to Religion, Ibid. paulo ante.
which are not to be contemned. And a little before: Sunt quaedam solemnitates,
quae adhibentur in sacramentorum administratione, qui alio nomine dicuntur
Caeremoniae: That there are certain solemnities which are made use of in the
Administration of the Sacraments, which by another name are called Ceremonies.
And again afterward, Ibid.
Ecclesia accendit in Templis Caereos and Luminaria, ut admoneat, Christum
veram lucem, seu Evangelii splendore omnes tenebras effugasse, in qua luce sit
nobis perpetuo tenore inambulandum: That the Church lights candles in the
places of Divine Worship and Luminaries, that it may admonish, that Christ the
true Light, by the splendor of his Gospel, has chased away all darkness, in
which light and splendor we ought perpetually to walk. And afterward also;
Ibid. Etiam postea.
Amplius ait Concl. and Catechism. (meaning the Council of Trent, and the
Catechismus ad Parochos) locis citatis, esse necessarium cognoscere ritus and
illorum significationem, ratione quadam, scilicet, quia magna erit utilitas
Caeremoniarum, si earum significatio non ignoretur: That the Council and
Catechism, in the places cited, says, that it is necessary to know the Holy
Rites, and their signification in some manner, (viz.) because great will be the
profit of the Ceremonies, if their signification be not unknown* and the like
others. And the like also the Confessions of the Reformed Churches: So the
former Helvetian, Quae media vocantur and sunt proprie, Sect. 17. De ritibus
and Caeremon. and med. In Helvet. priore.
iis uti vir pius quanquam libere, ubique and semper potest; tamen scienter and
ex charitate, nempe ad gloriam Dei, and ad Ecclesiae proximorumque
aedificationem omnibus utetur solum: That a Godly man may use those things
which are called indifferent, and are properly so, although in all times and
places freely; but yet however he must use them intelligently, and out of
charity, (viz.) to the glory of God, and the edification of the Church and his
neighbors only. So also that of Bohemia: In Bohemica, Ibid.
Sed tantum pro ornamento, Decore, honestaque spccie, and laudabili Disciplina
habeantur: But let them be accounted only for an ornament, Et in Gallica.
for decency, and an honest show, and commendable Discipline and order. And so
the French Confession; Et eas tantum admittimus, quae fovendae Concordiae, and
unicuique in obedientia debita retinendo subservient: And we admit only those
which serve to the cherishing of concord, and to the retaining of every one in
due obedience.

Et in Anglica, Ibid. Etiam.
And so the English, De multitudine otiosarum Caeremoniarum scimus Augustinum
graviter suo tempore conquestum esse, etc. Retinemus tamen and colimus non
tantum ea quae scimus tradita fuisse ab Apostolis, sed etiam alia quaedam quae
nobis videbantur sine Ecclesiae incommodo ferri posse, etc. We know that St.
Augustine in his time did grievously complain of the multitude of idle
Ceremonies; but yet we retain and practice not only those things which we know
were delivered by the Apostles, but also certain other things which did seem to
us, that they might be constituted without any damage to the Church, because
we desire all things to be done in the Church (as Paul says) decently and in
order: But all those things which we saw to be either very superstitious, or
frigid, or uncomly, or ridiculous, or contrary to the Holy Scriptures, or else
unworthy of sober men (of which sorts there are an infinite at this day in the
Popedom) we have utterly and without any exception rejected, because we will
not have the worship of God to be defiled any longer with such kind of toys.
And the like the other confessions. And there is no doubt but that an
Uniformity in these things will conduce to order, nor but that the peoples
exercising themselves intelligently in their practice and use of them will put
them in mind of the obedience they owe to Discipline and Government; Nor but
that their stirring up men, in a common moral way (suitable to their Humane
Institution, and according to the several intentions of their diverse
significations) will conduce to edification, and the like. Other things might
be said concerning them. In the interim, Pro. See Dr. Mortons Defense, worthy
to be read. Con. The Reply to it, both parts.

Pro. Dr. Burges his Rejoinder, in answer to that.

Con. Dr. Ames his fresh suit, in answer to that.

Also, Altar Damascenum. The English, Popish Ceremonies, said to be
Gellespies, etc. See, the Conference at Hampton Court by Dr. Barlow. p. 70, 71.


the controversy concerning these matters in the Church of England has been
largely handled and debated; and that by the first undertakers of it in the
main; their Books are to be seen both Pro and Con: but whosoever will read
them, let them weigh things on both sides, according to the Laws and Rules of
an Ecclesiastical Uniformity here laid down, and in a due manner; and then he
will have afforded the Church her due. In the mean time, the Church is not
worthy of blame for being tender of her Authority in this matter. In the
conference at Hampton Court, when the impeachment of Christian Liberty was
urged against the imposition of these things in England; King James was much
moved, and told the Opponent, That he would not argue that point with him, but
answer therein as Kings are wont to speak in Parliament; Le Roy S'avisera:
Adding withal, That it smelled very rankly of Anabaptism, etc. And therefore
charged him never to speak more in that point; how far he was bound to obey,
when the Church had ordained Laws. Last of all, such Ceremonies or
circumstances attending Divine Worship may, by some advenient or extrinsical
reasons, and in some particular cases, be made more or less particularly
requisite to the support of the welfare of any part of the charge of the
Magistrate in any National Church; which is the case of the Church of England
at present, in respect to the continuation of the use of her Established
Ceremonies: And has been heretofore, both on that and the other part of these
things, in many other Churches.

The Second.
VIII. We come to the second Rule then to be observed also in this business
concerning the Canon and Liturgy: And that is, That the Magistrates and
Churches Right of asserting their due and Established Church Government be also
conceded to them: And, that whether that Government be either of a later or
more ancient date, as to the actual erection of it in any National Church. And
this is a Right ordinarily of necessity belonging to the Supreme Magistrate for
the support of his Government in the State. And by the Church Government in any
Society, we do not mean here only the substance of it, but also the way and
manner in which it is exercised; for by it it is, that it uses to be more
exactly fitted in all Societies to the Government in the State. And ftom thence
it follows, that a change in this matter in the Church ordinarily is not
without a change in the State; Many instances might be given in which it has
been so: And then much more also will a change in the substance of it make a
change in the State. King James at his first coming into England, did often
recite that saying, No Bishop No King. And in the Conference at Hampton Court,
he vouched it from his own experience that he had of the Presbyterial
Government in Scotland, and that which was endeavored to be established there,
See the Conference at Hampton Court. p. 4. p. 20.
That the Sovereignty of a Prince could not consist with it. He said, that in
Scotland he was a King without State, and that he was kept as a Ward by the
Puritans there: That he was without Honor, without Order, and braved to his
face by every beardless Boy of the Ministers. That if the same Presbitery that
was in Scotland should come into England, it would agree as well with Monarchy
as God with the Devil: And then Jack, and Tom, and Will, and Dick, said he
(meaning the Lay Elders of the Consistories, p. 79.
even in very pitiful Country Parish) shall meet, and at their pleasures
censure me and my Council and all our proceedings. Then Will shall stand up and
say, it shall be thus; Then Dick shall reply and say, No marry, But we will
have it thus; And therefore here, said he, I must once again reiterate my
former Speech, Le Roy S'aviseva, Stay I pray you for one seven years before you
demand that of me. It is not for no cause then that the bringing in of this
Government has been so much opposed by the late Kings of England, See the
first and second Admonitions; and a Directory of Church Government, found in
the study of Mr. Cartwright. And the reformation of Discipline, etc used in the
Engl. Church at Geneva.
who are bound both to God and their People, and as their Established
Government is both their Right and their Charge, not to part with those Rights
with which God has invested them for the common welfare; and especially since
the Government endeavored would turn their Scepter into a straw, and the hand
that wields it, into the hand of a child. Let the form of the Government, as it
has been published under several hands be consulted: Let its parity of
Ministers; its deferring particular affairs of Congregations to the wild body
of the People in them (but the Ministers having a superintendency over them in
the mean time) be considered of, and whither these and the like things do tend.
The common saying is, to the setting up of a Pope in every Parish. And the
Government and order of the Church of Scotland. And Ley's Platform of the
Government, called Presbyterial. And the form of Church government agreed upon
by the Lords and Commons, An. 1648 compared with certain considerations and
cautions agreed upon by the Ministers of Land. and Westminst. See the
discipline of the Dutch Churches, and the Laws and Statutes, etc. See Pro. Dr.
Whitgift's Answer to the Admonition to the Parliament.

Con Cartwright's reply made to him. Pro. Dr. Whitgifts Defense of his Answer.
Con. Mr. Cartwrite's second reply to it. Pro. The Bp. of Rochester's Sermon
concerning the Antiquity and superiority of Bps. at Hampton Court, and the
perpetual Government of the Church, by Tho. Bilson; and Bp. Halls Episcopacy by
Divine Right. And Episcopacy asserted by Jer. Tailor, etc. Con. Bayne's
Diocesan's Trial, and assertion of the Government of the Church of Scotland,
Edit. 1641. And the Lord Brook against Episcopacy, 42. And Rutherfords Plea for
Paul's Presbytery, 42. etc. C. De Legib. and constitutionibus. L. qui
Imperatore. D. De recept. Arbitris. L. non distinguimus, Sacerdotio obveniente,
ubi Paulus.


And then, by that, opportunity will be given (the weaknesses of some men, and
the corruptions of others being considered) to those who by wit and cunning can
outstrip the rest, to divide the Empire amongst them: And whither such
Latitudes and Confusions may tend in the end, who can foresee? The Magistrates
hands being manacl'd, and the Ecclesiastical person being so independent upon
him; they that can outstrip the rest, may turn into a Conclave; and he that
can outstrip them, into an Universal Pope at last, if he will. If the
instances of Presbitery practiced in other Countries, be made against these
things, and how they have consisted with the State; it is evident that there
are none such practiced, neither in the Low Countries, nor at Geneva, nor
elsewhere, as in the particulars up and down in this Discourse mentioned have
been proposed for England. And yet not any one of the patterns for England has
attained the general liking of its friends neither. And then what will be the
end of these things, who can foresee? Last of all, as to the present
established Episcopacy in England; the controversy concerning it, as well as
that concerning the Ceremonies, has been also largely handled: The many
writings both Pro and Con concerning it may be seen. And so far forth as the
order and office of Episcopacy in the general is concerned in this Discourse,
and an Ecclesiastical Uniformity, as we have spoken of it heretofore, so also
we shall speak of it hereafter. And if the concession of Baronies to the
persons of those that discharge the Episcopal function in England be thought
much of, what reason is there why the King should not have his Churchmen and
the Clergy their part in Parliament? And this also, the particular constitution
of the Government of England being considered. The Emperor Leo in the Civil
Law, calls the Superior Clergymen, Ecclesiae Defensores; The Defenders of the
Church. And all Laws and Countries have ordinarily ever privileged Churchmen
beyond others, if it were but for Gods sake (to whose Service they are more
particularly devoted) and for the Honor of Religions sake, which ought always
to be supported. Sacerdotio obveniente, says Paulus in his Digests, Videamus
an cogatur arbiter sententiam dicere: Id enim non tantum honori personarum, sed
and Majestati Dei indulgetur, cujus sacris vacare Sacerdotes oportet: The
Priesthood coming in the way, let us see whether the Vmpire be constrained to
pronounce Sentence: For that is not only indulged to the Honor of their
persons, but also to the Majesty of God, whose service it behooves the Priests
to be at leisure for. And it was Padre Paulo's complaint concerning the Affairs
of Venice, That the Common Wealth, See the History of the Inquisition, Cap. 28.

See Hist. of the Counc. of Trent, Fol. 721.


as well as other Catholic Kingdoms, found it self between two Contraries; the
Protestants, who had no other aim but to diminish Ecclesiastical Authority; and
the Court of Rome, which would too much increase it, and make the Temporal her
Servant. In the last place, as to those in any Society whatsoever, that cry out
in these latter times, to have every punctilio in the mode of the exercise of
Church Government reduced to what they do at uncertainties fancy to have been
heretofore Apostolical; they are to be answered as Laynez in the Tridentine
Council, answered, perhaps truly, concerning some things in the Court of Rome;
That many did call those things abuses, which if they were examined and sounded
to the bottom, would be found to be either necessary or profitable; And that
some would make the Sea of Rome to be as it was in the time of the Apostles and
the Primitive Church, without distinguishing the times, not knowing what does
belong to those, and what to these. And, in the mean time, he that will weigh
the temper and manner of exercise of the Government in any Church; let him
remember also to do it, according to the just Laws and Rules of an
Ecclesiastical Uniformity.

The last Rule to be observed in the composition of this the Canon and Liturgy.
IX. These things then being said, we come to the last Rule to be observed in
the composition of the Canon and Liturgy, which have been all along hitherto
mentioned; And that is, That the Magistrate have the last act of supervising
them, and passing them, (viz.) by his Legislative power, or under his Great
Seal, or the like. And this both from his general right to the framing his
Uniformity in the positive part of it, and also from his right of restraint
upon opinions, which is consequent upon it, and has been heretofore mentioned.
And this also in order to the preservation of the welfare both of Religion and
Government, Lib. 2. Cap. 7.. 15. and alibi.
and the consistency of Religion with Government; of each of them in their
several respects, and so far forth as either absolute or relative welfare may
be concerned in this business of the Canon and Liturgy, and when they shall be
supposed to be extant. And this has been pointed at as an act of Authority in
the Magistrate heretofore; Lib. 3. Cap. 3.. 15.
but it is meant here principally as an act of caution: not but that any other
Doctrines, which are not particularly and expressly mentioned in the Canon (so
long only as they be according to the tenor of it) may be ordinarily taught to
the people: but only the principal points of caution are, both positively, that
the Doctrines expressed in the Canon should be true; and also negatively, that
none aliene from them, or contradictory to them, should be so taught to the
people. And the like also are the respects that this cautionary act has to the
Liturgy: not that it absolutely and universally excludes the use of any other
forms or ways of worship, then what are set down expressly in the stated body
and volumne of the Liturgy, (only so they be according to the intent and tenor
of them) but only that it intends positively to see that those set down in the
Liturgy be lawful; and negatively, that none any ways detracting from them, or
utterly contradictory to them, be used in public. And this then being the last
act of the Magistrate in the framing his Uniformity, it presupposes all former
acts requisite in order to it, and supposes comprehensively its passing thus
upon all the matters of the Uniformity mentioned. And this not only for the
several reasons which have been more particularly and topically mentioned
heretofore; but also because, there being many in all Societies (and such as
ever will be) whose both opinions and practices in Religion will be always
brute, and led only by custom; better it were that both their doctrines and
worship should be thus provided for them and secured (as far forth as humane
condition in this world will permit) then that they should be otherwise left
open to the seduction of Heretics, and the wild and pernicious ways of the
several sorts of deceivers. And as to others, who are led by reason, there is
still room for the exercise of their judgment of discerning in relation to all
these things in the mean time.

CHAP. VI.
What are the Uses that are to be made of the Canon and Liturgy by the Members
of any National Church.
I. THe Church and Magistrates Aims in the Canon and Liturgy downwards
described.

II. The manner in which the People are to make use of them.

III. The first particular kind of use to be made of them.

IV. The Second.

V. The Third.

VI. The Fourth.

VII. The Fifth and Last.

VIII. The Corollary subjoined to these things.

The Church and Magistrates aims in the Canon and Liturgy downwards described.
I. THe Canon and Liturgy are now in this period of our Discourse supposed to be
extant: And as we have formerly described the Church and Magistrates aims in
them upwards, and in a more direct relation to the preserving the welfare of
the Supreme Public Charge; so here we come to describe also their aims in
them downwards, and as to the peoples making use of them in a more direct
relation to their Uniformity of profession, and use of public worship, which
were said above to be the two great mediums for charitative communion, Lib. 2.
Cap. 7.. 10, 11, 12. and alibi supra and infra.
in order to the preserving the welfare of that public charge. And both these
sorts of intents of Public Authority in the Canon and Liturgy (both upwards
and downwards) are to be carefully heeded, and so far forth as they belong any
ways to them, by the members of any National Church.

The manner in which the people are to make use of them.
II. This then being the more general matter of the Church and Magistrates ends
in their Canon and Liturgy downwards; the manner in which the people are
intended to make use of them, is, according to their several Offices which they
bear, in their order of office in which they stand in an Ecclesiastical
Uniformity. And that is, in things Common to them both, of the Canon Primarily,
and of the Liturgy secondarily; and in things distinctly belonging to either;
of either in its own proper and distinct way, in relation to those things.

III. And the first particular kind of use which is thus intended to be made of
them, is, The first particular kind of use to be made of them.
in the two fundamental offices distinctly belonging to either: And those are,
as the one is intended precisely to be a Rule of Worship, and the other in like
manner a Rule of Doctrines. And so the uses to be made of them also, are, That
the one should serve for the performance and exercise of worship toward God,
and the other for the practice of Uniformity of profession to be given to it in
like manner.

IV. The Second Use to be made of them, is, The Second.
in a matter common to them both: And that is, for men's interpretation of all
doubtful Phrases in other Writings set forth by Authority, (viz.) Homilies,
disciplinary Canons, and the like. And so the Canon is to be made use of
Primarily, and for the interpretation of such Phrases, even in the Liturgy it
self; and the Liturgy secondarily, and so far forth as it is composed according
to it. And the Rules to be held in this interpretation of Phrases is this, That
men are to interpret the Phrases in other public Writings; relating to the
Canon and Liturgy, and if doubtful, in an wholesome sense by them; and in like
manner also to refer the Canon and Liturgy themselves, if doubtful, in the like
wholesome sense, to Scripture. And the other Writings are thus to be referred to
the Canon and Liturgy in any National Church, because those two are the two
original Humane Rules of Doctrines and Worship, as has been said. And they
themselves also are to be in like manner referred to Scripture, Lib. 3. Cap.
1.. 2. 1^. etc.
because it is their Original Divine Rule, as was said above also: And as to
the Senses, which the several Assertions, Offices, and Phrases are capable of
in such Canons and Liturgies; consideration is to be used for the finding of
them out, and the Comments on Canons, and the Rationales on Lyturgies, and the
like assistant writings are to be consulted, and the just Rules of
interpretation (hereafter laid down) are to be made use of in relation to these
things. Infra Cap. 8.
And the same course also is to be held concerning the interpretation of the
Original Divine Rule of Scripture in its kind. And, last of all, the wholesome
sense in all these things (and not the unwholesome) is still to be presumed to
be that meant by Authority; and that because, as a favorable construction is
always to be put upon such writings as have been mentioned set forth by
Authority in such a manner, and for so good ends; So also the same Authority
does allow to all their variety of notions, under which to make construction of
them, on purpose, that such their construction might be (and as they wish it to
be) in it self as far as may be just, and also favorable, as to them. And by
this Rule do all Churches intend that men should proceed in this matter: And it
is the last and only Rule they have to fix upon. So the Church of England
particularly, after the many sharp ventilations of these things in it, and in
the defense and justification of its present Lyturgy, and the former
established; We are fully persuaded (say they) in our judgments, See the
Preface to the Book of Common Prayer.
and do profess it to all the world, that the Book, as it stood before
established by Law, does not contain in it any thing contrary to the Word of
God, or to sound Doctrine, or which a Godly man may not with good conscience
use and submit to, or which is not fairly defensible against* any that shall
oppose the same, if it shall be allowed such just and favorable construction
as in common equity, ought to be allowed to all humane writings, especially
such as are set forth by Authority, and even to the very best Translations of
the Holy Scripture it self. They then are apparently guilty of Shcism in any
Church, who first construe the doubtful places of Lyturgies and Canons of
doctrine in an ill sense, and then construe such sense to be the meaning of
Authority, as if it could never be enough either blamed or suspected. Indeed
many are the exceptions that have been made both formerly and lately against
the English Lyturgy: The more general of which, and those that have been made
against it particularly as a Lyturgy, Lib. 3. Cap. 1.. 9. in fin.
we have mentioned above, and its adversaries collections of them. The more
particular, and those proper to be recited in this place, as being made against
the more particular phrases, and the like things in the several offices and
parts of it, are to be seen in the numerous writings (of this sort) of its
adversaries also, and which at several times have come fotth against it: And so
the Answers to these writings, For the exceptions made against the Lyturgy, See
a survey of the Book of Common Prayer. Printed, An. 1610. The first Admonition,
p. 8. and 2. part. Ibid p. 2. etc. And second Admonition, p. 10. etc. And a
view of Antichrist his Laws, etc. in a part of the Register, p. 64. 64, 65, by
A. Gilbir. An Exception taken against subscription, etc. Ibid. p 119, 120, 121,
etc. And a true modest defense of the Petition for Reformation, etc. p. 30, 31,
32, etc. Edit. 1618. And an answer to the Vice Chancellor, etc. p. 2. And
Bacon's Considerations, p. 24. etc. And Smectymnuus, p. 9. etc. And Reasons
showing the necessity of Reformation, p. 8. 11, 22, 26, etc. For Salvo's to
these exceptions also; See Hookers Ecclesiastical Policy, Lib. 5. from Sect 25.
to the end. A Defense of the Liturgy, etc. Edit. 1630. worthy to be read. And
the Christian Divinity contained in the Divine Service, etc. 1631. And Dr.
Covells modest Examination, etc. Cap. 13. And Dr. Hamonds view of the
Directory, p. 24, 25, etc.
and several defenses of the same Lyturgy are to be seen also. To both which
sorts of writings we shall refer men concerning these matters, and not abate
the edge of our Reader with a tedious recital of them here. In the interim, if
a man will answer to the general intents of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity in any
Church concerning these sorts of matters, Interpretari debent cum favore: They
must be interpreted with favor, as is said: So should the phrases of the
English Lyturgy, extant in the offices of Burial, Churching of Women, and
elsewhere, and more popularly excepted against, be dealt with. And certainly a
man is to strain very far in this matter, and if it be possible, rather then to
put an unwholesom sense upon these sorts of writings set forth by Authority:
Much less then is he to be wilfully blind, like him that will not see the Sun,
and to stumble as it were at a star that lies shining bright in his way. But
the truth of all is, that it is the usual method of such men as would innovate
in any Church, and undermine Public Authority, to cross these Rules here laid
down by us concerning these matters; and to give out to the world, as if
Authority only were never enough to be blamed, never enough to be suspected.
And when men see that, let them know their ends.

V. The third Use then to be made of the Canon and Liturgy in any National
Church, and by the members of it, The Third.
and that also in a matter common to them both, is, For the determination of
men's minds about the use of Ceremonies: And under what notions, and in what
senses severally they are propounded to be used. What particular Doctors teach
about them, or the private Expositors, or Controvertists of the Age say, is
nothing, as to any Authentic ground for men's derivation of their opinions
about the Use of them: But it is to be heeded only what the Church declares
concerning them in her Canon of Doctrines and Lyturgy, and in her Disciplinary
Canons, and the like public writings framed from them, and allowed by the
Magistrate; And that because the Church and Magistrate are the only composers
of the Canon and Liturgy, and the Authentic Interpreters of them, when
composed, and also the imposers of the Ceremonies, or the like things enjoined
in them, or in any other more derivative writings belonging thus to their
Uniformity. And concerning the Church and Magistrate also in this matter, these
Rules are to be observed, (viz.) That they do ordinarily express so much as
they do intend decisely to say concerning these their enjoined Ceremonies,
either in the Canon or Liturgy, or else in some other Authentic writings of
theirs explicatory of them; And that where they do not make such impression,
they do reserve farther explication to themselves upon occasion, as the light
of Nature dictates to them to do in things so mainly concerning the public
welfare, and not to leave them to others. Lastly, That in the mean time, in
both these cases mentioned, They do leave men to use their due liberty of
judgment of discerning, and to resolve themselves concerning these and the
like matters. And that also in a greater Latitude in the last of these two
cases, (viz.) for that very reason, because they have not defined nor
particularly declared themselves: Only men are still to look to it, that they
do not any ways vent such their judgments and resolutions to the hurt of the
Public Charge. The case in the general concerning this use of Ceremonies in
any National Church is evidently weighty in it self: And it is sometimes made
farther weighty by accidental contests. And whether the Ceremonies in any
Church be either established by written Law, or Custom, or of what sort soever
they be; this use is to be made, and according to these Rules mentioned, and
that also either more immediately or mediately, of the Canon and Liturgy
concerning them.

VI. We come next to their Fourth Use, The Fourth.
common to them both also; And that is, For the like determination of men's
minds about the form of Government used in any Church. And under what notion,
and in what sense profession of assent is supposed and required to be made to
it also (viz.) in any Oaths taken concerning it, or subscriptions made to it,
or in any the like kind of testimonials of submission to be given in to it by
the members of such a Church. And concerning this also, the same things are to
be heeded, and the same Rules are to be observed, (i. e.) proportionably, and
according to their suitable respects to this matter, as were mentioned just now
concerning the other. And the case concerning this also being in it self
weighty, and because it is many times contested; therefore the third notion,
under which the Church requires the profession of assent to be made to her
established Government, uses also to be expressed in some of her public
writings: And where it is not, the power of interpretation is however reserved.

The fifth and last.
VII. The Fifth and last Use thus to be made then of the Canon and Lyturgy is
yet still common to them both also. And as it is of great convenience to the
people on their part, so it is in like manner of very great moment toward the
welfare of the public charge of the Magistrate: And that use to be made of
them, is, For the Interpretation of the Magistrates mind and ends in all
public declarations and subscriptions propounded by him to be made, in all
Church and State Oaths, and the like, in like manner propounded by him to be
taken within his Territories. And, as to this, men may be sure that whatsoever
the immediate matter and intent of such assurances taken of them may be, yet
still the Magistrates last and general ends in them are the same with those of
the Canon and Lyturgy (mentioned) in his Ecclesiastical Uniformity (viz.) the
welfare of Religion and Government, and the consistency of Religion with
Government: And there is not any other center for his public actions, aims
and endeavors (whatsoever they be) to tend to, and terminate in, in his
management of his affairs. And then, Quoties idem Sermo duas sententias
exprimit, ea potissimum excipiatur quae rei gerendae aptior est, De Reg. Jur.
F. Reg. 67.
says Julianus the Civilian: That, so often as the same form of speech
expresses seemingly two meanings, that is rather to be understood, which is
more suitable to the affair it concerns. And this use is to be made of the
Canon and Liturgy in these matters; whatsoever the present circumstances of
men's cases may be, at any time, or in any juncture of humane affairs, (viz.)
the welfare of Religion, and of the present Lawful Government, and the
consistency of Religion with it, is to be attended to by them.

The Corolary subjoined to these things.
VIII. Last of all, these concessions then of the peoples so making use of the
Canon and Liturgy (as has been heretofore mentioned) are some of those
derivative Latitudes and Liberties belonging to them in order to their
performance of obedience to the Laws of Princes, and their Ecclesiastical
Uniformities.

CHAP. VII.
What is the Doctrine of the Church in the Canon and Liturgy?
I. THe several sorts of Doctrines in the Canon and Liturgy assigned.

II. The Doctrine of the Church distinguished.

III. The Doctrines of the Canon and Liturgy assigned in the general.

IV. The more particular distinction of them.

V. The first sort of them.

VI. The Second.

VII. The conclusive Rule to be observed concerning the distinguishing of those
Doctrines.

VIII. Two conclusive Propositions subjoyned to the main matters of this
Chapter.

IX. The first of them.

X. The second.

I. WE have defined the Canon to be the Rule or Standard of Doctrines for
profession of assent to be made to in any National Church: The several sorts of
Doctrines in the Canon and Liturgy assigned.
And it has been asserted, That the Liturgy ought to be framed according to
it. We come here to assign, what is the Doctrine of the Church in them both,
Supra Lib. 3. Cap. 1.. 2. Ibid.. 6.
and in each of them in its several capacity: And what are the several sorts of
it; that profession of assent may be made to it accordingly.

II. The Doctrine of any National Church then holding an Uniformity, is such,
The doctrine of the Church distinguished.
either originally (which is that expressed in the Canon) or else by further
explication and interpretation: And that again is such, either pro perpetuo and
fixedly (which is more principally and primarily, that in the Lyturgy) or else
less principally and secondarily, that in the more derivative public writings)
or else it is such only pro tempore, and upon occasion of emergent
controversies: And that again is, such either as defined by the Church and
Magistrate immediately, or else by their Delegates upon any occasion, requiring
their resolution of cases: And both those again are such, either by word or by
writing. The most of these sorts of the Churches Doctrines we have given hints
of here and there already, and as we have proceeded in this Discourse: But it
is evident, that that which we expressly enquire after here, is the Original
Doctrine of the Church primarily; and its Doctrine by further explication,
which is in the Liturgy, secondarily. And what both these sorts of Doctrines
are, we shall absolve presently, and in a very few words. And the like
distinctions of Doctrines which are in the more derivative writings of the
Church, will be sufficiently implied in this our description of those two sorts
only here.

The Doctrines of the Canon and Liturgy assigned in the general.
III. More generally then, The whole Canon is the declared Doctrine of the
Church: That being the designed Office of it in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity
(as is said) Systematically to comprehend such the professed Doctrines of any
Church: And so The whole substance of Doctrines also in the Liturgy, are the
declared Doctrines of any such Church in their way also.

The more particular distinction of them.
IV. More particularly, the Doctrines of the Canon and Liturgy may be
distinguished into diverse sorts; either such as concern Religion or Government,
either in the Church, or in the state; and that as they are, in relation to all
these, either fundamental, or not fundamental: And the fundamental, either as
they are primarily or secondarily so. But it is not these Doctrines of the
Canon and Liturgy, as they concern either Religion or Government, or both, in
the consistency of each with other, that we are to consider of here. But we are
to consider of the Doctrines of the Canon and Liturgy as such only, and so
(formally) as being set forth by the Church in them: And so also in relation to
the profession of assent that is to be given to them as such also by the
members of any National Church. And those Doctrines then are to be
distinguished from the phrase and terms, and the like, in which they are set
down and expressed in the Canon and Liturgy. For, Verba sunt nihil aliud quam
notae rerum, declarantes animi voluntatisque passiones, says Cicero: That,
words are nothing else but notes of things, declaring the passions of the mind
and will. And, Plato in his Definitions, Dictio vox hominis quae scribi potest,
Post Med.
and signum quoddam commune rem declarans: That, a word is the voice of a man
which may be written, and a certain common sign, Lipsius in Prefat. ad Politic.
declaring the thing. And, Vt Phrygiones e varii coloris filo unum aliquod
aulaeum formant; sic scriptores e mill aliquot particulis cohaerens opus: As
Broiderers do form some one piece of Tapestry out of a thread of diverse
colors; so Writers do form also one cohering work out of some thousand
particles, and small portions of things. And the distinctions then of the
Doctrines of the Canon and Liturgy, as set forth by Authority, Are,

The first sort of them.
V. In the first place, The Doctrines expressed in plain and particular terms,
are the Doctrines of the Church in the particular and literal sense of those
terms.

VI. And so in like manner, The Second.
The Doctrines expressed in dubious and general terms, are the Doctrines of the
Church also in the dubious and general sense of those terms. Neither is it to
be wondered at, that it is asserted here that they are so; since it is
supposed, that both the Canon and Liturgy are regulated by the original Divine
Canon of Scripture (as was above mentioned that they ought to be) and that God
has then revealed those Doctrines no further, Lib. 3. Cap. 5.. 4. Vid.
nor in no other terms in Scripture.

VII. And last of all, Under whatsoever distinctions or sorts of phrases or
terms, or the like, The conclusive Rule to be ob erv'd concerning the
distinguishing of those Doctrines.
the doctrines of the Canon and Liturgy are set down, under the very same still
are they the Doctrines of the Church; and they are so to be taken to be
declared to be: Just as the Scripture it self delivers the declared will of
God, sometimes in general, sometimes in particular, sometimes in literal,
sometimes in figurative terms and expressions, and yet still all is the
declared will of God in Scripture, according to those several capacities of it.
Sic loquitur Scriptura, says St. Augustine, ut altitudine superbos irrideat,
profunditate attentos terreat, virtute magnos pascat, Lib. 2. in Genesis C. 19.
affabilitate parvulos nutriat: That, the Scripture so speaks, that it may
contemn the proud by its sublimity, affright the attentive by its profundity,
feed the strong by its virtue, nourish the weak by its affability. And again,
Ad dignitatem Scripturae pertinet, De vera Relig.
ut sub una litera multos sensus contineat; ut sic, diversis intellectibus
hominum conveniens, unusquisque miretur se in Divina Scriptura posse in venire
veritatem quam mente conceperit: ac facilius per hoc contra infideles
defenditur; dum si aliquid, quod quisque ex Sacra Scriptura velit intelligere,
falsum apparuerit, ad alium sensum recursum possit habere: That It belongs to
the dignity of Scripture, that under one and the same form of words it should
contain many senses; that so it being agreeable to the diverse understandings of
men, every one may wonder that he can find that truth in the Divine Scripture
which he shall conceive in his mind: And by this also it is defended the more
easily against infidels; whiles that, if any thing appear false, which every
one would understand out of the Holy Scripture, there may be recourse had to
another sense.

VIII. We come then to put a period to this matter, by subjoyning two
conclusive propositions to the two main sorts of things beforementioned in this
Chapter: Two conclusive propositions subjoyned to the main matters of this
Chapter. The first of them.
And those are the more general distinctions of the Doctrines of the Church,
and the more particular distinctions of the Doctrines of the Canon and Liturgy.

IX. The first of these, in relation to the first of these sorts of things
then, is, That those distinctions of the doctrines of the Church (here above
delivered) are accordingly to be made, for the salving the several sorts and
degrees of Powers and Authorities, which are ordinarily found in all Churches,
in this matter, and the determination of it.

The Second.
X. The second is in like manner in relation to the more particular distinctions
of the Doctrines of the Canon and Liturgy: And that is also, That according to
the several sorts and distinctions of them, so is the profession of assent (to
be made by the members of any National Church (pro cujuslibet captu and ratione
intellectus: According to every ones capacity and manner of understanding) to
be adapted to them also. And this is that which is intended by the Church in
their so setting down of those Doctrines, as has been mentioned; and this is
all that is intended or required by them: just as men's devotions (in the case
of the Liturgy as such, and in their public use of it) is to be adapted to the
several sorts of the parts of the Offices of it.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Interpretation of the Canon and Liturgy to be made by private persons,
and how it ought to proceed.
I. THe liberty of Interpreting the Canon and Liturgy belongs to private
persons as their Right.

II. The Interpretation of private persons distinguished.

III. The Rules by which they are to proceed in it, assigned in the general.

IV. The more particular assignation of them. And first, of those concerning
the Interpretation of Words and Phrases.

V. The first of those Rules.

VI. The Second.

VII. The Rules to be observed in the Interpretation of the sense of the Canon
and Liturgy.

VIII. The first of them.

IX. The Second.

X. The Third.

XI. The Fourth.

XII. The Fifth and Last.

XIII. The conclusive caution subjoyned to these things.

I. THe use of men's judgment of discerning, The liberty of interpreting the
Canon and Liturgy belongs to private persons as their right.
both by the Natural and Divine Law, being conceded to them above generally,
though not universally in respect to the object; and it following from thence,
that their liberty of making use of it, for the fixing upon their immediate
notions, in respect to the matters of the Canon and Liturgy, belongs to them as
their Right by the same Laws, and in its manner also. There arises from hence
a necessity, that they should have it conceded to them, for the making their
several interpretation of these public writings: And this concession is also
one of those derivative liberties belonging to private persons, in relation to
their performance of obedience to the Laws of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity.

II. This interpretation then of private persons, The interpretation of private
persons distinguished.
severally and variously, being in it self distinguished from the authentic
interpretation of the Canon and Liturgy contained in the more derivative
public writings of the Church (which has been already mention, Hic supra Lib.
3. Cap. 7.. 2 and alibi. Infra Cap. ult.
and will be further hereafter) and the more remote and general Rule for the
interpreting the Canon and Liturgy, by the Original Divine Rule of Scripture,
having been laid down, and also explicated already: Hic supra Lib. 3. Cap. 6..
4.
I come here to distinguish of the interpretation of private persons, in
relation to the Canon and Liturgy: And that is, either of the Words and Phrases
contained in them, and of which they consist; or else of the sense of those
Words and Phrases, and which is meant and intended to be expressed by them.

The Rules by which they are to proceed in it, assigned in the general.
III. The Rules then by which men are to proceed for the making this
interpretation in this matter, are in the general, Partly those common to the
interpretation of all other writings; and partly those proper to the
interpretation of this sort of writings in an Uniformity of Churches. Those
which are common to this sort of writings with all others, are chiefly
concerning the interpretation of the terms and phrases; and those proper are
also chiefly of the other sort.

The more particular assignation of them; And first, of those concerning the
interpretation of the words and phrases.
IV. More particularly then, first, I come to the Rules for interpretation of
the words and phrases in the Canon and Liturgy: And those are principally these
two, together with their explications. The first concerning vulgar terms, and
the second concerning terms of Art, and so in like manner also concerning each
sort of phrases.

V. The first Rule then concerning the terms and phrases which are trite and
vulgar, The first of those Rules.
is this, That they are ordinarily to be taken according to the vulgar and
popular use and acceptance of them. And in relation to this sort of words and
phrases, principally and most properly, is that Rule true, concerning use and
custom, as to all sorts of writings. That it is it, Quem penes arbitrium est,
and vis, and norma loquendi:
In whose power is, the Government, and Force, and Law of Speech.
And this popular, and customary use of such words and phrases, as are made use
of in the Canon and Liturgy, is to be observed by every one; either what it is,
or has been, in every National Church and Society of men. And it is ordinarily
to be presumed, that the composers of the Canon and Liturgy (making use of such
kinds of words and phrases in the composing of them) do ordinarily intend them
to signify in their own common and ordinary way.

The Second.
VI. The Second Rule is, concerning words of Art, and that kind of phrases also:
And such Grammatical and Artificial words, are either literal, or figurative.
And the phrases compounded of them are accordingly: And the Rule to be held
concerning them, is, more generally, and in either capacity of them, That,
Artis vocabul^ ex Art and Authoritate prudentum sunt interpretanda: Words of
Art are to be interpreted from Art and the Authority of wise men: And more
particularly, That we should never depart from the literal signification of
them; Nisi ad absurdum vitandum, and ubi cogimur ex consequentia; Unless it be
to avoid an absurdity, and where we are constrained to do it by some
consequence of things. And as to the several sorts of tropes and figures usual
in writings, the Rhetoricians and Artists in that kind are to be consulted. And
although it be true, that the Canon of Doctrines in any National Church (being
a systematical explication of the original Divine Canon (as has been said) is
presumed ordinarily to be as plain as such may be; yet because the Scripture it
self delivers the Doctrines of God sometimes in general, and sometimes in
particular, sometimes in literal, sometimes in figurative terms, Hic supra Lib.
3. Cap. 7.. 7.
(as has been said also) therefore it is not to be wondered at, if the Canon,
in its delivery of them, according to the exemplar of Scripture, sometimes at
least, and according to the occasions of it, consist of such kind of terms also.

VII. These Rules then concerning the interpretation of the words and phrases
of the Canon and Liturgy, being thus briefly laid down; The Rules to be
observed in the interpretation of the sense of the Canon and Liturgy. The first
of them.
we come next to those to be observed concerning the Doctrinal and Hypothetical
sense of those words and phrases, of which the Canon and Liturgy consist, and
which is next to be interpreted.

VIII. And for the finding out of the sense of the Canon and Liturgy, to be
referred to Scripture in the first place, the ordinary Rules common to the
interpretation of all writings are to be made use of. Such are the comparing
the Text with the Context, and one place with another, and the like: And these
proportionably, and according to the capacities of the several Canons and
Liturgies in several Churches.

IX. In the second place, The Second.
The more derivative writings of the Church are to be consulted: For we have
all along laid down them as the authentic and further interpretations of these
more primary public writings.

X. The mind of the Lawgiver (always proper to this sort of writings) is in
the next place to be remembered: And that is, The Third.
that every thing should be so construed as may make most to the welfare of the
public charge (viz.) of Religion and Government, and the consistency of each
with either. And although the matters of Religion are always supposed to be of
the greatest weight, as to the everlasting affairs of another world; yet the
immortal notion of it is not so far to over-possess the mind of men (in this
business) as to make them forget the consideration of the present lawful
Government also (viz.) as that Ordinance of God which is of the greatest
moment, as to all Humane Affairs, as they are temporal, yea, even as to the
temporary and this live's exercise of Religion it self. And the like is to be
said of Religion taken in its simple notion; and as it includes also its
consistency with Government: So that he that will not err in the practice of
this Rule, in the interpreting the Canon and Liturgy, must consider of all
these things, both separately, and in conjunction one with another. And this
mind of the Lawgiver is to be heeded;

D. de legib. and Senatu^ Consult. L. Scire Leges.
1. In the general; Scire Leges non hoc est verba earum tenere, sed vim ac
potestatem, says Celsus, That this is not to know the Laws, (viz.) to have the
words of them ready, but to understand the force and power of them. And Paulus,
Contra Legem facit, qui id facit quod Lex prohibet, D. Eodem L. Contra L^gem.
in frandem vero legis facit, qui salvis verbis legis, sententiam ejus
circumvenit: That, he does against the Law, who does that which the Law
forbids; but he offers deceit to the Law, who observing the words of the Law
only, does craftily over throw the sense of it.

2. In emergent cases, of whatsoever nature they shall be, and upon whatsoever
occasion, and particularly, when Authority shall at any time chance to be
accused of intending to ruin Religion, and to destroy Godliness, and the like,
which is never ordinarily to be believed, although perhaps it may involuntarily
err, in its making choice either of the kind of Religion, or else in its
constitutions concerning this or that individual sort of Religion: But
otherwise it is intention ordinarily, in the making such constitutions, is only
to render Religion consistent actually with the Government of Humane Societies.
And the like is to be said of all other the like particular cases, a due
proportion being held to them, and the things mentioned severally; and whether
the cases be more or less doubtful. Benignius Leges interpretandae sunt (says
Celsus again) quo voluntas earum conservetur: D. eodem. L. Benignius.
That, the Laws are sometimes more favorably to be interpreted, that the mind
of them may be preserved. And again also, D. eodem L. proxime sequent.
In ambigua voce Legis, ea potius accipienda est significatio, quae vitio
caret, praesertim cum etiam voluntas Legis ex hoc colligi possit: That, in a
word of the Law which is doubtful, that signification is rather to be chosen
which is not faulty, D. de Diverse. Reg. Jur. L. 96
especially when also the will of the Law may be gathered from it. And
Maeciamus: In ambiguis orationibus maxim sententia spectanda est ejus qui eas
protulisset: That, D. eodem. L. 68 Hic supra Cap. 6.. 7.
in doubtful speeches, his mind is most of all to be attended to, who delivered
them. And last of all, that of Julianus (which was not long since recited
above;) Quoties idem sermo duas sententias exprimit, D. eodem L. 90.
ea potissimum accipiatur quae rei gerendae aptior est: That, so often as the
same form of speech expresses seemingly two sorts of meaning, that is rather
to be understood which is more suitable to the affair it concerns. And that of
Scaevola, (particularly concerning the same aequitas congrua due to the
application of the Law to Cases,) In omnibus quidem, maxim tamen in jure,
aequitas spectanda sit: That, indeed in all things, but most of all in Law,
Equity is to be had regard to.

XI. In the next place, The Authority of the Church, The Fourth.
composing the Canon and Liturgy, should in all things weigh considerably with
men: But, In valde dubiis and scrupulosis, In things very dubious and
scrupulous, quite turn the scale with them, (i. e.) So as that they should not
be too easy, and too hasty in making conclusions against those public
writings, or the truth or lawfulness of any thing contained in them, (viz.) so
as that they cannot either refer them to Scripture, nor consequently assent to
them under any immediate notion at all, amongst those that may perhaps be
considered of as belonging to them. And thus much is certainly due to the grave
Authority of any National Church, in respect to the particular, and in
themselves generally, far more fallible judgments of private men. Septimo mense
nasci perfectum partum jam receptum est, propter Authoritatem doctissimi viri
Hippocratis; and ideo credendum est eum, qui ex justis nuptiis septimo mense
natus est, justum filium esse, D. de statu hominum, L. septimo mense.
says the Text in the body of the Civil Law: That it was a received opinion,
from the Authority of the most learned Hippocrates, that in the seventh month
a perfect child might be born; and therefore it was to be believed, that he
which was born in the seventh month after lawful marriage, was a lawfully
begotten Son. And Plato, in the case of doubtful propriety; Verum si apud
Magistratus res, de qua agitur, conscripta non sit; tunc apud tres inter
Magistratus seniores usque ad latam sententiam deponatur: But, says he, if the
matter, De legib. Dial. 11. ad princip.
concerning which is the contest, be not registered in the Public Office, then
let it be referred to three of the Elder Magistrates for them to decide it.

XII. Last of all, the way of interpretation, Ex conjecturis, The Fifth and
Last.
called by the Rhetoricians, (...), and made use of by the Civilians, and all
other Faculties in their several ways, and according to the subject matter of
their occasions, is to be made use of also in relation to the Canon and
Liturgy, and in the ways proper to the subject matter of the occasions
belonging to them. But the sum of all is, both in relation to this, and all
other particular ways of interpretation, and in relation to these mentioned,
and all other sorts of writings; that there is one universal interpretour, and
that is, that which needs not the commendation neither of Plato nor Socrates,
which is not directed to, only either by the Law of Moses, or that of Christ,
but by the very humane nature it self; and that is, Right Reason: This is the
sum of all Professions, Arts, and Sciences, and Learning amongst men. This is
above the greatest of all Humane Authorities. This is the intent and complement
of all Councels and Deliberations in this world. Tnis is beyond what can be
thought of, or comprehended by man: The rule of the Actions of Angels, nay, of
the divinity it self. The Law of Humane Nature: Nay, the very Humane Nature it
self. And then, since the Supreme Creator has appointed all things to proceed
in their actions and motions by the Laws of their several natures; what is
there left for man to proceed by in all things but the Law of his Nature also?
What can he, or may he be governed regularly by but Reason?

Nam neque decipitur ratio, neque decipit unquam:
For neither is reason deceived, nor does it ever deceive.
Ei Deus hanc alta Capitis fundavit in Arce,
Mandatricem operum, prospectur anique labori:
And God has founded this in the High Tower of the Head,
The commandress of Actions, and the guide of Labor.
In D. L. Scire oportet,. Sufficit. Col. 4.
And therefore Baldus, and the other Doctors, in the unfolding their Law, do
rightly assert, That it is the weakness of Humane Intellect in any cause
whatsoever, to seek for a (written) Law, where it finds natural Reason; and
that the force of Reason is it, which all mankind is bound to obey. Idem. A^ L.
Nemo C. desentet interin^ut. O^^ judic. (...) L^^^b. 1.
And Cicero, Societatus humanae vinculum est ratio and Oration, quae dicendo,
communicando, disceptando, judicando, conciliat inter homines conjungitque
naturali quadam Societate, neque ulla re alia absumus a natura serarum: That,
Reason and Speech is the band of Humane Society, Epist. 77.
which by delivering things, by communicating of them, by discoursing, and
judging, does conciliate men, and join them by a certain Natural Society;
neither do we differ from the nature of beasts by any other thing. And, Seneca,
Nam cum sola ratio perficiat hominem, sola ratio perfecta beatum facit; haec
autem unum bonum est, quo uno beatus efficitur, scilicet virtus: For since only
Reason does perfect the man, perfect Reason only does make him happy: And this
also is the only good by which alone he is made happy, (viz.) Virtue. And
Divine Plato; De Repub. vel de Just. Dial. 9. ad fin.
At forte in Caelo illius (Civitatis) extat exemplar, etc. But perhaps the
pattern of that City is extant in Heaven, (viz.) which is founded and ordered
by Reason. And last of all, the Proclaimer of Proverbs, Cap. 20. v. 27.
and King of Israel, Solomon; The spirit of man is the candle of the Lord,
searching all the inward parts of the Belly.

And, Chap. 3. v. 19. the Lord by wisdom has founded the earth, by
understanding has he established the Heavens.

Verse. 20. By his knowledge the depths are broken up, and the clouds drop down
dew.

21. My Son, let them not depart from thine eyes; keep sound wisdom and
discretion.

22. So shall they be Life to thy Soul, and Grace to thy Neck.

23. Then shall thou walk in thy way safely, and thy foot shall not stumble.

24. When thou lie down, thou shall not be afraid, yea thou shall lie down,
and thy sleep shall be sweet.

The conclusive caution subjoyned to these things.
XIII. These then being the Rules that are to be proceeded by in this matter;
and because we have heretofore distinguished the Canon of Doctrines into
written and traditional, and have made frequent mention of customary
Ceremonies, and their being in National Churches, as well as those recorded in
the written Canon or Liturgy; therefore we are here last of all to give
caution, and it ought to be remembered, That wheresoever such a Traditional
Canon, or customary Ceremonies are found in any Church, there the same Rules,
which have been here all along given for the interpretation of the written
Canon and Liturgy, and the sense of them, are to be applied by private persons
in like manner also for the interpretation either of the Truth or Lawfulness,
either of the traditional Canon (where such is found) or customary Ceremonies,
and of each in their several capacities, and so far forth as either of them are
propounded by Authority, either as directly Doctrinal, or else as including
Assertion and Doctrine, and immediately implying practice Non possunt omnes
Articuli (says Julianus in the Digests) sigillatim aut legibus aut Senatus
consultis comprehendi; De Legib. and Senatus Consult. L. non possunt.
sed cum in aliquo casu sententia eorum manifesta est, is, qui jurisdictioni
praeest, ad similia procedere atque jus dicere debet: That, all particular
points severally cannot be comprehended either in any Laws or Decrees of the
Senate: But when in any case the meaning of them is manifest; he that has the
power of jurisdiction, ought to proceed to the like things, and so to pronounce
Sentence: Which Rule is evidently current in the like cases concerning all
other things.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Rewards and Punishments belonging to an Ecclesiastical Uniformity: And
the Authorities and Rights concerned in the dispensing of them.
I. THe peculiar necessity of rewards and punishments, to the Regiment of
Humane Societies.

II. The special application of them to the matters of an Ecclesiastical
Uniformity. And first, of the Doctrine of Rewards.

III. And first, those rewards distinguished; and the state of the present case
concerning them.

IV. A conclusive Corollary laid down concerning them also.

V. The Original, and most natural intents of all sorts of matters of special
reward.

VI. The ingress of Friendship, Kindred, Money, private service, and the like,
in respect to these things, in humane societies.

VII. The rewards (ordinary) in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity must needs be
Ecclesiastical.

VIII. The first Rule to be held concerning the dispensing of them.

IX. The Second.

X. The Third.

XI. The Fourth.

XII. The Fifth and last.

XIII. The neglect of the observance of these Rules in this matter, has
brought great damages to Societies.

XIV. The first conclusion laid down from hence.

XV. The Second.

XVI. The Doctrine of Penalties laid down.

XVII. The several sorts of Penalties in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity
distinguished.

XVIII. The degrees of Church censures.

XIX. Those censures to be dispensed with the least Humane mixtures.

XX. The right of dispensing them belongs to Churchmen.

XXI. The Church censures to be backed by the Magistrate.

XXII. He has also the power of controuling the execution of them.

XXIII. And upon the same account is exempted from them.

XXIV. The appendant questions resolved.

XXV. The First of them.

XXVI. The Second.

XXVII. The Third.

XXVIII. The Fourth and Last.

I. REwards and Punishments are things principally intended for the governing
men upon particular occasions: The peculiar necessity of rewards and
punishments to the regiment of humane societies.
And their necessity in the way mentioned to the Regiment of Humane Affairs is
evident from hence, (viz.) from their being the last and utmost means for the
Government of Humane Nature. Solon, qui and sapientissimus fuit ex septem, and
legum scriptor solus ex septem, Rem-Publicam duabus rebus contineri dixit,
Praemio and Paena, says Cicero; That Solon, In princip. Cap. 13.
who was the wisest of the seven wise men of Greece, and the only writer of
Laws amongst them all, said, That a Commonweal was contained in two things,
(viz.) Reward and Punishment. And again, Ibid. Cap. 19.
Omnino Clari and Nobilitati labores sunt faciles: That Renowned and
Nobilitated Labors are easy, but not so on the contrary. And, Facit non raro
atrocitas paenae obedientiorem duci militem, says the Roman Historian; Live.
Dec. 1. Lib. 8.
That severity and grievousness of punishment does oftentimes cause the
Soldier to be led in more obedience. And, Est utilius unius improbi supplicio
multorum improbitatem coercere, Cic. 5. Acc. in verr.
quam propter multos improbos uni parcere: It is more profitable to restrain
the viciousness of many by the punishment of one wicked man, then to spare one
because of many wicked. The special application of them to the matters of an
Ecclesiastical Uniformity. And first, of the Doctrine concerning Rewards. And
first, those Rewards distinguished, and the state of the present case
concerning them. Lib. 2. Cap..


II. The common places of others then, both Lawyers, Politicians, and the like,
concerning the Doctrine of Rewards and Punishments (both as to rules of Policy
and Prudence, and also of Justice and Equity) being pre-supposed to be known;
we come here to treat of them in a special way, and as belonging to an
Ecclesiastical Uniformity. And first, of Rewards.

III. And in the first place, those Rewards (as in other cases, so in this) are
either of Profit, Honor, or Pleasure, or else mixed, of all, or either of them.
And these things, we recited above, as the matters of this world ordinarily
valued by men: and either of those sorts of rewards again, are either more
common to many (as Ecclesiastical Immunities established by Law, and such as
are frequently mentioned up and down in the Civil Law, Vid. C. and Novel.
passim. Et vid. Cod. Theodos. lib. 16. Tit. 2. De Ecclesiis and Cler. and
alibi. A Conclusive Corollary laid down concerning them also.
the Theodosian Code, and elsewhere) or more special to few, as more special
dignities, and Ecclesiastical Promotions: And it is of this latter sort of
Rewards which we here principally treat.

IV. And although it be true, that both Churchmen, and others (concerned any
ways in the matters of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity) are obliged to the doing
of their duties (according to the best of their capacities and abilities) by
that tie they have upon them from God, and those eternal respects they bear to
another world; yet while Humane Nature is in them, and they partake of humane
infirmities (as they concern them in this Spiritual sense) there must be the
present support and temptation of temporal rewards also to encourage them to
deserts and enterprises accordingly. God himself took care in Israel, Deuteronomy.
17.3.9. etc. and Cap 33.11. and 2 Chronicles. 31.4.
that such things should be afforded for their encouragement.

And -- Nemo virtutem amplectitur ipsam,
Praemia si tollas. --
-- None embraces virtue it self
If thou take away the rewards of it. --
The original, and most natural intents of all sorts of matters of special
reward.
V. The original then, and most natural intents of all sorts of emoluments and
gratifications, conferred by the public in the more special way mentioned,
were principally two, (viz.) the rendering Princes Magnificent, and the
encouraging merits and deserts: And the former of these in its most eminent
capacity was always included in the latter. So that Princes were never found
to have acquired more Glory and Renown (as well as to have benefited the
public) then by their having bestowed matters of reward (proper to persons of
any faculty or profession) upon the most eminently and remarkably deserving
(and especially deserving from the public) in that profession.

The ingress of Friendship, Kindred, Money, private services, and the like, in
respect to these things, into humane societies.
VI. But in relation to these things, it was quickly found in the setting up of
all Common Weals, that (partly because of the rareness of men's performing acts
of conspicuous and more then ordinary merit, and partly because of the
prevalence of Avarice, Self-love, and the like corrupt affections with men)
Friendship, Kindred, Money, private Service, and the like stepped in, and almost
spoiled all: Especially Princes themselves grew more supine and careless, in
respect to these matters also, when at any time of their Empire, there were a
greater store of suites and importunities thus qualified, and their affairs
seemed to be in a more complete posture of present settlement and tranquillity;
So that they thought they needed not so much men of service. The present state
of the Uniformity of the Roman Church (in the several Territories of it, more
or less (but especially in those in Italy, and nearest adjoining to Rome it
self, where things seem to be more secure) is a great instance of these things.

VII. The rewards (ordinary) in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity must needs be
Ecclesiastical; The rewards (ordinary) in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity must
needs be Ecclesiastical.
And that whether they be of the more common, or special sort: And the reasons
why they must be so Ecclesiastical, are, both because Ecclesiastical Persons or
Churchmen, are the persons most ordinarily concerned in the matters of such an
Uniformity; and also because it follows then, that it belongs to them to bear
Civil Offices but indirectly, and a latere, and only as in the general they are
members of Humane Society.

VIII. And the first Rule then to be held in any Church, The first Rule to be
held concerning the dispensing of them.
concerning the distribution or dispensing of the more special sort of the
Ecclesiastical rewards, is, That the Prince should have enough of the greater
of them (of all sorts) in his hands to bestow upon any occasion. And as to
others, which either by reason of the propriety of others, or any other way,
are not within his power immediately to bestow; He should at least have the
power (ultimately, and wheresoever the state of his Affairs, in relation to any
particular persons, at any time requires it) of controuling the Collation of
them. And these things he should thus have in his power, ad conciliandum
favorem, for the obliging his Churchmen, and the more considerable sort of
them, the more firmly to him; and also for the better securing the welfare of
his public charge in many other respects. And the ordinary necessity of this
perquisite to the state and Dignity of Princes, is evident from hence; (i. e.)
from the mischiefs that ensue, either where it is not in a sufficient manner or
measure annexed to the Supreme Power; or else where the Churchmen, or any
considerable number of them, are left to be, for their income and maintenance,
at the devotion of the people. Let the late Act of the present Parliament in
England, See, Anno 17. Caroli secundi Regis.
for the uniting Churches in Cities, and Towns Corporate, and the like other
Laws of other Countries be consulted concerning this matter, and the
secondarily natural right of Princes belonging to them in it.

IX. Let us come to the second The Second.
Rule to be also observed in this matter: And that is, That no Ecclesiastical
Promotion should be too great, and so as to stand in any probable capacity of
over-topping the Princes power in his Dominions: Especially if it be bestowed
by, and depend upon a foreign power, as is the case of the Cardinals Hats
bestowed by the Sea of Rome. But yet still the Ecclesiastical Estate, in the
Dominions of Princes, is, in its Honors and Dignities, to be suited with the
Temporal: And that both for the Honors sake of Religion (the affairs of which
the Ecclesiastical Estate is more immediately and directly conversant in
attending upon) and also that the inferior Clergy, in relation to the ordinary
matters of justice dispensed by the Laws, may have their Protectors and
Defenders, as well as others, upon any occasion. And this is the reason why
diverse Governments, and the diverse sorts of them, have diversely modified these
things, for the better accommodating and cementing the affairs of their
Societies.

X. In the third The Third.
place, The matters of special reward in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity should be
annexed principally to actual and eminent merits and abilities. And, caeteris
paribus; and where men are Orthodox, Honest, and in the like manner well
qualified in other things, they should never be wanting to them: And that
whether they are dispensed immediately, either by the Prince himself, or by any
deputation. And this the Laws of Princes have many times taken particular care
for; Clerici etiam omnes qui Ecclesiae fideliter vigilant atque serviunt,
stipendia sanctis laboribus debita secundum servitii sui meritum vel
ordinationem Canonum Sacerdotibus consequantur, Vid. Capitul. Lib. 6. L. 227.
says the Law of Charlemain: Let all Clericks, who do faithfully attend on the
Church, and serve it, receive rewards due to their holy labors according to
the desert of their service, or the appointment of the Canons in that matter.
Lib. 6. Yet. 5. L. 1.
And the Emperors, Gratianus, Valentinianus, and Theodosius, in the Theodosian
Code, Nihil est tam injuriosum in conservandis and custodiendis gradibus
dignitatum, quam usurpationis ambitio: Perit enim omnis praerogativa meritorum,
etc. There is nothing so injurious in the conserving and keeping of the degrees
of dignities, as the ambition of usurpation: For all Prerogatives of merits
perishes in the mean time. And as this matter of dispensing rewards to merits
concerns the Prince in his place, so also it concerns all others who are in
places of power and trust, severally and proportionably in an Ecclesiastical
Uniformity.

The Fourth.
XI. In case of defect of such merits as have been mentioned; the matters of
reward should be bestowed upon the most fitting and best qualified persons
however.

The Fifth and Last.
XII. Or if private interest must needs mix with these things (as most times, by
reason of men's inordinate self-love, and the other the like corrupt affections
flowing from it, it not only does, but also bears away the Bays from all
besides, and yet finds out pretenses and defenses enough for it self in the
mean time) yet however it should proceed in conjunction with abilities and
fittingness in men: And to do so, is the least thing excusable, that it can do
in this matter.

The neglect of the observance of these Rules in this matter, has brought
great damages to Societies.
XIII. These then being the Rules thus to be laid down, the neglect of
observance of them in the Ecclesiastical Uniformities of Princes has brought
great damages to Societies: As to the Prince particularly, it has, sometimes
for the time being, sometimes utterly and for ever, ruined his Affairs. And to
Merit, and Worth, Nobility of mind, and virtuous emulation, it has discouraged
it. And lastly, as to the corrupt affections of men, it has filled all things
with them, and the effects of them, and has brought in all manner of
unworthiness, and baseness, and very barbarism amongst men. Est igitur in omni
genere Civitatum turpissima ac perniciosissima honorum ac praemiorum, quae
virtuti debentur, mercatura, says Bodin: That in all kinds of Common Weals, De
Repub. lib. 5. Cap. 4.
the buying and selling of Honors and Rewards, which are due to virtue, is
most foul and destructive. And, Nihil enim bono viro gravius est, Ibid.
quam in adipiscendis honoribus, improbis exaequari: That there is nothing more
grievous to a good and virtuous man, then in the obtaining of honors to be
levelled with wicked and unworthy men. And, Honoris and Gloriae Majestate de
Republica sublata, Cives in omne dedecus, ac flagitiorum faeditatem perrumpere
necesse est; quod minime futurum est, si honores ac praemia harmonicis
rationibus distribuantur: The Majesty of Honor and Glory being taken away from
the Commonweal, it follows necessarily, that the Citizens should break out
into all disgrace, and foulness of crimes; which will not at all be, if Honors
and Rewards are distributed in their due and fitting proportions.

XIV. Hence then it is, The first conclusion laid down from hence.
and in respect to these things last of all mentioned amongst others, that
Canonical Simony has by all Laws generally been prohibited, (viz.) That the
natural intent of Rewards might not be frustrated, and the evil consequences
mentioned, brought in upon Churches and Common-Weals: So in the Code and Novels
of Justinian; C. De Episcop. and Cleric. L. Si quenquam.
Nemo Gradum Sacerdotii pretii venalitate mercetur. Quantum quisque mereatur,
non quantum dare sufficiat, aestimetur. Profecto enim quis locus tutus, and
quae causa esse poterit excusata, si veneranda Dei Templa pecuniis expugnentur,
quem murum integritatis, aut vallum fidei providebimus, si auri sacra fames in
penetralia veneranda proserpat? etc. Let no man make Merchandise of the order
of Priesthood. Let every one be esteemed of so far forth as he deserves, and
not so far forth as he is able to give. For truly what place can be safe, and
what cause can justly be determined, if the venerable Temples of God shall be
forced by money? What wall of integrity, or Bul-wark of Faith shall we be able
to provide, if the cursed hunger of Gold shall creep into the Holyes of Heaven?
So also in the Novels: Per presentem Legem sancimus, De Ordinatione Episcopor.
Constitut. 137. Cap. 2.
ut quoties usu venerit Episcopum ordinari, conveniant Clerici and Primores
Civitatis, cui ordinandus est Episcopus, and propositis sanctis Evangeliis;
Super tribus personis Psephismata fieri, and quemque ipsorum jurare secundum
Divina Eloquia, and ipsis Psephismatibus inscribi, quod neque per dationem,
neque promissionem, vel amicitiam, vel gratiam, vel aliam qualemcunque
affectionem, sed quod scientes ipsos recte and Catholicae fidei, and honestae
vitae, and excedere trigessimum aetatis Annum ipsos elegerint. We appoint by
the present Law, that so often as by custom it come to pass, that a Bishop
shall be ordained, the Clericks come together, and the Chief of that City to
which the Bishop is to be ordained, and the Holy Evangels being proposed, let
it be recorded by the Three persons, and let every one of them swear according
to the holy Scripture, and let it be written in the Records, that they have not
chosen, neither by gift, nor promise, nor friend-ship, or favor, or any other
affection whatsoever, but knowing them to be of the Right and Catholic Faith,
and of an honest life, and to exceed the thirtieth year of their Age. Ibid.
Paulo post.
And a little after; Jus jurandum autem suscipere eum qui ordinatur per divinas
Scripturas, quod neque per seipsum, neque per aliam personam dedit quid, aut
promisit, neque post hac dabit vel ordinanti ipsum, vel his qui sacra pro eo
suffragia fecerunt, vel alii cuiquam ordinationis de ipso faciendae nomine. We
appoint also him who is ordained to take an Oath, by the Holy Scriptures, that
he has not given any thing, nor promised, neither by himself nor any other
person, nor will hereafter give either to him that ordains him, or to those who
have given their sacred suffrages for him, or to any other for the passing of
his Ordination. And the like Laws are to be found up and down in other Books of
Laws. And the Roman Canonists call Simony, Respectorii fol. 258. Summae Lib. 5.
de simonia summari^. 4.
Crimen Ecclesiasticum: an Ecclesiastical Crime: So Panormitanus. And, Qualiter
committatur his versibus comprehend, says Hostiensis; Munus, Lingua, Caro,
Timor, atque favor popularis
Impediunt gratis spirituale dari:
How it is committed take it in these Verses: A Gift, Entreaties, Kindred,
Fear, and Popularity
Do hinder a spiritual thing from being given freely.
And Simoniacus autem, Idem Ibid. Summar. 11.
in beneficio vel dignitate constitutus, per accusationem deponitur, per
inquisitionem amovetur: A Simoniack, being constituted in a Benefice or
Dignity, is deposed by accusation, is removed by inquisition.

The Second.
XV. The like respect to the things mentioned also, amongst others, has the
case of Pluralities, which is found in many of the Christian Churches, (viz.)
it is constituted and allowed of, as one sort of the Ecclesiastical immunities
above mentioned. Many things have been said concerning it by private persons,
both Pro and Con, of late days especially, and in some parts of the Europaean
Christian Churches: And heretofore it has been sometimes allowed of, and
sometimes prohibited by the Common Laws of Countries. The Rise and Progress of
it in the Christian Church is rightly described by Father Paul, in his
Judicious History of the Council of Trent, Lib. 2. p. 250, 251. etc.
(viz.) That its first beginning was in favor, not of them in Beneficed, but
of the Church, where there was insufficiency of benefices, and so as that that
Church which could not have a proper Minister, might have at least some other
Service. The exorbitances of it in the Church of Rome have been great, and some
other Churches separating from it have judged that they have fixed in a mean
concerning it, some in one way, and some in another. Many things according to
the diversities of the estates and conditions of Countries, might be alleged
for it, both in relation to Religion and Government, and the consistency of
Religion with Government. And since the Christian Churches have come to have
grown into a more settled condition of being national, it has been made use of,
particularly and amongst other things, for the consistency of the
Ecclesiastical Estate with the Civil, and the necessary support of the several
degrees of Churchmen.

XVI. Thus then concerning the Rewards. The Doctrine of Penalties laid down.
We come next to the penalties belonging to an Ecclesiastical Uniformity in
like manner also.

XVII. And first of all, they are either of Pain, or Loss, The several sorts of
penalties in an Ecsiastical Uniformity distinguished.
as in other things: And both again are either primary and principal, or else
secondary and accessory. The primary and most proper sorts of Penalties in an
Ecclesiastical Uniformity are the Church censures; which being spiritual
punishments, are most properly to be adhibited in spiritual matters. And the
secondary and accessory are the temporary punishments inflicted by the
Magistrate, and superadded to those spiritual ones in the case of obstinacy of
mind, and ineffectualness of those spiritual Punishments.

XVIII. The Church censures, The Degrees of Church censures.
and spiritual penalties proceed in their several degrees, as all punishments
ought ordinarily to do: And that for Plato's Reason, in the matter of Laws:
Legum vero, ut videtur, says he, aliae ad bonorum hominum doctrinam ponuntur,
De legib. Dial. 9. ad fin.
ut per eas intelligant quo pacto inter se amice versentur: Aliae ad
compescendas illorum pertinaciam qui indomiti natura sunt, spretaque omni
disciplina, nulla ratione moventur, quin ad omnem ruant improbitatem: That
amongst Laws, some as it seems, are established for the informing of good men,
that by them they may understand how to live amicably amongst themselves: And
others, for the restraining of the pertinaciousness of those who are unruly by
Nature, and all discipline being despised, are by no means prevailed upon, but
that they will run headlong into all manner of noughtiness: And therefore,
Quanto gravior and acerbior est Christi fidelibus excommunicationis censura,
majoraque interius and exterius infert nocumenta; tanto maturius cautiorique
judicio Ecclesiarum Praelati eorumque Vicarii ea uti debent, says Covarruvias,
and the like the other Canonists; In Bonifac. octavi Constit. quae incipit Alma
matter sub Tit. Excom. prioris part. Relect.. 9. Tom. 1.
That by how much the Church censure of Excommunication is more grievous and
bitter to the faithful of Christ, and brings greater damages upon them, both
internal and external; by so much the more maturely, and with a greater
wariness of mind the Prelates of the Churches and their Substitutes ought to
use it.

Those censures to be dispensed with the least humane mixtures.
XIX. And these Church censures ought always to be dispensed with the least
humane mixtures of Pride, private passion, and the like, of any sort of
penalties that are in the world. And the reason of the Divine Law of Christ its
so appointing them to be dispensed is evident, (viz.) because they are
spiritual penalties, dispensed by spiritual persons.

The right of dispensing them belongs to Churchmen.
XX. And the Churchmen, or Spiritual persons, then in every Society also, are
those to whom immediately, and ordinarily the right of dispensing them belongs.
And this Right of those Churchmen to whom it belongs, is warranted both by the
Law Natural and Divine, in their several respects, and was said to be one part
of their power of Jurisdiction above mentioned: Lib. 2. Cap. 6.. 9.
And this, whether they do dispense them actually, either by themselves, or by
others.

The Church Censures to be backed by the Magistrate.
XXI. Next after these Church Censures, in every Ecclesiastical Uniformity,
follow the additional Temporal Penalties to be inflicted by the Civil Power:
And those Spiritual, are always thus to be backed by these Temporal Penalties
for many Reasons;

1. Because all are not men of Conscience, and so value not spiritual penalties.

2. Because the Magistrate is appointed to assist the Church, and to be a
nursing Father to it.

3. Because men, when become Heretics, offend Humane Society, and the like.
Other things might be mentioned. And the Apostles heretofore, when the first
Christian Church was not National, had the extraordinary power of delivering
men over to be tormented by Satan.

He has also the power of controuling the execution of them.
XXII. The Magistrate also in every National Church ought to have the power of
Controuling the Execution of the Church censures: And therefore are the last
appeals in this matter, appointed by the Laws of Countries to be made to him.

And upon the same account is exempted from them.
XXIII. And upon the same account also it is, that the Magistrate himself is
exempted from the execution of these Church censures upon him, (viz.) because
if others shall have the power of so executing them, they shall in that
particular, become his Superiors, and so his person, upon any occasion being
rendered vile, and himself overawed in so weighty a matter, his affairs shall
be totally ruined in the end, See, The Doctrine and Discipline of the Kirk of
Scotland, London, 1641.

The first Book of Discipline. sub Tit. Persons subject to Discipline. Et alibi.


and the Ecclesiastical person shall overthrow him. The Scotch Presbytery then
in this matter, cannot expect to be allowed of by Kings: To discipline, say
they, must all the Estates within this Realm be subject, as well the Rulers, as
they that are ruled, and the like in other places of their public writings.
And the Sea of Rome proceeds from the Excommunication of Princes to the
absolving their Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance, and to the alienating
their Dominions to others, and last of all, to the pronouncing it as a matter
of merit for any one to kill them.

XXIV. This then being said also concerning these penalties; The appendant
questions resolved. The first of them.
there are some few appendant questions to be briefly resolved.

XXV. And the first of them is, concerning the Commutation of Church Censures
for money: And, at the practice and affirmation of which, that it may lawfully
be in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity, some persons are offended. But it is to be
considered what we said above upon another occasion; That Riches are the things
of this world ordinarily valued in the first place by men. Lib. 2. Cap. 5.. 7.
And then the depriving them of them, will easily be granted to bear the nature
of a punishment; and then, so long only as the Church Censures do not lose
their effect by it in the mean time, and foul and sordid Avarice does not
interpose in the matter, who will deny but that the difference in the kind of
punishment (the proportion and degree of it being only duly observed) does not
violate the Rules of distributing Justice? And therefore Pecuniary Mulcts have
been appointed by all Laws to be used as punishments, and that both in Sacred
and Civil matters; Si, sine venia Edicti impetrata, libertus patronum in jus
vocaverit, D. De in Jus vocando, L. 25.
(says Modestinus) ex querela patroni, vel supra dictam, (i. e.) quinquaginta
aureos dat; vel a praefecto urbtis quasi inofficiosus castigatur, si inopia
dignoscitur laborare: If, without pardon of the Edict being first obtained, the
Manumized servant shall implead his patron, either he shall suffer the above
said punishment, (i. e.) the payment of fifty pieces of Gold; or else he shall
be chastised as an inofficious person by the Prefect of the City, if he shall
be known to be poor. And, Lib. 4. Tit. De injuris.
Justinian in the Institutes, says, That by the Law of the twelve Tables,
propter os fractum nummariae paenae erant constitutae: For a bone of any man's
being broken, the punishments by payment of money were appointed. And the
Pecuniaria Mulcta, or Pecuniary Mulct, C. de Epis. and Cler. L. 56. ad finem.
De Legib. Dial. 12. Paulo post princip.
is appointed in the Code, as a punishment relating to sacred matters: And the
like by Plato in his Books of Laws; and very many the like instances might be
given.

XXVI. In the next place, another complaint, is, The Second.
because of Excommunication for light matters. But the answer is, that they may
be by accident great and weighty.

XXVII. The like is the question made also concerning Excommunication at first
dash. And Covarruvius says, Trina vero monitio, The Third.
Relect.. 9. Tom. 1. sub. Tit. Desentent. Excom.
quam ad Excommunicatione diximus esse necessariam, requiritur in
Excommunicatione ab homine ferenda; non tamen in Excommunicatione lata a Canone
vel Statuto; ipsa siquidem Lex, quae ita mature and caute censuram ipsam
indixit, quotidie admonet subditos ne prohibitum crimen committant, remve lege
vetitam agant: That the threefold admonition, which he said, was necessary to
Excommunication, is required in an Excommunication pronounced at the discretion
of the Judge; but not in an Excommunication inflicted by the Canon or Statute:
for the Law it self, which has so maturely and warily threatened the censure,
does daily warn the persons subject to it, that they do not commit the crime
forbidden, nor do the thing prohibited by the Law.

The Fourth and Last.
XXVIII. In the fourth and last place then, it will be Queried, How far forth
also severity of Temporal Punishments may be used by the Civil Magistrate in
these spiritual matters? And here truly we shall determine briefly, and without
intermedling too far: And that is, that as we dare not exclude the Magistrate
from the use of any means necessary for the preservation of his Public Charge,
so we will take it upon us most humbly to exhort him to remember mercy. The
tenderness of Conscience in his Subjects, in this case, is to be considered of:
The humanity which ought to be used toward all, and in all cases to be called
to mind: The distinction to be carefully made betwixt the weak, and obstinate:
And finally, if Mercy instead of Punishment, especially in the case mentioned,
may any ways prevail, he will be the servant of Christ, and like that God,
whose Deputy and Image he is upon earth, in being prone to Mercy.

CHAP. X.
Of the Magistrates further intent, in relation to the inward notions supposed
to the external profession and use of things. And of the more particular
latitudes belonging to those notions, and the assent included in them.
I. THe general intent of this Chapter.

II. The Magistrates intent concerning the internal notions in men stated
negatively.

III. And also positively.

IV. And that, first more generally.

V. Secondly, more particularly. And the Latitudes conceded in relation to them.

VI. An appendant question resolved.

I. THe inward notions, both mediate and immediate, The general intent of this
Chapter. Vid. Lib. 3. Cap. 4.. 2.
which are supposed to external profession, and the use of worship, having been
above more generally considered of; we come here to consider of them more
particularly and especially: And more expressly of the latter sort of them, and
of the more particular latitudes belonging to them also.

II. The Magistrates intent then, The Magistrates intent, concerning the
internal notions in men, stated negatively.
as to those inward notions in men's minds; First of all Negatively:

1. That he does not at all, in his Ecclesiastical Laws, intend the injoyning
upon men such and such more particular and immediate notions concerning things:
And the Reasons of this have been given above in their proper places, where an
universal inward unity of opinion in men has been denied to be either any of
the intents of a Canon and Liturgy, or else that kind of inward assent, which
is supposed to the external acts of profession, and use of Public Worship.

2. Much less does the Church or Magistrate intend the forcing any man to any
kind of assent whatsoever: And that whether it be either under any immediate,
or else under any mediate and third notion: And that because the forcing an
assent in men, is both unnatural, as a means to be used; and also impossible,
as an end to be obtained; besides the impertinency of inward assent
immediately, and in it self, to the Magistrate and his occasions. Outward
profession indeed may be forced, but inward assent can never: Although the
forcing of outward profession also, if it be specifically and directly
endeavored, be irrational and wicked, as has been said. The late Earl of
Portugal, Supra Lib. 3. Cap. 4.. 13. Parag. 2. Menass. Ben Israel. In his
Vindiciae Judaeor. Sect. 1. Parag. 16.
(mentioned by the Jewish Rabbi) in his dealing with the Inquisitor, gave a
sufficient instance of these things; Who, when his Physician had been compelled
by tortures, to confess himself a Jew, and he could not procure his Liberty;
Being incenc'd at it, feigned himself sick; and the Inquisitor, who had been
importuned for his Physicians Liberty, having been sent for to visit him, when
he came, he compelled him in like manner, by offering to have put a red hot
Helmet upon his head, to confess himself to be a Jew; and also he made him
write it with his own hand that he was so; Adding, That in like manner as he
had confessed, did his Physician confess, save only that he had presently, only
out of fear, and not sense of torment, confessed more then his Physician had
done before him.

And also positively.
III. Let us come then to the positive intent of the Magistrate in this matter.

And that first more generally.
IV. And that first more generally, is;

1. That he intends men's profession and use of things to be according to
their inward notions, both mediate and immediate, in each of their capacities;
and not that they should make (in respect to either sort of those notions)
either a bruit or false profession: And if they do so, it is their own fault,
and not his. And although he does not, yet Conscience should, and God does take
an actual and judicial cognizance of it. And, in the mean time, it being sin,
whatsoever is not of Faith, it is not to be supposed, that the Magistrate
should intend men's sinning against God any ways in the making their
profession, or practicing the use of things.

2. The Magistrate also wishes men a right notion (i. e.) such as may be right
in it self, as well as such as may seem right to them, for the founding their
profession and use of things upon: For he wishes them every ways absolute
welfare in his Uniformity. And in this sense it is, that the special direction
of Gods Spirit, and an unity of Truth in the minds of men, and the like, is
many times prayed for, in the stated Liturgy, and such other public writings
of Churches. And the Canon of Doctrine also is proposed, as a means whereby God
may so far forth as he shall please, work such an unity in them. Secondly, more
particularly. And the latitudes conceded in relation to them.


V. Yet in the interim, and notwithstanding these things, as the liberty of
opening, and of men's use of their judgment of discerning, is all along supposed
to be conceded to them in the general; So also, all just and more particular
Latitudes of it are conceded to them in like manner in relation to their fixing
these Notions concerning things, which we are here mentioning. And those
Latitudes are, that a man should profess assent

1. To the Canon and Liturgy themselves, and in the general, only as humane
things, and stamped with humane authority, and composed by fallible men, and
the like.

2. And so also, as to the particular Doctrines of the Canon, and forms of
Worship in the Liturgy, That a man should profess assent to them, and the use
of them, only under what more particular and further notion his judgment leads
him to: And that not only as to the diversity of notion in the nature of it
respecting the thing, but also as to the diversity of it, in relation to the
respect it has to the more or less firmness of it in a man's mind. And also a
man is allowed to profess assent

1. To Doctrines seeming to him certainly true, under the notion of such
certain Doctrines; and to forms of Worship seeming to him certainly lawful,
under the notion of such certainly lawful, and so to use them accordingly; And
to both these, as falling under what degree of certainty he pleases.

2. And so to Doctrines and Forms of Worship seeming to him only probable, only
under the notion of such probable: The Scripture Rule of acting from Faith
still being proceeded by, and the most probable of things (either to be
believed or done) being fixed upon.

3. And Lastly; The sum of all in this matter is, That all particular latitudes
are conceded to a man, in relation to these things, which are not destructively
contradictory to the third notions of the Canon and Liturgy, their being true
and lawful, and so to the Magistrates Ecclesiastical Uniformity, and so to his
public charge preserved by it in the latter end. For as the Magistrate is not
supposed to intend the denial of that degree of liberty in this matter to any
man, which is only just, and of no evil consequence; So also he must never be
supposed at all to allow of that, which shall be destructive to him and his
public affairs. Neque enim quis sciens and prudens vellet sui perditionem, aut
simul contradictora: Neither does any man, being in his right wits, and
understanding what he does, will his own destruction, or contradictories
together, and at the same time. And these things, and that they should be thus
allowed to the people, are their derivative natural rights in an Ecclesiastical
Uniformity; and that as flowing from their primitive right of the use of their
judgment of discerning: And they are also some of their derivative Latitudes or
Liberties relating to their performance of obedience to the Ecclesiastical Laws
of Princes.

An appendant question resolved.
VI. In the last place then, the appendant Question or Querie that is here to be
resolved, concerning the negative part of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity, and a
man's not divulging his Opinion, and that particularly in the case of his
downright dissenting from any Doctrine in the Canon, or form of worship in the
Liturgy, (viz.) How far forth a man should tolerate any such Doctrine, Lib. 3.
Cap. 4.. 14.
or Form of Worship in a National Church, rather then as much as in him lies to
oppose it by divulging the contrary, and suffering in Testimony against it, is
of kin to the Question above mentioned, of contending for the Faith; but is the
negative opposite to that positive, and will be determined from the several
following conclusive propositions; And those are,

1. That this Doctrine of Tolleration by private men takes no place in the
positive part of an Uniformity, (i. e.) in those things which a man either
uses, as to his practice, or makes profession of assent to, as to his belief:
And the reason is, because such tolleration of such things includes a
contradiction to the use and profession mentioned, and so renders both of them
sinful: But a sinful, either profession or use of things, and that which is
false and contrary to Faith, is not that kind of either, which is laid down as
a medium for a charitative communion in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity.

2. The use of things and forms of Worship, as to the Liturgy, is here supposed
to be more general; because the Liturgy being stated, the use of it, or, one
way or another the partaking in the use of it, is supposed accordingly to be
equally common to all: But then profession of assent, more specially in respect
to the Canon of Doctrines, is to be distinguished: And it is either definite or
indefinite, (i. e.) in respect to the object matter of it, or the Doctrines
which profession is to be made to. The indefinite is, when it is not
necessarily and definitely limited or determined, (either by any Act of a man's
own, or act or intent of the Magistrate) to a certain number of things; and the
definite is the contrary: And the one ordidarily takes place in the special
sort of professors, and such as are more strictly tied up, either by Oaths,
subscriptions, or the like in any National Church: And the other in the
community, and contrary sort of persons: But it is the latter of these, (viz.)
the generality and common sort of Church Members, who are here more principally
and ordinarily concerned.

3. The Doctrine of Tolleration by private men in any such case as this is, in
the general, is expressly asserted, and approved of by the Divine Law of Christ;
In that Text of St. Paul, Romans 14.22. Have thou Faith? Have it to thy self
before God, (i. e.) do thou believe such or such a thing, either to be true,
or not true, lawful, or not lawful? Enjoy thine own belief for the satisfaction
of thine own conscience: And that is as far as thou art (generally, and without
a more special Call, and particular charitative obligation) concerned.

4. The more particular qualification of this Doctrine, and how far forth such
a Tolleration in this particular case, ought to be practiced, is stated by the
dictate of the Law Natural: And that from the General Rule for the
determination of all such cases in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity, and which has
been all along hitherto mentioned. And that is, So far forth as it may make to
the public welfare of the charge of the Magistrate, which always includes in
it the sum of the two Tables of Moses (so frequently mentioned by the
Casuistical Divines, and as being parallel to this in the stating their case in
a notion separate from an Ecclesiastical Uniformity) (viz.) the glory of God,
and the good of our Neighbor in any Society.

5. The conclusion of all then, from these prefatory positions, is, That from
the measuring this case, in relation to particular things or Doctrines in an
Uniformity, men are to consider the value and worth of such Doctrines in
Religion; The Service they may otherwise do to God in their Calling, if they do
not incur the penalties of an Uniformity by their divulging their Opinions
against the present Ecclesiastical Laws; the high valuation that is to be had
by every one of the welfare of the Magistrates Charge, and of Charity and Peace
in the Church and State in order to it, and the like. And if these things be
but considered, it is not ordinarily to be supposed, that there are things of
such weight, and so unwarily proposed in any Canon of Doctrines in an
Ecclesiastical Uniformity, as first, to deserve a man's total dissent from
them, and after his violating the Common Peace and Profession, and stirring up
Contentions, by reason of any real and so gross erroneousness that is in them.
And these things do also in a more eminent notion concern the case of Revolting
in any Church; and as that also has its special reference to a presupposed
definite profession. Last of all then, as to those (many times found in all
Churches) who unwarily presume that they may vent their dissentings, in both
these sorts of cases mentioned, when and how they please: And that God, and
Conscience, and the Laws in any Society, are sufficiently satisfied, if they
do but subject themselves in the mean time to the penalties annexed to an
Uniformity. They are to remember that suffering is not at any time, or in any
case to be incurred, but upon just cause and good grounds for it, and where
doing, by reason of the malignity of the thing to be done, cannot be: And that,
not it, but obedience is the primary intent of all Laws; and so even of any
Penal Law whatsoever. And in vain also are the examples of the Apostles here
alleged for men's irregularity, divulging of their Opinions in Societies:
Whose case, of their first planting the Christian Religion in the world, was so
rare and singular in the circumstances of it, as that the like cannot possibly
now be met with in any Church whatsoever.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Testimonials to Profession in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity; And what
they are.
I. TEstimonials in the general defined and distinguished.

II. The Testimonials to Profession must be such as fall under humane
cognizance.

III. The distinction of them applied.

IV. The Testimonials to Indefinite profession assigned.

V. And also those to definite.

VI. Both sorts of these Testimonials ought to be given in, sincerely, by the
professors in Churches.

VII. Whence the necessity of the Testimonials to definite Profession has
sprung in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity.

I. TEstimonials, in the general, Testimonials in the general defined and
distinguished.
are things bearing witness to any thing: And they are either natural, or
instituted, or mixed. And each of these are either such as in the matter of them
fall under humane cognizance, or such as do not. The Testimonials to profession
must be such as fall under humane cognizance. Supra. Lib. 2. Cap. 7.. 10. and
deinceps passim. The distinctions of them applied.


II. Profession being assigned as the primary and universal medium for
charitative communion in any Church, the testimonies given in to it in an
Ecclesiastical Uniformity, must be accordingly such as fall under humane
cognizance: And that whether they be of either of the more general sorts
mentioned, either natural, or voluntary and instituted, or else mixed of both.

III. The natural Testimonials to Profession, are, such as in their own nature
of things import a witness-bearing to it. The instituted are, such as do so by
institution. And the mixed are, such as do it both naturally and by institution
also. The natural are equally common to all Societies, under their diversities
of applications of them to their diverse professions, and more particular
affairs; the instituted are more proper to some: And so are the mixed in their
more particular applications before others of the same kind; and that all of
them, whether they do testify either to definite, or indefinite profession.

The testimonials to indefinite profession assigned.
IV. The testimonials to indefinite profession (of which soever of the sorts
mentioned they are) are such as are required of all the members of any National
Church in common: And they do use so to be required. Lib. 2. Cap. 7.. 11. and
alibi.
Such are the outward practice of Doctrines, abovementioned; the being present
ordinarily at the public worship; the partaking in it with others; the saying
Amen to the Prayers of the Liturgy, framed according to the Canon of Doctrine;
the making use of its several offices for Baptism, and the celebration of the
Lords Supper, and the like. Such are also the using of the Church Ceremonies;
the bearing of Church-Offices; the taking of Oaths for the discharge of them;
nay, such is also men's very acquiescence under the Ecclesiastical Uniformity;
and the like of either of the sorts of Testimonials.

And also those to definite.
V. In like manner also are the Testimonials to definite profession on their
part, (viz.) such as are required of some sorts of persons in special, to
testify to their more special sort of profession: Such are Church-Oaths,
Subscriptions, Declarations, Protestations, and the like: And these do use to
be required of persons in more public and special sorts of station and
employment, in relation to the Uniformity. Such as ministers, or Clergymen, of
all sorts and degrees, are; and who ought to be more eminently exemplary to
others in the matters of it: Such also as are Physicians and Schoolmasters;
who are about the sick, who educate youth, and the like: Such Testimonials also
are habits in Ministers: And by these and the like ways do obligations of all
sorts use to be testified to, in special amongst men; Illud non interest, says
Vlpian, qualis processit obligatio, D De novationibus, and Delegat. L. 1..
Vnica.
utrum Naturalis, an Civilis, an Honoraria; and utrum verbis, an re, an
consensu, etc. That, that is not of weight what manner of obligation has
preceded, whether Natural, or Civil, or Honorary; D. eodem. L. 17.
and whether by words, or the thing it self, or consent. And, Delegare
Scriptura vel nutu; ubi fari non potest, debitorem suum quis potest: That any
one may assign over his Debtor, either by writing, or Nod, C. De Episcop.
Audientia. L. Statuimus hoc Edicto.
where he cannot speak And in the Code, Statuimus, hoc Edito in perpetuo
valituro, ut Potestates, Consules, sive Rectores, quibuscunque fungantur
Officiis, pro defensione fidei praestent public juramentum, quod de terris
suae jurisdictioni subjectis universos haereticos ab Ecclesia denotatos bona
fide pro viribus suis exterminari studebunt. We do appoint by this Edict, to be
in force for ever, that the Powers, Consuls or Governors, whatsoever Offices
they discharge, do give in their Oath publicly for the defense of the Faith;
that they will study really, and with all their might to exterminate all
Heretics, which are noted by the Church, from the Precincts subject to their
jurisdiction. C. Eodem L. prox. sequent.
And in the following Law, Nemo militet, qui non apud acta testificatus cum
tribus sit, propositis sanctis Evangeliis, se esse Christianum Orthodoxum: None
shall bear Arms, who has not testified in the presence of three Witnesses,
upon Record, the Holy Evangels being proposed, that he is an Orthodox
Christian. Vid. Quibus modis pignus, etc. L. non videbitur, et D. de
probationibus and praesumpt. L. Census and monumenta. Et eod. L. 25. in fin. et
D. de Test et qui Test. et L. ad Testium et L. singulos Testes. Et D. de
furtis. L. 28. 3. Et C. de Summa Trin. L. cum velimus. 3. et novel. 131. Cap.
2. circa Med. See Chap. 1. in princip. Supra L. 3. Cap 1.. 8. See Cap. 1. in
fin. See the Laws and Statutes, paulo post princip. Supra Ibid. Both sorts of
these testimonials ought to be given in sincerely by the professors in Churches.
And the like constitutions up and down in the body of the Law are every where
to be found; and so in other volumns of Laws and Constitutions in the world
And, in the Corpus Disciplinae, he that is called to exercise the function of a
Minister, is to subscribe The confession of Faith and Catechism used and
authorized in the Reformed Churches of the United Provinces; and also the
Doctrinal Decrees of the Synod of Dort, of the year 1619. and to submit to the
Synod, as was abovementioned. And a little after, The public Schoolmasters
should be directed by the Ministers, what Books they are to read to their
Scholars, and what prayers to use, etc. And in the Statutes of Geneva, there
is the manner and form of the Oath which the Evangelical Ministers take before
the Sindicques and Council, as was abovementioned upon another occasion also.
And the like Testimonials there are given in, in England, and in other
Christian Churches.

VI. These then being both the sorts of Testimonials to be given in, in an
Ecclesiastical Uniformity; there is one thing, in those that give them in,
which there ought to be a special regard had to by them; and that is, their
sincerity and reallity of intent in their so giving them in, and exhibiting of
them: And this is that which constitutes them to be formally such as to them.
But otherwise they are in their intentions, but materially such as to others,
and impostures and deceipts, as to them. Those then who have sowed the contrary
seeds of Doctrine in Churches (like Ulysses feignedly sowing salt in the
furrows) are here to be condemned. Such are the Doctrines of being Actively and
Passively present at Church-Services; Of using equivocation, mental
reservation, and the like, in Oaths, and the like Sacred pledges: As if men
might in these kinds of matters triumph innocently with him; Juravi lingua,
mentem injuratam gero:
I have sworn with my tongue, but I bear a mind in me unsworn still.
But these Doctrines are Hypocritical in the sight of God; and generally,
destructive to humane affairs; and have been invented for the serving of turns,
in cases of irregular commotions in Common-weals, and for the laying up of
parties in silence against another day; and who (like Cadmus his teeth from the
Earth) may upon occasion start up men of steel. If we shall admit of them,
what shall become of all Faith amongst men, and of all security to the Common
Peace of Princes? The Dolus malus, so frequently termed so by the Civilians,
has been decryed a million of times by all Laws. And the grosser Doctrines of
equivocation, and mental reservation, have not escaped the condemnation of some
of the very Roman Doctors themselves: Dicere non feci, quod tamen feci; licet
cum hac mentis limitatione, ut tibi significem, non est aequivocatio sed
mendacium, says Sotus: De Just. et jur. Lib. 5. Quaest. 6 a 2. Vid. Lib. 11.
Cap. 4. Variar. Resolut. Lib. 1. Cap. 2. N. 2. etc. 2 Kings 5.19. (...)
Integritas, Rectitudo, etc Schindler. in Pentaglott. The significant word. See
Hist. of the Council of Trent, Fol. 52, 53. De Offic. Lib. 1. De vita Phil.
To say, I have not done a thing, which yet I have done; although with this
limitation of mind, that I may signify it to you, is not equivocation, but a
lie. And the like Azorius, Covarruvias, and others. And if exigencies of
special cases be alleged for the warranting the use of these Doctrines; the
Apostolical Rule is, That Evil is not to be done that good may come of it.
Elisha's Lec le Shalom to Naaman in the Scripture may be interpreted as a
common valedictory form of Speech: Or else as a downright reproof: Shalom
being applicable to integrity of manners, as well to that of body, or the like.
And the case of the Elector of Saxonie's bearing the Sword before the Emperor,
in the Diet of Ausburg, and assisting at the Mass, was condemned even to
derision. And if men will, they may learn the lesson of sincerity from the
Heathen Sages: Compendiaria est via ad Gloriam, ut qualis quisque haberi vult,
talis sit, says Cicero: That the short way to Glory is, for every one to be
such as he would be accounted to be. And Diogines in Laertius, Trojanus Equus
idcirco fefellit, quia formam Minervae mentitus est: That the Trojan Horse
therefore deceived, because it falsely represented the form of Minerva. And, Vis
videri ab hominibus, an non? Nunquam bonae honestatis est longa simumulatio,
Epist. 10.
says Seneca: Wilt be seen of men, or not? A long dissimulation is never of
right honesty: So then these principles of dissimulation in an Ecclesiastical
Uniformity ought not to be suffered by Princes.

Whence the necessity of testimonials to definite profession, has sprung in an
Ecclesiastical Uniformity.
VII. Last of all, the necessity of Princes exacting the special sort of
Testimonials mentioned in their Ecclesiastical Uniformities, (as well as in
their other affairs) has sprung from the weaknesses and corruptions of men.
The simple vulgar have been always found so ductile and easily to be deceived;
and the lusts of Haeresiarks and Ringleaders of Sedition have been in like
manner found to have been so active and prevalently impetuous in all Societies;
that Princes have had reason to think, that they could never too much secure
the state of their affairs by any of those lawful ways whatsoever. And these
things will be sufficient for an answer to those, who have thought that
Christian liberty, and liberty of Conscience, and the like, have been impeached
by them.

CHAP. XII.
Of these Testimonials as Religious Bands: And in what manner, upon what
grounds, and to what things they oblige.
I. THe consideration of these Testimonials as Religious Bands.

II. First, more generally.

III. And secondly, more particularly.

IV. First, under what particular notions, and in what manner they oblige.

V. And that first, as Laws.

VI. Secondly, as men's own Acts passed.

VII. In both these respects absolutely.

VIII. Secondly, upon what particular account they oblige.

IX. First, Antecedently, upon the account of men's being Members of the
National Church.

X. Secondly, Consequentially also, upon the account of their having exhibited
them as such.

XI. Thirdly, by both these sorts of Obligation absolutely, upon the account of
the hurt ensuing from the contrary.

XII. Thirdly and Lastly, to what things they oblige.

XIII. First, the definite and indefinite to their different sorts of matter.

XIV. Secondly, mixtly, both of them to the making use of the Instruments of
the Uniformity.

XV. Thirdly, to the continuance in Profession.

XVI. Lastly, to the not divulging men's opinions to the public hurt.

I. HAving thus then absolved the consideration of these testimonials as such;
The consideration of these testimonials, as Religious bands.
I come next to consider them as Religious bands and ties upon men's
Consciences; And that also in relation both to the common and special sort of
profession mentioned. And that,

1. More generally; and secondly, more particularly.

II. First more generally. First more generally.
And so,

1. That they are intended (both sorts of them) to oblige in the general, it is
evident both from their being parts of the Uniformity enjoined by Law, and also
such specifical parts as testimonials are. Besides, that some of the special
sorts of them, and such as are promissory, are, not only by the intention of
the Magistrate, but in themselves and eminently, religious bands.

2. This also is here further to be noted, that there are the same Latitudes
(heretofore mentioned) allowed to them as obligations, which are allowed to
them as testimonials, and to the profession made of which they are testimonials.

And secondly, more particularly. First, under what particular notions, and in
what manner they oblige.
III. And more particularly we shall assign under what notions, in what manner,
and to what particular matters they oblige.

IV. First, under what notions, (i. e.) notions proper and belonging to them in
this their capacity, amongst the other matters of the Uniformity; and although
also in this particular, of their forming these notions to themselves, men are
equally left to their Liberty, as in the forming any other whatsoever.

And that first, as Laws.
V. First then, these matters testimonial in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity oblige
as Laws, and as being legal parts of the Uniformity it self, as has been
already hinted. And so, whether they are either of the Common or special sort;
whether parts fixed, or at any time super-added, they oblige antecedently, and
to the giving of them in, as such testimonials. Testimonials exhibited to
profession in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity are of two sorts: Either voluntary,
(and those are but accidental as to particular persons, and the Magistrates
intent relating to them; and therefore more rare, and so but reductively
belonging to be treated of here; and there is no antecedent obligation, upon
the account of which they are given in) or else they are enjoined, and such as
have been mentioned: And there is always an antecedent obligation belonging to
them, and as the formal cause of their being given in.

Secondly, as men's own Acts passed.
VI. In the second place, these testimonials oblige also as being exhibited as
such, (i. e.) as men's own acts of such a particular kind passed by their
exibiting of them: And so they oblige subsequently, and as having been before
given in to profession, which is still the thing they oblige to ultimately in
their kind; and as it is the primary universal medium for communion, and as
being therefore the last end of them in this matter as Humane Laws, and under
whatsoever other notion they may be thought by any particular person to oblige.

Thirdly, in both these respects absolutely.
VII. Thirdly and lastly, they oblige, both by this their antecedent and
consequent obligation, absolutely, (i. e.) to the profession to be made under
an absolute notion of the Truth and Lawfulness of those things which are to be
the object of that profession of assent so to be made: And then, Lib. 3. Cap.
10.. 5.
whether it be either absolutely probably, or absolutely certainly (as was
above hinted) that this profession of assent be yielded, it matters not.

VIII. We come then next to assign upon what particular accounts and grounds it
is, that they so oblige: Secondly, upon what particular account they oblige.

First, antecedently upon the account of men's being members of the National
Church.


And so

IX. First of all also, they oblige antecedently, upon the supposition of men's
being members of the National Church, in which they are enjoined to be
exhibited; otherwise not so. For, to corporations of Strangers, to Merchants,
to other professions tolerated, besides that of the National Church, generally
in all Societies, are immunities and peculiar freedoms from the injunctions of
exhibiting of them conceded: So in the very Roman Church it self, amongst those
that are called Christian; and even in the severest and most Catholic
Territories of it, in some measure or other: So also amongst the Mahometans,
and others; and generally for the commodiousness of Traffic, and the
prosperities sake of mankind in all Countries, the law of Nations will not have
it to be otherwise. In Rome it self the several Countries have their Cardinals
Protections, and connivance at least. And the Patriarch of Constantinople
resides there in the quality of an Ambassador for his Churches, Script. An.
1575
says Stephanus Gerlachius in his Letters to Crusius.

X. In the second place, Secondly, consequentially also, upon the account of
their having exhibited them as such.
they oblige consequentially upon the supposition of men's having exhibited them
as such members of the National Church also; but otherwise not so neither: And
that upon the same accounts which were last of all mentioned, mutatis mutandis,
and their proper respects being had to this sort of the obligation of these
Testimonials.

XI. In the third and last place, they oblige, Thirdly, by both these sorts of
obligations, absolutely upon the account of the hurt ensuing from the contrary.
both by this their antecedent and consequent obligation, absolutely also; upon
the account of that hurt, and at last final destruction, which the permission
of their obliging conditionally will bring to an Ecclesiastical Uniformity, and
to Humane Societies: For if the conditional notions, of, so far forth only as
things are True and Lawful, according to Scripture, or the like, shall be
permitted (in this case) and in respect to those things which profession of
assent is to be made; who sees not but that this permission will evacuate the
third notions fundamental to the National Profession; and so the National
Profession also it self (which is fundamental to the whole Uniformity) and the
utmost intents of it in the latter end? And then together with the Uniformity,
the very Government of Humane Societies also, and the consistency of Religion
with it, (both which are to be supported by that Uniformity) shall go down. If
it be said to this, that the negative part of an Uniformity is sufficient for
the preventing of these confusions; We answer, No: Not to a parallel degree;
nor at all, in the case of Emergent Controversies: in which Nature it self (as
was said above) directs to some fixation of Doctrines (and so of Forms of
Worship) by some Judge appointed for that case. Lib. 3. Cap. 1.. 12.
And the way of knocking both Opinions in the Head, only by silencing them, is
brute, and not satisfactory to Reason, and so not sufficient for the ending of
Religious strifes amongst Rational men: But it leads still (in this general and
simple consideration of it) to the denial of the real existence of any such
thing as Truth in Religion; and so to Atheism, and the denial of Religion it
self; and so to all the forementioned causes of Confusion in its kind also in
the latter end. And for this reason it is, that there is no Society, where (if
it continues long enough in being) there is not some National Church kept up,
notwithstanding any mixture of Professions, which may be otherwise tolerated
in any of the ways which have been heretofore mentioned. Nay, if it were no
more but the very Magistrates being of some one of those professions, supposed
to be all of them purely and equally tolerated and mixed in any Country, it
would come to determine the controversy in this matter amongst them in the
latter end: So that upon these accounts it is, that this absolute obligation
mentioned, must be thus annexed to these Testimonials. In the case of the
Uniformity of England, in this particular, it was the report made by Wray,
Chief Justice in the Kings Bench, and all the Judges of England; That, Whereas
one Smith subscribed to the Nine and Thirty Articles of Religion, with this
addition (so far forth as the same were agreeable to the Word of God) That this
subscription was not according to the Statute of the 13 of Elizabeth, because
the Statute required an absolute subscription, and this subscription made it
conditional: And that this Act was made for the avoiding of diversity of
Opinions, etc. And by this addition the party might by his own private opinion
take some of them to be against the Word of God. And by this means diversities
of Opinions should not be avoided (which was the scope of the Statute) and the
very Act it self made touching subscription should hereby be made of none
effect.

Thirdly and lastly, to what things they oblige. First, the definite and
indefinite to their different sorts of matters.
XII. Last of all, we come to assign to what things, and matters of duty these
testimonials oblige: And so also,

XIII. First of all, the testimonials given in to indefinite profession oblige
to indefinite matter; and those to definite, to definite matter: In both, the
matter is according to the profession, and the obligation is according to the
matter, and the latitude of it. And the sort of this Profession, called
indefinite, is here thus to be asserted, because it is in all Churches
generally indefinite in it self; it not being determined by any thing. If the
intent of the Magistrate (in the very proposing of his Uniformity, and the Laws
of it to be observed) be said to determine it; it will be denied, that there is
any such intent of his imported in that Act of Proposition: And that because
the indefinite profession mentioned has all the properties suitable to the
several notions and modes of things concerned in such an Ecclesiastical
Uniformity. For, as on the one hand, it does not necessitate to a total
profession; so, on the other hand also, it does not suppose, but that the
profession in the mean time may be total; or else however, but that the Canon
of Doctrines and Liturgy are so warily and skilfully composed, (the latitudes
also which have been mentioned, as belonging to the making this profession
being considered) as that the profession mentioned will be ordinarily
deficient, but in some, either very small, or few things. And then it follows,
that it is better for the public charge of the Magistrate, that the accidental
case of tolleration by private persons should be left open to the Generality of
the members of any National Church; (they not violating the common profession
of any outward Act in the mean time) nor he, nor any one else, not taking any
cognizance of any such tolleration as to any particular persons) then that
(they being on the contrary tied up to a total definite profession) they should
for every, either particular or small dissent, be forced to violate the common
profession mentioned, either by changing the Soil (it is ten to one declaredly
for that cause) or else by scismatically publishing those their dissentings at
home. If the edge of these things be again turned back upon us, as to a
definite profession of those select sorts of persons mentioned: And if it be
said, that the inconvenience will be the same in any National Church as to
them: The answer is, that those special sorts of persons are but few
comparatively, in any Church: That the special reasons for their special sort
of obligation have been partly mentioned: That they are generally of more
knowledge to discern and reconcile things: Or that any of them however have the
liberty not to enter upon such employments in Commonweals, as require their
giving in their Testimonials to such definite profession as has been
mentioned. And then this liberty being granted, it is all the reason in the
world, that the respects of private persons in this matter should give place to
those of the Public. Against Knott. See, in his Preface,. 39.
The judgment then of Mr. Chillingworth concerning the Uniformity of England
is here to be reprehended, (viz.) That all that was meant by subscription in
the Church of England, was, That the constant Doctrine of it was so pure, that
whosoever believes it, and lives according to it, undoubtedly shall be saved:
And that there is no error in it, which may necessitate or warrant any man to
disturb the Peace, or renounce the Communion of it. This would serve well for
Doctrinals, relating to indefinite profession; but neither for Doctrine nor
Worship relating to a definite.

Secondly, mixtly both of them, to the making use of the instruments of the
Uniformity.
XIV. In the second place, these testimonials (both sorts of them mixtly) oblige
to the making use of the instruments of the Uniformity: And that both as to
their general end (which is immediately the promotion and welfare of the
Uniformity it self) and also as to any of their particular ends whatsoever,
which also in their several kinds are always to be directed to their general.
And the Reasons of these things are, because what a man professes assent to,
it is supposed that he is willing to promote; and if to promote it, then to
undertake to use the means necessary and injunctively appointed to him for the
promotion of it, and the welfare of it. And such is the using the instruments
of the Uniformity appointed by the Magistrate, in respect to the welfare of the
Uniformity it self. And the use of such instruments is diversely prescribed, and
according to the diversity of the natural and ordinary intent of them, in all
Churches, and as has been all along hitherto, in the places proper to the
mention of these things, mentioned by us: And as to their tending as such to
their immediate general end; things and cases, and circumstances concerning
both, are to be carefully heeded, by him that will aright, and as he ought to
do, make use of them to that end. And in such cases, where reason and prudence
shall suggest it, the mind of the Lawgiver is oftentimes to be preferred
before the Letter of the Law: And that also is to be always judged of by its
more eminently tending to the general end mentioned.

Thirdly, to the continuance in profession.
XV. Thirdly, The giving in such testimonials does oblige also to the
continuance in profession of assent once made to the Uniformity. And the
reasons for it are evident also, (viz.) because of the great hurt which comes
to the Magistrates Charge every way by revoltings. And because that therefore
those testimonials are intended as cautions, and obligations de futuro; the
welfare of the Church and State for the future being intended, as well as that,
at any time, for the present; And such future welfare of them depending also
upon the future deportment of the Conformists, in relation to the Uniformity,
as well as the present upon that for the present. And if any of those
conformable practices (which we last mentioned) make to the welfare of the
Uniformity; then much more that profession upon which they are grounded. And
then, if the continuance of such practices be required, much more of such
profession.

Lastly, to the not divulging men's Opinions to the public hurt.
XVI. In the fourth and last place, the giving in the testimonials (both sorts
of them) does oblige also to the not divulging of men's Opinions to the hurt of
the Public Charge: And that, either of their different notions, about any of
the matters of the Uniformity; or else of any of their Notions, in case of
absolute dissent from any of the matters of it. And as to the last of these
things, men are to take great care (for the reasons up and down in this
Discourse severally mentioned) that they do not, either lightly dissent, or
else publish their dissentings.

CHAP. XIII.
Of men's Liberty of opining and exercising their judgment of discerning
concerning the matters of the Canon and Liturgy, and how far it extends. And
some cautions concerning such the exercise and spending of it.
I. THe liberty of opining applied to the matters of the Canon and Liturgy.

II. The matters of the Canon and Liturgy distinguished.

III. The due extent of men's liberty of opining, in relation to them, stated.

IV. Lastly, some cautions, concerning such their opining, laid down.

V. First of all, Negatively.

VI. Secondly, Positively.

The liberty of opining applied to the Canon and Liturgy. Lib 2. Cap. 3.. 3, 4.
and alibi.
I. THe liberty of men's exercise of their judgment of discerning being more
generally, and in its due latitudes asserted above; we come here to apply it
more particularly to the matters of the Canon and Liturgy. And that the Church
and the Magistrate do concede it in those due latitudes in respect to them, it
is evident from hence, because they do not in their proposing of them intend to
violate either the Divine or Natural Law by their unjustly infringing of it.

The matters of the Canon and Liturgy distinguished.
II. The Doctrines then of the Canon are either, stated or occasional: And so
are the Forms of Worship in the Liturgy, or any additionals made to it, either
temporary or perpetual: And both these in any National Church, of any kind of
Religion whatsoever, considered either in the special or individual notion of
it. And the Doctrines and Forms of Worship stated and ordinary in any of these
Cases, are ordinarily more plain and necessary, as has been all along
supposed: The due extent of men's liberty of opining, in relation to them,
stated. Vid. Lib. 2. Cap. 3.. 4.
although perhaps the occasional may be the contrary.

III. The Querie then, concerning the due extent of men's opining concerning the
matters of the Canon and Liturgy in particular, is here and from hence to be
resolved, after the same manner that it was above in the general, and
concerning other things. And that is, that to persons intelligent, and who are
sufficient (both in respect to prudence as well as perspicacity) to judge of
such things: God and Nature have allowed the liberty of the ordinary exercise
of their judgment of discerning universally, and according to the latitude of
its adequate object, and in relation to all the sorts either of Doctrines or
Forms of worship mentioned in any National Church: And that for many reasons,
relating both to the good of Religion and Government, and the consistency of
Religion with Government. But to the vulgar, and persons insufficient actually
and ordinarily not so. And the reasons for this are evident, (viz.) because
that, as the ordinary meddling of such persons with matters purely speculative
and opinionative (as those terms are taken in their more ignoble sense) is as
to them impertinent; so also is their actual meddling with such matters of
Religion less fundamental and doubtfully revealed generally and ordinarily of
very ill consequence, in many respects, both to themselves, and the public
charge of the Magistrate: For, it takes them off from looking after the
fundamentals of Religion, which must bring them to Heaven: It influences their
brains to an excess (as mad-mens are) with the too great nicity of notions: It
makes them a fit prepared matter for any Heresiark to work upon, and lead away,
and the like, both to the ruin of all substantial practice and sound Religion,
and of all Humane Society. And for these and the like Reasons it is, that the
state of this case here laid down, as it is asserted and countenanced by the
Scriptures, so also it has been generally practiced by the Governors in all
Societies. The Christian Scripture says, Romans 14.1.
Him that is weak in the Faith receive you, but not to doubtful disputations:
And, concerning both St. Paul's Epistles, and the other Scriptures, That there
are in them some things hard to be understood, 2 Pet. 3.16.
which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the other
Scriptures, to their own destruction. And the Laws of Countries have proceeded
in the like manner: So his present Majesty of England, in his late Letter to
the Archbishop of Canterbury, appointed him to see, See, the Kings Letter.
that the Ministers did preach in their Pulpits the most Christian Doctrines of
Repentance, and Faith, and of Humility, and Charity, and Good works, and the
like; omitting unnecessary Controversies, according to the Scripture Doctrine,
2 Timothy 2.23. See, Chap. 31. Of Ecclesiastical exercises in the Congregation.
See, p. 3.
So also the very Corpus Disciplinae appoints the after-noons Sermons to be for
the Exposition of the Catechism in a plain and familiar style. And, the Laws
of Geneva prohibit any strange manner of handling the Scriptures (in public)
which may turn to offense; Curiosity to search vain Questions, and the like.
And the state of this question, laid down after this manner by us, is suitable
to the distinction of definite and indefinite profession already mentioned. And
the Divines do give their several Reasons, why, notwithstanding, things
difficult, as well as plain; and things speculative and remote from the
foundation, as well as things practical and more necessary, are laid down in
the Scriptures.

Lastly, some cautions concerning such their opining laid down.
IV. In the next place then, we come to lay down some cautions concerning men's
opining, in relation either to the matters of the Canon and Liturgy, or others:
And that first, negatively; and secondly, positively.

First of all, Negatively.
V. First of all, Negatively. And that,

1. That they make not their inward heats of spirit, accompanying their
opinings, to be the Rule by which to judge such their opinings to be true. For
this leads directly to Enthusiasme. And by the heats exerted in the way of any
of the faculties or passions of men's minds, either of confidence, or zeal, or
desire, or love, or especially of comfort, or the like, how easily and
infinitely variously, both Satan (appearing as an Angel of Light) and men's own
Fancies may delude them, we leave it to be discerned from the writings of those
who have treated on purpose of such things. In the interim, if heroic motions
of Gods spirit, extraordinary impulses, Christian experiences, and the like,
shall be pretended; the Scripture is to be the Rule for the trial of all these
things, and that as they relate either to opinings, or outward actions
proceeding from them, 1 John 4.1. Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits.
And if the contrary to these things shall be permitted in any Society
whatsoever, and according to the diversity of prescripts of Religion; who sees
not (the weaknesses and corruptions of men being considered) but that it will
quickly evacuate and destroy all Religion and Government, and consistency of
Religion with Government.

2. That they make not neither the Holiness of persons to be the Rule by which
to judge their Opinions to be true. For, Holy men are fallible, as well as
others, and many times weak in Judgment, and God has not obliged himself in
the general to direct any certainly, any further then in fundamentals. Besides,
Holiness is many times pretended and counterfeited on purpose for the guilding
over of men's actions and designs, and the dazzling the eyes of the people, who
are not able to put a difference betwixt shows and things, and are taken with
nothing so much as with shows, and with no shows so much as with those of
Religion. Sozom. Lib. 5. Cap. 15.
It is recorded of Julian the Apostate, in the Ecclesiastical History, that he
wrote in his Letter to Arsacius the Chief Priest of Galatia; That if he would
have the Gentile Religion increase as the Christian did, he should take the
Form of Religion and show of Holiness upon him, and cause the like to be done
by others: That he should encourage good Works, and Holiness of Life; that he
should not suffer the Priests to frequent Taverns, nor Plays, nor to do any
thing which was not of good Fame, and the like. And many the like other
presidents in this matter are extant in Histories.

Secondly, Positively.
VI. We come then to our cautions positive; and those are also,

1. That men weigh both sides of controversies: And especially, That they
consider the reasons which Authority has for things, as well as those which
are alleged against them. Alexander is said, Apud Plutarch. in Alexand.
When sitting in judgment, always to have used to stop one ear with his hand
while one accused, and to have opened it, for the other while he justified and
purged himself. And, audire alteram partem, is a piece of Justice that is
universally due, but much more to Public Authority. And many times innovations
in Societies, are carried on by popular cries, and pretentions, and great shows
and colors for things, amongst which the considerations of the ordinary sort
of men are drowned over head and ears (like a vessel over-laden sinking in the
water) while the constitutions of Authority are not considered of, neither as
to the long time (perhaps) for which they have been settled; nor as to the many
wise heads from which they have proceeded; nor as to the reasons of weight,
upon which they are always to be supposed to be founded.

2. That the special consideration of Religion's consisting with Government be
thought of. And then this will easily untie many knots, which may otherwise
seem to be in things; for many things are appointed and done in Ecclesiastical
Polity, for the preservation of this consistency. And this is most certain,
That, quid proximum is sometimes to be chosen, and not quid optimum; not what
is simply best in it self, but what is next best for such or such a Society.

3. And lastly, That Scripture be made the only ordinary and constant Rule for
the measuring the Truth of men's opinings by. Lib. 3. Chap. 1.. 2.12. etc.
For both the Canon and Liturgy refer to it as their Divine Rule, as has been
heretofore mentioned.

CHAP. XIV.
What are the more particular Restraints and Liberties; and the Rights of the
Magistrate relating to men's divulging of their Opinions; especially concerning
the matters of the Canon and Liturgy.
I. THe more particular Restraints and Liberties, and the Rights of the
Magistrate, as to men's venting their Opinions, annexed to their General Rule.

II. Diverse have been the degrees both of such Restraint and Liberty, in diverse
Societies.

III. The restraints and liberties common to all Churches here to be laid down.

IV. The position, or removal of either of them will evidence the other.

V. The ways of men's divulging their Opinions distinguished and referred to
the restraints and liberties mentioned.

VI. The Querie concerning the permission of mixtures of professions obviated.

VII. The more particular restraints and liberties laid down.

VIII. First, as to the matter of men's Opinions.

IX. Secondly, as to the manner of divulging them.

X. Thirdly, as to persons divulging of them also.

XI. Fourthly, and lastly, as to the time of the divulging them.

XII. Last of all, the Magistrate has the Supreme Right and Power in all these
things.

The more particular restraints and liberties, and the Rights of the
Magistrate, as to men's venting their Opinions, annexed to their general Rule.
I. THe General Rule of men's not divulging their Opinions to the breach of the
Peace, and the consequent hurt of the Magistrates charge by it, having been all
along hitherto laid down; and the negative part of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity
consisting in the observance of it; I here come to the assignation of the more
particular restraints and liberties, and the rights of the Magistrate, relating
to the general matter of it.

II. And first of all, diverse have been the degrees either of restraint, Diverse
have been the degrees both of such restraint and liberty in diverse Societies.
which has been held over men, or else of Liberty which has been conceded to
them, either as to the divulging or not divulging their Opinions in several
Societies; and that where there has been the positive, or else only the
negative part of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity. In Spain, and generally where
the inquisition is in the Roman Church, men are not permitted so much as to
discourse in private against the matters of the Uniformity: And if they do so,
any of the company is taxable by the same Court, for not detecting and
revealing of it. In the European Churches, dissenting from the Roman, generally
is held the quite contrary course. And both Table discourses, and others, both
Pro and Con, concerning the matters mentioned, are tolerated. And in some, both
of those Churches, and the other of the Roman communion, there is a mixture of
professions both tolerated and countenanced in their several degrees: As in
France, Holland, Poland, and the like Countries at this day. And every State
Acts in this matter according to its present occasions.

III. But I intend not here only to give particular instances of these things;
The restraints and Liberties common to all Churches here to be laid down. The
position or removal of either of them will evidence the other. The ways of men's
divulging their opinions distinguished, and referred to the restraints and
liberties mentioned. The Querie concerning the permission of mixtures of
profession obviated.
but to lay down the restraints and liberties which are common and ordinary
(and ought to be so) generally to all Churches.

IV. And because the matters of restraint and liberty are privately opposite;
therefore by the position or removal of either of them, in relation to the
members of Churches, the other will be discerned.

V. The ways of men's divulging their Opinions then, are either more or less
solemn. The less solemn ways are, by private Discourses, Conferences, and the
like. The more solemn, by public Preaching, Printing, and the like. And,
concerning both these, the restraints and liberties mentioned are to be
assigned.

VI. But first of all, the Querie is here to be obviated; Why outward
profession (taken in an abstracted sense, in respect to either of these or the
like particular ways of venting of Opinions mentioned) since it is in it self
one of the more solemn ways of such venting of them, is in many Societies
tolerated; where perhaps either of the particular ways of either sort of them
mentioned is not? Answ. The Answer will be from the consideration of the
different effects of these several particular ways of divulging of Opinions
upon the charge of the Magistrate, and the state of humane affairs: And that
is, that because that the ways of venting of Opinions by words, (either spoken
or written) are naturally apt and fit, as to give men more particular
informations, so also to excite in them both more particular, and also more
vehement passions concerning things, then general and abstracted profession is;
and so consequently, where different matters of Religion are, are more apt (by
far) to hurl them into Religious contests (so many ways dangerous to the
public:) Therefore it is, that the way of contradictory divulging of Opinions
by the mixture of professions is tolerated (and that with safety to Societies,
as experience shows) though not so complete as it otherwise might be) where
notwithstanding the other ways of so divulging them by words (at least to the
same degrees of solemnity) are denied to men. For by particularities and
vehemencies (both in matters of Religion and others) are the most irregular and
dangerous passions stirred up amongst men. Lib 2. Cap. 9.. 8. ad fin.
And to this topic is the use of those extremes (heretofore mentioned) in the
Roman Church (viz.) of prohibiting Books in the vulgar tongue, of establishing
the doctrines of the use of Images, general devotion, implicit faith, and the
like, to be referred, if any man will seek after a reason of them.

The more particular restraints and liberties laid down. First, as to the
matter of men's opinions.
VII. These things then being thus said, we come next to the assignation of the
more particular restraints and liberties mentioned: And those are,

VIII. First of all, as to the matter of men's Opinions: And so first, in
respect to the Canon and Liturgy, some things perhaps are not defined, neither
by the Canon nor Liturgy, nor otherwise: And so are neither doctrines, nor
prescript forms of worship of the National Church. And in such things there is
in all Churches ordinarily a greater liberty of divulging men's Opinions
supposed to be conceded to them; so in the Church of Rome, as to their learned
men's actual debating points not defined; and the like in other Churches
proportionably, and according to their several particular constitutions. The
general Rule still being heeded of the public charge of the Magistrate its not
being damnified, neither by the breach of the peace, nor otherwise. 2. Some
Opinions perhaps are dissentings from the Canon, proper to the case of
indefinite profession; and men are to be very wary of divulging them, to the
hurt of public authority, by which the whole Society is preserved. 3. And
lastly, Some Opinions also are differences about the Canon, proper to the case
of definite profession: And there is usually supposed to be a lesser degree of
restraint held over the divulging of them. Secondly, the matter of men's
Opinions is considerable also, in respect to Religion: And so, 1. Some things
are controversal, and dubious, and the like; and so fit to be debated only
ordinarily in Academies, and places of Learning, amongst Scholars, and persons
intelligent. And it were no matter if such controversies were, to a degree
fitting, permitted in Churches; if it were but to keep wits in ure and
employment, and to provide Champions for those Churches upon occasion. Apud.
Flor. Lib. 2. Cap. 15.
As Nasica gave Council concerning Carthage, That it was not to be raced, That
the Roman People might always have an Enemy to contend with. But the great
caution in this matter is, that the people are not to be called down into these
Sands in the mean time. The common Adage were better for their Letany.

A medicorum Recipe,
A Juris Consultorum excipe,
A Theologorum distingue,
Libera nos Domine:
That they should pray to be delivered
From the Receipts of Physicians,
The Cases of Lawyers,
And the distinctions of Divines.
Secondly, some things are practical, and such as concern good life and
Godliness. And Scripture, and Reason, and Prudence, will allow a greater
liberty about them. Men's diverse notions concerning them may tend to edification
ordinarily, and not to destruction.

IX. In the second place, we come to the liberties, Secondly, as to the manner
of divulging them.
in respect to the manner of men's divulging their Opinions. And so also, 1. It
should be with humility and submission, and not on the contrary, with pride and
confidence, and singularity, and the like, at least before the people. 2. There
is a less degree of liberty conceded to intemperate zeal, and undue vehemence
of assertion, and the like. Not that it is at all the intent of the Uniformity
to extinguish the Noble and Generous heats of such zeal as is truly Christian,
but only to regulate it, when it is unduly exerted. Where is men's zeal for
practical Godliness? for the evident duties of the second Table? The thoughts
of these things do use to be buried many times as deep as the center, under the
dusts of unprofitable and perhaps malignant Opinions; which use to be raised
when men have a mind to innovate in Societies, and to gain the trophies of
honor and temporal emoluments out of the hands of others. 3. Passionate
expressions, and sharp reflections on others should be laid aside also. The
Apostles themselves were fain to observe such rules as these, for the
preservation even of their first Christian Churches, Phil. 3.15. If in any
thing, says St. Paul, ye are otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto
you. And reflections and passions, when once grown popular and common, are like
the risings of the waves at Sea before a tempest, and do argue commotions and
storms to be approaching in Societies.

X. In the third and last place, Thirdly, as to persons divulging of them also.
the quality of the persons divulging Opinions, is also to be heeded: And so,
1. Young men are supposed to be advised to a greater silence: And men of mean
and weak parts: And for these principally is the use of Homilies appointed
ordinarily in Churches. 3. It is but reason that persons suspected or observed
to be seditious, disloyal, and the like, should be more narrowly watched over,
and more nearly restrained, if there be occasion. And then,

XI. Fourthly and lastly, all these sorts of persons and things, Fourthly and
lastly, as to the time of divulging them.
and the like to them, are then most of all to be heeded, when the present
temper of the people is seditious, and any ways inflamed, either by some
increasing or decreasing Sect or Sects in Churches. Only in some cases the
heats of them are rather to be permitted to cool by degrees; then that at once
there should be endeavors used to extinguish them.

XII. In the last place then, the Magistrate, Last of all, the Magistrate has
the Supreme Right and Power in all these things.
who has the Supreme and ultimate power of laying a restraint upon the
divulging of men's opinions in the general, has also the same power of doing
the same thing as to all these particular ways and cases, relating to the
divulging of them, which have been mentioned: Especially, as to the more
ordinary solemn ways of divulging of opinions: 1. By preaching; Lib. 3. Cap.
1.. 17.
and 2. By Printing. 1. By Preaching, as was mentioned above. So it is both
amongst Turks and Christians, and all kinds of professions. See, p. 4. etc.
And the Laws of Geneva prohibit the setting forth of strange Doctrine (in the
Church) and the like, as was mentioned. And in Holland at this day, he that
medleth with State matters in the Pulpit, after two admonitions, has two
Stivers and a pair of Shoes sent him, if he do it the third time, and is
forthwith banished the Country.

De Origin Imper. Turk. Cap. De Sacerdotibus eor.
2. By Printing. And the use of the Magistrates Right of laying his restraint
upon this too is in like manner common to all Countries and Professions, and to
some in the extreme; so (says Georgieviz) aamongst the Turks, Apud illos sane
nullos vidi Typographos, etc. Amongst them truly I saw no Printers. De Gradibus
Episcopor. in Graecia, etc.
And Chytraeus of the Constantinopolitan Greeks; Typographiam nunquam habuisse
creduntur: That they are believed never to have had Printing amongst them. And
of the Jews there, Ibid.
Habent enim Judaei Prelum, sed ut plurimum cessans: That, the Jews have a
Press indeed, but for the most part not going. And, De Ruffor. Rel. etc. Davidi
Chytraev.
Paulus Oderbornius of the Tartars; Si Alcoranum, vel alium quemvis librum
Typis Editum hic videre licuisset; eum certe vel magno pretio comparatum ad te
misissem: If I had here seen the Alcoran, or other Book, set forth in Print,
although I had given a great price for it, truly I had sent to you. And if we
look nearer amongst the European Christians. Capit. Lib. 1. Lege 78..
Pseudographae, and dubiae Narrationes, etc. ne credantur, nec legantur: Let
not libellous, and offensive Papers, either be believed, Hist. of Russia, Chap.
21.
or read, say the Laws of Charlemain. And of the Russians, Fletcher; Some
years past, in the other Emperors time, there came a a Press and Letters out
of Polonia to the City of Mosko, where a Printing house was set up with great
liking and allowance of the Emperor himself: But not long after the house was
set on fire in the night time, etc. And in the Roman Church, it is part of the
Office of the Inquisition to regulate Books and Printing. And, in the Acts of
the late Synod of Dort, the regulating of Printing was one of the first things
which the Synod took into consideration: Putamus rem esse omnino necessariam,
and saluberimam, ut Licentia Typographorum reprimatur, etc. We think it to be a
thing altogether necessary, and most wholesome, that the License of Printers be
restrained, say the English Divines, Vid. Acta Synod. Sessione 22. Chap. Of the
Ministers. Hist. Inquisit. Chap. 29.
and so the others. And, the Discipline of the Dutch Churches: If a Minister
have the gift of writing any thing for public Edification, he shall not put it
in Print without the examen and approbation of the Classis. And last of all,
the matter of Books (says Father Paul, in the case of Venice) seems to be a
small thing, because it treats of words. But through these words come opinions
(says he) into the world, which cause partialities, seditions, and finally
wars. They are words, it is true; but such as in consequence draw after them
Hosts of armed men.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Supervisors in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity.
I. THe Reasons for the Supervisorship in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity.

II. The several sorts of the Supervisors distinguished.

III. The Supreme Supervisor assigned: And the Reasons for his being so.

IV. From whence he derives his Right.

V. The Deputative Supervisors further distinguished.

VI. The (...) or office of a Bishop in the Christian Church.

VII. The matters to be Supervis'd by these Supervisors.

VIII. The care to be taken in the Supervising of them.

IX. The Ecclesiastical Tribunals for the exercise of that care.

X. And the stated Circuits for Visitation.

XI. The last Appeals ought always to be made to the Chief Magistrate.

I. THe matters of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity then being of so great weight
as has been all along hitherto declared; The Reasons for the Supervisorship in
an Ecclesiastical Uniformity.
and the corruptions and weaknesses of men being so apt to intermingle with
them, and to busy themselves about them; it is but reason that a superiorship
should be Constituted in relation to them; and which is necessary to the
Application of the more particular powers, and to any due care to be taken
about them. Non tantum decenter leges far summo bono est, sed etiam sancita
accurate custodire and ad effectum deducere, C. In Constitutionibus Imperator.
Tiber. De Provinc. Praesid. Constitut. 3.

The several sorts of the Supervisors distinguished,


says the Emperor Tiberius in the Civil Law: That it is not only for the
Sovereign good of Societies that Laws be well made, but also that they be well
kept, and looked after, and brought to effect.

II. The Supervisors then in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity are of diverse sorts
and degrees, in relation to the affairs of it: They are such either as Supreme,
or Subordinate and by Deputation. And those by Deputation again are such
diversely, and according to the several Modes of Ecclesiastical Polity in
several Societies, and the occasions of them.

The Supreme Supervisor assigned, and the reasons for his being so.
III. The supreme Supervisor in every Ecclesiastical Uniformity is the Chief
Magistrate or Sovereign Prince. And the Reasons for his being so are, both
because he has the supreme and universal charge of all, and the management of
the affairs of it committed to him by God, as has been heretofore evidenced;
and also because he is supposed then by consequence, and from his actual
Management of those affairs, Supra Lib. 1. Cap. 5. and lib. 2. cap. 6.. 21.
to have the best knowledge of all occasions both of Church and State, and
which concern his Supreme Public charge mentioned.

From whence he derives his Right.
IV. And he has the Right to this his Supreme Superiorship partly by virtue of
his Supreme power over all, and partly by virtue of his indirect power in
Spirituals; and by virtue of either, from the immediate donation of God. And
this supreme Supervisorship is one of the Magistrates more particular Rights
above mentioned: And he has always held it generally in all Ages and
Societies. The Egyptian Hieroglyphick for Government was an Eye in a Scepter:
and the chief Magistrate is like a watchman upon a Tower, who is to look down
and view the general state of his people.

The Deputative Supervisors further distinguished.
V. The Deputative Supervisors then are those also, who derive their Right of
such their Supervisorship either from the Supreme Supervisor mentioned, or else
from Christ: And they also are either Supreme or Subordinate, and these again
either more or less Subordinate, either pro tempore, or pro perpetuo. And all
of them are the Church Governors or Ecclesiastics ordinarily, although
sometimes others also, in any Society, either Christian or other, and in their
several degrees and Spheres of Order and Government, and according to the
several Modes of Ecclesiastical Polity in several Societies, and the Occasions
of them; and who, so far forth as they are invested by the Supreme Magistrate,
derive their Right either mediatly or immediately from him; and so far forth as
by Christ in like manner also from him. And this Ecclesiastical matter of
Supervisorship; so far forth as it is Ecclesiastical, and relates directly to
Religion; is always ordinarily and most properly thus to be committed by the
Supreme Magistrate, and so far forth as belongs to him, to Ecclesiastics or
Churchmen; because it belongs to them in the nature of the affair, and in
relation to their being such a peculiar sort of members of their distinct
Church-Society, as was above mentioned more in the general. Lib. 2. cap. 6.. 4.
and 10. and alibi.
And these supervisors also have been accordingly always diverse, in the diverse
sorts of Churches and Societies that have been in the World; So in the state of
the Jews, and in the Ancient Heathen Church-Societies, both amongst the Greeks
and Romans, and others, as has been also partly mentioned under another notion
above. Lib. 2. cap. 6.. 4.
And in the Christian Church, whether more Primitive or Papal, the Records
concerning these things are to be seen in the Code and Novels of Justinian, in
the Body of the Canon Law, up and down in the Canons of Councels, and the like.
In the Code and Novels there are mentioned, Vid. C. I^e Epis. cap. and Cl^r L,
6. and p r Tit. and alibi. and Novel Vid. C^^stit. 5, 6. and 28. and 59. and
67, and 123. and alibi.

Vid. S^xti lib. 1. Tit. 6. prope fin. Et ibid. Tit. 15. Et lib. 5. De
Haereticis. Et Clementin. lib. 5. Tit. De Haereticis. Et alibi.

The (...), or Office of a Bishop in the Christian Church.


as was partly abovesaid, the Patriarchae Metropolitani, Archi-Episcopi,
Episcopi, Presbyteri, Diaconi, Sub-Diaconi, Exorcista, Lectores, Ostiarii, and
Artolythi: The Patriarchs, Metropolitans, Archbishops, Bishops, Priests,
Deacons, Subdeacons, Exorcists; nay, even the Ostiarii or Door-keepers, the
Arolytes or more inferior orders of Servitors in Church affairs, and the like
others of diverse sorts and degrees, as may be seen. And so also in the same Law
there are to be seen the Papal Offices of Legate a latere, of Inquisitions, and
the like described and recorded; and the like might be said also concerning
other Monuments and Churches, either more Ancient or Modern, and as they have
subsisted in their several times, or manners in the World.

VI. As to the Christian Church then in particular, and the offices constituted
by Divine Authority in it, we have here lighted upon the office of an (...),
Bishop, or Overseer Ecclesiastical of the affairs of it; and who is so termed,
up and down in the new Testament, by way of Emphasis and Eminency, and in a way
proper to himself, and distinctly from others. And he is the Supreme Supervisor
in every Ecclesiastical Uniformity, who is purely Ecclesiastical; and who by
virtue of the Institution of Christ, and according to his being endued with
suitable Direct power in spirituals from him, is bound ex officio to look after
the affairs of the distinct Society of the Christian Church in the General;
besides what more particular powers he may, at any time, and in any more
particular Mode of National society, derive from the supreme Magistrate,
principally for the sake of the Consistency of Religion with Government. In the
interim, this office he is ordinarily to spend his time in, and to look after,
and to manage it with great care and prudence: and that because, without a due
oversight of affairs, the particular Church Powers cannot be rightly applied
and brought to effect, as was said; and without the Application of them aright,
Hic Supra. 1.
there can be no well-being for the Church-Societie. So then, the due discharge
of this great office of trust is fundamental to the well-being of the Christian
Church; besides also what respect it may have to the welfare of Civil
Government and all Humane Society in any state or Commonweal. There are some
who mix this supreme Ordinary Ecclesiastical Supervisorship; and who, by
constituting the persons called Lay Elders to be Jure Divino, do divide and
share the Ecclesiastical Supervisorship betwixt Laics and Ecclesiastics. So
the Church of Geneva, See the Laws and Statutes page 1. and page 10, 11.
both expressly and in effect, both by their constituting their Elders or
Commissioners for the Seniory to be one kind of the perpetual Church Officers,
and also by their appointing the Magistrates to choose two of the Council to
join with the two of the Congregation chosen by the Ministers in the ordinary
Act of Visitation, or supervising of affairs. But those, who thus mix the Civil
and Ecclesiastical Powers, do practice against the Generality of Presidents of
all former Churches, and Ages; and do so far forth as they thus mix their
affairs, do that which tends to the confounding of the distinct Societies of
Church and State in the World. The Ordinary Church-Office of a Bishop or
Ecclesiastical Superintendent or Supervisor of affairs, with the reference of
things sometimes to a Synod, has been ever under Diverse Modes and Polities,
and generally in all kinds of Churches whatsoever made use of and asserted: and
even in the Mohammedan Church at this day they have their Cadii or Ordinary
Bishops, Vid. Leunclav. Pandect. Hist. Turc cap. Gradus Legis etc. Et in
Supplement. Annal. C. 1576.
their Hoggiae or Prebyters, and their Talis-mani or Deacons; and the like have
been also in other Ages and Churches: not but that the welfare of the people
(which is the things certainly meant in the constitution of Lay Elders) and of
the Common Society, ought always to be provided for, and taken a care of in
this matter of Church Government, as well as others; but that is accordingly
secured in this particular by the Liberty of Appeals to the Prince, who is the
supreme Supervisor ore all; and the powers attributed to the Lay Elders are in
the mean time misplaced in them. And if the Consistency of the Ecclesiastical
estate with the Civil be alleged; it is also supposed to be provided for by
the supervision of the Chief Magistrate.

The matters to be supervis'd by these Supervisors.
VII. The matters then to be supervis'd in every Ecclesiastical Uniformity, are,
either Ordinary, or Extraordinary. The Ordinary do use to be comprehended
within the Disciplinary constitutions or Canons of any National Church; the
extraordinary are according to the emergent and temporary Occasions of it; and
there are some of each of these which are of more moment, and some of less, in
respect to the welfare of the Supreme Public Charge.

The care to be taken in the supervising of them.
VIII. And as to that great care also which ought always to be taken about the
Supervising of these matters; the State both of Persons and Things ought to be
taken cognizance of by the Supervisors in their several places: Their Eye ought
always to be wakeful, like that of the Dragon watching over the golden Apples
of the Hesperides. And last of all, the first breakings out of any Fire of
Contentions, or of any other misdemeanors in the Church whatsoever, ought to
be timely stopped: as the breakings out of Fire in the City, were to be stopped
by the Praefectus Vigilum amongst the Romans.

(...).
It behooves not a consultor of the Public Good to sleep all night.
And Sciendum est autem Praefectum Vigilum per totam noctem vigilare debere, D.
De offi^io Praefecti vigilum. L. 3.. Sciendum est.
and oberrare calceatum, cum Hamis, and Dolabris, etc. says Paulus in the
Civil Law; That it behooved the Praefectus Vigilum to watch all night, and to
walk on foot every where about the City with Hooks and Axes, etc. And
Philosophus igitur, and iracundus, and volax, and robustus natura erit, qui
civitatis Custos optimus est futurus, said Plato: That he who is a seeker after
knowledge, and angry upon occasion, and active, stout by Nature, De Rep. Dial.
2. prope fin.
is likely to be the best keeper of a City.

IX. In order to these ends then, and for the due application of their several
powers accordingly, the Supreme Ecclesiastical Supervisors ought to have the
dispensing of Church Censures, The Ecclesiastical Tribunals for the exercise of
that Care.
and their Ordinary Tribunals and Consistories, or Courts Ecclesiastical, at
which Causes may be heard, and matters, according to Truth and Piety, may be
determined. The Sacrum Consistorium is many times mentioned in the Code and
Novels of Justinian. Vid. C. De Jure jurando propter Calumniam dando.
Principales personae.. Sed si. Et alibi.

And the stated Circuits for Visitation.


And there are all the same reasons in nature for it in this matter, which
there are for all other Courts of Judicature in others.

X. The Ordinary Ecclesiastical Supervisors ought also to have their stated
Circuits, or Journeyes, or Visitation. And those, whether Deputative, or
Personal; whether more or less frequent, according to the several Occasions and
Constitutions of Countries: And he that Travels in those Circuits is called
Visitator, aut Circuitor, and the like in the Code of Justinian: and those
Circuits are in like manner common also to all National Churches.

XI. Last of all then; De Episcop. and Cler. L. Omnem adhibentes.. 9. Et alibi.
The last Appeals ought always to be made to the chief Magistrate.
and in relation to all these matters which have been mentioned; The chief
Magistrate in every National Church ought always to retain the Right of
receiving the last Appeals concerning them. And in this there will be this
Right, nenessary for his Government, done to him, and Sanctuary also provided
for his people. And the Court of Rome then in this matter, unjustly demands
Appeals to be made out of the Dominions of Princes.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Supreme Interpreter in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity.
I OF how great moment the Office of Supreme Interpretor is.

II. The Authentic Interpretors in any National Church distinguished. And the
Supreme Assigned.

III. The Right of the Supreme, in respect to his Interpretorship, asserted.

IV. The Opposers of it Taxed.

V. The Principal Assistances, in respect to the Actual exercise of it,
assigned also?

VI. The Conclusion of the Whole.

Of how great moment the Office of Supreme Interpreter is.
I. HAving discoursed over all these preceding matters, relating one way or
other to an Uniformity in Churches, and the Constituting and rightly ordering
of it; I come here last of all, to State the Office of Supreme Interpreter, and
to whom it does belong. Which Office, and the discharge of it, of how great
moment it is, in respect of all Humane Societies, and the members of them, it
may be more then conjectured from hence, (viz.) from such the Supreme
Interpreter his becoming the Judge of Controversies, and having it in his hands
at any time to fix what Doctrines of Religion he pleases in any National
Church: which he that shall have the Faculty and Power of doing, what influence
may he not have both upon all Divine and Humane affairs? and whether they
relate either to Religion or Government, or the consistency of each with either!

The Authentic Interpreters in any National Church Distinguished, and the
Supreme Assigned.
II. The Authentic and Public lawful Interpreters then in any National Church,
and in relation either to its Temporary or Perpetual occasions to the Original
Divine, or the Derivative Humane Canon of Doctrines, or to the Liturgy, or any
other more derivative Writings, or other matters framed from it, and according
to it; are of diverse sorts. They are either Supreme, or Subordinate. The
Supreme is the Chief Magistrate, as shall be further evidenced by and by. And
the Subordinate are, ordinarily and most properly, in relation to matters
directly concerning Religion; the Ecclesiastics or Churchmen in any Society:
And that in their several Capacities, and according to the Designation and
intent of their Ecclesiastical Function in the general, and also as deputed in
Ordinary by the Supreme Magistrate mentioned. And in relation to matters more
directly concerning Government, he has his Counsel, or Ministers of State (of
what kind soever) ordinarily to attend him. Yet, Omnium tamen harum and
Interpretandi Scientia, and Actiones apud Collegium Pontificum erat, says
Pomponius in the Digests. D. De Orig. jur. L. 2.. Deinde. Ex his.
That the College Pontifical, amongst the Romans, had so great veneration
showed to them, as that they had the power of Interpretation committed to them,
even in Civil Actions and Causes. And this might be either for more Special or
common reasons. The Subordinate Interpreters then again are such either in
Conjunction one with another, as in the Church Representative; or else simply,
and by themselves, as in more ordinary Cases. And in both these Capacities,
they are so many times in Conjunction one way or another with the Civil
Magistrate: And in each of these Capacities again their Interpretations also
are such either pro tempore, or pro perpetuo. And those pro perpetuo, and
fixedly, are ordinarily in Writing. And those pro tempore, and upon any
temporary occasion, are either in Word, or in Writing. And the Interpretations
of each of these sorts and degrees of Interpreters, ought to have their due
repute and credit amongst men. The Liberties however, which have been
heretofore mentioned as belonging to the members of any National Church, in
respect to these Interpretations, Lib. 2. cap. 4.. 4, 5, etc. And cap. 11.. 6.
and alibi. The Right of the Supreme, in respect to his Interpretorship,
Asserted.
being reserved to them in the mean time.

III. But amongst all these sorts of Interpretors, it is the Supreme
Interpreter still, who stands in the most important relation, as was said, to
the matters of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity; and whose office therefore is here
most designedly treated of. And the Chief Magistrate has his Right and Title
to this his Supreme interpretorship derived to him from all the three sorts of
Laws, which are observable amongst men, (viz.) both from the Law Natural, and
the Divine, and that of Nations also.

1. From the Law Natural. And it dictates his Right and Title to it, evidently
and necessary, for the preservation of his Public Charge in all the parts of
it, and especially in that of the Consistency of Religion with Government:
Which, how easily it may be subverted, and the Magistrate wronged and ruined by
any other, if he shall have the faculties of this Supreme Interpretorship in
his hands, it was but now mentioned. And what a Temptation also the Magistrates
Temporal Splendors, and his Crown and Dominions will be to any one, so to
attempt the Ruin of him, it needs not be here mentioned neither. And this more
particular Right and Power then of the Chief Magistrate is one Principal part
of his Indirect Power in Spirituals; Lib. 2. cap. 11.. 2. and 4.
and which is more especially necessary for the retaining his more General
Right above mentioned, of the framing his Ecclesiastical Uniformity in any
Society.

2. In like manner also is this Supreme Interpretorship of the chief Magistrate
dictated by the Divine Law of both the Testaments and Books of God. So in the
Old, in relation to the Kingdom of Israel. At the delivery of the Law, at
mount Sinai: Moses was Gods Messenger most eminently Authorized, and went down,
says the Text, unto the People, and spoke unto them, Exodus 19.25. and verse.
24. But let not the Priests and the People break through to come up unto the
Lord, least he break forth upon them. And it was accordingly fixed for a
perpetual Law in Israel; that the Supreme Judge of Controversies (as well Sacred
as Civil) should be the great Synodrian, or Kings Council, assistant to him,
meant by the Judge in those days, Deuteronomy. 17.9. and 12. And this was the Right
which was exercised by Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 19.8. Moreover, says the Text, in
Jerusalem did Jehosaphat set of the Levites, and of the Priests, and of the
Chief of the Fathers of Israel, for the Judgment of the Lord, and for
Controversies, when they returned to Jerusalem. And afterward verse. 11. He
deputed Amarieh, principally in all Sacred, and Zebadiah in all Divine matters.
And who knows not but that the Supreme Authority in Israel did exercise the
Supreme Power of Judging of all kinds of Superstitions, and Idolatries,
Blasphemies, Heresies, and even of Prophecies, and Miracles, and the like? See
Deuteronomy. 12.28, 29, 30, 31, 32. Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. Deuteronomy. 17.2, 3, 4,
etc. Deuteronomy. 18.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, etc. Levit. 24.10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
15, 16, etc. If we look into the New Testament, the same thing is assented to,
and approved of by it: and although the Christian Church, at the Writing of it,
were not National, yet it provides for its being National: It commands in the
general, the giving unto Caesar that which is Caesar's, Mat. 22.21. It appoints
in the case of the Trespass of a Brother, the telling it to the Church (i. e.)
as dependent ultimately upon the Chief Magistrate, Matthew. 18.15, 16, 17. It
appoints Prayers to be made, for Kings, and for all that are in Authority; that
we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all Godliness and Honesty, 1 Timothy
2.2. and the like. And lastly, the Apostles, when they practiced the first
Plantation, and setting up of the Christian Religion, against the likings and
Authority of the Governors of Judea, the Roman Emperors, and the like; it was
in the reserved Case of a particular command from Heaven pressing them to it.

3. If we look then further, to the Law and Customs of Nations; the same
Tenor of practice also, we shall find to have been generally every where
observed, and in all Ages and humane Societies. And it is at least a tacit
compact generally amongst them, that the Sovereign Prince have the power of the
Interpretation and judgment of any public Doctrines of Religion whatsoever,
and of the admission and establishment of them in his Ecclesiastical
Uniformity. So in the admission and establishment of their own Public
Doctrines at home: And in all Embassies about the Admission and establishment
of them abroad. So in the Entreaties and Supplications of exiled and dispersed
Nations; and who are not associated locally under one Head: And so in any other
of those that are; and whether they do at any time treat or intercede, either
that their Profession of Religion may be only tolerated, or else established
authoritatively as national in any Society. And the humane Histories, and other
Monuments and Records abroad in the World, are full of the more direct
instances in this matter. Amongst the Greeks; The Senate of Athens, and the
Areopagus, and other Tribunals, did debate forms of Religion, Blasphemies
against the Gods, divulging of Mysteries, and the like, both Sacred and Civil
matters; In Solone. In Aristippo lib. 2. Orat. in Ctesiphont. paul post
princip. D. De Orig. jur. L. 2. D. Eodem. L. 2.. Exactu. Pro Domo sua. in
princip.
says Plutarch, Diogines, Laertius, and others; to be propounded ultimately to
the People. And Eschines recites the words of the Law against Demosthenes,
(...). And whosoever receive the Powers of Interpreting the Laws from the
People. Of the Roman State, says Pomponius in the Civil Law, that in the
beginning of the City, Omnia manu a Regibus Gubernabantur; all things were
governed immediately by the Kings. And afterward, when public Authority had
fetched Laws from Greece; it also gave the Power of the Interpretation of
them. And Cicero in his Oration to the Pontifies; cum multa divinitus,
Pontifices, a majoribus nostris inventa atque instituta sunt; tum nihil
praeclarius, quam quod vos eosdem and Religionibus deorum immortalium, and
summae Reipublicae praeesse voluerunt. Vt Amplissimi et Clarissimi Cives;
Rempubliacm been gerendo, religiones religionibus sapienter interpretando;
Rempublicam conservarent. Whereas many things, as it were by inspiration from
Heaven, O ye Pontifies! have been found out, and instituted by our Ancestors;
truly nothing more excellent then that you the same persons should preside both
over the Religion of the immortal Gods, and also over the sum of the
Commonweal. That the most Honorable and Renowned Citizens, De Vita Constant.
lib. 1. cap. 37. and alibi. Vid. C. De Summa Trin. L. nullus Haereticis. Et L.
Cum recta. Et alibi. C. De Haereticis and Manichaeis. L. Quoniam multi. Et De
vetere jure Enucle. and L. 1.. 6. C. De Legib. and Constitut. princip. and
edict. L. 1. C. eodem L 9.
by the well discharging of office in the Commonweal, by the wisely
Interpreting of matters of Religion by matters of Religion, might conserve the
welfare of the Commonweal. If we look into the state of the Christian Church,
so soon as it came to be National; Constantine, and the other Emperors, says
Eusebius, and the other Ecclesiastical Histories; did in person, many times,
preside in Counsels, and Synods Ecclesiastical. And up and down in the Code and
Novels of Justinian, Confessions of Faith are established by the Law Imperial;
Heresies are Anathamiz'd, and the like. The imperial decision of matters, is
styled an Oracle. The Emperor's sentence called a Divine Sentence. And
finally, the Supreme Interpretation of all Laws, both Divine and Humane, both
Sacred and Civil, is claimed as a right belonging only to the Prince. Inter
aequitatem jusque interpositam interpretationem nobis solis et oportet et licet
inspicere. It belongs to us only, both out of duty, and by our office, to have
the inspection into the Interpretation betwixt the equity and letter of the
Law, says the Emperor Constantine. And the Emperors Valentinian and Martian,
Leges Sacracissimae, quae constringunt hominum vitas, intelligi ab omnibus
debent. Si quid vero in iisdem Legibus latum fortassis obscurius fuerit,
oportet id ab imperatoria interpretatione pate fieri. The most Sacred Laws
which do bind the lives of men, ought to be understood by all. But if there be
any thing established in the Laws, which perhaps is more obscure; that ought
to be explained by the Imperial Interpretation: Vid. C. De Legib. and
constitut. Princip. L. 12. Et C. De vetere jur. Enucle. and L. Auctore.. 4. Et
C. eodem L. Dedit nobis. 21. Et In Novel. Constit. 112. cap. 1. Et alibi.

In Pandect. Hist. Turc. Gradus Legis Mahum. etc.


And the like many other Laws might be mentioned. Last of all, If we look
abroad amongst the more modern practices of Countries, and such as are at this
day amongst the Mahometans; although the Chief Mufti at Constantinople be
Instar Papae nostri, vel Patriarchae Graecorum. Quippe juris omnis and Sacrorum
Rex est; uti veteres etiam Romani loquebantur, says Leunclavius; like our Pope
in Italy, or the Patriarch of the Greeks: for he is the King of all Law and
Holy Things; as also the Ancient Romans were wont to speak; Yet it is indeed in
Subordination to the Emperor, and according to his will really guiding him.
And it is said, that for not Interpreting according to the mind of his Master,
not long since, the Mufti at Constantinople was degraded and sent to be Mufti
at Damasco; and that he died by the way in his journey thither, at Aleppo. The
like to this up and down in Europe is the Right exercised by all Princes in
their several ways, Lib. 2. Tit 5. De Regim. Reipub. Christian. p. 1. lib. 4.
disp. 10.. 3. n. 187. Vid. In Legib. Ordin. lib. 4. Tit. 1. L. 4. Et Diaz. de
Montalu. ad Leg. For. Hisp. lib. 1. Tit. 6. n. 1. in addit. Vid. Constit. Car.
5. Criminal. cap. ult.
and according to the several modes of their Countries. And the Princes only do
appoint and constitute the Ordinary Interpreters of Laws. So says the Ordines
Susitaniae, Fragosus, and others, that it is commanded to the Judges; that
where the Laws of the Kingdom, and the Civil Law, are deficients they should
have recourse to the Glosses of Accursius and to Bartolus; and by the Laws of
the Kingdom of Castile, the Judges are appointed to give sentence according
according to the Opinions of Johannes Andreas, and Panormitanus, in the Law
Canon; and of Bartolus and Baldus, in the Civil Law. And in Germany, Charles
the fifth, in his Criminal Constitutions, commanded the Colleges of Civil Law
Doctors, in the Universities appointed by him for Interpretation, to be
Consulted, if any thing doubtful or obscure should occur in those his
Constitutions. Finally, by the general consent of the Civilians, the Imperial
Interpretation, is held to be Authoritative and necessary, and such as must be
obeyed, upon the only account of Command and Sovereign Power. And indeed whose
should the Supreme Interpretation of Laws be, but theirs who made them, and
who have the Legislative power in their hands? and that rightly and
necessarily; since the interpretations of Laws are Laws themselves, in
effect, and in the decision and determination of all causes by them. And the
same reason there is for these things, and much more in Laws Ecclesiastical
then in Laws Civil; things being weighed on both sides, and proportionably in
respect to both. And whithersoever we will look abroad in the World; and
wheresoever any Canons of Doctrine or Liturgies are established in Churches;
The Opposers of it Taxed.
we shall find the Authority, that first constituted them, retaining also the
Supreme Right of the Interpretation of them.

IV. Amongst those then that make Opposition against this Right of the Supreme
Magistrate in his Ecclesiastical Uniformity, the Papal Infallibility heads the
foild, and in effect shuts out the Scripture from being made use of for the
determination of Controversies; and establishes those Traditions, a certain
and definite Catalogue of which would never yet be given. Hence are the
Interpositions of Rome; whether by its particular appointment, or the actings
of its Instruments, upon every occasion of Schism in the dissenting Churches
of Europe, Edit. 1618.
to persuade that they would return to the Infallible Judge of Controversies in
the Roman Uniformity. Such was the Enoticon dissecti Belgii, in the time of the
dissentions of the Low Country, s occasioning the Synod of Dort. Against Knot.
Such also was of late the Fiat Lux in England prohibited by Authority: And
concerning this pretended Infallibility we shall further only write the words
of Mr. Chillingworth; It is strange, says he, if the Bishop of Rome be
Constituted by God in an Office of so great moment as that of an Infallible
Judge of Controversies; that there should be nothing at all, no evident
direction in the Scriptures to send all men to him for determinations. The like
Injuries do they also do to the Supreme Magistrate, whosoever they are, that
upon any other pretentions whatsoever do claim from him this Supreme
Interpretorship. And lastly, they who assign God himself, speaking in the
Scriptures, to be the Interpretor of his own Laws; De Judice Controversiarum.
cap. 9.
speak not reason, nor reach not the Case (common to all Humane Societies and
their Ecclesiastical Uniformities) of emergent Controversies. In vain then does
Mr. Cameron in this Case, compare the speaking of God in the Scriptures, with
the speaking of a King by his Instructions to an Ambassador, of a father by
his Testament, of a Judge by his Sentence, and the like; and ask whether such
things do not express the mind of these persons, in the same manner as the
vocal word and lively voice does? And who knows not that all Courts of
Judicature, and Humane Tribunals, in all Ages of the World, and in all kinds of
Controversies and Causes whatsoever, have ever been forced (by even what nature
it self, in this matter, and present occasion has exacted from them) to
proceed by the way of a Living Judge, D. De Legib. and Senatus consult. L. 4.
D. De Judiciis L. 62.
for the determination of those Controversies? Ad ea debet aptari jus, quae
frequenter and facile eveniunt, says Celsus the Civilian; That the Law ought
to be fitted to those cases, which do frequently and easily fall out. And
Vlpian, Inter litigantes non aliter Lis expediri potest, quam si alter Petitor,
alter Possessor sit: That between two parties litigant, the Contention cannot
be otherwise put to an end, then by the ones being Plaintiff, and the other
defendant before a Tribunal. And innumerable other the like Testimonies and
instances might be given in this matter.

The principal Assistances in respect to the Actual exercise of it, assigned
also.
V. In the interim, the Principal Assistances, which the Chief Magistrate may
have in this matter of his Supreme Interpretorship, and upon any occasion
whatsoever of his actual Employment of himself in it, are the Subordinate and
Deputative Interpretors, which have been mentioned: And that according to the
peculiar quality of any particular sorts of affairs which may occur, and as
they are more or less proper to either sort of those Interpretors (either
Laics or Ecclesiastics) to advise in; and as they do, in any degree or kind
whatsoever, concern any particular Society.

The Conclusion of the Whole. De Turcarum. Ritub. In Epistola nuncupatoria. Pio
and Christiano Lectori, etc.
VI. We have put an end to this Work. We Conclude with fervent wishes of Peace
to all Christian and Humane Societies. Saeva discordia, and Principum nostrorum
intestina bella hoc mihi peregrino pepererunt, Christian Lector! etc. says
Georgieviz the Turkish Captive: O Christian Reader! It was raging discord, and
the intestine Wars of our Princes, which brought forth this evil to me a
Stranger; that being spoiled of all my Goods, bound in Chains, led like a beast
to market, through Towns, and Villages, and Streets; through the rough and
dangerous places of Thrace, and the lesser Asia; I was sold seven times, and
there under the Turkish and Rustic slavery, and harsh usage, in hunger and
Thirst, in cold and nakedness, lying under the open Heaven, I was compelled to
feed a flock of sheep and herds, Apud Damianum ^ Goes. De Aethiop. Morib.
to betake my self to plough, to look to Horses, and to learn the Art of War,
etc. And Zago Zabo in his Confession of the Ethiopian faith; Multo consultius
erit hujusmodi Christianos homines; sive Graecos, sive Armenios, sive Ethiopes,
sive ex quavis septem Christianorum Ecclesiarum; in charitate, and Christi
amplexibus sustinere, sine contumeliis permittere, etc. It would be far better,
in relation to Christian men that are strangers in Countries, whether they be
Greeks or Armenians, or Ethiopians, or out of any of the seven Churches of
Christians, to support them in Charity, and the Embraces of Christ, to permit
them without Reproaches to live and converse amongst other Christian brethren;
because we are all Children of Baptism, and do believe unanimously concerning
the true faith: Neither is there any reason why there should be such sharp
disputings about Ceremonies; but that every one should observe his own, without
hatred and inveighing against others, etc. And the Heathen Tragedian.

Seneca. In Hercule furent.
Si Aeterna semper odia mortales agant,
Nec caeptus unquam cedat ex animis furor;
Sed Arma faelix teneat, infaelix paret;
Nihil relinquent bella. Tum vastis Ager
Squalebit arvis: subdita tectis face
Altius sepultas obruet gentes cinis.
If eternal hatreds shall always drive men on,
Nor fury once began shall ever depart from men's minds;
But the Conqueror shall hold up his weapons, and the conquered give place;
Wars will at last leave nothing: Then the unplowed ground in vast
Fields shall lie wast, the fire being put to houses
Deep ashes shall overwhelme the buried Nations.
And lastly, Leunclavius, in his relation of the Seige of Vienna; De obsidione
Vienna. circa med.
Tempus itaque est, viri Christiani! ubicunque terrarum Christo vivitis;
Tempus, inquam, est, nos e Somno excitari; hanc irati ob nostra scelera numinis
plagam agnoscere, unanimiter ad Deum converti, rescipiscere; Omisso vanae
gloriae studio, odium mutuum ponere; monstrosas de fide Catholica dissentiones,
and nunquam finiendas disputationes abjicere; in unum Catholicae Ecclesiae
Sacrosanctum Corpus coalescere; and in amore proximi ac bonis operibus simul
totis viribus in Christo, qui caput est, unanimes vivere; orareque ut nobis
gratiam suam concedere dignetur, qua Armati immanem hostem a cervicibus nostris
propulsemus; ac deinde, oppressis hostibus, quieti in pace, pieque sancteque
vivere queamus. (i. e.) It is time therefore, O ye Christian men! in whatsoever
part of the World ye live to Christ; It is time, I say, for us to awake out of
sleep; to acknowledge this stroke of the Angry God, by reason of our Sins,
unanimously to be converted to God, to repent, leaving the study of vain glory,
to lay aside our mutual hatred; to cast away our monstrous dissentions
concerning the Catholic Faith, and those disputations never to be ended; to
unite into one Sacred body of the Church of Christ, and to live unanimously in
the love of our Neighbor, and in good works, together with all our strength in
Christ, who is our Head; and to pray that he would vouchsafe to grant to us his
grace, with which being armed we may drive away the Cruel Enemy from our necks;
and so our Adversaries being overcome, we may be able to live quiet, in peace,
piously, and holily. What shall we say then? Let the Peace of the Jerusalem of
Christ be the study of every sincere Christian! Let these things which we have
written in this work (with our Pen dipped in Sweat for the more public and
common good) be imprinted in the hearts of those that read them! Especially
those of them that make most to the Christian peace, and to the preservation
and promotion of the welfare both of Religion and Government, and the
Consistency of each with either in every national Society. May the Christian
Princes prosper, and flourish in their Dominions! May Piety and Adoration of
the Son of God spring up as it were from the ground amongst private persons!
May the Christian Church have her Faith propagated! and her Borders enlarged by
the illumination of the Most High, Matthew. 16.18. Apud. Eusebius. De vita Constable.
lib. 1. cap. 22.
under the Tuition of Princes, by the endeavors of her Priests, and with the
consent of Nations. And let the Gates of Hell (according to the Promise of him,
who appeared from Heaven with his Victorious Cross to the first Christian
Emperor Constantine) never prevail against her.

THE INDEX.
A
ABassines, Their Liturgy. 198 Their use of an unknown Tongue in their public
Divine Services. 180 The scarcity of Books amongst them. Ibid. Abraham, his
discharging the Priestly Office. 124 Accursius, his glosses; their appearing
first of all on the Civil Law: In Prolegom. ad fin. Adam, Monarch of the world,
34 And his Right to his so being, Ibid. His discharge of the Priestly Office,
124 Admonitions to the Parliament, set forth by the English Presbitrey in Queen
Elizabeth's days, 200 Egypt, Its Fame for Learning and Wisdom heretofore. In
Proleg. in princip. Egyptians, Their boasting concerning the derivation of
wisdom from their Country; In Proleg paulo post princip. Their custom
concerning the same person, his being both King and Priest. 139 Aequivocation,
The Doctrine of it condemned. 279 Affection, Natural, the foundations of it. 42
The Alcoran, not to be read by the Common People. 180 Mahomet his trick for the
obtrusion of it upon the people. 113
Alexander, His custom of stopping one Ear when sitting in Judgment. 291
Amurat, His faining his War to be given him in Charge from Heaven. 115
Apostolical, Canons, very ancient. In Proleg. circa med. Appeals, The last in
an Ecclesiastical Uniformity ought always to be made to the Chief Magistrate.
301 Archbishop of Toledo, Chancellor of Castile. 130 Archbishop of
Canterbury in England, his Prerogative. Ibid. Aristotle, His Politics, the
Repute of them. In Proleg. prop. fin. Armenians, their Liturgy. 190 Assent,
What kinds of it, and the Unity of it, is supposed to an Ecclesiastical
Uniformity. 225, 226, etc. Atheism, To be expelled out of Humane Societies. 88
Vertual Atheism, Ibid. The causes of Atheism in Societies. Ibid. Atheists,
Two grand sorts of them. Ibid. Athenians, Their swearing by their Twelve Gods.
176 Attributes of God, what they are, 17 And the operation of them how to be
discerned, Ibid. And the effects of them Ibid. And the Operation of them, how
it proceeds, Ibid. St. Augustine, His sayings concerning the phrase of the
Scripture. 251
B
Bartolus and Baldus, their Esteem amongst the Civilians. In Proleg. ad fin.
Beritus, Its fate by an Earthquake. 31 The Bible ought to be conceded to the
Laity in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity. 108 Bodine, De Repub. His dignity
amongst Modern Books of Policy. In Proleg. prop. fin.
C
Mr. Cameron Taxed. Camillus the Dictator, his trick for the encouragement of
his Soldiers. 115 A Canon of Doctrines defined and distinguished, 194. The
state of the case concerning its being the primary and principal of the two
grand instruments of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity. Ibid. A Canon or body of
Doctrines, the necessity of it in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity, 163, 164 Canon
Law, The Authority of it. In Proleg. ad fin. The intention of the Compilers and
authorizers of it. Ibid. Charles of Bourbon, his carrying a halter near his
colors, to hang the Pope with, for the encouragement of his Soldiers. 115
Cardinals, Of the Roman Sea, their secular Titles. 130 Church Censures, the
degrees of them asserted, 267. They are to be dispensed with the least humane
mixtures, 268 The right of dispensing them, to whom it belongs, Ibid. They are
to be backed by the Magistrate, Ibid. He has the power of controuling the
Execution of them, Ibid. And also is exempted from them, Ibid. Ceremonies, The
Magistrate has the right of establishing them in any National Church, 235,
236. Ceremonies distinguished, 236. The Rules to be held concerning the
customary ones, Ibid. And concerning the adjoining of them to the Divine
Worship, 236, 237. And the ends of them in Church Services, 237, etc.
Ceremonies in the Church of England, the controversy concerning them formerly
debated, 239. Ceremonies, an Uniformity in them convenient in Churches, 168.
Ceremonies of the Jewish Church, the intent of God in them in Israel, 196.
Ceremonies, too great a number of them a faultiness in an Ecclesiastical
Uniformity, 179, 180 The Character of the Ecclesiastical persons Function, at
first impressed upon him, indelible, 134 Charge, whose is the preservation of
the welfare of Religion and Government, and the consistency of Religion with
Government, 73, 74, etc. A Charge defined, Ib. and distinguished, Ib. The
Charge mentioned is the supreme Charge amongst men, 78. It is perpetually to be
looked after, Ib. The public Charge of the Magistrate, the causes of all
mischiefs to it, 111. Charge of the Magistrate, its danger of being invaded,
119 Charity distinguished, 94. The benefits of it to Societies, 94, 95, 96,
etc. And to the public charge of the Magistrate, Ib. To Religion, 95, To
Government, 96. and to the consistency of Religion with Government, 97. and how
much it is commanded in Scripture, 97, 98. Charity and Peace in matters of
Religion, the means, for the procuring the benefits of them in Societies,
assigned, 160 Chief Priest amongst the Jews, his sitting in the great
Synedrion, 128, 129 Mr. Chillingworth, his saying concerning the uncertainty of
many matters in Religion, 151 Mr. Chillingworth taxed, 285 His saying
concerning the appointment of an Infallible Judge of controversies, 307
Christian Religion, its positive and eminent consistency with Government, 70 It
is never subversive of the present lawful Government, 70, 71 Christian Church,
the Records of it defective, 197. The Christian Church and civil state are in
themselves distinct Societies, 122 And God has appointed them to be in a
capacity of subsisting apart in the World, 123 The Christian Church, the
distinct Ecclesiastical Orders in it, 125 Churchmen may intermix in the
administration of Civil Affairs, 126, 127, 128, etc. Church Government, The
Magistrates Right of establishing it in every National Church, 240, etc. The
case concerning it in England, 240, 241 Circuits for visitation in an
Ecclesiastical Uniformity, 301 Civillians, Their complaints concerning the
extinction of the Old Roman Doctors, In Proleg. post med. Common Good, The
great end of all Laws and Government amongst men, 58, 59 Common People, the one
sort of persons ordinarily guilty of the faults committed against the public
charge of the Magistrate, 111 Their particular faults instanced in Ib. In
respect to Religion, 111, 112. And Government, 114 and the consistency of
Religion with Government, 116 The frequency of their commission of those
faults, Ibid. Common-Weals, the two famous ones of Greece, In Proleg. post med.
Communions in matters of Religion, how far forth a mixture of them may consist
with the welfare of Societies, 164 Communication of Church Censures for money,
how far forth lawful. 269 Composition of a Canon and Liturgy, the rules to be
observed in it, 231, 232, 233, 234, 335, etc. Consent given to Government, the
distinctions of it, 36, 37 Consistency of Religion and Government with each
other intended by God and Nature, 2. The consistency of Religion with
Government defined, 6 And distinguished, 6, 7 And the distinctions of it
explicated and applied, 68 and that consistency proved, 68, 69, etc.
Constantinople, its sacking, and conflagration by the Saracens, 31 Constantine,
his saying concerning the subordination of his Bishops to him, 145 The
appearance of Christ to him from Heaven, 310 Contests about Religion
distinguished, 89 Contestation of Opinions in matters of Religion, the means
for the preventing the mischiefs of it in Societies, assigned, 160 The effects
of it, 150, 154, etc. And that in respect to the particulars of the Magistrates
charge, 156, etc. Conventicles, or more private convenings for the exercise of
Religion, how far forth to be permitted by Princes, stated, 219, 220, 221, 222,
etc. The present case, concerning them in England, 220, 221. Council of Trent,
the preservation of the several powers of Princes in it, 144 Councels, the
Celebration of them twice every year heretofore in the Christian Church, and
why, 127 Creed of the Apostles, was framed for a profession of assent to be
made to it, 197 Cromwell, his pretenses of Religion in England, 115
D
Delusions of the Heathens, how permitted and inflicted by God, 21 Dionysius
Halicarnasseus, his Story concerning Numa his suppressing of controversies and
opinions in matters of Religion, 177 Directory, whether it be not sufficient
for the preservation of the public peace in any National Church? 203
Discipline, an Uniformity in it convenient in Churches, 168, 169 Divinity,
three sorts of it amongst the Heathen, 14 Divulging of Opinions, how far forth
a duty in private persons, 274, 275, 276, and vid. venting of Opinion. The more
particular restraints and liberties, and the rights of the Magistrate relating
to it, 292, etc. The ways of men's divulging their opinions, distinguied, 294
The Doctors upon both Laws, In Prolegom. prope fin. Doctrines of Religion, a
distinction of them, 91 Certain doctrines in the Christian Religion made use
of by the Demagogues, Heresiarchs, and Ringleaders of sedition in Societies,
for their serving their several ends, 118 Doctrines in religion distinguished,
164 The several sorts of the Doctrines of Canons and Liturgies assigned, 249,
250, etc. The Doctrines of any National Church distinguished, Ibid. Druids,
amongst the Gauls, the reason of their dispersing their doctrine of the
immortality of the soul amongst the people, 85 Their being distinct in their
Orders of Ecclesiastics, 104 Their being both Priests and Judges heretofore
amongst the Gauls and Britains, 130
E
Earl of Portugal, the Story concerning one lately, in relation to an
Inquisitor, 272 Ecclesiastical person, the Querie, why he should not have the
Supremacy? resolved, 145 Elector of Saxony, his Acts of bearing the Sword
before the Emperor, etc. in the Diet of Ausburg condemned, 280 Empire, the
ways by which men have arrived at it, 34 The Ends of a Canon of doctrines and
Liturgy in any National Church distinguished, 211 The general Ends of them
assigned, Ibid. An Objection against them answered, Ibid. The more particular
Ends of them, 214, 215, 216, 217, etc. English Uniformity, the History of it,
199, 200 English Canon of Doctrines, the History of it, 201, 202 English
Liturgy, the History of it, 202 Enthusiasme condemned, 290 The (...), or Office
of a Bishop in the Christian Church, 299, 300 Erastus, concerning the
authoritative Execution of Church censures by Laics answered, 134 Estates of
men, the first and Capital distinction of them, 36 Euripides and Lycurgus
compared. 12 Euripides his saying concerning Jupiter, In Prolegom. in princip.
Eusebius, and the other Histories of the Christian Church; the notable
instances of Regiment of Churches in them. In Prolegom. in fin.
Excommunication, a caution concerning the inflicting of it, 267 The complaint
concerning its being inflicted for light matters in the Vniformities of
Churches answered; and for its being inflicted at first dash also. 269, 270 The
Extremes, in respect to an Ecclesiastical Uniformity distinguished, 177 Those
of too much looseness assigned, 177, 178 And that also of too much strictness.
178
F
The Fathers of the Christian Church, their derivation of the Magistrates Power
from God. 54, 55 Faultinesses, those in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity assigned,
178, 179, 180, etc. Fire of Sodom, its natural causes. 30 Five-Churches, his
actions in the Council of Trent. 144 Flood of Noah, the fame and dispersed
report of it. 30 Freedom, the principle of natural Freedom refuted. 39, 40,
41, 42, etc. Fragments, those of the twelve Tables amongst the Romans now
remaining: In Prolegom. post med.
G
Georgians, Their Liturgy, 198 Georgievez, His Turkish slavery sustained by
him. Gifts, The use of spiritual gifts is under the Magigrates Jurisdiction,
204 The scriptural end of such use of them, Ibid. The particular gifts
concerned in the performance of the Public Divine Service in a Church, Ibid.
The immediate effects of the use of them, Ibid. Golden Age of the Poets, whence
the Fiction of it. 32 Government defined. 5 and distinguished, 5, 6, the ways
by which men have arrived at it, 34. the power of Government at first lodged in
the several heads of Families, 34, 35, the first and capital distinction of
Government, 36 Government the Ordinance of God, 37 the Ecclesiastical
Government Gods Ordinance, 38 the two constitutive causes of the power of
Government, which are assigned in the Controversy concerning it, 39 the state
of the Case concerning the derivation of it from the people, 39 the effects of
it being derived from the people, etc. 45, 46, 47, etc. the proof of the power
of Government its being from God, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, etc. Not to be proved
to be so from the nature of that power, 51, 52 the distinctions of Government
applied to its consistency with Religion, 66, 67 Government, the Bond of all
Humane Societies. In Prolegom. in princip. Governors, the difference of Order
and Power in them necessary to all Governments of the greater Societies. 123
Greece, from whence its first Governments were fetched. In Proleg. in princip.
The Greeks, called the rest of the World, who spoke not their language,
Barbarians. In Prolegom. post med. their distinct orders of Ecclesiastics. 124
Greek Church, its Liturgy, 198 Its use of an unknown tongue in the Public
Divine Services, 180 Grotius taxed, 41, 127, 133, 138 His saying concerning the
doctrines of the Christian Religion. 70, etc. Gymnosophistae, amongst the
Indians, their distinction of their Orders of Ecclesiastics, 104, 105
H
Hampton Court, the conference at it betwixt King James of England, and the
dissentors from the English Uniformity. 201 Hebrews, their observation
concerning the distinction of the Offices of Moses and Aaron. 124 Heresy, to
be punished any where, 87 and as a mixed fault, both against the Church and
State. Ibid. Heresiarks, the persons ordinarily guilty of the faults of malice
against the public charge of the Magistrate in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity.
117 Herodotus, his saying concerning the divided Government, and different
Opinions of the Thracians. 155 Hesiod, his Admonition to Kings. 58, 59 Humane
Affairs, the first and capital division of them, 1 Histories, of the Greeks and
Romans, the notable examples of prudence in Governors in them. In Proleg. in
fin. Holiness of presons, no rule to judge of the truth of their Opinions by,
290 The pretense of holiness condemned. Ibid. Homilies, the use of them in
Churches. 295
I
Jacobites, their Liturgy, 198 Jesuits, their banishment from the Venetian
Territories. 65 Jesus Christ, not admitted as a God by the Roman Senate. 15
Jews, their parabolical doctrines, 113 their Liturgy, 198 their saying
concerning the flourishing of Israel. In Proleg. in princip. Their hatred of
the Samaritans, 155 their Law carried with Titus in Triumph, In Prolegom. circa
med. Jewish State, the occasions of it twofold, 196 Jewish Church, the records
of it defective, 197 the diversity of the settlements of it, 170 Imprudence,
the faults of it committed against the public charge of the Magistrate, and
the persons guilty of the commission of them, 111 their guilt evidenced, 112
their particular faults instanced in, in respect to the particulars of the
Magistrates charge, 112, 113, 114, etc. Indirect Power in Spirituals, that
belonging to the Civil Magistrate in every Ecclesiastical Uniformity, 136 and
the extent of it, 136 137. and the Magistrates Right to it, 137, 138, 139, 140,
etc. He may commit the exercise of it to others, 147, 148 Inquisition of Spain,
what course it holds as to the Kings Prerogative, 144 and that of Italy, as to
the Pope, Ibid. The Inquisition, admitted in Dominions of Princes by compact
145 The Interdiction of Venice, by Pope Paul the 5th, the sense of the Princes
about it. 143 Interests temporal, the mixing of them with men's zeal, a cause of
Religious contests. 92 Interpretation, the liberty of it, in respect to the
Canon and Liturgy in any National Church, belongs to private persons as their
right, 253 That their Interpretation distinguished, 253 254 the Rules by which
they are to proceed in it, assigned. 254, 255, 256, etc. Interpretorship in an
Ecclesiastical Uniformity, of how great moment the Office of Supreme
Interpretor is, 302. The Authentic Interpretors in any National Church
distinguished, and the Supreme assigned, 302, 303. His right to his Office
asserted, 303, 304, etc. the opposers of it. 307, 308 Josephus, the principal
Jewish Historian. In Proleg. circa med. Israel, the distribution of the rights
of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity in it. In Prolegom. in princip. Italy, the
variety of Religious Rites brought of old into it. 14 Julian the Apostate, his
letter to Arsacius, that he should take the form of Religion upon him. 290
Jurisdiction in spirituals, the rights of Ecclesiastics, 132
K
King, the notion of him in the Ancient Heathen writings, 45 King and Priest,
why the same person has so frequently been so in Societies. 138, 139, etc.
King James of England, his Objection made to the Bishop of Rome, concerning his
Prerogative. 147 The Kings of England, Sweden, Spain, Denmark, etc. Sovereign
Princes in their Dominions. 135 Knights Ecclesiastical amongst the Venetians.
130
L
Law, of the twelve Tables amongst the Romans concerning funerals. 235, 236 and
concerning a bone broken. 269, etc. Lawgivers, the famous ones amongst the
Greeks. In Prolegom. post med. Laws, from whence their necessity amongst men.
33, 34 Laws defined and distinguished. 100 The great reason of the restraint of
private persons by them. 101, 102 Lay Elders, their absurd mixture with
Ecclesiastics, in the Ecclesiastical Regiment. 299, 300 Laynez, his Answer, in
the Tridentine Council, concerning reformation in the Court of Rome. 240
Leunclavius, his exhortation to Christian peace. 309 Liberty defined. 43 and
distinguished, 43 and defined in the most absolute notion of it. 100 the worth
of it, 101 Liberty of the Subject defined. 101 it ought to be preserved in an
Ecclesiastical Uniformity. Ib. Christian liberty, defined and distinguished.
104 Liberty of men's judgment of discerning in matters of Religion,
distinguished and defined. Ibid. The exercise of it asserted. 105 the due
limitation of such the exercise of it. Ibid. Liberty, of profession and outward
actions, ought to be regulated by humane Laws. 106 Liberty of opining, applied
to the matters of the Canon and Liturgy in any National Church. 288 Those
matters distinguished, and the due extent of it. 288, 289 Cautions concerning
it. 290, 291 Liberties, those of the people relating to an Ecclesiastical
Uniformity distinguished. 100 their primitive spiritual and Ecclesiastical
liberties, described and asserted. 103 three sorts of them. 104 the liberties
and latitudes conceded to men in relation to the fixing their notions
concerning things. 273 A Liturgy defined and distinguished. 195 should be
accompanied with as few other sorts of Services as may be. Ibid. It ought to be
conformed to the Canon of Doctrines in any Church. Ibid. The Heathen, Jewish
and Apostolical Liturgies contested. 196 the present Liturgies that are abroad
in the world, 197, 198, 199 Whether Liturgy does not transgress the Rules of
Scripture? 204 the exceptions made against the Liturgies in the Church of
England, and the Salvoes to them referred to. 246 A Liturgical or
non-liturgical service, which may be used with more attention or affection.
205, 206 Lycurgus, his answer concerning his appointing small things to be
offered to the Gods. 85 his cunning. 115
M
Machiavel, his assignation of the cause of the Imperial Power its failing in
Italy. 88 Magistrate, the danger of his being invaded in his person. 120 The
Civil Magistrate is the Supreme in every Society. 135 (viz.) Not a Feudatory,
but the Sovereign Prince. Ibid. and how that Supremacy is committed to him by
God. 136 and his indirect Power in spirituals, which is a branch of it. Ibid.
Mahomet, his Arts and Fictions in establishing his prescript of Religion. 15,
16. his second coming; the Turks gulled concerning it. 24 His oaths concerning
the truth of his Doctrine. 23 Mahometans, their Liturgy, 198 These have their
Bishops, Priests and Deacons. 300 Malice, the persons ordinarily guilty of the
faults of it against the charge of the Magistrate. 117 the causes exciting them
to the commission of them. Ibid. the impetuousness and violence of those
exciting causes. 118, etc. Means, those necessarily to be used for the
preservation of the welfare of the Magistrates Public charge. 78 Means of
Grace ought to be conceded in any Christian Church. 107 and so those of
knowledge. Ibid. and what both sorts of them are. 107, 108 Men, the supposition
of their springing from the earth. 35, 36 The first state of them in the world.
31, 32 Mental reservation, the doctrine of it condemned, 279 Ministry of holy
things, the right of Ecclesiastics. 132 Minos, King of Crete, his trick for
the establishment of his Laws. 115 Miracles, one of the primary Divine
Testimonials to Religion. 18 their attestation to Moses his Law. 19 their
pretended testimony to the Heathens Religion. 21 and to Mahomets. 22, 23 and
how the Christian Religion excelled in them. 25 the difference betwixt them and
ordinary effects. 29. Not to be believed against Moses his established
constitutions in Israel. 176 Monarchy, the most Ancient Government of the
world. 34, 35 Monuments of Humane Affairs, the most, and most received from the
Greek and Roman States. In Proleg. post med. Moses his Books, the most ancient
System of Laws now extant. In Prolegom. Ib. His two Tables, the intent of God
in them in Israel. 196 His Laws and Ordinances, for the interpretation of them,
the Hebrew Rabbis are ordinarily produced. In Prolegom. circa med. The
testimonials from God to his Law. 18, 19, 20 Moses Maimonides, the Jews saying
concerning him. In Prolegom. Ibid. Chief Mufti amongst the Turks, sits in the
Divano. 130 his State and Authority, 306 Muncer his laughing at the common
people. 113 Mustapha, his trick for the leading a sedition. 115 Mycipsa, his
Admonition to his Sons, to be at Peace and Unity. 97
N
Nasica, his Council concerning the not Racing of Carthage. 294 National
Church, the more special notion of it, and it distinguished. 210, 211 Its being
supposed to an Ecclesiastical Uniformity. 211 Nature, the description of the
Law of it. 16 that Law twofold. 42 It is the guide of Humane Actions. In
Prolegom. prope med. Natural causes, their ordinary operation in the world. 29
Nestorians, their Liturgy. 198 Nicene Creed, the intent of the injunction of
it. 172, 177 Noah, his distribution of the world amongst his Sons. 53 his
exercising himself in the Priestly Office. 124 Third Notions, those in which
Unity of Assent, in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity, is to terminate. 226 The
Magistrates intent in men's inward Notions in relation to outward profession.
271, 272, etc. Numa, his exercise of himself in the Priestly Office. 140
O
Obedience, to be performed by private persons to Princes, in their
establishments of their Ecclesiastical Vniformities. 183 An Opinion in matters
of Religion, what it is, explicated. 150 Opinions, the open contesting of them
the cause of Atheism and Profaneness in Societies. 88 The variety of them a
cause of popular Religious contests. 91 the readiness of men to entertain them
in matters of Religion. 152 the numerous increase of them in men. 152, 153 the
posture in which they come forth to the venting and defending of them. 153, 154
Orators, both Greek and Roman, the singular use that that is to be made of
their writings. In Proleg. in fin. Orders of Ecclesiastics, the necessity of
the diversity of them in every Ecclesiastical Uniformity, 131 the Old Testament
Orders of Ecclesiastics. 131, 132 and also the like in the New Testament. 132
the perpetual Orders of them in it. Ibid. Ordinances, the Public Ordinances in
any Church ought to be celebrated in the vulgar tongue. 108, 109 Whether the
same specifical Ordinances only be not sufficient for the attaining the end of
an Ecclesiastical Uniformity? 203 In what manner the Sacred Ordinances of God,
are to be made use of in the public. 218, 219 Ordination, of Ecclesiastics to
their Offices, the Right of Ecelesiasticks. 133
P
Padre Paulo, his saying concerning Government, and the Powers belonging to it.
137, 138 his complaint concerning the estate of the affairs of Venice. 241, 242
Pandects of Justinian, their revival from Amalphi and Florence. 31 whence
collected. In Proleg. post med. Parents, their power of life and death
heretofore over their children, whence. 35 Passions, their mixture with zeal, a
cause of popular Religious Contests. 92 A distinction of such their mixture.
Ibid. Peace, the benefits of it to Societies. 94, 95, 96, etc. And to the
public charge of the Magistrate. Ibid. to Religion, 95 to Government 96 and to
the consistency of Religion with Government. 97 and how much it is commanded in
Scripture. 97, 98 Philosophical Prudences, what they are. In Proleg. prope fin.
Phylacteries, the intent of their being worn in Israel. 170 Pisistratus, his
trick for the recovery of his Tyranny at Athens. 114 Plato, his charge
concerning the instruction of the Citizens of his Commonweal in certain
doctrines of Religion. 87 his two grand sorts of Atheists. 88 his saying
concerning preparations of War and Peace in a City. In Prolegom. in princip.
the excellency of his works. In Prolegom. prope fin. his pattern of an
Ecclesiastical Uniformity. 176 his saying concerning the Government of humane
affairs. 301 Pluralities, the case concerning them. 266, 267 Poets, looked upon
of old as divinely inspired. 14 Greek and Roman, the singular use of their
writings. In Prolegom. in fin. Poland, the Kings Council in it, its consisting
partly of Ecclesiastics. 130 Politics, its dignity amongst the Philosophical
prudences. In Proleg. prope fin. Pontifies, the College of them, and their
authority amongst the Romans. 305 Pope, his possessing the splendors of the
Civil Magistrate. 147. above all orders in the Church, etc. according to the
Canonists. 38 his styles and ambition. 64, 65 Pope Paul the 5th, his usual
saying concerning Magistrates. 65 Popular state, when first erected. 35 Powers,
Those belonging to the Civil and Ecclesiastical Government distinguished. 122
the persons concerned in them, assigned. Ibid. Praefectus Vigilum, his Office
amongst the Romans. 300, 301 Prayer, a form of it was approved of by Christ.
197 Preaching, why so great a latitude of it generally is left open in national
Vniformities. 207, 208 and the case stated concerning it. Ib. the Magistrates
power of laying a restraint upon it. 296 Prelacy from God. 38 Prescript, of the
Christian Religion, it has been most vexed with contests. 194 whether a
traditional, and more Ceremonial Prescript of Religion, or else a written and
more doctrinal one be least subject to popular contests. 203 Printing, none
amongst the Turks. 180 the Magistrates power of laying a restraint upon it. 296
and the ill consequence of licentiousness in it. Ibid. Profaneness, to be
expelled out of humane Societies. 88 the greater and lesser degrees of it.
Ibid. Profession, national, how far forth the Magistrate may compel men to
unite in it, stated. 228, 229. External Profession, the only thing, in
relation to which all external Unity, as to matters of Religion, is to be held
amongst men. 162 It is the only great stated medium for the holding a
charitative communion as to those matters then. Ibid. The Magistrates Right, as
to the injoyning an unity of it in Societies. 165, 166 Profession in an
Ecclesiastical Uniformity distinguished, 274 mixture of it why tolerated,
where otherwise of divulging of opinions are not. 293, 294 Prophecy, one of
the primary divine Testimonials to Religion. 18 its pretended testimony to the
Heathens Religion. 20, 21 and to Mahomets prescript. 22 and how it testified to
the truth of the Christian Religion in a more peculiar manner. 23 Prophets,
those of the Old Testament. 18 Proselites, the proverbial saying concerning
them in Israel. 170 Protestant Churches, their Liturgies. 198 Public Worship,
the Unity of the use of it, the great secondary medium for the holding a
charitative communion amongst men, as to matters of Religion. 163 The
Magistrates Right of injoyning an Unity of it in Societies. 165, 166
Punishments, their peculiar necessity to the regiment of humane Societies. 261
the doctrine of them in respect to an Ecclesiastical Uniformity laid down: the
several sorts of them distinguished. 267
Q
Quintus Sectorius, his trick for his encouragement of his Soldiers. 115
R
Rabbinical Age, when it began. In proleg. circa med. Records of humane
affairs, the causes of the defects of them. 29, 30, 31 Reformed Churches, their
derivation of the Magistrates power from God. 55, 56, etc. Religion, its
consistency with Government intended by God and Nature. 2 Religion defined.
Ibid. and distinguished. 3, 4 Its divine appointment evidenced. 9 Its Divine
Original. 9, 10, etc. And the grounds in nature, and consent of Nations about
it. 10, 11, 12, etc. Two only sorts of Precepts, of which it can consist. 16
how the true prescript of it is to be known. 16, 17. Its Divine Original, the
sense of all Nations present in the world. 27 its propagation by Arms warranted
by Mahomets Law. 50 the distinctions of it applied to its consistency with
Government, 67 such its consistency proved. 68, 69, etc. Its healthfulness to
Government, and Civil Society. 85, 86, 87, etc. the damnifying it, a public
crime: 87 its being used as a politic instrument by the heathen Romans. 88 the
false application of the immortal notion of it, the cause of Religious
contests. 89 that it is the bond of all humane Society. In Proleg. in princip.
about what matters of it is both all peace and contention. 160, 161 Revolting,
from profession in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity, the mischiefs of it to
Churches. 275, 286. Rewards, the peculiar necessity of them to the regiment of
humane Societies. 261 the doctrine concerning them in respect to an
Ecclesiastical Uniformity. Ibid. the distinction of them. Ibid. the original
intents of them. 262 and their opposites. Ibid. the Rules to be held concerning
the dispensing them. 263, 264, etc. the mischiefs of the neglect of observance
of them. 264, 265 Right, that of God, to his obliging man by Precepts of of
religion, twofold. 9, 10 whose right the preservation of the welfare of
religion and Government, and the consistency of Religion with Government is,
73, 74, 75, etc. Right the public cement of all humane affairs. In Proleg. in
princip. Rights, those relating directly to an Ecclesiastical Uniformity, the
Tripartite division of them. 99 and those Rights distinguished. Ibid. the
primitive Rights of the people, 100 the Rights of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity,
dispersed up and down in the Greek and Roman writers. In Proleg. circa princ.
the Rights of Government, the distinction and proper extent of them, from
whence they flow. 123, etc. the Rights of the Church Governors and Ministers
in every Christian Church. 132, 133 Right Reason, the great commendation of it,
as the ultimate and universal interpretor of all Laws. 257, 258 Rising in Arms
against Princes, and particularly in defense of Religion, and the matters of an
Ecclesiastical Uniformity, not justifiable, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51 its opposition
to the common good of Societies. 59, 60, 61, etc. The Scotch and English
Presbytery, their following the principles of the Churchmen of Rome in it. 65
it is not being the Right of Ecclesiastics for the support of their Church
Society. 133 Romans, their Orders of Ecclesiastics. 124 Roman Civil Law, the
body of it the largest and most complete body of such Laws now extant. In
Proleg. ad fin. the reception of it in the dominions of Princes. Ibid. Roman
State, its most ancient Laws fetched from Greece. In Prolegom. circa princip.
Roman Church, its Liturgies. 198 Its emission of the doctrine of Rising in
Arms against Princes into Christendom. 64 Romulus, his Law concerning the
Senates taking care of Religion. 141 Russians, their Priests and Bishops of no
learning. 180 Russe Church, its Liturgy. 198
S
Sanhedrim, what things chiefly it took cognizance of in Israel. 141 Scipio
Africanus, his custom of deceiving the multitude. 115 Scripture, whether it,
as the Original Divine Canon of Doctrines, be not sufficient for the attaining
the ends of an Ecclesiastical Uniformity. 203 Sedition, the Ringleaders of it
the persons ordinarily guilty of the faults of malice against the Magistrates
public charge in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity. 117 Senate of Rome, their trick
for their withholding the people from Sedition. 115 their refusing to enroll
Christ amongst their Gods. 141 Society, the term explicated and applied. 5 by
what several ways men came first into Societies. 31 Sophi of Persia, his
dismissing his horse, etc. kept for Mahomet against his second Coming. 24
Sorbon, their threatening against the Pope. 144 A Subject defined. 100
Submission, to the Ecclesiastical Laws of Princes, a great reason of men's
doubts and and dissatisfactions concerning it. In Prolegom. circa med.
Supervisorship, the necessity of it in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity. 297 the
several sorts of the Supervisors distinguished, 297, 298, etc. the supreme
assigned. 298 whence he derives his right. Ibid. the deputative Supervisors
further distinguished. Ibid. the matters to be supervis'd, and the care to be
taken in the supervising of them. 300, etc. Supreme, the necessity of some one
such in every Ecclesiastical Uniformity. 134 the supreme in Humane Societies
defined, as to his political qualification. 135 and as to his person. Ib. the
Supreme power of jurisdiction of the Civil Magistrate, how it is committed to
him by God. 136 Sybilla Erythraea, or Cumana, her testimony concerning Christ.
24 Simony, why forbidden by the Laws Ecclesiastical. 265 how it is committed
266 the punishment of it. Ibid. Synagogues, no express approbation of them in
Scripture. 197 Synceritie, ought always to be in men, in the giving in of
testimonials to profession in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity. 279 Synod of
Divines, the last way in this world for the finding of truth in matters of
religion. 232 its right to the handling of such matters. 233 the rights of
Princes in relation to it. 233, 234 Synods Heretical, the Princes power of
prohibiting them. 234 and what they are. 235 Syrians, their Liturgy. 198
T
Temporal Penalties, how far forth the severity of them may be inflicted in
spiritual matters. 270 Testimony Divine, in what it consists. 17 Testimonials
to profession, in an Ecclesiastical Uniformity, defined and distinguished. 277
those to indefinite profession assigned. 278 and also those to definite. Ibid.
the necessity of Princes exacting the special sort of them. 280 of these
Testimonials under the notion of religious bonds. 281 and in what manner, upon
what accounts, and to what things they oblige. 282, 283 284, 285, etc.
Theodosian Code, its dignity amongst books of Laws. In Prolegom. ad fin.
Toledo, his saying to the Legate from Rome, in the Council of Trent, concerning
Christ's Valuation of Souls. 217 Toleration, what is meant by a loose and open
tolleration of venting of Opinions. 151 Tradition, the only instrument for the
conveyance of the Doctrines of religion, and the testimonials to them down to
future Ages. 18 that subservient to Moses his Law. 20 when it is an infallible
conservatrix of former Records. 18 how it was subservient to the Heathenr
prescript of Religion. 22 and how to Mohomets. 23 the tradition of the matters
of the Christian Religion, how it has been credible. 25, 26, 27 Transmigration
of Souls, a doctrine of Religion amongst the East Indians, etc. 114
Tribonianus, employed in the collecting the Digests. In Prolegom. post med.
Tribunals, Ecclesiastical. 301 Tridentine Fathers, their saying concerning the
Mass, its being established in an unknown tongue. 181 The Twelve Tables amongst
the Romans, from whence derived. In Prolegom. post med. but now extinct. Ibid.
U
Venice, that state its prohibition of building Religious Places without
License, 219, 220 Venting of Opinions in matters of Religion, the necesssity of
a restraint to be held upon it in Humane Societies. 164, 165 An Uniformity
defined. 1 and distinguished. Ib. Uniformity, Ecclesiastical, the general
matter about which it is conversant. 2 it is the means necessary for the
preservation of the welfare of the Magistrates public charge. 79 the
appertaining of it to the well-being of Humane Societies, proved more
generally. 82, 83 the greater necessity of the treating concerning it
evidenced. 194 the Rules to be proceeded by in the alteration of it in any
National Church. 206, 207 the practices of men, conversant about the making use
of it in Societies, assigned. 168, etc. such an Uniformity distinguished. 168
the grounds and reasons for it assigned. 169 the two grand instruments of it,
Ib. diverse have been the sorts of it in diverse Societies. Ib. the principles
leading men to the use of it. 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, etc. Princes
have been forced many times to the further degrees of it. 176 from whence the
just measures of it are to be taken. 182 who has the right of framing it in
Societies. 183 Unity in matters of Religion, the necessity of some kind or
other of it to be maintained in Common-weals. 39 All men would have it. Ib. but
none yet has sufficiently described it. Ib. It is the Mother of Charity and
Peace. Ib. the necessity of some kind of it for the holding of that Peace and
Charity amongst men. 164 that Unity distinguished. Ib. the internal defined.
Ib. the external described and distinguished diversely. 162 it is the great
stated medium for the holding of a charitative communion in Churches. 162, 163
the Unity of the use of public worship the great secondary medium for the
holding of it also. 163 Uses, those which are to be made by the people, of the
Canon, and Liturgy in any National Church. 244, 245, 246, 247, 248 Vulgar,
their manner of entertaining judgments in matters of Religion. 150, 151
W
Sr. William Wade, his Monument in the Tower of London. 65 Women, their being
zealous Suicides at the funerals of their husbands in the Eastern parts of the
world. 114 Worship of God distinguished. 164 Wray, Chief Justice in the Kings
Bench, his Report made in the case of Smiths conditional subscription to the 39
Articles of Religion in England. 284 Writing, the ordinary way for the
conservation of things and Records amongst men: 164
X
Xenophon, his mention of the Heathen ways of Prophecy. 20
Y
Young men, advised to a greater caution, as to the divulging of Opinions. 295
Z
Zaga Zabo, amongst the Abassines, both a Bishop and Viceroy. 129 Zaleucus,
his cunning in dealing with the common people. 115 Zeal, the Noble and Generous
heats of it, not intended to be extinguished by an Ecclesiastical Uniformity.
295 but only it to be regulated. Ibid.
FINIS.
The Intelligent Reader is entreated to Correct the ERRATA committed in the
absence of the Author.


