AN EXPOSITION OF THE Book of the Prophet ISAIAH.

By the endeavors of W. DAY M. A. late Fellow of King's College in CAMBRIDGE:

AND NOW An Unworthy Servant of God in the Gospel, at MAPLEDURHAM in the County
of OXON.

Totum quod legimus in Divinis libris, nitet quidem and fulget etiam in Cortice.

S. HIERONYMUS Epist. 13. ad PAULINUM. LONDON, Printed by G. D. and S. G. for
Joshua Kirton, and are to be sold at his Shop in St. Paul's Churchyard, at the
Sign of the Kings Arms. 1654.

THE PREFACE TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
THOU have here (Christian Reader) An Exposition of the Book of the Prophet
Isaiah: The Endeavors of one, who is conscious to himself of his own
weakness, upon him, who, as He is the most Eloquent, so is He the most
Evangelicall of all the Prophets. But what He did, He did for his own use, and
the use of his own Children, (if it should please God to bring them to the
years of discretion) without any thought of publishing it to the world. But
being persuaded thereunto by friends, He has now made it public: And if it
may prove any way beneficial to thee, or profitable to any one, whosoever he
be, which desires the knowledge of the Scriptures, it shall not repent him.

I called our Prophet, as the most Eloquent; So the most Evangelicall of all
the Prophets: For

Our Prophet has many excellent Prophesies of Christ, and of those things
which are contained in the Gospel: And our Savior and his Apostles have more
Quotations concerning the Gospel, and contents thereof, out of our Prophet, the
Prophet Isaiah, than they have out of any one, nay, I may say, out of all the
other fifteen Prophets besides.

Yet know, that the Gospel, and the contents thereof, was a Mystery, and was
hidden until these latter days, in which God spoke unto us by his Son;
Hence the Apostle calls the Gospel, The wisdom of God in a Mystery, even the
hidden wisdom, 1 Cor. 2.7. Hence he calls it also, The Mystery of his will,
Ephesians. 1.9. And the Mystery of the Gospel, Ephesians. 6.19. And the Mystery of God, and
of the Father, and of Christ, Colos. 2.2. And a Mystery which was kept secret
since the world began, Romans 16.25. And a Mystery which had been hid from Ages
and Generations, but now made manifest to the Saints, Col. 1.26.

I know that many understand this last place, not of the whole Gospel, but of
part only of it, namely of the calling of the Gentiles: But surely, if the
calling of the Gentiles was a Mystery which had been hid from Ages and
Generations, what part of the Gospel was not hidden? For to go no farther than
our own Prophet, what Prophecy was more frequent; what more plain (if any part
of the Prophesies concerning the Gospel was plain) than that of the calling of
the Gentiles.

It shall come to pass in the last days, that the Mountain of the Lords house
shall be established in the top of the Mountains, and shall be exalted above
the Hills, and all Nations shall flow unto it, and many People shall go and
say, Come ye, and let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, to the House of
the God of Jacob, and He will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his
paths: For out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the Word of the Lord from
Jerusalem, and He shall judge among the Nations, Isaiah Cap. 2. verse. 2, 3, 4.
In that day there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall stand for an Ensign of
the People; To it shall the Gentiles seek, and His rest shall be glorious,
Isaiah Cap. 11. verse. 10. In that day shall five Cities in the Land of Egypt
speak the Language of Canaan, and swear to the Lord of Hosts; One shall be
called the City of Destruction. In that day shall there be an Altar to the Lord
in the Land of Egypt, and a Pillar in the border thereof to the Lord: And it
shall be for a sign and for a witness unto the Lord of Hosts in the Land of
Egypt: And the Lord shall be known to Egypt, and the Egyptians shall know
the Lord, Isaiah Cap. 19. verse. 18, 19, 20. It is a light thing that thou
should be my Servant, to raise up the Tribes of Jacob, and to restore the
preserved of Israel; I will also give Thee for a light to the Gentiles, that
Thou may be my salvation to the ends of the earth, Isaiah Cap. 49. verse. 6.
The Isles shall wait upon me, and on my Name shall they trust, Isaiah Cap. 51.
verse. 5. Behold my Servant shall sprinkle many Nations, the Kings shall shut
their mouths at Him: For that which had not been told them shall they see, and
that which they had not heard shall they consider, Isaiah Cap. 52. verse. 15. I
will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David,
Isaiah Cap. 55. verse. 8. The abundance of the Sea shall be converted unto Thee,
the Forces of the Gentiles shall come unto Thee, etc. Isaiah Cap. 60. verse. 5.
etc. I am sought of them that asked not for me, I am found of them that sought
Me not: I said, behold me; behold me, unto a Nation that was not called by my
Name, Isaiah Cap. 65. verse. 1. It shall come to pass, that from one new Moon
to another, and from one Sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to worship
before me, says the Lord, Isaiah Cap. 60. verse. 21. All these are Prophesies
concerning the calling of the Gentiles, and I know no Prophesies concerning the
Gospel, more plentiful, and more plain than these are:

If therefore (notwithstanding these and many the like Prophesies concerning
the calling of the Gentiles) the calling of the Gentiles was a Mystery hidden
from Ages and Generations, then certainly other parts of the Gospel were hidden
too, especially if we speak of the distinct knowledge thereof.

Object. But you will say, the Chaldee Paraphrast, and many Jewish Doctors, had
knowledge of the Messiah before the days of the Gospel; and understood many
places of the Scriptures of the old Testament of the Messiah; so that they very
well knew the Gospel, for what is the Gospel but the History of the Messiah,
that is, the History of Christ, and the benefits by him received.

Answ. The Chaldee Paraphrast, and other Jewish Doctors believed, that the
Messiah was to come (having received it some way or other) and having more than
ordinary conceits of him, understood many eminent places of the old Testament
of the Messiah: But yet they were far from the knowledge of the Gospel; For
they understood little more of the Messiah than his name; for they were
altogether ignorant of his divine Nature, and his Offices: And though they
thought that he should be a King, yet they thought that he should be but a
Temporal King, so that they knew not the true Benefits, and true Redemption,
and Salvation which is wrought by Christ, which whosoever knows not, must
needs be ignorant of the Gospel.

Object. But yet you will say, How was the Gospel hidden so long, when as the
Prophets and holy Men of the Lord spoke of the Gospel (all, or many parts
thereof in the days of old?

Answ. Although the Prophets and holy Men of the Lord spoke of the Gospel (all,
or many parts thereof) in the days of old, yet notwithstanding, the Gospel was
accounted as a Mystery, and as a thing hidden from former Ages and Generations,
because they did either speak of it in Parables, and dark Speeches, and
Allegories, or because they spoke of it under the Types and shadows of other
things: And under the Types and shadows of other things does our Prophet speak
of the Gospel (and the glorious things therein contained) when he prophesies
of it; For he prophesies first of things to come in times nearer to his own
times: And by these things does he prophecy of the Gospel, and glorious things
therein. And this, or from this (as I conceive) is that vail which, St. Paul
says, remains upon the minds of the Jews untaken away, in the reading of
the Old Testament, ^ Cor, 3.14. For if they understand the Literal and
Historical sense of the Scriptures, they look no farther: They will not look
at those things which are figured by the History; so that the Historical sense
is as a vail before their eyes, and hinders them from beholding those
glorious things which are covered with that veil, and which lie wrapped up in
the History as in a Type.

But that veil is done away in Christ, ^ Cor. 3. v. 14. So that he which
believes in Christ, and beholds the wonderful dispensations of God, in the
Gospel of his Son, with a faithful eye, and then looks upon the Law and
the Prophets, shall see many glorious things of Christ and his Gospel, foretold
and held out unto us in the Law and the Prophets, which before he could not see.

So then for the better understanding of this our Prophet; take notice of these
things.

First, That many places of the holy Writers of the Old Testament, and
especially of the Prophets, carry with them a double sense; One concerning
terrene and corporal things, and things to come to pass before the days of
the Messiah: Another concerning spiritual and heavenly things, and things
which were not to come till the Mesiah's coming: The first sense I may call,
the First, or Literal, or Historical, or meaner Sense: The second sense I may
call, the Second, or the Mystical, or Sublime Sense.

Secondly, That the First, Literal, Historical, or meaner Sense, is signified
distinctly, plainly, and immediately, by the words of these holy Writers: But
the Second, or Mystical, or Sublime Sense is not signified distinctly,
plainly, and immediately, by their words: But, as it were, only in gross and
mediately, that is, only by those things which are signified distinctly,
plainly, and immediately by their words.

Thirdly, That notwithstanding that the Second, or Mystycall, or Sublime Sense
is not signified distinctly, plainly, and immediately, by the words of these
holy Writers, where the said two senses are to be found, but, as it were, only
in gross and mediately, that is, by the things which are signified distinctly,
plainly, and immediately by their words; yet there be in many of the Histories
(as I may call them) of these holy Writers, and in many of their Prophesies,
sometimes one, sometimes more sentences, which signify immediately by their
words, not only some passage or passages, which appertain to the First,
Literal, Historical, and meaner Sense: But also some passage or passages,
which are appertaining to the Second, Mystical, and Sublime Sense.

Fourthly, That though in many Histories of these holy Writers, and many of
their Prophesies, there be sometimes one, sometimes more sentences, which
signify immediately by their words some passage, or passages, not only which
appertain to the First, Literal, Historical, or meaner Sense; But also some
passage, or passages, which appertain to the Second, Mystical, or Sublime
Sense; Yet the words are not always to be taken after the same manner, but
sometimes in a different manner, in one, from that in which they were used in
the other sense.

Fifthly, Though in many Histories (as I may call them) of these holy Writers,
and many Prophesies, there be sometimes one, sometimes mo^e sentences, which
signify immediately by their words, not only some passage, or p^ssages which
appertain to the First, Literal, Historical, or Meaner Sense: But also some
passage, or passages, which appertain to the Second, Mystical, and Sublime
Sense: Yet it is not necessary, neither is it always so, (yea, it is seldom
so) that every sentence of the whole History (as I may call it) and the whole
Prophecy, does signify immediately by its words, those passages which
appertain to that Second, Mystical, and Sublime sense, ^s they do those
passages which appertain to the First, Literal, Historical, or Meaner Sense.

I shall illustrate and prove what I have said concerning these five Notes or
Observations, before I proceed any further.

The first thing that I would have notice taken of was, that many places of
these holy Writers of the Old Testament, and especially of the Prophets, carry
with them a double sense; One concerning terrene and corporal things, and
things to come to pass before the days of the Messiah: Another concerning
spiritual and heavenly things, and things which are not to come to pass
before the Messiah's coming.

Such a double sense we read of in the Law; For it is written in the Law, that
Abraham had two Sons, the one by a Bond-maid, the other by a Freewoman: And
he that was of the Bond-wonan was born after the flesh; and he that was of the
Freewoman was by promise: Here is one sense plain: Now besides this, there is
in these words another sense; For these two women signify the two Covenants,
etc. Gal. 4. verse. 22, 23, 24. So what is written Exodus 12. tells us of the
killing of the Passover, and all the Rites and Ceremonies thereto belonging:
And that is one sense of the Chapter: But besides that, there is another sense
therein contained; for the Passover signifies Christ, and his killing
Christ's suffering: 1 Cor. 5. v. 7. So Psalm 109. in one sense David
complains of his enemies: In another sense he prophesies how wickedly Christ
should be dealt withal: Acts 1.20. And here in this book our Prophet
prophesies of the wicked Jews, that they should be so destroyed by the sword
of their enemies, as that a very small Remnant of them should be left; and that
is one sense of the 7, 8, and 9. verses of the first Chapter, and yet in that
very same place he prophesies and foretells, that many should perish through
unbelief, so that few only should be saved. Romans 9.29. So Cap. 35. v. 3, 4, 5,
etc He prophesies of the Lords coming to save the Jews from the fury of the
Assyrians: And yet he foretells in that very place of Christ's coming in the
flesh, to save us from our sins, Mat. 11.5.

The Second thing which I would have notice taken of is this; That the First,
Literal, Historical, or Meaner sense (where the two aforesaid senses are to
be found) in the holy Writs of the Old Testament, is signified distinctly,
plainly, and immediately, by the words of these holy Writers: But the Second,
Mystical, and Sublime sense, is not signified distinctly, plainly, and
immediately by their words, but as it were only in gross and mediately, that
is, by those things which are signified distinctly, plainly, and immediately,
by their words.

In the Law this is evident; For the words thereof do plainly, and distinctly,
and immediately, set forth unto us the story of Sarah and Hagar, Genesis Cap. 16.
and Cap. 21. But they do not so set forth the matter of the two Covenants
therein contained; but they are signified not immediately by the words of that
Story, but by the things signified by those words, to wit, by Sarah and Hagar,
the former whereof signified the New, the latter the Old Covenant; Gal. 4. v.
24. So in the matter of the Passover, that which concerns the Passover is
distinctly, plainly, and immediately set down by those words which we read,
Exodus 12. But as for that which concerns Christ in that Chapter, (1 Cor.
5.7.) that is not signified by the words thereof; but by that which was
immediately signified by those words, that is, by the Passover it self.

For example sake, whereas it it said, Exodus 12.8. That the flesh of the
Passover shall be roast with fire, and eaten with bitter herbs; How can these
words immediately signify any thing in or about Christ? But though these words
cannot immediately signify any thing in or about Christ; yet that may, which
is immediately signified by those words; for that the Passover should be
roasted with fire, and eaten with bitter herbs, may signify, the cruel and
bitter death which Christ should suffer.

So in the Book of Joshua it is recorded word by word, how Joshua brought the
People of Israel, which were redeemed out of Egypt, into the Land of Canaan,
and the same Story contains Jesus, his bringing the Church of the Redeemed
into the heavenly Canaan, the Kingdom of God: But this is not signified word
by word as the Acts of Joshua are; but this is signified by the Acts of Joshua,
which were signified word by word in that Book.

And as in the Law, so in this our Prophet have we frequent examples of this
thing. For in that he prophesied, that a Remnant of the Jews should be saved,
and that they should not be quite cut off from being a Nation, neither when
Rezin King of Syria, and Pekah King of Israel should oppress them, and make a
great havoc of them, Cap. 1. v. 7, 8, 9. and Cap. 7. v. 1, 2, 3, etc. Nor when
Sennacherib should invade Judah, and make a great destruction and desolation
therein, Cap. 8. v. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, etc. and Cap. 9. v. 1, 2, 3, etc. and Cap.
10. v. 21, 22, 23, etc. He prophesied, that though many should perish
eternally, yet a remnant should be eternally saved, according to the election
of Grace by Christ Jesus, Romans 9. v. 29. and 11.5. But yet when he prophesied,
that a remnant should be eternally saved, according to the election of Grace by
Christ Jesus, he prophesied of that not in formal words immediately word by
word; but by those things which he prophesied of immediately word by word in
formal words, that is, by the Temporal salvation of those, which should be
saved from the sword, in the days of Rezin and Pekah first, and in the days
of Sennacherib afterward, which were they which remained in Jerusalem. So in
that he prophesied of the happiness and joy which should be upon the
destruction of Sennacherib's Army, Cap. 25. v. 6, 7, 8. And the joy and glory
which Sion and the Jews should enjoy after their delivery out of the
Babylonish Captivity, Cap. 60. throughout the whole Chapter. He prophesied o^
he joy, and happiness, and glory, which the Church of the Redeemed in Christ
Jesus should enjoy, after that Christ had destroyed the works of the Devil, and
triumphed over Principalities and Powers, and delivered his chosen Ones out of
their hands, 1 Cor. 15. v. 55. Rev. 7. v. 17. and 21. v. 4. Rev. 21. v. 25. and
3. v. 9. Rev. 21. v 22. and 22. v. 5. Yet when he prophesied of the joy, and
happiness, and glory, which the Church of the Redeemed in Christ Jesus should
enjoy, after the destruction of the works of the Devil, etc. he prophesied
not of them immediately by words, but mediately, that is, by the things
signified by those words, that is, by that temporal joy, and temporal and
carnal blessings, which the Jews should enjoy, after the destruction of the
Assyrians first, and the Babylonians afterward, and their delivery out of the
hands of those their Enemies.

The third thing that I desired should be taken notice of was, that
notwithstanding that the Second, or Mystical, or Sublime sense is not
distinctly, plainly, and immediately signified, by the words of those holy
Writers; but as it were only in gross and mediately, that is, by those things
which are signified distinctly, plainly, and immediately by their words; yet
there be in many Histories (as I may call them) and Prophesies, of those holy
Writers, sometimes one, sometimes more sentences, which signify immediately by
their words, not only some passage, or passages, which appertain to the First,
Literal, Historical, and Meaner sense: But also some passage, or passages,
which appertain to the Second, Mystical, and Sublime sense. We shall find
examples of this in the Law; for Exodus 12. v. 46. It is said of the Paschall
Lamb, Neither shall ye break a bone thereof; And this sentence is not only
understood of the Paschall Lamb, but it is also understood of Christ, who is
figured by the Paschall Lamb; and that (...), John 19. v. 36. So 2 Kings 7. v.
14. It is said by God of Solomon, I will be his Father, and he shall be my
Son; But this is not to be understood of Solomon only, but of Christ also,
of whom Solomon is there a Type, and that immediately too by the words,
Hebrews 1.5. And as there, so in our Prophet, the words of the Prophet are so
often directed, and ordered by the Holy Ghost, as that many sentences do not
only signify some passages concerning the Type, but also some passages
concerning the Antitype too, and that by their words immediately: For what we
read, Cap. 1. v. 9, Except the Lord of Hosts had left us a very small remnant,
we should have been left as Sodom, and we should have been like unto Gomorrah,
is literally understood, of the mercy of God in reserving a few Jews in the
Land of Judah, from the destruction and desolation, which Rezin King of Syria,
and Pekah King of Israel should make of the Jews. And it is not only
understood immediately by the letter, of the mercy of God, in reserving a few
Jews in the Land of Judah, from the destruction and desolation which Rezin
King of Syria, and Pekah King of Israel, should make of the Jews: But also of
the mercy of God, in saving a remnant, according to the election of grace, from
everlasting destruction, by Christ Jesus, Romans 9.29. And what we read, Cap.
8.18. I and the Children which the Lord has given me, is understood of Isaiah
and his children by him begotten, for Isaiah there speaks in his own person:
But it is not only understood of Isaiah, but also of Christ, of whom Isaiah
was a Type, Heb. 2.13. And those words which we read, Cap. 25.8. He will
swallow up death in victory; And these, the Lord God will wipe away tears from
all faces: Though they are understood of that joy which should be to the Jews,
and all the neighboring people upon the slaughter of the Assyrians, which laid
Judah waste, and besiedged Jerusalem: Yet they are to be understood also, of
that joy which the Redeemed of Christ should enjoy, when He had put their
spiritual Enemies under his feet; 1 Cor. 15. v. 55. Rev. 7. v. 17. and 21. v.
4. And what we read Cap. 53. v. 7. How beautiful are the feet of him that
brings good tidings, that publishes peace; that brings good tidings of
good, that publishes salvation: Though it be understood, according to the
letter, of those which brought good tidings of the delivery of the Jews out of
Babylon: Yet it is understood also (and according to the letter too) of the
Preachers of the Gospel, Romans 10. v. 15. I shall not need to bring any more
examples of this; for they which shall read this our Exposition, may have the
opportunity to observe many Notes of this kind (as of the others also which I
have propounded.)

But it may be objected against these Observations, and asked here. If the Word
of God carry a double sense with it; and the sentences of the Scripture may
have a double meaning; are they not like the Oracles of the Devil, which
carried a double sense, and had with them a double meaning?

Answ. God forbid: For first, the Oracles of the Devil, though they had a
double meaning, and carried a double sense with them, yet their double meaning,
and double sense, was concerning one and the same thing: But the Word of God,
where it has a double meaning, or a double sense, relates not to one and the
same thing, but to several things, whereof one is as the Type and Figure of
the other.

Secondly, Though the Word of God does carry a double sense with it in many
places, yet is each part of the sense determined to its proper subject, and not
left in suspense, and doubtful; But the double sense which the Oracles of the
Devil had, were not determined to any one truth, but left in suspense, and
doubtful, that the Devil, upon the Event of the thing, of which he gave his
Oracle, might apply it as he list, to save his credit with his followers.

Thirdly, The double sense of the Oracles, which the Devil gave, was
contradictory the one part thereof to the other; and could not (both parts of
it) be possibly true in the event, because they implied a Contradiction: But
though many parts of the Word of God, and many sentences thereof, do carry
with them a double sense, or double meaning, yet are both of the senses and
meanings true; there is no disagreeing between them, in that matter: Examples
of the Word of God which carry a double sense with them, I have given diverse a
little before: Now take one instance of the Devils Oracles, and by that judge
of the rest.

When Pyrrhus King of Epirus had a mind to go to battle against the Romans, he
was desirous to know what success he was like to have before he went to
battle; and therefore asked counsel of Apollo, who gave him this answer; Aio
te Aeacide Romanos vincere posse; which I render thus; I say that Pyrrhus the
Romans can overcome; which answer has a double sense, for the sense may be
this, that Pyrrhus can overcome the Romans, or this, that the Romans can
overcome Pyrrhus; where you see first, that this double sense is concerning one
and the same subject. Secondly, That the sense is not determined, but left in
suspense, and doubtful, for he does not determine whither Pyrrhus can overcome
the Romans, or the Romans Pyrrhus. And thirdly, One part of the sense is
contradictory to the other, and therefore cannot both parts be true in the
event; For if it be true, that Pyrrhus can vanquish the Romans, then cannot it
be true, that the Romans can vanquish Pyrrhus. And if it be true, that the
Romans can vanquish Pyrrhus, it cannot be true, that Pyrrhus can vanquish the
Romans.

The Fourth thing that I desired might be taken notice of was, That though in
many Histories, and Prophesies, of these holy Writers, there be sometimes one,
sometimes more sentences, which signify immediately by their words, some
passage, or passages, which appertain not only to the First, Literal,
Historical, or Meaner ^ense; But also some passage, or passages, which
appertain to the Second, Mystical, or Sublime Sense; yet the words are not
always to be taken after the same manner, but sometimes in a different manner
in one, from that in which they were taken in the other sense.

And this we may see illustrated and verified by diverse examples: The sixty
ninth Psalm was a Psalm which David made when he was in distress, and therein
he complains grievously of his Enemies, being no doubt in great streights and
pressure at that time: Now as David was a Type of Christ, so does this Psalm
(which sets forth the afflictions of David) prophecy of the afflictions and
miseries which Christ should suffer, while he was on the earth, by the Sons
of Men: And as the whole Psalm in the first sense concerns David; so in the
second and sublime sense it concerns Christ, and some particular sentences
are understood, acording to the words, as well of Christ as they are of David;
but of David in a Proverbiall and Figurative, of Christ in a proper kind of
speech: For that sentence, In my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink, Verse.
21. Is spoken of David only figuratively, and in the manner of a Proverb, and
signifies, that when he had need of comfort they did, in stead of comforting
him, add sorrow to his grief: But it is spoken of Christ properly, and
foretells, that his enemies should give him vinegar indeed to drink; and it was
fulfilled while he hung upon the Cross, John 19. verse. 28, 29. So Psalm. 19. v.
4. It is written (according to our old Translation, and according to the
Septuagint, and according to Saint Paul's reading, Romans 10. v. 18.) Their sound
is gone out into all Lands, And their words into the ends of the world; which
are spoken in the First, or Literal, or Historical, or Meaner sense of the
Heavens, and that Metaphorically; And the Heavens are said to sound out, and
speak the praises of God all the world over, because they are seen to all the
world, to be so excellently made, as that men may understand thereby the
eternal power and Godhead of him that made them. But as they are spoken in
the First, or Literal, or Historical, or Meaner sense, of the Heavens
Metaphorically: So are they spoken of the Apostles, who preached the Gospel in
all the world, in the Second, Mystical, and Sublime sense, properly, Romans 10.
v. 18. And note here, that Saint Paul alleges these words of the Psalmist, in
that place of the Romans, not by Accommodation only, that is, not because
they are words fit for his purpose, without any relation to the intent of the
Prophet David in that place; but he alleges them, as words intended by the
Prophet David (as a man inspired by the Holy Ghost) to signify that, for which
he there alleges them, as he that seriously considers the Text, and
Context, must needs confess.

But if you ask me, how the Prophet David, though inspired by the Holy Ghost,
can signify, by those words in that place, the preaching of the Gospel by the
Apostles throughout the world.

Take these my Notions (such as they are) in a place of much difficulty and
controversy.

The work of Christ, in the whole redemption of Man, is as a new Creation; and
has resemblance thereunto intended by the Holy Ghost: Hence we read, 1 Cor. 5.
v. 1 7. If any man be in Christ he is a new Creature: Old things are passed
away; behold all things are become new. And Gal. 6. v. 15. In Christ Jesus
neither Circumcision, nor Uncircumcision, avails any thing, but a new
Creature. The Psalmist therefore, while he speaks of the Heavens, which is the
highest, and lightest, and chiefest part of the material world, and the glory
which they bring to God their Maker, does in a mystical sense, foretell of the
Apostles, and the glory which they shall bring to the Lord, who gave them to be
Apostles, by their preaching. For in the new world which Christ framed, that
is, in the Church of Christ, the Apostles are the highest and chiefest
Creatures (hence in the similitude of an house, they are likened to the
foundations, which are the chiefest parts and most to be regarded in a
building, Ephesians. 2.20.) And they are the lightest also; for our Savior says
to them, Ye are the light of the world, Matthew. 5. verse. 14.

But to return to that, from which we may seem to have digressed. That which
our Prophet says of himself in the first sense, Cap. 18. v. 12. I and the
children, which thou have given me; is said also by Christ of himself in the
Second, and Sublime sense, Heb. 2. v. 13. But it is spoken by Isaiah otherwise
than it is by Christ; for it is spoken by Isaiah properly, for he was the
natural father of these children which he speaks of: But Christ is called the
Father of these Children, which he speaks of only by a Metaphor. So in these
wo^ds, Isaiah 25. v. 8. He will swallow up death in victory; Death (as the
words are considered in the First, Literal, Historical, and Meaner sense) is
to betaken Metonymically for Sorrow. Or if Death be taken for that which
deprives a man of life; the meaning of the words is this: That the Lord will
destroy death that it shall kill no more. But as the words are taken in the
Second, Mystical, and Sublime sense (as they are taken 1 Cor. 15. v. 55. Death
is to be taken properly, for the deprivation of life: And the sense of the
words is; That the Lord will so destroy death, and triumph over it, as that he
will restore those which are dead to life again. So Isaiah 35. v. 4. In the
words which we read there, to wit, Then shall the lame leap as an Heart, and the
tongue of the dumb shall sing; The lame, and the dumb (as the words are taken
in the First, or Literal, or Historical, and Meaner sense) are taken
Metaphorically, for those that are in such extremity of grief, as that they
have no desire either to talk or to walk, but sit as dumb and lame men. But in
the Second, Mystical, and Sublime sense, they are taken properly, for him that
is lame indeed; And him that is dumb indeed, Matthew. 11. verse. 5.

The Fifth and last thing that I desired to betaken notice of was this, That
though in many Histories ^as I may call them) and Prophesies, of those holy
Writers, there be sometimes one, sometimes more sentences, which signify
immediately by their words, not only some passage, or passages, which
appertain to the First, Literal, Historical, or Meaner Sense: But also some
passage, or passages, which appertain to the Second, Mystical, and Sublime
Sense: Yet it is not necessary, neither is it always so, (yea, it is very
seldom so) that every sentence of the whole Prophecy, or History (as I may
call it) does signify immediately by its words, those passage, or passages,
which appertain to the Second, Mystical, or Sublime sense, as they do those
passages which appertain to the First, or Historical, or Meaner Sense. Which
some not observing, where they have assuredly found a sentence belonging to
some passage of the Sublime sense; thinking therefore, that the whole Context
must necessarily thereunto appertain word by word, have attempted to construe
the Context word by word accordingly; and have racked the words, yet have they
not made them speak good sense.

But that it is not necessary, nor is it always true, that where one sentence
is found, appertaining word by word to the Second, Mystical, or Sublime sense;
the sentences adjoining must therefore appertain to the same sense word by
word; is evident by these examples following, for Exodus 12. v. 46. Those words,
Neither shall ye break a bone thereof, appertain in the Second, Mystical, and
Sublime sense, to our Savior Christ, John 19. v. 36. But though that sentence
appertains word by word to our Savior Christ in the Second, Mystical, and
Sublime sense; yet cannot the sentences preceding, or following, be construed
of him word by word, as he which reads them must needs confess. So that
sentence, 2 Samuel 7.14. I will be his Father, and he shall be my Son, is spoke
of our Savior Christ, in the Second, Mystical, and Sublime sense, Heb. 1. v.
5. Yet cannot the words following in that verse be understood of him, to wit,
If he commit iniquity I will chasten him with the rod of men, and with the
stripes of the children of men. So those words, Isaiah 1. v. 9. Except the Lord
of Hosts had left unto us a very small remnant, we should have been as Sodom,
and we should have been like unto Gomorrah, signify in the and Second,
Mystical, and Sublime sense, that many should perish through unbelief, and
that a Remnant only should be saved, according to the election of Grace, Romans
9. v. 29. But the preceding verses of the Context cannot be understood and
construed word by word of the same subject.

Now by what has been spoken, it is easy to conjecture, which of the two
(where there be these two senses) is the Thorow-sense, that is, which of the
two senses, the First, Literal, Historical, or Meaner; or the Second,
Mystical, and Sublime sense, is that, which is continued and carried word by
word through an whole History or Prophecy: (For I cannot persuade my self,
that any holy Writer is herein defective, and that he should neither one way
nor other go through with his sense.)

Certainly it is the First, Literal, Historical, or Meaner sense; and for the
carriage through of this (as being that which must be first known, before we
can rightly know the Second, Mystical, or Sublime sense) I have bent my poor
labors in this work.

But (you will say) to take pains about the First, Literal, Historical, or
Meaner sense, is to favor Judaisme; and to make the heart of the Jew (which is
obstinate enough) yet more obstinate toward the Gospel and Christianity; yea,
it is to weaken the cause of the Christians.

I answer, That to take pains for the finding out of the Literal sense is no
whit to favor Judaisme, but to seek out the Truth; and if the seeking of the
Truth, makes the Jew obstinate toward the Gospel, or toward Christianity, it
does it but occasionally, and the very best things may be an occasion of the
worst of evils.

Where the Jew has good reason to stand for a Literal sense, there to deny
him a Literal sense, may prove a stumbling block in his way: But if we grant
him his Literal sense, we take away the stumbling block; yet we give him no
advantage against the Mystical, which I may call the Gospel or
Christian-sense: For what if we grant him a Literal sense, can he therefore
justly deny a Mystical? Do not many places of the Law and the Prophets carry
a double sense with them? The Jew therefore cannot justly be hardened by this,
neither can this weaken the cause of the Christian, yea, by this the cause of
the Christian is rather strengthened against the Jew, and the Jew has nothing
justly to object against it.

But though I have taken pains about the First, Literally, Historical, or
Meaner sense; I have not neglected the Second, Mystical, or Sublime sense: But
have, as near as I could, cleared all the Texts of this our Prophet, which
either our Savior Christ, or his Apostles made use of, in that sense, in the
New Testament.

And if any Text has been omitted, it may easily be cleared by Observation of
what I have said before, and what I shall now say.

First, Therefore the corporal and earthly Redemptions and deliverances of the
Israelites, and the Prophesies thereof; were Types, and Figures, and Prophesies
of the spiritual and heavenly Redemption which is wrought by Christ.

And by this Rule do the Apostles, for the most part, walk, in applying of the
Testimonies, which they bring out of the Old Testament, to the things of the
New. And hence it is, (because the Inhabitants of Jerusalem were delivered
from the Assyrians for Hezekiah's sake: And because the Jews were delivered
from the Babylonians by Cyrus: And because Isaiah preached and prophesied of
this deliverance;) that Hezekiah, and Cyrus, and Isaiah, were Types and Figures
of Christ, for whose sake, and by whom, Man was redeemed, and who came and
preached himself of this Redemption.

Secondly, The temporal destruction of those Cities, and those Men (were they
Jews or others) which were Enemies, either to God, or to his People, and the
Predictions thereof, were Types, and Figures of the eternal destruction of
Unbelievers, and the Enemies of the Gospel of Christ, and Predictions thereof.

And from these considerations, to wit, that the corporal and earthly
Redemptions and deliverances of the Israelites, were Types and Figures of the
spiritual and heavenly Redemption which is wrought by Christ: And that the
temporal destruction of those Cities, and those Men, which were Enemies to God
and to his People, were Types and Figures of the eternal destruction of
Unbelievers, and the enemies of the Gospel of Christ; From these Considerations
(I say) it seems to be, that our Prophet, prophesying of the temporal
salvation of the Jews, and the temporal destruction of their Enemies, and the
Enemies of God, does often speak of them in such high and hyperbolicall terms,
as though he would not have us to look only on the immediate subjects which he
speaks of, which fall far short of those expressions, which he uses of them
in their proper and natural signification, but to some higher subjects also,
which the words taken in their height would better fit, at least in general.

Thirdly, Because the ten Tribes were rejected of God from being his People;
Hos. 1. v. 6, 9. And God did afterward receive this people again, which he had
rejected (though not to be a People of themselves, yet to live in his favor
(as many of them as believed the Prophets) with the Jews) Hos. 1. v. 10.
Therefore was the reception again of the ten Tribes, whom the Lord had
rejected, a Type of the calling and accepting of the Gentiles under the
Messiah, whom he had neglected and rejected before.

And hence it is, that that which Hosea speaks of the reception again of the
ten Tribes, Hos. 1. v. 10. in these words [ And it shall come to pass, that in
the place where it was said unto them, ye are the sons of the living God: And
again, Hos. 2. v. 23. I will say to them which were not my People, thou art my
People; And they shall say, Thou art my God. St. Paul applies to the calling
and accepting of the Gentiles, as meant of them, in the Second, Mystical, and
Sublime sense, Romans 9. v. 25, 26. Where note, that if any sentence be spoken of
any passage of any thing to come to pass before the days of the Messiah, in
the First, Literal, Historical, or Meaner sense: And of a passage to come to
pass in the days of the Messiah, in the Second, Mystical, and Sublime sense,
the immediate Subject of the whole History, or whole Prophecy, of which that
sentence is a part, is to be deemed (if I be not deceived) as a Type and Figure
of the whole thing which was to come to pass in the days of the Messiah.

Fourthly, Those Jews, which would not give credit to Isaiah and those
Prophets which the Lord sent to them, during the time of the Law, were a Type
and Figure of those Jews, which would not believe the Gospel of Christ in the
days of the Gospel: Hence it is, that that which was said of the one, Isaiah
7. v. 9, 10. is spoken also of the other, Matthew. 13.14. Mark. 4.12. Acts 28.26.
Romans 11.8.

Fifthly, Those Heathen which joined themselves to the Lord, and became
Proselytes under the Law: were a Type of the coming in of the Gentiles to the
Church, and their joining themselves to Christ Jesus under the Gospel.

Sixthly, Those Heathen which believed the Servants of the Lord, and the
Prophesies which they delivered (which the Jews would not believe) were a Type
and Figure, and did fore-signifie, that the Gentiles would receive the Gospel
of Christ, when the Jews refused it.

Hence that which is spoken of the Babylonians and others, Isaiah Cap. 52. v.
15. in the First, is applied to the believing Gentiles under the Gospel in the
Second sense, Romans 15. v. 21. And that which is spoken by way of Prophecy of
one, may be understood of the other also.

Seventhly, The Heathen, doing what the Lord would have them to do, in the
time of the Old Testament, were used oftentimes as Types of the obedience which
the Gentiles would yield to the Gospel of Christ in the days of the New.
Compare Isaiah 65.1. with Romans 10.20.

Thus was the Lord pleased, under the Law (yea, and before the Law too) to
shadow out to us, and as it were rudely to draw the things concerning Christ
Jesus, who was fore-known, or foreordained, before the foundation of the
world; but was manifest in these last times, 1 Pet. 1.20.

Now in this Exposition of ours, I have followed our common, that is to say,
the new Translation, than which generally none is better: But note, that
whereas in many places of the Hebrew Text, the same words carry a double sense,
an Historical and a Mystical, or a Meaner and a Sublime sense; and one
language cannot so happily express a double sense as the other may: Our
English Translation is more for the Mystical and Sublime sense, than for the
Meaner and Historical; which may perhaps make some wonder at the
interpretation of some places, which I have given in pursuance of the Meaner
and Historical sense, until they look back to the Original, which when they
have looked back to, and considered, they will cease to wonder.

And though I follow our English Translation, yet have I interpreted many
Conjunctions and Prepositions, otherwise than they are commonly used with us in
our Native Language; As And for, for moreover, In for, or because of, etc. But
besides that, that the reason of every respective place requires it, know,
that these Conjunctions and Prepositions are there become, not so much English
as Hebrew: For our Translators, rendering the Hebrew by what it most commonly
signifies, leave the English word, as an Hebrew, to signify not only what it
commonly signifies with us, but to signify also as many things as the Hebrew
signifies.

As for example; Because the Hebrew Praefix VAU, signifies commonly And, our
Translators render it And: But because VAU signifies not only And, but
sometimes For, they leave And to signify For too: Yea, they leave it of as a
great latitude as VAU is, and to signify as many things as VAU does.

And our Translators in this are not singular, for the Penmen of the New
Testament do the like; for St. Matthew if at least St. Matthew wrote in Greek)
uses (...) (as the Septuagint do from whom he took it) (which signifies
commonly Beyonds to signify on this side, or nigh to, Matthew. 4.15. And that
Maldon. in Mat. 4 15.
because he makes the Greek (...) of equal latitude with the Hebrew GNEBER,
which signifies as well on this side, or nigh to, as beyond: So does St. Paul
in his Epistles, use the Greek Preposition (...) in more senses than the Greeks
do, he uses it instead almost of all Prepositions, and See Mead in his
Apostasy of the latter times, p. 115.
why is this, but because he makes it equal to the Hebrew Praefix BETH?

And not only Conjunctions and Prepositions of other Languages, are thus made
Hebrews, but other parts of speech also: For the Noune Truth, signifies
Stability, and Setlednesse, Cap. 39.8. and Cap. 95.16. And therefore does it so
signify, because it is Hebrewized, and made there of the same latitude, as the
Hebrew AMEN, which it rendereth, which signifies not only Truth, but
Stability, and Settlednesse also. So the Participle (...), which we render
speaking the truth, Ephesians. 4.15. signifies, being established and fixed, as
appears by those words, Tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind;
to which it is opposed, v. 5. And therefore does it come to signify, being
established and fixed, Beza in Ephesians. 4.15.
because (...) answers to the Hebrew word AMAN, which signifies not only to
speak the truth, but also to be established and fixed, to be firm and constant.

Many words of this nature have the learned observed, and often do they run
thus to the Hebrew for the meaning of a Greek or English word.

But it was not my purpose to dwell upon these things, that I might not be too
tedious: Yet not so to pass them over, but that they which have not been
exercised in such matters, may from hence take notice, and have some knowledge
of them; for whose sake also I have hereunto added an explication of such
Terms of Art, and Rhetorical Tropes, and Figures, as they shall most
frequently meet with in this work: For I have not paralleld the words and
phrases of this our Prophet, as I have took them, with the like words and
phrases of other Scriptures, for that had been extreme difficult, if not
impossible, but instead thereof I have made good the words and phrases, as I
have taken them, by those Rules of Art and Speech, which the Masters thereof
have made and collected from the observation of all Languages, imitating
herein, as many other Expositors, so Piscator chiefly.

Thus much I thought good to premise by way of Preface; And now (Christian
Reader) if these my endeavors shall contribute any thing to the understanding
of the divine Word (which is all the fruit I aim at) I have my desires:
Howsoever I shall make mention of thee in my Prayers, that the God of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Father of glory would give thee the Spirit of wisdom and
understanding in the perfect knowledge of his sacred Oracles, and shall desire
thee to do the like for him, who professes himself,

Thy Servant for Christ's sake. WILLIAM DAY,
Maple-durham January, 22. 1653.
AN EXPLANATION Of those TERMS OF ART, And RHETORICAL TROPES AND FIGVRES
Which most frequently occur in this BOOK.
AN ABSTRACT, AN Abstract is a Noun substantive, signifying a Quality or
Accident, Inherent in a Subject, without connotation or signification of the
Subject in which it does inhere; As Power, Goodness, Excellency, etc.
ANTICIPATIO] Anticipatio is a Figure, whereby we speak of a Thing before we
should speak of it; If we should speak of it in its course and order of Time.

An Example of this you may read, Isa. cap. 7. verse 1. where the Prophet
says, That it came to pass in the days of Ahaz the son of Jotham, the son of
Uzziah king of Judah, that Rezin the King of Syria, and Pekah the son of
Remaliah King of Israel went up toward Jerusalem to war against it, but could
not prevail against it: Which Thing was not done in order of time, before that
which follows next in the Prophets Narration, though the Prophet does record
it before.

(...) or Anthropopathia, (...) or Anthropopathia is a Figure, whereby we speak
of God (who is a pure Spirit) as of a Man, and attribute to him the Parts and
affections or Passions of a Man. As Isai. cap. 1. verse 14. Your new Moons, and
your appointed feasts my soul hates. And verse 15. When ye spread forth your
hands I will hide mine eyes from you. And verse 20. The mouth of the Lord has
spoken it, And cap. 30.27. Behold, the Name of the Lord comes from far,
burning with his anger; -- His lips are full of indignation. And Psalm. 2.4. He
that sits in heaven shall laugh; the Lord shall have them in derision.
Antithesis. Antithesis is a Figure, whereby contraries are opposed to
contraries: As Prove. 11. verse 1. A false Balance is an abomination to the
Lord: but a just weight is his delight. And Isai. 3.24. It shall come to pass
that in stead of sweet Smell, there shall be a ^^ink, and in stead of a Girdle,
a Rent, And in stead of well set Hair, Baldness, etc. Apodosis. Apodosis is
the applying of a Parable or similitude, and the parts thereof to the purpose
for which it was brought. An example whereof you have, Isaiah cap. 5.7. The
vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel, and the men of Judah his
pleasant plant, etc. In which words the Prophet applies the Parable, which he
brought in the beginning of the Chapter, to his present p^rpose. Aposiopesis.
Aposiopesis is a Figure by which a speech begun is broke off, and the latter
part thereof concealed; and yet the part concealed may be understood.

This kind of speech proceeds for the most part from anger.

An Example of this you may have, Isai. cap. 9. verse 9, 10. And all the people
shall know, even Ephraim and the inhabitants of Samaria, that say in the pride
and stoutness of heart, The bricks are fallen down: but we will build with
hewn stones: the Sicomors are cut down, but we will change them into Cedars.
For this speech is pronounced with anger, and is abrupt and broke off, and has
its latter part concealed; but we may understand what it is which is concealed,
to wit, This, that they shall be thoroughly plagued.

Apostrophe. Apostrophe is a Figure, whereby we do all on a sudden turn our
speech from one person to another.

An Example hereof we have, Isai. cap. 9. verse 3. Thou have multiplied the
Nation and not increased the joy. They joy before thee, according to the joy in
harvest, etc. where the first speech is spoken to Senacherib King of Assyria:
The second is spoken to the Lord, yea, if we direct our speech to one, though
we spoke not before to another, This is called an Apostrophe also, though
improperly.

Appositio. Appositio is a Grammatical Figure, whereby two Substantives of the
same case are joined together, and the latter depends in construction upon the
former, without the intervening of a conjunction.

An Example hereof we have, Isai. cap. 1.4. Ah sinful nation, a people laden
with iniquity, a seed of evil doers, children that are corrupters.

Concessio (...). Concessio ( I speak of that which Rhetoricians call Concessio
Ironica) is a Figure whereby we give leave to one to do what he has a mind
and intent to do, but intimating, that he shall get no good by his doings, but
bring upon himself a certain evil.

An Example hereof we have, Isa. cap. 8. verse 9, 10. Associate your selves, O
ye people, and ye shall be broken in pieces: and give ear all ye of far
countries; gird your selves and ye shall be broken in pieces, gird your selves
and ye shall be broken to pieces: take counsel together, and it shall come to
naught: speak the word, and it shall not stand.

A Concrete. A Concrete is a Noun Adjective which signifies a Quality or
Accident inherent in a subject, and connoteth or signifies withal, the
subject in which it is inherent, as Powerful, Good, Excellent. Ellipsis (...).
Ellipsis is a Figure, by which a speech is l^ft defective f^r the Auditor or
Reader to supply, or make up.

An Example of this we have, Isai cap. 7. verse, 8, 9. The head of Syria is
Damascus, and the head of Damascus is Rezin; and within threescore and five
years shall Ephraim be broken that it be not a people: and the head of Ephraim
is Samaria, and the head of Samaria is Remaliah's son. The supplements whereof
you shall find on the Notes or Exposition of that place.

Emphasis. Emphasis is a Grammatical Figure, by which some power, which is
hidden in a word, is drawn out thereof as it were into open View.

An Example of this we have, Isai. cap. 10. verse. 13. By the strength of my
hand have I done it, and by my wisdom, for I am prudent: And I have removed
the bounds of the people, and have robbed their treasures, and I have put down
the Inhabitants like a valiant man, and my hand has found as a nest the riches
of the people, etc. Where those Pronounces, I and My cover and contain (in
Sennacheribs intent, in whose person the words are spoken) Power and Wisdom,
which will be showen, and as it were drawn out of those words in to open view,
by a lively pronunciation thereof.

Enallage. Enallage is Twofold, of the Number, and of the Person.

Enallage of the Number is when we change either the Singular into the Plural,
or Plural into the Singular Number, while we speak of the same Thing or Things.

An Example hereof we have, cap. 3, 10. Say ye to the righteous that it shall
be well with him: For they shall eat the fruit of their doing: where the word
Righteous is of the Singular, They of the Plural number; Yea when one number
is any way put for another, we say, It is by an Enallage.

Enallage of the Person is, when we change the First into the Second or Third,
of the Second into the First or Third, or the Third into the First or Second
Person, while we speak of, and mean the same Man.

An Example of this we have, cap. 1. verse. 29. They shall be ashamed of the
oaks which ye have desired. Where They the Third, and ye the Second Person is
spoken of the same M^n.

(...). (...) is a Figure whereby one Thing is signified by two several words
Substantives;

As by A cloud and smoke, is signified a smoakie cloud, Isa. cap. 4.5. And
neither the Heat nor Sun is put for Neither the Heat of the Sun. cap. 49.10.
And Peace and Truth is put for True or stable Peace, cap. 39.8.

Exegesis Exegesis is a Figure whereby a Latter sentence is put to expound a
Former: or Latte words the Former.

An Example of this we have Isaiah cap. 22. verse. 22. where those words, I will
cloth him with thy Robe, and strengthen him with thy girdle, are expounded by
those which immediately follow after, namely by those, I will commit thy
government into his hand.

Hypallage. Hypallage is a Figure, by which the order of things is inverted.

An Example of this we have, Isaiah cap. 1. verse. 3. The ass knows his
masters cribb: where his masters cribb, r the cribb of his Master, is put for
the Master of his Cribb. And cap. 25.7. where The face of the covering is put
for The covering of the face. And cap. 58. verse 5. where A day for a man to
a^flict his soul, is put for For a man to afflict his soul for a Day.

Hyperbaton, Trajectio, Transpositio. Hyperbaton, Trajectio, or Transpositio is
a Figure, whereby words are transposed from the plain Grammatical Order.

An Example hereof we have, Isaiah 28.1. Woe to the crown of pride, to the
drunkards of ^phra m, whose glorious beauty is a f^ding flower, which are on
the head of the fat valleys, etc. The Order of which words should be this: Woe
to the crown of Pride, whose glorious be^uty is a fading flower; to the
Drunkards of Ephraim, which are on the head of the fat valleys, etc.

Hyperbole. Hyperbole is a Figure by which we speak of a thing above the truth
thereof.

An Example of this we have, Isaiah cap. 34.3. The Mountains shall be melted
with their blood, and all the host of heaven shall be dissolved, and the
heavens shall be rolled together as a scroul, and all their host shall fall
down as the leaf falls off from the vine. And verse 9. The streams thereof
shall be turned into pitch, and the dust thereof into brimstone, and the land
thereof shall become burning pitch: it shall not be quenched night nor day, the
smoke thereof shall go up for ever.

Ironie. An Ironie is a Figure, whereby we speak contrary to what we mean,
thereby to mock him to whom or of whom we speak.

An Example of this we have, Isaiah cap. 10, verse 12. where the Lord says he
would punish the glory of the high looks of the Kings of Assyria. And cap. 19.
verse 11. where the Prophet says, The counsel of the wise counselors of
Pharaoh is become brutish. And again, verse 12. Where are they, where are thy
wisemen? In which place the Lord did not think that there was any great Glory
in the high looks of the King of Assyria: or his Prophet that there was any
great Wisdom in Pharaohs counselors. But what they said, they said one to mock
Senacherib, the other to mock Pharaohs counselors.

Catachresis, (...). Catachresis, or (...) is a Figure whereby a word is abused
for lack of the proper word.

An Example of this we have cap. 24 30. where the Prophet calls the people of
the Jews, that were in the very lowest and poorest con^ition. The firstborn
of the poor, where there is a great ab^se of that word, The firstborn. See
Notes on that place.

(...). That thing is said to be (...), which is not absolutely so as it is
said to be, but only in some regard.

An Example we have of this, Isaiah cap. 20. verse. 3 where Isaiah is said to
have walked naked, which is to be understood not absolutely, as though Isaiah
had no clothes on, but (...), that is, in some regard, to wit, Because he
walked without his sackcloath, that is without his upp^r Garment. Verse 2.

(...) or (...). (...), or (...) is a Figure, whereby a virtuous and good man
does out of Modesty, make himself partaker of other men's vices, and other men
partakers of his virtues.

An Example of this we have Isaiah cap. 53.3, 4. where the good and godly man
telling what was done by the wicked, speak thus: We hid as it were our faces
from him, he was despised and we esteemed him not: surely he has born our
griefs, and carried our sorrows, yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of
God and afflicted, etc. When the good and godly men ma^e themselves of the
number of the wicked, and partakers of their wickedness; for this is spoken by
them, or in their person. And themselves partakers of the wickedness of the
wicked: so do they here make the wicked partakers also of their vertu^s, in
that they make this godly confession in their name also, when they say, we h^d
as it were our faces from him, etc.

(...). (...) is a figure, by which we speak of greater things in lessening
words, or in words which lessen the matter.

An example of this we have Isa. cap. 9.17. Therefore the Lord shall have no
joy in their young (...). By which is me^nt that the Lord would grievously
afflict t^em, and destroy them alm^st (...) d^struction. And cap. 17.13. The
Lord shall rebuke them, When the Lord did not only rebuke them, which is
nothing else but a chi^ing of words, but did smite them too, ti^^ he had
destroyed them.

(...), This is the same figure with (...). Metaphora. Metaphora or A Metaphor
i^ a figure, whereby we translate and take a word, which properly signifies
one thing, to signify another, and that by reason of some similitude or
likeness, which is between those things.

An example of this we have Isaiah 9.12. The Syrians before, and the
Philistines behind shall devour Israel with open mouth: where to devour with
open mouth, which is properly spoken of Lions and Bears, and Wolves, and such
like ravenous beasts, is translated to the Syrians and Philistines, because
they should destroy Israel, as th^se ravenous beasts use to destroy the flock
and the heard, while they devour them.

Metonymia. Metonymia or A Metonymie is manifold, the species or kinds thereof
follow. Metonymia Actus. Metonymia Actus is a figure whereby the Act is put for
the Object.

An example of this we have Isaiah cap. 21.2. A grievous Vision is declared to
Me. Where Vision, which signifies the Act of seeing, is put for the Object or
thing seen.

Metonymia Adjuncti. Metonymia Adjuncti is a figure whereby the Adjunct or
Accident is put for the Subject, to which the Adjunct is adjoined, or for which
the Accident is inherent.

An example of this we have Isaiah 4.5. Upon all the Glory shall be a Defense,
where Glory is put for the Glorious ones.

Metonymia Causae. Metonymia Causae is a figure, whereby the Cause is put for
the Effect, or thing caused.

An example whereof we have Isaiah 1.3. But Israel does not know, where Israel
the Father is put for the Jews the children of Israel. And cap. 5.18. Woe to
them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, where inquity is put for
calamities and plagues, which iniquity procures, and brings upon a man.

To this Metonymie may we reduce the Metonymie called Metonymia Antecedentis.

Metonymia Continentis. Metonymia Continentis is a figure, whereby the thing
containing is put for the thing contained.

An example of this we have Isaiah cap. 23.1. Houle ye Ships of Tarshish, where
the Ships are put for them which are or fail in Ships. And cap. 51.17. Which
have drunken at the hand of the Lord the Cup of his Fury. Where the Cup is put
for the drink or liquor in the Cup.

Metonymia Efficientis for Metonymia Causae.

Metonymia Effecti. Metonymia Effecti is a figure, whereby the effect is put
for its Cause.

An example of this you may have Isaiah 5.7. He looked for righteousness, but
behold a cry Where the Cry is put for Oppressions which causes the poor to
Cry. And cap. 24.16, My leanness, My leanness, Where leanness is put for sorrow
and grief of Heart, which causes l^^nness in the body.

To this Metonymie may be reduced the Metonymie called Metonymia Consequentis.

Metonymia Materiae. Metonymia Materiae is a figure, whereby the matter of
which a thing is made, is put for the thing it self which is made of that
matter.

An example hereof we have Isaiah cap 9.10. The Bricks are fallen down, Where
Bricks are put for housen made of Bricks. And cap. 61.9. Their seed shall be
known among the Gentiles. Where seed is put for children, because children are
made of the seed of their Parents. And cap. 10.34. He shall cut down the
Thickets of the Forest with Iron. Where Iron is put for an Axe made of Iron.

Metonymia Subjecti. Metonymia Subjecti is a figure whereby the subject is put
for the Adjunct or Accident, which it does any way sustain.

An example of this you have Isaiah 7.20. The Lord shall shave with a Rasor the
Head and the Hair of the Feet. Where the Head is put for the hair of the Head.
And Philip. 2.1. If there be any consolation in Christ, If any bowels and
mercies, where bowels is put for pity and compassion. And Isaiah 19.1. The
heart of Egypt shall melt, that is, the courage of the Egyptians shall fail,
where there is a double Metonymie of the Subject. For first, the Heart is put
for the Courage, And then Egypt is put for the Egyptians or Inhabitants of
Egypt.

Where note, that when we speak De Metonymia Subjecti, or of the Metonymie of
the Subject. The word Subject is to be taken in a larger sense than the
Logicians take it. For the Earth may be called a subject in respect of the men
that live upon it: And so may the thing containing in respect of the thing
contained. And Metonymia Continentis may be reduced to this Metonymie of the
Subject.

(...). (...) is a figure whereby we imitate another man's words or gestures.

An example hereof we have Isaiah cap. 10. Ver. 13. Thou have said in thine
heart, I will ascend into Heaven, I will exalt my Throne above the Stars of
God, I will also sit upon the Mount of the Congregation, In which words the
Lord does imitate the speech of Sennacharib. And cap. 19.11. How say you unto
Pharaoh, I am the son of the wise? The son of ancient King. Where the Prophet
imitates the words of the Counselors of the King of Egypt.

Parenthesis. Parenthesis is a figure, whereby a clause is comprehended within
another sentence, which clause may be left out, and yet the sense of the
sentence be complete without it.

An example of this we have Isaiah cap. 16.6. We have heard of the pride of
Moab (He is very proud) even of his haughtiness, and his pride, and his wrath.
where that clause, He is very proud, is comprehended within that sentence, we
have heard of the Pride of Moab, even of his haughtiness, and his pride, and
his wrath; and yet the sense of the sentence is perfect without it.

Periphrasis. Periphrasis is a figure whereby we express one word by many.

An example of this we have Isaiah cap. 5.8. That they may be placed alone in
the midst of the Earth, where in the midst of the Earth, is no more than in the
Earth. And cap. 3.27. Behold the Name of the Lord comes, where the name of
the Lord is put for the Lord.

Prosopopoeia. Prosopopoeia (as Divines most commonly use it) is a figure
whereby we attri^ute reason, and understanding to things which have neither
reason nor understanding, as though they were persons, that is, individual
substances endued with reason or understanding.

An example hereof we have Isaiah cap. 1. Verse 2. Hearken O Heavens, and give
Ear O Earth. etc. Where he speaks to the Heavens and to the Earth, as though
they were persons endued with reason and understanding. And cap. 3.26 Her gates
shall lament and mourn, and she being desolate shall sit upon the ground. Where
the material City of Jerusalem and her gates are spoken of, as if they were
women.

A Sarcasme. Sarcasme is a nipping kind of taunting and scoffing.

An example hereof you have Isaiah cap. 14.10. Art thou also become weak as
we? Art thou become like unto us?

Secundum quid. See (...). See Concessio. Syllepsis. Syllepsis is a figure
whereby we comprehend in a word or sentence more than the word or sentence does
properly or naturally signify.

An example of this we have Isaiah cap. 26. verse 7. Thou most upright do
weigh the path of the just. Where by weighing is not only meant trying in the
balance, but finding also to be good upon trial. And cap 3.6- When a man shall
take hold of his Brother of the house of his Father, saying, thou have
clothing, be thou our Ruler. Where this sentence is comprehended. Then shall a
man take hold of his Brother of the house of his Father, saying, Thou have
clothing, be thou our Ruler. q. d. Then sh^^ a man take hold of his Brother of
the house of his Father, saying, Thou have clothing, be thou our Ruler: But
when A man shall take hold of his Brother, etc.

Synecdoche. Synecdoche is of diverse sorts, as may ap^ear by what follows,
Synecdoche Generis is a figure whereby the Genus is put for the Species.

An example of this we may have Mark 16.15. Preach the Gospel to every
Creature. Where the Creature in general is put for Man in special. And Isaiah
66. verse 23. All flesh shall come to worship before me. Where all Flesh is put
for all Men.

Senecdoche Speciei is a figure, whereby the Species is put for the Genus.

An example of this we have Isaiah 2.4. Nation shall not lift up sword against
Nation. Where by the sword is meant any weapon.

Synecdoche Integri is a figure, whereby the whole is put for a member or for a
part of the whole.

An example hereof you may have Isaiah 5.14. Hell has enlarged her self, Where
he says, Hell has enlarged her self, for Hell has enlarged her Paunch. For
he speaks of Hell as of a devouring beast. And cap. 13.11. I will punish the
world for their evil, Where by the world is meant the Babylonians, which were
but part of the world. And cap. 57.8. Thou have discovered thy self to another
than me, Where he says thy self for thy nakedness, or thy secret parts,

Synecdoche Partis or Membri is a figure, whereby a member or part of a thing
is put f^^ the whole.

An example of this we have Isaiah cap. 1, 26. The mouth of the Lord has
spoken it. That is, The Lord has spoken it. And cap. 3. verse 9. Woe unto
their soul. That is, we unto them. And cap. 13.18. Their eye shall not spare
children. That is, they shall not spare children.

Trajectio See Hyperbaton. Transpositio See Hyperbaton. (...). (...) is when
that sentence which should be last of the two, is put-first.

An example of this we have Isaiah cap. 50. verse 2. Their Fish stinketh
because there is no water, and dies with thirst, where he says Their Fish
stinketh, before he says It dies, whereas it stunk not, before it was dead.


To these take (good Reader) the meaning of these words and Characters
following.
Supple. Supple signifies as much as Add. And I use this word often when I add
somewhat to the words of the Text by way of exposition, to make the sense
thereof the plainer. As cap. 1. verse 3. But Israel does not know, supple his
Lord and Master. And cap. 6. verse 1. And his train filled the Temple, supple
in which he saw the Throne erected. E. G. E. G. is the abbreviation of Exempli
Gratia, and signifies for examples sake, or as for example. I. E. I. E. is the
abbreviation of Id est, and signifies that is, or that is to say. Q. D. Q. D.
is the abbreviation of Quasi diceres, or Quasi diceret. And signifies as if
thou should say, or as if he should say. Scil. Scil. is the abbreviation of
Scilicet which signifies to wit.

V. G. V.G. is the abbreviation of Verbi Gratia, and signifies for example
sake, or as for example. Viz. Viz. is the abbreviation of Videlicet, and
signifies, to wit.
AN EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK of the PROPHET ISAIAH.
ISAIAH CHAP. I.
THE Vision of Isaiah.] The word Vision is taken here for the Object or thing
seen, by a Metonymie. And so it is most frequently taken in Scripture; So that
if you ask what a Vision is, (in the most frequent usage of the Scripture) It
is certain Images or Idaeas represented by God to the Phancies or
Understandings of men in a trance, the meaning whereof, the Lord does make
known to them, that they might make it known to others.

Between a Vision and a Dream (I mean a Dream sent of God) there is little or
no difference but only in this, that a dream is sent to a man while he is in a
sleep, as Genesis 37. Verse. 5, 6. But a Vision while he is awake, as Numb. 24.
Verse. 15, 16.

Note that a Vision in the Singular number is put here for Visions in the
Plural number: For it is not one Vision only which is here spoken of, but many.

Note also, that because God did not reveal his will to his Prophets by Visions
only, but also by other means: Hence may a Vision, be put to signify that
which was revealed, as well by other means, as by Visions, by a Synecdoche.

ISAIAH the Son of AMOS.] This Amos, which was the Father of Isaiah, was not
that Amos, which is reckoned among the lesser Prophets: But one Amos, which (as
the Hebrews say) was the Brother of Amasiah King of Judah; so that Isaiah was
of the Tribe of Judah, and of the blood Royal.

Which he saw.] What he here saw, he saw not with the eyes of his body, but of
his soul, Viz. his fancy, or understanding. And from this kind of seeing, was
a Prophet of old called a Seer, 1 Samuel 9. Verse. 9.

Concerning Judah] By Judah is here meant the Tribe or Children of Judah,
(which Judah was one of the Sons of Jacob, Genesis 49.8.) And that per Metonymiam
efficientis. And per Synecdochen membri. Not only the Tribe of Judah, but the
Tribe of Benjamin also.

For when the ten Tribes of Israel revolted from the house of David their King,
the Tribe of Judah and the Tribe of Benjamin stuck to it, and became one people
and one Kingdom, which from the noblest Tribe, and the Tribe of the King, was
called the Kingdom of Judah.

And Jerusalem.] i. e. And the Men or Inhabitants of Jerusalem.

Jerusalem was the chief City and Metropolis of the Kingdom of Judah, in
which was seated the Temple of God, and the Palace of the Kings of Judah.

In the days of Vzziah.] This Vzziah is called Azariah, 2 Kings 15.1.

This first verse is as the Title of the whole book: And though Isaiah
prophesies in this book of matters concerning the Assyrians and the
Babylonians, and the Egyptians, and others: Yet being that his Prophesies are
for the greatest part, concerning Judah and Jerusalem; this book may have its
Title from the greatest part of the Contents thereof. And yet that which Isaiah
prophesied concerning the Assyrians and the Babylonians, and others, did some
way or other concern Judah and Jerusalem, So that this whole book may be well
styled, The Vision of Isaiah the Son of Amos, concerning Judah and Jerusalem.

2.
Hear O heavens, and give ear O earth.] He speaks to the Heavens and to the
earth, which are insensible creatures, as though they had sense and
understanding, by a Prosopopoeia.

The Lord] i. e. God, whom He calls the Lord, because he is the Lord of all
things in general by right of Creation, for He created all things, Exodus 20.
verse 11. And the Lord of the Jews and Hebrews in special by right of
Redemption, for he redeemed them out of Egypt, to be his peculiar people, Exodus
20. ver. 2.

Has spoken.] Supple, saying.

I have nourished and brought up children.] By these children He means the
Jews, That is, the men of Judah and Benjamin, which made one people, which
were called the Jews, who with other the sons of Israel, were Children of
the Lord their God, Deuteronomy. 14. verse. 1

These children of his did God nourish, while they were in Egypt, by Joseph. in
the Land of Goshen: And when they came out of Egypt, He fed them with Manna in
the Wilderness: And after that, with Milk and Honey in the Land of Canaan:
Yea, at all times He provided for them all things necessary, as a careful
Father does for his children.

And they have rebelled against me] i. e. And yet for all that, they have
rebelled against me.

They are said to rebel against God which refuse to obey his comm^ndements
(see ver. 19, 20.) especially if they follow after strange Gods

3.
The Ox knows his Owner.] q. d. The Ox though he be a brute beast, yet he
knows his owner, that is obeys him, when he would have him serve in the
Plow, or in the cart, or in treading out his corn

And the Ass his Masters cribb.] q. d. And the Ass, though he be a stupid
creature, yet he knows the Master of his Cribb, that is, is ready to serve
him, and to take his burden upon him at any time.

Note that these words, his Masters cribb, are put here by an Hypallage for the
Master of his Cribb: that is, his Master which feeds him, and finds him
with meat and provender in his Cribb.

Israel.] That is, the Jews, which were the children of Jacob, who was also
called Israel, because of the power which He had with God, Genesis 32. verse. 28.

The father, to wit Israel, is put here for the children, to wit the Jews, per
Metonymiam Efficientis.

Note, that though this name Israel (when it is put for the children of Israel)
since the days of Rehoboam, is most commonly put for the ten Tribes, as when
we say, such or such a one was King of Israel: Because the ten Tribes were the
greatest part of the children of Israel, in that division, which was made under
Rehoboam: ^et this name Israel is put here for the two Tribes, to wit, the
Tribes of Judah and Benjamin, which stuck close to the house of David in that
division. And the Prophet calls them here by the name of Israel, the more to
shame them, that being descended from Holy Israel, they did not imitate the
works of their father Israel.

Does not know.] Supple, his Lord and Master, that is, do not obey Him.

Note, that the word know, is often taken as well practically as speculatively:
And signifies as well action and obedience, as speculation and mere knowledge:
And that per Metonymiam antecedentis, because knowledge must go before
obedience, for how can we obey him whose will we know not?

My people.] Supple, the Jews,

Does not consider.] Suppl^, who has nourished and brought them up, so as to
serve and obey Him.

4.
Ah sinful Nation.] This Particle, Ah, signifies a detestation, and
indignation, together with an admiration of a thing; So that the Prophet does
in these words show his detestation of, and indignation toward the Jews, by
reason of their sin, admiring that they could thus sin against God, who had so
nourished them and brought them up.

A people laden with iniquity.] He compares iniquity and sin to a weight (as
the Apostle also does Hebr. 12.1.) with which he says this people is heavy
laden, intimating thereby the great number and heinousness of their sins.

These words are governed of the former by Apposition.

A seed of evil doers.] By Seed are meant children, per Metonymiam materiae:
because children are born of the Seed of their Parents. And it is used
sometimes absolutely for men; and sometimes relatively for Sons and Daughters,
in relation to their Fathers or Mothers.

Some take this word, Seed, here absolutely for men, and those words of evil
doers, instead of an Epithete, signifying as much as wicked, or evil working,
for the Hebrews often put a Substantive of the Genitive case, for an Adjective,
q. d. wicked and evil working men.

Others take this word Seed here, relatively, for children, in relation to
their Parents: and those words, of evil doers, they understand of the Parents
of these children, q. d. Children of wicked Parents, as though the Prophet
intended to brand them not only with their own sin, but with the sins of their
Parents and Forefathers also, whom they did imitate.

Children that are corrupters.] Supple, Of themselves by their own sins, and of
others by their evil company, counsel, and example.

They have forsaken the Lord] They are said to forfake the Lord, which depart
from his ways, and keep not his Commandments. Psalm. 18.21. That is, which
forsake the service of the Lord.

Note that here is an Enallage of the person, for the Prophet passes from the
second to the third person (though he speaks of the same men) a figure which
he uses often.

They have provoked the Holy one of Israel to anger.] Supple, by their sins;
q. d. they have made God to be angry with them by reason of their sins, and
in his anger to punish them.

The Holy one.] i e. God.

Note that Holiness signifies the separation of a thing from all things else,
by way of excellency. And therefore God is called the Holy One, because he is a
Majesty of Peerless Power, and Peerless Wisdom, and Peerless Goodness,
and because he is Peerless in all other his Attributes, being separated from
all other things, and above them all, in a most eminent manner.

The Holy one of Israel.] i. e. The God of Israel.

When God is called either the God, or the Holy one of Israel, we may take
Israel, for Jacob the son of Isaac, as he is taken Genesis 28. verse. 21. And God
may be said to be the God of Israel, that is, that God of Jacob; because God
promised to be with Jacob, and to keep him, and to be his God, Genesis 28.15. And
because Jacob again made choice of the Lord for his God, Genesis 28.21.

Or we may take Israel for the children of Israel, as it is taken verse. 3. And
God may be said to be the God of the children of Israel, because he redeemed
them out of Egypt, Exodus 20. ver. 2. And took them to be a peculiar people, and
treasure to himself, Deuteronomy. 14.2. And because God showed them his statutes and
his judgments, and so dealt with them, as that he did not do the like to any
nation, Ps. 147. Verse. 19.20. And because they promised to obey him and serve
him, and him only, Exodus 20 Verse. 19. Deuteronomy. 5. Verse. 27. Gal. 5. Verse. 3.

They are gone away backward.] i. e. They are gone back, and cease to follow
him. That is, they have forsaken him: For these three last phrases signify one
and the same thing.

5.
Why should ye be stricken any more?] q. d. Why should I smite you any more, or
send any more plagues among you?

The end why God smites and plagueth his people, is, that they should amend
their lives: As a Father strikes or whippeth his Son, that he should amend his
faults. Now because God had oftentimes smitten and plagued his people, and they
were never the better for it, and it might be feared that they would be never
the better for it, if he should afflict and plague them again; Therefore he
says here, Why should ye be stricken any more?

Y^ will revolt more and more] q. d. if I should strike you, i. e. if I should
plague you, or punish you, you would not be any whit the better for it, yea, ye
would grow worse and worse.

They are said to revolt from God, who forsake his commandments, and will not
obey him.

That which the Prophet here speaks of, was fulfilled in Ahaz: for it is said
of Ahaz, that in his distress he did yet trespass more and more against the
Lord. 2 Chronicles. 28.22.

The whole head is sick, and the whole heart is faint] He proves here, that
though the men of Judah should be smitten, yet, they would revolt more and
more: And he proves it from former experience: for experience showed that
though God had smitten them, that they should amend, yet for all that, they
were not the better for it. And where men grow not the better, they grow worse
and worse.

The Prophet compares the people of Judah here to the body of a man, and the
calamities and plagues, which God had laid upon them, to wounds, and bruises,
and putrefying sores, and other sicknesses.

By the head of this body, are meant the King, and Princes, and Judges, and
other the Rulers of the Commonwealth: and by the heart, he means, the
Priests and Levites.

6.
From the soal of the foot even to the head.] Here he includes all the members
of the natural body, and by them he understands all the members of the body
Politic. q. d. There is none from the highest to the lowest, in all the
Kingdom or Commonwealth of Judah, which has not been smitten by the hand of
God.

There is no soundness.] The soundness here spoken of, is opposed to the
wounds, bruises, and putrefying sores, spoken of in the next words.

In it] That is, In the body.

Note that this Relative, It, is put here without an Antecedent. And indeed it
is usual with the Hebrews to put a Relative without an Antecedent, and to
leave the Antecedent to be gathered by the Circumstances of the place.

But wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores] These are opposed to the
soundness spoken of just before: And by these are meant all the calamities and
plagues, which had been of late inflicted upon the Jews.

They have not been closed] These words relate especially to the wounds before
spoken of: and by closing here, is meant the ^queezing of the lips of the
wounds together, that the crude and raw blood, which is in them, might be got
out, that they might heal the better.

Note that this praepositive Pronoune They, is put for the Subjunctive Which.
q. d. Which have not been closed.

Neither bound up.] Supple, with swathes and clothes, as wounds, and bruises,
and sores use to be bound up by Chyrurgians, to keep them from the air, and to
keep them warm.

Neither mollified with ointment.] Neither suppled with ointment.

Wounds and sores cause a hardness or stiffness in the adjacent parts through
the afflux of humors, which hardness or stiffness is mollified and supled
with fit ointment.

Note that the Prophet is not curious in observing the method of Chyrurgians in
this place: For the binding up of wounds or sores, is the last thing which the
Chyrurgians do, though here it be put before mollifying them with ointment.

Those wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores, which have not been closed
nor bound up, nor mollyfied with ointment, must needs be grievous. And by these
is meant, that the plagues and miseries, which the Lord had brought upon the
Jews, were still grievous, and lay heavy upon them, even at this time when he
spoke.

Note that the Prophet leaves somewhat here to be understood, to complete the
sense: And it is this. Viz And yet ye are never the better, but rather worse
and worse, and revolt more and more.

7.
Your Country is desolate.] Understand here, yet nevertheless, q d. But though
ye will revolt more and more if ye be stricken, and are never awhit the better
for all the calamities which have been brought upon you, yet neverthel^ss ye
shall undergo more calamities, and ye shall be stricken again; for your
Country shall be desolate.

A Country is said to be desolate, when it is spoiled of its Inhabitants which
should manure it: And when the Cities and dweling places thereof are ruined,
and the Vineyards and Gardens cut down and laid waste.

Note that the Prophet uses a present tense in this place for the future: And
so do Prophets use to do often, to signify thereby, that that, which they
speak of, shall as certainly come to pass, as if it were already come.

The desolation and misery here prophesied of, was that which the King of Syria
and Israel brought upon the land of Judah, 2 Chronicles. 28. Verse 5. etc.

A Question might here be asked; why God said, Why should ye be stricken any
more? ye will revolt more and more: And yet for all that did strike them again.

Answer. When God tells them here that they w^ll revolt more and more if they
be stricken, he does it for this end, that they might not revolt: And herein he
imitates a careful Father, which asks an untowardly son, why he should
scourge him, and tells him he will be never the better for scourging: And this
he does that his son may be the better; for he scourges him for all that, that
he may reclaim him.

Secondly. Though God does see the means, which he uses, will do but little
good, yet nevertheless he will use them, that it may appear, that not He, but
man is the cause of his own perdition.

Thirdly, Though the greatest part were like to revolt more and more upon the
Lords striking them again; yet it was likely that some few of the best of them
would return and repent, and for these few sakes, the Lord might strike them.

Your Cities are burnt with fire] Here he puts again a Present, or a
Praeterperfect tense for a Future, and so he does throughout this and the next
Verse.

Your land strangers devour it.] q. d. Your land and whatsoever is therein,
strangers shall devour.

Note that the Relative Pronoune It, is often redundant, as it is here in this
place.

In your presence.] i. e. before your face, which will cause the greater grief.

And it is desolate, as overthrown by strangers.] That desolation is the
greatest, which is made by strangers: For strangers do more waste a Country by
wars, than inhabitants of the Country do: For strangers have not that love of
a Country, which the natives and inhabitants thereof have; neither do they hope
for that good from it in times to come, as the inhabitants do; therefore they
spoil it, and devour it, so that they may either enrich themselves for the
present, or hurt their enemies for the future.

8.
And the daughter of Sion.] Sion was a famous hill within the walls of
Jerusalem, upon which the Palace of the Kings of Judah was built, and that
which was called, the City of David. 2 Samuel Chap. 5. Verse. 7. But by a
Synechdoche it is here taken for Jerusalem it self.

By the daughter of Sion, or the daughter of Jerusalem, is meant the City of
Sion, or the City of Jerusalem, as we say the City of London: For the Hebrews
do usually speak of a City, as of a woman, by a Metaphor, or Prosopopeia: and
because among the sex of women, the Daughters, that is, the young Maids and
Virgins are commonly the fairest: therefore they do call a City sometimes a
Daughter, sometimes a Virgin, sometimes both, because whatsoever beauty or
elegancy is to be found in a Land, it is to be found in the City thereof.

Is left as a Cottage in a Vineyard.] i. e. Shall be left alone as a Lodge in a
Vineyard, which stands alone, no houses being near it, and to which there is
no traveling of people too and fro.

This was either because the Towns and Villages about Jerusalem were
destroyed, and so Jerusalem, stood as it were alone. Or, because the people,
which dwelt about Jerusalem in the land of Judah, were destroyed by the sword,
or carried away captive, or ran away to save their lives, so that there was no
traveling to Jerusalem as there had been: Neither did they, which dwelt in
Jerusalem, dare to come far out of their gates, for fear of their enemies.

There was wont to be in great Vineyards a little Cottage or Lodge built,
wherein he, which watched and kept the Vineyard, did lie.

And a Lodge in a garden of Cucumbers.] This is for sense the same with the
former words, and what he calls a Cottage there, he calls a Lodg^ here.

By Cucumbers understand Melons also, and such like cool fruit, whereof there
were many gardens in Judaea, as also there were in many other such hot Regions.

As a beseiged City.] The similitude consists in this, that as when a City is
beseiged, there is no concourse and conflux of people to it, as was wont to be,
the beseigers hindering all commerce with that City, during the siege: So there
should be no conflux and concourse to Jerusalem, no going in and out at the
gates thereof, as was wont, and that for the reason before given.

9.
Except the Lord of Hosts had left us a very small remnant] q. d. We shall be
left a very small remnant, and except the Lord (who is Lord of Hosts, and able
to stop the fury of our enemies) shall leave us this very small remnant, we
shall be utterly destroyed.

He puts a Praeterpluperfect tense here, for a Future, to show the certain
event of what he speaks of.

The remnant, which the Prophet speaks of, were those of Jerusalem, and others
of Judah, which had fled to Jerusalem for safety, and were safe there. For
though Rhezin King of Syria, and Pekah King of Israel beseiged Jerusalem, yet
they could not prevail against it. 2 King. 16. ver. 5. And these were a small
remnant in respect of all the Kingdom of Judah besides, which were either
destroyed, or carried away captive. 2 Chronicles. 28. Verse. 8, 9, 10.

The Lord is called the Lord of hosts, because the Angels and all other
creatures obey God at his beck, and are more at his command to fight against
his enemies, than any Army of men are at the command of their General. Yea,
there is no Host or Army of men, which the Lord is not Master of.

Note that the Prophet says not except our enemies, but, except the Lord of
Hosts had left us a very small remnant, etc. and that because of the Providence
of God, which rules over all, and puts bounds to the destroyer how far he
shall destroy.

We should have been as Sodom, and we should have been like unto Gomorrah] i.
e. We should have been utterly destroyed, as Sodom and Gomorrah were, Genesis 19.

Note that the similitude or likeness here spoken of consists only in the
likeness of the utter destruction, not in the likeness of the manner, by which
the destruction was wrought,

The Holy Ghost has so ordered the words of the Prophet here, as that by them
he does not only signify what a destruction should be made of the Jews by
the swords of Rezin and Pekah: but also (in a more sublime sense) how many
should perish through unbelief in the days of the Gospel.

For the temporal destruction of the Jews by the swords of their enemies, was
a Type of their spiritual destruction through unbelief in the time of the
Gospel.

Hence the Holy Ghost, when he speaks of their temporal destruction by the
sword, does oftentimes in some one passage or other so order the Prophets
words, as that they signify in a literal sense, not only what shall be done
in the Type, but also what shall be done in the Antitype.

10.
Hear the words of the Lord ye Rulers of Sodom.] Because the Prophet told these
men against whom he prophesied, that they had revolted from God, and forsaken
him, for which he would punish them: They defied the Prophets words, and denied
that they had forsaken the Lord: And to justify themselves, told him that,
they did offer continual Sacrifices to the Lord, and observe the new Moons and
the S^bbaths, etc. which the Lord appointed: That therefore he might take away
what they alleged for their justification, he does bid them to hear and
hearken to what follows.

Ye Rulers of Sodom.] By occasion of the word Sodom in the former Verse, he
calls the Rulers of Judah and Jerusalem, Rulers of Sodom, And that he might do
for these reasons.

First, Because as the men of Sodom were given to a peculiar sin, by which they
left the natural use of women, and burned in lust toward their own Sex, Men
toward Men, Genesis 19.5. (which sin is called to this day Sodomy from them) So
was this people given to this sin, 1 King. 14.24. and 1 King. 22.46.

Secondly, because as Sodom was given to pride, fulness of bread, abundance
of idleness, and unmercifulness toward the poor, Ezekiel. 16.49. so was the
people of Judah and Jerusalem.

Thirdly, Because as Sodom was impudent in her sins, so was this people,
Chap. 3. Verse. 9.

Fourthly, Because as there were but few righteous in Sodom when it was
destroyed, only Lot and his family: So there were but few righteous at this
time in Judah.

Give ear unto the Law of our God.] The Law here, is not to be taken properly
and strictly, but largely, even as large as (...) the Word. For to give ear
unto the Law of our God, is the same with that which he said immediately
before, Hear the Word of the Lord.

Ye people of Gomorrah.] He calls the people of Judah and Jerusalem, the
people of Gomorrah, upon the same occasion, and for the very same reasons as he
called the Rulers, Rulers of Sodom just before.

11.
To what end is the multitude of your Sacrifices unto me, says the Lord] q. d.
To what end are so many Sacrifices that you bring and offer to me, says the
Lord? Are they to worship me, or honor me, or delight me therewith? I am not
served, or worshipped, or honored, or delighted with them.

I am full of the burnt-offerings of Rams, etc.] q. d. I loath the
burnt-offerings of Rains, etc.

He says I am full, for I loath, by a Metaphor drawn from a man with a full
stomach, which loatheth the meat that is set before him.

It may be asked here, why God says that He is full, and loatheth the
burnt-offering of Rams, and the fat of fed beasts; and why he says that he is
not delighted in the blood of Bullocks, or of Lambs, and He Goats: When as the
Rams, and Bullocks, and Lambs, and Goats, were cattle of the Heard, and of the
Flock, which God appointed for his Sacrifice Lev. 1.2. And when as he appointed
the fatt for the Altar, Lev. 3.3, 4, 5. etc. And the blood to be offered to
him, Lev. 17. ver. 10, 11.

A. The reason why God abhorred these things, and loathed them, was not because
they were naught in themselves, but because they were wicked which offered them
to God. Hence it was, that though God did accept of the Sacrifices of the just,
yet the Sacrifice of the wicked was abomination to him, Prove. 15.8. For
Sacrifice was of that nature, as that God accepted not man for the Sacrifice at
any time, but only the Sacrifice for the man.

12.
When ye come to appear before me.] Supple, with your Sacrifices.

Who has required this at your hand?] Because it is certain that God
commanded his people to appear before him with Sacrifices, as Exodus 23.17. etc.
This place cannot be so understood, as if God did simply forbid there appearing
before him with Sacrifices; It must therefore be understood (...), that is,
with some restriction, not as though God blamed them because they appeared
before him with Sacrifices, but because they appeared before him with
Sacrifices, when their hands were full of blood, Verse. 15.

When ye come to appear before me.] To appear before God, is to go into the
Courts of Gods house, which were before the Sanctuary of the temple, where
because God sat upon the mercy seat (as we may read Exodus 25.22. and Numb.
7.89.) therefore were they, which came into the Coutrs of the Temple, said to
appear before God.

Who has required this at your hands?] i. e. Who has required this of you.

The hands, which are the chief instrument of man's actions, are put here per
Synecdochen partis, for the whole man.

To tread my Courts.] These words may be governed of the Relative, This, by
Apposition, or else we may repeat those words again, Viz. Who has required
this at your hands? q. d. Who has required this at your hand, to tread my
Courts?

By treading his Courts, he means there appearing before him: But when he
says to tread my Courts, it is intimated, that God received no good by their
appearing before him, (for it was neither honor nor profit that He got by it)
but that He suffered loss rather, for they wore out his Courts, with their
treading.

My Courts.] i. e. The Courts of my Temple.

Before the Temple or house of God, the Priests had a Court to stand and do
their service in. 2 Chronicles. 4.9. And the People had another Court where they
stood for to worship God: Therefore by saying My Courts, He reprehends both
Priests and People.

13.
Bring no more vain oblations.] He does not absolutely forbid them here to
bring any more oblations, but (...), to wit, while they were as they were, that
is, while they were such abominable sinners.

While they are such, he calls their oblations vain, because they fail of the
end for which they intend them. For they intend therewith to honor and worship
God: But God is not honored or worshipped by the Sacrifices and oblations of
wicked men.

Incense is abomination to me.] i. e. Incense is abominable to me, I abhor
it, and detest it as a thing abominable.

Abomination is put here for abominable, an Abstract for a Concr^te, per
Metonymiam adjuncti.

God did not abhor and detest Incense simply, as it appears Exodus 30.7. and
Lev. 2. Verse. 1, 2. but only as it was offered by the hands of wicked men.

The new Moons.] The Hebrews did use Lunar Months, which they computed or
measured from one New Moon to another: And by the New Moons are here meant the
first days of every month, viz. the days in which the Moon changed; by a
Metonymie.

Note, that although the New Moon, or first day of the Month, is not reckoned
amongst those feasts, in which all servile work was forbidden, Lev. 23. yet
this we read of it elsewhere.

First, That it had its peculiar Sacrifices appointed for it. Numb. 28.11.

Secondly, That it had a peculiar solemnity of blowing the Trumpet over its
Sacrifices, Numb. 10.10.

Thirdly, that on that day, the People repaired to the Prophets, or other
Ministers of God to be instructed by them, 2 Kings, Cap. 4. Verse. 23.

Fourthly, that there were Assemblies on that day for Gods worship, Isaiah. 66.
Verse. 23.

Fifthly, That they kept religious feasts that day. 1 Samuel 20 5, 6.

Sixthly, That it was not lawful to buy or sell on that day, Amos, 8.5.

And Sabbaths.] The Sabbaths of the Jews were some weekly, as Exodus 20.10. Lev
23.3. Some yearly, which were kept but once every year, as Lev. 23. verse. 32.
etc.

The calling of Assemblies.] i. e. The meeting and assembling together, on the
New Moons and the Sabbaths, to hear the word of God, and to worship him. See 2
Kings, 4.23. and Isaiah. 66.23.

The calling of Assemblies, is put here for the meeting together in Assemblies:
The Antecedent for the Consequent.

Note, that these words, the calling of Assemblies, are governed of the former
word, by Apposition: And they do show and explain what those former words
mean: Namely, meeting in Assemblies on those days, to hear the Word of God,
and to worship him.

It is iniquity.] q.d. This calling of Assemblies, or meeting together (though
to hear Gods Word and to worship him) is sinful.

Iniquity is put here for sinful, an Abstract for a Concrete.

Therefore was this meeting in Assemblies sinful, because they were wicked, men
which were there assembled.

Note, that here is the cause, why God could not endure their meetings, viz.
because they were sinful, as being performed by wicked men, who lived in their
sins without repentance.

Even the solemn meetings.] q. d. I say, that even your solemn meetings,
wherein ye meet together to hear Gods Word, and worship Him on the New Moons
and Sabbath days, is sinful and evil.

14.
Your New Moons, and your appointed Feasts, etc] He repeateth here what he
said in the former verse, to show his greater dislike and detestation of it.
And what He called Sabbaths there, He calls appointed Feasts here: Because the
Sabbaths were Feasts appointed of God, Levit, 23. Yet he calls them, Their New
Moons, and Their appointed Feasts, in respect of Their manner of coming to
them, and solemnizing of them, which was with wicked hands, and wicked hearts,
which God detested.

My soul hates.] i. e. I hate.

The Prophet speaks here of ^od, (...), as of a man; And puts the Soul, which
is but a part, for the whole man.

I am weary to bear them] i. e. They are troublesome and grievous to me, and I
can endure them no longer; therefore will I ease my self of them by destroying
you.

He uses a Metaphor from a Porter, whose burden is grievous and troublesome to
him, when he stands too long under it, and is thereby wearied.

15.
And when ye spread forth your hands.] i. e. And when ye pray to me, either
in those Assemblies and meetings mentioned, v. 13. or at any other times.

He puts the spreading forth of the hands, for praying, a gesture, which was
wont to be used in prayer ( Exodus 9.33. 1 King 8.22, 38. Ezra 9.5. Job 11.13.
and Psalm. 88.9. for the act of praying it self.

I will hide mine eyes from you.] i. e. I will not regard your prayers; nor
g^ant your desire,

He speaks of God here, (...), and alludes to the manner of men, where when one
man has injured another, and he, that suffered the wrong, is resolved not to
forgive the wrong, which he suffered, he will not look upon him that did the
wrong, when he beggeth pardon, but turns away from him, that he may not be
moved by his humble demeanor to forgive him.

I will not hear.] Here he speaks of God again (...), and alludeth to the
manner of men, who go away, and will not hear the requests, which they are
resolved not to grant, least they be moved to grant them when they hear them.

Your hands are full of bloud] i. e Your hands are besmeared with the blood of
those, whom you have murdered: q. d. Ye are guilty of murder

Blood is put here Metonymice for Murder, and that again is put Hyperbolice,
for Injustice and cruelty in oppressing the poor.

Note, that the Prophet speaks here particularly of Judges and Lawyers: Though
what he speaks particularly of them, is proportionably to be understood of all
other sorts of men.

For if Judges and Lawyers be naught, it is not to be expected that other sorts
of men should be good. Their countenance and example is enough to corrupt a
whole City, yea, a whole Kingdom.

O my people, they that lead thee, cause thee to err, says our Prophet Chap.
3.12. And St. Paul proves the ungodliness of all men, by the ungodl^nesse of
the chiefest, Romans Chap. 1. Verse. 18, 19, etc.

Note, that these words, Your hands are full of blood, contain the cause why
God would hide his eyes, when they did spread forth their hands. And why he
would not hear, when they did make their prayers to him, for God hears not
sinners, John, 9.31. Psalm. 66.18.

16.
Wash ye, make ye clean] Viz. From this blood.

He speaks of spiritual washing the soul from sin by repentance; under the
Metaphor of bodily washing the body from blood, or any other filth, by water.

Cease to do evill] Supple, To your neighbors.

17.
Learn to do well] i. e. Accustom your selves to do well to your neighbor.

We learn to do well by custom and frequent practice.

Or, he may say, Learn to do well: because they were ignorant of that lesson,
viz. the lesson of doing well.

Seek judgment.] Judgment is taken here for the justice and uprightness of a
cause, q. d. Ye Judges and Lawyers (for to such He syeaketh) when a cause is
brought to you, seek diligently on which side the Right lies, and be for that.

The Prophet does explain here that general Praecepts: Learn to do well, by
four Particular Praecepts: Seek Judgment, Relieve the Oppressed: Judge the
Fatherless: Pl ad for the Widows.

Relieve the Oppressed.] i. e. If any unjust Sentence has been given against a
Man, whereby ^e is oppres'd; recall that Sentence and correct it, and so relieve
the oppressed. Or if any poor man is oppressed by one that is mighty, and
flies to the Law for relief, direct Him, and help Him against His oppressor.

Judge the Fatherless.] i. e. Give the ^atherlesse an hearing, and defer not
to give sentence in this cause, which depends before you.

This is spoken to the Judges, and is therefore spoken, because the Fatherless,
when He has a cause ready for hearing, cannot get a hearing, but is put off
(to his vexation) that the causes of great and rich ones may be sped.

Plead for the Widow.] i. e. Take in hand the cause of the Widow, and plead
it for her, though you can expect no reward of her for your pains.

This is spoken to Advocates or Counselors.

God has always an especial care of the Fatherless and the Widow, because
they are (for the most part) destitute of friends, and most apt to be oppressed
and wronged.

18
Come let us reason togeth^r, says the Lord] Because God charged this people
with sin ano threatened them with judgments in the former part of the Chapter:
and they thought they were not guilty of the sins, which were laid to their
charge, nor deserved the judgments, which were threatened against them: He
inviteth them here in a friendly manner to plead their cause with him, that he
may hear what they can say for themselves: And that they may hear what he can
say for himself. And in conclusion, when he had convinced them of sin, and
prooved them worthy of punishment, (that they may know that he is more prone to
show mercy than to punish) he tells them, that for all that, yet if they will
repent, Though their sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow, etc.

But note, That neither the Subject of their Reasoning, nor yet the Arguments
on either side are here set down, but they are left to be understood: Only it
is set down in brief, upon what terms God and they parted after this
reasoning, which were these.

That if they would repent them of their sins, Though their sins were as
Scarlet, they should be as white as snow: And though they were as red as
Crimson, they should be as white as wool.

Let us reason together.] i. e. Let us bring Arguments and Reasons, I for my
self, and ye for your selves, that it may appear, whether what I have done, or
threatened to you, I have done without cause, or no.

Though your sins be as Scarlet.] q. d. Though we have pleaded together, and
I have convinced you, and proved you guilty of the sins, wherewith I have
charged you, and worthy of the punishments which I have threatened against you,
yet if you repent you, Though your sins be as scarlet, They shall be as white
as wool.

Though your sins be as scarlet.] i. e. Though your sins be as scarlet for
redness: that is, though your sins be never so heinous.

It is not the substance, but the color of scarlet, to which the Prophet here
alludes: And therefore would he express the heinousness of sin, under the
Metaphor of a red color, because red is the color of blood, and he alludes
here to the blood of which he said, their hands were full, Verse. 15.

They shall be as white as snow.] q. d They shall be perfectly forgiven, and ye
shall be to me as if ye had never sinned.

As Red and Black, may be the Emblems of sin; so may White be of righteousness.

They shall be as wooll] i. e. They shall be as white as wool.

A Question may be here asked; How sin can be said to be white as snow or
wool, when as sin is so essentially evil, as that it cannot be good.

Answ. Sin may be here taken for the sinner, per Metonymiam adjuncti: that
is, By putting the Quality for the person, in which the Quality is inherent.

Now though sin can never be made white, that is, good, yet the sinner may.

Or we may say, that this is an Allegorical or Proverbiall kind of Phrase. And
such kind of Phrases, are many of them to be glanced upon only with a quick
eye, not too exactly to be pried into.

19.
If ye be willing] Supple, To obey me, and keep my Commandments.

And obedient.] i. e. And are actually obedient to me.

Ye shall eat the good of the land] i. e. Ye shall eat the good and pleasant
fruits of the Land wherein ye dwell: The enemy shall not destroy them, and take
them away from you: Nor shall the sword destroy you, and take you away from
them.

20.
But if ye refuse.] Supple, To obey me, and keep my Commandments.

And rebel.] i. e. And be indeed disobedient to me.

Note that the Prophet opposes Refusing here in this Verse, To be willing to
obey, in the former Verse: And to rebel, in this Verse, to to be obedient, in
the former Verse.

Ye shall be devoured with the sword.] Supple, of Rezin King of Syria, and
Pekah King of Israel.

He speaks of the sword here Metaphorically, as of a ravenous beast.

For the mouth of the Lord has spoken it,] i. e. For the Lord has spoken it,
and therefore it shall come to pass. For the Lord cannot lie, and what he
says, he is able to make good.

The prophet speaks here of God as of a man, per (...), and puts the mouth,
which is but a part, for the whole man by a Synechdoche: And the mouth rather
than any other part here, because with the mouth we speak.

21.
How is the faithful City become an Harlot.] How is Jerusalem, which was once
faithful, as a wife to her husband, become now as an harlot, committing
adultery with her lovers?

The faithfulness here spoken of, alludes to the faithfulness of a wife to
her husband.

The Scriptures, under the Metaphor of Adultery and Fornication, do often
signify peculiarly the sin of Idolatry: And under the Metaphor of an Whore or
an Harlot, an Idolater. And so it may be here taken, especially if we
understand Also, In the following words, q. d. How is the faithful City become
an Harlot? It was Also full of Judgment, etc. For the Prophet upbraids them
with their Idolatry Verse. 29. etc.

But as by the Metaphor of Fornication and Adultery, the particular sin of
Idolatry is often understood: So also may we (by the same Metaphor) understand
disobedience and sin against God in general, as may appear James, 4.4. For
the promise of obedience, which the Jews made to God, either in their
Forefathers, as Exodus 20.19. Deuteronomy. 5.27. Or by themselves, either in their
Circumcision, Galat. 5.3. or at any other time, as 2 Chronicles. 15. Verse. 12, 15.
and 2 Chronicles. 23.16. may be compared to the promise of a wife, which she makes
to to her husband at her marriage, to be obedient to him, and true to his bed.

And for this reason does the Lord say to Sion, that He is her husband, Chap.
54. Verse. 5.

Wherefore as a Wife, so long as she keeps the promise which she made to her
Husband, is accounted Faithful, but if she breaks that promise, and falls in
love with other men, and follows them, becomes a Whore, or an Harlot; So
might Jerusalem be accounted Faithful, so long as she was obedient to God,
according to her promise. But when contrary to promise she became disobedient
to God, and followed her own lusts, she might be counted of as an Harlot, and
so be called by a Metaphor.

And thus not only Idolatry, but any other particular sin, may be called
Adultery, and not only the Idolater, but any other sinner be called an
Adulterer: And he which walks uprightly according to his Covenant, that is,
according to the Law of God, which he promised to keep, might be called
Faithful: and among the rest, He who executed judgment without respect of
persons: For which cause Sion also may be called Faithful in this place.

How is the faithful City, etc.] This question speaks admiration and sorrow.

Note that this is the beginning of a new Prophecy, Or a new Prophetical
Sermon.

It was full of judgment.] By Judgment is meant Upright dealing in Courts of
Justice, and equal administration of Justice without partiality.

Righteousness lodges in it.] Righteousness signifies the same as Judgment
did. And this is a repetition of the former sentence.

He speaks of Righteousness as of a Person, by a Prosopopocia.

Lodged in it.] i. e. Took sweet repose and rest in it.

To lodge in a place, as it signifies sweet repose, and rest; so it signifies
but a short abode, and as it were but for a night.

But now Murderers] i. e. But now unrighteous and unjust Judges, who have put
Righteousness out of her lodgings.

He calls Unrighteous and unjust Judges, which oppress and wrong the poor in
Judgment, Murderers, (by an Hyperbole) because they deprived the poor of their
means (which was their life) and gave it away from them (by their unrighteous
sentence) to them, to whom it did not belong. By reason of which, many did
perish, not only through grief of mind, but also through famine and hunger,
having no means left them to buy bread to sustain nature.

22.
Thy silver is become dross.] Under the Metaphor of silver, understand
Righteousness; under the Metaphor of dross, understand Unrighteousness: q.
d. The Righteousness in Judgment is turned into Unrighteousness.

The Prophet uses an Apostrophe here to Jerusalem, to whom he speaks as to a
woman by a Prosopopoeia.

Thy Wine is mixed with water.] He speaks of wine so mixed with water, as that it
has lost all its virtue by that mixture.

By Wine, understand Justice; By Water, respect of persons, or whatsoever is
contrary to true Justice: q.d. Thy Justice is mixed with respect of persons,
and is now so corrupted from that sincerity, which once it had, as that it is
no more Justice.

23.
Thy Princes, etc.] i. e. Thy Judges; For Judges are Princes, and Chief men in
a Commonwealth: per Metonymiam Generis.

Are Rebellious.] i. e. Are disobedient to the Commandments of the Lord, who
has given this Commandment to Judges, saying, Ye shall not respect persons in
Judgment: But ye shall hear the small as well as the great, Deuteronomy. 1.17.

And Companions of Thieves.] They may be called Companions of other men, which
either did or suffered the like as other men did or suffered.

So saint John, writing to the seven Churches in Asia, called himself their
Companion in Tribulation, Rev. 1.9. Because he suffered like tribulation, as
they did, though not with them, or in their company: And thus might their
Judges be called Companions of Thieves, because they did take away other men's
goods, as Thieves did: For the spoil of the poor was in their houses, Chap. 7.
Verse. 14.

Again by Thieves may be meant, not only Thieves, but all kind of evil doers
whatsoever, by a Synecdoche.

And these Judges may be called Companions of Thieves and of evil doers,
because Thieves and evil doers resorted to them to bribe them, that they might
be acquitted in Judgment, when they were appealed for their villainy.

And they themselves did privily resort to thieves and evil doers again, that
they might make the better bargain with them, and sell their absolution at the
dearer rate.

And thus Thieves being often in their company, and they again often in the
company of Thieves, might be called the Companions of Thieves.

Or thirdly, They might be called the Companions of Thieves, because their
companions, presuming of their favor and connivance, became no better than
Thieves in their Actions, by defrauding, and oppressing, and taking from other
men.

Every one.] Supple, Of them.

Loves gifts and follows after rewards.] By which gifts and rewards, they
are corrupted and drawn to do injustice. See Ex. 18.21. and 23.8.

They judge not the Fatherlesse] i. e. They will not give the Fatherless a day
of hearing, nor judge their cause when it depends before them: But delay it,
and put it off from Time to Time, and day to day, because they have no friends
to make to them, nor gifts to give them. See Verse 17.

Neither does the cause of the widow come unto them] q. d. And the c^use of
the widow is kept off, and cannot come unto them to be heard for the causes of
great men.

He speaks of the widows cause, as of a Person by a Prosopopo^ia: And puts
an Indicative for a Pot^ntial Mood, for the Hebrews have no Potential Mood

24
The mighty one of Israel] i. e The God of Israel, which excels in strength,
might and power.

I will ease me of mine adversaries] i. e. I will ease me of these rebellious
Princes, and Judges, which are now a trouble to me, and anger me.

He calls these rebellious Princes and Judges, his Adversaries, because they
refuse to keep his Commandments And the carnal mind is enmity against God,
Romans 8. Verse. 7.

But how will God ease himself of these his Adversaries?

Answ. By cutting them off, or destroying them out of the City,

For note, that this is spoken of God (...), and revenge uses to ease yea, to
be sweet to the mind of an angry man.

And avenge me of mine enemies.] This Particle, And, may be taken for a Note of
Explication here, and declare how God will ease himself of his Adversaries, to
wit, by Avenging himself of them.

25.
And I will turn my hand upon thee.] i. e. For I will take thee in hand O
Jerusalem.

And, is put here for For, a Copulative for a Causall.

Note, that because we must turn our hand to a thing, before we can take that
thing in hand: Hence (by putting the Antecedent for the Consequent) turning the
hand to a thing, is put for taking a thing in hand.

Or, I will turn my hand upon thee, signifies, I will afflict thee, or punish
thee, and that from the End, for which He will turn his hand upon her.

And purely purge away thy dross.] i. e. And clean purge away the dross. Or
purge away thy dross from thee, so as that thy silver shall be pure silver.

What is meant by dr sse. See Verse 22.

And take away all thy Tinn] Tinn and Dress signify here one and the same
thing, viz Unrighteousness: Yet Tinn seems to signify Vnrighteousn^ss^, as
it is veiled with a mask of Righteousness; For Tinn shows like silver,
though it be not silver.

The Lord did purge away the Dr^sse, and take a^ay the Tinn, that is, the
Vnrighteousness^ which was in Hierusal^m, either by dest^oying the Unrighteous
Judges, or amend^ng them.

The Question will here be, how and when God did ease himself of these his
advers^ries, and avenge himself of these his enemies, and purge away the
dr^sse, etc.

Answ. He did it in the days of Hezekiah, and by the hands of Hezekiah, who as
he reformed the Temple of God, when he came to the Crown, 2 Kings, 18.4. So
did he (no doubt) reform the Commonwealth also, and did accordi g to that
saying of his Father David, I will early destroy all the wick^d of the Land
that I may cut off all the wicked doers from the City of the Lord, Psalm. 101.8.
Hezekiah therefore did cut off these wicked Judges, either by the sword, which
was a natural death, or by banishment, which was a civil death: And they
being banished and turned out of Jerusalem were taken and destroyed by the
hands of the Assyrians under Sennacharib, when they came against Judah and
Hierulem See Notes Cap 22. Verse. 18.

26.
And I will restore thy Judge^ as at the first.] i. e. I will make thy Judges
such as the were heretofore, in the days of David, Solomon, Asa, and
Jehoshaphat.

Note here, that it is not the Prophets meaning, that all th^se Judges, which
were corrupt, should become good, for most of them were incorrigible, and so
destroyed. But his meaning is, that many of them should amend their faults, and
in the places of those which would not amend, others (which were just and
righteous) should be put. ^or although these last were several Persons, or
individua distinct from those into whose places they were put: Yet he speaks,
of them as if they were the same men, because they did succeed one another in
the same place of judicature.

As in the beginning.] i. e. As heretofore. An Hyperbole.

Thou shall be called the City of Righteousness.] i. e. Thou shall be a
righteous City.

The Prophet uses the word to be called, for, to be. For it is not the
Prophets meaning, that this shall be the proper name of Jerusalem, Viz. the
righteous City. But that Jerusalem should be a righteous City, and men may
truly so call it. The like manner of speech he uses, Cap 7.14. and Cap. 9.
Verse 6. etc.

The City of Righteousness.] i. e. the Righteous City, or City wherein Justice
is truly administered.

He puts a Substantive of the Genitive case, for an Adjective.

The faithful City] See Verse. 21.

27.
Zion shall be redeemed with judgment.] q. d. When the Assyrians shall come
under Sennacharib against Judah and Jerusalem, Jerusalem shall be redeemed
out of their hands, because of the Judgment and Righteous Justice, which shall
be administered in her.

Zion.] i. e. Jerusalem. See verse. 8.

And her Converts.] i e. And such of her Judges and Princes, which were
Unrighteous, but shall turn from their unrighteous dealing.

With Righteousness.] i. e. For their Righteousness.

What is meant by Judgment and Righteousness, See Verse. 21.

28.
And the destruction of the Transgressors and of the sinners shall be together]
i. e. But the Judges, which have transgressed and sinned, and will not turn
from their sins and transgressions, shall be destroyed all of them.

And is put here for But.

He opposes here the Transgressors and Sinners to the Converts, in the 27.
Verse. And means by them, the Rebellious Princes and Companions of Thieves,
(which he mentioned Verse. 23.) which would not amend. But now these were
destroyed. See Notes, Verse. 25.

Together.] q. d. Every one of them without exception, for so does this word,
Together, signify. Psalm. 33 15. and Psalm. 37.38. Eccles. 18.1.

29.
For they shall be ashamed of the Oaks.] Between this and the former verse, we
must understand these or the like words, viz. Neither shall their Idols save
them.

They shall be ashamed.] Note here, that because men, which look and hope after
great matters, and do any thing in expectation thereof, if they fail and come
short of their hopes and expectation, are (for the most part) ashamed and
confounded. Hence, to be ashamed or confounded, signifies, to fail, or be
deceived of their hopes, by a Metonymie.

Now because these men trusted in their Idols, that they would save them, and
for that end did worship them and sacrifice to them; hence, because they shall
fail of their hopes, and because their Idols shall not save them, the Propheh
says, They shall be ashamed.

Of the Oaks.] Oaks are taken here per Synecdochen speciei, for any kind of
trees, under which Idolaters were wont to worship and sacrifice to their Idols.
For Idolaters were wont to worship and sacrifice to their Idols, in Groves, and
in Gardens, under the green Trees thereof, as appears, Cap. 57.5. and Chap.
65. Verse. 3. and Jer. 2. Verse 20. etc.

When therefore the Prophet says, that they shall be ashamed of the Oaks, or
Trees, under which they worshipped their Idols, His meaning is, that they shall
be ashamed of the Idols also, which they worshipped, and the worship which they
gave to the Idols under those Trees, (by a Metonymie) because their Idols shall
not help them.

Which ye have desired.] i. e. Which ye have made choice of, Supple, to worship
your Idols, and sacrifice to them under them.

Note here the Enallage of the person, with the Apostrophe which the Prophet
uses (which is a thing frequent with the Prophet) for he changes the third
person, which he began with, into the second, where both are to be understood
of the same persons.

And ye shall be confounded.] i. e. And ye shall blush.

These words signify the same as those words did, ye shall be ashamed, And
these two words, Ashamed and Confounded, are often joined together, as
signfying the same thing. See Chap. 24.23. Chap. 41.11. Jer. 14.3.15.9. Psalm.
40.14. and 70.2. etc.

For the gardens which ye have chosen.] Supple, that you may worship and
sacrifice to your Idols, under the trees thereof.

This is a Repetition of the foregoing sentence.

30.
For ye shall be as an Oak whose leaf fades.] He speaks of an Oak, whose
leaf fades, not so much by reason of Winter as by reason of old age and
rottenesse, q. d. Ye shall consume away like an old rotten Oak, which is past
bearing leaves.

And as a Garden that has no water.] A garden is put here, by a Metonymie, for
the herbs and flowers of a garden, which, if they are at no time watered, must
needs fade away, q. d. Ye shall perish and decay as the herbs and flowers of a
Garden, which are never watered

The Prophet uses this Allegory in expression of their punishment, to allude
to their sin, as he spoke of it, Verse. 29.

31.
And the strong.] By the strong, he means the Idol, which the Idolater
reputed his strength, and thought strong and able enough to save him.

So that the Idol is called the strong, only in regard of the account or
esteem, which the Idolater had of it.

The Strong, or, the Idol in the Singular number is put for, the Strong, or,
the Idols in the Plural number.

Shall be as tow.] Which is easily set on fire, and quickly burnt up.

And the maker of if.] i. e. The maker of the Strong, or, the maker of the
Idol.

Note that by the maker of the strong, or, maker of the Idol is meant, not
only the carfts-man that made it, but he also that hired the crafts-man, and
set him on work: And he also that worshipped the Idol when it was made. For he
also consented to the making of it, a part post.

As a spark.] A spark of fire, if it light into the Tow, soon setts the Tow on
fire; And the Spark and Tow are both consumed.

To such a Spark does the Prophet liken the maker of an Idol here, because he
does by his sin, provoke and cause God to consume both himself and his Idol
too.

And they shall both burn together.] i. e. They shall both be consumed through
the wrath of God, which he has stirred up.

He persists still in the Metaphor of Tow set on fire by a Spark.

And none shall quench them.] q. d. And they shall not be quenched, till they
are utterly consumed.

He persists still in the aforesaid Metaphor.

ISAIAH. CHAP. II.
THE word that Isaiah the Son of Amos saw, etc.] See Cap. 1.1.

The word which Isaiah saw.] Words are the object of the Ear, not of the Eye;
Why then does the Prophet say; The words which Isaiah saw, and not, The words
which Isaiah heard?

Answ. The Hebrews do often by an Enallage, take one Sense for another: But
especially the Sight for any other sense; because it is the best and most
certain sense of all. So is the Sight taken for the Touch, John, 20.29. And
for the Smelling, Exodus 5.21. And for the Taste, Psalm 34.8. And for the
Hearing. Exodus 20.18. For which Sense it is also taken, in this Place.

Concerning Judah and Jerusalem.] See of this Chap. 1.1.

2.
And it shall come to pass in the last days.] i. e. And it shall come to
pass hereafter.

Note that this Particle, And, is redundant, or, superfluous: For this is the
beginning of a Prophecy; And therefore the sentence would be full and
complete without it.

But the Hebrews do often use this Particle, And, in the beginning of a Book,
or a speech, by a Redundancie, or peculiar Elegancie.

In the last days.] These words are often used to signify the days of the
Messiah, and of the Gospel, (the Hebrews themselves being witness) and so
are they taken here in the second or sublime sense; for without all doubt, in
that sense the Prophet does here prophecy of the great glory of the Church of
Christ in the time of the Gospel, and of the abundant coming in of the
Gentiles thereunto.

But these words do not always so signify, but do often signify, only
hereafter, or, in time to come, as Genesis 49.1. Numb. 24 14. Deuteronomy. 4.30. and
31.29 Dan. 2.28. and 10.14. Prove. 31.25. and Act. 2.16. compared with Joel,
2.28. Yea, they may signify, not only that which is to come a long time
hereafter, but that also which is to come within a short time hereafter. And so
do they here signi e in the first and meanest sense.

That the last days may signify, that, which is to come within a short time
hereafter, may be proved per argumentum a contrario. For if the beginning may
signify that which was done not long since, then may the last days signify
that which is to come to pass within a short time; For as the last days,
being absolutely put, do signify the end of days, or, the last days in order
of time, so does the beginning, being absolutely put, signify the beginning of
time, or that time before which there was no time, as may appear Isaiah, 40.
Verse. 21.

But that the beginning may signify that which was done not long since, is
evident Isai. 48 Verse. 3, 5, and 7. In which last place we read thus, They are
created now, and not from the beginning: The meaning whereof is this, they are
made known now, and not at any time heretofore.

Note therefore, that the Hebrews are often Hyperbolicall in their expressions
of times.

But you may say, if the meaning of these words in the last days, be
hereafter, or, ere long be, why did not the Prophet say, And it shall come to
pass hereafter, ere long be, but say, And it shall come to pass in the last
days.

Answ. Because the Prophet was in these words to prophecy, not only of what
was to come to pass ere long, but of what was to come to pass in the days of
the Messiah, and time of the Gospel also. And to signify what was to come to
pass in the days of the Messiah, and time of the Gospel, he could not better
do it then by saying, And It shall come to pass in the last days.

Note here, that when the Holy Ghost intends two several senses, by one and
the same words, the words do for the most part declare the sublimer sense, and
that which concerns the days of the Messiah, or of the Gospel in a full
signification: But the lower sense, and that which concerns the Jews, and
the time of the Law, in a signification not so full; But in a jejune, and, as I
may so say, scantie and restrained signification, in respect of the latitude of
the words, and that because of the scarcity of words, which cannot signify
both, with the like propriety. And the Holy Ghost condescendeth to use the
words of men

The Mountain of the Lords house shall be established in the top of the
Mountains.] The ^emple of Jerusalem, which is here called the Lords house,
was built upon mount Moriah, which Mount was not a distinct Mountain from
Mount Sion; But as sometime one Hill has several tops, so were Mount Moriah,
and Mount Sion several tops of the same Hill or Mountain, whence it comes to
pass, that Mount Moriah is sometimes called Mount Sion.

And as the Temple of the true God was built upon an Hill or Mountain: so were
the Temples of Idols and false Gods also, for the most part: And to these
Temples so built, does the Prophet allude, when he says, The Mountain of the
Lords house shall be established in the top of the Mountain.

That therefore which the Prophet says, is this, that the Mountain, on which
the Temple of the Lord is built (which is Mount Moriah, or Mount Sion) shall be
set upon the tops of the Mountains, on which the Temples of the Idols are
built. And his meaning is this; That the Temple of God shall surpass all other
Temples, and be above them all in honor and esteem.

And shall be exalted above the Hills.] This is the same with the former
sentence.

And all nations.] i. e. For many of many nations.

Note, that All is not always put for All without exception, but sometime for
Some, or Many, and so it is to be here taken, as appears by these words, Many
people, verse. 3.

And Nations and People do not always signify whole Nations, and whole
People, but Some or Many members of those Nations, or People per Synecdochen
integri, and so must we take them here.

Shall flow unto it.] Here is a Metaphor taken from the flowing of waters in a
River, where, because the waters flow downwards, they flow naturally: And so
their flowing by a Metaphor shows a willingness and doing of a thing without
compulsion: And because waters in a River are many, some continually succeeding
others, they signify abundance too. So that the meaning of this place is, that
many of many Nations and People shall come with chearfullnesse, and in great
abundance to the Temple of God in Jerusalem, to worship the Lord there, and it
contains a reason why the Temple of God should surpass all other Temples,
and be above them all, in honor and esteem, and the reason is, because all
Nations shall forsake the Temples of the Idols, and shall come willingly, and
in abundance to the Temple of the Lord, to worship the Lord there.

This Prophecy (in its first and meaner sense) seems to have been fulfilled
in the days of Hezekiah, when the Angel of God had destroyed an hundred
fourscore and five thousand in one night, in the Camp of the Assyrians: And
when God (that he might give to Hezekiah a sign of his recovery, when he was
sick) brought the shadow of the Sun ten degrees backward, by which it had gone
down in the Dial of Ahaz.

For when these great miracles were heard of, no doubt but many did enquire
after the truth of them, and finding the Truth to be according to the Report,
did conclude with themselves, that the Gods, which they worshipped, were not like
to the God of Israel, who had done these great Things, yea, they were no Gods
in comparison of Him; therefore they would worship Him, and He should be their
God.

This is confirmed by that, that these miracles were so taken notice of, as
that the Princes of Babylon sent Ambassadors to Hezekiah, to enquire of the
wonder (of the Suns going back) that was done in the Land of Judah, 2 Chronicles.
32.31. And upon the cutting off of so many of the Assyrians in Sennacharibs
Camp by the Angel, it is said, that many brought gifts to the Lord to
Jerusalem, so that he was magnified in the sight of all Nations from
thenceforth, 2 Chronicles. 32.23.

But yet (as I said) in a second and more sublime Sense, the Prophet without
doubt does here prophecy of the Glory of the Church of Christ in the time of
the Gospel, and the calling or coming in of the Gentiles to that Church.

3.
And many People.] i. e. And many men of many kind of People. See Verse. 2.

Shall go and say] i e. Shall say, supple, one to another. That word, Go, is
Redundant here: The like we read, Cap. 27. Verse. 37. Where it is said,
Sennacharib King of Assyria departed, and went and returned, for, departed, and
returned. The like also is to be read John 15. Verse. 16.

He will teach us of his ways.] i. e. He will teach us by his Priests and
Levites his commandments, and the ways which we should walk in, and according
to which He will be worshipped.

His ways.] He calls the Commandments of the Lord, his ways, and his paths,
by a Metaphor: For as while we walk in a right way or path we do not err, but
go on without wandering to our journeys end: So when we observe and keep the
Commandments of God, we do not err, but go on in the way to eternal
happiness.

And we will walk in his Paths] i. e. We will walk in those ways which He
teaches us: or we will do as He will have us, and worship Him as He appoints
us.

For out of Sion shall go forth the Law.] i. e. For many people shall come to
Jerusalem to the House of God, to learn the Law of God, and shall carry the
knowledge of it back with them: Or, he speaks here of the fame of the Law,
putting the Law by a Metonymie for the fame thereof: q. d. For out of Sion
shall go forth a Great fame and report of the Law of God: which fame and
report shall cause all Nations to flow to the Mountain, that is, to the Temple
to learn that Law. He speaks here of the Law, or the fame of the Law, as of a
Person, by a Prosopopoeia.

Sion.] This is that Mount which he called, The Mountain of the Lords House,
Verse. 2.

And the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem.] This is a Repetition of the
foregoing Sentence.

4.
And He shall judge among the Nations, and shall rebuke many People.] q. d. He
shall examine the cause of the wars and quarrels, which have been between
Nations, and judge thereby who have been the cause of them. And those People
which have been the Authors of the wrong, and cause of the wars and quarrels,
He shall rebuke sharply, that they may not offend in this kind any more.

The meaning is, that God shall make peace between those Nations and People,
which were at war and enmity one with another.

The Phrase is Metaphorical, borrowed from the manner of ending private
quarrels and contentions among Men of the same Country. For when private
quarrels and contentions are brought before a Magistrate, the Magistrate
examineth the matter, and judges between the disagreeing parties, which of
them begun the quarrel, and did the wrong; and finding by whom the quarrel
began, and who was the cause thereof, he rebukes that party, and reprooveth
him for it, and so makes peace between them which were at odds before.

But yet these words, And He shall judge among the Nations, may be interpreted
thus, and that perhaps better: q. d. And the Lord shall judge among the
Nations, and they shall willingly submit to His Judgment.

The meaning whereof is, That the Lord shall be their God and their King; and
that they shall take Him for their God and their King, and obey Him, and fear
Him accordingly.

The way, which God is said here to judge the People, is by His Law, and by
those which he had ordained his Ministers therein: So that none are judged in
this sense but they which belong to the People of God: For the Ministers of God
have nothing to do to judge those which are without, 1 Cor. 5. verse. 12.

And He shall rebuke many people. It is the part of a Judge to rebuke where he
finds a fault, therefore to rebuke is put here for to judge: And this is but a
repetition of the former sentence.

And they shall beat their Swords into Plow-shares, and their spears into
pruning-hookes.] i. e. They shall change the weapons, which they use in war,
into Instruments of Husbandry, which they use in peace. The sense is, they
shall be at peace one with another, per Metonymiam Effecti.

Nation shall not lift up Sword against Nation.] i. e. Nation shall not fight
with Nation in battle.

Neither shall they learn war any more.] i. e. Neither shall they give their
mind to war, or practice it any more.

Because war is learnt by practice. Hence does he say, Neither shall they
learn war, for neither shall they practice war any more.

Any more.] These words do not always exclude the whole time following, but
sometimes some little part of the future only, and signify for a while, or
for a time. So we read, 2 Kings 6.23 That the bands of Syria came no more into
the Land of Israel: And yet it follows, Verse. 24. in the very next words, And
it came to pass after this, that Benhadad King of Syria gathered all his
Host, and went up and besiedged Samaria.

The Hebrews (as I said) Verse. 2. are often Hyperbolicall in their expressions
of time.

Now for the sense of this Verse; We may understand this place, not of the
whole Nations, but of as many of them as turned to the Lord, as we said Verse.
2. For though they were at enmity and wars one with another, in respect of
their several Nations, of which they were members heretofore: Yet now being
joined together in the worship of the same God, they lived and loved together
as Friends and Brethren, and were at peace both with themselves, and with the
Jews.

5.
O house of Jacob.] i. e. O children of Jacob: See Cap. 3. verse. 6.

Let us walk in the light of the Lord.] i. e. Let us walk in the Law of the
Lord, and according to the direction thereof.

By the Light of the Lord is meant the Law and Command^ments of God: For the
Commandment is a Lamp, and the Law is Light, Prove. 6.23. The Commandment of
the Lord is pure, enlightening the Eyes, Psalm. 19 8. It is a Lamp to the feet,
and a Light to the paths, Psalm. 119.105. It is both the way in which we should
walk, and a Light to direct us in that way.

The Prophets here foreseeing in the Spirit this willing Conflux of the
Gentiles to Gods worship, would from their example stir up the Jews to a
willing and cheerful walking in the Law of God.

6.
Therefore thou have forsaken thy People, the House of Jacob, because, etc.]
The Prophet foreseeing that the Jews would not take his counsel, given in the
former verse, and walk in the light of the Lord, but continue in darkness, and
walk therein, threatens them with Gods Judgment against them for it, and
foretells what should befall them at the length, q. d. Being that thy People, O
Lord, will not walk in thy Light, but walk in Darkness, therefore will thou
forsake them, etc.

Thus have these words their immediate coherence with the former, yet if any
will make this the beginning of a new Sermon, I will not strive with him.

Thou have forsaken.] i. e. Thou have determined to forsake them, Or, thou will
forsake them: For the Prophets often use a Praeterfect Tense for a Future.

God is said to forsake his People here, because he suffered their enemies, the
Babylonians under Nebuchadnezzar, to spoil them, and destroy them, and hindered
them not.

Thy People, the House of Jacob.] q. d. The Jews, the Sons of Jacob, which
are thy People.

Because they be replenished from the East.] i. e. Because they abound, Viz.
with superstitious Rites and Ceremonies, and are full of Magic and curious
Arts, which they have borrowed from the Eastern People, which are great
Magicians, and judiciary Astrologers.

The Prophet tells us here in express words, that the house of Jacob was
replenished: But with what he leaves us to understand.

And are soothsayers.] i. e. Diviners, which observe Times, and undertake to
tell Fortunes. This was forbidden, Deuteronomy. 18. Verse. 10.

Like the Ph listines.] The Philistines dwelt on the West of Judaea, and were
given to Judiciary Astrology, and such vain Arts, as the Chaldaeans were, which
dwelt on the East.

And they please themselves in the Children of Strangers] i. e. And they take
delight and pleasure in the Children of Strangers, whom they buy and abuse
(like catamites) against nature: So some.

But others had rather interpret it of the manners and customs of Strangers by
a Metonymie: q. d. And they please themselves in such naughty customs and
manners, as the Children of Strangers, That is, as the Nations, or the Heathen,
which are Strangers to the Commonwealth of Israel use.

Others again take Children here, for the Children (not of the Body) but of the
Brain, that is, for Books made, or Arts invented, by Strangers, q. d. And they
d^l ght themselves in the Books, which Strangers have made, and the naughty
Arts, which they have invented.

Strangers.] All such as were not of the Seed of Jacob they counted Strangers,
Deuteronomy 17. verse. 15.

Note here, that Children of Strangers, as it may be taken for the Sons of
the Strangers, so may it be taken for Strangers themselves, as (...), the
Sons of the Graecians, is taken for (...) the Graecians. And (...), the
Sons or Children of Physicians, for (...) physicians.

7.
Their Land is also full of silver and gold.] It was expressly forbidden,
greatly to multiply silver and gold, Deuteronomy. 17. Verse. 17.

Neither is there any end of their Treasure.] q. d. And their Treasures are so
great, as that there is no end of them.

These are the same with the former words.

Their Land is also full of Horses.] To multiply Horses was expressly
forbidden, Deuteronomy. 17. verse. 16. Least they should trust more in the Strength and
Power of them, than of God.

Neither is there any end of their Chariots.] i. e. And their Chariots are so
many in number, as that they are in a manner numberless.

The Chariots which are here spoken of, are such Chariots as they were wont to
use in war: Such as we read of, Judge. 4. verse. 3. See Psalm. 20. verse. 7.

8.
Their Land also is full of Idols.] To set up an Idol was against the Command,
Exodus 20. verse. 4.

They worship the work of their own hands.] i. e. They worship the ^dols which
they themselves have made with their own hands, as if they were God, which is
uncreated.

9.
And the mean man boweth down, and the great man humbles himself.] By the Mean
man and the Great man are meant by a Synechdoche, all sorts of Men. q. d. All
sorts of men, high and low, do bow down to Idols and worship them.

Boweth down.] Viz. In the way of worship.

Humbles himself.] i. e. Casts himself down before the Idol, and so adoreth
it.

Therefore forgive them not.] q. d. Therefore, O God, forgive them not, but be
avenged of them for these their sins, and walking in darkness.

The Prophet prays thus out of zeal to Gods Glory.

Yet this may be taken Prophetically, for a Praediction. q. d. Therefore
(because they commit these things) Thou will not forgive them, but be avenged
of them. For the Hebrews do often use an Imperative Mood for a Future Tense:
And thus He Prophesies of their punishment.

10.
Enter into the Rock] The Prophet speaks this by a Sarcasme, i. e. Scoffingly.
q. d. Go and hide your selves in the Clifts of the Rocks, but it shall be to
little purpose.

Rock is put here for Rocks, whereof there were many in Judaea.

And he speaks to the Jews here, as though he had seen the Babylonians under
Nebuchadnezzar (by whom God intended to punish the Jews for the sins
aforementioned) already entered into the Coasts of Judaea, or ready to enter, to
execute Gods Judgments upon the Jews: wherefore he cries to the Jews to go
and hide themselves from their furies, Graphically thereby describing in what
great fear the Jews would be in, and how they would run and hide themselves
when the Babylonians should invade the land indeed, and Artificially showing
how God intended to punish them.

In the dust.] i. e. In the Caves of the earth.

The earth is but dust compacted.

For fear of the Lord.] Supple, Who comes with a great and terrible army of
Babylonians, against you.

He speaks of God as of the General of an Army.

And for the glory of his Majesty.] i. e. Because of the splendour and
brightness of his Majesty, which you shall not be able to endure.

The Majesty of the Lord signifies, by a Periphrasis, the Lord himself; for as
when we say of a King, the Kings Majesty, we mean the King himself: so when we
say the Majesty of the Lord, we mean the Lord himself.

And as in General, that is called the glory of a thing, which makes or
shows that thing to be glorious: so in Particular the splendour and
brightness with which God shall be clothed at this time, may be called his
glory. As Exodus 33. Verse. 18.

Note here, that when God does execute judgment upon the wicked, though he
does it not immediately by himself, but mediately by his instruments (as here
he he does it by the Babylonians) yet the Scripture does oftentimes so describe
it, as if God were immediately in the action himself, as chief, in a visible
manner, like a man, yea, sometimes as though the whole business were performed
by him alone, and this it does that the praise may be given to God alone, and
not to his instruments. Psalm. 115.1. And when the Scripture does speak this of
God and imply him in such an action, it describes him after a glorious manner,
that he may appear to be more than man: And in their descriptions, the
Scripture alludeth, for the most part, to those apparitions, by which God did
manifest himself, and to those wondrous works which he wrought, and those
accidents which fell out, and those judgments which he executed upon the
enemies of Israel in their conduct from Egypt to Canaan: A short model whereof
you may read Hab. 3.3. etc.

See for this purpose that Poetical description which David makes of God Ps.
18.7. etc. and 2 Samuel 22.8. etc. By which nothing else is meant, but that God
executed his judgments upon David's enemies, though he did not do it
immediately, and after the manner there described. See also Job, 40.10. etc a
place which may happily give light to this place.

Yet we may interpret, For the glory of his Majesty, for fear of his great
army, to wit, his great army of Babylonians, which shall be led by
Nebuchadnezzar, who shall be the Lords Lieutenant in this expedition: For it
is usual with the Hebrews to put the word glory, to signify an army, or,
great power of men, by a Metonymie, because an army brings glory to him, and
makes him renowned, whose army it is. See Chap. 8. Verse. 7.

11.
The lofty looks of man.] The lofty looks of man is put here, for the man of
lofty looks, by an Hypallage, or a Metonymie, and by the man of lofty looks, is
meant the proud man, for the proud uses to carry his head high, and his eyes
lofty.

And the haughtiness of man, etc.] The haughtiness of man is put here, for
the man of haughtiness, that is, for the haughty looked, or the haughty minded
man, by the same figure as before.

Shall be humbled.] i. e. Shall be brought low.

How or when these men were brought low, see ver. 17. And the Lord alone shall
be exalted in that day. See ver. 17.

12.
For the day of the Lord of hosts.] i. e. The day in which the Lord has
appointed to avenge himself.

Shall be upon every one, etc.] i. e. Shall come upon every one, etc. q. d. For
that day shall come, in which the Lord of Hosts shall punish, and avenge
himself upon every one, etc.

13.
And upon all the Cedars of Lebanon.] Lebanon was an hill which lay North of
the Land of Israel, and divided it from the Land of Syria: This hill was famous
for the goodly Cedar trees which grew thereon. Whereupon the Cedars of Lebanon
were taken to signify, goodly tall Cedars.

That are high and lifted up.] i. e. That are high and tall.

And upon all the oaks of Bashan.] Bashan was a region beyond Jordan, of which
Og was sometime King, which region, when Og was slain, Moses gave to the
Gadites, and the Reubenites, and half the Tribe of Manasses, Josh. 12.4. etc.
This Bashan abounded with fat Pastures, and large and tall Oaks: Hence
Proverbially an Oak of Bashan may signify a tall Oak.

15.
Upon every fenced wall.] By fenced wall, he means walls which are made for
the defense and safeguard of a City, which walls are higher than other walls
use to be. And such walls are called fenced walls, because they use to be fenced
with Towers and Motes to hinder the enemy that he approach not to them, to beat
them down with Rams and other Engines.

16.
And upon all the ships of Tarshish.] Tarshish was an ancient City of Spain,
called Tartessus, which stood at the mouth of the River Boetus, and had great
commerce with the Phoenicians, and the Phoenicians with that. Now because the
Phoenicians were wont to traffic to Tartess^^ in Spain, and the Tartessians
to Phoenicia again, the ships of Tarshish may signify Merchant ships, which
were wont to go to and from Tartessus for Merchandise, as we call those
East India ships which, use to go to and from the East-Indiaes.

By the Ships of Tarshish therefore are meant the tallest kind of ships which
were made to sail in the Vast Sea, and were like to suffer wind and storms,
and all manner of tempestuous weather, and therefore were built accordingly:
Which ships for bulk far excelled those vessels of Bullrushes which were
used about Nilus, Cap. 18.2. And those little ships, or fisher-boates which
were used in Judaea, about Genezareth, etc.

And upon all pleasant Pictures.] By Pictures are here meant ships. For, as
now, so of old they were wont to adorn the hindecks, or Poopes of the ships,
with Pictures. And because the hindecks, or Poops were adorned with Pictures,
he calls the hindecks, or Poopes themselves, Pictures, per Metonymiam adjuncti.
And by the hindecks, or Poopes, he means the the whole ships, per
Synecdochen partis: As Puppis is put, in Latin, for Navis, the hinder part or
Poope, for the whole ship.

He calls the ships pleasant Pictures, or Pictures delightful to the eye,
because they were pleasant to behold, and that either by reason of the Pictures
with which the hindecks or Poopes were adorned: or else by reason of the
Artificial or neat building of the ships, and the tallnesse thereof, and the
tackle thereto belonging.

Now to distinguish these ships from those which he called, Ships of
Tarshish, we may say, that by the Ships of Tarshish were meant, Merchants
ships, and by these, Men of war.

But yet notwithstanding the former interpretation of these words, which is
that which Interpreters most generallly follow; I take it as not improbable,
that by Pleasant Pictures, may here be meant Idols. For what the Prophet has
spoken from the 12. Verse hitherto, he does repeat again in the two next
following Verses, and there he mentions the abolishing or pulling down of
Idols, etc.

Note here, that by the Allegory of the Cedars of Lebanon, the Oaks of Bashan,
the high Mountains and Hills, the high Towers, fenced walls and Ships of
Tarshish: are meant, proud and lofty men, which he spoke of before plainly,
but here under an Allegory.

17.
And the loftiness of man.] i. e. And the man of loftiness, or the lofty man.
Here is an Hypallage, or Metonymie, as v. 11.

Shall be bowed down.] i. e. Shall be brought down, whether he will or no, as
sticks and trees are bowed down against their natural inclination.

And the haughtiness of man.] i. e. Men of haughtiness, or the haughty men.

Here is an Hypallage, or Metonymia adjuncti, as before, verse. 11.

Shall be made low.] All this came to pass when some of them fell by the
sword, others were glad to run into the Clifts of the Rocks, and holes of the
earth, to hide themselves, and others were led away captive into Babylon, by
the Babylonians.

And the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day.] q. d. Though now these men
(which I speak of) are high and lofty, and carry themselves like so many Gods:
and their Idols are exalted, and set up as if they were not stocks and stones,
or gold, or silver, but Gods indeed; yet, in that day, the Lord only shall be
high and lofty: For all other high and lofty ones, shall be cast down by him,
and he alone shall keep his state.

I take to be exalted here, for to be high, and lofty, rather than to be
praised and magnified, as it often signifies: For so the Context seems to
require it; it being opposed here, to the condition of these which he spoke of,
when they are brought down, and made low.

Yet to be exalted, here may be taken, for to be praised and magnified; and the
sense of this place may be this: q. d. And though these Men, and their Idols,
be now magnified and praised, yet the Lord alone shall be magnified and praised
in that day: For their praises shall come to an end, and their glory shall
cease.

The Lord alone] The Lord is said here, to be alone exalted, not only in
opposition to those lofty and haughty men, which should be brought down, but
also in opposition to the Idols (which they did set up in the place of God)
which should be abolished.

In that day.] By that day he means, that day which he mentioned Verse. 12.
And which he called, The day of the Lord of Hosts.

18.
And the Idols He shall utterly abolish.] St. Hierome observes, that the Jews
did never by any common or public consent, set up any Idol to worship it,
after the Babylonish Captivity: And the Thalmud Hieros^lymitanum affirms the
same.

Note, that And may be put here for (For) and be a Causuall rather than a
Copulative.

19.
And they shall go into the holes of the Rock.] Here is a Relative again
without a formal Antecedent But the Antecedent is easy to be gathered: For by
(They) he means those haughty Men, which he spoke of verse. 11. and 17.

When He arises.] Supple. As a man out of sleep, whereby he is refreshed, and
so the more able and fit for any employment. Or, as a man which has sat
patient a long time, and both heard and seen himself abused with patience, but
now being no longer Patient, arises up in Fury Or, as a Lion which couched
quietly, but now is roused up.

When He arises to shake terribly the Earth] The Earth is to be taken properly
here for the Earth we tread upon, not Metaphorically, for earthly minded men:
Yet not for the whole earth, but for the Land of Judah and Benjamin only,
which is but a part of the whole earth: per Synecdochen Integri.

To arise to shake the Earth, is, to arise to make the earth to tremble. The
meaning therefore of the words are: q. d. When he arises, and beg^nneth to
execute dreadful and terrible Judgments in the Land of Judah.

For understanding of the Phrase, note, that it is the manner of the Scripture,
to speak of the Earth (though it be an insensible and inanimate thing) as if it
were apprehensive of those great things which are done in it, or upon it, and
variously affected, according to the apprehension thereof: For if great and
notable things of Joy be done in it, it is said to rejoice and be glad: if
great and notable matters of sorrow, to be sorry, and mourn: If dreadful and
terrible things be wrought in it, to shake and tremble for fear. Hence it is,
that it is said, Let the Earth be glad, Psalm. 96. verse. 11. And let the Earth
rejoice, 1 Chronicles 16 v. 31. And be joyful O earth, and break forth into singing
O Mountains, Isai 49. v 13. Hence it is, that the Prophet Jeremie says, that
the earth shall mourn, Jer, 4. v. 28. And again, the ways of Sion do mourn,
Lam. 1. v. 4. And hence it is written, At his wrath the earth shall tremble,
Jer. 10. v. 10 And again, he has smitten his people, and the Hills did
tremble, Isai. 5. v. 25. See the like 2 Samuel 22. v. 8. Psalm. 18. v. 7. and
60.2. Job. 9. v. 6. and 26.11. and Hab. 3. v. 10.

Now because the Scripture speaks thus of the Earth by a Metaphor, or
Prosopopocia: It goes on further to signify, by the rejoicing of the earth,
the joyful things done in the earth: And by the mourning of the earth, to
signify, the heavy and sorrowful things done in the earth: And by the fearful
shaking and trembling of the earth, to signify, the dreadful and terrible
things which are done on the earth, and that per Metonymiam Effecti, putting
these Passions, which are caused in the earth, for the things themselves which
caused them. And thus, To arise to shake terribly the earth, signifies here,
to arise, and begin to execute dreadful and terrible Judgments in the Land,
which shall make the very earth to tremble and shak^ for fear.

20.
In that day.] See Verse 11. and 17.

Shall a man cast his Idols which are made of silver, and his Idols which are
made of gold, which they made each one for himself to worship, to the Moles,
and to the Batts.] i. e. In that day shall a man fling away his Idols (though
they are made of silver, and of gold (the most precious metals that are) and
though they made them their Gods to worship them) in dark holes, and dirty
corners, where they use to fling such things as they make no account of: And
this they shall do, out of contempt of their Idols, and out of indign^tion,
that they cannot save them in the time of their adversity.

To the Moles and to the Batts.] By Moles and Batts, are to be understood
Metonymice dark and dirty, or filthy holes and corners, such as Moles and Batts
use to frequent, and make their nests in.

Some observe that the Prophet jesteth here upon these men, as if the Prophet
should say, they shall fling their curious, costl^, and pleasant idols, which
have been the delightful object of their eyes, to Moles and Batts, which
either cannot see, or see but dimly.

21.
To go into the clifts of the rocks] i. e. That he may make haste to go into
the clifts of the rocks.

The Prophet repeateth here what he said verse. 10. and verse. 19. And this he
repeateth the oftener, that being terrible, it migbt the better work upon his
auditors.

22.
Cease ye from man.] i. e. Cease ye from putting any trust or confidence in
man, as though he could deliver you at this time

This the Prophet speaks, because the Jews were to prone to put their trust
in the arm of flesh, that is, in the wisdom, and policy and strength of men,
when any calamity was threatened.

Whose breath.] And by consequence whose life, for no longer is there life in
man, then there is breath in his body.

Whose breath is in his nostrils.] i. e. Whose breath consists in his
nostrils, as in a most necessary instrument. Or, whose breath is ( i. e.
passes) in ( i. e. by) his nostrills: So that if his nostrils be but stopped
(which is easily and quickly done) man must needs perish.

These words show the vanity of man, and contain a reason why we should cease
from putting any trust or confidence in him.

The inward part of a man's nose is divided by a middle partition into two holes
or passages, and these two holes or passages are called the nostrills

Wherein] i. e. In what thing, or, for what thing

Is he to be accounted of?] i. e. Should any one so account of him, or so
highly esteem him, as to put his trust and confidence in him against any
eminent danger?

Note, that this Interrogative has the force of a Negative: q. d. In nothing
is he to be accounted of; especially if we compare him or oppose him to God, as
here he is to be compared and opposed.

When God threatens ruin or misery, in vain do we trust in man to prevent
it, or keep it off.

ISAIAH. CHAP. III.
FOR behold etc.] This has referrence to the last Verse of the former Chapter.
And the seven first Verses of this Chapter contain (at least by the by) a
Reason why they should cease from Man, that is, from putting any trust and
confidence in man, as the Prophet counsels Chap. 2, verse. 22. q. d. Cease I
say, from man, that is, from putting any trust and confidence in man, as though
he could save you and deliver you from the day of the Lord of Hosts, which I
have foretold you of. Chap. 2 12. etc. For behold the Lord of Hosts will take
away your bread, and your your drink, by which your life is supported (and what
will become of man then?) And though there be among you now some mighty men,
and men of war, and Judges, and Prophets, and Prudent, and Ancient, Captains
of fifty, Counselors, cunning Artificers, and eloquent Orators, which are (the
props and stays of your Commonwealth, to uphold it that it falls not to ruin
of it self, and to bear it up a little against foreign enemies: And in which
you put your trust and confidence) Yet before that day of the Lord comes which
is spoken of Chap. 2.13. he will take away all these: And moreover he will give
you Children to be your Princes, and Babes to rule over you: In whose time
there shall be no good government or order among you: But Anarchie, Sedition,
and Confusion. And so miserable shall your State be, as that if there be any
man thought fit to rule among you, yet he will not accept of it: so that there
shall not be any men among you, to keep you from ruin amongst your selves,
much less to preserve you, from the ruin which I threatened to you in the name
of God, in the former Chap. So that your trust and confidence in man, shall be
but vain.

Does take away.] i. e. Will take away.

A Praesent Tense for a Future.

The stay and the staff.] i. e. The Props and the Pillars of the Commonwealth.

These words are Metaphorical, taken from a stay or a staff, that an old
feeble man has, wherewith to uphold him, and keep him from falling.

What he means particularly by the stay and the staff, he tells in the next
words.

The whole stay of bread] i. e. All the bread (and by bread understand all
other food) which is the stay and support of man's life.

When he says, the stay of Bread, he means bread which is a stay ( Supple,
of man's life) and speaks as Paul does Romans 4. verse 11. Where he says,
Abraham received the sign of Circumcision, that is, Circumcision which was a
Sign.

And the whole stay of water.] By water he means all manner of drink, which
he calls a stay, because it is a Stay, a Support of man's life, as well as
bread and meat.

Now when God takes away from man his meat and his drink, man must needs die.
In what therefore is man to be accounted of, or what confidence can we put in
man to save us from what God intends against us, when God can take away his
meat and his drink, and they being taken away man, must needs perish?

2.
The migty man.] Supple, Of Valor.

The Pro^het goes on, to show, what he meant by the stay and the staff, which
he spoke of verse. 1

And the man of war.] i e. The man expert in war and military affairs.

The Judge.] By the Judge is meant, not only he which decideth causes, which
are brought before him; But also the Magistrate, which is set for the
preservation of the Peace, and prevention of disorders.

And the Prophet] The Prophet was he, who was wont to instruct the People in
the way of the Lord: and to whom they were wont to make their addresses in
their distresses, as Ezekiah did to Isaiah 2 King 19.2. and J^siah to Huldah, 2
King 22. verse 13, 14.

And the Prudent] By the Prudent is meant the man which can wisely conjecture
of what will be in future, by considering the state of things in present.

And the An^ient.] By the Ancient is meant, he which has gained wisdom by
long experience.

3.
The Captain of fifty.] The Hebrews had Captains over fifty Soldiers, as we
have most usually Captains over an hundred. See 2 King. 1. Verse. 9, 10, 11,
12, 13, etc.

And the honorable man.] i. e. The man which is of Authority and Grace with
the People, and whom the People honor and reverence, and by whom they will be
easily ruled to do what he would have them.

And the Counselor.] i. e. The Senator or Counselor of State, who is able to
give good counsel and advice in state matters.

And the cunning Artificer.] i. e. And the cunning Engeneer, which is witty and
cunning in devising and making Fortifications, and Engines, and Instruments of
War.

And the eloquent Orator.] The eloquent Orator is of great use to reconcile
those, which are at variance, and to pacify those which are angry, and to
appease tumults and uproares, and to incite and encourage people to fight for
their Country, and to go in an Embassy, and to dissuade an enemy from his
enterprise.

Note, that when the Prophet spoke this, most men in place were wicked and
unable men, as appears verse. 12. Yet all were not so: But there were many good
and able men, even among them, even such as are here mentioned, in the second
and third Verses.

Note, that in the second and third Verses of this Chapter a Singular number is
put every where for a Plural.

Note also, for confirmation of what the Prophet said, Chap. 2.22. That when
God took away these men which are here spoken of, he did experimentally show,
how little we ought to trust in man, and how meanly he is to be accounted of.
He did also show, that there was no possibility or likelihood that man could
save Judah and Jerusalem from the destruction threatened, Chap 2. when he had
taken away these Props and Pillars thereof, and given them such Kings as he
speaks of. v. 4.

4.
And I will give Children to be their Princes, and Babes shall rule over them.]
q. d. And when I have taken away these Props and Pillars, (...) will give
Children to be their Princes, and Babes to rule over them.

^f the Kings themselves had been wise and experienced men in Government, the
miss of most of those men mentioned in the second or third Verses, would have
been the less: For they are but the Kings Instruments and Helps in
Government: But to make up the measure of the misery of this People to the
full, he says, that their Kings themselves shall be Babes and Children, that
is, of no understanding in those things which concern the good of the
Commonwealth.

By Childeren and Babes, He means not Children and Babes for age: But
Children and Babes for understanding, in those things which concern good
government, and the good and safety of the public.

By Princes and those which shall rule ever them, he means their Kings, which
are the Supreme Rulers: and in particular Jehoiakim, Jehoiachin, and Zedekiah,
in whom, and in whose days, that which the Prophet here speaks of, was
fullfilled. Read 2 Kings, Chap. 24.25.

Note, that whereas the Prophet spoke hitherto in his own person, he speaks
here in the person of God.

5.
And the people shall be oppressed.] q. d. And then the people shall be
oppressed.

He shows the misery of that Kingdom, or Commonwealth, wherein Children
bear all the rule: which is no better than an Anarchie, and the fruits of
both are alike.

The Child.] The Child is taken here in regard of his Age.

Against the Ancient.] i. e. Against the Old Man.

The base against the honorable.] i. e. An ordinary Common man, against a
Noble man.

6.
When a man shall take hold of his brother.] That which the Prophet here
speaks, is curte and concise: which is made full and plain thus. q. d. And
every one, seeing this disorder, and oppression, and being weary of it, shall
desire those which are richer and better apparrelled than themselves, to
interest themselves in the government of the Commonwealth, and to apply their
whole endeavor to keep it up, from falling into utter ruin: But yet when a
man shall take hold of his brother, etc.

When a man shall tak^ hold of his brother.] q. d When a man (as every man,
being weary of that Confusion, will be glad to have, and will endeavor to get
a good Ruler) shall take hold of his brother, that he may make his request
known to him: See Chap. 4.1.

Of his Brother.] Put an Emphasis upon this word Brother. q. d. But yet when a
man shall lay hold upon another, though he be his brother, i. e. his kinsman,
etc.

He will lay hold on his brother, rather than another man, because he is more
likely to prevail with him, (because of the neerenesse of his blood) than with
a stranger.

Of the house of his Father.] i. e. Of the family and nere blood and kindred of
his Father.

Because any one of the Nation of the Jews might be called a Brother, Deuteronomy.
15.12. He shows here, that he means a Brother in a nearer and stricter
acception, Viz. A Brother or Kinsman which is near of Kinn to his own Father,
and therefore one bound to him in a nearer link of love than a Common Jew.

Note, that the word House signifies a family or kindred, not in Scripture
only but in Profane Authors also.

And it seems to signify so per Metonymiam Continentis: For at the first,
they only were said to be of an house, which lived together in the same house,
as the Father, and Children of him begot, which lived under the same Roof: But
in Process of time the word came to be of a larger extent, as the word Family
did.

Thou have ^lothing.] i. e. Thou have very good Apparel, and art very well
clothed.

It is requisite that a Magistrate or Ruler be better apparelled than other
Men, that he comes not into contempt with the Vulgar for his mean garments.

By clothing some understand, by a Synecdoche, all things requisite to make a
Ruler: q. d. Thou art fit to make a Ruler, and want nothing which is
requisite thereunto, be thou therefore our Ruler, etc.

Others take it plainly, without a figure, and observe from hence the
lamentable condition of this People, and the great scarcity of Men fit to bear
Rule, which was such, as that if they saw a Man but a little better clad or
apparelled than another, they were earnest with him, to be a Ruler or a
Governor.

Be thou our Ruler.] This signifies not, that they would have him King, but
that they would have him in an Inferior place of Rule, in which they hoped
that he might do some good.

And let this Ruin be under thine hand.] By ruin is here meant Metonymice,
that which is tottering, and ready to fall to ruin, he means the Kingdom or
Commonwealth of Judah, which here he compares (under this Metaphor) to a
ruinous house.

In the whole Sentence there is an Hypallage, for he says, Let this Ruin be
under thine hand, for Let thine hand be under this Ruin, or, Put thine hand
under this Ruinous State to lift it up, or keep it that it falls no further to
ruin,

It is observed, that the Scripture does often mix Metaphors, and begin with
one, and end with another: So does it here; for when it says, under this
Ruin, it alludeth to a Ruinous house ready to fall. But when it says, Put
under thine hand, it alludeth to a man putting his hand under another man's
burden, which is ready to fall, and so lifting it up again. For when an house
is ready to fall, we use not to put under our hand, but set props to it to keep
it up: But we put our hands under a burden, and so help it.

7.
In that day shall he swear saying, etc.] q. d. He shall not take many days,
or any long time to consider of it (as men usually do in weighty businesses)
but in the very some day, in which the motion and request is made to him, he
shall give his resolute answer, and swear saying, etc.

Shall H^ swear.] q d. He shall not simply deny, and say. H^ will not be a
healer, but He shall swear that He will not be a healer; and this he shall
do, that they may know that He is resolutely bent against it, and therefore
they trouble Him and themselves in vain about it.

I will not be an healer.] This answers to that Let the Ruin^ be under thine
hand, and it is, as if he should say, This Ruin shall not be under my hand,
or, I will not put my hand under this Ruin: For the sense is the same, though
the Metaphor be not the same; For there he compares the Kingdom of Judah to a
rotten or ruinous House: Here he compares it to a wounded body, wherefore in
allusion thereunto he says, He will not be an Healer.

It is the part and duty of all in Authority and Rule, not only to preserve a
Commonwealth or Kingdom in a flourishing condition, but to use all means
possible, when they see it declining, to keep it from utter ruin: But such was
the miserable condition of this Kingdom at this time, as that they that were
in Authority did rather hasten than hinder the ruin thereof. and so desperate,
as that they which were not in Authority, would keep themselves out of
Authority.

For in my house is neither bread nor clothing.] This answers to that in the
former verse, Thou have clothing.

The Argument which was there used, to persuade him to take some Rule upon him
for the good of the Commonwealth, was this: Thou have clothing, be thou
therefore our Ruler: The Antecedent of which Argument he here de^^^eth, s^^ing;
In my house is neither bread no^ clothing: Neither br^ad to eat, or at least
not bread in so plentiful a manner as b^cometh a Rulers house: Nor clothing to
put on, at least such clothing as you speak of, cloth^ng fit for the Ruler of a
People.

He mentioned only clothing in the Argument, but he mentions bread also in
the Answer thereunto, which makes the Answer the stronger.

Note that these words, For in my house is neither bread nor clothing, must in
construction come after those words, Make not me a Ruler of the People, (though
they are set before them) for they contain a Reason of those words, Make me not
a Ruler of the People, q. d. Make m not a Ruler of the People, for in my house
is neither bread nor clothing.

8.
For Jerusalem is ruined] i. e. For Jerusalem shall come to ruin.

These are not the words of him, which excuses himself from being a Ruler, but
of the Prophet, who uses here a Preterperfect Tense for a Future, to show,
that what he speaks of shall as surely come to pass, as if it were already
done.

Because their tongue.] The tongue is put here Metonymice, for words proceeding
from the tongue.

To provoke the eyes of his glory.] q. d. So that they do thereby provoke the
Glorious Lord to anger against them.

Note, that the word To, in, To provoke, signifies not the intent of these
Men, but the event of their words and doings.

Note also, that when he says, The eyes of his Glory, he speaks of God, (...),
and puts the Eyes, by a Metonymie, for the whole Man. And therefore does he
put the Eyes for the whole, rather than any other part, in this place; Because
he would intimate, that their sins were openly and impudently committed: And
because that which is done against a man before his eyes, and in his presence,
does more provoke him, than that which is done against him in his absence, and
behind his back.

Note thirdly, that the tongue or words of a man, are here made the Object of
the eyes or sight, as well as his Doings, of which see Chap. 2. v. 1.

Note fourthly, that in these words [of his Glory] the Glory of God is put
(...) for God himself; as when we speak of a King, and say, the Kings Majesty,
we mean the King himself: See the like Chap. 2.10. So that the sense of these
words, To provoke the eyes of his Glory, is this, to provoke his eyes, or Him
who is Glorious.

Or else, of His Glory, is put for Glorious, a Substantive of the Genitive case
for an Adjective; so that the eyes of his Glory may signify his glorious eyes,
as the yoke of his burden signifies his burdensome yoke, Chap. 9. v. 4.

9.
The show of their countenance does witness against them.] Supple that they
are wicked men: q. d. You may guess by their very countenance, that they are
naughty and wicked men, so impudent they are, etc.

And they declare their sin as Sodom.] i. e. They declare their sin as the men
of Sodom did.

We read Genesis 19.5. That when two Angels came to Sodom at even, and were
entertained by Lot, the men of Sodom, all of them, compassed the house round,
and called unto Lot, and said unto him, where are the men which came to thee
this night? Bring them unto us, that we may know them. i. e. That we may abuse
them against nature. Thus did the Sodomites, without shame and blushing,
declare the filthy sin which they would commit. As these were not ashamed to
tell of their sin, no more we^e the men of Judah ashamed to tell what they
would do. And as it was likely, that the Sodomites did boast of their sin,
when they had at any time committed it: So it is likely, that the men of Judah
boasted of theirs, when they had committed it.

Woe unto their soul] i. e. Woe to them.

The soul is put here, by a Synecdoche, for the whole man.

For they have rewarded evil unto themselves.] q. d. For they have brought
evil upon themselves, as a reward of their sins.

10.
Say ye to the Righteous, etc.] This is either spoken by God to His Prophets,
or by the Prophet to other Men.

For they shall eat the fruit of their doings.] q. d. For they shall receive
their reward according to their doings.

Here is a Metaphor, taken from a man which eats of the fruit of an Orchard,
or Vineyard which he himself planted.

Note, that the prophet speaks in this part of the verse in the Plural
number, whereas he spoke in the former part hereof in the Singular number,
though he relates to the same thing. But this kind of Enallage, or Confusion of
Numbers is frequent.

11.
The reward of his hands] i. e. The punishment which is due to him, as the
reward of his works.

He puts the hand here, per Metonymi^m Efficientis, for the works of the hands:
And by the works of the hands, he means, by a Synecdoche, all evil works
whatsoever, whether they be done by the hands, or any other member.

12.
As for my People, etc.] What he said in General of the wicked in the former
verse, That the reward of their hands shall be given them: He shows here in
Particular of the Princes and Rulers which oppressed the People, Verse. 12. etc.
And of the proud women of Jerusalem, who were holden with pride, v. 16 etc.

As for my People, etc.] This speech begins abruptly, as Patheticall
Speeches use to do: And it is the Pity and Compassion which he had of the
People, to see them so oppressed, which made him thus begin: By which kind of
abrupt speech, he sets out also the greatness of the Oppression, which the
Princes and R^lers used toward his People.

He calls the Jews his People, because he called them to be a pec^li^r People
to himself, and did special favors for them.

Children.] By Children are meant men, which have no more understanding to
govern as they ought, than Children have.

Children are their Oppressors.] He should have said, Children are their
Princes, as v. 4 But because their Princes, which were set over them for Good,
did nothing else but oppress them, and abuse their Power that way, he says
not (what they were by their Places) Princes, but what they were by abuse of
their Places) Oppressors.

But what? are they Children, and yet Oppressors?

Answ. The Prophet calls them Children, because they were but Children for true
knowledge and understanding how to manage the Places which they filled; And
Oppressors, Because they were men of Crafty devices, to know which way to
fleece and oppress the people, and did it accordingly. And the Prophet seems
of purpose to put these (as it were Contradictory) terms together, to show the
strange temper of these Men, what fools they were one way, and yet how crafty
and subtle another.

Note, that the Children, which here he speaks of, are not the same with those
which he spoke of Verse. 4. For these, wh ch he speaks of here, were now in
actual being when he spoke these words: But they, which he speaks of there,
were not yet in actual being, but to arise, or be a great w^ile after: And
they were such as the sin of these men b^ought as a Scourge upon the Land.

Note also, that at this time, though there were many wise Princes or Rulers,
as appears by Verse. 2, 3. yet there were also many unwise, as appears by
this place.

And Women.] By Women he means Men, which were impotent and unable to bridle
and oversway their lusts and affect^ons, and which like women, would lust
after, and affect, and covet every thing they saw, and would bend all their
power to compass and obtain what they had a mind to.

And Women rule over them.] Whose Rule must needs be grievous and oppressive.

They which lead thee.] i e. Thy Princes and Rulers.

Princes and Rulers are called the Leaders of their People, by a Metaphor of a
Shepherd, which goes before his Sheep, and leads them when they go to
Pasture, and back again. See Numb. 27. v. 17. Or Princes and Rulers may be said
to lead the people, because People do (for the most part) follow the example
of their Princes and Rulers.

Cause thee to err.] i. e. Cause thee to sin.

He alludeth to that Metaphor which compares the Law of God to a way, of which
see Chap. 2. v. 3.

Princes and Rulers may cause their People to err many ways.

As first, By commanding them to do those things which are contrary to the
Word of God.

Secondly, By persecuting those which are good and godly, and disallowing their
ways, and yet tolerating the wicked, and their doings.

Thirdly, By favoring (if not hiring) false Prophets, to prophecy happiness
to them, whom God abhors.

Fourthly, By persuading the People, both by themselves and their Parasites,
that they govern in righteousness, when they do nothing less.

Fifthly, By alluring and inducing them by their ^xample to sin, as to Idolatry
or the like. And this last seems especially, to be the Prophets meaning in
this place.

The Prophet taxed the Rulers with oppression in the first part of this verse:
Here he shows them guilty of more wickedness than that.

And destroy the way of thy Paths.] i. e. And destroy the way in which thou
should walk.

This way is the Law of God, according to which we should direct our lives.

The Law of God is compared to a strait and narrow way. Now as such a way is
easily marred and destroyed, by the continual crosse-trampling of cattle, and
crosse-walking of Men, so that no man can see that way to walk directly in it:
So is the Law of God marred and destroyed (at least in the true sense of it) by
the sins and transgressions of R^lers, so that they which look upon their
example cannot discern between the Commandments of God, and corrupt usage of
men, but call evil good, and good evil. Hence has Idolatry been taken for
the service or worship of God, and other things, which have been sins in
their own nature, have been taken for matters of Indifferency.

13.
The Lord stands up to plead] Subaudi, But. q. d. But the Lord stands up to
plead the cause of his People.

And stands to judge the People] Supple, which are thus oppressed by their
Rulers.

The sense of this verse is, q. d. But the Lord is ready to relieve those which
are oppressed, and to deliver them from their Oppressors.

Note, that to plead a man's cause, is often taken for to deliver a man from
oppression and wrong, for so it is taken 1 Samuel 24. verse. 15. and 1 Samuel 25.
verse. 39. and Psalm. 35. v 1. and Psalm. 43. v. 1. etc. And as to plead a man's
cause, so to judge a man, or to give Sentence in his cause, is taken for to
deliver a man from oppression and wrong, etc. For so it is taken 1 Samuel 24. v.
15. Psalm. 43. v. 1. and Psalm. 10. v. 18. And these words come thus to be taken,
by a Metaphor drawn from the usage and customs of Courts of Justice. For
because a man, which is arrested and troubled upon a false action, when his
cause is pleaded by a good and honest Lawyer, and Sentence given therein by a
just Judge, is relieved and delivered from further molestation and trouble in
that Suite: Hence to plead a man's cause, and to judge him, come Metaphorically
to signify, or to be taken, for to deliver a man any way from the oppression
and wrong which he suffers.

But you will object, that to judge, signifies to punish and to plague; For so
it signifies Heb. 13. v. 4. and Psalm. 9. v. 19. How then can it signify to
deliver from oppression, and to relieve a man? for these seem contrary.

Answer: To judge, signifies both to relieve and deliver from oppression and
wrong, and also to punish and to plague, and both from the same Metaphor. But
the diversity of the signification comes from the diversity of men, or of the
causes which are judged. For if a Man's cause be good, and he in the mean time
suffers wrong, then is he, when he is judged, and sentence is given in his
cause, relieved and delivered out of trouble. But if a man's cause be naught,
and he has done the wrong, then when he is judged, and sentence is given in
his cause, he is doomed to some punishment or other: And hence it is, that this
word comes to signify so contrarily.

The Lord stands up to plead] i. e. The Lord is ready to plead, or about to
plead

He alludeth to the Posture of a Counselor or Advocate, when he is about to
plead: For though He sat down before, yet when He is about to plead, He rises
from his Seat, and stands up, and pleads standing.

He stands to Judge.] What we said of a Counselor or Advocate, we say the
like of a Judge, when he is about to given Sentence; for then he usually
stands up, though he sat before.

14.
The Lord will enter into judgment with the Ancients of his People.]

Judgment is taken here for the Judgment Hall, or Court, or Place where
Causes were pleaded and judged: And to enter into Judgment, is like to that
Phrase of the Latins, In jus ambulare.

Note, that because a Malefactor, or he that has done wrong, when he is
cited, or brought into Court, it is for this end, that he might there receive
the sentence of the Judge, according to his desert, and might be punished
according to that Sentence: Hence, (by putting the Antecedent for the
Consequent) to enter into Judgment with the Anciens of the People, signifies
here, to punish them, or to have them punished for their oppression, etc.

With the Ancients of his People] i. e. With the Rulers of his People.

The Rulers of a People are called the Ancients thereof, because they are for
the most part chosen out of Ancient Men: Or because they were chosen out of
such at first. Hence were the Senators of Rome s^ called, because they were,
Senes, that is, Ancient men, which were at first chosen to that place: Hence
were the Lacedaemonian (...) so called. And hence are the Prime Rulers in a
City or Borough with us, called Al^er-men, quasi, Elder-men. Yet he calls
these same men Children, Verse. 12. But it is not from their years, or from
their place, but from their Ignorance, and their carriage, that he calls them
Children in that place.

For ye have eaten up the Vineyard.] By the Vineyard, he means the Poor,
of whom the Lord has as great a care as a Master of a Vineyard has of his
Vineyard: See Chap. 5. verse. 7.

Men eat only the Grapes of the Vineyard, but the Beasts eat the Vines
themselves: To such therefore may these men be here compared; except you take
the Vineyard by a Metonymie, for the Grapes of the Vineyard.

By eating up the Vineyard, is meant, the spoiling of the Poor, of their money
and goods, by oppression: And wonder not that this should so signify, when it
is said in the same sense, They eat up my People as they eat bread. Psalm. 14 v.
4.

Note here the Enallage of the Person, how he passes from the Third to the
Second Person.

The spoil of the poor.] i. e. The goods which ye have spoiled the Poor of,
or, which ye have wrung from the poor by oppression and extortion.

What mean ye that ye beat my people?] By my people, are here meant the poor,
for the Lord does often call the poor, his people, because of the care which he
has of them, as Psalm. 14.4. and James, 2.5.

15.
What mean ye that ye beat my people to pieces, and grind the faces of the
poor?] q. d. What reason have ye, thus to oppress my people, to wit, the
poor, and to get their means and their substance from them by Oppression?

Those Phrases are both of them Metaphorical, alluding to wheat, whose flower
is gotten out by beating, or by grinding.

For note, that they were wont not one- to grind their wheat in a Mill, but
also to bray it, and beat it in pieces in a mortar (as appears Prove. 27.
verse. 22.) that they may get the flower out of it. Hence they which imprison
the poor, or use them hardly, that they may get their money or means away from
them, are said to beat them in pieces, and to grind them. The like phrase we
have among us, which speaks of squeezing a man, which phrase is Metaphorical,
and taken from Grapes, or such like fruits, which we squeeze, that we may get
the juice out of them.

But you will say, that a Man's money or his means, are not the same to a Man,
as the flower is to the wheat, or the juice is to the grapes.

Answer, Nor need they be to make the Metaphor good, for Similitudes run not
upon four feet: Yet the Scripture often speaks in this case of a poor man's
money and goods as if it were part of the man, yea, the man himself, see Micah
3. v. 2.3. Job 29. v. 17. Prove. 30. v. 14. Psalm. 14. v. 4.

And grind the faces of the Poor.] i. e. And grind the poor.

He uses here a Synecdoche, of the Part for the Whole. And puts the faces of
the Poor for the Poor themselves, and the face rather than any other part in
this Place: Because this oppression of the Poor did show it self in the Faces
of the Poor, when they went heavy and sorrowful, through the manifold wrongs
which they suffered: And when the hunger, which they sustained for want of
their means to buy them bread, showed it self in their lean, thin, pined, and
starved faces.

16.
The daughters of Sion.] i. e. The women of Jerusalem.

Sion is taken for Jerusalem, as Cap. 1. v. 8. And Jerusalem (as any other
City may) is taken here, by a Prosopopoeia, for a Mother, her Inhabitants all
for Children, the Men for her Sons, the Women for her Daughters, see Chap. 1.
v. 27.

Are haughty.] Some understand this not only of the haughtiness of the mind,
(which certainly is chiefly here intended) but of the Stature of the body also:
As though these women, to make themselves more tall and stately, used high-sole
Shoes or stately Buskins.

And walked with stretched forth necks.] Like Cranes or Swans.

The Prophet uses a kind of Sarcasme in this description.

It is the manner of proud Ones to go as loftily as they can, but humble Men
and Women look low.

And wanton eyes.] i. e. Lascivious eyes, which they cast wantonly and
lasciviously upon young Men, thereby to allure them to their embraces.

Walking. Supple, Abroad in the streets, which is not so seemly for them, as to
keep at home.

And mincing as they go.] i. e. Mincing and cutting their steps and strides,
as it were, into little pieces, and taking but a piece of a stride at a time as
they go.

And making a tinckling with their feet.] How this tinckling was made with
their feet as they went, no man can certainly know, being utterly unacquainted
with the dressings and fashions of the women of that time. But some conjecture
that they were bells about their feet, by the tinckling of which, the measure
and composure of their steps might be taken notice of. Others conjecture, that
they were Jewels and Pearls in their Shoes (and Pliny writes of such lib. 9.
cap. 35.) and that the hitting and striking of these together, as they went
mincing, made this tinckling. Others have other conjectures: but they wore some
kind or other of tinckling Ornament about their feet, v. 18.

17.
The Lord will smite with a Scab the Crown of the head.] This Scab might come
either immediately from God, or by carrying burdens upon their heads (as
captives are put to all hardness.) Or by pulling of their hair by the roots,
which they were wont to do in their Lamentations.

And the Lord will discover their secret parts.] This was when they had not any
clothes left them to cover their nakedness: For the Babylonish Soldiers under
Nebuchadnezzar pilladg'd them of their long trained gowns, and scarce left
them, or allowed them a rag to wear.

18.
In that day.] i. e. In the day in which the Lord shall punish this pride of
theirs by the Babylonians under Nebuchadnezzar.

He puts a Relative here without an Antecedent, as the Hebrews often use to
do: Or else this relates to the day mentioned, chap. 2. v. 12

19.
The tinckling Ornaments about their feet.] See verse. 16.

The chains.] Which they wore about their necks

And the bracelets.] Which they wore about their wrists.

And the Nose Jewels.] i. e. Jewels hanging down from the forehead, as low as
the Nose.

Some say, that the Eastern women were wont to were Jewels in their noses, as
well as in their ears, by boring a hole in their nose, as they did in the
ear, and that the Prophet speaks here of such jewels or rings.

22.
The changeable suits of apparel.] Changeable Suits of Apparel, were many
Suits of Apparel, whereof they wore one one day, and another another, and
another a third day, which change and variety of Suits, and of Apparel, was
accounted a piece of the Luxury of those times.

And the mantles.] They were wont (it seems) to use and wear mantles about
their shoulders, especially in cold weather, and in journeys, as many Eastern
women do at this day.

And the crisping pins.] With which they used to crisp and curle their hair.

23.
The glasses.] i. e. The Looking-glasses, wherein they did contemplate and
behold their beauty, and dress and prank themselves.

24.
Instead of sweet smells.] caused by the Spices and Perfumes, which they
carried about them.

There shall be stink.] Caused by noisome scabs and putrified Sores. Or rather
through want of change of clothing, and good lodging, for from the bodies of
such proceeds a noisome and stinking smell.

Instead of a girdle a rent.] Observe the Antithesis here, a girdle is an
Ornament added to, and the above the whole and complete garment: A rent is a
deformity, and taking from the garment which was whole and complete.

Well-set hair.] i. e. Hair set orderly and trimly, by trim dressing.

Baldness.] This baldness might be caused, either by some disease or scab
which God might bring upon them: Or by themselves, tearing their hair off of
their heads, through grief and impatience: Or by the Babylonians their enemies
(if at least they were wont to shave those which they conquered, and made
Captives, as the Romans did:) Or by the servile work, and the burdens which
they bore on their heads in their captivity, of which see Ezekiel. 29. v. 18.

A stomacher.] Which uses to be more precious and costly than any part of the
garments beside.

A girding of sackcloth.] i e. Sackcloth girt upon their stomach.

Sackcloth, as it is the coursest of clothes, so is it also a badge of
mourning, Psalm. 30. v. 11. and 35.13.

And burning.] i. e. A Face burnt with the Sun.

He puts an Abstract here for a Concrete.

Or by burning is meant Deformity, and Vgliness caused by the burning of the
Sun, per Metonymiam Efficientis.

25.
Thy men shall fall by the Sword.] Viz. By the Sword of the Babylonians. For
the Judgments here threatened were performed by the Babylonians, when
Nebuchadnezzar came against Jerusalem, and took it, and carried the Jews into
captivity.

The Prophet does by an Apostrophe turn his speech to Jerusalem.

And thy mighty.] i. e. And thy strong and valiant men.

26.
And her gates.] i. e. And the Gates of Jerusalem.

He changes the Person here, speaking of Jerusalem in that third Person, to
whom he spoke in the 25. Verse in the second Person.

Her gates shall lament and m^run.] He uses a Prosopopoeia, or a Metaphor
here, attributing that to inanimate creatures, which is proper to man.

Note, that within the Gates of the City (not of Jerusalem only, but of other
Citys also) there were wont to be large and fair rooms, where public
Assemblies of the Citizens used to be kept for matters of the Commonwealth,
that is, for justice and judgment, and the like, Genesis 34.20. Deuteronomy. 17.5. and
22.15. and 25.7. Ruth. 4.1, 11, etc.

Now because the Gates being destinated and appointed for these Assemblies,
would have been glad and rejoiced when they were frequented by them; but
lamented and mourned at the slaughter and carrying them away, which were wont
to assemble there, if they had had sense, and understanding. Hence it is, that
he says here, Her Gates shall lament and mourn, because the Judges, and
Lawyers, and others, which used to meet there, and frequent those places,
should be either slain by the sword of the Babylonians, or carried away into
captivity.

And she being desolate.] i. e. And Jerusalem her self being left as a widow
without an husband, and a mother spoiled of her children.

Shall sit upon the ground.] Viz. As mourners were wont to do, Ezra, 9.3. Job,
2.13. 2 Samuel 12.16.

He speaks here by a Prosopopoeia, or a Metaphor, of Jerusalem, as of a
Mother or Matron, full of grief and heaviness. Jeremie uses the same manner
of speech concerning Jerusalem, Lament. 1. Verse. 1. and our Prophet of
Babylon, Chap. 47.1.

ISAIAH. CHAP. IIII.
AND in that day.] Supple, In which God shall make such a desolation as is
spoken of, in the third Chapter.

This does depend upon the foregoing Chapter. And the Prophet here shows,
that there should be so few men left after the desolation and destruction there
spoken of, as that many women should scarce be able to get one man to be their
husband.

Seven women.] i. e. Many women.

He puts a certain number, for an uncertain.

Shall take hold of one man.] As having an earnest suit or request to him: And
as though they would not let him go, until he had condescended to their
request.

The request that they should make to him is, that he would be their Husband
and marry them.

We will eat our own bread, and wear our own apparrell] The Husband was to find
his Wife with food and raiment, Exodus 21.10. Least therefore this man should
deny their request, and put them off with this, that he was not able to find
food and raiment for them, therefore he would not be their husband: They
prevent him, and tell him, that they will not put him to that trouble and
charge, but will find their own food and their own apparel.

Only let us be called by thy name.] i. e. Only let us be thine, that is, thy
wives.

To be called by a man's name, or, to have a man's name called on a thing,
signifies to be a man's own: For every thing, which is owned, is called by the
name of the owner, as David's Wife, Salomons Son, Paul's Cloak.

To take away our reproach.] ^t was a reproach and a shame among the Hebrews
for a woman to be of ripe years, and not to be married: So also it was to be
without issue, Luke, 1.25. Genesis 30 23. This reproach was (one part of it)
certainly taken away, and the other likely to be taken away by marriage.

2.
In that day] Here is a R^lative put without an Antecedent: But what day he
speaks of, may be gathered from the fourth Verse: It is the day or time when
the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the Daughter of Sion, ^^d shall
have purged away the blood of Hier^^^^^^ and so shall bring the residue of his
Pe^ out of their Captivity.

Here the Prophet prophesi^ of joyful things (for the comfort of those which
were righteous) after those grievous things which he foretold, for the terror
of the wicked.

Here should this fourth Chapter have begun.

Shall the branch of the Lord.] The Prophet supposes here, that the Branch of
the Lord would spring up, as foreseeing it in the Spirit, therefore he speaks
not of that, that it shall spring up, but comes directly to speak of the
Glory, and Beauty, and Excellency of it, when it shall spring up: Or else he
includes both, by a Sylepsis: q. d. And in that day there shall spring up a
Branch of the Lord, and that Branch of the Lord shall be beautiful, etc.

The branch of the Lord.] By the Branch of the Lord is meant, the Salvation
which God wrought for the Jews, when he redeemed them by Cyrus out of the
Babylonish Captivity: Of which salvation our Prophet speaks often, from the
fourth Chapter of this Prophecy to the end thereof: And in the 45. Chapter and
the eighth Verse, he speaks of it Metaphorically as he does here, that is, as
of a Branch, or a Plant, which the Lord makes to spring out of the Earth.

The branch of the Lord shall be beautiful and glorious, etc.] q. d. The
Salvation, which God will work for those which escape of Jews, shall bring
honor and glory to them that escape, and make them honorable and glorious ^n
the eyes of all men.

How honorable and glorious the Jews were, by reason of this Salvation, see
among other places, Chap. 40. v. 5. Chap. 41. v. 10. etc. Chap. 43. v. 14.
Chap. 45. v. 17. Chap. 49. v. 9, 23. etc. Chap. 52. v. 9. Chap 54. v. 1. etc.

And the fruit of the Earth.] i. e. And the fruit which shall spring up out of
the Earth.

This is but a repetition of the former Sentence: And the fruit of the Earth
signifies the same here, as the Branch of the Lord does there.

Note, that the fruit of the Earth is of larger extent than the fruit of Trees,
or Plants, or Branches: For not only the friut of Trees, and of Plants, and of
Branches, but Trees, and Plants, and Branches themselves may be called the
fruits of the Earth.

And comely.] i. e. And an Ornament.

For them that are escaped of Israel.] i. e. For those Jews which shall escape
death, and survive after the destruction and captivity, which the Babylonians
shall bring upon that People.

Of Israel.] i. e. Of the Jews, to wit, the Tribes of Judah and Benjamin, see
Chap. 1.3.

3.
He that is left in Sion, and he that remains in Jerusalem.] By him that is
left in Sion, and him that remains in Jerusalem, is meant, he that remains
alive of the Jews after the Babylonish captivity.

Note therefore, that in Sion, and in Jerusalem, is, as if he should say, in
Jacob, and in Israel, For as Jacob or Israel is often put for the Jews, and
that per Metonymiam Efficientis. Because Jacob or Israel was the Father of the
Jews. So is Sion, or Jerusalem, put for the same Jews by the same figure:
Because Sion or Jerusalem was the Mother of the Jews. But observe, that Jacob
or Israel was the true natural Father of the Jews: But Sion or Jerusalem was
called their Mother only by a Metaphor, yet that she was so, at least, called
their Mother, we may learn from Chap. 49. Verse. 20. and Chap. 50. Verse. 1. and
Gal. 4. Verse. 25.

But yet we may take Sion and Jerusalem here plainly without a Metaphor, that
the sense of these words may be this, Viz. And he, Supple, of the Jews which is
left alive, Supple, and shall dwell in Sion, and he, Supple, of the Jews which
remains, Supple, alive, and shall dwell in Jerusalem, after the Babylonish
captivity, shall, etc.

For note, that though many of the Jews surv^ved after the Babylonish
captivity, yet the Blessings spoken of in this Chapter, did appertain only to
them which returned and dwelt in Jerusalem.

Shall be called Holy.] i. e. Shall be holy.

For the Hebrews do often use vocal verbes for real, and (...), to be
called, for (...), to be.

To be holy, does primarily and originally signify to be separated from others
by way of excellency; Hence they which excel the vulgar sort of Men in Piety,
and Religion, are commonly called Holy, and in this sense may these Men be
called Holy in this place.

Yet because this place speaks both in the precedent and Subsequent Verses, of
the blessings of God to this People, in keeping and preserving them: I had
rather take Holy here, for such as God separates and sets apart from other
People, by his blessings to them, and hedge of protection about them, by which
he makes a difference between them and other People;

In which sense the word Holy is taken, Exodus 19. Verse. 5, 6. where we thus
read, Now therefore if ye will obey my voice indeed, then shall ye be a
peculiar treasure unto me above all the people: (For all the earth is mine) And
ye shall be unto me a Kingdom of Priests, and an holy Nation.

In opposition to Holiness thus taken, God is said to proph^ne the Princes of
the Sanctuary, Chap. 43. Verse. 28.

Every one that is written among the living in Hierusalem] i. e. Every one
which shall be alive after the Babylonish Captivity, and shall live in
Jerusalem, shall be called Holy.

He alludeth here in this phrase to the Mustering of an Army after a Battle,
where the names of those which escaped in Battle, are written and entered into
a Muster-Roule, or Muster-Book, that so they m ght know what they have lost,
and what forces they have left.

4.
When the Lord shall have washed away the filth, etc.] i. e. When the Lord
shall have washed away the sins, etc.

He likeneth the sin of the Soul here, to the filth of the body; And the taking
sin away, to the washing away of that filth by water: But the way by which God
took away the filth of sin here spoken of, was by destroying the incorrigible
sinner, and bringing others to amendment of life, both which he did by the
Babylonians, into whose hands he gave them.

The filth of the Daughter of Sion.] Read Chap. 3.16.] To wh ch place the
Prophet does here allude.

The blood.] Blood is put here Metonymice for Murder, by which the blood of man
is shed: And that again is put Hyp^rbolice for Oppression, See Chap. 1. Verse
15.

The Prophet does here allude to the Oppression which he spoke of Chap. 3.
Verse. 12. etc.

From the midst of her.] i. e. From her, or, out of her.

An Hebrew Periphrase.

By the Spirit of judgment.] The Spirit of Judgment, is put here
Periphrastically for Judgment, the word Spirit, redounding by an Hebraisme.

By Judgment, the Prophet means the Calamities and Punishment which God
brought upon this People by the Babylonians, which kind of Calamities and
Punishments are called Judgemenes, because of the Justness of them, and that
by a Metaphor from those Punishments, which are inflicted upon a Malefactor
upon a Just Sentence or Judgment given against him.

And by the spirit of burning.] i. e. And by burning, for the word Spirit
redounds here as it did before.

He means the same thing by burning here as he did by Judgment just before.
But he alludeth here to the manner of Goldsmiths, and other the like
Crafts-mens, who purify their Gold and other metals from their dross, by
Fire and Burning.

5.
And the Lord will create upon evey dwelling place, etc.] The meaning of this
Place is, that God will protect them, and keep them in all their dwellings, and
will be no less p^esent with them for this purpose, than ^e was with their
fathers, when he brought them out of Egypt, and went before them by day in a
Pillar of a Cloud to lead them the way, and by night in a Pillar of Fire to
give them light, to go by day and by nigh^, Exodus 13. v. 21.

Upon her Assemblies.] i. e. Upon her particular families, which are Assemblies
of diverse individual men. Or upon the Assemblies, in which men shall meet in
her, in the Temple and in the Synagogues for holy duties. And upon the
Assemblies in which men shall meet in her Gates, for the Administration of
Justice, and other matters concerning the good of the Commonwealth.

A cloud and smoak] i. e. A dark black smoakie Cloud.

Here is a figure called (...) where two or more words are put to signify one
thing.

A cloud and a smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night.] He
alludeth here (as I intimated) to the Pillar of a Cloud, and the Pillar of
Fire, in which the Lord went before the Israelites by day and by night, as they
went out of Egypt, Exodus 13.21. which Pillar seemed not only to direct them
which way to go by day and by night, but served also to defend them from the
Scorching heat of the Sun in hot days, as they traveled through the
Wilderness: And from the Coldness of the night when the nights were cold, (to
both which the Psalmist may seem to allude, when he says, The Lord is thy
keeper etc. The Sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the Moon by night, Psalm.
121. v. 5, 6.)

For though the Cloud ascended a great height in the Air, straight up like a
Pillar, yet there it dispersed it self abroad (it seems) like another Cloud,
at least when need was, and so kept them from the scorching heat of the Sun, as
it was a Cloud: And as it kept them from scorching heat in the day, when the
weather was hot, as it was as Cloud, so it is probable, that it kept them from
the coldness of the night, when the nights were cold, as it was fire.

Note, that this and the like places are not so to be understood, as if the
Prophet meant, that God would create indeed a Cloud, and Smoke, and a Flaming
fire to protect Jerusalem, and her Assemblies, as he did for the people of
Israel, Exodus 13. v. 21. But here we must observe, that the Hebrews do usually
express l^ke things by like, and here by a Cloud in the day, and by a Fire by
night, he signifies Gods continual protection of them, who did once protect
the Israelites after this manner.

For upon all the Glory shall be a defense.] He takes Glory here for glorious
ones, and puts an Abstract for a Concrete: And by the glorious ones he means
those Jews which survived after the Babylonish Captivity, which were glorious
by their Salvation and deliverance, Verse 2

When he says, that upon these shall be a Defense (that is, a Covering to
defend them:) His meaning is, that they shall be saved by Gods providence, and
defended from all their enemies, and from all the evil that they can do. And
in his expression he is Metaphorical, and alludeth to the Covering of Goats
hair, Exodus 26. v. 7. Or of Rams skins, Exodus 26. v. 14. which were made as a
Defense or Covering, to preserve and defend the Curious Curtains of the
Tabernacle (of which we read Exodus 26 v. 1.) from Rain, and Wind, and any thing
that might hurt them.

6.
And there shall be a Tabernacle for a shadow, etc.] He alludeth here to the
Tents and Tabernacles, which the Israelites made and dwelt in, in the
Wilderness. q. d. And as the Tents and Tabernacles, in which the ancient
Israelites dwelt in the Wilderness, did keep them from the heat of the Sun,
and from Storms, and Rain, so will God defend these, and keep them safe from
all evil.

This Copulative, And, couples these with those words, And the shining of a
flaming Fire by night: So that those words (For upon all the Glory shall be a
defense) may be read with a Parenthesis.

From the heat.] i. e. To defend them from the heat of the Sun, when the Sun
shines hot.

For a Place of Refuge, and for a Covert from storm and from rain] i. e. For a
place of Refuge, and for a Covert to defend them from storm and from rain, when
a Tempest is up.

What the Prophet here prophesies of, we may see historically fulfilled, Ezra.
Chap. 4. Chap. 5. hap. 6. and Nehemiah Chap. 4. And the benefit of this
protection did the Jews enjoy till almost the times of Antiochus. And God
failed not of his protection until they failed of their Obedience, which is a
Condition tacitly included in all the promises of God.

Note here, that as what the Prophet says from the second Verse to the end of
this Chapter, does in the first sense show the Glory and Protection, which
should befall the Men of Judah and Jerusalem after the Babylonish Captivity:
So in a second and more sublime sense, it shows the Glory and Protection
which God would show to his People under the Gospel, after their delivery from
the Thraldom, which they were in under Satan, and their redemption from their
spiritual bondage.

ISAIAH. CHAP. V.
NOW will I sing to my well-beloved a song of my well-beloved.] i. e. Now will
I Isaiah, the servant of the Lord, sing to the Lord, whom I heatrily love, a
song concerning himself.

Note, that to sing to God, is to sing in the honor and praise of God, and so
the Psalmist does also often use this Phrase.

A song of my well-beloved.] i. e. A song concerning himself, or a song
containing his praises (For he might call this song a song of his well-beloved,
in the same sense as he said, I will sing to my well-beloved.

Note here, that it is probable from the first Verse of the following Chapter,
that the Prophecy contained in this Chapter, was made known to Isaiah in the
year that King Vzziah died.

2.
And he fenced it.] He observes here the method of husbandmen, who being
about to make a Vineyard, first fence in the ground, to keep it from cattle,
and things that may hurt it.

And gathered out the stones thereof.] This is the next thing which the
Husbandmen do, they gather out the stones, that the ground may be the plainer,
and easier to dig, and better for the Plants which shall be planted therein.

With the choicest Vine.] i. e. With the best Vines.

Here is a Singular number put for a Plural.

And built a Tower in the midst of it.] The use of a Tower in a Vineyard, was
for the Vine-dressers and keepers of the Vineyard, to betake themselves thither
in storm and rain, and to lay up their instruments therein: But especially
for them to abide and watch there, that they might look to the Vineyard, that
neither Thieves nor Beasts should spoil it.

The Prophet calls this a Cottage Cap. 1. v. 8.

And also made a Wine Press therein.] Viz. That the Grapes that grew there,
might be pressed therein to make Wine.

And he looked] Supple, After all his care and charge.

That it should bring forth grapes.] i. e. Sweet grapes, which are pleasant to
the taste, and acceptable to the stomach, and which would make excellent Wine.

Wild Grapes.] i. e. Bitter, sower, unpleasant grapes, like wild grapes.

Note, that the wild grape is the fruit of that Plant, which is called the Wild
Vine, which is that Plant different in Species from the choice Vine, which
makes some Interpreters to expound wild grapes here, by a note of similitude,
q. d. Grapes like wild grapes. But though the wild grape be the fruit of the
wild Vine, and never comes of the Vine naturally: Yet being that this is a
Proverbiall kind of speech, we may expound it without a note of similitude: For
Proverbs do not always observe the course of nature, and what naturally
proceeds from what, as you may see, Chap. 14.29. Where the Serpent is said to
produce a Cock^trice, and the Cockatrice to bring forth a flying Serpent, and
Chap 59.5. Where the Cockatrice egg is said to break out into a Viper.

3.
And now O inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, etc.] These words are
spoken in the Pe^^on o^ God, whom the Prophet called his well-beloved. verse. 1.

Judg^ I pray you betwixt me and my Vineyard] Supple, Which of us two were in
the f^ult, that it brought not forth grape^, but wild grapes.

God calls the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah to judge here;
Because the application of this Parable concerns them, and there is no better
way to show that a man is justly condemned, than to make him by some way or
other to condemn himself. Thus did Nathan deal with David, 2 Samuel 12.2. And
thus did our Savior deal with the Priests and Elders, Mat. 21. v. 33.40.

4
What could have been done more to my Vineyard that I have not done in it?] q.
d. What have I omitted that a good Vine-dresser should do? Or, what have I
neglected, which was needful to make my Vineyard fruitful?

Wherefore when I looked.] q. d. What then is the reason? Or where is the fault
(is it in me, or in my Vineyard?) that when I looked, that it should bring
forth grapes, it brought forth wild graces?

5.
And now.] Supple, That the fault is not in me, but in my Vineyard.

Note here, that we must understand (between this and the former verse) that
the men, whom God called to judge between Him and his Vineyard, gave sentence
for Him against his Vineyard: Upon which sentence, God goes on to give
sentence against his Vineyard, as it deserved.

Go to.] This raises attention.

I will take away the hedge thereof.] Supple, That men and Beast may freely go
in and out at their pleasure.

And break down the wall thereof.] This is a Repetition of those words, I will
take away the hedge thereof.

Where note, that in stony places, they were wont to make their fences of
stones built into walls in stead of Hedges of thorns.

Yet some take the Hedge for one fence, and the wall for another: As though the
Vineyard had a double fence about it, an outward fence of a Hedge of Thorns,
an inward of a Wall of Stones.

It shall be trodden down] Supple, By men and beasts.

6.
It shall not be pruned.] When Vines grow rank and too luxuriant, they are to
be cut and pruned, that they may bear the better.

Nor dug.] They were wont to dig at the roots of the Vines, to open them,
and let in the air and rain the better; as also to dung the roots, that the
fruit may be the more, and the fairer.

There shall come up briars and thorns.] Supple, Instead of the Vines, which
shall be trodden down. Or, there shall grow up briars and thorns among the
Vines, which shall suck away the juice from the roots of the Vines, both which
are the signs of a Vineyard negl^cted and rejected.

I will also command the Clouds that they rain no rain upon it.] And the
Plants which are planted upon a hill, must needs wither away without rain.

7.
For the Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts is the house of Israel.] This
Conjunction For, if it be a Causal, and so taken, shows that there is an
(...) here, and that something is to be understood: That therefore which is to
be understood here, is this, or the like, q. d. Now therefore the Lord will
forsake his People, the house of Israel and the men of Judah and will leave
them to be spoiled by their enemies and will not help them, for that which is
meant by the Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts, is the house of Israel, and that
which is meant by his pleasant Plants, is, the men of Judah.

But yet note, that some take For here, for Now truly, and so make the
sentence perfect without an Elleipsis.

For the Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts is the house of Israel] i. e. For they
which are meant and signified in this parable by the Vineyard of the Lord of
Hosts, is the house of Israel, etc.

The house of Israel.] The house of Israel is taken here for the Jews: See
Chap. 1. Verse. 3.

This verse tells us, that what the Prophet sang of the Vineyard in the
former Verses, was a Parable: Now although it be not necessary that whatsoever
is contained in a Parable, should have its application (because many things are
spoken to make up the narration, and many things are added to adorn it) And
although it might seem enough to make this Parable and the Apodosis thereof to
meet to say, that, as this Vineyard had all things requisite to make it
fruitful: So had the Jews whatsoever was needful to make them good: And yet
for all that, as the Vineyard prooved naught; so did the Jews: And therefore
as the Lord would lay waste his Vineyard, so would he give over his people to
desolation: And although little more than this is expressed, in the Apodosis
here given. Yet because Interpreters have been more accurate in explication of
every member of this Parable, than ordinary, I will here take a review of it,
and with them run it over again.

1.
My well-beloved.] i. e. God whom I love dearly.

Has a Vineyard] By this is meant the house of Israel, verse. 7.

In a very fruitful hill.] By this fruitful hill is meant Judaea, which was
high for situation, and mountainous, yet fruitful for the quality of the soil.

2.
And he fenced it] i. e. He gave it his Protection, and kept it from all its
enemies which dwelt round about it.

And gathered out the stones thereof.] i. e. He did cast out thereof the Gods
of Stone, and the Canaanites which worshipped those Gods, Psalm. 80.8. who by
worshipping stones, were like to the stones which they worshipped. Psalm. 115 8.

And planted it with the choicest Vine.] By the choicest Vine or, Vines, are
meant, the men of Judah, v 7.

And built a Tower in the midst of it.] By this Tower is meant Jerusalem,
which was the strongest fortress of all that Country.

And also made a Wine Press therein.] By this is meant the Altar of
Jerusalem, which ran with the blood of the slain beast, as the Winepress did
with the juice of the pressed grapes.

And he looked that it should bring forth grapes.] By grapes are meant, work^s
of Righteousness, v. 7.

And it brought forth wild grapes] By wild grapes are meant wo^k^s of
unrighteousness^, v. 7. etc.

3.
And now O Inhabitants of Jerusalem and men of Judah, judge I pray you betwixt
me and my Vineyard.] q. d. And now O Inhabitants of Jerusalem and men of
Judah, speak your selves, whether I or my Vineyard, that is, whether I or you
be in the fault, that for works of Righteousness, ye bring forth works of
unrighteousness.

4.
What could I have done more to my Vineyard that I have not done in it.] q. d.
What greater kindness could have been showed to a People, than I have showed
to you, that I might induce you to obey my Commandments, and work the works
o^ righteousness.

Wher^fore when I looked that it should bring forth grapes, brought it forth
wild grapes?] q. d. Why then, when I looked that ye should work the works of
Righteousness, did y^ work the works of unrighteousness?

And now go to. I will tell you what I will (...) to my Vineyard.] q. d. And
now go to, I will tell you how I will deal with you my People.

5.
I will take away the hedge there^f, and (...) shall be eaten up: and beat d^wn
the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden d^wn.] i. e. I will forsake you, and
be your Shield and defense no longer, but suffer your enemies to invade you and
spoil you.

6.
And I will lay it waste, it shall not be pruned nor dug, but there shall
come u^ briars and thorns.] i. e. No body shall have any care of you, or
respect to you.

I will also command the Clouds that they rain no rain upon it.] i. e. I will
also withhold my loving kindness from my Vineyard, that is, from you.

7.
The house of Israel, and the men of Judah.] These two phrases signify the
same men, and are but a repetition of the same thing in diverse words.

That Israel is taken for Judah: See Chap. 1. verse. 3.

And the men of Judah his pleasant Plant.] Under the Men of Judah we must
comprehend the Men of Benjamin also, which clave to the Tribe of Judah in the
Schism made by Jeroboam: Which men may be called Gods pleasant Plant, because
they revolted not to Idolatry, as the other ten Tribes did, but retained the
worship of God, for which he had more pleasure in them, than in the ten Tribes,
though at length they revolted also.

He looked for judgment.] i. e. He looked for upright dealings in the Courts
of Justice, and that Justice should be administered with an even hand to the
poor, as well as to the rich. See Cap. 1. v. 21.

This place concerns Judges, and those which had to do in Courts of Justice.

But behold oppression] But instead of Judgment he finds oppression, to wit,
oppression of the poor, and fatherless, and widow.

For righteousness, but behold a cry] This is a repetition of the former
Sentence, and a cry is taken here for oppression and wrong, because oppression
and wrong cause those which are oppressed and wronged, to cry. Metonymia
effecti.

Here the prophet begins to show what those wild grapes were which the
Vineyard of the Lord brought forth.

8.
Woe unto them that join house to house, etc] He shows here more wild
grapes, which the Lords Vineyard brought forth: That is, more sins of the
house of Israel and men of Judah: But he changes a little his manner of
speaking of them, from what he used in the former verse; speaking here of them
with a woe to them which did commit such things, which he did not there.

Woe to them which join house to house, and field to field.] i. e. Woe to them
which buy more housen to those which they have already, and more fields to
those which they have already.

He taxes here their insatiable covetousness.

Till there be no place.] Supple, For the Poor to dwell in: Or, till there be
no place, Supple, which they have not got into their own hands.

In the midst of the earth.] i. e. In the earth, (...).

By the earth is meant the land of Judah, or Judaea, which is often called the
earth per Synecdochen integri.

9.
In mine cares said the Lord of Hosts.] i. e. The Lord of Hosts said in my
hearing.

Many houses shall be desolate.] These houses were made desolate, because the
Inhabitants were forced to fly, or were destroyed, or led away captive by
their enemies.

Even great and fair.] q. d. Even their great and fair houses, upon which they
have spent so much cost, shall be desolate.

This is the punishment of their joining house to house, a punishment answering
to their sin.

10.
Yea.] i. e. And. For so must we interpret this Particle, Yea, making it a
Copulative, coupling the other part of the punishment (which answers to the
other part or Species of the sin) to the first part thereof.

Or; Yea, may signify q. d. Yea (which is yet more wonderful than that) etc.

Ten Acres of Vineyard.] An Acre is as much ground as a Yoke of Oxen can plow in
a day. It is held to be a space of ground containing 240 feet in length, and
120 in breadth.

Shall yield one Bath.] i. e. Shall yield but one Bath of wine. q. d. Ten Acres
of Vineyard shall yield no more grapes, than will make one Bath of wine.

How much a Bath contained, being there is such variety about it, I determine
not. Some make it to contain nine Gallons and three quarts of our measure.
Others, seven gallons, one pottle, three ounces, three quarters and a half, and
twelve grains. Others, four gallons and a half: According to the greatest of
which accounts, one Acre of Vineyard, would not yield one gallon of wine.

And the seed of an Homer shall yield an Ephah.] i. e. And an Homer of seed
being sowed, shall yield but one Ephah.

Note that (...), or (...) only, is here to be understood.

Whatsoever was the just measure of an Homer according to our measures (of
which it is not yet agreed) an Ephah was but the Tenth part of an Homer,
Ezekiel, cap. 45. ver. 11.

As he threatened a desolation, or that, that many houses should be without
Inhabitants, for their joining house to house: So he threatens here, that
their Land should scarce yield the tenth part of the seed, which was sown, for
their joining field to field.

When and how this came to pass we have no certain ground to revolt, yet we
doubt not but what the Prophet here speaks of, was fullfilled in its due time.

11.
We unto them that rise up, etc.] He shows here, yet more wild grapes, i.
e. yet more sins of the house of Israel, and men of Judah: And here he taxes
them for their Luxury and Joviality.

That continue.] Supple, At their pots or drinking.

Till wine inflame them.] i. e. Till wine does over-heat their brains, and
make them like mad men; or their bodies, and stir them up to lust, so that they
are not ashamed to do any thing, be it never so vile.

12.
And the Harp and the Viol are in their feasts.] q. d. And who have the Harp
and the Viol, i. e. who have their Music in their feasts.

But they regard not the works of the Lord.] But they regard not the
calamities and miseries which have partly befallen them, and partly hang over
their heads, and are threatened against them

All calamities and afflictions may be called the works of the Lord. For shall
there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? says Amos. Amos,
Chap. 3. v. 6.

Neither consider the operation of his hands.] This is a Repetition of the
former sentence.

13.
Therefore my people, etc.] By the People of the Lord, understand, the Jews,
which he calls the house of Israel, and men of Judah, v. 7.

Are gone into Captivity.] i. e. Shall go into Captivity.

He puts a Praeterperfect tense here, for a Future, because of the certainty
of what he speaks.

This was fullfilled partly by Rezin, King of Syria, and Pekah, King of Israel,
2 Chronicles. 28. v. 5, 8. And partly by Sennacherib, King of Assyria. For no doubt
but Sennacherib, as he had opportunity, sent many Jews which he took in war
Captive into Assyria, before the Angel destroyed his Army.

Because they have no knowledge.] i. e. Because they have no regard, Supple, of
the works of the Lord, nor consideration, Supple, of the operation of his
hands, etc.

Because we must know a thing before we can regard it, or consider it, hence
does he put knowledge for regard or consideration, by a Metonymie.

And their honorable men are famished.] i. e. And their honorable men shall
be famished and die for hunger.

This is a punishment answering to their feasting.

And their multitude.] i. e. And their Common People.

Dried up with thirst.] i. e. Shall perish through thirst.

This is a punishment answering to their drinking.

The meaning of this place is, that all sorts of men, high and low, rich and
poor, should die with hunger and thirst in Captivity.

14.
Therefore Hell has enlarged her self.] i. e. Because my people have no
knowledge, therefore shall Hell enlarge her paunch, etc.

He amplifieth here the punishment of the sin, which he mentioned in the former
verse.

Hell. By hell is meant the grave, the receptacle of dead bodies, which he
speaks of here (by a Metaphor) as of a ravenous beast, and make it to enlarge
her paunch, as though it were too narrow before, to receive so many as should
die, because of their sin.

Her self.] i. e. Her paunch.

He puts the whole for a part, per Metonymiam integri.

And opened her mouth without measure.] i. e. And shall open her mouth, or gape
without measure to swallow down the carcases of those which have no knowledge.

He puts here a Praeterperfect for a Future tense.

And their glory.] i. e. The Glory of my People.

He puts Glory here, for Glorious men, that is, for the honorable and noble
of the people, By a Metonymie.

And their multitude.] i. e. And their commonalty or common sort of people.

And their pomp.] i e. And they which follow, and are delighted with the pomp
of the world, whether they are noble, or men of common sort. A Metonymie.

And he that rejoices.] Supple, in feasting, drinking, and music, (as v. 11,
12.) whether he be a noble, or a common man.

Shall descend into it.] i. e. Shall go down into it, that is, into hell, that
is, into the grave, and there rot.

Though he spoke of the Grave, as of a ravenous beast, in the former part of
the Verse, yet he speaks of it here as of an hole or pit, as it is indeed.

15.
And the mean man shall be brought down.] q. d. And the man of mean power
shall be brought low.

And the mighty man shall be humbled.] And the man of great might and power
shall be brought down.

And the eyes of the lofty.] q. d. And the men of lofty eyes, that is, the
proud men, all of them, whether they be noble or ignoble, mean or mighty in
power, shall be humbled.

Why men of lofty eyes signify proud men, see cap. 2 v. 11.

16.
But the Lord of Hosts shall be exalted in judgment.] q. d. For so notable
shall the judgment be, which the Lord of Hosts will execute upon them, as that
he shall be praised and magnified for it in every place, and men shall speak of
it all abroad, to his praise.

But the Lord of Hosts.] i. e. For the Lord of Hosts.

But is put here for For, And the Lord is called here by the name of the Lord
of Hosts, to show his power, that he was able thus to punish this People, and
also to intimate, that he would do it by an host, or hosts.

Shall be exalted.] i. e. Shall be praised and magnified.

In judgment.] i. e. For judgment, to wit, the judgment which he will
execute upon these men, for their wickedness.

In is put here for, For.

And God that is holy.] i. e. And God who is Peerlesse in all his Attributes,
and namely in his justice, which he shows in punishing the wicked.

Note here that, to be holy, signifies in general, to be separated from
others by way of excellency, and to be set in a state of singularity above
them: And the holiness of God is nothing else but his superlative Eminency,
whereby he is exalted above all, and divided from all other Eminencies
wh^^soever.

Shall be sanctified in righteousness.] i. e. Sha^^ be exalted for his
Justice, which he will show in punishing these wicked men for their wickedness.

Note, that to sanctify signifies in general to separate, or set apart: And
then is God said to be sanctified, when he is advanced above other things, and
exalted in praises.

In righteousness. i. e. For his righteousness, that is, for his Justice,
Supple, which he will show in punishing these wicked men.

In is put here for, For, as before: And by righteousness is meant the Justice
of God.

17.
Then shall the Lambs.] i. e. When those sinners which he made mention of
before shall be brought down and destroyed, Then shall the Lambs, etc.

The Lambs.] By the Lambs, he means the meek and poor, and the innocent of
the Land, which were oppressed by those wicked ones, and made their prey.

Shall feed after their manner.] i. e. Shall live in the land, and enjoy the
fruits thereof freely and quietly, as they did before these oppressors did
oppress them, and disturb them.

The waste places of the fat ones.] By the fat Ones are meant, those covetous
and voluptuous rich men, which he spoke of Verse. 8.11. etc. whom he might call
fat Ones (by a Metaphor from fat Bulls, as Psalm 22. v. 12. Or fat Boares, as
Psalm. 119. v. 70.) because they pampered themselves up, and grew fat with their
luxurious and riotous living.

The Lands and Possessions which these covetous and voluptuous rich men
enjoyed, he calls their waste places, because they should be made waste and
desolate by the death of them who were the Lords thereof.

Shall Strangers eat.] By Strangers he means those whom he called Lambs
before, and he calls them Strangers, because they were not of kin to those
whom he calls fat Ones, nor had right, by way of descent, to their Lands. For
a Stranger is sometime taken for one that is not of the same kin, or tribe, or
family.

Eat. i. e. Plant, and sow, and eat the fruits thereof: A Syllepsis. Or by
eating, he means enjoying, by a Metaphor from Cattle, whose enjoying of
grounds, is by eating and feeding upon them.

It is the use and practice of such men as these were, to call their Lands and
Housen by their own names, and it is their desire to transmit them to their
Seed after them. But here the names of these men shall perish, and Strangers
shall inherit their Land.

18.
Woe unto them that draw iniquity with Cords of Vanity.] Here be more wild
Grapes, which the Lords Vineyard brought forth.

Though most Interpreters take Iniquity here formally, and by the Cords, with
which wicked men draw iniquity, they mean, the occasions of, and temptations to
iniquity, whereby they cannot avoid the iniquity it self, but draw it to them,
or upon them, as it were with Cords: Yet they seem to interpret this place most
agreeable to the Context, who take Iniquity (by a Metonymie of the cause) for
Gods Judgments or Punishments for Iniquity, q d. Woe to them, who by their
presumptuous sinning, and daring words, draw down Gods Judgments upon
themselves, as it were, with Cords and Cart-ropes.

With Cords of vanity.] i e. With vain Cords.

He puts a Substantive of the Genitive case for an Adjective.

With Cords of vanity, and as it were with Cart-ropes.] He likeneth
Presumptuous sins, and daring words against the Almighty, to strong Cords and
Cart-ropes, because as Horses in a Teem, by the means of strong Cords and
Cart-ropes, draw great loads and burdens after them, and fail not: So do
these kind of men, by these their sins, draw Gods Judgments after them. Or
because as men, when strong Cords or Cart-ropes are fastened to any great
Stone, or piece of Timber in a house, which they would pull down, do not fail
to pull it down, and that upon their own heads too, if they take not heed: So
do such men as these, by these their sins, not fail to pull down Gods
Judgments upon their own heads, if they avert them not by hearty and speedy
repentance.

But why then does he call them Cords of vanity, or vain Cords?

Answer: He calls these Sins Cords of vanity, or vain Cords, not in respect
of the punishment which they should draw after them: (For they would not fail
of that, and therefore in that respect they were not vain:) but in respect of
the end which those sinners proposed to themselves in committing these
presumptuous sins, and speaking these daring words: For what was the end
which these men had; in committing such sins, and using such words? Surely
their end was frivolous, and so vain: Or if they did expect any good by their
doing and speaking, they missed of their end, and so were their sins vain
also: Yea, such Cords as these were, that is to say, Sins, are always vain,
there is no good or profit in them, but evil and mischief to the committers of
them.

19.
Let him make speed and hasten his work] i, e. Let God make speed and hasten
his Judgments, which thou, O Isaiah, have threatened us with, we care not.

By his work he means his Judgments, i. e. The judgments of God, see Notes
on Verse. 12.

Lo the counsel of the Holy One of Israel draw nigh, etc.] i. e. Let the
Judgments or Punishments which God (who is the Holy One of Israel) has
decreed to send, or concerning which he has taken so long counsel and
deliberation, draw nigh.

He puts the counsel of God here, for the Judgments of God, concerning which
he had taken counsel and deliberation by a Metonymie.

And this is a Repetition of the former sentence, both which sentences show,
how much these men contemnea the judgments which the Lord threatened.

The long suffering of God toward man (who threatens a great while before he
strikes) is greater, but wicked men abusing it, think that those threats are
vain, which are not speedily followed with judgment; and therefore they mock
at them. Thus do they mock and scoff also, 2 Pet. 3.4.

20.
Woe unto them that call evil Good, and good Evil.] So great a power has
Custom in sin, to corrupt and deprave the judgment of men, as that they
which accustom themselves to sin, cannot judge of good and bad, honest and
dishonest, Virtue and Vice aright, and as they are in themselves, but judge
that good which is bad, and that bad which is good, that dishonest which is
honest, and that honest which is dishonest: that virtue which is vice, and that
vice which is virtue.

That put.] That is that affirm, or maintain, or hold.

So in the Schools, that speech which is made in affirmation and maintenance
of that part of a question which we hold, is called, A Position.

That put darkness for light, and light for darkness.] i. e. That affirm and
maintain or hold, that Darkness is light, and Light is darkness.

He says here in Metaphorical terms, what he said plainly before; and by
dark^esse he means evil, by light, good.

Darkness is put here for evil, and therefore may it be so put, because They
which do evil, love darkness, Joh. 3. verse. 18, 19. And because evil, as it
proceeds from the darkness of the judgment and understanding, so does it
darken the same again more and more.

And light is put herefor good, and it may be so put: First, because They which
do well, come to the light, that their deeds may be made manifest, Joh. 3.
verse. 20.

Secondly, because it proceeds from Light, Viz. the Light of the
understanding rightly enlightened.

And Thirdly, because it increases that Light, and makes it the brighter.

That put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter] This is another repetition of
what he said.

Bitter signifies evil, and so it may signify, because evil is unpleasing
to God, and all good men, as that which is bitter is to the Taste. And Sweeter
signifies good, and so it may signify because good is pleasant and delightful
to good men, and to God himself, as honey and sweet things are to the mouth.

21.
Woe to them that are wise in their own eyes.] Supple, They which are wise in
their own conceits, had rather rule their actions by their own conceits, than
by the word of God: and rely more upon their own judgment, than upon what the
Prophets of the Lord say: And so follow their own fond conceits, to their own
destruction.

In their own eyes.] i. e. In their own judgment, or in their own opinion and
conceit.

A Metaphor translated from the body to the soul.

And prudent in their own fight.] These repeat the former words.

22.
Woe unto them that are mighty to drink wine.] q. d. Woe to them which boast of
their might, and of their strength which they show (not in feats of valor
and defense of their Country, but) in drinking and bearing wine

And men of st^ength to mingle strong drink] This is but a repetition of what
he said.

To mingle strong drink, is put here, for to drink strong drink, because the
drink which was mingled, was mingled for this end, to wit, that it might be
drunk.

Sober men were wont to mingle water with their wine before they drunk it: And
some think, that the Prophet alludeth to this mingling by a (...).

But as Sober men mingled wine and water together, so did drunkards mingle
diverse strong intoxicating drinks (as our Roarers do hot waters) with their
wine, and to this they say, (and that most probably) that the Prophet here
alludeth.

23.
Which justify the wicked, etc.] We must repeat the Woe here; q. d. Woe to
them which justify the wicked.

To justify the wicked, is to pronounce him just in judgment, and his cause
good who is not just, and whose cause is not good.

This is denounced against corrupt Judges.

And take away the righteousness of the righteous from him.] i. e. And which
do condemn him in Judgment, who is righteous, and whose cause is just and
good.

The Scripture does often compare Righteousness to a Cloak, a Garment, a
girdle: and to these or one of these does the Prophet seem here to allude, when
he says, And take away the righteousness of the righteous from him.

The Prophet does here tax Judges for their unrighteousness and corruptnesse:
as he did the Drunkards for their drinking, v. 22.

But you will say, that he taxed the Judges before for their unrighteousness,
v. 7. And he did tax the Drunkards before for their drinking, verse. 11, 12.
How then does he come to tax them for these things here again?

Answer, because these sins of injustice and drunkenness were most rife among
this People, therefore does he use the more frequent reprehensions against
them, that he might the better repress them.

Secondly, though he taxed these sins before, yet he did not tax them with
the same circumstances as he does here, For he taxes the oppression and
unrighteousness of Judges under the Commination or threatening of a woe here,
which he did not do before: And he taxes the Drunkards here as glorying in
their might and strength, which they showed in their drinking, which he did not
do before.

24.
Therefore as the fire devoureth the stubble, and the flame consumes the
chafe.] And this the fire and flame does suddenly, and utterly. And turns
the Stubble and the chafe to dust and ashes, which the wind drives up and
down.

So their root shall be rottenness, and their blossom shall go up as dust.]
i. e. So shall they be utterly and suddenly consumed.

The Prophet in this Apodosis, or Application of the similitude, alludeth to
that which he said v. 7. The Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts, is the house of
Israel, and the men of Judah his pleasant Plant. For he speaks of this people,
as of a Tree or Plant, which is ordinarily consumed with rottenness.

Their root shall be rottenness.] i. e. Their root shall be rotten or rot
away: And if that root be rotten, the stock and branches must decay.

He uses here, an Abstract for a Concrete.

And their blossom shall go up as dust.] i. e. Their blossom being resolved
into dust, by reason of Putrefaction and rottenness, shall fly up into the
air by the force of the wind, and so be dispersed.

The Prophet speaks here Hyperbolically, when he says, that they shall be
thus utterly consumed, and persisteth in his Metaphor.

Because they have cast away the Law of the Lord of hosts.] Contemning it as a
vain unprofitable thing, and as a thing of no worth, and preferring their own
conceits, before it.

25.
And he has stretched forth his hand against them.] He speaks of God (...),
and though what God did here, he did by Instruments, yet you see the Scripture
speaks of God, as though he were a man, and did this thing himself. See Notes
in Cap. 2. v. 10.

And has smitten them.] i. e. And will smite them.

That which the Prophet here speaks of, was fulfilled in the days of Ahaz, 2
Kings, 16. v. 5. 2 Chronicles. 28. v. 6. etc.

Though Jerusalem was not taken in the days of Ahaz, and so the carcases of
the men thereof were not torn in the midst of the streets thereof, yet other
Cities of Judah did not escape so, but suffered that which the Prophet here
speaks of.

And the Hills did tremble.] i. e. And the Hills shall tremble for fear and
dread, when these Judgments shall be executed.

The Scripture does often speak of the heavens and the earth, and the parts
thereof, as of sensible; yea, intelligible creatures, and as if they were
apprehensive of the great works, which are wrought therein, and as if they
were moved and affected according to those works, See Notes, cap. 2. v. 19.

Judaea was a mountainous place, in which were many Hills.

And their carcases.] The carcases of the men of Judah.

Were torn] i. e. Shall be torn by their enemies.

In the midst of the streets.] Though not of Jerusalem, yet of other Cities
and Towns of Judah.

For all this his anger is not turned away.] q. d. Although the Lord shall
smite his People after this grievous manner as I have said, and therefore may
seem now to be appeased, when he has done this; yet he will not be as yet
appeased.

But his hand is stretched out still.] As ready to smite them again. i. e. But
he will smite his People yet more.

26.
And he will lift up an Ensign.] i. e.

For he will lift up an Ensign.

And is put here, for For, for he shows here that the Lords hand is stretched
out still to smite them, and will smite them again.

He will lift up an Ensign to the nations.] i. e. He will bring the Nations
together into an Army, to fight against Judah.

By these Nations he means the Assyrians, and the many Nations which were in
their Armies, who invaded and subdued Judah under Sennacharib.

The Prophet alludeth here to a Captain in war, who commands his Ensign
or Colors to be set up and displaied, for his Soldiers to repair to them,
when he would have them meet to march, or to go upon any service.

From far.] i. e. Which shall come from far.

And will hiss unto them.] Viz. To come against Judah.

By this he shows how easily God can do this: For if he does but hiss, (he
says) they will come at his Hiss.

He speaks of God, (...).

Note here, that it is not the property of a Captain to hiss to his
Soldiers, when he would have them come, but the property rather of Masters to
their Servants, wherefore note again, that it is usual with the Prophet to
mingle Metaphors, and begin with one, and go on with another.

From the end of the earth] i. e. To come from the end of the earth.

He speaks of the earth after the manner of the vulgar, who conceive the
earth to be flat, not Circular, and so to have ends properly taken. And he
says, From the ends of the earth, by an Hyperbole, for, from far.

27.
None shall be weary.] i. e. None of them shall be weary of his journey, though
he comes so far.

As he commended these men for their speed in the last words of the former
Verse, so he commends them here for their strength.

Nor stumble.] For weakness or weariness.

None shall slumber nor sleep.] He commends them here for their watchfullnesse,
and vigilancie.

Neither shall the Girdle of their Loins be loosed, nor the latchet of their
shoes be broken] i. e. Neither shall they put off their Arms, that they may be
ready to march at all times, and to go upon service upon all occasions.

The Girdle here mentioned, is that with which they girded on their Armor, and
that at which their swords hung.

He says, Nor shall the latchet of their shoes be broken: For neither shall
they untie their shoe-latchet; because the latchet of the shoe is often broken
in untying.

He commends their diligence and readiness here upon all occasions.

Yet it is not improbable that he commends here the strength, and good case
of their Armor, and defensive Arms, as he commends their offensive Arms or
weapons, in the next verse following.

28.
Whose Arrows are sharp.] q. d. Their Arrows are sharp.

He commends them here for the goodness of their weapons; with which, he
says, They shall be well appointed. For what he says of their Arrows, must
be understood proportionably (by a Synecdoche) of all other their weapons.

And all their Bows bent.] This shows that they wanted not strings to their
bows; and that their bows were not at fault, or out of repair: This shows
also their readiness to offend, and fight against the Jews.

Their horses hoofes shall be counted like flint.] i. e. The hoofes of the
horses, which they shall bring with them, shall be as hard as flint, so that
they shall not easily be foundred with long Marches, and hard ways, nor need
to be shod with iron shoes.

And their wheels like a whirlewind.] i. e. And the wheels of the Chariots,
which they make use of in their wars, shall be as swift and as quick, as a
whirlewind.

Or by the wheels we may by a Synechdoche understand the Chariots themselves,
which shall be so many, as that they shall make a noise in their March like a
Whirlewinde, and be heard before they are seen.

Or thus, q. d. And their Horses, with which they use to draw their Chariots,
shall be so swift, as that the Chariots, which they draw, shall fly like a
Whirlewind.

The two first expositions speak the praise of the Chariots, which are
commendable both for their speed and agility, and also for their number: But
the third speaks the praises of their Horses, which he might commend here from
their swiftness, as he did before, for the soundness of their feet.

29.
Their roaring shall be like a Lion.] q. d. As a Lion which is hunger-bit,
roareth after his Prey: So shall the Assyrians roar, when they fall upon the
men of Judah.

By this Metaphor of a Lion, the Prophet would show the greediness and the
cruelty, which the Assyrians would use to the men of Judah.

Their roaring. etc.] He alludes here to the ancient custom of Soldiers, who
at the instant of their onset, and joining battle with their Enemies, did use
to give a shoute, and cry aloude: And this they did, partly to encourage
themselves, and partly to terrify and daunt their enemies; and the louder the
cry was, the more effectual it was for these ends. See more in Notes Cap. 42.
v. 13.

This kind of cry or shouting the Greeks called (...), the Latins Barritus.

They shall roar like young Lions.] Which are more terrible and fierce than
the old Lions.

And lay hold of the prey etc.] This is spoken properly of the Lion, but
Metaphorically of the Assyrians, and signifies, that the Assyrians shall lay
hold on the men of Judah, and on their goods and cattle, as on their Prey: And
carry them away. See cap. 10. v. 16.

None shall deliver it.] Supple, Out of their hands, no more than they can the
Prey out of the Lions paws.

30.
And in that day.] q. d. Yea in that day, Viz. In which the Assyrians shall
fall upon the men of Judah.

And is put here, for Yea.

They shall roar against them like the roaring of the Sea] i. e. The Assyrians
shall roar against the men of Judah, like the roaring of the Sea.

Like the roaring of the Sea.] The roaring of the Sea is more terrible than the
roaring of the Lion, or the young Lion, and there is less mercy in the Sea
where it prevails, than in any of them two.

Observe therefore the Gradation, which the Prophet uses, comparing the Shoute
of the Assyrians, First to the roaring of a Lion which is fierce, then to the
roaring of a young Lion, which is fiercer, then to the roaring of the Sea,
which is the fiercest of all: And this he does, to set out the judgments of
God in the more terrible manner, that his Auditors or Readers may be the more
affected with them.

Unto the land.] Viz. of Judah.

Behold darkness.] i. e. Behold calamity and misery.

As light is often put by the Hebrews for Prosperity and Mirth: So is
Darkness put for Adversity and Sorrow.

And the light is darkened, etc.] It is usual with the Scriptures, to make the
Heaven and the Earth (after a Poetical manner) Sympathizing with men in great
changes, as if they were sensible of, and affected with what befalls them. Of
which see Notes Verse. 25. and Chap. 2. v. 19.

Now because the subject here, is matter of Sorrow, the Prophet brings in the
Heavens and the great Lights of the world, Sympathizing with the Jews in that
Passion, and showing themselves Sorrowful: And this he makes them to do, by
clothing themselves with Clouds, as it were with sackcloth, and not shining so
bright and clear as usually they do, or by turning their light into darkness,
for darkness best suiteth with grief and sorrow, as light does with joy and
mirth: when therefore he says, The light is darkened; the sense is, q. d Behold
such sorrow and grief as shall cause the very heavens over them to mourn and
cover their light as it were with sackcloth, or turn it into darkness.

And the Light is darkened.] i. e. And the light shall be darkened, and that
either by interposition of clouds, or by being it self turned into darkness.

He puts a present tense for a future.

In the heavens thereof.] i. e. In the Heavens of the land of Judah, That is,
in that part of the Heavens under which the land of Judah lies.

ISAIAH. CHAP. VI.
I Saw.] Viz. In a Vision.

Also.] This word is Redundant, or else it relates to the foregoing Chapter, as
concerning the same thing, or shows, that this Vision was manifested to the
Prophet the same year, as the matters of the foregoing Chapter were.

The Lord.] That which Isaiah saw, was not the Lord, but an Humane shape, in
which it pleased God to manifest his presence: But yet such a shape the
Scripture usually calls God and Lord.

Sitting upon a Throne.] As a King, or as a Judge, upon his Tribunal, or
Judgment Seat.

This sitting of God upon a Throne, signifies, that he would judge his people,
Viz. The men of Judah.

This Throne which Isaiah saw, he saw as it were in the Temple, which was the
house and Palace of God, the great King.

High and lifted up.] So that the Throne had a Basis or Foot, and an ascent
unto it by steps, as there was to Salomon's Throne, 1 King. 10. v. 18, 19.

And his Train.] i. e. And the Train of his Robes, with which he was clothed.

The Robes of Kings and Princes, use to have long Trains, which are held up
and carried after them (for State) by their Attendants.

Filled the Temple.] Supple, In which he saw the Throne erected

This that it filled the Temple, is spoken Hyperbolically, (as the
Circumstances of the Place will show) to signify the length and largeness of
his Train, which was accounted the more stately, the longer and larger it was.

2.
About it stood the Seraphims.[i e. Above the Throne, between the Throne and
the upper wall of the Temple (for the Throne seems to have been set somewhat
forward, from the upper wall) upon the Basis of the Throne stood the Seraphims,
as those that are nearest of a Kings Attendants stand behind his Throne or
Chair of State, at his elbow.

Some think that the Seraphims hung in the Air with their wings over the
Throne, as we see some birds hang without mooving or flying backwards or
forwards, which posture of theirs is called standing, in opposition to flying
or mooving, one way or other.

Some interpret Above, nigh to, that is, nigh unto the Throne.

The Septuagint render it, About it, as if the Seraphims did encompasse the
Throne, in which Interpretations we must not look to the word Above, as it is
taken commonly with us in the English, but to the word in the Original, which
it rendereth or translates and take it accordingly.

Stood.] As Ministers and Attendants waiting upon God.

The Seraphims] i. e. The Angels.

These Angels are called Seraphims here, from the word Sa^aph, which signifies
to kindle, or set on fire, Because they appeared like fire.

And therefore did they appear like fire, because they were, at this time,
Ministers of Gods wrath against the Jews; whose wrath is compared to fire. For
the Angels in their Apparitions, appeared suitable to their present employments.

Each one.] Viz. of the Seraphims.

Had six wings.] For what use, they had these six wings, the next words will
show.

With twain he covered his face.] He covered his face, that he might not see
the face of God, especially being angry, as not being able to behold it.

With twain he covered his feet.] By the feet the Hebrews do modestly signify
the Secret, or Privy parts of a man, which as shame and modesty bids men to
hide: So did these Angels (being in the shape of Men) hide or cover with their
wings.

With twain he did fly.] i. e. Twain he stretched out as if he were about to
fly, which posture signified his ready obedience to Gods commands.

3.
And one cried to another.] This cry of theirs, was in approbation and praise
of the just sentence which God, fitting upon his Throne, gave against the Jews.

Where note, that it is to be conceived, and understood, that the Lord gave a
most severe sentence against the Jews, as he sat upon his Throne, though it
be not expressed in this place. For the Scripture often uses such a (...), or
Omission, to avoid Repetition. Yet what the sentence was, may be gathered from
the 10, 11, and 12, Verses of this Chapter. I say therefore, that this cry of
the Seraphims one to another, was in approbation and praise of the just
judgment and sentence of God, which he gave against the Jews.

Holy, Holy, Holy, is the Lord of Hosts.] q. d. Exceeding just is the Lord of
Hosts in this his sentence, which he has passed against the men of Judah.

To be holy signifies, to be separated and differenced from others, by way of
excellency: And therefore because God is thus separated, and differenced in all
his Attributes from all others whatsoever they be, He is called Holy (...): And
because He is excellent in Justice, as well as any of there his Attributes, He
may be said to be Holy in respect of his Justice, as well as o-any other
Attribute of his.

He says, Holy, Holy, Holy, that is, thrice Holy, for the more vehement
affirmation of what he says. For a Triple Repetition has the force of a
vehement affirmation, as Jer. 22. v. 29. and Ezekiel. 21. v. 27.

The whole earth is full of his glory.] i. e. The whole earth shall be full of
his praise, with which men shall praise him and glorify him, for his Power and
Justice which He shall show upon the People of the Jews.

He uses here a Present for a Future tense.

4.
And the Posts of the door moved at the voice of him that cried.] i. e. The
Posts of the door of the Temple, trembled at the voice of him that cried.

Note, that it was not so much the greatness of the voice of him which cried,
which made the Posts of the door of the Temple, to tremble, as the dreadful
matter of his cry. For it is the usual manner of Scripture to make insensible
things apprehensive of great affairs, and to be moved therewith, as if they
had sense and understanding: Now because the Sentence of God against the men of
Judah (which the Seraphims here approved of, and praised by their Cry) was so
terrible, as that it might well make the man which heard it to tremble; The
Posts of the door of the Temple, are here made to tremble, as if they
understood, and were affected with the terriblenesse thereof.

By the Posts of the d^or of the Temple we may understand, by a Synecdoche, the
whole Temple.

And the house was filled with smoke.] i. e. And the Temple was filled with
smoke.

This smoke did proceed out of the nostrills of God, and was a sign or token
of his exceeding great anger, as 2 Samuel Cap. 22. v. 9.

When a man is angry and in a chafe, his breath comes out thicker, both out of
his mouth and of his nostrils, and more like the smoke, than at other times.
Wherefore the Temple being filled with smoke at this time, showed, that God
was at this time, exceeding angry.

As the breath of the Lord is here likened to a smoke which filled the Temple,
so is it likened to an overflowing stream Chap. 30. v. 28.

5.
Then said I.] i. e. I Isaiah.

For I am undone.] i. e. For I shall presently die, and be cut off.

Because I am a man of unclean lips.] i. e. Because I am a man of Sinful
lips.

Sins residence is only in the soul, and the members of the body are called,
sinful only as they are Instruments of sin there residing.

The sin of the lips which Isaiah complains of, is thought to have been,
not so much in speaking, what he should not, as in not speaking what he should,
that is, in not reprehending the sins of the Princes, and of the People, so
freely, as he should have done.

By this Sin of his lips, we may understand, all other Sins of his, by a
Synecdoche, q. d. I am unclean every part of me, not so much as my lips, but
are unclean.

But the reason why he mentions the uncleanesse, or sin of his lips,
rather than any other sin, may be, because he could not occupy his lips in
the praises of God, as the Seraphims did. For Praise is not seemly in the mouth
of a Sinnner. Eccles. 15. v. 9.

And the Prophet was the more afflicted for his sin, because he was in the
sight of Angels, whose Purity and Righteousness called his impurity and
unrighteousness to mind, and made it appear the worse: And because he was in
the sight of God then, when He was seated upon his Throne to judge sinners.

And I dwell in the midst of the People of unclean lips.] The men of Judah
were men of unclean lips: For their tongue provoked God to anger. Cap. 3. v.
8. And they declared their sins as Sodom, Cap. 3. v. 9. And when they heard of
Gods judgments, they said presumptuously, Let God make speed, and hasten his
work, that we may see it. Cap. 5 v. 19. etc.

But by the uncleanesse of their lips, we must understand here also, all other
their sin and uncleanesse, by a Synecdoche. But the Prophet mentions no more
than the uncleanesse of their lips, because he mentioned no more of his own
uncleanesse, than that of his lips.

But why does the Prophet mention the uncleanesse of the Peoples lips, that is,
their sin, in this place?

Answer, Not to excuse himself and lay the fault upon them, as though he had
taken his sin from them by a Contagion or living among them; but rather to
augment his own sin, and lay their sin upon himself, as though they came to
be so bad, because he neglected to reprove them: Or at least, to augment his
miserable condition, in that he could have no hope of escaping the judgment of
God, or having it deferred, being they were unclean among whom he lived,
as well as himself. For whereas God has been known, to spare some wicked men
for the righteous sake, among whom they lived, Isaiah could have no hope of
this now, because the People among whom he lived, were polluted, as well as
himself.

For mine eyes have seen the King the Lord of Hosts.] q. d. I say woe is me,
For mine eyes (who am a man of unclean lips) have seen the King, the Lord of
Hosts, sitting upon his Throne of Judgment.

There was an opinion among the Jews, that whosoever saw God should surely
die, Judge. 13. v. 22. Which opinion sprung from those words of God to Moses,
There shall no man see me and live, Exodus 33. v. 20.

But if the mere seeing of God might make the Prophet cry, Woe to me, I am
undone, then might he much more cry so, when he saw God sitting on his Throne
to judge sinners, he being conscious to himself of his sins.

The sense therefore of this place is this, q. d. Woe is me, I am undone,
because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell among a people of unclean
lips, Woe is me, (I say) I shall not escape, for I being a sinner, and liveing
among sinners, have seen, with mine eyes, the Lord of Hosts, and that sitting
upon a Throne to judge sinners.

6.
From the Altar.] Viz. Of burnt Offering, which was before the door of the
Temple.

7.
And he laid it upon my mouth.] Where he complains of his sore, there was the
Plaster applied: He complained of the uncleanesse of his lips, and upon his
lips is the live-cole laid.

This has touched thy lips, and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin
purged.] By this iniquity and sin, he means in particular the uncleanesse
of his lips, which he complained of v. 5. But by a Synecdoche, we may
understand (as there) all other his sins: And he speaks of this uncleanesse
and iniquity, as of dross, which is purged away by fire.

Note that the Prophets sin was taken away, or purged by the live-cole, only
in a mystery. For God commanded the live-cole to be laid upon his lips, only
that it might be an outward sign of his inward grace conferred upon him; And
that it might be as a Seal, to confirm to the Prophet, that God had taken away
and purged his sin.

A live-cole might be an apt sign, or seal of purging away sin, because
fire is of a purging nature. The sense therefore is, q. d. This has touched
thy lips, and therefore let it be a sign and a seal to thee, that thine
iniquity is taken away, and thy sin purged.

Note, that all this was done, not in reality, but in a vision.

8.
Whom shall I send?] Supple, to the wicked and rebellious men of Judah to tell
them what I have done, and what sentence I have passed against them?

Note, that God asks this Question, not because he knew not whom to send: But
that he might give occasion to the Prophet, to show his cheerful obedience:
For God loves cherfulness in his service.

And who will go for us.] This is a repetition of the former words.

He should have said by the order of the Syntax, And who will go for me? But it
is not only usual to put one number for another, but also to join a Plural
number with a Singular, in the same sentence, although it be spoken of one and
the same Person, as may be seen John, cap. 3. v. 11, 12. Or it may be that the
Prophet uses a Plural number to signify the Trinity of Persons, as he did a
Singular number before to show the Unity of the Godhead. Or he may say, Who
will go for us? for, Who will go for me? Because the Lord is brought in as a
King, and it is the manner of Kings, to speak of themselves in the Plural
number.

A Question it is, to whom the Lord speaks, when he says, Who will go for us?

For Answer, some say, that God the Father speaks here to God the Son, and
God the Holy Ghost.

Others say, that he speaks to the Seraphims, conferring as it were with them
as Princes use sometimes to confer with their Servants, like to one of whom,
God is here brought in, by the Prophet.

Then said I, here I am, send me.] Isaiah hearing what the Lord said, as being
present, offers his Service cheerfully: and is another man now, than what he
was v. 5.

When the live-coale was laid upon his mouth, and touched his lips, Isaiah was
not only purged from his sin, but he received also more boldness and
courage to go upon Gods errand, than he had before, which though it be not
expressed verse. 7. yet it may be gathered from this place.

And this might the live-coale well signify; It might signify Courage and
boldness in going upon Gods errand, because fire is an hot and active Element,
and is the cause of Courage and Boldness, where it is predominant in our
tempers.

And he said.] i. e. And the Lord said to Isaiah.

9.
Go tell this People] i. e. Go and tell the men of Judah.

He puts a Relative here without an Antecedent: And says not my People as he
was wont, but this People, and that out of Indignation, reputing them as
Strangers, because they had estranged themselves and revolted from him by their
sins.

Hear ye indeed but understand not, and see ye indeed but perceive not.] i. e.
Ye shall hear indeed, but ye shall not understand what ye hear, and ye shall
see indeed, but ye shall not perceive what ye see.

The Prophet uses the Imperative Mood here, after an Emphaticall manner for a
Future tense, as will appear by Saint Matthew, Matt. 13. v. 14.

Note, that to hear, and to see, be taken here for the acts of the outward Ear
and Eye.

Note further, that to Perceive, though it be properly spoken of the outward
Eye, and signifies to mark diligently what may be marked with the eye, yet it
is here to be translated by a Metaphor, to the mind, and signifies the same as
to understand, and so it is translated and signifies also, Job. 33. Verse, 14.
Mark, 12. Verse, 28. Luke 9. Verse. 47. Acts, 14. Verse, 9.

Note yet further, that to Understand and Perceive signify here to apprehend,
and know the meaning of what is spoken or seen, as will appear by Matthew. 13.
v. 14. But they signify not only so, but they signify also to believe, as
will appear by Acts, 28. v. 24, 25, 26.

The meaning then of this Verse is this, They shall hear the word of God spoken
or preached to them by the Prophets, But they shall not understand it, and that
because it shall be spoken or preached to them in figures and Parables, Matthew.
13. v. 13, 14. And if they should chance to understand it, yet they shall not
believe it: And so they shall not be the better for it. Act. 28. verse. 24, 25,
26. And they shall see the wonderful works which God will work among them,
but they shall not know or understand, that they are wrought by God, neither
shall they believe the word of the Lord for all them.

10.
Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their
eyes, least they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand
with their hearts, and convert, and be healed] Note first, that the Heart is
put here for the Mind and Understanding, by a Metaphor, and so are the Ears,
and so are the Eyes, (the two Principal senses by which we come to knowledge.)
For they all, Heart, Ears, and Eyes, signify here one and the same thing.

Note secondly, That as the Heart and Ears, and Eyes, signify here, all one
and same thing: So do their acts to wit, to See, to Hear, and to Understand,
signify here all one and the same things, Viz. To understand and to believe;
So that to see, and to hear are of a different signification here, from that in
which they were used Verse. 9.

Note thirdly, That the fatness of the Heart, the heaviness of the Ears, and
the shutting of the Eyes, signify properly, the fatness of that fleshie
Heart; which is one of the Principal members or bowels of man's body: And the
heaviness of the outward Ears, and the shutting of the outward bodily Eyes:
But by a Metaphor they signify here, the indisposition and averseness of the
mind, from understanding and believing, and that for these reasons: Because if
the Eyes be shut we cannot see; If the Ears be heavi^, that is, if the Ears
be stopped, we cannot hear: And a fat heart (as Physiognomers observe) is the
sign at least, of a mean wit, yea, it may be, the cause also thereof; for the
goodness of the Animal Spirits, which serve the wit, depend upon the
goodness of the Vital Spirits, and a fat heart, is an ill Mint or Forge of
Vital Spirits.

Now therefore for the sense of this place, many make it to be this, q. d. Go
and preach to this people, that by thy preaching thou may make them more
indisposed and averse from understanding and believing, least they should
understand my word and believe it, and so turn from their sins and be saved.

This is the exposition, I say, which many give of this Place, making this,
part of the judgment which God inflicted upon his People.

Where note, that the Prophets preaching, was not a direct cause of these men's
not Understanding and Believing, but only an Occasion thereof. For these men
hateing the Prophet, and bearing a malicious mind toward him, because he
preached not unto them pleasing things, they could not endure to hear him
preach or prophecy unto them in the name of the Lord, but the oftener they
heard him, the more was their hatred and malice increased against him: And the
more their hatred and malice was increased against him, the further were they
from giving any attentive heed to his Sermons, that they might understand them;
and yet further from giving any credit to them, or believing that they were the
words of God: And this God foresaw; Wherefore he said, Make the heart of this
people fat, etc.

This, I say again, is the exposition which many give of this place, who make
this, part of the judgment, which God inflicted upon this people at this time:
But I prefer that exposition, which makes this not a part of the judgment,
which God inflicted upon this people at this time; but a Reason why he did
inflict the judgment mentioned in the former Verse; for our Savior interprets
it so. Matthew. 13. Verse. 15.

In the former verse therefore the Lord said concerning this people, That They
should hear indeed, but they should not understand; And they should see indeed,
but they should not perceive: And here he gives a Reason, Why they should hear
and not understand, and see and not perceive. And the Reason is, because they
might have understood and believed, what they had heard, but they would not,
and they might have understood and believed, what they had seen, but they would
not, but obstinately and wilfully refused to understand and believe, whereby
they might have repented and been saved, and therefore because heretofore they
would not, now they should not understand and believe.

This, I say, is the exposition which I prefer before the former; In Order to
which I explain the words, as follows.

Make the heart of this people fat, and make their cares heavy, and shut their
eyes, least they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand
with their hearts, and convert and believe.] q d. Tell this people, that they
wilfully refused to understand and believe, what they ought and might have
understood and believed; And that understanding and believing, they might have
repented and been saved.

I showed before, that the Heart, Ears, and Eyes, are here Metaphorically
taken for the Mind and Understanding: And to see, hear, and understand, are all
taken for to understand and believe.

Make the heart of this People fat, etc.] i. e. Tell this People, that they
have made their heart fat, etc. i. e. Tell this people, that they would not
understand, etc.

Note here, that the Prophet uses a real Verb for a vocal, when he says,
Make the heart of this people fat, etc. For, Tell this people; that they have
made their heart fat, etc. The like manner of speech we read, Genesis 41. v. 13.
Where Pharaoh's chief Butler, speaking of Joseph to Pharaoh, and telling him of
Joseph's skill in interpreting Dreams, says Me he restored to mine Office,
for he told me, that I should be restored to mine Office: And him, (meaning
Pharaoh's chief Baker) He hanged: For, he told him, that he should be hanged.
In like manner this we read Jer. 1. v. 10. I have this day, (says the Lord to
Jeremie) set thee over the Nations and over the Kingdoms, to root out, and to
pull down, and to destroy, and to throw down, to build, and to plant. The
meaning of which words is this; I have set thee, or appointed thee this day, to
Prophecy concerning the Nati^ns, and concerning the Kingdoms, and to tell,
that some of them shall be rooted up and pulled down and destroyed, and some
again shall be built up and planted.

And make their ears heavy.] i. e. And tell this people that they have made
their heart heavy.

To make the Ears heavy, signifies to stop the Ears, so that they cannot
receive the voice of him which speaks: And Ears so stopped are called heavy
Ears; Because that which stops the Ears after this manner (though it be
not weighty in it self) yet it is troublesome, and seems heavy to him whose
ears are stopped.

Or, he calls heavy ears, such ears as are slow and dull of hearing, in
allusion to heavy things, which are slow of motion, and hard to be moved out of
their place, whereas light things are quick and nimble: And hence is the Greek
word (...) which signifies one that is heavy, or dull of hearing.

By the Ears, as I said before, is here Metaphorically meant, the mind, or
understanding, and these men are said to have stopped, or made heavy their
ears, because they would not understand and believe what was spoken.

Least they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with
their hearts, etc.] There be other effects of a fat heart, besides not
understanding; and other ends, why a man may stop his ears besides that, that
he may not hear; and other ends, why he may shut his eyes besides that, that he
may not see For he may shut his eyes to preserve them from the dust: And stop
his ears, to defend them from the cold. To show therefore why these men made
their heart fat, and their ears heavy, and did shut their eyes, He tells us,
that it was for this end, least they should, see with their eyes, and hear with
their ears, and understand with their heart: By which he signifies
Metaphorically, that these men did wilfully refuse to understand and believe
what they saw done, and heard spoken by the Prophets, in the name of the Lord;
as he wilfully refuses to hear, which for this end stops his ears; and
wilfully refuses to see, which for this end shuts his eyes; and wilfully
refuses to understand, who for this end makes his heart fat.

That with which these men made their heart fat, and stopped their ears, and
closed their eyes, that is, that which made these men so averse from
understanding and b^lieving, was, the hatred which they had of the Prophets
person, and the delight which they had in sin, which they could not follow
without remorse of conscience, if they understood and believed the word of the
Lord.

And convert.] i. e. And turn themselves to the Lord from their evil ways.

And be healed.] That is, And be delivered from their afflictions and
calamities (whenever they should befall them, for their sins) and from the
fear of those calamities (before they befell them.) See Jer. 6. v. 14.

The judgments of God, that is, the afflictions and calamities, which befall
men for their sins, are often compared to diseases, and wounds, and sores. As
Cap. 1. v. 6. c. 19. v. 22. c. 30. v. 26. And to these may the Prophet allude,
when he says, and be healed.

Or, And be healed, may signify, and have their sins forgiven. For sin is
the Plague and Sickness of the Soul, of which Plague and Sickness we are
healed, when our sin is forgiven.

But a man may object here and say. Is it likely that any one would affect
spiritual blindness and unbelief for this end, that he might not be healed?

Answ. It is not likely that a man would affect spiritual blindness and
unbelief, directly and chiefly for this end that he might not be healed: But it
is more than likely, that many make it their indirect end, and end by
consequence: For many make that their ends, upon which this must needs follow:
For many do directly desire to enjoy the pleasures of sin without control, and
for this end do hate them, which tell them of the word of the Lord, or denounce
his judgments against them, which notwithstanding they must hear and believe
to, before they can repent, and be saved; So they desire not to be healed, by
consequence and in the causes thereof; though they do it not, directly, and in
it self.

Note, that what the Prophet delivers here, is not so spoke of the People of
the Jews which lived between the days of Vzziah, and the desolation which
Sennacherib, made in Judaea; But that the Holy Ghost had a farther intent in
it, to wit, to signify the blindness and perverseness of those Jews also,
which lived in the time of our Savior, and of his Gospel, as appears, Mat.
13. v. 4. Act. 28. v. 26. For they in Isaiah's time were (as it were) a Type of
these, which lived in our Saviors days, or in the days of the Gospel: And as
there was but a tenth only saved of those which lived in Isaiah's days, v.
13. So in the days of the Gospel, a remnant only are saved, according to the
Election of Grace, Romans 9. v. 27.

11.
How long.] Supple, Shall this People hear, and not understand? and see, and
not perceive?

The Prophet asks this Question, not out of any Curiosity, but out of grief
for their misery, and out of a desire, which he had of their conversion, that
they might be healed.

Until the Cities be wasted.] What is meant by the wasting of Cities, the
words next following show, Viz. Their being without inhabitants.

The vastation here spoken of, was that vastation of the Cities of Judah, which
was made by Sennacherib.

12.
And the Lord have removed men far away.] i. e. And until the Lord has
removed the men which dwell in the Cities out of the land from their Cities,
and from their housen, and dwelling places; and that, either by making them
fly into other Countries for fear, or, by sending them into Captivity by the
hands of their enemies.

And there shall be a great forsaking in the midst of the Land] This word
Forsaking, may be taken, either Actively or Passively. It may be taken
Actively, and that either for God's forsaking his People, and giving them over
into the hand of their enemies: Or, for the Peoples forsaking their dwellings
or habitations. Or, it may be taken Passively, for the Lands being forsaken of
its Inhabitants, and so a forsaking and desolation will be for sense, the same
thing.

In the midst of the land.] This is put (...), for, In the land, to wit, the
land of Judah.

13.
But yet in it shall be a tenth.] i. e. But yet for all that desolation and
forsaking, which shall be in the midst of the land, a small remnant shall be
left alive and safe there.

By a tenth, he means a small remnant, and as it were a tenth part, in
respect of the whole People, putting a certain for an uncertain Number.

This remnant were they which were in Jerusalem when Sennacherib warred
against Judah: For when Sennacherib invaded Jud^h, many fled out of all parts
of the land to Jerusalem for safety, and were safe there; for Jerusalem could
not be taken by the A^syrians.

He mitigates here, the severity of the former judgment.

And it shall return and be eaten.] i. e. And it shall be eaten again.

But what shall be eaten again.

Answ. The tenth, or remnant, which shall be left, shall be eaten again; that
is, shall be consumed, and devoured again by their enemies. So most understand
this place. And it is true, the Jews which were left, were afterward consumed
and devoured again by the Babylonians under Nebucadnezzar.

But under correction, I conceive, that it is the Land, which is here said,
shall be eaten again: Which, he says, shall return and be eaten, or, eaten
again, because it should be plowed, and sowed, and planted, and the fruits
thereof eaten again, by the tenth, that is, by the remnant of the people,
which should be left, and because it should be enjoyed by them again.

This place is the same for sense with the 17th. Verse of the fifth Chapter,
Viz. With that, Then shall the lambs feed after their manner: And the waste
places of the fat ones, shall strangers eat, the Notes on which place see.

Observe the manner of Phrase which the Prophet here uses, when he says, And
it shall return and be eaten, For he says, It shall return and be eaten, for,
it shall be eaten again. The like manner of Phrase is used, Psalm. 78.41. Where
we read, they turned back and tempted God, for, they tempted God again. And
Genesis 30. v. 31. Where we read, I will again feed and keep thy flock. Whereas
it is in the Hebrew, I will return, feed, and keep thy flock. The like may be
observed, Judge. 2. verse. 19. and 8. v. 43. Where to return and do a thing, is
to do a thing again.

As a Tile tree and as an Oak, whose substance is in them when they cast their
leaves.] This Sentence is Defective, and with its Supplement makes this sense.
q. d. As a Tile tree, and as an Oak, which have their vegetative soul within
them, in the winter time, when they cast their leaves; though they seem to be
dead, yet they are not dead, but spring again and flourish in the Summer, by
reason of that vegetative soul which is in them, etc.

Note, that the Prophet might have instanced as well in any other kind of tree
which did cast its leaves in the winter, as in the Tile tree, and in the Oak,
but it seem^ that these trees were most common in those parts.

Note here, that they which say, that it is the tenth which is here said shall
return and be eaten, do understand here, these words [Yet nevertheless.] q. d.
Yet nevertheless as a Tile tree, and as an Oak. etc. Which they need not
understand, which say, that it is the land, not the tenth, which is here said,
shall be eaten.

Whose substance.] By substance here understand the vegetative soul, which
gives life to those trees or plants.

So the Holy seed shall be the substance the^eof.] i. e. So the Holy seed shall
be to the People of the Jews, as the vegetative Soul is to these trees. For as
the Vegetative soul, which is in these trees, is the cause that these trees die
not in the winter, though they cast their leaves, and that they revive and
spring, and flourish again in the Summer: So the Holy men, which are among the
People of the Jews (and Hezekiah by name) shall be the cause, that the Nation
of the Jews shall not wholly perish and be destroyed in that desolation, which
Sennacherib shall make (though their case may seem desperate) but that they
shall flourish, and increase, and multiply again.

If you ask how the holy seed, which was among the Jews, was the cause why the
whole Nation of the Jews was not destroyed.

I answer, It was because God did rebuke the fury of Sennacherib for that
seeds sake, and would not suffer him to root out the Nation of the Jews
utterly, from being a People.

The holy seed.] i. e. The holy and righteous men among the Jews.

He says seed for men, per Metonymiam materiae. Or, he calls the holy ones
among the Jews, the holy seed, because they were reserved, as it were for seed
to be sown, out of which should spring up a plentiful harvest of men.

Shall be the Substance.] i. e. Shall be as the Substance or veget^t^ve ^oul.

The note of similitude is here left to be understood.

Thereof.] i. e. Of the people of the Jews: A Relative without a near
adjoining Antecedent.

Or thereof, that is, of the land, But by the land understand Metonymice, the
people of the land.

Or thereof, that is, of the tenth, before mentioned.

ISAIAH. CHAP. VII.
AND it came to pass] And is redundant here. See Notes Cap. 2. v. 2.

It came to pass in the days of Ahaz.] The story of this you may read, 2
Kings 16. v 5.

But could not prevail against it.] This is spoken by Anticipation, for tha^
which follows came to pass before this.

2.
And It was told the house of David.] i. e. It was told to Ahaz the King, and
to the nobility of the Kingdom of Judah, which were of the lineage of David,
etc.

This which he speaks of was told them before Rezin and Pekah came against
Judah and Jerusalem, yea, so soon as ever they had made this confederacy.

Syria is confederate with Ephraim.] q. d. Syria and the ten Tribes have made a
league between themselves, and have agreed to join their forces together, with
an intent to cut off Judah from being any more a People.

It was the intent of Rezin King of Syria, and Pekah King of Israel, in joining
their forces against Judah, utterly to have cut off the People of Judah, from
being a People, or Commonwealth, or Kingdom of themselves any more: For if
they had taken Jerusalem, they would have made the son of Tabeal King, Verse.
6. And so have cut off the house of David: And those which they did take in the
Land of Judah, they carried away captive, 2 Chronicles. 28. v. 8. Intending to have
peopled the Land of Judah with some of their own People; as the Eastern
Conquerors were wont to do, when they intended that a People should be no more
a People, or Commonwealth of themselves, but live dispersed here and there as
slaves to others.

With Ephraim] i. e. With the ten Tribes of Israel.

Ephraim (which was the son of Joseph, Genesis 41.52. and the grandchild of
Jacob, and by him adopted and made as one of his own sons, Genesis 48. v. 5. ^is
put here for the Tribe of Ephraim, per Metonymiam efficientis. And the Tribe of
Ephraim for the ten Tribes of Israel, by a Synecdochen membri: And this Tribe
rather than any other, because Jeroboam, which was the first King of Israel,
was of this Tribe: As also because this was the chiefest Tribe of the ten.

And his heart was moved.] i. e. And Ahaz trembled and quaked for fear.

The heart is put here for the whole man, by a Synecdoche.

And the heart of his People.] i. e. And all his People, when they heard of it,
trembled and quaked also.

The fear of Ahaz and of his People was, least they should be utterly
destroyed, and be no more a People; which fear was the greater in them, because
they trusted not in God, nor believed his Prophets, who prophesied the contrary.

3.
Then said the Lord unto Isaiah, go forth now to meet Ahaz.] Isaiah is sent to
Ahaz the King, because Ahaz was most afraid, and because this message concerned
the good of the Kingdom whereof he was head.

Thou and Shear-jashub thy son.] Shear-jashub signifies, a remnant shall
return, and this name was given by Gods appointment to one of the sons of
Isaiah, to signify, that though the Jews should be brought into a miserable
condition by their enemies, yet a remnant at least should return to their
former happiness, and should enjoy the privilege of being a People, and
Commonwealth of themselves. And though the Jews should be expelled and driven
from their dwellings, by the prevailing of their enemies, yet a remnant of
them, at least, should return to their dwellings again, and there live and
increase, and enjoy the happiness of being a People, and Commonwealth of
themselves.

Because Ahaz feared, that he and his People would be utterly destroyed and cut
off from being a People, when Rezin and Pekah had both agreed to join their
Armies and forces together against them. Therefore was it, that God commands
Isaiah to go meet Ahaz, and carry Shear-jashub his son with him, (for the
sons of Isaiah were for signs and wonders in ^srael, cap. 8. v. 18.) that
Isaiah might confirm him and his people, not with words only, but with a sign
of comfort also from God, that Rezin and Pekah should not utterly cut them off
from being a People, or Commonwealth any more of themselves.

At the end of the Conduit of the upper pool.] Ahaz had gone out thither either
to walk, or to see how that place was fortified, or might be made advantageous
for the defense of the City against the enemy.

There were two Pooles near Jerusalem, whereof one was called the upper Poole,
the other the nether Poole, from their situation.

In the highway of the Fullers field.] i. e. In the highway which is near to
the fullers field: Or which goes through the fullers field.

Fullers use much water in their trade, and therefore are wont to dwell near
some Pool or river, and they had need of some open field to dry their clothes
in, when they were wet, and such a kind of field was it which is here called
the fullers field.

4.
Take heed.] Supple, That thou distrust's not God, and send'sts to the King of
Assyria for aid against Rezin King of Syria, and Pekah King of Israel.

And be quiet.] i. e. And sit quietly at home, and neither go thou, nor send
thou to Assyria for help.

When Ahaz heard that Rezin King of Syria, and Pekah King of Israel made a
confederacy against him, he trembled and quaked, notwithstanding the good word
of the Lord to him, and would not be quiet, but thought either to go or to send
messengers to Tiglath-Pileser King of Assyria for help, 2 Kings 16. v. 7. From
this therefore does the Prophet dehort him in these words; Take heed and be
quiet; q. d. Take heed and send not for aid abroad, neither be thou moved, but
put thy confid^nce in God. For in rest shall thou be saved, in quietness and
confidence shall be thy strength. See the like Cap. 30 v. 15.

For the two tails of these two smoking firebrarnds.] i. e. By reason of the
two tails of these two smoking firebrarnds: q. d. Let not the two tails of
these two smoking firebrarnds thus disquiet thee, and make thee to send for
aid abroad,

What he means by the two tails of the smoking firebrands, he tells in
the next words. By the two tails of the smoking firebrands, he means Rezin
King of Syria, and Pekah King of Israel, whom he calls firebrands, because of
their rage and fury against Judah, and smoking firebrarnds, because they could
but smoke, they could not burn: They could but terrify, they could not destroy
Judah. And he calls them tails or ends of firebrarnds, because as the tails
or ends of firebrarnds are soon spent and consumed, so should they shortly come
to an end and perish.

For the fierce anger of Rezin with Syria.] q. d. that is, by reason of the
fierce anger of Rezin King of Syria, and his people, the people of Syria.

He explaineth what he meant by the former words.

Of the son of Remaliah.] i. e. Of Pekah Son of Remaliah King of Israel.

He gives Pekah neither his proper name nor his title of King here, but calls
him only the Son of Remaliah (who was but a private man) out of contempt.

5.
Because Syria, etc.] Note that this relates not to what went before, but to
what follows after, q. d. Because Syria, Ephraim, and Remaliah's son, have
done this; therefore thus says the Lord, etc.

Ephraim.] i. e. The ten Tribes of Israel, See v. 2.

Have taken evil counsel against thee.] i. e. Have taken counsel, and
consulted together to destroy thee.

He calls it evil counsel, because they intended evil and mischief against
Judah, to destroy him utterly, and took counsel together accordingly.

6.
Let us go up against Judah.] i. e. Let us war together, against the Tribe of
Judah.

And vex it.] i. e. And vex Jerusalem the chief City thereof, with a close
siedge, or a fierce storm.

This Relative, It, is put here without an Antecedent, as the Hebrews often
put it, but the Antecedent is easy to be understood, to wit, Jerusalem.

Let us make a breach therein.] i. e. Let us make a breach in the walls
thereof, and so force our way into it.

For us.] i. e. For us to enter the City.

And set a King in the midst of it.] i. e. And when we have taken it, let us
depose, or destroy Ahaz, and set up a King of our own in it.

In the midst of it.] i. e. In it. A (...).

Even the Son of Tabeal] Tabeal seems to be the name of some Syrian: And
this man they would make as Viceroy, or as a Tributary to themselves.

7.
Thus says the Lord God.] q. d. Therefore thus says the Lord God.

It shall not stand.] i. e. The evil counsel which they have taken against
thee, shall not stand; for I will overthrow it.

Neither shall it come to pass.] q. d. Neither shall it take effect.

8.
For the head of Syria is Damascus, and the head of Damascus is Rezin.] q. d.
For the chief City and Metropolis of Syria is Damascus, and the King of
Damascus is Rezin. Supple, Let Rezin therefore content himself with this, that
he is King of Damascus, and the Kingdom thereunto belonging, for he shall not
come to be King of Judah and Jerusalem to bear rule there.

Here is an (...).

And within threescore and five years shall Ephraim be broken, that it shall
no more a People.] In the fifth Verse of this Chapter, he said, That Syria,
Ephraim, and the son of Remaliah, had taken evil counsel against Ahaz: And in
the same order which he spoke of them in that place, does he prophecy against
them in this: First against Syria, in the first words of this Verse, then
against Ephraim, in these present words, and then against the Son of Remaliah
in the following Verse.

Within threescore and five years.] This must not be so understood, as though
the Prophet would have the account of this threescore and five years to begin
at that time, in which he thus spoke: But the account must begin (as
Interpreters either generally, or for the most part, agree) from the time that
Amos did foretell the ruin of the kingdom of Israel, who foretold the ruin
thereof, threescore and five years before it came to pass. The sense therefore
of this place is this, q. d. Within threescore and five years, (which
threescore and five years began long since, even when Amos first prophesied of
the total destruction of Ephraim, and which are since well nigh expired) shall
Ephraim be broken, that it be not a People.

Ephraim] i. e. The ten tribes of Israel, as verse. 2.

That it be not a People.] So that their State, and Commonwealth, and Kingdom
shall be overthrown.

This was brought to pass by Salmanasser. 2 King. 17.6. Joseph. lib. 9. Antiq.
cap. 14.

9.
And the head of Ephraim is Samaria, and the head of Samaria is Remaliah 's
son.] q. d. And in the mean time, the chief City or Metropolis of Israel is
Samaria, and the King of Samaria is Remaliahs son. Supple, Let Remaliah's
son therefore content himself with this, that he is King of Samaria and the
Kingdom thereunto appertaining, for he shall not enlarge his dominions, and be
King over Judah and Jerusalem, or rule there.

Here is an (...) as before.

If ye will not believe.] Supple, The words which I have spoken unto you, from
the Lord, and rely on him.

Ye shall not be established.] i. e. Ye shall not be free from fear, nor settled
in your minds, but your heart shall be still moved as the trees are moved with
the wind.

The establishment which he here speaks of is opposed to that motion
proceeding from fear, or that trembling, which he speaks of, v. 2.

11.
Ask thee a sign of the Lord thy God.] Supple, for confirmation of what I
have said to thee in his name (if thou will not believe me) and he will give it
thee.

Ask it either in the depth.] i. e. Ask this sign to be shown or given thee
either in the earth.

The earth is called here the depth, because it is deep, that is, low in
respect of the Heavens.

Or in the Height above.] Or in the Heavens, which are above the earth, as
Verse. 9. That the Sun should stand still, as it did it the days of Joshua, etc.

The Heavens are called the Height here, because they are high above the earth.

By the depth, and the height (that is, by heaven and earth) we may understand
all other places as well as them, by a Synecdoche.

12.
I will not ask] Supple, a sign of the Lord.

Neither will I tempt the Lord.] q d. For I will not tempt the Lord (that I
should offend him) for that is forbidden, Deuteronomy. 6 v. 16.

Then do we tempt God, when we will not believe that he will save us, or help
us, according to his promise, except he shows us a Miracle, as may be gathered
from Exodus 17. v. 2. and 7. and Luke. 11. v. 16. But the case may be such, as
that we may desire a sign and not tempt God, as appears by Gideon, Judge. 6.
v. 36, 37. and by Ezekiah, 2 Kings, 20. v. 8. And they tempt not him, who ask a
sign with his leave, or at his bidding, as Ahaz might have asked a sign here.

Wherefore this seeming honest and godly Answer which Ahaz here gave, did not
proceed out of Piety and Religion towars God, but out of Hypocrisy: For if
Ahaz had minded Piety and Religion toward God, he would have trusted in God,
and not have trusted in the King of Assyria for help, as he did: For he sent to
Tiglath-Pilesser for help, 2 Kings, 16. v. 7. Ahaz therefore desired rather to
seem godly, than to be godly.

13.
Hear ye now O House of David.] i. e. Hear ye now O Ahaz the King, and ye
Nobles, which are descended from David.

He shows here, that not only Ahaz, but the Nobles (the Kinsmen of Ahaz) did
distrust God, as well as Ahaz, and approve of the Answer which Ahaz, made to
Isaiah.

He calls them the house of David, to mind them how far they had degenerated
from their Father David.

To weary man.] i. e. To vex a man (as I am) while he is weary, and not able
to bear it.

But will you weary my God also.] q. d. But will you with your crossnesse vex
my God also, (who has sent me to you, and has offered you by me to do such
things for you) until you have made him weary also to bear your doings?

He speaks of God here (...).

14.
Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign.] q. d. Therefore because
you will not ask a sign of the Lord (when he bids you v. 12.) The Lord
himself shall give you a sign without asking.

Or, Therefore may be taken here for Nevertheless, q. d. Yet nevertheless,
though you are so perverse, as that you will not ask him a sign when he bids
you, the Lord himself will of himself give you a sign, See cap. 30. v. 18.

Behold a Virgin.] i. e. Behold one who is now a Virgin.

This Virgin) to speak of this place in its first sense) is most probably
thought to be that Prophetess, which our Prophet took to wife, Cap. 8. v. 3.

Shall conceive.] By a Husband which she shall take.

And bear a Son.] It may be that this son was born before Rezin and Pekah
laid siege to Jerusalem; For that, which is here spoken, was spoken at that
time in which it was told the house of David that Syria was confederate with
Ephraim, v. 2. And no doubt but the house of David heard of this Confederacy
so soon as it was made.

And it may be that they did not begin to levy Soldiers so soon as ever they
had entered into this confederacy: Moreover so great an Army as Rezin and
Pekah marched with against Judah, could not suddenly be mustered and gathered
together and fitted for a march: And when they were come into Jud^a it asked
some time to vanquish that, before they came to lay siedge to Jerusalem which
was the last thing they did, and in the mean time when Ahaz saw that this
Virgin was with child, he might be confirmed in the truth of the Prophets
words, being that the fruit of the womb is a special gift of the Lord.

Immanuel.] This name Immanuel signifies God with us. Matthew. 1. v. 23. And it
was given to this Child, to signify, that God would be with the Jews, so that
though he suffered them to be diminished, and brought low by their Enemies, yet
he would not suffer them to be utterly cut off, that they should be no more a
People.

Marvail not, that God gave this name Immanuel for a special Sign; For Isaiah
says, that his Children were for Signs, and for Wonders, Chap. 8 v. 18. which
they were, only by reason of the mystery and signification of their names.

Probable it is (as I said) that this Immanuel was the Son of the
Prophetess, which is mentioned Chap. 8. v. 3. And that she conceived him by
Isaiah, and that this Immanuel was the same with Mahar-shalal-hash-baz,
mentioned in the eighth Chapter, (compare the first verse of Chap. 8. with
verse 8. of that Chapter) for it is not unusual with the Hebrews, that one
man should have many names.

Note here, that though in the first sense, the Virgin here meant, was the
Virgin which Isaiah afterward took to wife, by whom he had a Son called
Immanuel: Yet in a second and more sublime sense, the Virgin Mary is here
signified, who was a Virgin and a Mother both, in sensu Composito (as the
School speaks) that is, a Virgin even when she was a Mother: And the Son
which was born of her was Immanuel (not in name, but) in deed; For he was true
God, who being made Man, dwelt with us, and among us, Matthew. 1.23. and was our
Salvation, of which Immanuel, Immanuel the Son of Isaiah was but a type.

The temporal Calamities and Afflictions which the Jews suffered by their
enemies, were Types and Figures of the Spiritual miseries which men suffered
by Satan and their sins: And this calamity which the Jews suffered by Rezin
and Pekah, was a Type and Figure thereof, as well as any other: As therefore
Immanuel, which was born of her which was a Virgin at this time (though she
afterward conceived by Man) was a sign, that the Jews should not utterly
perish, but be delivered at length from this temporal calamity and
destruction: So was Christ Jesus (who was the true Immanuel, God with us, born
of a Virgin, which conceived him by the Holy Ghost) a sign that Men should not
all perish eternally, but a remnant at least should be saved everlastingly. And
a greater sign was he than that Immanuel, in that he was not only signum
portendens, but signum operans, a sign, not only foreshewing, but working out
their redemption.

15.
Butter and Honey shall he eat, that he may know to refuse the evil, and
choose the good.] As milk and honey signifies Plenty and Delicates, Exodus 3.
v. 8. So does butter and honey, Job, 20. v. 17. And the Prophet says, That
this Child should eat butter and honey till he comes to know, how to refuse
the evil, and choose good, to show, the plenty of food which should be in
Jerusalem during the siedge, because Ahaz and the Jews feared, that if Rezin
and Pekah should lay siedge to Jerusalem (though it should happen, that they
were not overcome by force, yet) they should at length be starved out by famine.

That he may know.] i. e. Until he knows. For this Particle, That,
signifies here, not the end or intent of a thing, but the term of time, as
also the Original does.

To refuse the evil, and choose the good.] By this Phrase is signified, the
Age which is able to make good use of Reason, and which has understanding to
discern between Good and Evil, which Children are held commonly to have, when
they are about seven years old. So Infants are usually described by this, That
they have no knowledge between Good and Evil, as Deuteronomy. 1. v. 39.

16.
For before the Child shall know to refuse the evil and choose the good.] q.
d. And, or, Moreover before this child shall come to the use of Reason.

For, is put here for And, or Moreover.

The Prophet does here prevent an Objection: For because he said, that the
Child should eat butter and honey, till he came to be so old, as to make use of
his reason, the Jews might object out of fear, that though they should have
plenty so long, yet afterward Rhezin and Pekah might starve them out; and so
vanquish them: He therefore answers here and says, That that shall not be, for
before that time, both Pekah and Rezin shall be dead.

The Land.] i. e. The Lands, Viz. of Syria, and Israel.

A Singular number is put here for a Plural. Or else he speaks of them Two, as
One Land, because they were at this time joined in One against Ahaz.

Which thou abhorrest.] Viz. Because of the Enmity which their Kings and People
bear against thee.

Shall be forsak^n of her Kings.] i e. Shall be rid of Rezin and of Pekah, both
which shall die a violent death.

Of Pekahs death we read 2 Kings, 15. v. 30. and of Rezins 2 Kings 16. v. 9.

17.
The Lord shall bring upon thee, etc.] Because Ahaz would not believe for all
this, nor rely upon God, but would rely upon Tiglath-Pileser King of Assyria
for help against Rezin and Pekah, (2 King. 16. v. 7.) therefore the prophet
breaks out here into a threatening Prophecy against him, saying, The Lord shall
bring upon thee, etc.

Days that have not come.] i. e. Such days, as the like have not been (for
misery and calamity) to you, and your People, and your Fathers house.

From the day that Ephraim departed from Judah.] i. e. Since the day or time
that the ten Tribes of Israel revolted from the Tribe of Judah, and made them a
King of their own, and a Kingdom distinct from that of Judah: which was done
by Jeroboam, in the days of Rehoboam, the Son of Solomon, 1 Kings 12.

Ephraim is taken here for the ten Tribes, see notes verse 2.

Even the King of Assyria.] Here we must repeat those words, The Lord shall
bring upon thee, that the sense may be this, The Lord shall bring upon thee,
even the King of Assyria, Supple, which shall more sorely afflict thee than
ever thou wast afflicted since the days of Rehoboam.

The King of Assyria here meant was Sennacharib.

18.
In that day.] Supple, In which he intends thus to afflict thee.

A Relative without an Antecedent.

He shall hiss for the fly that is in the utmost part of the Rivers of
Egypt.] He puts the fly here for flies, and part for parts, Singular for
Plural Numbers: And by the utmost parts of the Rivers of Egypt, he means the
brimms or brinks of Nilus, and other the Rivers of Egypt, where flies were wont
to breed and abide in great abundance.

By the flies that are in the utmost parts of the Rivers of Egypt, are here
Metaphorically meant, the Egyptians themselves: which he signifies here by the
Metaphor of flies, because of the abundance of flies which were in Egypt, by
reason of the store of Rivers and waters which were there, in which kind of
places flies do breed and multiply abundantly. Or because as the fly is an
impudent creature: So were the Egyptians an impudent People. Or because the
flies use the wings, and so are speedy, and because they usually are in swarms
and so are many. Therefore does be signify the Egyptians under the Metaphor of
flies, to show the great number of them which should come, and their speed in
coming against Judah.

He shall hiss for.] This shows how easily God can do this: For he shall
but hiss for them, and they shall come.

And for the Be that is in the Land of Assyria.] The Be is put here for Bees,
a Singular number for a Plural.

By the Bees in the Land of Assyria are Metaphorically meant the Assyrians
themselves, perhaps because Assyria abounded with Bees, as Egypt did with
Flies, Or, he calls the Assyrians Bees, because of the great number of them
which should come into Judaea, and the speed which they should use: As he
called the Egyptians Flies. Or he might call the Assyrians Bees, because of
the dexterity which they had to hurt, as Bees have to sting; Or, because of
their strength and order in war, as Bees are in their kind strong and orderly,
in which two things as Bees do excel Flies, So did the Assyrians excel the
Aegytians.

Note here, that he speaks not of the Egyptians and Assyrians as of two
distinct Armies under two distinct Generals; But as two Nations joined in one
and the same Army of Sennacherib.

19.
And they shall come and shall rest all of them in the desolate Valleys, and in
the holes of the rocks, etc.] He persists in the Metaphor of Flies and Bees,
and alludeth to their nature, in saying, They shall rest in the desolate
Valleys, and in the holes of the rocks, and upon all thorns, and upon all
bushes: But under this Metaphor he means, that the Army of the Assyrians
should come up against Judah, in such a number, as that they should fill all
Judaea, so that no place should be free from them.

20.
In the same day shall the Lord shave with a Rasor that is hired.] By a Rasor
that is hired, he means a sharp Rasor. For those things which we use to hire,
are of the best in their kind, and fittest for our purpose.

What he means by shaving with a Rasor that is hired, he explaineth in the
next words.

By them beyond the River.] i e. By the Assyrians which dwell beyond the River
Euphrates.

The Assyrians are they which are meant by the Rasor.

By the King of Assyria.] q. d. That is, By the Forces of the King of Assyria.

The King of Assyria (who was the head of his Army) is put here for his whole
Army, per Synecdochen. And these words explain the former, and tell us, that by
them beyond the River, he means the Assyrians.

The head] i. e. The hair of the head, Metonymia subjecti.

And the hair of the feet.] By the hair of the feet is meant, the hair of the
privy members: For so the Hebrews use to speak out of modesty, and call the
privy members, the feet.

The Prophet compares the Land of Judah to the body of a man, and the men of
that land, to the hair of that body: And this he says, that as the hair of the
body uses to be shaved with a Rasor, so shall the men of Judah be cut off, and
slain by the Assyrians.

And it shall consume the beard.] q. d. Yea, the Rasor shall also cut off the
beard.

Note, that the Prophet does here allude to the manner of the ancient Hebrews,
who (as Vatablus tells us) were wont to shave their heads and their privy
parts, but to let their beards grow long: And when he says, that the Lord will
shave with a Rasor that is hired, the head and the hair of the feet, his
meaning is, that the Lord will cut off and kill all, high and low; and when he
adds, and it shall also consume the beard, his meaning is, q. d. and he shall
spare none.

21.
And it shall come to pass in that day.] By this day, he means the day or
time after this invasion and desolation made by the Assyrians.

He uses a Relative here without a Antecedent, as the Hebrews often do.

A man shall nourish a young Cow and two Sheep.] i. e. A man shall have but
only one young Cow, and but only two sheep to nourish.

This shows the paucity of Cattle which should be left after this; for after
this a man had not herds of kine and beasts, and flocks of sheep, as before,
but a man had only one young Cow, and two Sheep to keep, because of the
destruction which was made of cattle.

22.
And it shall come to pass for the abundance of milk that they shall give.] i.
e. Yet it shall come to pass for the abundance of milk which the young Cow and
two Sheep shall give, etc.

And is put here for Yet, as cap. 8. v. 9.

They were wont (it seems) to milk their Ewes as well as Cowes, as many do in
some places of our Land. See Deuteronomy. 32. v. 14.

He shall eat butter.] i. e. He and his, all shall eat butter to the full.

For butter and honey shall every one eat, that is left in the Land.] Butter
and Honey were accounted for dainties among the Jews, so that in this verse
the Prophet mingleth (as he is wont to do for the godlies sake) a word of
comfort among the judgments which he denounces.

23.
And it shall come to pass in that day, that every place, etc.] This must
relate to, and follow in construction (not the 22. but) the 21. Verse.

Every place shall be.] Scil. For Briars and Thorns.

The Prophet does not perfect his speech here, but suspends it, to show what
places he speaks of, till the latter end of the Verse, and there he resumes
it, and compleates it.

Where there were a thousand Vines at a thousand silverlings.] i. e. Where
there were many Vines let out for a Sheckel of silver a piece.

A thousand is put here for many, a certain for an uncertain number, and by a
Silverling he means a Sheckel of silver.

The Hebrews were wont to count their Sums by Sheckels, as the Romans were
by Sesterees; So that as Nummus and Sestertius came at length to be used
promiscuously, the one for the other among the Romans, so did a Sheckel, and a
Silverling, or a piece of silver among the Hebrews. Now a Sheckel was twenty
Gerahs, Exodus 30.15. and a Gerah (as they say, who have been diligent in
computing the Hebrew coins with ours) was th^^e half pence of our money, A
Sheckel therefore, or a Silverling, containing twenty Gerahs, was worth two
shillings six pence of our coin.

It shall be even for Briars and Thorns.] i. e. It shall be full of Briars and
Thorns, because there shall not be men enough to dress these places and manure
them, which being not dressed nor manured, but neglected, produce Briars and
Thorns.

This Pa^ticle For, shows not the intent but the event, to wit, that it
should so fall out, that Briars and Thorns should come up in those places; not
that men should purposely set them apart for Briars and Thorns there to grow.

Or, if it signifies the intent, it is to be interpreted of the intent not of
man but of God, thus punishing man's sin.

24.
With arrows and bows shall men come thither] q. d. None shall dare to go
thither unarmed, or without his bow and arrows, forfear of wild Beasts which
shall dwell and harbor there among the Briars and Thorns. See Lev. 26. v. 22.

25.
And on all hills that shall be dug with the Mattock, there shall not come
thither the fear of Briars and Thorns.] q. d. And though many Hills shall be
dug with the Mattock, as they were wont, yet they shall not be dug for
that end for which they were wont, that is, to make Vineyards thereon.

There shall not come thither the fear of Briars and Thorns.] q. d. There
shall not be any Vineyards planted there.

Note, that this word thither, is redundant after the Hebrew manner.

Vineyards were wont to be fenced about with thick hedges of Thorns and
Briars, to keep out beasts and ill-minded men, who seeing such fences, would be
afraid to venture over, or through them, for fear of tearing their clothes, and
doing themselves a mischief: Hence he says, There shall not come thither the
fear of briars and thorns, for, there shall be no Vineyards planted there.

The f^ar of Briars and Thorns.] i. e. Briars and thorns to make men afraid,
Supple, to break through.

But it shall be for the sending forth of Oxen, and for the treading of the
lesser Cattle.] i e. But it shall be, that the digging of the Hills with
Mattocks, shall be for this end, to wit, that men may send their greater Cattle
thither to feed there, and the lesser cattle there to walk and graze.

Note here, that because men could keep their Cattle, and preserve them from
thieves, robbers, and freebooters, better upon Hills (which were as natural
fortresses) than in the Plains; hence many (who escaped the sword at that time
here spoken of) made choice rather of the Hills, than of the Plains, for the
feeding of their Cattle, and they especially which lived in the borders of the
Land near to the Philistims, and Edomites, and other their Enemies, who were
wont as Freebooters to come into their Quarters, to steal or plunder their
Cattle, and carry them away: And that their Cattle might have the better food,
and pasture in more Plenty upon the Hills, they grub'd up the bushes and
briars, which grew in the way, and hindered the growing of the grass, and the
walks of the Cattle, with Mattocks.

ISAIAH. CHAP. VIII.
TAke thee a great Roll.] This Roll was to be a great or a large Roll,
because many things were to be written therein.

The Ancients had not such manner of books so bound up as we use now, but in
stead of them, they had Parchments, or Barks of Trees, or the like, which they
rouled up like our Chancery Roules. From whence, even at this day, Volumen,
which signifies a Roll (as having its derivation from Vol^o, which signifies
to roll) comes to signify a Book.

With a man's Pen.] i. e. With a writing Pen.

That which is here rendered a man's Pen, Is in the Hebrew Cheret Enosh. Where
note, that Cheret signifies not only a writing Pen, or Pen which men use to
write with, but it signifies also a Crisping-pin, or a Pin with which women
were wont to crisp their hair; as appears Chap. 3. verse. 22.

To distinguish therefore this Cheret, as it signifies a writing Pen, or a Pen
which men use to write with, from that Cheret which signifies a Crisping-pin,
or Pin with which women were wont to crispe their hair, it may be called Cheret
Enosh, as if he should say, the man's Cheret, that is, the man's Pen. Where note,
that the word Enosh is to be taken here for a man, in opposition to a woman, a^
it is also taken, Genesis 17.27. and Numb. 13.3. and elsewhere.

But if a man's Pen signifies here no more than a writing Pen, and signifies
not some extraordinary writing Pen, you will say, that these words are
needless, for it was enough to say, write in it, without saying, with a man's
Pen.

Answ. It was enough: yet though the Instrument be often intimated sufficiently
in the action, it is also often added and expressed with the action, as Exodus
29.34 Thou shall burn the remainder with fire. And Deuteronomy. 7.5. Ye shall burn
their graven Images with fi^e. In both which places the word fire is as
needless as a man's Pen is here, and is sufficiently intimated in the word burn.

Concerning Maher-shalal-hash-baz.] q. d. That which I shall tell thee
concerning Maher-shalal-hash-baz, as v. g. who shall be his Mother that shall
bear him, and who his Father that shall beget him, and what his name shall be,
and what his name shall signify and portend, etc.

He calls him here, Maher-shalal-hash-baz, by a Prolepsis, for as yet he was
not named, as appears v. 3.

2.
And I took unto me faithful witnesses to record.] q. d. And according to what
was written and commanded by God in that Roll, I married the Prophetess whom
God would have me to marry, and when I married her, I took faithful witnesses
to record or bear witness of my marriage.

Here the Prophet comprehends a great deal in few words, which may be
understood by the context.

Note, that Matrimony among the Jews was not wont to be celebrated before
less than ten witnesses.

Uriah the Priest, and Zechariah the son of Jeberechiah.] This Vriah was High
Priest, of whom we read 2 King. 16.10. and Zachariah was a Prophet, of whom we
read 2 Chronicles. 29.13.

Note, that these were not all the witnesses which Isaiah took to record or
bear witness of his marriage, but only two of them, which two are here named,
because they were men of great authority, to show, that in a matter of great
moment; he would take witnesses suitable.

3.
And I went unto the Prophetess.] i. e. And I lay with the Prophetess which
was now my wife.

The Prophetesse] Some think that this woman was endued with the gift of
Prophecy, and therefore called a Prophetess; Others think that she is here
called a Prophetess only, because she was the wife of a Prophet, Viz. the
Prophet Isaiah, as we use to call the wife of a Major, Majoresse.

Call his name Maher-shalal-hash-baz.] This name Maher-shalal-hash-baz being
interpreted is, In making to the spoil he hasteneth the prey Or, Make speed to
the spoil, hasten the prey. And it was given to the child to signify, that the
Assyrians should come speedily and take a great prey from the Syrians, and the
ten Tribes of Israel.

4.
Before the Child shall have knowledge to cry, my Father and my Mother.] i. e.
Before the child Maher-shalal-hash-baz, shall come to so much knowledge, as to
know his Father and his Mother, and call them by their names.

The riches of Damascus, and the spoil of Samaria shall be taken before the
King of Assyria.] i. e. the riches of the Syrians, and the spoil of the
Kingdom of the ten Tribes of Israel, shall be taken and carried away by the
Assyrians.

We read of the fulfilling of this 2 Kings 15.29. and 2 Kings 16.9. and it was
fulfilled by Tiglath-Pileser.

Damascus was the head or chief City of Syria, Chap. 7.8. As Samaria was the
head or chief City of the ten Tribes; and these two Cities are here put to
signify the several Kingdoms which were subject to them.

Before the King of Assyria.] i. e. Before the face of Tiglath-Pilesser King of
Assyria, by his soldiers, and at his command.

5.
The Lord spoke also unto me again.] That which the Lord spoke here, contains
his threats against the Jews, for that they believed not what he spoke against
the Syrians, and the men of Israel, but did for all that rejoice in Rezin and
Remaliah's son.

6.
Forasmuch as this People.] By this People is meant, the men of Judah.

Where note, that all the men of Judah did not refuse the waters of Siloah, yet
what some of them only did, is imputed to the whole People, because of the
communion which is between a part and the whole.

Refuse the waters of Siloah that go softly.] Siloah was a soft and gentle
stream, which arose out of Mount Si^n in Jerusalem, and thence glided gently
and softly along into the brook Kidron, and by the waters of this soft gentle
stream, the Prophet does here Metaphorically mean the house of David, that is,
the King of Judah, and the royal seed thereof, (which descended from David)
whom he likeneth to the waters of Siloah, because as the waters of Siloah were
but low, and the current thereof but weak; So (to the eyes of man) the house of
David, was but weak in strength, and in a mean and low condition, in respect of
any humane power it had, (though it was upheld by the power of God) at this
time.

He takes his Metaphor from Siloah, because Siloah was well known to the Jews,
to whom he spoke, and because Siloah sprang out of Sion, which was a hill in
Jerusalem the head City of Judah, upon which the Palace of the Kings of Judah
was built.

From this place it appears, that many of the men of Judah did despise the
house of David, to whom the Scepter and Kingdom of Judah did belong, (because
it was weak and destitute of humane power, at this time) and did wish that the
Kingdom of Judah were translated to the Syrians, and the Kings of Israel, who
were confederate with the Syrians, thinking by these means, that they should
be no more afflicted (as they had been) by the ten Tribes, and by the Syrians:
And this they did, because they heard that the Syrians and the Israelites had
made a league together, and would join their forces to invade Judah, and that
they thought that Judah would never have been able to resist them.

Forasmuch as this People refuse] At least in their mind, and in their private
practices.

The waters of Siloah which go softly.] i. e. The house of Judah, which is
low, and destitute of humane power, and not sufficient in it self to resist
Rezin and Pekah.

And rejoice in Rezin and Remaliak's son.] i. e. And wish, that Rezin King of
Assyria, and Pekah the son of Remaliah, King of Israel, (who are joined
together in league) were Lords of Judah instead of the house of David.

To rejoice.] Is put here for to desire and wish for, per Metonymiam effecti,
because we rejoice in that, which we desire and wish for, when we have obtained
it.

7.
The Lord brings upon them.] i. e. The Lord will bring upon the men of Judah
which refuse the waters of Siloah, and rejoice in Rezin and Remaliah's son.

Because waters lie lower than the top and surface of the earth, he uses here
the Metaphor of waters; therefore he says the Lord brings up, etc.

The Lord brings up.] i. e. The Lord will bring up.

A present is put for a future tense.

The waters of the river strong and many] By the River is here meant Euphrates,
which is called in Scripture the River (...), which was a very great River, and
a River which ran with a very strong and mighty stream and current.

By the River Euphrates is meant Metaphorically, the King of Assyria, whom he
signifies by this River rather than by any other River, because as Euphrates
was a great and a strong mighty River, so was the King of Assyria, a mighty and
powerful King; and because Euphrates was in the Assyrians dominions, as Siloah
was in the dominion of the Kings of Judah.

He opposes the river Euphrates whose waters were strong and many, to Siloah,
whose waters ran softly, and fits the punishment of these men, to their sin.

Even the King of Assyria and all his glory.] By the King of Assyria, is meant
Sennacherib, and by all his glory, All his Forces.

He shows here, what or whom he meant by the waters of the River strong and
many, to wit Sennacherib King of Assyria, and all his Forces.

And all his glory.] i. e. And all his power and strength of men.

It is a thing usual with the Hebrews to call the strength and Power of men,
which a Prince has, his glory, and that perhaps per Metonymiam effecti,
because he glories in this his strength himself, or is renowned for it, by
others.

And he shall come up over all his Channells] i e And the King of Assyria shall
come up beyond the bounds of his own Empire or Kingdom.

He persisteth in the Metaphor of a Rivers whose proper Bounds are his
Channells.

And go over all his banks.] This is the same for the sense with the words
which immediately went before, and the Metaphor is the same.

8.
He shall pass through Judah.] i. e. He shall over-runne the land of Judah,
with his Army, from the East thereof even to the West.

This is also spoken in allusion to an overflowing River, which runs
through a place with its waters.

He shall overflow, and go over.] Supple, The land of Judah. i. e. He shall
overrun the land of Judah with his Army, and destroy it as he goes.

He persists still in the Metaphor of a River, which overflowing and going over
a place, drowneth and carries all things before it, as it goes.

He shall reach even to the neck] He still persists in the Metaphor of a River,
which rises higher and higher; and here compares Judaea (as it was at length
overrun with Sennacherib and his Army) to a man in great waters, which rise
up and reach as high as his neck: For as a man in such a case is nigh to be
quite drowned, all his members being under water, save only his head: So was
Judaea (when Sennacherib did invade and overrun it) nigh to be utterly
destroyed: For all the Cities and Villages of the whole land were destroyed,
and laid desolate one after another, excepting Jerusalem only, which was the
head of the Kingdom, and which was only, as it were, above the waters at this
time.

And the stretching out of his wings, shall fill the breadth of thy Land, O
Immanuell!] i. e. And he shall fill thy land (O Immanuel) from one side thereof
to another with his Army, So great it shall be, and so little shall escape him.

He leaves his Metaphor of a River now, and speaks of Sennacherib as of a
General or chief Commander of a great Army.

The stretching out of his wings.] i. e. H^^ wings being stretched out, etc.

By his wings he means the Army of Sennacherib, For the Hebrews call all
Forces both of Horse and Foot Wings: Though the Latins by the wings of an Army
mean only the Horsemen, which being placed in battle, part of one side, and
part of the other side of the foot, do cover the body of the footmen, as
wings do the body of a bird.

O Immanuel!] He makes this Apostrophe to the Child, as to him that shall bear
witness to the truth of those calamities which he has foretold.

Of Immanuel, See Cap. 7. v. 14.

9.
Associate your selves, O ye People.] He makes an Apostrophe here to the
Assyrians, and their Associates, and by a Figure call-(...), or by an Ironicall
exhortation, he exhorts them to associate themselves, and join together
against the Jews, and chiefly against Jerusalem.

Associate your selves.] q. d. Associate your selves, and join together
against Judah and Jerusalem, if ye will.

O ye People.] i. e. O ye Assyrians, and other Nations which join with the
Assyrians in their Expedition against Judah and Jerusalem.

Note, that the word People here, is a word of the Plural number, for there
were many of several Countries and Nations which served under Sennacherib in
this expedition.

And ye shall be broken to pieces.] And is put here for But, or Yet, or
Nevertheless.

Though Sennacherib, and his Army did mightily prevail against the Jews at
the first, and destroyed them in a dreadful manner, yet at length they were
broken to pieces by the Angel of the Lord, who slew in one night, an hundred
fourscore and five thousand of them, 2 King. 19.35.

Note here, that the passage contained in this and the next verse, is an answer
to an objection which might be made by reason of that word Immanuel, in the
eighth verse: For being that that word Immanuel signifies, God with us, and it
was a name given to a Child, that it might be a sign, that God would be with
the Jews, and help them against their enemies; It might be objected by the
Jews, saying, How will God be with us; If the Assyrians and their Associates
shall do thus to us? To which the Prophet here answers; That God will be so
with the Jews, that their enemies shall not always prevail against them, for
though they prevail at the first, they shall not prevail at the last, but shall
be broken to pieces.

And give ear.] To wit, To Sennacharib, when he inviteth you to join with him
in an Expedition against Judah and Jerusalem, if ye will.

Gird your selves, and ye shall be broken in pieces.] i. e. Gird your selves
with your swords to fight against Judah and Jerusalem, yet shall ye be broken
in pieces.

Gird your selves, and ye shall be broken in pieces.] He repeateth these words
again the more to confirm the truth of what he says.

10.
Take counsel together.] Supple, Of vanquishing and subduing Judah and
Hierusolem, and cutting them off utterly.

And it shall come to naught.] i. e. Yet the Counsel which ye take, shall come
to naught.

Speak the word.] q. d. Determine and give out by words, what you will do
against Judah and Jerusalem.

And it shall not stand.] i. e. Yet your determination and saying shall not
stand, they shall be overthrown.

For God is with us.] i. e. For God is with us, and stands by us to help us
against our enemies. And indeed God did help them when he sent his Angel, which
destroyed Sennacherib's Host, 2 Kings, Chap. 19. v. 35.

He alludeth in these words, God is with us, to the Childs name Immanuel, and
explaines the meaning and mystery of that name, for Immanuel is, being
interpreted, God with us, Matthew. 1. v. 23.

11.
For the Lord.] For, is to be taken here for And, or Also, or Moreover, as it
is Cap. 7. v. 16.

This Verse has its immediate connection with the eighth Verse of this Chapter,
the two verses which are between being brought in by the by, only upon
occasion of that word Immanuel, and of the Objection, which might be raised
from thence.

With a strong hand] i. e. With a strong, that is, a loud and very audible
voice, so that I could not be deceived in what he spoke, but must needs take
good notice thereof.

The Scripture speaking often of God (...), attributes to him the parts and
members of man's body, as if he he were a man: And here they attribute to him A
Hand, by which is meant the Voice, by a Metonymie of the cause.

Object. But you will Object, that the tongue, not the hand is the cause of the
voice, as being the instrument of speaking.

Answ The hand being (...), or the chief instrument of the body, is often put
to signify any other instrument thereof. And in particular we find it often
put for the mouth or tongue, as Lev. 10. v. 11. Where we read thus. That ye may
teach the Children of Israel the statutes which the Lord has spoken unto them
by the hand of Moses. And Numb. 15.23. Where we read thus; All that the Lord
has commanded you by the hand of Moses. And Numb. 16.40. Where we read thus;
As the Lord said to him, by the hand of Moses.

And instructed me that I should not walk in the way of this People saying.] i.
e. And instructed me, that I should not do as this People does, saying, etc.

This People.] The People here meant, are the Jews which refused the waters of
Siloah, because they went softly. See v. 6.

These were Traitors at this time to their King, for because he was weak, they
did cast in their mind, how they might revolt to Rezin and Pekah, Kings of
Syria and Israel, which were joined together, for the destruction of Ahaz and
the Kingdom of Judah: And the way which they walked in, was Treason and
Rebellion, in meditating a revolt from their own King, to the Kings of Syria
and Israel: All which they did notwithstanding the Promise of God, that he
would be their H^lper, and defend them against those two Kings, and so they
feared those two Kings more than God.

12.
Say ye not a confederacy to all them to whom this People shall say a
confederacy] q. d. Go not about to make a confederacy, or a conspiracy
against your King, with all those, with whom they would make a confederacy or
conspiracy.

The order of the words is this, q d. Say ye not, Let there be a confederacy
between u^, to all them, to whom this People will say, Let there be a
confederacy between us.

A confederacy.] Here is a word left to be understood, namely, Let there be,
q. d. Let there be a confederacy between us.

The confederacy which he means, was a confederacy to depose Ahaz King of
Judah, and bring his Kingdom into the hands of Rezin King of Syria, and Pekah
King of Israel, who had at this time joined their forces against Judah.

To all them.] These words signify all those men, with whom those Traitors
would make a Confederacy, or Conspiracy against their King, and they were
partly their fellow Subjects, whom they would draw into the same conspiracy
with themselves, partly and chiefly Rezin King of Syria, and Pekah King of
Israel, and their Subjects.

Neither fear ye their fear.] i. e. Neither be afraid of them, of whom they are
afraid.

The word fear, is to be taken here Objective, for the thing feared, as it is
taken elsewhere, as Genesis Chap. 31. v. 42, 53, etc.

They which these men feared were Rezin and Pekah, who had joined their forces
and combined together against Judah and Jerusalem, and therefore to curry
favor with them, and to provide for their own safety, they did desire (at
least) to maintain intelligence with them, to betray the Kingdom of Judah
into their hands, and did persuade and labor their fellow subjects to do the
like.

Neither be afraid.] As though they ( Viz. Rezin and Pekah) could subdue Judah.

13.
Sanctify the Lord of Host himself.] i. e. Fear ye the Lord of Hosts and him
only: Fear not Rezin and Pekah.

Then we sanctify God, when we do that (which we ought to do) to him, and no
other, For to sanctify, is to separate a thing from others by way of
excellency, or to acknowledge a thing to be so separate, by our words and
actions.

Himself.] This word carries an Emphasis with it, q. d. Fear him, and
sanctify him, fear not these.

Let him be your fear, and let him be your dread.] These words, fear and dread,
are to be taken here, Objective, for the thing or party to be feared and
dreaded, as v. 12. q. d. Fear him only.

There was reason why they should fear God, if they went on with their
confederacy, for God had threatened in that case, to bring upon them the King
of Assyria, etc. verse. 7. and what he had threatened he was able to bring to
pass.

14.
And he shall be for a sanctuary.] q. d. And he shall be to you as a place of
refuge, where ye shall be safe from all danger, i. e. He shall be your
protector and defender.

A Sanctuary.] A Sanctuary, properly signifies an Holy Place, separated or set
apart for Gods worship. And therefore the Tabernacle was called a Sanctuary,
Exodus 25. verse. 8. And so was the Temple Psalm. 78. v. 69. But here a Sanctuary
is taken Metaphorically for a Protector or Defender; Because in many cases,
they which fled to a Sanctuary or Holy place, were thereby protected and freed
from the hands of Violence: So that none, whatsoever they were, could (without
a great offense) touch them or lay violent hands upon them, so long as they
were there. Hence it was that Adoniah when he feared King Solomon, caught hold
of the horns of the Altar (which was before the Tabernacle, 2 Chronicles. 1. v. 5.
1 King. 2. verse. 29. And that this was the Practice also long before, we may
learn out of Exodus 21. verse. 14. And to this Practice and custom does David
allude when he says; In the secret of his Tabernacle shall he hide me. Psalm.
27.5:

But as for the Original of this practice, I do not remember that it is any
where written, that God appointed the Sanctuary to be a place of refuge for any
sort of men, as he did appoint certain Cities, to be Cities of refuge for the
manslayer, Deuteronomy. 19. v. 2. and Josh. 20.2. Wherefore I conceive that it was
the reverence which men bore to that place, that began and continued this
Practice of flying to the Sanctuary, and being safe there. For even among the
Heathens their Temple and Altars were places of Refuge, for this we read in
Euripides, -- (...),
(...).


The wild beast has the Rock for his refuge, but servants, the Altars of the
gods.

But for a stone of stumbling, and for a Rock of offense to both houses of
Israel.] q. d. But he shall bring evil upon both the Houses or Tribes of
Israel, that is, upon the House or Tribe of Judah, and the House or Tribe of
Benjamin.

For a stone of stumbling,] By a stone of stumbling is meant, a stumbling block
or stone, at which a Man stumbleth. A Substantive of the Genitive case being
put here by an Hebraisme for an Adjective.

Now because a Man which runs, and in his running stumbleth at a stone,
comes thereby to a great fall. And if he flies before his Enemy, he does not
only come to a great fall, but also is overtaken with his enemy and slain: So
that the stone is to him a cause of hurt by his fall, and a cause of his death,
in that by his fall, his Enemy overtook him, and slew him: Hence it is, that
to be a stone of stumbling, is put Metaphorically, for to be a cause of evil
to a Man, or to bring evil upon a Man; yea, to be the cause of destruction to
him, or to bring destruction upon him.

And for a Rock of offense.] By a Rock of offense is meant, a Rock against
which a Man does offend, that is, strike or hit his foot, and so stumbleth.

Note, that this is but the former sentence repeated, and that a Rock here
signifies no more, than a Stone there, which is called a Rock, not because of
the Greatness, but rather because of the hardness of it. It was no great
Stone with which Zipporah circumcised her Child, Exodus 4. v. 25. yet it is
there called, Petra, that is, a Rock.

To both the houses of Israel.] i. e. To both the Tribes of Israel.

Viz. The Tribe of Judah, and the Tribe of Benjamin, which two, Viz. Judah, and
Benjamin, were the Sons of Jacob, who was called Israel.

When the other ten Tribes revolted from the House of David, in the days of
Rehoboam, these continued their obedience, 2 Chronicles. 11.12. Hence we read, these
two Tribes often joined together, as 2 Chronicles. 14.8. and 15.2. etc. Yet do both
these two Tribes go often under the name of Judah only, as Chap. 1. v. 1. for
reasons there given.

For a Gin, and for a Snare.] A Gin is an instrument or decive to catch birds:
And a Snare is an instrument or device made and laid to catch beasts. Now
because these birds which were taken in the Gin, were killed by the Fowler; and
those Beasts which are taken in the Snare, are killed by the Hunter: Therefore
to be for a Gin and for a Snare, is put here by a Metaphor, for to be a cause
of destruction, or to bring destruction upon men.

So that, To be for a stone of stumbling, and for a rock of offense, for a gin,
and for a snare, Sgnifieth, To afflict, and to destroy.

To the Inhabitants of Jerusalem.] Note here, that both the houses of Israel,
and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, are put by a Synecdoche for those of both
the houses of Israel and of the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, which would not fear
the Lord, but feared Rezin King of Syria, and Pekah King of Israel, and made a
conspiracy, or confederacy against their own King, that they might curry favor
with them.

For a Sn^re and for a Gin, to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem.] Being that
Jerusalem was preserved, both when Rezin and Pekah came against it, and also
when Sennacherib invaded Judah, it may be asked, how any of the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem could be destroyed?

Answ. The Inhabitants of Jerusalem here spoken of, as they thought Ahaz too
weak to withstand Rezin and Pekah: So might they think Hezekiah too weak to
withstand Sennacherib, and so not trusting themselves in the City when the
Armies of the Enemies came against Judah, they might get out (and perhaps join
with Sennacherib's men) and so perish, either by them or with them, if they
perished not before.

15.
Shall stumble, and fall, and be broken.] i. e. Shall be afflicted and brought
to misery.

A Metaphor from a man, which running stumbleth at a stone in his way, and
falls, and so comes to hurt.

And be broken.] He alludeth to those, which in their running stumble at a
stone, and fall, and so break their face, or knees, or arms, or legs, etc.

And be snared and be taken.] i. e. And shall be destroyed.

He alludeth to Birds and Beasts, which are taken in Gins and Snares, and so
killed by the hands of the Hunter or Fowler.

Bind up the Testimony.] i. e. Bind up the Roll, in which thou have written
that which I have told thee concerning the matter of Rezin and Pekah, and the
Instructions which I gave thee concerning my People, whereby they might know
how to carry themselves at that time, and wherein thou have written the
calamities, which shall befall them which revolt from their own natural King to
Strangers.

These are the words of the Lord to the Prophet.

Whether these things were written in the same Roll which is mentioned v. 1. or
no, it matters not, only this is certain, that the Prophet wrote these things
in a Roll, and exposed the Roll to the open view of all that passed by, that
they might read them.

He calls this Roll the Testimony, because it testified, what the mind of God
was in these particulars.

This Testimony Isaiah had enrouled or written in a Roll or Parchment, both
that he might the better preserve it, and that he might expose it to all men to
read, and therefore the Lord says here to him, Bind it up, q. d. Roll up this
Testimony (which thou have engrossed in Parchment, and exposed to all men to
read) and when thou have rouled it up, bind it, that it unroul not.

This Testimony, that is, this Revelation and Instruction so written and
enrouled, God had commanded, as it seems, to be laid open and made public
for all to read, yea, for those which refused Ahaz, and desired Rezin and
Remaliah's son; And for this end did he command it to be laid open, that all
might take warning thereby, to rely upon God, and make no confederacy against
their King: But because they which refused Ahaz would not be warned thereby,
and return to their obedience by this, the Lord commands it in anger to be
taken away from them, and rouled up, and bound, and sealed, and to be shown
only to his Disciples, and left among them, that it might be a Testimony to
Posterity: What gracious warning he gave those Traitors, though they would not
take his warning: And that his Disciples might have the will of God always by
them, to square their actions according to it.

Seal the Law among my Disciples.] q. d. Seal the Law, and keep it close from
these men: and carry it to, and lay it open among my Disciples, viz. that it
may be a Testimony, that thou did warn these Traitors in my name, and that my
Disciples may have my words near them, to rule themselves according to them.

The Speech is Elleipticall.

Seal the Law.] i e. Keep the Law close, to wit, from these Traitors.

To Seal, signifies to keep close, by a Metaphor taken from the Practice of
men, which set a Seal upon the Letters or Boxes, which they would have kept
close shut, and not opened.

The Law] By the Law, he means the same as he did by the Testimony, and this
is but a repetition of the former sentence.

Note, that the word Law, does not always signify the Law, as it is commonly
taken, but it oftentimes signifies more generally, and is taken for any
Lesson, or Doctrine, or Instruction, or Word of God whatsoever.

And so it is to be taken here, and so it is taken, cap. 1. v. 10.

Among my Disciples.] q. d. And carry it to, and open it among my Disciples.

Here, therefore are some words left to be understood.

Among my Disciples.] They are called Gods Disciples here, which were willing
to be taught of God, that is, which were willing to give ear to Gods
instructions delivered by the Prophets, to be ruled by them.

Note, that these words hitherto, were spoken in the Person of God, the next
words the Prophet speaks in his own Person.

17.
And I will wait upon the Lord.] And is put here for Yet, or Nevertheless, and
the sense is, q. d. Though the two houses of Israel, and the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem (many of them) believe not the promises of God, which he has made
of defending Judah and Jerusalem, from the power and intents of Rezin and
Pekah, nor will follow his instructions, but are still afraid more of those two
King than of God, and therefore endeavor to make a confederacy with those
two Kings, against their own King (which has kindled Gods anger against the
house of Jacob, and made him to take away his Testimony from them in
displeasure) yet will I wait upon the Lord in full assurance, that he will
perform what he has promised.

I will wait upon the Lord.] Supple, For the performance of what he has
promised, and behave my self accordingly.

The Prophet speaks here in his own person.

That hides his face from the house of Jacob.] i. e. Which is angry with the
house of Jacob, because they will not rely upon his promises, but endeavor to
make confederacy with Rezin and Pekah, etc. being more afraid of them, than of
Him.

That hides his face, etc.] To hide his face signifies, to be angry, by a
Metaphor from men, who will not look upon them with whom they are displeased.

From the house of Jacob.] i. e. From the Jews which are Jacobs Children; yet
not from all the Jew^s, but those, who out of distrust of God, and fear of
Rezin and Pekah's forces, would for their own safety make a league with them,
against Ahaz their King, contrary to Gods command, See v. 14, 15.

I will look for him.] Supple, until he comes and helps us.

He speaks of God, (...).

18.
Behold, I and the Children which God has given me, are for signs and for
wonders, etc.] q. d. Behold, I and my Children are for signs and for wonders,
to foretell and foreshew the goodness of God to us Jews, and that he will be
with us, to help us, and aid us against our enemies, that they shall not have
their wills of us, and utterly destroy us.

He gives a reason here, why he will wait upon God, and look for him, Viz.
Because he believed the truth of those things which He and his Sons portend.

We may understand For, in the front of this Verse.

For Wonders.] A Wonder is here taken merely for a Sign or Token of a thing to
come.

The Children of Isaiah were for Sign and Wonders, only by reason of their
names, because they had such names given them by Gods own appointment, as did
signify things to come: So Shear-jashub Isaiah's Son signified, that a
Remnant at least, of the Jews should return to their peace and happiness, and
to their dwellings again, when they were disturbed in the one, and expelled
from the other, cap. 7. v. 3.

So did Immanuel the Son of Isaiah signify, that God was with his People,
and would help them, Cap. 7. v. 14. and cap. 8. v. 8, 11.

So did the name of Maher-shalal-hashbaz the son of Isaiah signify the
sudden destruction of the Syrians and Israelite^, and so by consequence, that
Judaea should be freed of the fear of Rezin and Pekah, Cap. 8. v. 3.

And ^saiah himself was for signs and wonders, either as he was a Prophet, and
so uttered words which signified things to come, or because of the Miracles
which were done by him, in confirmation of what he foret^ld, as 2 Kings, 20.11.
Or, because be took his Sons with him, by Gods command, when he went to
prophecy, and so prophesied by them, as Cap. 7.3. Or, because by his habit,
and going, and gesture, he signified things which should be, as Cap. 20. v. 3.

The Children which God has given me.] Isai h might well say, the Children
which God h^^^ given me, For, the Children which he begat, he begat by the
precept of the Lord, who directed him in his marriage, etc.

In Israel] i. e. Among the Jews, which were the Children of Jacob, who was
called Israel.

From the Lord of Hosts] i. e. Given of or sent from the Lord of Hosts to his
People, to be signs and wonders to them.

Which dwells in Mount Sion.] God was said to dwell in Mount Sion, because
his Temple was built there, which was his house, and in which he was said to
dwell. Compare Exodus, 25. v. 8. and 29. v. 45. with 1 Kings, 8. v. 27.

God was said to dwell in his Tabernacle first, and then in his Temple
afterward, not because he was there circumscribed, but because of his special
manifestation of himself, in those places.

Note, that Isaiah and his children mentioned here, in this verse, were a Type
of Christ, and of the faithful, which God gave him, as Children, as appears,
Heb. 1. v. 13. For, as Isaiah and his Children did rely upon God, when the
Syrians and Israelites were joined together to consume Judah: So did Christ and
the faithful, which God gave him as Children, put their trust in God, when the
Jews and the Romans were set on fire to destroy them.

19
And when they shall say unto you] q. d. And when you are in any distress
because of Rezin and Pekah, and your brethren, which are wicked shall say unto
you, etc.

Here is either a Relative put without an Antecedent, or else, They shall say,
is put impersonally for, when it shall be said unto you

These words are spoken in the person of God to the Prophet, and they relate to
those words of the eleventh Verse. The Lord spoke unto me, etc. q. d. The Lord
spoke thus unto me saying: Say ye not a confederacy to all them, to whom this
people shall say a confederacy, etc. And thus, when they shall say unto you,
seek unto them, which have familiar spirits, etc.

Seek unto them which have familiar spirits and to Wizards.] Viz. That you may
know by them, what will be the event and success of your troubles: And in
particular, what will be the event and success of Rezin and Pekah's Expedition
against you.

Them which have Familiar spirits] i. e. Them which have familiarity with
devils, and use the familiarity of such foul spirits, to know by them hidden
things, and things to come.

Wizards.] i. e. Witches, Conjurers, Southsayers, etc.

That peep.] To wit, like Chicken in the shell, before they are quite hatched.

There were a special kind of Southsayers called (...), which had a devil
within them, which answered them, which asked them any question, through the
belly of those men in whom he was, and so spoke with a small and broken voice:
And this his answering, the Prophet may call Peeping, by a Metaphor from a
chicken.

Moreover Southsayers in general, because they could not speak certainly of
the event of things which they took upon them to tell, did not speak clearly
and plainly what they spoke, as the Prophets of the Lord did, but did mumble
out their words, to the intent that they might not be plainly understood, that
so they might have an evasion for what they should speak falsely, when they were
questioned for it: And this their mumbling the Prophet may call Peeping by the
same Metaphor.

Again many of these kind of fellows, when they were sued unto for their
advice, spoke softly out of hollow places, crypts, vaults, and remote corners,
so that they could be hardly heard of them which came to know their mind: And
this might the Prophet call Peeping also.

Note, that these kind of fellows pretended themselves to be the Servants, or
Mystae of some Idol, or Deity, or other: And they which are here advised and
persuaded to seek unto them sought to them under that notion, and so by seeking
to them, thought that they sought to their Gods by them. See Cap. 19. v. 3.

And that mutter.] i. e. And that mumble and speak so, as that they cannot be
distinctly heard, and understood.

He means the same by muttering, as he did by peeping, and the Prophet makes
choice of these words, in contempt and derision of these vain fellows.

Note here that it is not likely, that they which would persuade others to seek
to such fellows, would use these words which the Prophet here uses: But the
Prophet uses these words in derision of these fellows, that he may show to
his Auditors, what they are indeed; the like you may observe, Chap. 30.10.

Should not a People seek unto their God?] q.d. Should not a People, which have
a God, seek unto their God, by their servants as the Wizards, etc. to know from
him, by them, what will be the end of their troubles? Let us therefore seek to
our God also by his servants the Wizards.

These words are still the words of Idolaters, and by their God here they mean
Baal or some other Idoll-God, To whom they would entice their Brethren, to
seek, by Wizards, etc.

For the living to the dead.] i. e. Answer them with these words, should we
seek to those which are dead, for the affairs of those which are living?

This is the Answer which they are advised to give to them, which would have
them seek to Wizards, etc.

The dead] By the dead are meant here the false Gods of Idolaters. For most of
the Heathen Gods, (and the Heathen were the Inventors and spreaders of
Idolatry) were but Men, once their Kings, but since dead: Whom some worshipped
simply, others as translated (as they thought) into the number of the stars.

Obj. But you will say, If the Gods of the Heathen were but dead men, how came
the Heathen Gods to speak and give Oracles?

Answ. Whatsoever was spoke, or whatsoever Oracle was given by Idol Gods
(abstracting from the juggling of the Priests) was given by devils, to confirm
men in their Idolatry and superstition.

20.
To the Law and to the Testimony.] i. e. Seek to the Law and to the
Testimomie, for therein does the Lord himself speak.

The Law and the Testimony may signify in general, any Revelation or
instruction which God gives by his Prophet, as we said Verse. 16. And here they
signify the whole Revelation of Rezins and Pek^hs expedition against Judah and
Jerusalem, and the Circumstances and event thereof, with Gods instructions to
his People, not to fear them, nor to make any confederacy with them, or to
revolt from their King to them, because they should not prevail.

If they speak not according to this word.] i. e. If the Jews, which are
enticed to see^ to them which have familiar spirits, and wizards, give any
other answer to them which entice them, than what I here teach them, and
command them to give, and think that they may seek to those which have familiar
Spirits, and Wizards, and to Idols, and the Gods of the Heathen, rather than to
the Ro^l which I my self commanded to be written, and in which I my self speak,
etc.

It is because there is no light in them.] i. e It is because they are blind,
and void of sound knowledge, and know nothing as they ought to know.

Light is put here for true knowledge, as Darkness is often put for error and
ignorance.

21.
And they shall pass thorough it.] q.d. And therefore they shall pass through
their own Land, to escape the hands of their Enemies, which ere long be shall
fill it with their Armies.

Through it.] i. e. Through the Land of Judah which is their own native Land.

It is put here as a Relative without an Antecedent, which is a thing usual
with the Hebrews, who often leave the Antecedent to be understood by the
circumstances of the place) and God (whose words these are) speaks as if he
pointed at the land it self and showed it with his finger, when he said, they
shall pass through it.

Hardly best^ad.] i. e. being sore pressed with a great deal of hardship.

When they shall be hungry.] Supple, And know not where to get food, to allay
their hunger.

This misery here prophesied of, seems to have come to pass when Sennacherib
came up against Judah and Hierusal^m, and occupied it in such manner, as the
Prophet speaks of, Cap. 7.19. At which time, though there was store of food
within Jerusalem, yet they which were without, might have little enough: Or,
if there were enough without, they could receive but little good by it, because
of Sennacheribs Soldiers.

They shall fret themselves.] i. e. They shall grow angry and impatient.

And curse their King.] Because he does not defend them, or relieve them. Or,
because they thought that it was the Kings fault that Sennacherib came up with
his Army against Judah, 2 King. Chap. 18. verse. 7, 13.

Their God.] i. e. Their Idol-God, or strange God, whom they worshipped: And
they shall curse him, because he is not able to help them in this their misery.

And look upwards.] To wit, toward heaven, the Palace of the true God,
expecting aid from him, seeing their Idol-God cannot help them. Supple, But
they shall find no help.

22.
And they shall look unto the earth.] To wit for succor from other men, or
Nations, being their King cannot succor them.

And behold trouble and darkness.] q.d. But whether they look up to heaven to
God, or downwards to the earth, to men, They shall find no aid or relief, but
they shall see trouble and darkness on every side: For God will be angry with
them from above, and their enemies shall possess all things, and keep all
things from them in the earth beneath, etc.

And is put here for But.

Darkness.] i. e. Calamity and Misery. A Metaphor.

Dimnesse of anguish.] i. e. Sore vexing and tormenting Misery or Calamity.

Note, that it is usual with the Hebrews to put a Substantive of the Genitive
Case for an Adjective: Wherefore when he says, Dimnesse of anguish, it is, as
if he had said; Sore vexing and tormenting dimnesse, i. e. Sore vexing and
torminting misery or calamity.

Note, that both Darkness and Dimnesse do signify here the same thing, Viz.
Misery or Calamity. For the Hebrews do usually put words, which signify
darkness, to signify all kind of Misery or ^alamity. See Cap. 5. v 30.

Note also, that this word Dimnesse, does not signify less in this place,
than the word Darkness does, But is put here for Darkness, and with these
words (Of anguish) added to it, It signifies more than the word Darkness
signifies by it self: For the Prophet uses a Gradation here, q. d. Behold
trouble and darkness, yea, dimnesse or darkness of anguish, q. d. Behold
trouble and Misery, yea, sore vexing and tormenting trouble and misery.

And they shall be driven into darkness.] Viz. As wild beasts are driven into
a net, or Toil which they cannot escape.

Into darkness.] The word Darkness signifies otherwise here, than it did in
the former sentence; Nor is it wonder, being that Metaphorical words signify
variously: in the former sentence therefore the word Darkness, signified
Misery; but here it signifies, a state or condition of mind, in which a man
knows not what to do, or what course or counsel to take, being even at his
wits ends, And that by a Metaphor drawn from bodily darkness: For as in such a
case, we cannot see to do any thing with our bodily eyes, so in this case, we
cannot see with the eyes of our mind what to do.

ISAIAH. CHAP. IX.
Nevertheless the dimnesse shall not be such, etc.] This depends upon the
former Chapter, and contains a mitigation of the great calamity and
affliction which was there threatened against the men of Judah. For in the last
Verse of that Chapter, he said that there should be in Judah dimnesse of
anguish, and here he says, That, Nevertheless the dimnesse shall not be such
as was in her vexation, etc.

The dimnesse shall not be such as was in her vexation.] i. e. The Misery and
Calamity, which shall befall the Land of Judah, shall not be so great, as the
Misery and Calamity which shall befall the Land of Israel in the time of Her
vexation.

As was in her vexation.] i. e. As shall be in the time of the Vexation of the
Land of Israel.

He puts a Relative here without an Antecedent, as the Hebrews use often,
pointing as it were to the Land of Israel, when he says, Her vexation.

And he puts a Preterperfect for a Future tense.

When this time of Vexation was, the next words show.

When at first he lightly afflicted the land of Zebulun and the land of
Nepthali.] i. e. When he shall lightly afflict the Land of Zebulun and the Land
of Nepthali.

The Land of Zebulun and the Land of Nepthali were parts of Galilee: Zebulun of
the lower Galilee, and Nepthali of the upper Galilee, and are here put by a
Synecdoche, to signify all Galilee, consisting of the upper and lower, which
Galilee was a part, and but a part of the land of Israel, or of the Kingdom of
the ten Tribes.

This lighter affliction, which is here prophesied of, was that which was made
by Tiglah-Pilesser, who came against the King of Israel, and grievously
afflicted that part of the Land of Israel, which was called Galilee, 2 King.
15. v. 29. And this part of the affliction of the Land of Israel, here spoken
of, seems to have been wrought by Tiglah-Pilesser, when Ahaz hired him to
come up and save him out of the hand of the King of Syria, and the King of
Israel, 2 Kings 16.7.

And afterward did more grievously afflict her.] i. e. And shall afterward
more grievously afflict the Land of Israel.

He uses a Preterperfect or Preterimperfect tense for a Future.

By the way of the Sea.] By the way of the Sea is meant, the Tract or Region of
Land which borders upon the Sea.

And by the Sea, is meant the Sea of Tyberias, which is also called the Lake of
Gennasaret.

Beyond Jordan.] i. e. Near to Jordan; For so is this praeposition observed to
signify, John, 1.28. and elsewhere, in relation to the Hebrew.

Jordan was the chiefest and most noted river of all the Land of Canaan: It
arose near unto Mount Libanus, which was in the utmost parts of the Land of
Israel, where were two fountains or springs, one called Jor, the other Dan,
which after a little space joined their waters, and made, and named the River
Jordan: This river ran into the Sea of Tyberias, and then breaking out of that
Sea, ran along with a greater stream, while it fell into the dead Sea.

In Galilee of the Nations.] By Galilee of the Nations, some take the Upper,
some the Lower Galilee: and both give their particular reasons, why the
Galilee, which they mean, should distinctively be called Galilee of the
Nations. But I rather take Galilee of the Nations for all Galilee, containing
the Upper and Lower Galilee together.

And Galilee so taken, is called Galilee of the Nations, not as by a Note of
distinction, but as by a note of declaration: as if he should say, in Galilee,
which is so populous, and frequented, and inhabited, with men of diverse
Countries and Nations.

Galilee was frequented and inhabited by men of other Countries and Nations,
because it was a rich and fertile Country, and convenient for merchandise,
because of the convenience of the Seas and the Rivers: for Galilee reached from
the Sea of Tiberias to the Mediterranean Sea, so that it invited many foreign
Merchants and Strangers thither: And the Prophet seems to mention this
populousness of Galilee here, that he might make the desolation more grievous,
which should be begun by Tiglah-Pileser, and should be finished therein by
Salmaneser. For note, that this latter affliction was wrought by Salman^ser, of
which you may read 2 King. 17. v. 5.

Note here, that this affliction and desolation, which Salmaneser made by the
way of the Sea, and beyond Jordan in Galilee of the Nations, must be
understood, by a Synecdoche, of the affliction and desolation of all the Land
of Israel, for Salmaneser made a desolation in all the Land, and carried all
away captive, though it seems he begun with Galilee, and showed the greatest
spite there, which made that alone to be named here. Or that alone is here
named, because Galilee was the richest and most populous of all the Land of
Israel, and it will move the more lamentation to tell, that so rich a Country
shall be spoiled, and so populous a Country wasted, then to tell of the
spoiling and desolation of a Land, which is not so rich and populous.

Note, that neither of the two afflictions, which are spoke of in this verse,
were light in themselves. But when Israel was afflicted by Tiglah-Pileser, he
was said to be lightly afflicted, in comparison of that affliction which he
suffered afterward by Salmaneser, which of the two was far the most grievous
affliction.

Note also, that when it is said, that the dimnesse or affliction of Judah,
wherewith Sennacharib shall afflict him, shall not be so great as the
affliction of Israel, wherewith Tiglah-Pileser first, and afterward Salmaneser
shall afflict him. The affliction of Israel by Tiglah-Pileser, and the
affliction of Israel by Salmaneser, are not to be taken severally, as though
either of them two were greater than the affliction of Judah by Sennacharib
(for the affliction of Israel by Tiglah-Pileser seems not to have been greater
than the affliction of Judah by Sennacharib) but jointly; q. d. Yet shall not
the affliction of Judah by Sennacharib be so grievous, as the affliction of
Israel by Tiglah-Pileser and Salmaneser. For Tiglah-Pileser shall begin to
destroy the Israelites, and to carry them into Captivity, out of which they
shall not be redeemed: And what he has begun, Salmaneser shall make an end of;
For he shall carry the residue into perpetual captivity, and destroy Israel
from being any more a People, or a Kingdom: But Sennacharib shall not be able
to deal thus with the Jews, for though he shall overrun all Judea, yet he
shall not prevail against Jerusalem: So that out of Jerusalem shall Judea be
peopled again, and flourish.

2.
The People that walked in darkness.] i. e. For the People of Judah, and
especially of Jerusalem, which shall be grievously afflicted by Sennacharib
and his Host, etc.

By Darkness he means Misery and Affliction, which the Hebrews often
signify by the Metaphor of Darkness.

Note here, that he puts a Praeterperfect Tense for a Future, as before.

He gives a Reason here in this and the following verses, why the dimnesse or
affliction of Judah should not be so great as the affliction of Israel in his
vexation.

Have seen a great light.] i. e Shall receive great comfort, and a great
deliverance.

Here again a Praeterperfect Tense is put for a Future.

And by light he means comfort: For as the Hebrews do often put darkness
to signify misery and affliction: So they do put light to signify comfort
and prosperity, and both by a Metaphor.

This was fulfilled when the Lord destroyed by his Angel the huge host of the
Assyrians, which had wasted the Land of Judah, and did at that time besiedge
the chief City Jerusalem, of which you may read, 2 Kings, Cap. 18. and 19.

They that dwell in the Land of the shadow of death.] i. e. They that shall
dwell in the Land, which is overspread with the dark and dreadful night, or
with black and dreadful darkness: That is, they which shall be grievously
afflicted.

This Phrase is every whit the same for sense with that which went a little
before, namely with that, The People that walked in darkness.

By the shadow is meant the night, or darkness. For darkness is nothing else
but the shadow of a thick dark body, interposed between the light and the thing
darkened: And the night is nothing else but the shadow of the earth interposed
between the light of the Sun and the Air, or whatsoever else is thereby made
dark.

He calls that the shadow of death, which is such a shadow, or night, or
darkness, as is as dreadful as death, or which affrights a Man with the
terror of death, or which is such as death brings, for upon whom death
seizes, him it depriveth of all light. Wherefore a dead man is called Lumine
cassus, i. e. one deprived of light by the Prince of Latin Poets. And on the
contrary, Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery? says Job, Job
3.20. That is, why does he live?

Again, by the shadow of death may be meant, such darkness as the dead have in
their Sepulchers, for death is put sometimes for the dead, per Metonymiam
adjuncti, as cap. 28. v. 18. and Sepulchers are wholly dark, without any light
at all.

The Prophet Amos speaking of the night, uses the very same Phrase as is here
used, saying, Seek him that makes the seven Stars and Orion, and turns the
shadow of death (that is, the night) into the morning, Amos 5. v. 8. And Job
uses the shadow of death for a great darkness, when he says, Let darkness
and the shadow of death stain it, Job 3. v. 6.

Upon them has the light shined.] i. e. Upon them shall the light shine,

He alludes here to the light of the Sun, or Morning: And by it does
Metaphorically understand comfort, as before.

It was a Maxim received among the Hebrews, that the Redemption from their
temporal enemies (such as were the Egyptians, Midianites, Philistines,
Assyrians, etc.) was a Type and Figure of the Redemption which was to be
expected in the days of the Messiah, and accordingly, the Redemption here
spoken of was the Type and Figure of the spiritual Redemption, which was
wrought in the days of the Messiah, Mat. 4. v. 15.

Where note, that the spiritual Redemption here prefigured, was not more
peculiar to those, which inhabited the Land of Zebulun, and the Land of
Nepthali, and Galilee of the Nations, than it was to others, (though it may
seem to concern them more than others, at the first reading of Mat. cap. 4. v.
14, 15.) for the Evangelist, by mentioning the Land of Zebulun, and the Land of
Nepthali, and Galilee of the Nations, does only upon occasion apply this
General, to those Particular Men: and make use of these words, Viz. The Land of
Zebulun, the Land of Nepthali, by the way of the Sea, beyond Jordan, Galilee of
the Nations, to show what particular Men he meant (though they are not the
words of the same sentence) because those words were nigh the sentence, which
he quoted, and which concerned his purpose.

3.
Thou have multiplied the Nation.] i e. Thou will multiply the Nation of the
Assyrians, by adding many Nations to it, i. e. Thou will get together many
Nations.

He puts a Praeterperfect for a Future Tense.

He uses also here an Apostrophe to Sennacharib, who mustered a great Army out
of many Nations, and marched with it against Judah.

But not increased the joy.] q.d. But though thou will get many Nations
together, yet thou shall not make thy joy the greater.

Sennacharib, when he had gathered a mighty Army together, out of almost all
Nations, did rejoice, in hope to have utterly destroyed Judah and Jerusalem,
and made them desolate: But the success did not answer his hope, whereby he
should augment and increase his joy. For contrariwise (to his great grief and
sorrow) his great Army was destroyed by an Angel in one night, and Jerusalem,
which was therewith besiedged, was delivered, and he himself fain to fly with
shame.

They joy before Thee.] i. e. But the men of Judah, and especially of
Jerusalem, whom Sennacharib's great Army shall afflict, shall rejoice before
Thee, O Lord! for that Army which afflicted them shall be destroyed, and they
shall be delivered.

He puts the Relative, They, here without an Anetcedent, pointing as it were at
the Men of Judah, and Jerusalem, when he speaks it.

He makes also an Apostrophe to God.

According to the joy in Harvest, and as Men rejoice when they divide the
spoil] Husbandmen were wont to show a great deal of mirth in Harvest time, when
they gathered in their fruit, as you may see Cap. 16. v. 10. and Jer. 48.33.
And so were Soldiers when ^hey had the spoil of a City or a Field given them,
to divide among themselves.

4.
For thou have broken, etc.] i. e. For thou will break, etc.

A Preterperfect for a Future Tense.

The yoke of his Burden.] i. e. The heavy or burdensome yoke, which
Sennacharib, and his predecessors, either have, or shall put upon the neck of
them, the Men of Judah and Jerusalem.

When he says [of his Burthen] He puts a Substantive of the Genitive Case for
an Adjective, after the Hebrew manner; For he puts it for Burdensome.

Note here the Enallage of the number, For he says, His, here in the Singular
Number, speaking of the men of Judah and Jerusalem as of one Man, when he
spoke of them, as of many, in the Plural Number, in the foregoing verse.

The Substantive therefore or Antecedent of this Relative His, is Israel, which
is as much to say, as the Jews, or men of Judah and Jerusalem.

And the st^ffe of his shoulder.] And the staff, with which Sennacharib will
smite or beat them upon the shoulders.

He puts his shoulder for their shoulders, as before, and alludeth to such as
strike another with a staff, who when they strike another, strike him commonly
upon the shoulders.

The rod of his Oppressor.] i. e. The rod with which Sennacharib, their
Oppressor, will smite them, or whip them.

He puts His for Theirs, as before.

The Yoke, the Staff, and the Rod, are here Metaphorically put, to signify
the great power which Sennacharib had, which power he did abuse to the
oppression and affliction of the Men of Judah and Jerusalem. Or they are put
to signify the great oppression and affliction it self, whereby he did in any
kind oppress or afflict the Men of Judah and Jerusalem, which oppression and
affliction ceased, so soon as ever Sennacharib's Army was destroyed by the
Angel.

As in the day of Midian.] i. e. As thou did break the Yoke, and the Staff,
and the Rod, whereby the Midianites oppressed thy people Israel, in the day in
which thou did vanquish and destroy the Midianites by the hand of Gideon,
Judges 7.

Midian is put here for the Midianites, per Metonymiam Efficientis. For the
Midianites were the Children of Midian, which was the son of Abraham by
Keturah, Genesis 25.2.

That he calls the day of Midian, in which the Midianites were overthrown and
destroyed suddenly and miraculously, and without the loss of any ones life on
Isreal's part. And that which he says here is this, that as the Israelites were
delivered, and the Midianites overthrown and destroyed suddenly and
miraculously, without the loss of any ones life on Isreal's part: So shall the
Men of Judah and Jerusalem be delivered, and the Assyrians overthrown and
destroyed suddenly and miraculously, and without the loss of any ones life on
the men of Judahs part.

5.
For every battle, etc.] Here the Prophet shows that the A^ yrians shall be
overthrown as the Midianites were, that is, suddenly, miraculously, and
without the loss of any ones life on the part of the Men of Judah and
Jerusalem.

Every battle of the warrior.] i. e. Every battle which is ordinarily fought
between warriors

Is with confused noise.] i. e. Is fought with confused noise, and in it are
heard the clattering of swords, and the cries of some killing and wounding^,
and the groans of others wounded and dying, etc.

And garments rouled in blood.] i. e. And with effusion and shedding of much
blood, (not of their blood only which are overcome, but of th^irs also which
do overcome) by which the Garments, which they wear, are as bloody, as if they
were rouled in blood: Yea, they are sometimes rouled in the blood of the slain,
while enemies fling one another upon the ground, and there scuffle for the
Mastery.

But this.] Supple, Battle, or whatsoever else we shall call it, in which
Sennacharib's Army shall be destroyed.

Shall be with burning and fuel of fire.] i. e. Shall be accomplished by
fire: For the Lord shall heap together much wood, and set that wood on fire,
and fling the Assyrians thereon and there burn them as a sacrifice, See Cap.
10.16. and 30.33.

By burning understand fire, per Metonymiam effecti, or Adjuncti: And by fuel
of fire understand wood.

The Prophet does almost every where (where he speaks of the destruction of
the Army of Sennacherib) describe it, as done by fire, which has made the
Hebrews think, that it was done by fire indeed, by the Ministry of an Angel,
though others do think that it is described by fire only, because it was
suddenly done, and without any noise or clamor, and without damage or loss
on Judah's side, as fire is Active, and they, for whom, or in whose behalf a
fire is kindled, suffer no harm by the kindling thereof, but good rather.

6.
For unto us a Child is born.] By Us, he means the men of Judah, and by this
Child, Hezekiah the Son of Ahaz, who succeeded his Father in the Throne, 2
King. 16. v. 20.

The meaning of the words is this, q. d. There is a Child born, (even Hezekiah
by name) for our welfare and salvation, who are Jews: For whose sake God will
break the forces of Sennacherib, when they shall oppress us, and besiedge us.

The Prohet gives the reason, or shows the motive here, which would move God
to do such things for them, as he spoke of, v. 4. q. d. And this will the Lord
do, for Hezekiah 's sake, for unto us a Child is born, even Hezekiah, etc.

Note, that this word Child, is used sometimes of those which are of good
years, as it is of Jacob's Sons, Genesis 32.22. As well as it is of a Child new
born.

When the Prophet foretells of the delivery of Jerusalem from the power of
Sennacherib, he tells for the most part, that it is for a King's sake, even
Hezekiah's, that the Lord would work this deliverance, See Cap. 10. verse. 27.
And Cap. 11. verse. 1. etc.

Hezekiah was here a Type and Figure of the Messiah, as the deliverance by
which Jerusalem was delivered from Sennacherib's Army, was a Type and Figure
of that Spiritual deliverance, by which the faithful should be delivered from
the power of darkness. For as the men of Judah which were in Jerusalem, were
delivered from Sennacherib's Army for Hezekiah's sake, so are the faithful,
delivered from the power of darkness for Christ's sake. Hezekiah therefore was
a Figure of Christ, and these words which are here spoken of Hezekiah in the
first sense, are also spoken of Christ Jesus in the second and sublime sense,
yea, and they befit Christ, better than Hezekiah; For in the fulness of sense
do they appertain to Christ, whereas they appertain to Hez^kiah only in a
narrow and restrained sense, and befit him but as a great suite of apparel
befitted Xenophons little boy. Xenon. Lib. 1. (...).

That therefore the Jews interpret this of Hezekiah, they are not to be
blamed; but their blame is in this, that they interpret it only of him, though
the grand Titles here given make some also even of them to interpret it of the
Messiah.

And the Government shall be upon his shoulder.] i. e. And he shall be King.

By the government he means the government (...), that is the regal or
Kingly government, which here he likeneth to a burden which is carried upon
the Shoulder, and indeed honos, is onus, honor is a burden, and the more
Eminent the Heavier.

And his name shall be called.] i. e. And he shall be.

Concerning this manner of Phrase, where to be called, is put for, to be, See
Chap. 7. verse. 14.

Wonderful.] Or, Admirable.

Hezekiah might be called Wonderful, or, Admirable, because of those admirable
and wonderful Virtues which were in him Or, he might be called Wond rfull,
because of those wonderful things, which God did for him in destroying the
Army of the Assyrians Cap. 37. v. 36. And in the bringing back the Sun for his
sake, Cap 38. v. 8. And promising a lease of life for fifteen years, Cap. 38.
v. 5. For we may admire and wonder at such men, for whom God would vouchsafe to
do such things.

Counselor.] Hezekiah might be called Counselor because of that holy counsel
and advice which he gave to the Levites concerning reformation of Religion,
etc. 2 Cron. 29. v 5. And because of the ability, which he had to give advice
and counsel in Civil affairs, See Chapter, 11. v. 2.

The mighty God.] i. e. The mighty Potentate.

Hezekiah might be called a mighty Potentate, because the Lord was with him,
and he prospered whither soever he went forth, 2 Kings, 18. v. 7.

But may a Creature be called by the name of God?

Answ. He may, if we speak of the English word, as appears Psalm. 82. verse. 6.
and John, 10. v. 34, 35. And if we speak of the Hebrew word here used, he may
also be called, EL, that is, God, as appears Ezeck. 32. v. 21. Which
signifies no more than a Potentate.

The Hebrew word, E L, which is here rendered God, does properly signify,
strong and powerful, (as they which are skillful in the Hebrew teach us) It
does not therefore signify any thing which God has not communicated to his
Creature: For God has communicated power and strength unto him, and therefore
the name also may in some sense be communicated and given to Hezekiah here,
especially when he is a Type of Christ, who is the true E L, and when as it is
so given to him, as it is also given to Christ, and that in a far more
excellent sense, than it is to him.

The everlasting Father.] Hezekiah might be called the everlasting Father,
because of his everlasting posterity, for from Hezekiah sprang everlasting
generations successively: For from Hezekiah sprang so many generations as
lasted from his time, to Christ's, Mat. 1. v. 10. And for this reason might
these generations be called everlasting, as the Priesthood was called
everlasting, Exodus 40. v. 15. Yea, Christ Jesus himself sprang from Hezekiah,
who lives for ever and ever.

Or, Hezekiah might be called a Father in respect of his Country, of which he
had a Fatherly care, and might be called everlasting, in that he should be had
(as just men are) in everlasting remembrance, Psalm. 112. v. 6. And indeed the
memory of no King of Judah is more precious at this day, than the memory of
Hezekiah.

Or, he may be called the everlasting Father, in respect of his long life; for
the Hebrews do often term that everlasting, which is only of long durance,
and that by an Hyperbole, as Psalm. 24. v. 7. And though many Kings lived longer
than Hezekiah, yet they had not while they lived that assurance of life as
Hezekiah had, See 2 Kings, 20. v. 6.

Or, he might be called the everlasting Father; as the righteous is called an
everlasting foundation, in opposition to the wicked, who passes as the
Whirlewind, and is no more, Prove. 10. v. 25.

Or, he may be called the everlasting Father, because as he was a Father to his
People and Countries, at the beginning: So he continued, so long as he lived.
He did not (as many Kings do) prove a Father at the beginning of his Reign, and
a Wolf or a Lion afterward. And thus may he be called an everlasting Father,
as he is said in the next verse to stablish the Throne with Judgment and
Justice for ever.

The Prince of peace.] Hezekiah might be called the Prince of peace, that is, a
Prince, which should enjoy peace and prosperity, because of the peace which God
gave him, cap. 39. verse. 8. And of the prosperity which he enjoyed after God
had destroyed the Assyrians, which invaded his Land.

Note that this word peace, with the Hebrews, does not only signify peace, as
we usually take it, but also all manner of prosperity whatsoever.

7.
Of the increase of his government, and peace there shall be no end.] The
increase of his government was by the increase of his Subjects. And after the
destruction of the Assyrian Army, they increased daily, for not only Jews and
Israelites, which were scattered abroad in all parts of the Earth, but men of
all Nations, hearing of those great things, which God had done for Hezekiah,
and the great glory and prosperity which he enjoyed, came and lived in the land
of Judah under his government, and thought themselves happy thereby. See Notes
cap. 2. v. 3, 4.

And after the aforesaid destruction of the Assyrians, Hezekiah enjoyed great
peace cap. 39. v. 8. and great plenty, cap. 39. v. 2. which increased more and
more to the very end of his life.

Shall be no end.] Supple, So long as he lives.

That Hezekiah was called the Prince of peace, and it is said that of the
increase of his government, and of his peace there shall be no end, it is to be
understood in relation to the peace and happiness, which he enjoyed after the
Army of Sennacherib was destroyed, yet Hezekiah subdued many people, and did
prosper wheresoever he went, even from the beginning of his Reign: so that it
might be said that his government and prosperity increased all the days of his
life, though they were interrupted a while by Sennacherib King of Assyria, and
what mortal happiness has not its interruption?

Upon the Throne of David.] Supple, shall he fit: as the son and heir of
David. And upon his Kingdom.] the kingdom is put here Metonymice for the Throne
of the Kingdom, and these are a repetition of the former words.

To order it.] i. e. To rule and govern that Kingdom of David.

This relative relates to the Kingdom, but not as it is taken metonymice for
the Throne of the Kingdom, but as it is taken for the Kingdom it self.

And to establish it with judgment and justice.] This judgment consists in
punishing the wicked; and this justice in remunerating, and rewarding, and
showing mercy to the just; by which Thrones are established and Kingdoms
flourish. Proverbs Cap: 25. verse. 5. and Cap. 29. verse. 14.

The sense of this place is, q. d. he shall sit upon the Throne of David, and
rule and govern his Kingdom with judgment and justice, by which he shall
establish the Kingdom, and make the Throne to flourish.

From henceforth even for ever.] i. e. From the beginning of his Reign even to
the end of his life.

Note, that this word henceforth, does not signify the point of time in which
the Prophet spoke this, (no more does the like in other places, Mat. 23. verse.
39.) But the time in which Hezekiah should begin his Reign: for this word
henceforth is a Relative, put without an Antecedent, and the Antecedent is left
to be understood by the circumstance of the place. A thing usual with the
Hebrews, as we have often observed.

And for ever, signifies to the end of his life, or, so long as he lives, so
David says, I will sing of the mercies of the Lord for ever, Psalm. 89. verse 1.
That is, I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live, I will sing praise to my
God while I have my being, Psalm. 104. verse. 33. So I will never forget thy
precepts, says he again, Psalm. 119. verse. 93. That is, I will not forget thy
precepts so long as I live.

The Zeal of the Lord of Hosts will perform this.] That is, q. d. the ardent
love, which the Lord of Hosts does bear to the good and godly among his people,
will perform this. That is, will give us so good a King, and bless him to us;
and will for his sake perform what I spoke of, ver 4. That is, will (for his
sake) break the yoke of our burden, and the staff of our shoulder, and the
rod of our oppressors, as in the day of Midian.

8.
The Lord sent a word unto Jacob.] By this word, he mean^^h threatenings per
Synechdochen generis: and by Jacob. He means the sons of Jacob, p^^
Me^^nymiam efficientis, q. d. The Lord ^^d threaten all the children of Jacob,
both those of the kingdom of Judah, and them of the kingdom of Jsrael, that
he would bring grievous plagues upon them, if they were not obedient to him,
and walked not according to his commandments.

And it has lighted upon Jsrael.] i. e. And these plagues, which he threatened
against all the Sons of Jacob, are lighted upon the ten Tribes, or, Kingdom
of Jsrael.

This Particle It, relates to, (...), a word q. d. And that word has lighted
upon Israel. And by the word he means the plagues threatened by that word,
Per Metonymiam Adjuncti.

The Prophet seems to allude to a stone cast, or, an Arrow shot into a Crowd
of people, whereby some of the Crowd are hurt though other escape.

This is either a new Sermon, or else it relates to the first verse of this
Chapter, and depend upon that.

9.
And all the People shall know.] Who he means by the word, people, he
explaineth in the next words.

In these words, And all the people shall know, etc. There is a Figure called
(...), where part of the speech is left to be understood, the sentence being
abruptly broken off, in indignation and anger. The sentence entire would be
this. And all the people shall know, even Ephraim, and the inhabitants of
Samaria, that the Lord will be avenged of them to the full.

Even Ephraim.] By Ephraim he means the ten Tribes of Jsrael, See Notes, cap.
7. verse. 2.

And the inhabitant of Samaria.] The inhabitant is put for the inhabitants,
Collective.

Samaria was the Metropolis or chief City of the ten Tribes.

10.
The Bricks are fallen down, but we will build with hewn stone.] i. e. Our
housen, which were made of bricks are beaten down by our enemies, but we care
not for that, we will build more sumptuous and stately housen in the room
thereof we will build housen of hewn stone.

The bricks.] By bricks he means housen made of bricks, per Metonymiam
Materiae.

They say they are fallen not beaten down, to lessen and slight there
punishment, as though it were an effect of chance, not a Punishment of God, for
there sins.

The Sycomors are cut down, but we will change them into Cedars.] By Sicomors
he means housen built of the wood or timber of Sycomor Trees, which was a
more base and common wood: and by Cedars, housen built of the wood of Cedar
Trees, which were the more precious trees.

These two last sentences seem to be two proverbs, and to signify one and the
same thing. q. d. we men of Israel and Inhabitants of Samaria have suffered
losses by our enemies, but we boldly and confidently say, we care not for it,
nor regard it a button: for we will easily make up these losses; and whereas
they have beaten down our housen, we will build up better in their room.

It is a great provocation of Gods wrath, and it does mightily Provoke him, to
afflict us to the uttermost, when we regard not his lesser judgments, nor are
humbled by them but contemn them: and this is that, that brings greater
judgments here, upon Israel.

11.
Therefore] i. e. For, supple because they say so.

Therefore is put here for, for

The Lord shall set up the adversaries of Rezin against him.] i. e. The Lord
will set the adversaries of Rezin against Rezin and destroy him.

The adversaries of Rezin here meant, were the Assyrians under Tiglah-Pileser,
of which 2 Kings. 16. verse 9.

But what is this to the punishment of Israel?

Answer; Rezin and Israel were nere confederates Cap. 7 verse. 1. And Israel did
put much trust and confidence in the strength, of this his Confederate: it must
therefore be a great affliction to Israel to bear that his Confederate shall be
encombred with war, so that he cannot help him in time of need; much more to
hear, that he shall be subdued and broken to pieces, as here.

And join his Enemies together.] i. e. And shall send for the enemies of
Israel or Ephraim from all parts, and join them together against him.

His Enemies.] i. e. Ephraim's enemies. For this Particle, his, is not to be
referred to Rezin, which is the nerest substantive or ant cedent, but to Israel
or Ephraim, which is farthest off.

The chiefest enemies here meant were the Assyrians under Tiglah-Pileser who
when they had took Damascus and slew Rezin, made war upon Israel. 2. Kings
15.29.

12
The Syrians before and the Philistines behind.] q. d. With the Assyrians under
Tiglah-Pileser shall he join the Syrians which dwell on the East of Israel:
and the Philistines which dwell on the west of Israel, and these shall set upon
Israel from their several quarters.

The Syrians were but even now, while Rezin lived, the friends and Confederates
of Israel; but Rezin being slain, and they subdued by Tiglah-Pileser and the
Assyrians; the Assyrians made them serve in the war against Israel; yea,
happily the Syrians themselves were willing of themselves to go with the
Assyrians, against Israel to ingratiate themselves with their new Masters: for
such is the base nature of man, as that he will follow the conduct of fortune,
and change his friends or foes, as the Victory falls out.

He names the Syrians because Israel would little think, that they would
prove their enemies, who were so near friends; and he names the Philistines,
that he might show, that the Syrians their friends would prove as bad to them,
as the Philistines their ancient enemies had done.

The Assyrians needed not much to entreat the Philistines to join against
Israel, who were willing of themselves, to take any advantage against Israel,
and, when they see him tottering, to cast him down.

And they shall devour Israel with open mouth.] i. e. And they shall kill and
destroy, Israel

This is a Metaphor taken from a wild beast, as a Lion, etc.

For all this.] q. d. Notwithstanding this, when the Lord has thus plagued
Israel by these his enemies.

His anger is not turned away.] i. e. His anger is not turned away, Supple,
from Israel.

But his hand is stretched out still.] Supple, to strike him, and beat him yet
more, See Cap. 5. v. 25.

13.
For the people turns not.] i. e. Israel or Ephraim (as v. 9.) will not turn
by repentance.

Unto him that smites them.] i. e. Unto the Lord who plagueth them.

The Assyrians, and the Syrians, and the Philistines, and all other the enemies
of Israel, were but Gods Instruments, and rods to scourge and plague Israel.

Neither do they seek the Lord of Hosts.] i. e. Neither will they seek the Lord
of Hosts, to procure his favor and grace.

To seek the Lord of Hosts, is, to sue for his grace and favor, and this is
done by Repentance, Isai. 55. verse. 6. and by Prayer, Psalm 34. v. 4. and by
keeping his Commandments. 2 Chronicles. 14. v. 4.

The Lord, seems to be put here, by a Metonymie, for the grace and favor of
the Lord, which we are said to seek, when we sue for it, by a Metaphor from
bodily things, which we have lost and seek after, that we may find them again.

Or he speaks of God here, (...), as of a man which is angry, and hides
himself from him, with whom he is angry; whom he, that has offended him seeks
after, that he may find him out and appease him.

14.
Therefore the Lord will cut off from Israel head and taile] That which the
Lord here prophesies of, from this to the eighteenth Verse, was that which
Salmaneser did to the ten Tribes of Israel, of which we may read, 2 Kings, 17.

Head and tail.] i. e. The most honorable and the most base; yea, all from
the most honorable of all, to the basest of all.

This is a proverbial kind of speech, signifying all men whatsoever of a body
politic. And in it the body politic is compared to the natural body of a
four footed beast, of which the head is the most considerable, the tail the
vilest and basest part.

Branch and rush.] i. e. The greatest and the least; yea, all from the greatest
of all to the least of all.

This is a proverbiall kind of speech, as the former was, and signifies all
whatsoever of a body politic, as that did, and here the body politic is
resembled and compared, but to what is doubtful.

If we take the word rush Metaphorically for the little shoot or sprout of a
tree, which is like to a rush, especially in the winter when the leaf is
fallen, then is the body politic plainly compared to a tree, and the greatest
to the branches, and the least men of account therein to the rush, that is, to
the little shoots or sprouts of that tree.

But if we take the rush properly for a rush, that grows in the waters, or in
watery and moist places; then as a body politic is sometimes compared to a
Forest, and sometimes again to a field, so should I think, that it is compared
here to a wood, such a wood as we call a Coppice, or underwood, many whereof in
their low and watery places bear rushes: for as many of these woods and coppices
have low and watery places, in which they bear rushes: so the greatest pants,
which they use to bear, seem to be rather branches than trees. To the branches
therefore of these woods and coppices may the greatest, and to the rushes may
the least men of account in the body politic of Israel be resembled.

In one day.] i. e. At one time.

For the word day signifies, not only the space of twelve or four and twenty
hours, but sometimes a very great space of time also, as cap. 4. v. 1. cap. 5.
v. 30.

15.
The ancient and honorable he is the head.] i. e. The Ancient and Honorable
are they whom I mean by the head.

By the Ancient and Honorable he means the Princes and chief Rulers of the
ommon-wealth, as Cap. 3. v. 14. which were Honorable, as well by their birth,
as by their places.

These he resembles to the head, because as the head is the principal member
of the natural body, and that by which the whole body is governed; so were
these the prime and chief members of the Commonwealth, and they which by their
places were to govern and rule the Kingdom of Israel.

And the Prophet that tells lies, he is the tail.] By the Prophet that
tells lies he means, the false Prophets, who preached and prophesied to the
people pleasing things, and promised them peace (whereas the Lord denounced
destruction against them for their wickedness) for flattering them in their
sins: These, he says, he means by the tail.

But why did he resemble these to the tail, whereas he should have resembled
those to the tail, which were of the lowest and meanest condition in the whole
Commonwealth of Israel?

Answ. He resembled these to the tail, because (it is most probable) that they
were not only of the lowest and meanest rank in the whole Commonwealth of
Israel, but the lowest and meanest of all the m^n of the lowest and meanest
rank; for as the Priests were made of the lowest of the people, 1 King. 12. v.
31. so it is likely, that the lowest of the people, that is, the lowest of the
lowest of all became Prophets too, but Prophets which ran when God never sent
them, only for filthy lucre sake; yea, it may be, only for a morsel of bread.

Again, these false Prophets were not only the lowest and meanest of those
which were the lowest and meanest, by their birth and condition; but the basest
of all the men of Israel for their manners, and custom of life also: For they
lived altogether by flattery, and whereas a flatterer is the basest fellow that
lives, they were the basest of all flatterers; and for this reason also might
he compare these men to the tail; though he does it principally, as I conceive,
for the first reason.

Again, many think that the Prophet resembled these Prophets to the tail,
because they did flatter, and fawn upon the People (the wealthiest especially)
and did put a fair gloss upon their foul stinking sin. For the tail covers
the ill favored and unsavory part of the beast: And the Dog, which is a
fawning and flattering creature, shows his fawning and flattery most by the
tail.

But I conceive, that the Prophet says, that the Prophet which tells lies is
the tail, if not only, yet chiefly, for the first reason.

The Prophet had rather say, And the Prophet that tells lies, he is the tail,
then and the lowest of the people they are the tail, that he might show the
baseness of false Prophets, and make them despicable and contemptible to all
men.

What he says here of the head and the tail, the same may be understood of the
branch and the rush, viz. that the Ancient and Honorable he is the branch, and
the Prophet that tell^th lies he is the rush.

16.
For the Leaders of this people cause them to erre] By the Leaders of the
people, he means the Princes and chief Rulers of the Commonwealth, and also
the Priests and the Prophets which told lies; whereof the Princes and chief
Rulers made the people to err by their example, and the Pr^est and the Prophet
by their example and doctrine too.

And they that are led of them.] By this he means all other sort of people,
which were under those which he called Leaders.

Are destroyed.] That is, Have the way of their paths destroyed, and so by
consequence wander out of the way by following them.

They which have the way of their paths destroyed (knowing not which is their
way) do wander and go astray out of the right way.

As for the sense of this; see a parallel place; Cap. 3. v. 12. and Cap. 28 v.
7. And note, that this word [destroyed] does not signify here the punishment
(as most seem to understand it) but the sin of these men, whose punishment
follows in the next verse.

After the word, destroyed, therefore understand (from Cap. 3. v. 12.) the way
of their paths, q.d. are destroyed the way of their paths, which is to say,
have the way of their paths destroyed, where only a Verb or Participle passive
has an Accusative case after it, like an Active; a kind of Syntax which the
Hebrews sometimes use, and the Greeks often, etc.

17.
Therefore the Lord shall have no joy in their young Men.

Young men are amiable and lovely, yet he says, The Lord will have no joy in
them, by which he means worse; Viz. That the Lord will abhor them, and
detest them, and give them over to be devoured by the sword, or carried away
captives by Salmaneser.

For there is a (...) in these words.

Neither shall have mercy on their fatherless and widow.] The fatherless and
the widows use to be the object of mercy and pity, yet he says, that God
will have no mercy on them; yea he will show all seveverity and rigor against
them.

For Every one is an Hypocrite.] Here is another reason, why the Lord will have
no joy in their young men, nor have mercy on their widows.

For it is usual to give diverse reasons of the same thing, and to follow that
with one reason, which was ushered in with another.

And every mouth speaks folly.] i. e. Every one speaks that which is
wicked; And their talk is wicked talk.

Every mouth.] i. e. Every one.

Here is a Synecdoche membri, for the mouth is put for the whole man, and
therefore the mouth rather than any other part, because he speaks of
speaking, whereof the mouth is the instrument.

Folly.] It is frequent with the Scripture to put folly for wickedness and
sin, because it is the greatest folly in the world, to commit sin, and do
that which is wicked.

18.
For wickedness burns as the fire.] q. d. For wickedness is of a burning
nature, like the fire, and shall kindle a fire among them.

It shall devour the briars and Thorns.] i. e. Wickedness shall devour the
common and ignoble and basest sort among the people: As the fire does the
briars and thorns.

He speaks of wickedness here Metaphorically as of fire: And therefore
compares the men which it destoyeth to combustible matter.

Therefore wickedness is said to destroy and devour the wicked, because it
kindles Gods wrath against them, and makes Him to execute his judgments upon
them, and destroy them.

And shall kindle in the thickets of the Forests.] i. e. And will set the
Thickets of the Forest on fire, by which they shall be consumed.

By the Thickets of the Forest here, are meant the tall trees of the Forest,
which grow and stand thick together: And by them again are Metaphorically
meant the men of the more noble and honorable rank and condition.

And they shall mount up like the lifting up of smoke.] q. d. And they shall
be turned into ashes, and being turned into ashes shall be carried up into the
Air by the wind, and mount up as the smoke mounteth up into the air, and
there vanishes away.

Or thus, And they shall be turned into smoke, as ordinary wood is turned
(when it burns) and shall mount up into the air, as we see the smoke in our
Chimneys, mount up.

The lifting up of smoke.] i. e. Here is an Hypallage, or Metonymie: For the
lifting up of smoke, is put for smoke which is lifted up: That is, which rises
or mounteth up into the air.

He compares the wickedness of the nation to a fire, got into a wood; For as
fire, which is got into a wood, does first take hold of the briars and thorns,
and then of the Trees, and so goes over the whole wood and consumes it: So
does the wickedness of a people, consume and destroy, first the poorest and
meanest, then the better sort of the people, till all are consumed.

19.
Is the Land darkened.] i. e. Shall the Inhabitants of the land be overwhelmed
with miseries and calamities.

The Hebrews under the Metaphor of darkness comprehended all miseries and
Calamities as was said Cap. 5. v. 30. and v. 2. of this Chapter.

A Present is put here for a Future tense.

And the people shall be as the fuel of fire.] i. e. And the people thereof
shall be destroyed, as the fuel is by the fire.

No man shall spare his brother.] He shows here, how the people shall be as
the fuel of fire, that is, how they shall be destroyed: He says that they
shall be destroyed one of another.

His Brother.] i. e. His Country man, or Man of his own Nation: q. d. No man
shall spare his Countryman, or Man of his own Nation, though he is his Country
man, or man of his own Nation.

The Hebrews called any one which was of their own Nation, their Brother
according to that which we read Deuteronomy. 15. v. 7, 12.

20.
And he shall snatch] And, is put here for But, and He is put here for These,
For He has here the force of a plural number, as appears by the word, They,
following: And the words, no man, going before.

And he shall snatch on the right hand and be hungry.] i. e. But these shall
snatch and tear in pieces their Brethren which stand on their right hand, and
yet shall not be satisfied, but shall go on still and snatch and tear in
pieces whomsoever they meet with.

And he shall eat on the left hand, and they shall not be satisfied] i. e. And
They shall fall upon, and devour their Brethren which are on their left hand,
and yet shall not be filled but kill and destroy and devour still.

Note here, the Enalage of the number, where he joins a singular and plural
together in the same sentence.

They shall eat every man the flesh of his own Arm.] q. d. They shall devour
or destroy every one his own Brother.

By the Arm he signifies Metaphorically a Neighbor or Brother: For as the
strength of a man's body is in his Arm, and with that he helps himself and
defends himself when he is assaulted: So is one neighbor the strength of
another; And one Brother the strength of another; And Neighbors and brethren,
when they are assaulted by any force, are ready to aid and help one another.

He says the flesh of his arm, for his arm by a Synecdoche: Because the
flesh only is that which is usually eaten.

What the Prophet said v. 19. that no man should spare his Brother, he here
amplifieth or proves under a Metaphor, for says he, as Lions, or Bears or
other wild Beasts, which are hunger-bit, run raging into the flock or into the
heard, and there kill and devour, some on this side, and some on that, and are
never satisfied: So shall the men of Israel rage and destroy among their
Brethren in battle, and shall kill all they meet with without mercy.

21.
Manasseh Ephraim, and Ephraim Manasseh.] i. e. The Children of Manasseh shall
eat or devour the children of Ephraim, and the Children of Ephraim shall eat
or devour the Children of Manasseh.

He persisteth still in the Metaphor of wild Beasts.

Ephraim and Manasseh are put here by a Metonymie, for the Children of Ephraim
and Manasseh.

The Prophet names these 2 tribes of Israel the more to exaggerate and set out
the greatness of this Calamity: For Ephraim and Manasseh were not only the
Children of Israel, but also the Children of Joseph; and therefore nearer
allied between themselves than any other Tribes were; It is therefore the sign
of the greater misery; that they should destroy one another.

At what time this that the Prophet here prophesies of, came to pass, cannot
be certainly gathered from the Scripture: But this by conjecture; Though
Salmaneser lead the greatest part of the Children of Israel away Captive, and
broke the Kingdom of Israel, from being any more a Kingdom; yet after
Salmaneser's departure, some of every Tribe were left in the Land of Israel,
Cap. 17. verse. 6. And many, which had fled away and hid themselves for fear of
Salmaneser, returned and dwelt in the Land of Israel again. And between that
time and Sennacherib's expedition against Judah, they had strengthened
themselves, and they with others had fortified Samaria for themselves, So that
Sennacherib had some work there, before he marched against Judah, as may be
gathered with probability out of 2 Kings, Cap. 18. v. 23.

In that work therefore which Sennacherib had to reduce Samaria, and those that
rebelled, it is likely that he pressed many of the Children of Israel to serve
him against Samaria: So that now a Child of Israel fought against a Child of
Israel, and a brother killed and destroyed a brother, an Ephramite a Manassite,
and a Manassite an Ephramite: And when he went against Judah, It is likely that
he carried many of the Children of Israel to serve him, and to fight for him,
in that expedition against Judah: And thus it might come to pass which he here
says, No man shall spare his Brother, they shall eat every man the flesh of
his own arm, Manasseh Ephraim, and Ephraim Manasseh; and they together shall
be against Judah.

And they together shall be against Judah.] This, as I said, is likely to have
been when Sennacherib went in his expedition against Judah, and besiedged
Jerusalem: For Conquerours use to make use of the Conquered to fight their
battles, and so might he make use of many of the ten Tribes to fight against
the Tribe of Judah, even against their wills.

Note, that though the men of Israel were enemies to the men of Judah, and did
often conspire with other nations against Judah, while they were a Kingdom and
Commonwealth of themselves; Yet after their Kingdom was destroyed by
Salmaneser, and they were no longer a Commonwealth, they which remained and
dwelt afterward in the Land, did stick close to the men of Judath, and were in
good Amity and friendship with them; And the men of Judah with them again, as
affording them such succor and refuge, as one wanted, and the other could
give, as may be gathered from Cap. 11. v. 13, 14. A great part therefore must
it be of the Misery of the ten Tribes; that they should be forced to fight
against Judah, at such a time as Judah and they, were such friends, and they
received all kindness at Judah's hands.

For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out
still.] i. e. For all this his anger will not cease against Ephraim or Israel:
But he will still stretch out his hand against them, and smite them.

After all the misery which is here spoken of, the Children of the ten Tribes
did suffer much hardship and bitterness in the Land of their Captivity, and
elsewhere.

ISAIAH. CHAP. X.
WOE unto them that decree unrighteous decrees.] This Prophecy is denounced
against unjust and corrupt Judges.

And that write grievousnesse which they have prescribed.] i. e. And that
commanded the Clearks and Registers to write and register the grievous Decrees
which they have made.

That write.] To write, is put here, for to command to write: As to Preach is
put here for to cause or command to Preach, Ephesians. 2. v. 17.

Grievousnesse.] By Grievousnesse is meant the unrighteous decrees and
sentences which unjust Judges gave or made: which he calls grievousnesse, per
Metonymiam adjuncti, because they were grievous to them which were wronged
thereby.

If we may judge of things done in the Courts of the Jews, by what is done in
our Courts, the Registring of a Decree is the ratifying thereof, and making it
the more ready and valid for execution.

2.
To turn aside the needy from judgment.] i. e. That they may deprive the poor
of their right.

This Phrase is Metaphorically taken from the putting a Traveller, or him which
runs a Race, out of his way.

3.
And what will ye do.] i. e. But what will ye do.

The Prophet speaks here in the person of the Lord, and uses an Apostrophe
here to those unjust and corrupt Judges, together with a Sarcasme.

In the day of visitation.] i. e. In the day or at the time in which ye shall
be visited and punished for your Offenses.

To visit, is taken sometimes for to reward, and sometimes for to punish, as
the deserts of those are whom God is said to visit, and the end for which he
visits.

In the Desolation.] Supple, Which God will make in your Land, by Sennacherib.

Which shall come from far.] This desolation is said to come from far,
because the Assyrians, which made this desolation, came from far.

Note, that he speaks of this desolation here, as of a Person by a
Prosopopocia.

Where will you leave your Glory.] i. e. Where will you hide the riches, which
you have thus unjustly gotten, which riches are your Glory.

Your glory.] He calls their Riches their Glory, per Metonymiam adjuncti,
because they gloried in them.

4.
Without me they shall bow down under the prisoners.] i. e. I will withdraw my
self from them, and they shall be feign to bow down to their enemies in a more
base and submissive manner, than Prisoners do to their Goalers, or to those at
whose suite they were cast into Prison, that they may have mercy upon them.

Note, the Enal^age of the Person and the Hyperbole.

That which was here spoken, was fulfilled, 2 Kings, 18. ver. 14. When the King
was feign to send Ambassadors to Sennacherib after a submissive manner to
entreat for peace.

And they shall fall under the slain.] i. e. And they shall fall down to their
enemies lower, and lie flatter on the ground, than the slain fall or lie on
the earth. An Hyperbole.

They shall fall.] Supple, Down to the ground in way of worship and
supplication.

Under the prisoners under the slain.] i. e. Lower than the prisoners, and
lower than the slain.

For all this his anger is not turned away.] See cap. 5.25.

The Prophet speaks here, in his own person, whereas he spoke immediately
before in the person of God.

5.
O Assyrian, the Rod of mine anger.] Here again the Prophet speaks in the
person of God, and inciteth Sennacherib King of Assyria to invade Judah.

The Rod of mine anger.] i. e. Whom I use as a Rod, to scourge those with whom
I am angry.

And the Staff in their hand is mine indiggnation.] q. d. And whose Staff,
which thou have in thine hand is my Staff, which I have put into thine hands
for this end, to wit, that thou should execute my wrath and indignation upon
mine enemies, and beat them therewith.

Note here, first the Enallage of the number, for he speaks here as of many
Assyrians, whereas he spoke but as of one before.

And Secondly, Note the Enallage of the Person, for he speaks of the Assyrians
in the third person, whereas he spoke before to the Assyrians in the second
person.

The Syntaxe therefore is here very confused and abrupt, as though he had
forgotten what he had said in the words immediately foregoing. And such is the
speech of men transported with anger, and such a speech is here attributed to
God, because the Prophet brings him speaking, as an angry man by an (...).

The Staffe] By the Metaphor of a staff he means the power of the Assyrians.

Is mine indignation.] Is the Instrument and effect of mine Indignation.
Supple, for I gave it into your hands, because I was angry with mine enemies,
and I would have you beat them therewith. Metonymia Causae.

6.
I will send him.] i. e. I will send Sennacherib the Assyrian.

He returns here to the Singular number again.

Against an hypocritical Nation.] By this hypocritical Nation he means the
men of Judah, which worshipped God with their lips and outward ceremonies: But
their heart was far from him, and their actions dishonored him.

Against the people of my wrath.] i. e. Against the People, with whom I am
angry.

Genit. Adjuncti.

Will I give him a charge.] The charge, which God gave Sennacherib against
Judah, was by the secret motion of his Providence, whereby he directed him
against the Jews, but God is brought in here speaking as a General, who gives
his Orders and Commands to an inferior Officer.

To take the spoil.] i. e. To spoil them of their goods.

And to take the Prey.] This Prey may be understood as well of the persons, as
of the goods of the Jews.

And to tread them down like the mire of the streets.] i. e. And to use them as
contumeliously and with as little regard, as men do the dirt and mire of the
street, which they trample upon.

7.
Howbeit he means not so,] q. d. Yet notwithstanding, he means not to
perform my charge, as it is my charge: But as it makes for his own ambitious
and cruel ends.

The Prophet prevents an Objection here, for because Sennacharibs Army was to
be destroyed (as he had prophesied) because Sennacharib had invaded the Jews
as he did, and was such an enemy to them, it might therefore be objected, that
Sennacharib was not to blame to do as he did, because God sent him against the
Jews, and therefore God would be unjust, if he should destroy Sennacharib's
Army, because he destroyed the Jews. The Prophet therefore prevents this
Objection here, and takes it away, saying, Howbeit he means not so.

Neither does his heart think so.] i. e. Neither does he think so.

The heart is put here for the whole man by a Synechdoche.

But it is in his heart to destroy and cut off Nations not a few.] i. e. But he
has thought in his heart from the beginning, and does think still, to cut off
many Nations, from being any more Nations, of their own power, and living by
their own Laws, that he might subdue them to himself, and make them his
vassals, to be ruled according to his will. And in order to these his cruel
and ambitious thoughts, not to my charge, does he march against the Jews.

It is in his heart.] i. e. It has been in his heart from the beginning of his
power, and is so still, etc.

We must here, by a Syllepsis, understand this of the time past, as well as of
the present time.

For he saith] And he says.

For is put here for And.

He saith] Subaudi, concerning Jerusalem, which I will not have destroyed or
overcome.

The Lord proves here by a particular Argument, that Sennacharib did not what
he did in order to His Commands, and in subordination to him: For Sennacharib
boasted, that he would overcome Jerusalem, which God gave him no command to
do, but only to vex it.

Are not my Princes altogether Kings?] i. e. Are not the Captains and chief
Commanders of my Army all of them Kings, and therefore able to subdue
Jerusalem?

By Princes he means the Captains, and Chief Commanders of his Army.

Sennacherib speaks this proudly, as one who acknowledge no Superior, and
therefore did not execute the Counsels of God, as they were Gods counsels: And
he speaks it as though by his own power, not by Gods, he did what he did, and
as though his power were irresistible, and such as Jerusalem in particular,
was not able to withstand. So, How will thou turn away the face of one
Captain of the least of my Masters servants? said Rabshake to Hezekiah in the
name of Sennacherib, 2 King. Chap. 18. v. 24.

9.
Is not Calno as Carchemish?] q. d. Have I not brought Calno under me, as well
as Carchemish?

Calno was a City standing upon Euphrates nere unto Babylon, Gen 10. v. 10. and
so was Carchemish, 2 Chronicles. 35.20.

Is not Hamah as Arphad?] q. d. Have I not subdued Hamah as well as Arphad?

Hamah was a City of Syria not far from Damascus, See Genesis Chap. 10. verse. 18.

Arphad also was a City of Syria not far from Damascus, Jer. Chap. 49. v. 23.

Is not Samaria as Damascus?] q. d. Have I not vanquished Samaria as well as
Damascus?

Samaria was the chief City of Israel, and Damascus of Syria.

10.
As my hand has found the Kingdoms of the Idols, etc.] i. e. As I have
subdued and gotten the Kingdoms of the Idols, etc.

The hand, is put here for the whole man by a Synechdoche: And to find for to
subdue, conquer and get by force, perhaps by a Metaphor from him which finds
a birds nest with eggs or young ones, of which see verse. 14.

The Kingomes of the Idols.] By Idols he means here petty Idols, and petty
Gods, such as were not to be compared with the Sun: For otherwise the kingdom
of the Assyrians, was an Idolatrous kingdom, for they worshipped the Sun, and
the Images of the Sun, and the Stars.

And whose graven Images did excel them of Jerusalem and Samaria.] i. e. And
these Kingdoms, whose graven Images (which they worshipped) did excel the
graven Images, which Jerusalem and Samaria worship; And so were more likely to
protect the Kingdoms which worshipped them, than the Images which Jerusalem
and Samaria worship, are to protect them.

11.
Shall I not as I have done unto Samaria, etc.] Between this and the tenth
verse, there is a (...) or (...), i. e. A Defect, or Gapp to be made up thus; q
d. So it has already found out Samaria, and it shall ere long find out
Jerusalem. For shall I not as I have done to Samaria and her Idols, so do to
Jerusalem and her Idols?

Shall I not as I have done to Samaria and her Idols, etc.] It appears from
hence that though Salmaneser vanquished Samaria, yet Samaria did afterward
strengthen herself, and rebel against Sennacherib.

Jerusalem and her Idols.] Samaria was full of Idols. And because the ten
Tribes (whose Metropolis was Samaria) and the Jews (whose Metropolis was
Jerusalem) were descended from the same Ancestors, it might make Sennacherib
to think that Jerusalem had her Idols to worship, as well as Samaria. Or
because Sennacherib might hear of the Idols of Ahaz King of Judah, the Father
of Hezekiah, he might think that Hezekiah and Jerusalem had their Idols to
worship, as well as Ahaz.

In that Sennacherib intended to subdue Jerusalem to himself, as he had done
Samaria and other places, it shows, as I said, that he did not what he did in
obedience to Gods will, but only to satisfy his own covetousness and
ambition. For though the Lord sent Sennacherib to distress Jerusalem with his
Army: yet he sent him not to vanquish it, and subdue it to himself.

12.
Wherefore it shall come to pass.] q. d. Because Sennacherib thus vaunteth and
thus does, therefore it shall come to pass, etc.

The Prophet from the eighth verse hitherto did personate Sennacherib King of
Assyria by a (...): Here he speaks again in the Person of God.

When the Lord has performed his whole work upon Mount Sion, and on
Jerusalem.] i. e. When I the Lord have done what I intended to do to Sion and
Jerusalem, by Sennacherib King of Assyria: That is, when Sennacharib has
besiedged Jerusalem with his Army, and straightened it, and vexed it, as much
as I the Lord think fit, etc.

The Lord speaks here of himself in the third person.

Mount Sion] This signifies the same as Jerusalem: For Mount Sion was part of
Jerusalem, and was within the walls thereof, and the part is often put for the
whole.

I will punish the fruit of the stout heart of the King of Assyria.] q. d. I
the Lord will punish Sennacharib King of Assyria for this his vaunting and
boasting.

This vaunting and boasting did proceed from the pride of Sennacharibs heart,
as fruit does from the Tree; Therefore the Prophet calls it, the fruit of his
stout heart.

Note here, the confusion of Persons; where the Third and the First Person are
confounded in the same sentence.

And the glory of his high looks.] i. e. And his high looks, which he thinks
to be a grace and glory to him.

The Prophet uses an Ironie here.

13.
For he says.] i. e. For Sennacherib King of Assyria says.

He adds other reasons here, why he will punish the fruit of the stout heart
of the King of Assyria.

By the strength of mine hand.] i. e. By mine own strength and power.

The hand is put here for the whole person, by a Synechoche: And by his
strength is meant his power and valor.

I have done it.] i. e. I have found and subdued the Kingdoms of the Idols,
etc. and done what I have done.

He ascribes that here to himself, which was due only to God, and therefore
he did not act any thing in all this in obedience to God.

Note that this Pronoune I, is to be read here, and in the next Verse, with an
Emphasis, as if he should say, I have done it, and I have been beholding to
none but to my self in doing it, etc.

I have removed the bounds of the People.] i. e. I have by mine own strength
and wisdom brought these Kingdoms, which were distinct and several, and
which used their own several Laws and Customs (which were as distinct and
several bounds to them) into mine own power, to be ruled by me.

And I have robbed their Treasures.] i. e. And I have got their wealth to my
self.

And I have put down the Inhabitants.] i. e. And I have subdued the
Inhabitants, supple, (which did inhabit and dwell in strange places, or which
did inhabit the Thrones and royal Palaces of the earth) by mine own strength.

Like a valiant man.] i. e. Like a valiant man as I am.

And my hand has found, as a neast, the riches of the people.] q. d. And I
have taken, by my might, the riches of the people, with as great ease, as a
country man takes young birds out of a neast.

He puts here the hard for the whole man, by a Synechdoche, and to find, for to
get, and to take, by an Hebraisme: And a neast, for the young birds in the
neast, by a Metonymie. And to find for to take away that which he has found.

And as one that gathers eggs that are left, etc.] q. d. Yea, as one takes
and gathers eggs which the Hen or Bird has forsaken, which is easier than to
take Birds.

And is put here for Yea.

Have I gathered all the earth] i. e. Have I gathered and taken all the spoils
and Treasures of the earth.

By the earth he means the spoils and Treasures of the earth, by a Metonymie.

And there was none that moved the wing, or opened the mouth, ^r peeped, etc.]
i. e. And there was none, which did, or durst resist me, or as much as murmr
against me.

This Phrase is Metaphorical, wherein the Prophet alludes to Birds, whereof
some fly with the wing at those which come near them to take away their eggs,
or their young ones, as the Hen: Some strike at them with the wing, as the
Pidgeon: Some open the mouth and peck them; Some peep only, and make a
mournful noise, as small Birds.

15.
Shall the Axe beast it self against him that heweth therewith?] From the
thirteenth verse hitherto, the Prophet personated Sennacharib, by a (...): Here
he speaks either in his own Person, or in the person of God

Shall the Axe boast it self against him that heweth therewith?] This and the
following sentences of this verse are proverbiall; The sense whereof is, as if
he should say, Shall they that are but Gods Instruments advance themselves
against God?

They advance themselves against God, and boast against him, who attribute that
to themselves which is to be attributed to him. Now the strength, and power,
and other means, by which Sennacharib did such great things, was from God, not
from himself, Cap. 37. v. 26. Therefore this boasting of Sennacharib was an
advancing and boasting of himself against God.

Him that shakes it.] i. e. Him that uses it, and saweth therewith.

He says, shakes it, for uses it, by a Metonymie, because the saw shakes
while it is used.

As if the rod should shake it self, etc] As if the rod should brussle and
exalt it self, and lift it self up in pride or disdain.

A rod being small and slender at the top, shakes when it is lifted up:
Therefore he puts shaking it self here, by a Metonymie, for lifting it self up,
etc.

Against them that lift it up.] Supple, To smite or strike naughty men
therewith, as though it could lift up it self for that purpose, and need not
another to lift it up.

As if the staff.] Supple, Wherewith Offenders are beaten.

Should lift it self up.] Supple, In pride and contempt against him that used
it, and did strike with it, and say, that he himself of himself did strike or
smite.

As if it were no wonder.] i. e. As if it were not a senseless thing, which
cannot move it self, but a man, or more than a man, that could strike at his
pleasure.

16.
Therefore.] i. e. Because Sennacharib does thus senslesly advance himself
aginst the Lord; Therefore, etc,

Among his fat ones.] By fat ones are meant Metaphorically, the great Captains
and Officers of Sennacharibs Army, of whom he boasted, v. 8.

Leanness.] By leann sse, he means death and destruction, as Psalm. 106. v.
15. which therefore may signify death and destruction, because the death and
destruction of the body usually follows sickness, which consumes the body,
and makes it lean.

Or, by leanness may be meant Metaphorically, any low estate: For we say of a
corpulent and fat man, when that any sickness has wasted his fat, and his
flesh, that it has pulled him down: And of such men as are here meant, the
Prophet (when he speaks of such a judgment as he does here) says, That they
shall be brought low, Cap. 2. v. 12.

He makes choice of the word leanness here, that he might oppose it to the
fatness of the fat ones.

And under his glory he shall kindle a burning.] i. e. He shall consume his
great Army by fire.

By his glory he means his Army, for the Hebrews call the Army and Military
strength of a King, his Glory, because he is wont to glory of it, and to
confide in it, and to be glorified for it of others.

This Army of Sennacherib he compares here to a Sacrifice, which is laid upon
the wood, and the fire upon the Altar, and so consumed.

A burning.] i. e. A fire.

He puts a burning here for fire, per Metonymiam adjuncti.

Like the burning of a fire.] i. e. Even a burning of fire. q d. A burning,
even a burning of fire.

Note, that words which commonly signify likeness, do sometimes nevertheless
signify Identitie. As John, 1.14. We behold his glory, (speaking of Christ)
the glory, as of the only begotten of the Father: where that common note of
similitude As, signifies an Identity: for Christ was in truth, the only
begotten of the Father.

So also 2 Cor. 3.18. We all with open face beholding as in a glass, the glory
of the Lord are changed into the same Image, from glory to glory, even as by
the spirit of the Lord, where the last (as) though it goes commonly for a note
of similitude, is taken for a note of Identity; For this change is truly made
by the Spirit of the Lord. And as elsewhere, so here, this particle like, or
as, signifies Identity.

There is nothing more active than fire, therefore the Prophet does express
the great and sudden destruction of Sennacherib's Army in one night, as if it
were caused by true and real fire. Yea, the Hebrews say, that it was really
performed by true fire. See Notes Cap. 9. v. 5.

17.
And the light of Israel.] By the light of Israel, is meant the Lord, the God
of Israel, who is called the Light of Israel here, because he did enlighten
them with his word, or rather because he did cheer them, and make them joyful
in misery, by his Salvation. For light with the Hebrews, signifies joy, and
mirth, and prosperity; And at the time here prophesied of, he was a light to
them when he delivered them from Sennacherib's Army, and consumed that Army.

When he says, The light of Israel, he has some allusion to the light of
fire, or to fire whose light is inherent, because he says, the light of Israel
shall be for a fire. For we kindle fire with fire.

Shall be for a fire.] Supple, To kindle that burning, spoken of before, v. 16.

God is said to be for a fire to kindle that burning by which Sennacherib's
Army was destroyed, because he sent his Angel to destroy it, and so was the
principal cause of its destruction.

And his holy one for a flame.] By his holy one is meant God, who is called the
holy one of Israel: So that this is but a repetition of the former sentence.

And it shall consume and devour.] i. e. and he shall consume and destroy.

He speaks of God under the Metaphor of a fire or flame, and therefore he
says, it for he.

His thorns and his briars.] i. e. The common and meanest Soldiers of his,
that is of Sennacherib's Army.

The Prophet compares Sennacherib's Army to a forest, and the common
Soldiers to the thorns and briars thereof: And the Captains and Officers to
the high Tree.

In one day.] i. e. In one natural day, whereof the night is a part, in which
this Army was destroyed.

This here spoken of was fulfilled 2 Kings. 19. v. 35.

18.
The glory of his forest.] By the glory of his forest, are meant the high
trees, and tall Cedars which grew in the forest, which are indeed the glory
and grace of the whole forest.

And by the high Trees, and tall Cedars of the forest, he means
Metaphorically, the Captains and Officers of Sennacherib's Host, which he
compares to a forest.

Of his fruitful field.] He compared Sennacherib's Army to a forest of trees
and bushes immediately before, for the majesty thereof: Now he compares it to
a fruitful field of Corn, because of the riches thereof, with which it
abounded.

Of the forest the tall trees were the Glory: Of the fruitful field, the
full, and large, and tall ears of standing Corn, are the grace.

Both soul and body.] i. e. Utterly.

This Phrase is Proverbial, and contains an Hyperbole. It is spoken of man
properly and commonly, of trees but improperly and unusually. There is
therefore here a Confusion of Metaphors.

And they.] i. e. And all the men of Sennacherib's Army: Both Captains and
Officers, (which were called the glory of the forest,) And the common
Soldiers which were termed thorns and briars.

Shall be as when a Standard Bearer faints.] i. e. Shall be utterly
discomfited, ruined, and destroyed.

A Standard Bearer is said to faint, either when his courage fails him and he
flies, or, when he is wounded, and so his vital and animal spirits fail him,
and he falls down dead. And when he faints, his whole company is soon
disordered, ruined, and destroyed, being persecuted and slain by the enemy.

And as it is with one company, so it is with the whole Army also, if all the
Standard-bearers thereof faint, because the Army, has no means left to bring
or keep it self in Order; hence the loss of all its Colors, or Standards, is
put often to signify the loss and destruction of an whole Army.

A Standard Bearer.] i. e. The Standard-bearers.

A Singular for a Plural number.

19.
And the rest of the Trees of his forest.] i. e. And the rest of the Soldiers
of Sennacherib's Army, which shall escape the fire, that is the destruction
which the Angel shall make.

He persists in his Metaphor still.

Shall be so few that a Child shall write them] i. e. Shall be so few in
number, as that a Child (who has no skill in Arithmetic) shall easily number
them, and make a List or a note of them.

20.
And it shall come to pass in that day] i. e. And it shall come to pass after
this.

Here is a Relative without an Antecedent expressed.

The Remnant of Israel.] i. e. The Remnant of the men of Judah (which were the
Children of Jacob, who was called Israel) which shall remain after the
destruction which Sennacherib shall make.

This Remnant were they which were in Jerusalem, which Sennacerib could not
take.

Shall no more stay upon him that smote him.] i. e. Shall no more rely upon the
King of Assyria which smote them, as heretofore they did, when Ahaz relied upon
Tiglah-Pileser, 2 Kings 16. v. 7.

Note, that though they were diverse Kings of Assyria, of whom he speaks here,
yet he speaks of them, as if they were the same person, because they were in
the same place, and Kings of the same Kingdom, wherein they succeeded the one
the other.

In truth.] i. e. Truly and sincerely, without hypocrisy.

21.
Shall return -- unto the mighty God.] i. e. Shall rely and stay upon the
mighty God. For this is but a repetition of the former words, repeated here for
the greater confirmation of what he said.

They forsake God, who leave him to rely upon the arm of flesh: And they
return to him, who leave the arm of flesh, to make him their stay.

22.
For though thy people Israel.] i. e. For though thy people, O Israel; So some
making this an Apostrophe to Jacob, and taking Israel in the Vocative case. Or
though thy People (O Hezekiah) which are the Children of Israel; So others, who
make this an Apostrophe to Hezekiah, and make Israel of the same case with thy
people by Apposition; taking Israel, by a Metonymie, for the Children of
Israel: Or (which is the same for sense) though thy people O Israel, that is, O
Hezekiah, who art a true Son of Israel.

Be as the sand of the Sea.] Supple, for number or multitude.

Yet a remnant shall return.] i. e. Yet only a remnant of them shall escape,
and return unto the Lord.

This Particle [Onely] is often left by the Hebrews to be understood.

The Prophet gives a reason here, why he said in the former verses, A remnant
of Israel. He said it; because there should be but a remnant, that is, a very
few, saved out the hands of the Assyrians.

The Consumption decreed shall overflow.] i. e. The Consumption which God has
decreed, and determined to bring upon the Land of Judah, for the sins
thereof, by the hand of Sennacharib, shall overflow the Land, like a mighty
River, and take away most of the Inhabitants thereof.

He alludes here to a great River, which overflowes it is banks after a great
Rain.

With righteousness.] Righteousness is sometimes taken for Justice, in
opposition to Mercy, and (so if we take it here) we may interpret (...), with
Righteousness, q. d. with all severity.

Again, Righteousness is sometimes taken for Truth, in fulfilling and
performing what a man has spoken, and so if we take it here, the sense will
be, as if he should say, according as he has decreed.

23.
Even determined.] i. e. Even such a Consumption as he has determined to make,
which is a great one.

In the midst of the Land.] i. e. In the Land, supple, of Judah.

The Land in general is taken here, by a Synechdoche, or by way of excellency,
for the Land of Judah in particular. And he says, In the midst of the Land, by
an Hebraisme, for in the Land.

24.
Therefore thus says the Lord God of Hosts, etc.] This relates to the 20. and
21. verse, where the Prophet says that a Remnant shall return. For because a
Remnant shall return, he comfort the Inhabitants of Sion, and wishes them
not to be afraid of Sennacherib King of Assyria and his forces, q. d Being
therefore that a Remnant shall return, thus says the Lord God of Hosts; O my
people, that dwell in Sion, be not afraid of the Assyrians, etc.

But you will say, what comfort is it to the Inhabitants of Sion, more than to
any other, that a Remnant shall return?

Answ. If a remnant shall return, a remnant shall be saved to return, and that
remnant which was saved, were they which were in Jerusalem at this time; For
they, and they only of all the Land, were safe from Sennacherib.

That dwell in Sion.] i. e. That dwell in Jerusalem.

Sion is put here, by a Synecdoche, for Jerusalem.

Be not afraid of the Assyrian.] i. e. Though Sennacherib, the Assyrian, does
besiege thee, and vex thee, yet be not afraid of him.

He shall smite thee with a rod, and shall lift up his staff against thee,
after the manner of Egypt.] i. e. He shall vex thee, and oppress thee indeed
with Taxes, and Tributes, and with a siege, as the Egyptians did thy
forefathers.

By the Rod and the Staff, is meant in general any kind of Oppression and
Vexotion, by a Metonymie, and a Synecdoche. And by Egypt, is meant, by a
Metonymie, the Egyptians, the people of Egypt.

Yet Note, that the Prophets meaning is not, that Sennacherib vexed them and
oppressed them after the same special manner, as the Egyptians vexed and
oppressed their forefathers, but only after the same manner in general.

For yet a little while.] i. e. But after a little while.

For, for But, as it is often in the old Testament.

The indignation.] Supple, which I conceive against you, and for which I have
sent the Assyrians to vex you.

And mine anger.] Supple, toward you.

In their destruction.] i. e. In that destruction of the Assyrians, which vex
and oppress you.

The sense is. q. d. After a little while, I will be appeased with you, and my
fury shall break out against them, and destroy them, which vex you.

26.
And the Lord of Hosts.] i. e. For the Lord of Hosts.

And, for For.

Note here, the Enallage of the person, from the first to the third.

Shall stir up a scourge for him.] i. e. Shall raise up a scourge for the
Assyrians, to whip them out of thy Land.

Note here, the Enallage of the Number, which has been charged thrice in these
three last verses.

By this scourge, he means Metaphorically the Angel which scourged, yea,
destroyed fourscore and five thousand of the Army of the Assyrians, 2 Kings,
19. etc. upon the seeing and hearing of which, the rest, which escaped, took
their heels and fled.

According to the slaughter of Midian.] q. d. Yea, he shall slay him, according
to the slaughter of Midian. i. e. Yea, he shall make a slaughter among them,
like to the slaughter which he made among the Midianites, of which see Judges,
Chap. 7. v. 22.

Midian the Father of the Midianites is put here by a Metonymie for the
Midianites themselves.

The slaughter of the Assyrians and the Midianites were alike in these respects.

First, that as the hand of God was seen in the slaughter of the Midianites, so
it was in the slaughter of the Assyrians.

Secondly, that as the Midianites were slain without loss of any of the
Israelites, so were the Assyrians, without any loss of the men of Judah and
Jerusalem.

Thirdly, that as the whole Army of the Midianites was over-thrown, so was the
whole Army of the Assyrians.

Fourthly, that as the Midianites were overthrown on a sudden, when their
thoughts were at the highest: so were the Assyrians.

At the Rock Oreb.] The Rock Oreb, was situate in the Tribe of Ephraim, and
was called the Rock Oreb, because Oreb one of the Princes of the Midianites was
slain there Judges, 7. v. 25.

And as his Rod was upon the Sea.] i. e. And as he smote the Red Sea with his
rod, by the hand of Moses, and made it return to his strength, and overflow
the Egyptians in the midst thereof, when they were pursueing after the
Israelites through it, Exodus 14. v. 26, 27.

So shall he lift it up] Supple, Against the Assyrians and overthrow them.

After the manner of Egypt.] i. e. As he did lift it up against the Egyptians
at the Red Sea, and over-threw them.

Egypt is taken here for the Egyptians, the Country for the Men thereof.

Note, that after the manner of Egypt, signifies otherwise here, than it did
verse. 24. For there, of Egypt, was Genitivus Efficientis, here it is Genitivus
Patientis.

Note, that though the Assryrians were overthrown and destroyed but one way,
yet the Prophet describes it many ways, in allusion to many overthrowes and
destructions, which God has wrought upon the enemies of Israel. For the
Hebrews use to express like things by like, and one victory, and destruction,
and desolation, by another, as was observed Cap. 4.5. Sometimes by this,
sometimes by that.

26.
That his burden.] i. e. That the Burden which Sennacherib lays upon your
shoulders.

And his yoke.] i. e. And the yoke which he has put upon your neck.

By Sennacherib's burden and yoke he means the Tributes, Taxes, Siedge, and
other vexations with which he vexed the Jews; and especially the men of
Jerusalem, which vexations were to them as heavy as a burden is to the
shoulder of the Porter, or to the back of the Beast; and as grievous as the
yoke to the neck of the Heifer.

The affliction, with which the Egyptians afflicted the Israelites in Egypt,
is also likened to a yoke, Levit. 26. v. 13. And to a burden, Exodus 1.11. and
66. and Psalm. 81. v. 6. To which happily the Prophet here alludes.

From off thy shoulder.] He uses an Apostrophe to the people of Judah.

Because of the anointing.] i. e. Because of the King, namely, King Hezekiah,
whom the Lord will favor, and for whose sake he will do this.

The anointing is put here for the anointed, an Abstract for a Concrete, per
Metonymiam adjuncti: And by the anointing or anointed, he means the King;
and it comes so to signify, because the King of Israel and Judah, were wont
to be anointed with oil, at their taking upon them the kingly office.

28.
He is come to Aiah.] i. e. Sennacherib is come to Aiah.

Here is a Relative without an Antecedent, yet the Antecedent is easy to be
understood.

Aiah was the Region in which Ai stood Josh. 8. It was in the Tribe of Benjamin
near Bethel, and Bethaven.

What the Prophet speaks here, he speaks in the Person of a Messenger or
Scout, which was sent to learn Sennacharibs motion, who brings word thereof to
the King which sent him.

The Prophet hereby describes the marches of Sennacherib, wherewith he should
march toward Jerusalem (to besiedge it, or rather to strengthen the siedge
thereof) that he might thereby set forth the danger into which the Inhabitants
of Jerusalem should come, and afterward show what a deliverance they should
have, in being delivered from him.

He is passed to Migron.] Of Migron we read 1 Samuel 14.2. That was also in the
Tribe of Benjamin, in the uttermost parts of the Territories of Gibeah.

This is spoken in the person of another Messenger or Scout.

At Michmash he has laid up his carriages.] Supple, That he might march with
the more speed.

Michmash was a City in the Tribe of Ephraim in the uttermost parts thereof,
near the Tribe of Benjamin.

This is spoken in the person of another Messenger or Scout.

29.
They are gone over the passage.] By This Passage is meant that Passage, which
was called the passage of Michmash, of which you may read, 1 Samuel 13.23. and
14. v. 4, 5.

Note the Enallage here of the number, he speaks in the Plural number here
(whereas he spoke in the Singular before) because Sennacherib marched with a
great part of his Army, in this march of his.

They have taken up their lodging at Geba.] i. e, They intend to quarter at
Geba this night.

Geba was in the Tribe of Benjamim, not far from Ramah, as the next words
show.

Ramah is afraid] i e. The Inhabitants of Ramah are afraid, Supple, because of
the approach of Sennacherib, and the forces which he had with him.

Ramah was a City of Benjamin; Josh. 18. v. 25.

Gibeah of Saul is fled.] i. e. The Inhabitants of Gibeah of Saul are fled for
fear of Sennacherib.

Gibeah was seated in the Tribe of Benjamin, and was called Gibeah of Saul,
because Saul (who was the first King of Israel) dwelt there.

Of this you may read 1 Samuel Cap. 11. v. 4.

30.
Lift up thy voice O Daughter of Gallim.] q. d. Cry aloud for sorrow and grief,
O ye Inhabitants of Gallim, because the Assyrians are come so near you.

O Daughter of Gallim.] i. e. O City of Gallim.

The Hebrews call their Cities by the name of Daughters, See Chap. 1. v. 8

The Prophet puts here the Cities themselves for the Inhabitants of the Cities
per Metonymiam Subjecti, or Continentis.

Cause it to be heard] i. e. Cause thy voice to be heard in mourning and
lamentation.

This is spoken not to Gallim but to Anathoth.

It is a Relative without an Antecedent, but the Antecedent may be understood
from the former words.

Unto Laish.] Some think that this Laish was a City in the Tribe of Benjamin.
But others take it for that Laish, which was in the Tribe of Dan, and which was
the utmost City, one of them, of the Land of Canaan Northward, of which Judge.
18. So that by bidding them cry, and cause their voice to be heard to Laish, he
bids them cry exceeding loud.

O poor Anathoth.] This City was in the Tribe of Benjamin, and was the City of
the Prophet Jeremy, Jer. 1.1.

He calls it poor Anathoth out of pity, pitying the case thereof, because of
the Assyrians approach toward it.

31.
Madmenah is removed.] i. e. The Inhabitants of Madmenah, have left their City
for fear of Sennacherib.

Madmenah was a City of Benjamin.

The Inhabitants of Gebim gather themselves to fly.] Supple, For fear of the
Assyrians.

Gebim was a City of Benjamin.

32.
As yet he shall remain at Nob that day.] q d. Yet for all this his speed,
which he makes to come to Jerusalem, he shall not come to Jerusalem, he shall
come no farther than Nob, there he shall remain, and there he shall be that
day, Supple, in which he shall march from Geba, in which he lodged, v. 20.

These words are somewhat defective, and have an Ellepsis in them, which I have
made up.

Note, that whereas the Prophet spoke in the four former verses, in the person
of Messengers, and Scouts, here he speaks in his own person, and prophesies
of the speedy destruction of Sennacherib's Army, which shall be before
Sennacherib can get himself to Jerusalem to trench against it.

As yet.] i. e. Yet for all this.

He.] That is, Sennacherib.

Nob.] This Nob was a City of the Priests, 1 Samuel 22.19. And it was in the
Tribe of Benjamin.

That day.] He means the day in which Sennacherib removed from Geba, where he
lodged, v. 29.

He shall shake his hand against the Mount of the daughter of Sion, the hill of
Jerusalem.] i. e. When he is come to Nob (from whence he may see Jerusalem)
he shall shake his hand against Jerusalem, and threaten it; But he shall not
come to Jerusalem to cast up any Banks, or raise up a Fort against it.

Note here, that it is most probable, that though Jerusalem was besiedged by
Sennacherib's Army, yet Sennacherib was not there himself in person, though he
was coming thither, but that Rabshake, or some other great Officer of
Sennacherib's had the chief command of the siedge, till Sennacherib himself
should come. For it is said of Sennacherib himself, Cap. 37. v. 33. and 2
Kings, 19.32. That he should not come against Jerusalem with Shields, nor cast
a Bank against it.

He shall shake his hand.] i. e. He shall (if he will) shake his hand.

Shake his hand.] i. e. Threaten.

They which threat^n a man do usually hold up their hand and shake it against
him, whom they threaten. Hence to shake the hand, is put here, for to threaten,
by a Metony^ie.

Against the Mount of the Daughter of Sion] i. e. Against Mount Sion, whereon
the City of David was built, 1 Kings, 8.1. and whereon were strong holds, 2 Samuel cap. 5. v. 7.

The Daughter of Sion, is as much to say as the City of Sion. See Chap. 1. v. 8.

The hill of Jerusalem.] i. e. Mount Sion, which was within the walls of
Jerusalem

This is a Repetition of the former words.

33.
Behold] i. e. But behold.

Shall lop the bough] He puts bough here, Collective for boughs.

By the Boughs, he means the Soldiers of Sennacherib's Army: For here he
compares Sennacherib and his Army to a Tree, whereof Sennacherib is the Body,
on which the Boughs depend, and the Soldiers are the Boughs of that Body.

Yet note, that some take the Bough here simply and singularly, for some
eminent bough, and think that Rabshake was meant thereby, of whom we read, Cap.
36. and 37. who Commanded in chief at this time in which the siedge was laid
against Jerusalem.

With terror.] i. e. After a terrible manner.

And the high ones of stature.] i. e. And the Tall trees. By which are
Metaphorically meant, the Captains and chief Officers of Sennacherib's Army,
See v. 18.

In the former words he likened Sennacherib to a Tree, and the Soldiers of his
Army to the boughs of that tree: The Captains and chief-Officers to the
upper, and the common Soldiers to the low^r boughs. But here he likeneth
Sennacherib's Army to a forest (as he does also v. 18.) And his Captains and
chief-Officers, to the tall trees, The common Soldiers to the Briars and
thorns thereof; where note, that the Prophet passes here from his first to
another Metaphor, which thing is usual with him.

And the haughty.] i. e And the high Trees.

Shall be humbled.] i. e. Shall be felled down.

This is a repetition of the former sentence.

34.
And he shall cut down the Thickets of the Forest.] By the Thickets of the
Forest, he meanneth here the Briars and Thorns, which grow thick in the
Forest: And by them are meant the common Soldiers of Sennacherib's Army.

The thickets of the Forest, are taken otherwise here, than they are taken
cap. 9.18.

With iron] i. e. With an Instrument of iron, as v. g. An Ax. Metonymia
materiae.

The Prophet alludes here to a Woodman.

And Lebanon] i. e. And the whole forest, i. e. The whole Army.

Lebanon was a famous Forest lying on the outmost borders of the land of
Canaan Northwards, which abounded with tall Cedars and other goodly Trees.

Shall fall.] i. e. Shall be cut down.

By a mighty one.] By this is meant the Angel of the Lord, which showed his
might in killing of Sennacherib's Army, For he slew an hundred fourscore and
five thousand in one night. 2 Kings, 19.35.

ISAIAH. CHAP. XI.
AND there shall come forth a Rod out of the stem of Jesse.] This Rod was
Hezekiah, for whose sake God destroyed the Assyrians.

This Chapter therefore depends upon the former, and contains a reason why the
Lord would destroy the Assyrians, as is mentioned in the later part of the
former Chapter: The reason whereof is, because Hezekiah, was to be King at that
time,, who would prove a godly and religious King, and therefore God would so
favor him, as that for his sake, he would destroy the Assyrians.

This reason also the Prophet gives of the destruction of the Assyrians Army,
when he mentions it, Cap. 9.6. and Cap. 10.27.

Therefore the Particle, And, may be here rendered For, q. d. For there shall
come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, etc.

But here some do object, That Hezekiah cannot be here meant by this Rod, which
should come out of the stem of Jesse: For it is not here said that this Rod
is come forth, but that it shall come forth, out of the stem of Jesse. But
Hezekiah was come out of the stem of Jesse already, and was sprung up, and
was of good years at the time of this Prophecy, for before this time the
Prophet was sent to Ahaz, who was then King of Judah, Cap. 7. And that was
before this in order of time, for it is set down in the book before it: And if
the Prophet prophesied to Ahaz when he was King, before he declared this
Prophecy, then must Hezekiah be at that time at least nine years old, for
Ahaz reigned but sixteen years, 2 Kings, 16.2. and Hezekiah succeeded Ahaz his
Father immediately, and when Hezekiah began to reign, he was twenty five years
old 2 Kings 18. v. 2. By this Rod therefore we cannot understand Hezekiah.

In Answer to this I say, First, that though the Prophecy, which the Prophet
prophesied to Ahaz, be set down, and registered in order before this Prophecy,
as that being registered in the seventh, this in the eleventh Chapter, yet it
does not follow for that reason, that that Prophecy was before this in order
of time: For it is confessed by all Interpreters, that the Prophesies of Isaiah
are not registered in this book, in the same order of time, as they were at the
first delivered.

Secondly, I may answer, that because neither the particular time of the
destruction of the Assyrian^ Army, nor the time when the Assyrians would invade
Judah, nor who should reign over Judah at that time, was as yet distinctly
known. The Prophet might speak of Hezekiah as yet to rise or spring out, though
he was already born.

Thirdly, The Prophet speaks here of Hezekiah, not as of a private person, but
as of a King: And therefore though he was born before this, yet because he was
not a King before this, he might say, there shall come forth a Rod out of the
stem of Jesse, etc.

Howsoever we read Cap. 14.29. Rejoice not thou whole Palestina, because the
Rod of him that smote thee is broken: For out of the Serpents Root shall come
forth a Cockatrice. And his fruit shall be a fiery flying Serpent: Where, that
by the Cockatrice and fiery flying Serpent is meant Hezekiah, is generally
agreed by all: And it was spoken in the year that Ahaz died, Cap. 14. verse. 28.
at which time Hezekiah was about twenty five years old, Compare 2 Kings,
16.20. with 2 Kings, 18.2.

If therefore any one be not satisfied with the former Answers, let him tell
how the Prophet could say, Out of the Serpents root shall come a fiery flying
Serpent, etc. when as Hezekiah was born already, and what he says in
satisfaction to that place, will likewise satisfy this.

Note, that though Hezekiah be meant here by this Rod, and by this Branch, in
the first and meaner sense, yet in the second and more sublime sense, Christ
Jesus is here meant: See what we said Chap. 9. v. 6.

There shall come forth a Rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch shall grow
out of his root.] Here Hezekiah is compared, by a Metaphor, to a Rod or Twig
which sprouts out of the stem of a Tree, and to a Branch or Shoot which springs
out of the Root of a Tree: And Jesse is compared in one place to a stem, out
of which the Rod, in the other to a Root of a Tree, out of which the Branch
grows.

Jesse was the Father of David, Matt. 1.6. Of whom by diverse descents Hezekiah
came, Matthew. 1. v. 6, 7, 8, 9. which is the reason that the Prophet here says,
There shall come forth a Rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch shall
grow out of his Root.

The stem of Jesse.] The Prophet says the stem of Jesse, and the root of
Jesse, as St. Paul says the sign of Circumcision, Romans 4.11. where the
Genitive case, is a Genitive case of Identity. For it is as if he should say,
The stem Jesse, and the root Jesse, and as if St. Paul should say, the sign
Circumcision.

2.
And the spirit of the Lord.] By the Spirit of the Lord is here meant the gifts
of Gods Spirit, per Metonymiam efficientis, which gifts he rehearses in the
next words.

Shall rest upon him.] i. e. Shall be given him, and always remain with him,
for rest signifies Permanencie.

The Spirit of wisdom.] i. e. The gift of wisdom.

By Wisdom understand knowledge of divine matters.

Understanding.] By Understanding is signified, Knowledge in natural things.

The spirit of Counsel.] By Counsel understand Prudence, by which he was able
to give good advise in Civil matters, yea, and in matters concerning Religion
to. See cap. 9. v. 6.

And might.] By might understand the might and fortitude of mind, which
enableth a man to do with valor, and to suffer with Patience and Constancy.

The Spirit of knowledge.] By knowledge understand, by a Synecdoche generis,
the knowledge of interpreting and expounding Scriptures.

And of the fear of the Lord] By the f^ar of the Lord, understand the duties of
man toward God.

3.
And shall make him of quick understanding in the fear of the Lord.] q. d. And
that Spirit of the Lord shall make him of quick understanding in the fear of
the Lord, and in things which concern man's duty toward God.

The Prophet, as he showed what that Spirit of the Lord was (which he spoke of
v. 2.) in it self, and in its own nature, that it was a Spirit of wisdom and
understanding, a Spirit of counsel and might, a Spirit of knowledge and the of
fear of the Lord: So here he shows what it shall be in its effects, and what
effects it shall produce in Hezekiah: It shall make him of quick understanding
in the fear of the Lord, expert in knowledge, strong and stout in courage and
might, ready in counsel, prompt in understanding, and excellent in wisdom.

These are the effects which that Spirit should produce in Hezekiah, yet the
Prophet mentions but one of these, for brevities sake, and leaves the rest to
us to be understood out of the former verse, where he shows the nature of this
Spirit.

If you ask why the Prophet mentions this effect of the Spirit, namely, he
or it shall make him of quick understanding in the fear of the Lord, rather
than any of the other.

I answer, because he made mention last of that Spirit, as it was the Spirit of
the fear of the Lord, of which to be of quick understanding in the fear of the
Lord, is an immediate effect. And the Hebrews, when they repeat or descant
upon the particulars, which they have rehearsed, use an (...), and begin with
the last first.

And he shall not judge after the sight of his eyes.] i. e. And ( Supple, by
virtue of that Spirit which shall rest upon him) when he shall sit in judgment
and give sentence upon any man, he shall not judge according to the outward
appearance of things: (For such unwary Judges as do so, are often decieved by
the specious shows of Hypocrites) But he shall dive into the heart and truth
thereof.

He puts the sight of the eyes, for the outward Object of the eyes, by a
Metonymie.

Neither reprove after the hearing of his ears.] i. e. Neither shall he
reprove any one which is brought before him, as a Delinquent, according to the
Tales which are told him, or according to the flying reports which come to his
ears, (which are for the most part false) But he shall examine and search out
the truth, and reprove according to that.

As he puts the sight of the eyes for the thing seen, just before: So here he
puts the hearing of the ears for the things heard, or the tales told him.

4.
With righteousness shall he judge the Poor.] He instructs in the judgment
of the Poor, because they are still oppressed by corrupt Judges. And therefore to
judge them with righteo^snesse, or to give an upright sentence in their cause,
shows evidently the justice or uprightness of the Judge.

And reprove with equity.] This is a repetition of the former sentence.

Because Judges, when they judge or give sentence, do reprove directly or
indirectly the party which does wrong; hence to reprove may be taken for to
judge.

For the meek of the earth.] i e. For the good and comfort of the Poor of the
Land.

By the Meek he means the Poor, per Metonymiam adjuncti: For meekness and
humility, use to be the companions of Poverty.

And by the earth, he means the Land of Judah, by a Synecdoche, of a part for
the whole.

And he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth.] i. e. And he shall
condemn those wicked men to the rod, to be whipped, which deserve the Rod.

By the earth he means, the wicked of the Land, where there is first a
Metonymie, whereby the earth is put for the men which inhabit the earth: And
then there is a Synecdoche, whereby the Inhabitants of the earth in general,
are put for the wicked which inhabit the Land of Judah in particular.

By the rod of his mouth, he means the sentence of condemnation, which
proceeds out of the mouth of him the Judge, whereby the Malefactor is
condemned to be whipped or smitten with a rod: For because a Malefactor, which is
condemned to the rod, by the sentence which proceeds out of the Judges mouth,
is smitte^ with the rod, according to the Judges Sentence, therefore does he
call the sentence of the Judge whereby he does sentence or condemn the
Malefactor to the rod, a smiting with the rod of the mouth.

And with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked.] i. e. By the
sentence which proceeds (as the breath) out of his lips, shall he condemn the
wicked which deserve death, to death, and his sentence shall be executed upon
them, and they shall be slain accordingly.

The wicked] Supple, Which deserve death.

5.
And righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the
girdle of his reins.] i. e. And he shall have Righteous and Faithful men
always about him, which shall encompasse him as a girdle does the loins and
reins.

He commends him here from his Counselors and attendants.

The Hebrews often leave the note of similitude to be understood, as so it is
left to be understood here in this place.

Righteousness is put here, per Metonymiam adjuncti, for righteous men: An
Abstract for a Concrete: And Faithfulness for faithful men.

A Girdle is a strength to the loins, and an ornament to the whole man, being
usually more rich and costly th^n the other garments are: So are righteous
Counselors the strength of a King, Prove. 11. v. 14. and 15.22. compared with
Prove. 25.5. And they are an Ornament also to him, Psalm. 101.

Thus some interpret this place.

But because Virtues which are the Ornaments of the mind, are often compared to
the Ornaments of apparel, which adorn the body, as to a Robe, and to a
Diadem, Job, 29. v. 14. and because he speaks here of the Virtues of
Hezekiah, I take righteousness and faithfulness here, rather for the Virtues
of righteousness and faithfulness, than for righteous and faithful men. And
I take And, for For, q. d. For righteousness shall be as the Girdle of his
loins, which does adorn him, and faithfulness shall be as a girdle of his
reins, which is an Ornament to him.

Righteousness.] Righteousness according to this last interpretation is a
Virtue inherent in a Judge, by which he does administer justice impartially, to
the poor, as well as to the rich.

Faithfulness.] Faithfulness signifies the same, according to the last
interpretation as righteousness does.

And faithfullness comes to signify righteousness in this place. Because in
that covenant, which Israel made with the Lord, the Judge promises that he
will be righteous in his Office, and administer justice justly, and truly, and
indifferently, who, if he keeps this his promise, and does according to it, he
is said to be faithful; And this his righteous d aling may therefore be called
faithfulln^sse: But otherwise he is unfaithful, and his doings may be termed
an adultery, and he an Adulterer, by a Metaphor from the keeping or breaking a
promise made in wedlock, between man and wife. See Notes Cap. 1. v. 21.

6.
The Wolf also shall dwell with the Lamb.] q. d. And because of Hezekiah's due
and faithful administration of justice, men shall dwell so peaceably together,
that one shall not dare to offend or wrong the other.

The Wolf is a ravenous beast, which devoureth the Lamb, the lamb a gentle
Creature and the usual prey of the Wolf: When therefore he says, that the
Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb quietly, his meaning (by a Proverb) is to
show, that those men, which were given to rapine and violence shall in
Hezekiah's days, give over their lewd Courses, and betake themselves to an
honest kind of life. This is that also which he means by the Leopards lying
down with the Kid; And the Calfes and young Lions being together, etc.

And the young Lion.] The young Lion is more fierce and lusty than the old
Lion, and more greedy of his prey, yet here he says, that he shall not prey as
he was wont upon the Calfe and the fatling, but go and walk friendly together
with them.

The Fatling.] i. e. The fat Cattle.

Together.] i. e. Shall be, or walk, or go together, for these or one of these
words is here to be understood.

And a little Child shall lead them.] i. e. And a little Child shall be able to
lead them.

It shows every one of these beasts to be tame, that they will be lead by a
man, but much more if they be such, as that a little Child may lead them.

7.
Shall feed -- and lie down together.] He means, they shall lie down together
peaceably and quietly.

And the Lion shall eat straw like an Ox.] And if the Lion shall eat straw
like an Ox, he will no more prey upon other Beasts, which he did only to eat
them for satisfaction of his hunger, but be as free from that, as the Ox.

8.
The sucking Child.] The sucking Child is the weakest of all Children, and
less able to resist any hurtful thing.

Shall play on the hole of the Aspe] Supple, Without any hurt. q. d. The
sucking Child shall play on the hole of the Aspe, and yet notwithstanding the
Aspe shall not hurt him.

The Aspe is a venomous kind of Serpent (though it be but little) and loves
holes to lurk in.

The weaned Child.] i. e. The Child which is newly weaned, and therefore unable
to withstand any noxious thing

Shall put his hand on the Cockatrice den.] Supple, And yet the Cockatrice
shall neither hurt him, nor sting him.

The Cockatrice also is a Venomous kind of Creature, and dangerous.

9.
They shall not hurt nor destroy.] i. e. Neither the Wolf, nor the Leopard,
nor the young Lion, nor the Bear, nor the Lion, nor the Aspe, nor the
Cockatrice, (by which are meant wicked men, or men of rapine and violence)
shall hurt, or destroy, the Lamb, the Kid, the Calfe and fatling, the Cow, the
Ox, the Sucking Child, (by which are meant simple and well-meaning men) in all
my holy mountain.

In all my holy mountain.] i. e. In all the Kingdom of Judah.

The Prophet speaks here in the person of God, and by Gods holy mountain, he
means Mount Sion, upon which the Temple stood, and by a Synecdoche, the whole
Kingdom of Judah.

For the earth shall be full] By the earth is meant the land of Judah, by a
Synecdoche, as v. 4.

Full of the knewledge of the Lord.] i. e. Full of the knowledge of the will
and law of the Lord.

The Lord is put here, by a Metonymie, for the will and commandments of the
Lord. And here he alludes to a Channel full of water (as appears by the next
words) where he compares the Land of Judah to the Channel, and the knowledge of
the Lord, to the waters which fill the Channel.

As the waters cover the Sea.] q. d. As the Channel of the Sea is full of
waters, with which it is covered.

By the Sea is meant here, the Channel of the sea, per Metonymiam adjuncti: For
properly the Sea is the waters which are gathered together in a great Channel,
Genesis 1. v. 10.

The Prophet here gives another reason of what he said from the sixth verse
hitherto, that is, why the Wolf should dwell with the Lamb, etc. That is, Why
wicked men, or men of rapine and violence, should leave their old course of
life, and live civilly with civil men: And this other reason is, because the
knowledge of God should be more plentiful among them, than it had been. For if
the ignorance of the will of God does alienate from the life of God as the
Apostle speaks Ephesians. 4.18. That is, does make men strangers to a godly life;
the knowledge of God will cause men to lead the life of God, that is, to lead a
godly life.

Now that Hezekiah did promote, and propagate the knowledge of the Lord, Read 2 Chronicles. Cap. 29.30, 31. and in particular 2 Chronicles. Cap. 30. v. 22.

10.
And in that day there shall be a root of Jesse which shall stand for an
ensign, etc.] i. e. q. d. And at that time in which there shall come forth a
rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch shall grow out of his root, (as v.
1.) that stem of Jesse, and that branch, which shall grow out of his root,
shall stand for an ensign for the people, etc.

There shall be a root of Jesse.] By the root of Jesse, he means Hezekiah,
which he called, the rod of the stem of Jesse, and the branch of the root of
Jesse, v. 1.

Hezekiah is said to be a root of Jesse, by a Metonymie, because he was a
branch growing out of the root of Jesse, v. 1. Or we may say, that as by (...),
and Genus, is understood both the lead of a generation or kindred, and the
generation or kindred it self: So both the head of a generation or kindred, and
the generation or kindred it self, is meant by the root in the Hebrews manner of
speaking. For it signifies the head. v. 1. And it signifies the offspring,
Revel. 22. v. 16.

Which shall stand for an ensign of the people.] i. e. To whom many of the
Gentiles shall repair, as Soldiers do to their Ensign or Colors.

A Metaphorical Phrase.

More than probable it is, that the people, which dwelt near unto Judaea,
hearing of, and seeing the happiness and prosperity of Hezekiah's reign, did
desire to dwell or sojourne in the land of Judah, and to be under the
protection of Hezekiah, especially such as did turn to the Lord, By which
means they lived not only peaceably, but also were near to the Temple to
worship. And this they did chiefly then, when the Angel of the Lord had
miraculously destroyed Sennacherib's Army, and when the Lord had showed a
miracle (for Hezekiah's sake) in the Sun, and had promised Hezekiah by his
Prophet, peace, so long as he lived.

To it shall the Gentiles seek] i. e. To that Root, or to that Ensign, (by
which he means Hezekiah) shall the Gentiles seek, Supple, That they may live
in Judaea under his protection.

The Gentiles] By the Gentiles are meant all that were not of the seed of
Abraham.

And h s rest.] i. e. And the peace and quiet which he shall enjoy from his
enemies.

Or, by his rest, may be understood, the place of his habitation, or the place
where he rests, that is, where he dwells; by a Metonymie.

Shall be glorious.] The peace and quiet which he shall enjoy shall be
glorious, because many shall admire it, and speak of it, and desire to partake
of it.

And Jerusalem, which shall be the place of his habitation, shall be glorious,
by reason of that Prosperity, and those blessings which it shall enjoy by him.

11.
In that day.] i. e. In the day of which he spoke, v. 10.

The Lord shall set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of
his people, which shall be left from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from
Pathros, etc.] q. d. As God did once put his hand to redeem his people when he
delivered them out of Egypt, and brought them into the land of Canaan, by the
hands of Moses and Joshua: So shall he now again set his hand to recover his
people (which are or shall be led away Captive into Assyria, or fled into
Egypt, and into Pathros, and other places for fear of their enemies) from the
places to which they were either carried away captive, or fled, and bring them
back again into their own land.

Note, that when he says, the Lord shall set his hand again the second time,
to recover the Remnant of his People, which shall be left from Assyria, and
from Egypt, and from Pathros, etc. These Relative words, relate not to the
place, or places from which the Lord did recover them, either in the first or
second recovery; But only to the Recovery it self. q. d. As the Lord did set
his hands to recover his people once, in the days of Moses, so shall he now
set his hands the second time to recover them, in the days of Hezekiah. For
the places from which he did recover them, were not all the same in the first
and second recovery, no nor yet was the manner of the recovery the same.

The Lord shall set his hand again the second time to re^over.] The first time
at which God set his hand to recover his people, was when he set his hand, and
showed his power, for their delivery out of Egypt from under Pharaoh, by Moses.

The remnant of his people which shall be left.] By this he means those
Children of Israel which were left alive after that desolation and destruction,
which was made of them by Tiglah-Pileser, Salmanaser, and S^nnacherib, and
which were dispersed abroad in foreigne lands.

The Lord is said to recover the remnant of his people, In that he allured and
heartned them to return into the land of Canaan, by the prosperity and peace
which he gave to Hezekiah: And in that he sent troubles among the Assyrians, by
reason of which many of the Israelites and Jews, which were there Captives,
had opportunity to escape and return to their own land: Of which more Cap. 14.
v. 1.

From Assyria, and from Egypt etc.] By these places, understand other places
also, whether the Israelites and Jews were either led Captives, or fled to
save their lives.

These words, From Assyria, and from Egypt, etc. relate to the word, to
recover.

From Pathros.] By Pathros some understand the land of Pharusii near to
Aethiopia.

And from Cush.] By Cush is meant Aethiopia, where the Children of Cush lived,
which Cush is mentioned, Genesis Chap. 10. v. 5.

From Elam.] By Elam is meant, the Land of the Elamites (which were neighbors
adjoining to the Medes) whose fore-father was Elam, of whom, Genesis 10. v. 22.

And from Shinar] By Shinar is meant Chaldaea or Babylonia.

And from Hamah.] Hamah was situate under Mount Lebanon, not far from
Damascus in Syria.

And from the Islands of the Sea.] By the Islands of the Sea, he means Cyprus,
and Creete, as also Macedonia, and parts of Asia, bordering upon the Sea: For
the Hebrews call not those lands only, which are environed round about with
the Sea, Islands of the Sea, But those Lands also which border upon the Sea,
though they are not environed with it.

12.
And he shall set up an Ensign for the nations, etc.] The Prophet repeateth
here what he said in the former verses, for the greater confirmation of what he
said.

For the Nations.] i e. For the People or Gentiles mentioned v. 10.

The Outcasts of Israel.] i. e. Many of those of the ten Tribes of Israel,
that were either carried away Captive, or ran out of their own Land to save
themselves in the days of Tiglah-Pileser, and Salmaneser.

The dispers^d of Judah.] i. e. Those of the Tribe and Kingdom of Judah, which
fled in the days of Sennacharib into foreign Countries to save themselves.

From the four Corners of the Earth.] i. e. From the East, and from the West,
from the North, and from the South parts of the Earth.

He speaks of the Earth, as of a Quadrangular or apiece body, after a
vulgar manner.

13.
The envy also of Ephraim shall depart.] i. e. The envy also and hatred with
which the men of Israel were wont to be incensed against the men of Judah, and
to persecute them, shall cease and vanish away.

Ephraim is put here, for the Ten Tribes of Israel, as Chap. 7. verse. 2.

Great was the envy, and hatred, and enmity which the ten Tribes of Israel did
bear against the Tribe or Kingdom of Judah, as appears (as by other places)
so by 2 Kings, 16.5. and Isaiah Cap. 7.1. etc. But this envy, and hatred, and
enmity, ceased in Hezekiah's days; for they which returned stuck close to the
Jews, either by reason of their common danger: Or because Hezekiah and the men
of Judah, were a refuge for them, in their affliction.

And the adversaries of Judah shall be cut off.] i. e. And the adversaries of
the Tribe or Kingdom of Judah shall be cut off

By the adversaries of Judah, we may understand the Nations or Gentiles, which
were the enemies of that Tribe or Kingdom, such as were the Philistines, and
Edomites, and Moabites, and Ammonites, whom Hezekiah subdued, according to what
is prophesied, verse 14. and then these words are left here to be read with a
Parenthesis.

Or, we may understand by the adversaries of Judah, those of Ephraim, that is
of the ten Tribes of Israel, which bore inveterate hatred against Judah: And
these were cut all off by Salmaneser. And then And may be taken here for For,
q.d. For the the Adversaries of Judah, (those Adversaries I mean, which he had
in Ephraim) shall be cut off

Ephraim shall not Envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim.] q. d. I say
that the men of Israel shall not envy the men of Judah and vex them, neither
shall the men of Judah vex the men of Israel: But they both shall live together
as friends, in one Commonwealth, under one King, namely Hezekiah.

When he says, Ephraim shall not envy Judah, he does as it were, resume those
words which he used in the beginning of the Verse, Viz. Ephraim shall not envy
Judah, which he intermitted, or suspended before he had perfected what he would
say, by reason of those words; And the adversaries of Judah shall be cut off.

14.
But they.] i. e. But both the men of Judah and they of the ten Tribes of
Israel, which shall live under Hezekiah, in the land of Judah.

They shall fly upon the shoulders of the Philistines.] i. e. They shall join
together, and set upon the Philistines, and shall prevail against them, and
make them run away, and turn their backs upon them, so that they shall pursue
them, and fly upon their shoulders.

All this is continued by a (...) in these words, They shall fly upon the
shoulders of the Philistines: The like whereof we read Genesis 49.8.

The History of this Victory over the Philistines. See 2 Kings, 18.8.

The Philistines toward the W^st.] This he says, because the Philistines
dwelt Westward of Judaea.

They shall spoil them of the East.] By them of the East, he means the
Arabians, which dwelt East from Judaea, From these he says he shall take the
Prey.

Together.] Refer th s word to (...), they q. d. But they together shall fly
upon the shoulders of the Philistines, they together shall spoil them of the
East

They shall lay their hands upon Edom and Moab.] i. e. They shall subdue the
Edomites and Moabites.

To lay the hand upon them, is put here per Metonymiam adjuncti, for to subdue
them.

Edom and Moab are put per Metonymiam causae, for the Edomites and Moabites,
Fathers for the Children.

And the Children of Ammon shall obey them.] i. e. And they shall vanquish and
overcome the Ammonites, and make them their servants.

To obey, is put here, for to be vanquished and overcome: Per Metonymiam
effecti. Because they which are vanquished and overcome, use to obey, and be at
the beck and command of their Conquerors, and become their Subjects or Servants
rather.

It is likely that these Arabians, and Edomites, and Moabites, and Ammonites,
which are here spoken of were Auxiliaries to the Philistines, at the time here
spoken of, and served them against the Kingdom of Judah, and so were overcome
when the Philistines were overcome.

15.
And the Lord shall utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian Sea.] i. e. And
the Lord shall divide the Red Sea, and dry it up, so as to make a passage
through it, as upon dry land, that his People which are in Egypt, may come
safely without any impediment from Egypt to their own Land.

He says the Tongue of the Egyptian Sea, that is, the tongue of the red Sea
(which divided Egypt from Arabia.) because Geographers liken that Sea to the
Tongue of a beast: So did they liken the whole earth to a Sling, Europe, to a
Woman, Spain to a Beasts hide, etc.

The meaning of these words are, That the Lord shall bring his People which
fled into Egypt, to save themselves, when Tiglah-Pileser, and Salmaneser, and
Sennacherib, invaded their Land with their Armies, safe out of Egypt again,
into the land of Judah. And this his meaning the Prophet expresses in this
manner, in allusion to that which God did when he brought the Israelites out of
Egypt, by the hand of Moses, for then he divided the Red Sea, and brought them
safe through it, as on dry land, Exodus 14.21, 22. For the Hebrews do love to
express like things by like, and one thing by the Circumstances of another.

This Verse has its immediate relation and dependence upon the twelfe verse.

And with his mighty wind shall he shake his hand over the river, and shall
smite it.] By this River is meant the great River Euphrates, which ran on the
West of Assyria: For when the River is put (...), the Scripture does commonly
mean the River Euphrates.

And here he compares the mighty wind to a Rod, which a man holds in his hand,
and whipps or strikes another with, by a Metaphor. And in it he has a double
allusion.

First, To the Rod wherewith Moses smote the Red Sea to divide it, Exodus 14. v.
21.

Then to the strong East wind, wherewith God caused the Sea to go back, and
made the Sea dry land, Exodus 14.21.

By all this, his meaning is only this, that the Lord will bring his People,
many of them, which either fled, or were carried away captive into Assyria, in
the days of Tiglah-Pileser, Salmaneser, or Sennacherib, without any let or
hinderance, into their own Countries again.

In the seven streams.] There is which says, that the seven streams was the
name of a noted place in the River Euphrates, if any such place there was, it
may be fit to this place. Otherwise I conceive that In, is put for Into, (as
many Interpretations render it) and that the sense is, that he shall smite it
and divide the River Euphrates into seven, that is (putting a certain for an
uncertain number) into many streams.

When a great River is divided into many streams, it becomes fordable, and is
easy to be passed over: That therefore which is meant by dividing the River
into seven streams, is this, that it shall be made fordable: And by that
again this is only meant, that Euphrates shall be no hinderance to the People
of Israel in their Return from Assyria to Judaea.

Make men go over.] i. e. Over the Channel thereof, wherein it ran.

16.
And there shall be an high way.] Suple, Through the River Euphrates.

From Assyria.] i. e. For those which are in Assyria, to come from thence.

Like as it was to Israel in the day that he came up out of the land of
Egypt.] Supple, So shall it be to the Remnant of the Lord's People, when they
come out of Assyria: for as when the Israelites came out of Egypt, the Red Sea
was divided, to make an high way for them to pass over: So shall the River
Euphrates be divided, for the Remnant of the Lords People, that they may pass
over it, when they come out of Assyria.

ISAIAH. CHAP. XII.
AND in that day.] i. e. At that time, in which the Lord shall destroy the
Assyrians, and deliver Jerusalem, as it is said, Cap. 10. and in which he
shall recover the remnant of his People, and bring them again into their own
Country, as is said in the eleventh Chapter.

Thou shall say] i e. Thou which art delivered, and thou which art brought home
again to thine own Country, (for to such the Prophet makes this Apostrophe)
shallt say.

I will praise thee.] Supple, For thy great mercies, showed to me.

Though thou wast angry with me.] Supple, When thou did afflict me, or
carry me away, or make me fly into a strange Land for fear of the Assyrians.

2.
God is my salvation.] i. e. God is my Savior, which saves me from
destruction.

Salvation is put here, per Metonymiam effecti, for a Savior.

I will trust.] Supple, In him.

And not be afraid] Supple, Of the Assyrians, or any other man, for what they
can do unto me.

Is my strengh.] i. e. Does strengthen me, and make me able to withstand
whatsoever any man can do to me.

He says, he is my strength, for he does strengthen me, per Metonymiam effecti.

And my Song.] i. e. And the subject of my Song.

His meaning is, that he is his Deliverer. For when God delivered any of his
People out of any great affliction, they were wont to make, and to sing Songs
in praise of God, and their delivery.

He is become my Salvation] i. e. He is become my Savior.

3.
Therefore with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of S^lvation.] q. d.
And because God is become my Salvation, All ye that trust in him be assured and
confident of his Salvation in your distress: For he will abundantly save you,
and ye shall receive salvation from him in a plenitfull manner.

In this Epiphonema, he encourages by this example, those that trust in the
Lord, not to break off their trust, but still to trust in him, for he will save
them at length which trust in him.

Shall ye.] i. e. Ye which trust in God, and rely on him. For to such does the
Singer here make an Apostrophe in this his Song.

Note that he puts a Relative here without an Antecedent, a thing usual with
the Hebrews.

With joy shall ye draw water out of the wels of Salvation.] In this Metaphor,
he compares God, our Savior, to a Well, And the Salvation, which he bestows
upon his servants, to the waters of that well.

The wells of Salvation.] He says Wells in the Plural, for the Well in the
Singular Number, because God is as many wells unexhaustible.

4.
And in that day.] i. e. Moreover in that day.

The day which he means is the same with that which he mentioned Verse 1.

And he puts (...) And, for Moreover.

Shall ye say.] He changes his number here, for in ver. 1. he said, Thou
shall say, and here he says, Ye shall say, though he speaks to the same.

The Prophet uses often the like Enallage.

Call upon his Name.] i. e. Call upon him.

The Hebrews often put the name of God, per Metonymiam adjuncti, for God
himself.

To call upon God, is put here, for to give thanks to God, for we call upon
God, as well when we give thanks to him, as when we ask any thing at his hands
Matt. 11.25, Dan. 2.23. 1 Chronicles. 29.13.

Note here, that they which are mindful of the goodness which God has showed
unto them, and are glad thereof, think their own thanks and praises not
sufficient for so good a God: And therefore they invite others to praise God
also in their behalf.

Declare his doings among the People.] i. e. Declare among the heathen (as
occasion shall serve) what wonderful things he has done for us, that the
heathen may take notice of them.

Make mention that his name is exalted] q. d. Tell abroad, that he has done
marvelous matters, for which he is exalted of us Jews.

He says his name is exalted, for he is exalted, putting his name for him, as
a little before.

He says, he is exalted, for he has done marvelous matters, for which he is
exalted, per Metonymiam adjuncti: For he that does marvelous matters, is
exalted and praised for his doing, and gets himself renown thereby.

5.
This is known.] i. e. This, that he has done excellent things for us, is
known.

In all the earth.] An Hyperbole.

6.
Cry out and Shout.] Supple, For joy.

Thou Inhabitant of Sion.] Sion was a Hill within Jerusalem, and here it is
taken for all Jerusalem, by a Synechdoche. Jerusalem, I say, which the Lord
preserved from Sennacherib's fury, and therefore is here particularly called
upon to cry out and shout for joy.

For great is the holy One of Israel.] i. e. For the Lord is great, and has
showed himself great by what he has done for thee.

The holy one of Israel.] i. e. God even the God which Israel worshipeth.

In the midst of thee.] i. e. Which dwells with thee or in thee.

The Hebrews use often to say, The midst of thee, for Thee, (...).

God may be said to dwell in Sion, not only because of his especial
manifestation of himself in his Temple there, but also because he was at hand
with his people of Jerusalem, and ready at all times to them. See Psalm. 46.5.

ISAIAH. CHAP. XIII.
THE burden of Babylon.] The grievous misery and affliction which shall befall
Babylon. Or the Vision of that grievous misery and affliction which shall befall
Babylon.

Note, that this word Burden is here put Metaphorically by the Prophet, for a
great and heavy misery and ^ffliction, which affliction and misery he calls a
burden, because it is grievous to him, whom it does befall, as an heavy burden
is to him that bears it, yea, it is put for the Vision of that grievous misery
and affliction By a Metaphorical Metonymie.

Isaiah the son of Amos.] See Chap. 1. v. 1.

Saw.] Supple, In a trance.

Note, that this verse is as it were a Title of the whole Chapter.

Josephus in the tenth book of his Antiquities and Chapter 3. tells us, that
the Empire of the Assyrians was broken in pieces by the Medes in the days of
Hezekiah, not long after the destruction of Sennacherib's Army before
Jerusalem. And surely at the same time was this Prophecy fullfilled against
Babylon, for Babylon, according to this Prophecy, was to be destroyed by the
Medes, v. 17. And Babylon was at this time belonging to the King of Assyria, 2
Kings, 17.24. And being it was a Royal City of the Assyrians, it was like to
be set upon by the Medes, if it did not yield to them the sooner, and to suffer
deeply if it were taken by storm; and it is most probable that it yielded not,
but was taken by storm, and so suffered deeply almost to an utter ruin at
this time, as we shall show v. 20. Add to this, that there was no long time to
be between the manifestation of this Prophecy, and the fullfilling thereof as
appears verse 22. Therefore it is most likely that this Prophecy was
fullfilled at this time we now speak off, to wit, when the Medes broke the
Assyrian Empire as Josephus tells.

2.
Lift ye up a Banner.] These words are spoken in the Person of God, who as Lord
of Hosts commands certain Officers of the Army which he had prepared, and
appointed to march against Babylon, to gather his Army together for that
purpose.

Lift ye, etc.] He speaks here to Standdard-Bearers, or Ensigns of the Mede's
Army.

Lift ye up a Banner.] Supple, that the Soldiers of my Army may repair to it,
and gather themselves together in a Body.

Upon the high Mountaines] i. e. Upon an high Mountain. And therefore upon an
high Mountain, that it might be seen the farther off, and so more notice might
be taken of it, for the resort of Soldiers to it.

Exalt the voice unto them.] i. e. Cry aloud to them, and bid them repair unto
their Colors.

Unto them.] i. e. Unto the Soldiers of the Army which I have provided.

He puts a Relative here without an Antecedent after the Hebrew manner.

Shake the hand.] i. e. Becken to them with the hand to come to their Colors.

When we becken with the hand, we move or shake the hand, though when we shake
the hand, we do not always becken with it. So that here is a Synechdoche
generis.

We call to them which are within hearing, we becken to them which are farther
off.

That they may go into the Gates of the Nobles.] i. e. That they may come
together, march against Babylon, and enter it, and plunder it, and lay it waste.

The Gates of the Nobles.] i e. The City of the Nobles.

He puts the Gates here for the whole City, by a Synecdoche.

By the Gates or City of the N^bles, he means Babylon, which was called the
City of the Nobles, because most of the Nobles lived there, as being one of the
royal Cities of the Empire of the Assyrians.

3.
I have commanded my sanctified ones.] i. e. I have commanded those which I
have set apart for this purpose, supple, to come together, and march to
Babylon, and to enter it, and plunder it, and lay it waste.

Sanctifi d ones.] They are called sanctified ones, which are separated and set
apart for any business: For to sanctify signifies properly to separate or
set apart. (...), says Saint Ch^ysostome; what means that, that the Lord
sanctified the seventh day? the meaning is, that he set it apart.

I have also called my mighty ones for mine anger.] i. e. I have also called
those men of valor which I have appointed for the execution of mine anger upon
Babylon, supple, to come and execute my anger upon it.

For mine Anger] i. e. Whom I have appointed for the execution of mine anger,
supple, upon Babylon. A Metonymie, and an (...).

Even them that rejoice in my Highness.] i. e. Even them which rejoice in
doing what I would have them do.

In my highness. i. e. In doing what I would have them do.

Here are many figures couched. For first, he says, In my Highness, for in
me, By a Periphrasis. So we say of a Prince, the Princes Highness.

Secondly, he says, In me, for, in my will, and in my pleasure, per Metonymiam
Efficientis.

Thirdly, he says, In my will, and in my pleasure, for, in doing my will and
pleasure, per Metonymiam Objecti.

One Soldier that goes joyfully and with a good mind upon any service, is
better than ten that care not whether they go or no.

All this is spoken in the person of God, (...)

4.
The noise of a multitude in the Mountains.] q. d. Hark, there is a noise of
a multitude of men in the Mountains of Media.

The sentence is defective, and is to be supplied with the words, hark there
is.

The Prophet speaks here, as though he heard on a sudden the whole Army of
God met together in the Mountains of Media, at the command of the Lord of
Hosts, to march against Babyl^n, and as though he would have others to attend
and kearken. By which he signifies, that the Medes shall certainly come with
an Army against Babylon, and that speedily too.

When he says, the noise of a multitude in the Mountains, he alludeth to the
quality of the Land of Media which was mountainous.

Of the Kingdoms of the Nations gathered together.] He says, of the Kingdoms
of the Nations gathered together, because with the Medes the people of many
other Kingdoms of the Nations were joined in this expedition.

The Lord mustereth the Host of the battle.] i. e. The Lord does already
gather his Army together, which he intends to send against Babylon.

Least they, to whom the Prophet spoke in the words immediately going before,
might doubt what the reason of that noise was, which they heard in the
Mountains; here he tells them what the reason of it is: It is from this, that
the Lord mustered the Host of the battle which he intended against Babylon.

The Host of the battle.] i e. The warlike Host.

A Substantive of the Genitive case put for an Adiective.

5.
They come from a far Country.] They are coming already, they are already
upon their march, etc.

Who are meant by this, They, the following words show, they are the Lord, and
the weapons of his indignation, whose noise they heard in the Mountains.

From a far Country] Although the Medes themselves were not far from
Babylon, yet many people, which joined with the Medes, were.

From the end of the Heaven. i. e. From the end of the earth, where heaven and
earth seem to meet together.

The Prophet speaks here in the phrase of the common and vulgar sort of
people, which think that the heaven is Semicircular, like a Bow, and that there
it ends where the sight is bounded, and that there it is joined to the earth,
as the Bow to the string.

He mentions their far coming, because far comers are for the most part
more covetous and fierce than others, and would seem to do something to their
enemies, worthy of their far coming, and hard pains, and such are more
formidable to their enemies than others are.

The weapons of his indignation] i. e. The Medes, whom he makes use of to
execute his wrath upon Babylon, as a man makes use of his weapons to revenge
himself upon his enemies. A Metaphor

To destroy the whole Land] i. e. To destroy the whole Land of Babylon, or
Babylonia.

6.
Howl ye.] i. e. Lament ye men of Babylon.

He uses a Metaphor in the word howl, taken from Dogs, or Wolves, or the
like, and an Apostrophe to the Babylonians in the word Ye.

For the day of the Lord.] i. e. The day in which the Lord will pour out his
vengeance upon you.

It shall come as a destruction.] i. e. It shall come as a day of destruction.

He says, a destruction, for, a day of destruction, per Metonymiam Adjuncti.
Or thus, that destruction, which the Lord will bring upon Babylon in that day,
shall come as a d^struction, etc.

As a destruction from the Almighty.] That destruction is said to come from
Almighty God, which is an inevitable, and a full destruction, and such as weak
man cannot make, but shows it self to be the work of God, by the greatness
and inevitableness thereof.

7.
Therefore shall all hands be faint.] i. e. All the hands of the Babylonians
shall be faint, and not able to hold up a weapon against the Medes.

And every man's heart.] i. e. Every Babylonians heart.

Synechdoche Generis.

Every man's heart shall melt.] Supple, As Ice, (Josh. 7.5.) or as melting Wax,
(Psalm. 22.14.) to wit, for fear.

The heart is put here for the courage: And then a man's courage is said to melt
when he has not courage enough to resist his enemy, but flies away from him,
and stands not to him.

Things which melt wax soft, and things which are soft cannot resist the Agents
which press upon them, as hard things can: And therefore because a fearful
man flies from his enemy, and is not able to withstand him, his heart is said
to melt, by a Metaphor from ice or wax, which being hard in themselves, grow
soft being melted, and so not able to resist the Agent which presses upon
them. And that this is the reason of this Metaphor, we may learn from Job, who
says, I am afraid of him: for God makes my heart soft, Job. 23. v. 15, 16.
And Caesar speaking of the Gauls says, Vt ad bella suscipienda Gallorum
alacer ac promptus est animus: Sic mollis ac minime resistens ad calamitates
perferendas men's eorum est: Caes. Com lib. 3. page 63. As the courage of the
Gauls is cheerful and ready to undertake wars: So their heart is soft, and
of little resistance to undergo miseries.

8.
Pangs and sorrows shall take hold of them, they shall be in pain as a woman
that travaileth] q. d. Great sorrow, and trouble, and anxiety, and vexation of
mind, shall lay hold upon them.

The pangs, and sorrows, and pains of a woman in travail, are Metaphorically
here to be understood, of the sorrow, and trouble, and anxiety, and vexation of
the mind.

They shall be amazed one at another.] Supple, To see themselves so timorous,
faint-hearted, and cowardly now, which use to be so valiant at other times: And
such shall be their amazement, as that they shall not be able to counsel or
encourage one another.

Their faces shall be as flames.] i. e. They shall blush for shame to see
themselves so faint-hearted, and cowardly, so that their faces shall be as red
as flames, that is, as red as fire with blushing.

Because these passions may seem incompatible to the same subject, at the same
time, understand them of the same subjects at several times, or of several
subjects at the same time.

9.
Behold the day of the Lord comes.] See verse 6.

Cruel both with wrath and fierce anger.] He speaks here of a day, as of an
angry man: By a Metaphor or Prosopopeia.

A day, if we will speak without a Metaphor, is said to be cruel for no other
reason, than because cruel things are done in it. And though the things, which
were done by the Medes at this time, were cruel indeed in respect of them, yet
in respect of God they were just.

To lay the Land.] He means the Land of Babylon. See verse 5.

10.
For the Stars of Heaven, and the Constellations thereof, shall not give
their light.] i. e. For such shall be the miseries and calamities, that that
day shall bring upon the men of Babylon, and their Land, as that the Heavens
and Constellations thereof shall not give their light, but they shall cloth
themselves with darkness, and mourn, as being affected, and much moved with
the miseries and calamities which shall befall Babylon, and the men thereof, at
that time. See notes, Cap. 2. v. 19. and Cap. 5. v 25, 30.

This is to be referred to those words, The day of the Lord comes cruel, both
with wrath and fierce anger, to lay the land desolate; and is as an argument,
to prove the cruelty, and the wrath, and the anger which shall be showed in
that day.

The Constellations thereof.] A Constellation is a certain number of stars,
which goes to the making up of one Sign in the Heavens, such as is Aries,
Taurus, Gemini, Virgo, etc.

In his going forth] i. e. At his rising.

When the Sun rises, it is said to go forth, as a Bridegroom out of his
Chamber, by a Metaphor, Psalm. 119. v. 5.

11.
And I will punish.] i. e. For I will punish.

And, for For, as it is often used by the Hebrews.

The Prophet speaks here in the Person of God.

The world.] i. e. The Land, or the Sinners of Babylon. Synechdoche integri
hyperbolica.

Of the proud.] i. e. Of the proud Babylonians. Synechdoche Generis.

Of the terrible.] i. e. Of the Babylonians, who have been a terror to their
adjoining Neighbors; And in a special mannen to the people of Israel.

12.
I will make a man more precious than fine gold.] q. d. I will either cut off
so many of the Babylonians with the sword of the Medes, or make them fly from
their own houses and land to save their lives abroad for fear of the Medes, as
that I will leave but very few Babylonians in the Land of Babylon, so few, as
that a man shall be more scarce than a apiece of fine gold.

A man.] i. e. A Babylonian, Syn^chdoche generis.

More precious.] i. e More rare or scarce, for every thing which is rare and
scarce is precious. Metonymia effecti.

Even a man than the golden wedge of Ophir] This is a repetition of the former
sentence.

Ophir was the place whither Solomon sent his ships for gold. 1 Kings, 9.28.
No wonder therefore if they had gold in the wedge from thence, being that there
were Mines of gold there.

Oph^r is thought to have been some part or other of the East Jndies.

13.
Therefore I will shake the heavens.] q. d. Therefore that I may do this, or
bring this to pass, i. e. That I may make a man more precious than gold, even
a man, than the golden wedge of Ophir, I will do such terrible things in the
Land of Babylon, as shall make the very heavens over it, to tremble.

I will shake the heavens.] i. e. I will do such terrible things as shall make
the heavens to shake. See Notes Cap. 2.19. c. 5.25.30. and here Cap. 13.10.

And the earth shall remove out of her place.] q. d. And the earth tremble for
fear to see all those direful things that I will do upon her, yea, it shall
even remove out of her place for fear,

In the wrath.] i. e. At the wrath, or to see the wrath of the Lord of Hosts,
which he will execute upon the men of Babylon.

Or, In the wrath, i. e. In the day of that wrath.

Of the Lord of Hosts.] Note here, the Enallage of the person from the first to
the third.

14.
And it shall be as the chased Roe.] i. e. And Babylon shall be as a Roe-deer
which is chased with hounds and huntsmen; for as a Roe, which is so chased,
flies from it is wonted place it knows not whether: So Babylon being pursued by
the Medes shall fly from her own home into foreign Lands, which she knows
not, that there she may save her life.

Here is a Relative without an Antecedent expressed.

The Relative It without an Antecedent, but the Antecedent is easy to be
understood, for the Antecedent is Babylon of whom he speaks as of a woman, by
a Prosopopoeia.

This person is given here to Babylon, to show how her Inhabitants shall be
forced to fly at that day.

And as a sheep that no man takes up.] i. e. And as a wandering sheep that no
man takes up, or has care of, when he sees it wandering, but lets it wander
on. For as such a sheep wandereth in unknown ways until it falls into some
pit or other, or into the jaws of the Wolf, or some other ravenous beast: So
shall Babylon wander until she falls into some destruction or other.

They shall turn every man to his own people] i. e. They, which came as
Auxiliaries or were hired by the Babylonians, to help them to serve them in
their wars, shall (upon the coming of the Medes in the day of the Lord) fly
every one to his own home, and leave the Babylonians destitute.

Here is a Relative again (viz. they) put without an Antecedent, after the
manner of the Hebrews.

15.
Every one that is found.] i. e. Every Babylonian, which the Medes find either
remaining in Babylon or flying out of it.

Shall be thrust through.] Supple, with a sword, i. e. Shall be slain.

And every one that is joined to them.] i. e. And every stranger or outlandish
man, that joined himself to the Babylonians to help them.

By the sword.] Supple, Of the Medes.

16.
Their Children also] i. e. The Children also of the Babylonians.

Shall be dashed in pieces.] Supple, By the Medes, who shall take their
Children, and dash them against the stones, as Psalm. 137. v. 9.

Their houses shall be spoiled.] i. e. Their houses shall be plundered of all
their goods.

17.
Behold I will stir up the Medes against them.] i. e. For behold I will stir
up the Medes against them.

Here he shows by whom he will execute his judgments upon the Babylonians,
he will execute them by the Medes.

Which shall not regard silver.] And therefore shall not call to the
Babylonians to ransom their lives, when they have got them into their power:
Nor accept of a ransom, if the Babylonians should offer them a ransom to save
their lives, but shall kill every one which they take and meet with.

18.
Their bows also shall dash the young men to pieces.] i. e. They shall also
dash out the brains of the young men with the stocks of their Bows.

This is a sign of extreme fury and hatred.

On the fruit of the womb.] i. e. On Children: For Children are the fruit of
the womb, Psalm. 127. v. 3.

Their eyes shall not spare Children.] i. e, This is a repetition of the
foregoing sentence.

It is a sign of extreme cruelty, thus to use Children, whose weak age used to
privilege them from the sword, as Deuteronomy. 20. v. 13, 14.

Their eyes.] That is, They.

The eye, which is but a part, is put here by a Synechdoche, for the whole man.
And therefore the eye rather than any other part, because we are more ready to
pity a miserable object when we see it, than when we hear of it, etc.

19.
And Babylon the glory of Kingdoms.] The Assyrian had many Kingdoms subject
to him, in which there was no City more famous than Babylon: Hence he calls it,
The glory of Kingdoms.

The beauty of the Chaldees excellency.] i. e. The prime, and chief, and most
beautiful of all those excellent Cities which the Chaldees had.

He puts beauty and excellency here, by a Metonymie, for beautiful and
excellent Cities.

Or by the Chaldees excellency may be meant, the Chaldees themselves, by a
Periphrasis: So when we say of a General, the Generals Excellency, we mean the
General himself.

Babylon that famous City, was situate in Chaldea, and therefore is it called
the beauty of the Chaldees excellency.

Shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah.] i. e. Shall be utterly
overthrown.

Note here, that by the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, is usually signified,
an utter destruction of a City, and such a destruction as is never repaired
again, as appears by this place, and by Jerem. 49. v. 18.

20
It shall never be inhabited, neither shall it be dwelt in from generation to
generation.] An utter desolation is here prophesied of Babylon, and that it
should never be inhabited again.

But how could this Prophecy be fulfilled, when the Medes broke to pieces the
Assyrians Empire, whereas Babylon was so far from being overthrown, like to
the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, and from being never inhabited from that
time, as that it remains in some renown even to this day; for at this day it
is a Town of great ^raffique, if we believe reports.

Answer. That Babylon, when the Medes invaded the Assyrian Empire, was
grievously ruined, is more than probable: For at that time Babylon was not not
so strongly fortified, as it had been in former, and was in after times. For
Eusebius reports (in the end of the ninth book of his Evangelicall
preparation) out of Abydenus, that Belus had fortified Babylon with a wall; but
that that wall was in process of time abolished, until Nebuchadnezar
fortified it again with a new wall. So that it was no hard matter for the Medes
to take Babylon by force and storm in that interim: And by force and storm it
is likely that they took it; and having so taken it, that they did fire it, and
grievously ruinate it: For as though it had been utterly ruinated at that time,
Nebuchadnezar says of what he built afterward, is not this great Babylon
which I have built? Dan. 4. v. 30.

So then when the Medes did destroy the Assyrian Empire, Babylon (in all
likelihood) was grievously ruined (besides that, that the power of the
Assyrians, which ruled there, was quite destroyed) yet some part of it (without
doubt) was left remaining, as may be gathered from 2 Kings. chap. 20. verse. 12.
where mention is made of Baladon King of Babylon (though we know, that men
oftentimes bear titles from places which have been, but now are not) therefore
it is said here, that Babylon shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah; I conceive, that Babylon is to be taken, per Synechdochen integri,
for the greatest part of Babylon: And in all likelihood, the greatest part of
Babylon was utterly destroyed at this time. I conceive moreover, that though
Nebuchadnezar did build Babylon, yet that part of Babylon, which was so
ruinated by the Medes, was never built or inhabited again; and that
Nebuchadnezar built not upon the old ruins, but upon new ground, as Rome,
which was built after the inundation of the Goths, was not built upon the old
ruins, but lower, on the bank of Tiber upon Campus Martius, and has little
left of old Rome, but only the name, as being not situated in the same place.

Neither shall the Arabian pitch Tent there.] There were Arabians, which lived
wholly upon their cattle, which they drove from place to place for fresh
pasture: And they themselves lived in Tents, which they moved from place to
place for the more benefit of their flocks and herds; from their living in
Tents they were called Arabes Scenitae, and from their feeding of cattle,
Nomades.

These Arabians bordered upon Chaldea, and therefore it had been convenient for
them to have pitched their Tents, and fed their cattle there, if there had been
good convenience there for feeding of cattle: But he says, the Arabian shall
not pitch his Tent there, to wit, there to feed his cattle, because it should
not be a place fit to feed cattle, by reason of the ruins and rubbish which
should be there; and the briars and thorns which should grow up there; and
especially because of the wild beast (which he mentions in the next verse)
which should lodge there.

Yet note, that by an Arabian we may understand, Metonymically, any one which
led that kind of life, as those Arabians did, though he were not an Arabian
born: that is, any Shepherd, and so by an Arabian may be meant, a Shepherd
here, as well as a natural Arabian.

Neither shall the Shepherds make their fold there.] i. e. Neither shall the
Shepherds feed their sheep there; for where Shepherds make their fold, they
feed their Sheep.

This is a repetition of the former sentence.

21.
And their houses.] i. e. And those ruinous parts of their houses which remain.

Doleful Creatures.] i. e. Creatures which make mournful cries and noises.

And Saytres shall dance there.] Satyrs were reputed as Gods of the woods
among the Heathen, whose upper parts were like a Man, their lower parts like a
Goat.

If you ask what they were indeed? Surely they were no other than Devils in
such a shape, who haunt for the most part remote woods, and sollitary places,
and there appear in strange forms.

Shall dance there] He alludes to the leapping and skipping and dancing of
wanton Goats, part of whose shapes these Devils assumed.

22.
And the wild beasts of the Islands.] i. e. Strange beasts which Inhabit
Islands and remote places.

Note, That the Hebrews call all places near the Seas Islands.

Shall cry.] i. e. Shall make hideous noises.

In their pleasant Palaces.] i. e. In those which are now pleasant Palaces, but
then shall be ruinous heaps.

Her time is near to come.] i. e. The time in which Babylon shall be thus
afflicted is near at hand.

And her days shall not be prolonged.] i. e. And the days which she has to
flourish, shall not be many.

Or thus, And her days, in which these things shall come upon her, which I
have spoken of, shall not be long before they come, that is, they shall not be
deferred.

These Phrases show, that it was not long before this Prophecy was executed
upon Babylon, and therefore surely it was executed before the days of Cyrus,
in the days which Josephus says, that the Medes destroyed the Assyrian Empire,

ISAIAH. CHAP. XIIII.
FOR the Lord will have mercy upon Jacob.] i. e. For the Lord will have mercy
upon the Children of Jacob, and his mercy will be showed in that, that he will
punish and bring down their enemies, and comfort and refresh them. In
particular he will by the overthrow of Babylon, give the Children of Jacob,
which were held in slavery and in bondage in Babylon, opportunity to return to
their own land again.

Jacob is put here, per Metonymiam efficientis, for the Children of Jacob.

Note, that this has Coherence with the former Chapter, and contains a
reason, why God would deal so severely with the Babylonians, and destroy
Babylon.

And will yet choose Israel.] i. e. And will yet show that he made choice of
Israel for a peculiar people, by his love to them.

Israel is put here, by a Metonymie, for the Children of Israel, who is the
same as Jacob, For Jacob and Israel are but two names of one man. Genesis Chap.
32. v. 28.

And to choose signifies, to show love, for God shows his love to them whom
he makes choice of.

And set them in their own land.] i. e. And bring, them which are, or shall be
Captives in Babylon, etc. back out of Babylon, etc. into that Land which he
gave them at first, to wit the Land of Canaan.

When Sennacherib invaded Judaea, and took many Jews captive, it is likely
that he sent them away into Babylon and other places of his Dominions as fast
as he took them, and as he had the opportunity of a Convoy for them: And of
these might this place be understood. q. d. The Lord will have mercy upon those
Jews, the children of Jacob, who also is called Israel, whom Sennacherib shall
send away Captive into Babylon, and will yet show his love to them, and set
them in their own land again.

But it may not so be understood of them, but that by Jacob and Israel may be
here meant the People of the ten Tribes also. q. d. Though the Lord has
utterly cut off the ten Tribes of Israel from being a people, and has sent
them into captivity into Babylon and other places of the Assyrians dominions by
Tiglah-Pilesser first, and Salmanaser afterward, and seems to have quite
forsaken them for evermore, yet will he have mercy upon them, and will yet show
his love to them, and set them in their own land again.

We read expressly that the King of Assyria brought men from Babylon, etc. and
placed them in the Cities of Samaria instead of the Children of Israel, 2
Kigns, 17.24. wherefore it is certain that the Children of Israel many of them
were sent at that time back to Babylon, for such changes were the Eastern
Conquerours wont to make.

Note here, that the Lord never brought back the ten Tribes to be a People and
kingdom and Commonwealth of themselves again, as he brought the two Tribes
of of Jud^h and Benjamin, after that Nebucadnezzar had carried them away
Captive into Babylon: But he is said to set the Childdren of Jacob, or the
Children of the ten Tribes in their Land again^, because he gave them
opportunity to escape out of Babylon, and other places of their Captivity, and
to return back into the land of Canaan, which he gave unto their Fathers, by
the troubles, which he brought upon Babylon and the King of Assyria, whose
power he broke in pieces at this time by the M^des, which opportunity many of
them made use of, and came back into the land of Canaan, and dwelt there; not
only in the Cities of Israel, but also in the Cities of Judah, which, being
lately wasted by Sennacherib, had room enough to entertain them.

So that any part of the land of Canaan (that land which God gave to their
forefathers) may here be called, their own land, as England may be called the
Land of an English man, in what County soever thereof he was born, or what
Shire thereof soever he dwells in.

And the strangers shall be joined with them.] i. e. And the Strangers among
whom they live in their Captivity, being won by their example to worship
their God, and hearing of the prosperity of Hezekiah, and fearing what may be
the event of those troubles and wars, which the Mede^ shall bring upon
Babylon and Assyria, shall go along with them into their land.

By Strangers are meant such as were not of the seed of Jacob, and in
particular here, are meant those among whom they lived Captive.

And they.] i. e. And the Strangers.

Shall cleave to.] i. e. Shall stick close to.

To the house of Jacob.] i. e. To the Children of Jacob, and live with them.

2.
And the People shall take them and bring them to their places.] i. e. And the
stranggers shall accompany the Children of Israel into their own land, and
furnish them with things necessary for their journey.

The People.] i. e. The Strangers, or Gentiles among whom they lived in
Captivity.

Shall take them and bring them.] This signifies no more than if he had barely
said, they shall bring them.

Shall bring them.] To bring a man on his way does not signify only to
accompany him, but also to furnish him with necessaries for his journey, as you
may see, Tit. 3. v. 13.

And the house of Israel shall possess them in the Land of the Lord, for
servants and hand-maides.] i. e. And they shall serve the Children of Israel,
in the Land of the Lord and be their servants.

In the Land of the Lord.] Judaea was called the Land of the Lord, because
there was the Temple and house of God, and God was there worshipped. Yea, the
whole land of Canaan might be called the Land of the Lord, because God did
reserve to himself a peculiar Interest in that land. Levit. 25. v. 23.

And them Captives, whose Captives they were.] i. e. And the Children of Israel
shall take many of the Assyrians and Babylonians Captives, whereas they were
before in Captivity to them.

Note, that whereas the word Captives is here twice repeated; In the first
place it is to be taken Metaphorically, in the other properly: For the
Assyrians and Babylonians are called Captives of the Children of Israel, only
because they went along with the Children of Israel, and left the^r own land to
dwell with them, and serve them, which they did out of their own free election.

But the Children of Israel are called Captives of the Babylonians and
Assyrians, because the Babylonians and Assyrians, conquered them by their
sword, and carried them away, whether they would or no, from their own, to
their Land, there to be bondmen and bondwomen.

And they shall rule over their Oppressors.] i. e. And the Children of Israel
shall rule over their Oppressors, either as Masters over Servants, or as
Princes over Subjects.

Over their Oppressours] i. e. Over the Babylonians and Assyrians, which did
oppress them in the Land of their captivity.

Note here, that the Children of Israel are said to take them Captive, whose
Captives they were, and to rule over their Oppressors. Not because they took
those individual men captive, whose Captives they were: Nor because they ruled
over those individual men which oppressed them: But because they, whom they
are said to take captive, and to rule over, were of the same People and Nation
as they were of, to whom they were in captivity, and which oppressed them.

3.
And it shall come to pass, that in that day that the Lord shall give the
rest.] He uses an Apostrophe here to Jacob, that is, to the Children of
Israel, even all of them, which had been any way afflicted by the Assyrians,
and were now relieved.

From thy sorrow, and from thy fear, and from thy hard bondage, etc.] He says,
and from thy hard bondage, in regard of those only, which were carried into
Babylon, etc. For they only were in bondage, though they and all the rest of
the Children of Israel were in sorrow and in fear, by reason of the cruel
oppressions and wars which the King of Assyria brought upon them.

When Sennacherib's host was destroyed, they which were in Jerusalem were
delivered from their sorrow and fear: But they which were in bondage were not
delivered thence until the Medes destroyed Babylon.

4.
Thou shall take up this Proverb.] i. e. Thou shall use this el^gant song, or
speech, so some; or this quipp, or taunt, so others.

Against the King of Babylon.] The King of Assyria is here meant by the King of
B^bylon, for he was King of Babylon at this time, 2 King. 17.24.

As the Emperor of Russia is sometimes called the Emperor of Russia,
sometimes the Great Duke of Muscovie: So was the King of Assy^ia called,
sometimes the King of Assyria, sometimes the King of Babylon.

If it be asked, why he is called here rather the King of Babylon, than King of
Assyria?

The reasons may be; First, because the Prophet did prophecy of the great
overthrow of Babylon, which, as it is likely, felt more of the Medes fury than
any place of the Assyrian Empire besides: That therefore he might more lively
set out the calamity which should befall the King of Assyria, he calls him the
King of Babylon, as if he should say, The King of that Babylon, whose overthrow
should be as the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah.

Secondly, He might be called the King of Babylon here, because that it is
likely, that more of the Children of Israel were captive in Babylon, than in
any other place of the Assyrian Empire besides, and more hardly and cruelly
used there: And there dwelt the Exactors of that Tribute, which had been laid
upon the Children of Israel, and there was that Tribute paid in: That therefore
the destruction of the King of Assyria might more affectionately work upon the
Children of Israel, and make them more joyful, having suffered so many things
from Babylon, he calls the King of Assyria, King of Babylon.

By this King of Babylon is meant in particular, Sennacherib (as will appear by
the process of this proverb or song.)

And this may be the reason why Sennacherib is made the subject of this Song or
Proverb more than any other King of Babylon; to wit, because no King of
Babylon, or Assyria did ever oppress the Jews (whom this book most concerns,
as appears Cap. 1.1.) more than Sennacherib did.

Secondly, Because Sennacherib was in a manner the last King of Babylon, at
least the last Oppressor of that Race. For though after he was slain,
Esar-haddon his Son reigned in his stead, Cap. 37.38. yet his Reign was but
exceeding short, for he was scarce seated in the Throne, when the Medes came
and destroyed his Empire: And the Children of Israel, which were with Hezekiah
scarce, heard of his being King, much less did feel the hand of his
Oppression: and yet there is something in this Proverb which concerns
Esar-hadhaddon and other the Children of Sennacherib, v. 21.

How has the Oppressor ceased?] q. d. How is it come to pass, that the King
of Babylon (who was wont to Oppress all kind of people, and make war against
them, only that he might place his own Subjects in their Land, or make them
his Tributaries) I say, how is it come to pass that this man cease so
suddenly from his Oppression, whereas he had so mighty a power to Oppress?

The golden City ceased?] q. d How has the City, which was enriched with gold,
which was extorted from all nations by way of tribute and exactions, ceased so
suddenly to exact her Tribute?

Or thus, How has the Oppressor ceased? The golden City ceased? i. e. How is
the Oppressor perished? How has the golden City been destroyed? For those
things which perished and are destroyed, are said to cease, (Supple, from
being) whether they be men, or inanimate Creatures?

The golden City.] By the golden City, he means Babylon, which he calls the
golden City by a Mimesis, because the Babylonians, in their pride were wont so
to call it; because of the abundance of gold and riches which were therein, as
being the City in which the Nobles and most wealthy men dwelt.

Or else he calls it the golden City, because that thither the Tributes were
carried, and there paid, which the King of Assyria exacted of the Nations round
about, and so it abounded with gold and silver.

Some perhaps may here ask, how it was against Sennacherib to tell of the fall
of Babylon, when as Sennacherib was dead before Babylon was overthrown?

Answer, The Prophet uses a kind of Poesy in all this Proverb, which he has
against the King of Babylon, and in Poesy the dead are brought in, with like
affections as if they were living.

Again as in the Parable of Dives and Lazarus, our Savior brings in Dives
(when he was in Hell) taking care for his brethren and their well doing which
were upon the earth, Luke, 16.28. So might the Prophet bring in Sennacherib
(when he was dead) taking care for the welfare of his Children, and as touched
with their losses and with their death, and spoke of him as if it were grievous
to him, whatsoever was grievous to them.

This Question, is the Question of one admiring and insulting; Admiring at what
was done, and insulting over those to whom it was done.

5.
The Lord has broken the staff of the wicked.] i. e. The Lord has broken the
power of the Oppressors, so that they cannot any more oppress.

By the Oppressors are meant Sennacherib and his sons, or Sennacherib and
his ancestors, or Sennacherib and his Ministers, who were his Instruments to
oppress.

The Prophet gives an Answer here to that Question, How has the Oppressor
ceased? And this he amplifieth and continues to the end of the 22. verse, and
then in the 23. verse, he gives an answer to the other Question, How is the
golden City ceased?

The Staff.] By the Staff he means Metaphorically, the Power which
Sennacherib and his Sons, and Ancestors, and Ministers used to oppress other
nations: For as men use a Staff to beat Dogs, or Slaves, etc. So did they use
their power to oppress all people.

Of the wicked.] i. e. Of the Oppressors, Synechdoche generis. For all
Oppressors are wicked men, though all wicked men are not Oppressors.

And the Scepter of the Rulers.] This is a repetition of the former words.

The Scepter was an Ensign of Majesty, which Kings were wont to bear: Yet it
was but a Stick or a Staff (though happily trimly adorned) Homer Iliad. a.
verse. 234. with this also were Kings wont to strike in their anger those with
whom they were offended: So did Agamemnon strike Thersites with his Scepter,
Hom. Iliad. a. v. 265. By the breaking therefore of the Scepter, may be meant
the breaking of the Power and Empire of the Assyrians.

6.
He who smote the People in wrath with a continual stroke.] i. e. He which did
continually vex and oppress the People.

Here he comes to speak peculiarly against Sennacherib, and by his smiting, he
means, Metaphorically, his Oppressing.

With a continual stroke.] i. e. With continual strokes.

A Singular for a Plural number.

By his continual strokes, he means, his continual Oppressions.

He is persecuted] Sennacherib was persecuted by an Angel of God (by which also
his Army was destroyed) from Judaea to Niniveh, 2 Kings, 19.35, 36.

And when he was there, he was also persecuted and slain by his own sons, as
he was worshipping in the house of Nisroch his God, 2 Kings, 19.37.

And none hinders.] i. e. And none are willing to hinder this his
persecution, but rather rejoice in it.

None hindered it, because he was at last slain by them which persecuted him.

The prophet ^^^graphically describes the Persecution of Sennacherib, as
though he were then in persecution when he spoke it.

7.
The whole earth is at rest and is quiet.] q. d. Sennacherib is slain, and now
that Sennacherib is slain, the whole earth is quiet from wars, with which he
was wont to vex it.

This is to be understood as if Sennacherib were but newly slain, and this
spoken so soon as ever he was dead.

By the whole earth he means the Inhabitants of the whole earth by a
Metonymie, and he uses here a Synechdoche integri, by putting all for part
only of the Inhabitants of the earth.

They break forth into singing.] Supple, For joy that Sennacherib is dead, who
was wont to vex them with wars, or tributes, or both.

8.
Yea the Firr trees rejoice at thee.] The Prophet makes an Apostrophe here to
Sennacherib and uses a most elegant Prosopopoeia or Metaphor, by which he
makes the trees of Lebanon to rejoice, because being that Sennacherib was dead,
who delighted in war, they should now stand and be cut down no more, to make
warrelike Engines and Fortifications, as before.

Rejoice at thee.] i. e. Rejoice to hear that thou art dead.

Since thou art laid down.] i. e. Since thou art dead.

He uses a Metaphor here from trees which being cut down, lie along upon the
ground.

No feller is come up against us.] Supple, To cut us down.

9.
Hell from beneath is moved for thee.] i. e. Hell is moved as a Town and City
is moved when a great King is brought Prisoner thither, and every one runs out
of his house to see him, I say, Hell is moved to hear that thou art dead, and
coming thither; that it might meet thee.

By Hell he means the Graves, or the lower parts of the earth in which the
Graves are made.

The Prophet uses here the like Metaphor or Prosopopoeia as he did before in
the Firr trees. And moreover in this description he alludes to some great
Prince taken in war, and brought Captive to some Town or City, there to be kept
like a Prisoner.

For thee.] i. e. To meet thee, (as the next words explain it.) or for thee,
i. e. At the report of thee, and of thy coming.

It stirs up the dead for thee.] i. e. Hell (or the Graves) stirs up the
dead, and calls them, which are buried in her, to meet thee at thy coming,
and to gaze at thee, as thou come to thy Grave: As wondering at thy mean
condition, which wast once so high.

Even all the chief Ones of the earth.] Supple, Which are buried in her.

It has raised from their Thrones all the Kings of the Nations.] i. e. Hell or
the Graves, have raised up all the Kings of the Nations (which were buried
within them) from their Thrones, to come and meet thee.

From their Thrones all the Kings of the Nations.] Here is a Prosopopoeia, by
which the Prophet brings in the dead, with that dignity and honor which they
had while they were living.

All the Kings of the Nations.] Supple, Which Sennacherib had vanquished, and
others also.

10.
And say unto thee.] Viz. Scoffing and jeering at thee.

Art thou also become weak as we.] q. d. Art thou also, which wast so mighty
and powerful, as that none was able to resist thy strength, art thou become
weak as we?

The dead are weak indeed, as not having any life or power to action

11.
Thy pomp is brought down, and the noise of thy Viols.] He speaks of
Sennacherib's Pomp and the Music which he was wont to delight in, as of a
Man, or person, once living but now dead, by a Metaphor or Prosopopoeia.

Or, by Sennacherib's Pomp and the noise of his Viols, he understands
Sennacherib himself, who delighted in Pomp and Music, by a Metonymie.

The worm is spread under thee, and the worms cover thee.] q.d. Instead of
thy fine sheets and thy costly coverlids, the Worms are spread under thee as
sheets, and cover thee as coverlids

The Worm, for worms, A Singular for a Plural number.

He alludes either to the worms which breed in the earth, in which the graves
are dug, or to the worms which breed out of the Putrefaction of a dead body.

Note, that when he says, Thy pomp is brought down to the grave, etc. He uses
a Preterperfect Tense for a Future (a thing frequent with the Prophets) for the
Prophet brings in the dead here, rising out of their graves, and meeting
Sennacherib as he comes to the grave.

12.
How art thou fallen from heaven.] i. e. How art thou fallen from thy great
power, and majesty, and that glorious state in which thou wast?

He puts Heaven, Metaphorically, for Sennacherib's power, and majesty, and
glorious state, because he here compares Sennacherib himself to Lucifer the
morning Star, and all Stars are placed in the heavens.

Lucifer.] Lucifer is the morning Star, a Star which rises in the morning
before the Sun, and appears greater and brighter than any other Star. But here
the Prophet, by Lucifer, means Sennacherib, whom he calls Lucifer, because
as Lucifer the morning Star excels all other Stars in brightness: So did
Sennacherib King of Assyria excel all other Kings and Princes in majesty and
glory.

Lucifer, according to the etymology of the word, signifies bringing light;
And therefore is the morning Star, so called, because it arises with the
morning, and ushereth in (as it were) the great light of the Sun.

Lucifer Son of the morning.] He calls Lucifer the Son of the morning, because
that Star arises in or with the morning.

The phrase or manner of speech is merely Hebraicall.

How art thou cut down to the ground.] He alludes here to a tree which is cut
up by the roots.

Which did weaken the Nations.] By making war upon them, etc.

13.
For thou have said in thine heart.] i. e. Though thou have said in thine heart
heretofore, or though thou did say in thine heart.

For is put here for Though, as the Adversative particle yet, verse. 15. shows.

Thou have said in thy heart, I will ascend into Heaven.] The sense of these
three verses following is this: q. d. Thou did persuade thy self that thou
were a God: But thou art dead, and shall be buried as a man.

Because the Throne of the Lord, the true God, was in Heaven (above the Stars
and the Clouds) and his dwelling was in his Temple, at Jerusalem (where he was
worshipped) therefore does the Prophet describe Sennacheribs persuasion of
himself, that he was a true God, by this, that he said in his heart, that he
would ascend into heaven, and exalt his Throne above the Stars of God, that
he would sit upon the Mount of the Congregation in the sides of the North, that
he would ascend above the heights of the Clouds, that he would in every thing
be like the most High.

But did Sennacharib persuade himself, that he was the true God?

Answ. So proud have been the thoughts of many Tyrants, and so high have they
been lifted up, by their prosperous successes in what they undertook, and by
their greatness, as that they have conceited themselves to be Gods, and that
they could do, and ought to be worshipped, as Gods: And it is not unlikely,
that Sennacherib was as vain and foolish, in his conceits, as any of these.

Howsoever certain it is, that Sennacherib despised the Lord the true God, in
respect of himself; and thought himself greater and more powerful than he,
Isai. Cap. 36. v. 20. and Cap. 37. v. 10, etc. And therefore in consideration
of that, the Prophet might well attribute such thoughts to Sennacherib, as here
he does, because he would deserve to sit in Heaven, etc. if he were greater
than the Lord, whose Throne is in heaven, etc.

Above the Stars of God.] i. e. In heaven, which is above the most glorious
and excellent Stars.

By the Stars of God he means, the most excellent and glorious Stars: For
whatsoever is glorious and excellent, the Hebrews say to be of God, or to be
divine, because whatsoever is of God, and divine, is glorious and excellent.

The Stars of God.] i. e, The divine or glorious Stars. For the Hebrews put
a Substantive of the Genitive Case for an Adjective.

I will sit also upon the Mount of the Congregation.] q. d. I will sit also
upon the Mercy Seat, between the Cherubims, in the Temple which is built upon
the Mount of the Congregation.

The Mount of the Congregation.] By the Mount of the Congregation is meant,
Mount Sion, or Mount Moriah, upon which the Temple of Jerusalem was built, in
which was the Mercy Seat, where God was wont to sit, which Mount he calls, the
Mount of the Congregation; because the people of Israel were wont there to
assemble themselves to worship God, with Prayers, and Praises, and Sacrifices,
etc.

In the sides of the North.] i. e. I will sit even in the North side thereof:
for we must either repeat these words [I will sit] again, or say, that these
words are governed of the former by Apposition.

He says, In the sides of the North, for in the North, or Northern sides, or
the sides looking toward the North. For (as we observed but now) the Hebrews
often put a Substantive of the Genitive Case for an Adjective.

He says sides, for side, putting a Plural for a Singular number.

But why does he say, he will sit in the North side of the Mount of the
Congregation, or Mount Sion, etc?

Answer. Because the Temple of God was built on the North side of that Mount,
and his meaning is, that Sennacherib said in his heart, that he would sit in
the Temple of God, as God.

14.
I will ascend above the height of the Clouds] i. e. I will ascend into Heaven.

I will be like the most High.] i. e. I will be like to the Lord God, who sits
between the Cherubims in his Temple, whose Throne also is in heaven, for I will
sit where he does.

The most High.] He calls God the most High, because there is none higher than
God, he is over all.

This verse is but a repetition of the former, with which kind of repetition
our Prophet is much delighted.

15.
Yet thou shall be brought down to Hell.] i. e. By Hell is meant the Grave,
which is opposed to Heaven, and which is opposed also to the Mount of the
Congregation, as that which is dug, and lies below the Surface of the earth,
to that which rises above the earth.

To the sides of the pit] q. d. Thou shall be brought down to the pit, and laid
between the sides thereof.

To be brought down to the sides of the pit signifies, to be brought down to
the bottom of the pit. So when Jonah went down into the bottom of the Ship,
he is said to have gone down into the sides of the Ship, Jonah chap. 1. verse.
5. For those Vessels or Cavernes which have sides, are deep and spacious.

Note, that the Prophet opposes the sides of the Pit here to the sides of the
North, verse. 13. q d. Thou shall not ascend up to the sides of the North, and
sit there: but thou shall be brought down to the sides of the pit, and lie
there.

Of the pit.] i. e. Of the grave.

16.
They that see thee.] Supple, Thus weak, and in so mean and contemptible a
condition.

Shall narrowly look upon thee.] i. e. Shall view thee exactly, and
attentively, contracting the apple of their eye, that their sight may be the
sharper.

Is this the man that made the earth to tremble?] Supple, For fear of him,
because of his power, which he abused to oppression.

The earth.] i. e. The Inahbitants of the earth. Metonymia Subjecti.

That did shake Kingdoms?] i. e. That did make whole Kingdoms to shake and
tremble for fear of him, yea, that did tumble them topsie turvie.

17.
That made the world as a wilderness.] A wilderness is a place that has
neither Men nor Cities in it; wherefore because Sennacherib was continually
making war upon some place or other, slaying the Men, and carrying them away
captive, and burning the Cities, and laying them waste, the Prophet says, that
he made the world as a wilderness.

That opened not the house of his Prisoners] i. e. Which committed many men to
prison, but would never again release them, and let them out.

By this may be Metaphorically understood, that he carried many away captives
out of their own Land, and would never suffer them to return into their own
Land again.

18.
All the Kings of the Nations.] i. e, All Kings whatsoever

Or rather particularly, all the Kings of Babylon or Assyria.

The Kings of Babylon or Assyria, might be called the Kings of the Nations,
because they had many Nations under their Dominions, over which they ruled.

Lie in glory.] i. e. Lie buried after a glorious manner.

Every one in his own house.] i. e. Every one in the Sepulcher of his own house
or family, that is, (as the Scripture speaks) every one in the Sepulcher of
his Fathers.

He puts the house here (by a Metonymie) for the Sepulcher of an house or
family.

It was the custom of Kings, and many Nobles, of many Nations, to erect
stately buildings for themselves and their own families to be interred in.

19.
But thou art cast out of thy grave.] i. e. But thou art cast out of thy grave,
which thou might have challenged in the Sepulcher of thy Fathers, among thy
Ancestors.

It seems, that Sennacherib was buried at first among his Ancestors, in the
Sepulcher of his Fathers, but afterward, upon some tumult or other, or upon
some occacasion or other, was drawn out from thence again, and had his body
dishonourably cast about the streets, or buried in some ignominious place or
other.

Like an abominable branch.] i. e. Like some ill and unprofitable plant, which
an Husbandman or Gardener detesteth, and suffers not to grow in his grounds,
but pulls it up by the roots, and casts it away to the dunghill.

And as the raiment of those that are slain, thrust through with a sword.] i. e.
And as a garment of those that are slain in the battle, and which are thrust
through with a sword, supple, in many places.

The garment of those which are slain, and run through with a sword in many
places, no man will think worth taking up, as being both besmeared with blood,
and full of holes: And if any chance to take it up, he straightway casts it
away again.

That go down to the stones of the pit.] i. e. As the garment or raiment of
those (which being slain) are cast into the next quarry or pit, and there
covered with stones.

These words are governed of the former by apposition.

To go down into the pit, signifies as much, as to be brought, and put, or
cast in into the pit, so also it signified, Job, 21.13.

He alludes here to the custom or manner of the wars, for in wars they cast
the bodies of the common soldiers into some hole or pit, which they either
find or make, near the place of the battle and so bury them: But as for the
bodies of Commanders, and men of note, which are slain, they carry them away,
and give them an honorable burial.

By that therefore that he says of them that go down to the stones of the
pit, he means of the common soldiers. And this makes the raiment, which he
speaks of, the worse, and more contemptible. For if no man will think the
raiment of him which is slain, thrust through with a sword in many places, worth
the taking up, or if he does take it up, will cast it away presently again,
because it is besmeared with blood, and full of holes, though otherwise it were
a good raiment, much less will he think it worth the taking up, and much more,
if he has taken it up, will he cast it away, if it be the garment of a common
soldier; for common soldiers were wont to be poorly and meanly arrayed at all
times.

20.
Thou shall not be joined with them in burial.] i. e. Thou shall not be joined
with the Kings of the Nations, that is, with the Kings of Babylon and Assyria
thy Ancestors in burial, nor lie buried in the Sepulcher of thy Fathers with
them.

Because thou have destroyed thy Land.] That is, because thou have destroyed
the people of thy Land.

He puts the Land for the People thereof, by a Metonymie.

But how did Sennacherib destroy the People of his Land?

Answer. Perhaps Sennacherib was such a one as Nero was, which delighted or
sported himself in the death of his People. Or therefore might Sennacherib be
said to destroy his People, because by his pride and blasphemy he provoked God
to cut off his mighty Army by an Angel, in which Army he had so many of his
people, as that the Ethiopian said of the Assyrians at that time, that they
were a Nation scattered and peeled, to wit, by reason of the great multitude of
men which Sennacherib had taken out of Assyria, and carried with him to invade
Judea, Cap. 18. v. 2. And indeed it is a Tradition among the Jews, that
Sennacherib's Subjects were extremely incensed against him for that loss,
especially they which had any Fathers, or Sons, or Brothers, or any near Kinn
therein.

Any of these Reasons may be reason enough to a rabble to ransack the
Sepulchers of the dead, and to draw out the body of a Tyrant, or such as they
were incensed against, from thence, to use it reproachfully.

The seed of evil doers.] See Chap. 1. v. 4.

Shall never be renowned.] i. e. Shall never be had in that memory as the
righteous shall, Psalm. 109. v. 15.

21.
Prepare slaughter for his Children.] q. d. O ye Medes, prepare your selves,
and come and slay the Children of Sennacherib.

This Apostrophe is to the Medes, who (as I said) about this time did break in
pieces the Empire of the Assyrians, of which Sennacherib was late King.

Note here, that he, of whom the former part of this Proverb was made, was d^ad
before God called to the Medes to prepare slaughter for his Children, and
before Babylon was destroyed, as will appear to those that attentively read
this Proverb or Song: And so was Sennacherib: He therefore is the subject of
the former part of this Proverb or Song, and to none does it agree so well as
to him.

For the iniquity of their Fathers] i. e. For the iniquity of Sennacherib their
Father, Salmanaser their Grandfather, and Tiglah-Pilesar their great
Grandfather, who had grievously oppressed, as other people, so especially the
Children of Israel.

That they do not rise.] Supple, To that power and glory which their Father
Sennacherib once had.

Nor possess the Land.] Supple, Which their Father possessed.

Nor fill ^he (...) of the world with Cities.] i e. And that they build not
Cities upon the face of the earth, as their Fathers have done.

Proud Tyrants, though they pulld own and destroy Cities in some places, yet
they build again in other, that they may become famous thereby to present and
future ages. And for the most part, they call the Cities, which they build,
after their own names, as Alexander, Caesarea, Antiochia, were called from
Alexander, Caesar, and Antiochus.

22.
The name.] i. e. All which are called by his name as being of his blood.

He puts the name for the party named, by a Metonymie.

And remnant.] i. e. And those which remain alive of his blood.

It is likely, that many of Sennacherib's house, and race were slain in his
wars, as it, often happens to the Kindred and Children of other Princes, and
therefore he says, the remnant, supple, of Sennacherib's Kinn.

And Son, and Nephew.] Supple, Of Sennacherib.

23.
I will make it also a possession for the Bittern.] i. e. I will also make
Babylon it self a place for the Bittern, where it may haunt and abide quietly,
and not be de disturbed by any man.

A Bittern is a solitary fowl or bird, which delights in fenny places and
waters.

And pooles of water.] Babylon stood in a marish and fenny ground, yea, where
Babylon stood it was at first all water, called a Sea, as Eusebius reports,
in the latter part of the ninth Book of his Evangelicall Preparation, out of
Abydenus; very likely therefore it is, that a great part of it, if not all, lay
so low, as that it was fain to be defended from the inundation and overflowing
of the River Euphrates, and other waters, by banks, which banks being broken
down by the Medes, Babylon (or at least a great part of it) must needs become a
pool, or pooles of water.

And I will sweep it with the Besome of destruction.] i. e. And I will utterly
destroy every man out of it.

He alludes to a maid which sweepeth her house, that she may purge it and
cleanse it from all the dirt, and dust, and filth that is therein: For as such
a one so sweepeth her house, as that she leaves not the least piece of dust, or
dirt, or filth in it: So, says the Prophet, will the Lord so cleanse Babylon
of the wicked and filthy Inhabitants thereof, as that he will leave none in it,
but destroy them all.

The besome of destruction.] i. e. The destructive besome, or a besome which
shall destroy them.

He puts a Substantive of the Genitive case for an Adjective, as the Hebrews
are wont, and takes destruction actively.

Note, that this Verse contains an Answer to that Question which was moved
verse. 4. How is the golden City ceased? For here he answers that Babylon the
Golden City ceased through the Power of God, who made it a possession for the
Bittern and Pools of water, who also swept it with the besom of destruction.

Here ends the Proverb which he began v. 5.
24.
The Lord of Host has sworn saying, etc.] This is a Prophecy distinct from
that which went before, which yet seems here to be added, because it concerns
Sennacherib, as the former part of this Chapter did.

As I have thought.] Supple, To do.

So shall it come to pass.] Supple, Which I have thought of.

It shall stand.] A purpose is said to stand which we alter not, till we have
effected what we purposed.

25.
That I will break the Assyrian.] This is that which the Lord thought, and
shall come to pass: And which he purposed and shall stand.

The Assyrian.] By the Assyrian he means Sennacherib first, who was King of
Assyria by way of excellency, Then he means Sennabherib's Army, by a Metonymie.

In my land] i. e. In Judaea.

Why Judaea was called the land of the Lord, See v. 2.

And upon my Mountains.] id est, Upon the Mountains of Judaea my Land.

Judaea was a Mountainous Country, and Jerusalem was encompassed with
mountains, Psalm. 125.2. on which Sennacherib's Army was slain.

This was performed, 2 Kings, Chap. 19.35.

Then shall his yoke.] i. e. The yoke of Sennacherib the Assyrian, which he
has put upon the necks of the men of Judah the People of God.

What he means by the yoke, See Cap. 9.4. and 10.27.

From off them.] i. e. From off the men of Judah, but especially of Jerusalem.

He puts here a Relative without an Antecedent, and seems to point at them of
whom he speaks.

And his burden depart from off their shoulders.] This is the same for sense
with the former words.

26.
This is the purpose which is purposed upon the whole earth.] He puts the whole
earth by a Metomymie, for all the Nations and Inhabitants of the earth: And by
all the Nations or Inhabitants of the earth, he means those of all Nations,
which were in Sennacherib's Army, (for Sennacherib's Army consisted of almost
all kind of Nations, in the known world) by an Hyperbole or Synechdoche.

The sense of this place is this, q. d. This is the purpose which is purposed
by the Lord upon all the Nations and Inhabitants of the earth, which shall
serve Sennacherib in his Army, against Judah and Jerusalem, to wit, to break
them.

The Prophet speaks this in his own person, repeating in other words what God
had said, v. 25. and attesting of it.

And this is the hand which is stretched out upon all Nations.] i. e And this
is the Judgment or Punishment which shall be inflicted, and is ready to fall,
upon all Nations.

He puts the hand here, for the judgment or punishment executed with the hand,
per Metonymiam efficientis.

And speaks here of God (...), and alludes to a man which stretches out his
hand to strike, who then threatens and resolves, and is ready to strike, when
his hand is stretched out.

Or when he says, this is the hand which is stretched out upon all Nations, He
may point as it were at Gods hand, as though he saw it stretched out upon all
Nations, which stretching out of Gods hand upon all Nations, did sufficiently
show what he purposed against them.

Upon all the Na^ions.] i. e. Upon all those men of several Nations, which
were in Sennacherib's Army.

27.
For the Lord of Hosts has purposed, etc.] Between this and the former verse
we must understand these or the like words. And this shall come to pass which
God has purpos^d, and he shall smite them upon whom his hand is stretched out,
q. d. And this shall come to pass, which God has purposed, and he shall smite
them upon whom his hand is stretched out, for the Lord of Host has purposed,
etc.

Has purposed.] Supple, To break the whole earth, that is, all the men of the
earth, which shall serve Sennacherib in his Army against Judah and Jerusalem.

And who can disanull it?] i. e. And who can disanull his purpose?

And his hand is stretched out.] Supple, To smite all the men of all the
Nations, which shall serve Sennacherib against Judah and Jerusalem.

And who shall turn it back.] Suple, That he should not smite him?

28.
In the year that King Ahaz died was this burden.] Ahaz was the Father of
Hezekiah, who succeeded Ahaz in the Kingdom.

That therefore, which is here spoken, was delivered either a little before
Hezekiah came to the Crown, or when he was newly crowned.

Note, that this Verse is to be referred, not to that which went before, but to
that which follows after.

This burden.] He means the burden of Palestina, of which he is about to
speak.

What a burden signifies in this place learn from the like. Chap. 13. v. 1.

29
Rejoice not thou whole Palestina.] Vzziah (the Grandfather of Ahaz and great
Grandfather of Hezekiah) was a great scourge of the Philistines, and
exceedingly prevailed against them, 2 Chronicles. 26.6. At whose death the
Philistines did generally rejoice throughout all Palestina, because such a
scourge was taken away from them: In allusion therefore to this general joy of
the Philistines throughout all Palestina, at the death of Vzziah, the Prophet
says, Rejoice not thou whole Palestina.

Palestina.] He puts Palestina here by a Metonymie, for the Philistines, the
Inhabitants of Palestina.

Because the rod of him that smote thee is broken.] i. e. At this, that the Rod
of Vzziah, who smote thee, and mightily afflicted thee, is broken.

By the rod of Vzziah is meant Metaphorically, the power of Vzziah, which he
used against the Philistines, which rod was then broken, when Vzziah died.

For out of the Serpents root shall come forth a Cockatrice.] By the Serpent is
here meant Metaphorically, Vzziah, because as a Serpent stingeth, so did
Vzziah, sting the Philistines.

By the Cockatrice is meant Hezekiah, because the Cockatrice is a more
dangerous Serpent, and stingeth worse than that which he here calls by the
general name of a Serpent. And Hezekiah was a more dangerous enemy, and
afflicted the Philistines more than Vzziah had done, 2 King. 18.8.

Out of the Serpents root.] In these words he alludeth to a shoot or branch
which shoots or springs out of the root of a tree or plant.

And his fruit.] i. e. Yea, the Serpents fruit, q. d. Yea, Hezekiah which is
the great grandchild of Vzziah, (of whom I speak under the Metaphor of a
Serpent, etc.

And is put here, for Yea.

Shall be a fiery flying Serpent] He likeneth Hezekiah here, to a fiery flying
Serpent, because as a fiery flying Serpent is more hurtful than an ordinary
Serpent, yea, than a Cockatrice, so was Hezekiah far more hurtful unto the
Philistines than Vzziah was.

The fiery flying Serpent comes suddenly upon a man, and cannot easily be
avoided, because he flies, and when he comes, he stingeth deadly, because he
is a fiery Serpent.

These kind of Serpents were called fiery Serpents, not because they were of a
fiery nature, but by reason of the effects which they produced, which was, that
by their biting or stinging, they did so inflame him whom they bit or stung, as
that he was thereby as hot as fire, as we use to speak.

This Sentence is a Repetition of the former, and both of them seem to be
Proverbs, used by the Hebrews, when they would signify that a worse or a more
terrible man shall succeed a better or less terrible.

30.
And the firstborn of the Poor] i. e. And they which are in an exceeding poor
and low condition.

He means hereby the men of Judah, which were brought very low in the days of
Ahaz. 2 Chronicles. 28.5. etc.

When he says the firstborn of the poor, for him, that is in an extreme poor
and low condition; he uses a Catachresticall Metaphor. For because the
firstborn Son excels all his Fathers Children in wealth, and other
privileges of his birthright, therefore does he call them, which are the
poorest (in condition) of all men, the firstborn of the poor, as excelling and
surpassing all which are poor and miserable in poverty and misery.

Shall feed] Supple, in safety under him, i. e. shall live quietly and
peaceably without fear under Hezekiah.

In the word, feed there is a Metaphor drawn from Cattle, which are kept in
safety (while they feed) from wolves and other ravenous beasts, by the
Shepherd.

And the needy.] This is a Repetition of those words: And the firstborn of
the poor.

Shall lie down in safety.] These are for sense the same with those words,
shall feed, and in these also, there is a Metaphor taken from Cattle, which lie
down and couch safely from ravenous beasts, by the custody of Shepherds and
their dogs.

And I will kill thy root.] But I will kill thy principal men, O Palestina,
with famine.

He puts And for But: And by the root, he means the principal men, by a
Metaphor, from a tree, whose principal part is the root.

He speaks here in the person of God.

And he shall slay thy remnant.] i. e. And Hezekiah shall slay with the sword,
those that escape the famine.

By He, he means the Cockatrice, and fiery flying Serpent, that is, Hezekiah,
whom he signifies by those Metaphors.

31.
Howl O Gate.] q. d. Lament ye Cities of the Philistines, or Palestina, for
the miseries which shall come upon you.

He says, howl, for lament, by a Metaphor from dogs and wolves, which howl
and make a doleful noise.

He says O Gate, for O ye Cities, or O ye which inhabit the Cities of
Palestina, where first, he puts a Gate, for Gates: A Singular for a Plural
number. Then by Gates, he means, the Towns and Cities which have Gates, by a
Synechdoche: Then by the Towns and Cities, he means, the Inhabitants of
those Towns or Cities, by a Metonymie.

Thou whole Palestina art dissolved.] i. e. All ye Inhabitants of Palestina
shall faint, and melt away with fear.

By Palestina, he means the Inhabitants of Palestina by a Metonymie.

And he says, that they are dissolved, for they shall be dissolved, after a
Prophetique way: Putting a Praeterperfect tense for a Future.

And he says, ye shall be dissolved, or melted, as he said, and every man's
heart shall melt, Cap. 13.7. The Notes upon which place see, For the Phrase and
Metaphor is the same with this.

There shall come from the North a smoke.] By this Smoke he means either
Hezekiah whom he signifies by smoke, because as smoke is quick in its motion,
and hurts the eyes: So Hezekiah was quick in his expedition against the
Philistines and was very hurtful to them, and did sore vex them.

Or, by this smoke, he means a great Army of the men of Judah marching
against the Philistines, by a Metonymie. For great Armies in their march raise
a dust, which is seen a far off, like a Cloud or Smoke.

From the North.] i e. From Judaea, or the land of Judah, which lay North of
Palestina, or the land of the Philistines.

But did not Palestina, or the land of the Philistines lie West of Judaea, or
the land of Judah, Cap. 11.14? How then is it here said, that the land of
Judah, or Judaea lay North of the land of the Philistines, or Palestina?

Answer, Palestina did neither lie directly West, nor directly South from
Judaea, but between the South and the West points: So that (to speak without
exactness and as they commonly speak) it might indifferently be said to lie
either South or West of Judaea, and Judaea North or East of that.

And none shall be alone.] i. e. And none shall separate himself, and abide
apart from the rest of his brethren the Jews but all shall march together as
one man, with one mind against Palestina.

He seems here to allude to a straggling sheep, which separates herself from
the flock and keeps alone.

In his appointed times.] i. e. In the times which Hezekiah shall appoint for a
muster, or for his expedition against Palestina.

By his times, he means the times of Hezekiah (who was signified above by a
Cockatrice, and fiery flying Serpent) that is, the times which Hezekiah should
appoint for his Armies mustering or marching. Not his times, who should be
appointed to muster or march at such times.

32.
What shall one then answer the messenger of the Nation.] q. d. And at that
time the Nation of the Philistines shall send Messengers, or Ambassadors, into
the Land of Judah to Hezekiah, to make peace with him and his people, and shall
plead hard for peace, putting Hezekiah and his People in mind of the
uncertainty of war, but when they shall speak of the uncertainty of war,
what Answer shall be given them.

What shall one then answer, etc.] i. e. And what Answer shall be given them.

And seems to be left here to be understood.

Of the Nation] i. e. Of the Nation of the Philistines.

That the Lord has founded Zion.] i. e. To the messengers of the Nation, i. e.
Of the Philistines that shall come to entreat a peace, and put Hezekiah and his
People in mind of the uncertainty of wars, that thereby they may obtain a
peace: This Answer shall be given, Viz. That the Lord has founded Zion.

The Lord has founded Zion.] i e. The Lord has given Zion a promise of
certain victory.

By Zion (and Hill a part of Jerusalem) is meant Jerusalem it self, by a
Synechdoche. And by Jerusalem, are meant the Inhabitants of Jerusalem by a
Metonymie, and by the Inhabitants of Jerusalem (which were but part of the
Inhabitants of Judah) all the men or Inhabitants of Judah, are meant, by a
farther Synechdoche. And by the Inhabitants of Judah, the hope of these men, by
another Metonymie.

God is said to found Zion, that is, to settle or build, the hopes of Zion upon
a sure foundation. Because he gave her his promise, upon which she built her
hope, as upon a firm foundation.

And the poor of his people.] i. e. And his poor People the Jews, which now
are in a low and a poor condition.

This Phrase, the poor of his people, is like that of Saint Paul's, the sign
of Circumcision, Romans 4.11. For as the sign of Circumcision is no more than
this, Circumcision which is a sign, So the poor of his people is no more than
this, his people which are poor.

Shall trust in it.] i. e. Shall trust in that foundation, i. e. In that
promise, and build their hopes upon it.

The Antecedent, (Viz. Foundation) which is the Antecedent to this Relative It)
is not formally and plainly here expressed; But yet it may be plainly
understood, from the foregoing words.

The foundation, which is here meant, is (as I said) Gods Promise made to the
poor Jews, of certain Victory over the Philistines, upon which Promise the
Jews did rely and build their hope, (as it were a Superstructure upon a sure
Foundation) and therefore would not hearken to their mortal Enemies, the
Philistines, when they desired peace, by their Ambassadors, and pleaded for it
by arguments fetched from the uncertainty of war.

The Promise that the Jews should prevail over the Philistines, is contained,
in the 29, and 30 Verses of this Chapter.

ISAIAH. CHAP. XV.
THE burden of Moab.] What is meant by the burden here, learn from Chap. 13.
verse. 1.

Moab is put here for the Moabites, the the Father for the Children.

Moab was the Son of Lot, which he had by his eldest daughter, Genesis 19. v.
36.37.

Because in the night Ar of Moab is laid waste.] Here is somewhat to be
understood: Viz. Howl or lament ye Moabites, So that the full sentence is
this. Howl O ye sons of Moab, because Ar of Moab shall be laid waste in the
night.

In the night.] That is suddenly, and when it is little thought of: For those
things, which fall out in the night are sudden and unexpected.

See of this Phrase 1 These. 5.2. and 2 Pet. 3.10.

Ar of Moab.] Ar was one of the chief Cities of the Moabites, Numb. Chap. 21.
v. 28.

Is laid waste.] i. e. Shall be laid waste.

He speaks of a thing to come, as if it were come already.

And brought to silence.] i. e. And utterly cut off, so that where there were
many and great tumults, and much noise of people heretofore, there shall be now
altogether silence.

Because in the night Kir of Moab.] i. e. Howl and lament also, because in the
night, Kir of Moab shall be laid waste, etc.

This is another cause why they should howl and lament.

As Ar was one, so Kir was another chief City of the Moabites.

2.
He is gone up.] By He, understand Moab, and by Moab, the Children of Moab, per
Metonymiam efficientis.

He speaks of a thing to come, as if it were present, and that Prophetically.

To Baiith.] Baiith was a Town or City of the Moabites, so called from Baiith,
that is, the House or Temple, Supple, of their God Chemosh, (as he is called
Numb. 21.29.) or Baal-Peor, (as he is termed, Numb. 25.3.) which was there
situate; So Fanum fortunae, was the name of a City in Italy, between Pisaurus
and Senogallia, so called from the Temple of Fortune which was there. And Fanum
Minervae, was a City of Gaul, so called from the Temple of Minerva which there
stood.

This Baiith is called Beth-Baal-Meon, Josh. 13. ver. 17. and in short
Baal-Meon, Numb. 32.38. And indeed it is probable that it was but a Temple at
first, and for the entertainment of Votaries, some Inns were at first built
near unto it, and afterward other housen added which multipled and grew into a
Town or City: so have Abbeys and Religious houses been occasion of Towns with
us, as of Roiston, Saint Albans, etc.

And to Dibon.] Dibon is also the name of a Town where some Temple, or Altar,
or Idol was erected, and where the Moabites had consecrated a place for the
worship of their God.

The high places.] i. e. The places of worship.

Those places where there was any Temple, or Altar, or where any Idol was
erected, or where they were wont to worship, were called high places, because
such places were commonly chosen and situated on high Mountains. They chose
high hills for those purposes.

To weep.] Supple, because of the affliction, which shall befall the land of
Moab, and to see to what pity and compassion they can move their God to, and
what aid they can get from him by their weeping.

Moab shall howl.] i. e. The Moabites or Children of Moab shall lament.

Moab for the Moabites, or Children of Moab, by a Metonymie, as before.

Over Nebo and Medeba.] Nebo and Medeba were Cities which belonged to the
Reubenites, Numb. 32. verse. 38. Josh. 13. verse. 16. but won from them by the
Moabites.

He says Moab shall howl over them, because he shall lament for them,
standing over the ruins thereof, as men standing over the dead, lament their
departure.

On all their heads shall be baldness, and every beard cut off.] He alludes to
the custom of the Eastern nations, which were wont to shave their heads, and
their beards, in the times of Public Calamities, See Cap. 22.12.

3.
They shall gird themselves with sackcloth.] It was an ancient Custom to wear
Sackcloth in the times of heaviness, Psalm. 30.11. and 35.13.

On the tops of their houses.] In the Eastern parts of the earth, they were
wont to build their houses (not as we do, ridge-wise, but) flat on the top, so
that they might walk and do many things thereon.

Thither they were wont to go up and weep in public calamities, Cap. 22. v. 1

4.
And Heshbone shall cry and Elealeh.] i. e. And the men of Heshbone shall cry
for the miseries of Heshbone: And the men of Elealeh, for the miseries of
Elealeh.

These Cities Heshbone and Elealeh, were Cities of the Reubenites, and by them
once possessed, Numb. 32. v. 37. Josh. cap. 13. v. 21.

But note, that as many Cities were given to the Israelites, which they never
came to possess, by reason of their own sloth: So they possessed many, which
afterward they lost to the Moabites and other people, by their own fault.

Their voice.] i. e. The Cry of the men of Heshbone and Elealeh.

Shall be heard unto Jahaz.] i. e. Shall be heard unto the uttermost end of
their land, and so shall be an exceeding great Cry.

Jahaz.] stood in the uttermost borders of the land of Moab, Numb. 21.23. Josh.
21.36.

Therefore the armed Soldiers of Moab shall cry out.] q. d. So great shall
their Cry and Lamentation be, that the very Soldiers of the Land of Moab,
shall therefore cry out, and break forth into weeping, because of their Cry and
Lamentations.

Or therefore, may be put for yea, q. d. Yea, the armed Soldiers of Moab shall
cry out.

Or Therefore may signify, because of this, q. d. Because of this misery which
shall come upon Ar, and Kir, and Heshbone, the armed Soldiers of Moab shall
cry.

Soldiers use to be hard-hearted, and not easy to be moved with pity: That
the Soldiers therefore should be moved with these cries and lamentations, or
with these miseries, it showed those cries, and lamentations, and miseries, to
be very grievous and lamentable indeed.

His life shall be grievous unto him.] i e. their lives shall be grievous unto
them.

He changes here the number, putting a Singular for a Plural, by an Enallage.

5.
My heart shall cry out for Moab.] q. d. So grievous shall the misery of Moab
be, as that it breaks my heart also, and makes me cry out to think of it.

The heart is put for the whole man, by a Synechdoche.

This the Prophet speaks in his own person, as the Prophet Jeremie does in the
like case, Jer. 48.36. And this is an Argument of the grievousnesse of their
misery, that the thought thereof should thus afflict the Prophets heart.

Yet some understand these or the like words here, Viz. every one shall say, q.
d. Every one which hears of, or sees the misery of Moab, shall say, my heart
shall cry out for Moab. And this is no less argument of the misery of the
Moabites, that every one, which hears thereof, or sees it, shall weep and
lament at the hearing or seeing of it, than the other was.

His fugitives shall flee unto Zoar.] By his is meant Moab's, and the sense is,
q. d. For many of his People, that is, many of the People of Moab shall be
feign to fly to save themselves, to fly even to Zoar.

They which fled in this case he calls Fugitives, not in a reproachful, but in
a civil sense.

We must understand the Causall conjunction, For, in this place, q. d. For his
Fugitives shall fly unto Zoar. For he gives a reason here, why his heart shall
cry.

Zoar was a City in the Coasts of Judah, of which you may read, Genesis 19.22. And
it shows, that the Moabites were sorely persecuted which would fly to a City
of Judah for Refuge: For the Moabites were in enmity with Judah at this time,
and would not pay him the Tribute which was due to him from them, Cap. 16. v.
1, 6. But what will not fear do?

Accipitrem metuens pennis trepidantibus ales,
Audet inhumanas fessa venire sinus:
Nec se vicino dubitat committere tecto,
Quae fugit infestos territa cerva canes.
Ovid de Ponto, Lib. 2. Eleg. 2. Shall fly.] Roaring and crying as they go.

An heifer of three years old.] i. e. As an Heifer of thr^e years old.

The Hebrews often leave the Note of similitude to be understood.

An Heifer of this age, is strong and lusty, and therefore will run stoutly,
and bellow loudly as it runs: Therefore to such an Heifer may they be well
likened which fly with all speed, and cry aloud for fear and grief, as they
fly along.

For by the mounting up of Luhith, with weeping shall they go it up] i. e. For
they shall go up to Luhith, with great weeping and lamentation, as they go.

This Causall, For is to be referred to those words, my heart shall cry for
Moab, as relating to them immediately: And so it must as often as it is
repeated in this Chapter: For in every place where it is repeated, it shows a
Cause, why the Prophets heart and every ones heart else, should cry for Moab.

Shall they go it up.] This Relative It, is here redundant, after the Hebrew
manner.

By the mounting up of Luhith.] i. e. As they go up by the ascent of Luhith.

The way which led to Luhith was on an ascent, or mounting up; For Luhith was a
City situate on a Hill, near unto Heshbon, not far from Arnon.

Shall they.] i. e. Shall the people of Moab.

Although there is no formal Antecedent here to this Relative, yet it is easy
to be understood.

By the way of Horonaim] i. e. By the way which leads to Horonaim, which also
was a City of the Moabites.

Shall they.] i. e. Shall the Moabites, or People of Moab.

The meaning, is not all the People of Moab shall go up to Luhith and weep as
they go: And that all the People of Moab shall go to Horonaim, and weep as they
go: But the meaning is, that they that go up to Luhith, shall weep as they
go, and they that go to Horonaim, shall cry as they go, etc.

A cry of Destruction.] i. e. A grievous and lamentable cry, such as they use
to make which see their Country and wives and Children, and whatsoever is near
unto them, destroyed.

It may be that Luhith and Horonaim, were Cities of Defense and well fortified,
whether those Moabites, that could, betook themselves in this Public
Calamity; Or else there were high places there, whether they went to weep, as
they were wont to Baiith and Dibon. v. 2.

6.
For the waters of Nimrim.] We read of Nimrah, a City of the Gadites, Numb.
32.3. which is also called, Beth-nimrah, Numb. 32.36. and Josh. 13.27. Which
City although it appertained to the Gadites, yet was possessed by the Moabites
at this time, this is that City which is here called Nimrim, or the waters of
Nimrim: For by the waters of Nimrim, may be, meant Nimrah, or Nimrim it self;
And it may be called the waters of Nimrim, because it was situate upon the
waters, and therewith encompassed, as Tire is called the Sea, Cap. 23.3.
because it was situate upon the Sea, and therewith girded.

Shall be desolate.] i. e. Shall be forsaken of its Inhabitants, and left
desolate without any people in it.

Note, that this Conjunction, For, depends immediately upon these words, My
heart shall cry for Moab.

For the Hay is withered away.] Note, that this also relates immediately unto
those words, My heart shall cry for Moab.

He puts Hay here for Grass, of which they make Hay, per Metonymiam mateteriae.

How came the hay to wither away, and the grass to fail, and every green
thing to consume away in the land of Moab, at this time?

Answer, From the multitude of their enemies, which even with their multitude
of horse and men, partly devoured the grass and every green thing, and partly
trod them down, and trampled them under feet.

You may observe here how the Present, or Preterperfect tense is confounded in
this Verse with the Future, which is a thing usual with the Prophets, because
the things, which they speak of, though they are not yet come, shall as
assuredly come, as if they were come already.

7.
Theref^re the abundance they have gotten, and that which they have laid up,
shall they carry away to the brook of the willowes.] i. e. Therefore the
abundance of cattle and wealth, which the Moabites have heretofore gotten, by
their labor and industry, and the silver and gold, which they have heretofore
laid up for themselves and their Children, shall these enemies of the Moabites
which are now Masters of it (being they cannot quarter any longer in the land
of Moab for want of provision) carry away to the brook of the Willowes. q d.
And because the hay in the Land of Moab is dried up, and the grass fails,
and there is no green thing there, these enemies of the Moabites, (having eaten
up and spoiled all the Provision in the land of Moab) shall seek fresh
Quarters, and go with all the plunder which they have spoiled the Moabites of,
to the Brook of the Willowes.

Note that there be diverse Relatives here without Antecedents, which is usual
with the Hebrews, who leave the Antecedents to be gathered by the
circumstances of the place.

As what the Prophet says in this Verse, may be an argument ab effectu, to
make good what he says of the failing of the grass and the hay, and every
green thing: So may it show a new misery of the Moabites, for which he may
justly cry and lament.

To the brook of the Willowes.] This was some noted Brook, about which grew
great store of Willowes, which are wont to grow in watery grounds and delight
therein.

About this brook, it is likely, that there were good store of rich Pastures
and feedings, and therefore these enemies of the Moabites went out of the land
of Moab (and carried all that they had plundered or taken) thither, there to
refresh themselves, their horses, and Cattle.

This Place or Brook of the Willowes, was not in the Land of Moab. It is
commonly thought to have been in a Valley of Arabia, and to have been in the
way from the land of Moab to Assyria. Howsoever certainly it was the most
convenient place, these enemies of the Moabites could choose, for prosecuting of
their Victories over the Moabites.

8.
For the cry is gone round about the borders of Moab.] i e. For a grievous cry
and lamentation, is heard in all the borders of Moab round about.

This relates also and depends upon those words, My heart shall cry for Moab,
v. 5.

The howling thereof unto Eglaim, and the howling thereof unto Beer-Elim] i. e.
The cry and lamentation of Moab is heard to Eglaim, it is heard to Beer-Elim.

These two To^^es Eglaim and Beer-Elim were in the uttermost Coasts of the land
of Moab.

Thereof.] i. e. Of Moab, i e. Of the Moabites.

Moab is put, by a Metonymie, for the Moabites, or Children of Moab.

9.
For the waters of Dimon shall be full of blood.] The Prophet alludes to the
name of Dimon, which is derived from Blood, and signifies Bloody: And says,
that Dimon shall be filled with the blood of the Moabites, which shall be
slain at this time.

It is thought, by comparing this place with that of the second of Kings, Cap.
3. v. 20. etc. that this Dimon was that River, which came by the way of Edom
into the Land of Moab by the means of Elisha, when the King of Israel and the
King of Judah, and the King of Edom went together against Moab to battle, and
they and their Armies were distressed for want of water: And that it was called
Dimon (that is Bloody) First, because the Moabites, when they saw the Sun
shine upon the water, as red as blood, said, this is Blood. Secondly, because
the waters of that River, were colored with the blood of the Moabites, which
were slain there, close by that River or those waters at that time.

Note, that this sentence, must be referred (as the former were) to those
words, My heart shall cry for Moab, v. 5.

For I will bring more upon Dimon.] i. e. For I the Lord will bring more
streams of blood upon Dimon q. d. When the three Kings of Israel, Judah, and
Edom, warred against Moab, The Lord slew so many of the Moabites, as that whole
streams of their blood ran into Dimon, and raised the waters thereof, and as
the Lord did then, so will he do now again, he will slay so many of the
Moabites, as that more streams of their blood, shall run into Dimon, and
increase the waters thereof, therewith.

Note that the Prophet speaks here in Person of God.

Lions upon him that escapes of Moab.] i. e. I will also bring (for these
words are here to be repeated or understood) Lions upon that Moabite which
escapes the sword, and they shall devour him.

And upon the remnant of the Land.] i. e. And upon them that remain alive in
the land of Moab, after the desolation and destruction here spoken of.

The like judgment of this by Lions, we read of, 2 Kings, 17.25.

Note, that this Prophecy, and that which follows in the next Chapter, were
not delivered at one and the same time, but yet they concern one and the same
judgment of the Moabites, for the Prophets did often repeat one and the same
Prophecy, as they were moved thereunto, concerning the fulfilling therefore of
this Prophecy, we shall speak at the end of the next Chapter.

ISAIAH. CHAP. XVI.
SEnd ye the Lamb to the Ruler of the Land, etc.] For the understanding of this
place, we must know, that David made war upon the Moabites, and overcame
them, he put two parts of them to the sword, and one part of them he spared,
upon this condition, that they should become his servants, and acknowledge him
for their Lord, and pay him a yearly Tribute, 2 Samuel 8.2. This Tribute was
yearly to be an hundred thousand Lambs, and an hundred thousand Ramms with
the wool, 2 Kings, 3.4. Now when the Kingdom of David, was rent in twain, in
the days of Rehoboam his grandchild, the Moabites paid this Tribute to the
Kings of Israel, as having the greater part of that divided Kingdom and
therefore being the strongest, as they thought: And the payment thereof they
continued until the days of Ahaz, 2 Kings 3.4. But now the Prophet advises
them to pay this Tribute to Hezekiah, as due to him (he being of the lineage of
David, and his right Heir) and so much the rather, because now the Kingdom of
Israel, was utterly ruined by Salmaneser, but the Kingdom of Judah did
increase in power and strength, and flourish under Hezekiah.

Send ye the Lamb.] q. d. O ye Moabites, send ye the Tribute of Lambs, and of
Ramms, which ye owe to David and his Successors.

He speaks here to the Moabites. And by the Lamb he means the Lambs,
putting a Singular number for a Plural: And by the Lambs he means, the
whole Tribute of Lambs and Ramms, which the Moabites owed to David and his
Successors, (by a Synechdoche) by part of the Tribute understanding the whole.

To the Ruler of the Land.] i. e. To Hezekiah King of Judah, who is the Supreme
Lord of your Land, and so your Lord.

By the Land, he means the Land in which they lived, that is, the Land of
Moab.

But how could Hezekiah be called the Ruler or Lord of the Land of Moab?

Answer, Because he was the right Heir of David. For because he was the right
Heir of David, he was by right of Inheritance, Lord and Ruler of the Land of
Moab. For the Moabites covenanted with David to be his Servants, (and by
consequence the Servants of his Heirs and lawful Successors) 2 Samuel 8.2. And
if they covenanted to be his Servants, then was he, by consequence, their Lord.

From Sala to the wilderness.] These words depend upon the Pronoune, Ye; So
that the sense of the words, and order thereof is this. O ye Moabites, Supple,
which dwell from Sala to the wilderness, send ye the Lambs to the Ruler of the
Land.

Sala was a City situate on the South, and the wilderness here mentioned, was
a wilderness lying on the North of the Land of Moab, (the west part of which
wilderness bordered upon Jordan) these therefore were two of the bounds of
that Land: And by these two bounds the whole Land of Moab is to be understood.

Unto the Mount of the daughter of Sion.] i. e. To Jerusalem which is the head
City of the Kingdom of Judah, and where is the Throne of David, and Palace of
Hezekiah.

By the Mount of the daughter of Sion he means Jerusalem, see Chap. 1. verse.
8.

These words, Unto the Mount of the Daughter of Sion, depend upon the word,
send, q. d. Send ye the Lambs unto the Mount of the Daughter of Sion.

When he bids them send the Lambs to the Ruler of the Land, he tells them the
Person to whom, and when he bids them send them to the Mount of the Daughter of
Sion: He tells them the Place whether they should send them.

2.
For it shall be, etc.] i. e. For otherwise it shall be.

Understand otherwise here.

A wandering bird cast out of the nest.] By a wandering bird cast out of the
nest, he means, a young Bird, (which while a man comes to take the whole
nest) gets out of the nest; But when it is out of the nest, wandereth up and
down peeping and crying, knowing not which way to take or what to do, having
no Damme to feed it, and to guide it and tutour it.

So the Daughter of Moab shall be.] i. e. So shall the Daughters of Moab wander
up and down, crying and bemoaning themselves, and not knowing what to do, or
which way to take.

By the Daughters of Moab he means, the Women of Moab, and by a Sylepsis, the
Men to, but he mentions only the Women, because they are most subject to
fear and terror, and soonest faint.

Or, by the Daughters of Moab, he means the Cities of Moab by an Hebraisme, of
which Cap 1.8. And by the Cities of Moab, he means the Inhabitants of those
Cities, by a Metonymie.

At the ford of Arnon.] Arnon was a River which ran on the East of the Land of
Moab, and divided the Land of Moab, from the Land of the Ammonites.

By the Ford of Arnon, therefore understand the East-borders of the Land of
Moab, and by the East-borders, all the other borders thereof, by a Syllepsis.

3.
Take counsel.] q. d. Take counsel together, and consider what ye are bound to
do, to, or for the Kings of Judah, and their People, by that Covenant which ye
made with David, when ye became his Servants, and Tributaries, 2 Samuel cap. 8. v
2.

These words are to be joined with the first Verse, as if the second were
brought in by way of Parenthesis.

Executes judgment.] q. d. When ye know and have considered what ye are bound
to do by your Covenant, for the Kings of Judah, and their People, do it, for
this is just, and justice requires it to be done.

Judgment is put here, for that which is just, or that which justice requires
to be done.

Make thy shadow as the night in the midst of the noon day.] q. d. It will not
be long before the men of Judah will be persecuted, and feign to fly out of
their own Country to strangers for relief: But when they are persecuted, and
feign thus to fly, receive ye them and relieve them.

The Phrase is Allegorical, wherein he compares Persecution to the heat at
noone day, and the relief afforded to such as are persecuted, to the shadow of
a tree or tent, which abates that heat.

The time when the men of Judah should be persecuted, and fly to save their
lives, and had need of relief abroad, was when Sennacherib invaded the Land of
Judah.

Make thy shadow.] i. e. Let thy shadow be.

He alludes to a tree or tent, which casts a shadow by the interposition of
its leaves, or Curtains between the Sun and the earth.

As the night.] the night is nothing else but a Shadd^w caused by the
interposition of the earth between the Sun and us: But is a great shadow,
and abateth the scorching heat of the day more than any shadow else.

In the midst of the noone day.] At which time the Sun is at the highest,
and the weather hottest, and by which is meant here, the heat of persecution.

Hide the outcasts.] i. e. Receive them, and hide them from the fury of their
enemies, which are feign, for fear, to leave their own homes.

By the Outcasts, he means such Jews as were constrained for fear of the
Assyrians, under Sennacherib to fly out of their own land.

Bewray not him that wandereth.] q. d. Bewray not that Jew to his enemies,
which is feign to leave his house and home, and to steal or go privately from
place to place, to save his life.

4.
Let mine outcasts dwell with thee O Moab.] q. d. Yea, entertain my People,
which are forced to fly from their house and home, and give them a safe and
quiet dwelling among you, O ye Moabites.

This is spoken in the Person of God.

Be thou a covert to their from the face of the spoiler.] i. e. Be thou as an
hiding place to hide them, in that the spoiler may not see them, or find them
out, to spoil them.

A Metaphor from a Covert, which keeps from Storm and Rain, as Chapter 4.
verse 6.

That which the Prophet here advises the Moabites to, is not so much a piece
of mercy as of justice, For being that they were by their Covenant, Servants to
the Kings of Judah, and the Kings of Judah were their Lords, they were bound in
justice to relieve their Subjects as they were able.

For the Extortioner is at an end.] i. e. For the Assyrians, which shall vex my
people, shall not continue their cruelty long, but they shall be speedily cut
off, and brought to an end.

He puts a Singular number here Collective, for a Plural, and by the
Extortioners, he means the Assyrians, which did extort and wring gold and
silver, and whatsoever they liked, from, or out of them over whom they
tyrannized, and particularly out of, or, from the Jews, 2 Kings, 18. v. 14,
15, 16.

The Spoiler cease.] i. e. They which will spoil the land of Judah, shall
presently be destroyed.

The Oppressors are consumed out of the Land.] i. e. They which shall oppress
my People, shall be forthwith consumed, and clean ridd out of the Land of Judah
again.

These three last Phrases signify all one and the same thing, and they are
repeated for the more assurance of what is said, and the meaning of the phrases
is this, that though the Assyrians shall cruelly vex and oppress, and spoil
the land of Judah, and the People thereof, for a while, yet it shall be but for
a while, for after a while they shall be utterly destroyed, and consumed, so
that not one of them shall be left in the land. And this came to pass when the
Angel destroyed an hundred fourscore and five thousand of the Assyrian Army in
one night, 2 Kings. Chap. 19. Verse. 35.

He tells the Moabites here, that the Assyrians rage and cruelty shall last but
a while in the Land of Judah, the better to persuade them to show kindness to
the men of Judah in their distress. For the less burdensome men are like to
be, the soonner will they find entertainment.

5.
And in mercy shall the Throne be established.] q. d. And through the mercy of
God, the Kingdom of Judah shall be established, and stand firm, and flourish
again, maugre all the cruelty of the Assyrians.

In mercy.] i. e. By mercy, viz. the mercy of God.

Note, that the Preposition In, is put for almost all other Prepositions among
the Hebrews, and so used.

The Throne.] The Throne, which is the Kings Chair of State, is put here
Metonymice, for the Kingdom of Judah.

And he shall sit upon it.] And Hezekiah shall sit upon the Throne of the
Kingdom of Judah after the destruction, which the Assyrians shall make in the
Land of Judah.

He putts the Relative, He here, without an Antecedent; which yet may be easily
understood.

And by Hez kiah's sitting upon the Throne he means, Hezekiah's Reign and
rule over the Kingdom of Judah.

In truth.] i. e. Certainly and without fail.

Or, In truth, i. e. According to the truth, to wit, of Gods promise made to
David, Psalm. 132. v. 11, 12.

In the Tabernacle of David.] i. e. In the House or Palace of David.

He says, the Tabernacle of David, for the House or Pall^ce of David: And he
so says; either in allusion to that, that David was once a Shepherd, and
Shepherds live abroad in Tents and Tabernacles: Or he says it to signify,
that the Palace of David should be as a refuge to all that were oppressed with
wrong, as a Tabernacle is a refuge to those which are beaten with a storm, or
parched with the heat, Cap. 4. verse. 6. And indeed the Palace of a righteous
King should be a Sanctuary and refuge to all that are oppressed, see Cap. 32.
v. 2.

Or he says, the Tabernacle of David, for the House of David, because the most
ancient dwellings were in Tents and Tabernacles.

Of David.] David may be taken here, per M^tonymiam Efficientis, for the Kings
of Judah, which were the Sons and Heirs of David.

Judging.] Supple, All causes which are brought before him.

And seeking judgment.] i. e. And seeking the truth and uprightness of a
Cause, that he may give sentence accordingly.

And hasting righteousnesse] i. e. And hasting the decision of the Causes which
are brought before him, and the administration of Justice: Not delaying or
spinning out Suits, to the vexation of the Poor.

Righteousness is taken here for that which we commonly call Justice, which
consists in judging and deciding controversies, etc.

That Hezekiah should sit upon the Throne, administering Justice after this
manner, was a sign, that he should be rid of the sword of the Assyrians; for --
Silent Leges inter Arma, War makes Justice silent, and the Laws dumb: It was a
sign also, that his Kingdom should be established and flourish again: For the
Throne is established by Righteousness, Prove. 16. v. 12.

6.
We have heard of the pride of Moab.] The sense is, as if he should say, But I
speak to them which a^e deaf: It is but lost labor to admonish them: For
(according as we have heard) the Moabites are full of pride and wrath: And
pride and wrath stop the ears against all good counsel.

Moab is put here for the Moabites, or children of Moab,

Even of his haughtiness, and his pride, and his wrath.] q. d. We have heard,
I say, even of their haughtiness, and their pride, and their wrath.

Because of their haughtiness and pride, the Moabites despised Judah: And
therefore they would not hear to become Hezekiah's servants, and to pay Tribute
to him. And because of their wrath against the people of Judah, they would not
hear to relieve them when they were persecuted, or to let them dwell with them;
when they were forced to flee from their own homes.

But his lies shall not be so.] q. d. But though they are now proud, and angry,
and their speech is haughty and tumultuous, yet ere long be, their pride shall
be pulled down, and their wrath abated, and their speech shall be humble and
calm.

The meaning is, that ere long be, they should fall into their enemies hands:
And then their speech to them should be humble, and lowly, and meek, and calm.

The speech of Captives to their Conqueror is called lies, for Captives, which
are taken in wars, use to invent lies, that they might please their
Conquerours, and procure favor of them. Hence in the Hebrew Phrase, to tell a
lie, signifies to be subdued and overcome, as Deuteronomy. 33.29. Thine enemies shall
be found liars unto thee. Thou shall subdue thine enemies, and Psalm. 81.15.
Whereas we read, the haters of the Lord should have submitted themselves unto
him. In the Hebrew it is, they should have lied unto him, and Psalm. 66. verse.
3. Where we read, through the greatness of thy power shall thine enemies
submit themselves unto thee, in the Hebrew it is, shall lie unto thee. And
Captives when they tell their lies, they tell them with all lowliness and
meekness, even to baseness: In allusion to which, the Prophet may here say of
Moab, his lies shall not be such, i. e. His lies shall not favor of
haughtiness and pride, and wrath.

But yet these words may be otherwise expounded thus, q. d. But yet their great
braggs and threats, which they give out against the men of Judah shall not be
so, that is, shall not fall out so as they would have them.

In this sense he puts Lies, for Braggs, and Threats, which he calls lies,
because their braggs and threats shall not come to pass in reallity, as they
thunder them out in words.

This last exposition is most generally given of this place, but I leave the
Reader to his choice, but for mine own part, I approve most of the former
exposition. we may read these words, but his lies shall not be so, as with a
Parenthesis

Therefore Moab shall howl for Moab.] i. e. Therefore because the Moabites are
so proud, and haughty, and angry, as that they will not hearken to my counsel
nor follow it, therefore the miseries of the Moabites shall be such, as that
one Moabite shall weep and lament for another Moabite by reason of the misery
which shall come upon him, they shall mutually bewail one another miseries.

For the Foundations of Kirhareseth.] i. e. For Kirhareseth.

The part is put here for the whole.

Kirhareseth was a City so strong, that the Kings of Judah, Israel, and Edom
besiedged it, and yet could not take it, 2 Kings 3. v. 25.

He here shows the matter of their grief, and the cause why every Moabite
shall howl.

Shall ye mourn.] Supple, O ye Moabites.

Here is an Enallage of the Person, for he changes the Third into the Second
person.

Surely they are stricken.] Surely they shall be stricken, and so stricken, as
that they shall be overthrown by Rams, and other warlike Engines.

He uses a Preterperfect tense here for a Future.

8.
For the fields of Heshbone languish.] i. e. Moreover the fields of Heshbone
shall languish and faint away.

He puts For, for Moreover, as Cap. 7. Verse, 16. And a Present for a Future
tense.

The fields of Heshbone are here said to languish, because all the grass, and
corn, and green herbs, and plants thereof are broken or trodden down, and so
withered.

Note, that the word languish is a Metaphorical word, taken from those who
through infirmity of body pine, and are ready to faint away for want of Spirits.

What he spoke here of Heshbone, he would have us also to understand of
Elealeh, (as appears by the next following Verse, by a Sylepsis. And these two
Heshbone and Elealeh, he joins together in the 15. Chapter, verse. 4. The like
Sylepsis we have Matthew. 5. v. 14. Where our Savior says to his Apostles, Ye
are the light of the world: A City that is set on a hill cannot be hidd;
neither do men light a Candle and put it under a bushel. Where these words are
omitted and left to be understood, by a Sylepsis: Viz. Ye are a City set on a
Hill: For the full sentence should run thus. Ye are the Light of the world, ye
are a City set on a Hill: A City that is set on a Hill cannot be hidd, etc.

And the Vine of Sibmah.] i. e. And as for the Vine of Sibmah.

Sibmah was a City once of the Reubenites, Numb. cap. 32. v. 38. but now of the
Moabites.

By the Vine of Sibmah, he means Sibmah it self, which he here calls a Vine,
because of the abundance of Vines which grew about it, as he calls Nimrim, the
waters of Nimrim, because of the abundance of waters adjoining thereto, Cap. 14
v. 6.

The Lords of the Heathen.] By the Lords of the heathen, he means those that
subdued and destroyed Moab at the time here Prophesied of, which seems to have
been many Lords of diverse people, joined together.

Have broken down the principal Plants thereof.] i. e. Shall destroy even the
chief branches thereof.

By the principal Plants, or branches of the Vine of Sibmah, are meant the
chiefest Cityzens of Sibmah.

Thereof.] i. e. Of the Vine of Sibmah.

They are come even unto Jazer.] q. d. And this, that the Lords of the Heathen,
shall break down and destroy the principal Plants of the Vine of Sibmah is
worthy lamentation: For the branches of the Vine of Sibmah are gallant
flourishing branches, they are come and sprouted out even to Jazer: They are
wandered through the wilderness, etc.

I conceive that these words or the like, Viz. (And this, to wit, that the
Lords of the Heathen shall break down and destroy the principal branches of
the Vine of Sibmah, is worthy of lamentation, for the branches of Sibmah are
gallant flourishing branches) are here to be understood. And that this latter
part of the Verse sets out the flourishing condition of Sibmah before it was
cut off. (as the Psalmist describes the flourishing estate of Israel, by the
like Metaphor, Psalm. 80. v. 9, 10, 11.) And this the Prophet does, to make the
misery the greater, which should befall Sibmah and her Inhabitants, for, -- Qui
tolluntur in altum
Lapsu graviore ruunt. --
I know that it is most generally thought, that the Prophet intends by this
latter part of the Verse, to describe the flying of the Citizens of Sibmah into
several Quarters or parts of the earth, to save their lives, for fear of the
enemy, but this agrees not so well with the Metaphor of the shooting or
spreading out of branches from their stock, which is here used. For the cause
of Branches so shooting out, is the thriving of the Vine, not the decaying of
it, but Sibmah is said here, to decay.

Jazer.] This Jazer was a City situate in the Eastern part of the Tribe of Gad
near to the Ammonites: Of this Jazer we read, Numb. 32.35. and Josh. 13.25:

They wandered through the wilderness.] i. e. They by running and bending to
and fro are gone through the wilderness, to places beyond it.

He likeneth here, the shooting out of the branches of a Vine, (because they
shoot not out directly in a straight line, but wide this way and that way, up
and down) to the wandering of a man, which is out of his way and knows not
what way to take, who one while takes his way to the right hand, and another,
that, to the left.

Her branches are stretched out.] That is the branches of the vine of Sibmah
are far stretched out.

They are gone over the Sea.] i. e. They are gone over the Mediterranean Sea to
Cyprus, etc.

By this stretching, or shooting out of the Branches of the Vine of Sibmah, is
meant, the traveling of her people into far Countries for traffic, or for
other ends, for which the Citizens of flourishing Cities use to travel.

9.
Therefore I will bewail with the weeping of Jazer, the Vine of Sibmath.] q.
d. Therefore because the Princes of the heathen shall break down the Principal
Plants of this goodly Vine of Sibmah, etc. I will bewail with the weeping of
Jazer the Vine of Sibmah.

The Prophet may be here understood to speak in his own Person. Or else these
words may be understood: Viz. Every one shall say, q. d. Therefore every one
shall say I will bewail with the weeping of Jazer the Vine of Sibmah, etc. See
Notes Cap. 15.4.

With the weeping of Jazer.] i. e. With a mighty weeping.

To weep with the weeping of Jazer seems to me to be a Proverbiall kind of
speech, the ground of which Proverb has been some exceeding great weeping at
Jazer, though when, and upon what occasion that weeping was, it is not now
known.

I will water thee with my tears, O Heshbone and Elealesh.] i. e. I will shed
even showers of tears, (to think of your misery) O Heshbone and Elealeh,
wherewith I will water you, as I stand weeping over you.

He alludes to those words verse. 8. The fields of Heshbone languish; for fields
used to be watered with showers of rain (if not also by the labor of man) to
make them fruitful.

For the shooting of thy summer fruits, and for thy harvest is fall'n] i. e. At
the in-gathering of their fruit there was wont to be much shouting and
rejoicing among those which gathered them in, and to this shouting does the
Prophet here allude.

Thy harvest.] Harvest is not taken here for the time, in which fruits are ripe
and use to be gathered, but for the ripe fruits themselves.

Is fallen.] i. e. Is perished.

There shall be no shouting for the Summer fruit, and Harvest, because there
shall be no corn and fruits to reap and gather in: And there shall be no fruits
and corn to reap and gather in, because the enemy shall beat down their corn
and their fruit, and trample them under their own and their Horses feet.

10.
The plentiful field.] i. e. The field which was wont to be plentiful, and to
abound with the abundance of corn and other fruits.

I have made their Vintage shouting to cease] He speaks this in the person of
God.

11.
Wherefore my bowels shall sound.] This relates to the seventh Verse, and
depends on that.

The Prophet having set out the misery of Moab, and Kirhareseth, and of
Heshbone, and Elealeh, and of the Vine of Sibmah, particularly in the seventh
and eighth Verses of this Chapter, expresses here a particular grief of every
one of these (by reason of their misery) in this and the two former Verses,
beginning at the Ninth Verse with the last, and so going on (to the end of this
Verse) to the very first, as the Hebrews use to do in their descant or
repetitions, who begin with the last, which they repeat first, and so go
upward in a retrograde way.

My bowels shall sound like an Harp for Moab.] i. e. I will out of pity and
compassion to Moab, utter sighs and groans, and make as mournful a noise for
him, as the Harp does upon funeral and sad occasions.

He puts the Bowels here for the whole man. A part for the whole, by a
Synechdoche: And therefore the bowels rather than any other part or parts,
because the bowels were held to be the seat or subject of pity and compassion.

Note that the Prophet speaks here in his own person, as verse. 9. or else
these words are here to be understood, Viz. every one shall say, q. d.
Wherefore every one, which hears of the misery of Moab and Kirhareseth, shall
say, my bowels shall sound like an Harp for Moab, and my inward parts for
Kirhareseth.

And my inward parts.] i. e. And my Bowels, Supple, Shall sound like an Harp.

This is a Repetition of the former words.

Note that, that which the Prophet says here, to wit, my bowels shall sound
like an harp for Moab, and my inward parts for Kirhareseth, the Prophet
Jeremie expresses thus. Mine heart shall sound for Moab like pipes, and mine
heart shall sound like pipes for Kirhareseth. Jer. 48.36. From whence you may
understand what is chiefly meant by my bowels here.

12.
And it shall come to pass.] This relates not to the Verse immediately going
before, but rather to the eighth Verse, and in construction to follow that.

And it shall come to pass, when it is seen that Moab is weary on the high
place, etc.] Here is somewhat to be understood by a Sylepsis: For the whole
sentence should have been thus expressed. And Moab shall go to his ordinary
high places, to pray to his Idols there, to deliver him out of his misery and
calamity; and it shall come to pass when he is weary with praying on these
high places, (because he sees no fruit of his prayer) that he shall attempt to
come to his Sanctuary to pray there, etc.

Moab is to be taken here for the Moabites, which were the Children of Moab, by
a Metonymie.

And the high place is to be taken, Collective, for the high places, and those
ordinary ones.

What is meant by high places, See Cap. 15.2.

He shall come to his Sanctuary to pray.] i. e. He shall attempt to come to his
Sancturay to pray.

The thing it self is put here for the attempt of the thing, per Metonymiam.

To his Sanctuary.] By ^is Sanctuary is meant, that famous Temple of Chemosh,
or Baalpeor, the Idol or God, (as they esteemed it) of the Moabites, which
Temple is called, Beth-Baal-Meon, Josh. 13.17. and Baal-Meon, Numb. 32.38. etc.
See Notes Cap. 15. v. 2.

Note, that the word Sanctuary, was a word appropriated, by the People of God,
first to the Tabernacle which was made by Moses, and afterward to the Temple
which was built by Solomon, (which succeeded in the place of the Tabernacle)
which were the dwellings of the true God. Therefore it is attributed to the
Temple of Ch^mosh, only by a Catacr^sticall Metaphor, because the Temple of
Chemosh was such among the Mo^bites, as the Tabernacle of God made by Moses,
and the Temple of God built by Solomon was among the people of Is ael.

Note that Idolaters were wont to build Altars, and to exercise their Idolatry
in Groves, upon high hills, and there to erect and set up their Graven Images:
But besides these, the Moabites had a fair built house or Temple for their God
Ch^mosh, where Chemosh was graven and set up in a more stately manner, and of
which place they had a more religious esteem, than of any other. And this place
the Prophet calls here, the Sanctuary of Moab.

Note, that what is spoken here, and in the former Chapter, of the Moabites, is
not to be understood C^llective, but Distributive, not all of all the Moabites,
or every thing of every one of them, but some things of some of them, and other
of others of them: So though some went up to Baiith where their Sanctuary was,
yet others, (though they attempted it) could not get thither.

But he shall not prevail.] Supple, To come thither, for the enemy shall
hinder him.

13.
This is the word, etc.] q. d. This which I have spoken from the first verse
hitherto, is the word, etc.

Which the Lord has spoken.] Supple, Unto me Isaiah, or by me Isaiah.

Since that time.] q. d. Since that time which he spoke the burden of Moab,
contained in Cap. 15.

That time] He puts a Relative here, without an Antecedent, And leaves the
Antecedent to us, to gather.

From hence observe, that though the burden or calamity denounced against Moab,
in this Chapter was the same with that which was denounced in the former
Chapter; yet they were not spoken or revealed at the same time.

14.
But now the Lord has spoken saying, etc.] This speech is defective, and some
words are left here to be understood by a Sylepsis: The sentence therefore
complete sounds thus. q. d. Now when he spoke first concerning Moab, and the
miseries and calamities which should befall him. He made no mention of the time
when they should befall him. But now when he spoke of him the second time, he
revealed the time also, when they should befall him saying, etc.

Within three years as the years of an hireling] That is within three precise
years.

An hireling which is hired by the day, will see that he does not work longer
than he is hired: And he that hireth him, will see to it, that he shall work so
long: Hence the time of an hireling signifies such, or such a time, precisely.

And the glory of Moab] This Particle, And, is redundant.

The glory of Moab.] By the glory of Moab, I conceive that the Nobles of Moab
are here meant.

Moab is put here for the Moabites. And Glory is put by a Metonymie, for the
Nobles of which they gloryed, or for which they were renowned.

Shall be contemned.] i. e. Shall be made contemptible.

With all that great multitude.] Supple, Of men, in which they trust.

They shall be made contemptible, because they shall be diminished and brought
down.

And the remnant.] Scil. Of that great Multitude, which shall be left alive.

Shall be small.] Supple, For Number.

And seeble.] Scil. For strength.

Concerning the fulfilling of this Prophecy, when or by whom it was fulfilled,
and Moab thus laid waste, I can find no certainty, but certainly it was not
fulfilled when Sennacherib first invaded Judah, yet it may be, that when
Sennacherib had made a good progress in the conquest of Judah, and had subdued
most of the Towns and Cittyes thereof, he sent a great power of men into the
land of Moab to subdue that, and appointed fresh forces newly raised, to join
with them, and by them was Moab brought to the misery here Prophesied of.

ISAIAH. CHAP. XVII.
THE burden of Damascus.] i. e. The Vision of the miseries and calamities which
God will bring upon Damascus, and upon the ten Tribes of Israel.

Note, that by Damascus, we must not understand here Damascus only, but the
ten Tribes of Israel also, by a Sylepsis, for the miseries and calamities of
them both are here joined together in this Chapter, because they were both
joined together in hostility against Judah, Cap. 7.1, 2. 2 Kings, 16.5. And the
calamities of them both, befell them at the same time.

Damascus was the chief City of the Kingdom of Syria: and it was taken by
Tiglah-Pileser, 2 Kings, 16.9. but it was ruined by Salmaneser, because of the
league which the Syrians had there with the ten Tribes, against Assyria, 2
Kings. 18.9. etc.

Is taken away for being a City.] i. e. Shall be destroyed and be no City, but
an heap of rubbish.

He puts a Preterperfect for a Future tense as Prophets are wont.

And it shall be a ruinous heap.] i. e. And it shall be reduced to a heap of
stones and rubbish.

2.
The Citye^ of Aroer are forsaken.] i. e. The C^tyes of Aroer shall be
forsaken, and left desolate, because the Inhabitants shall either fly away, or
be slain, or carried into Captivity.

Aroer] Aroer was a Tract of land by the brink of the River Arnon, which the
Reubenites, and Gadites, and Manassites, did possess, of which, Deuteronomy. 2.36.
And of this Aroer do some interpret this place thinking it to have been held by
the Syrians at this time: Others had rather take it of a Tract of land in
Syria, called also by the Hebrews Aroer, by Ptolomie (...).

They shall be for flocks.] i e. Sheep and other Cattle, shall feed and lodge
there.

They shall lie down.] Supple, Quietly.

And none shall make them afraid.] Because there shall be left none of those
Cities to disquiet them.

3.
The fortress also shall cease from Ephraim.] i. e. Samaria also shall be taken
away from the ten Tribes of Israel, which was the Royal City of that Kingdom.

By the Fortress is meant Samaria, which he calls a Fortress, from the
strength and Fortifications thereof. For it was as strong and as well
fortified, as if the whole City had been a Fortress, so strong and well
fortified it was, as that Salmaneser besiedged it three years, before he took
it, 2 Kings, 18.9, 10.

By Ephraim he means the ten Tribes of Israel, See Cap. 7.2.

Because Ephraim and Syria joined in their sin, they are here joined in their
punishment, and are both so distressed, as that the one is not able to help the
other.

And the Kingdom from Damascus.] So that Damascus shall not be a Royal City,
and head of a Kingdom as before.

And the remnant of Syria.] Supple, So that none of the Syrians, which shall be
left, shall come to be Kings of Syria, or of the Syrians.

They shall be as the glory of the Children of Israel.] i. e. The Syrians,
though they are very many for number, and glory of their multitude yet they)
shall be as the glory or multitude of the Children of Israel; that is, they
shall be brought low and diminished, as the Children of Israel shall. That is,
q. d. The Syrians, and the Children of Israel, though now they are exceeding
many for number; yet both of them shall be brought low, they shall become few
in number.

The glory of a Nation consisted in the multitude of a People: And that most
commonly the Prophet calls a Nations glory, either because they gloried in it
themselves, or were renowned abroad for it, by others.

That therefore that the Prophet says here is this (as I said) viz. that the
great multitudes of the Syrians shall become as the great multitudes of the ten
Tribes of Israel.

If you ask what became of the great multitudes of the ten Tribes of Israel, he
will tell you in the next following verses, that they were diminished, and
brought to a small number.

Note, that the Prophet gives a reason here, why he said, the remnant of Syria:
q. d I said the remnant of Syria, for the great multitudes and glory of the
Syrians, shall be as the glory of the Children of Israel; it shall be
diminished, and brought to a remnant, as they shall.

Note, that there is no formal Antecedent here going before this Relative,
They, but the Antecedent may easily be understood.

4.
And in that day it shall come to pass.] For In that day it shall come to
pass, etc.

He puts And for For: For he shows here, in what he likened the Syrians, or
the glory of Syria, to Children of Israel, or the glory of Isra l.

In that day] i. e. At that time, in which the Lord wiil scourge the Israelites
by Salmaneser.

The glory of Jacob shall be made thinn.] i. e. The great multitude of the ten
Tribes of Israel shall be diminished, and brought low, and left as but a
remnant.

This is the sense of these words; but the Prophet uses a Metaphor here, and
puts Jacob the Father, for the ten Tribes of Israel, which were the Children of
Jacob, by a Metonymie. As Jacob therefore was a single man, so does he there
speak of all the ten Tribes, as if they were but one single man, yet a bigg,
fat, and corpulent man, and the multitude and great numbers of the ten Tribes,
he likeneth to the corpulency and fatness of that man: For as a man grows
big by his corpulency, and the fatness of his flesh: So does a Nation or
Kingdom by the multitude of its People: And as a man grows thin and slender,
when the corpulency and fatness of his flesh abateth: So is a Kingdom or
Nation diminished and brought low, when the multitude of its People is
destroyed.

The glory of Jacob.] By the Glory of Jacob is here meant, the Corpulency and
bigness of the natural body of Jacob, by which (as I said) is meant the
multitude of the politic body of the people of Israel, which multitude is a
Peoples glory.

And the fatness of his flesh.] i. e. And the fatness of Jacob's flesh, by
which he means, the multitude of the children of Israel, as he did by the
glory of Jacob. For as man grows big by the fatness of his flesh, so does a
People wax great by their multitude.

Shall be made lean.] i. e. Shall be diminished or brought low.

5.
And it shall be as when the harvest man gathers the Corn, and reapeth the
ears with his arm.] i. e. And the glory, that is, the multitude of the
Children of Israel, shall be as when the harvest man gathers the corn and
reapeth the ears with his arm: For as the harvest man gathers the corn, and
reapeth the ears with his arm, that he may carry them out of the field into
the barn: So shall Salmaneser gather the great multitude of the Children of
Israel, and fetch them from their several dwellings to carry them out of their
own land, into Assyria.

Note, that the Antecedent to this Relative It, is the glory or multitude of
Israel, likened to the glory or fatness of Jacobs flesh: v. 4. For the Prophet
often passes from the thing signifying to the thing signified.

Note, that these two Phrases gathers the Corn, and reapeth the Ears, Are
but repetitions, and signify the same thing, for the Prophet loves to repeat
the same thing by diverse words. Or, if they signify diverse things, by
gathering of the corn is meant, the gathering and grasping of the standing corn
with the left hand (in reaping) that he may the better cut or reap it with the
right hand. And by the reaping of the ears is meant, the cutting of the
standing corn with his right hand, which he has gathered and grasped in his
left.

Or if we take the gathering of the corn, for the gathering of the Corn into
bundles, or sheaves, or the gathering of it into the barn: then is there an
(...), and that is put first which was last, and that last which was first: For
we reap the Corn before we thus gather it: The like (...) we observed Cap. 1.
v. 6.

The ears.] By the cares of the Corn we must understand the blade also.

With his arm.] i. e. The Arm may be taken here for the hand, which is but
part of the arm, by a Synechdoche.

And it shall be as he that gathers ears in the valley of Rephaim.] i. e.
Yea, the glory, that is, the multitude of Israel, shall be as he that gathers
ears in the valley of Rephaim.

After the Corn and the Harvest is carried in, there be ears of Corn left here
and there, which Gleaners gather; and when these ears are gathered, there is a
clean riddance of the Corn out of the Field indeed: To this gathering or
riddance of Corn out of the Field, does the Prophet here compare the gathering,
or ridding of the People of Israel out of their own Land.

And is put here for Yea.

And by It is here meant, the glory or multitude of Israel, as before: for that
is the Antecedent to this Relative.

But it may be here objected, that the glory or multitude of Israel, is rather,
as the ears gathered in the valley of Rephaim, than, as he that gathers them.

To this I answer, that in Parables and Similitudes we must look upon the whole
body of the sentence, and take the whole meaning from the whole, not part from
part, least when we divide it into pieces, we destroy the whole. For it is
usual in Parables and Similitudes (not that persons should answer to persons,
or parts to parts, or words to words, but) that the whole should be compared,
and answerable to the whole. And this will appear, if we scann some Parables or
Similitudes. Matt. 11. v. 16. [ Whereunto (says our Savior there) shall I
like this generation? It is like unto Children sitting in the Markets, and
calling to their fellows, saying, we have piped unto you, and ye have not
danced, we have mourned unto you, and ye have not lamented.] Here, if we
consider only the words, our Savior seems to compare the Scribes and
Pharisees to Children which piped and mourned, whereas he intended to compare
them rather to them which would not dance when others piped, nor lament when
others mourned. So Matthew. 13. v. 24. The Kingdom of Heaven is like to a man
which sowed good seed in his field. Now the Kingdom of Heaven is not like a
man which sowed seed, but rather like the seed or ground it self which was
sowed. And Matthew. 13. v. 45. The Kingdom of Heaven is like a Merchant man
seeking goodly Pearls, etc. Now the Kingdom of Heaven is not like a Merchant
man, but rather like the Pearl. So that the sense of Matthew, 13. v. 24. is, q.
d. The case of the Scribes and Pharisees is, as if Children sitting in the
market place should call to their fellows, and say, we have piped unto you,
and ye have not danced, we have mourned unto you, and ye have not lamented.
And of Matthew. 13. v. 24. the sense is; q. d. It so happens and falls out in
the Kingdom of ^eaven, as if a man had sowed good seed in his field, etc. And
Matthew. 13. v. 45. The sense is, q. d. It so happens or falls out, as if a
Merchant man should seek after goodly Pearls, etc. And the sense of the place
in hand is, q. d. It shall be with the Children of Israel (who are now as the
sand of the Sea shore for multitude) as when a man gathers ears in the
valley of Rephaim: For as he which gathers and gleaneth the scattered ears
of Corn, after the harvest man has reaped and gathered the Corn into the Barn,
leaves little behind him in the Field: So shall Salmaneser leave but very few
of the Children of Israel in the Land of Israel, which he shall not carry away
Captive.

In the valley of Rephaim.] The valley of Rephaim was a fruitful valley near
to Jerusalem.

6.
Yet gleaning grapes shall be left in it.] i. e. Yet there shall be a few of
the Children of Israel left in the Land of Israel: As few grapes (are left for
the gleaners) after the gathering of the vintage.

The Prophet does as it were correct here his last speech.

In the gathering of the vintage they could not gather the grapes so clean, but
that some of them would escape the hands of the gatherers: And they which so
escaped at the first gathering, were to be left for the poor to glean, Levit.
19. v. 10. And therefore they were called gleaning grapes, q. d. Grapes left
for the poor to glean.

In it.] i. e. In the Land of Israel.

Here is a Relative without an Antecedent expressed.

As the shaking of an Olive tree.] q. d. There shall be left in a few men, as a
few Olives use to be left on the tree after the shaking of it.

As the shaking of an Olive tree.] And as the shaking of the Olive tree.

By the shaking of an Olive tree is meant, the few Olives which are left upon
the tree after shaking.

Two or three berries in the top of the uppermost bough.] q. d. That is, as it
were, two or three berries in the top of the uppermost bough, etc.

Berries, i. e. Olives.

In the top of the uppermost boughs, in the outmost branches.] If after the
shaking of a tree, any fruit remains upon the tree, it is most commonly upon
the uppermost boughs, and uttermost branches, because they are farthest from
the body of the tree, which is first shaken, and the force of the shaker is
abated before it comes to them.

7.
At that day.] Supple, In which these judgments and calamities shall befall
the ten Tribes of Israel.

Shall a man look to his Maker.] Let the men of Israel look to God who made
them (as a Servant looks to the hand of his Master) that he may have mercy upon
them.

He puts here a Future Tense for an Imperative Mood (after the Hebrew manner)
and advises the men of Israel what they should do in their calamity. See the
like, Cap. 30 v. 20, 21, 22, etc.

And his eyes shall have respect.] i. e. And let his eyes have respect

He puts the Eyes for the whole man, by a Synechdoche, and a Future tense for
an Imperative mood.

8.
And he shall not look to the Altars.] i. e. And let him not look to the
Altars, Suple, of his Idols for help.

The work of his hands.] i. e. Which he himself has made, and therefore are
not like to help him.

Neither shall respect.] i. e. Neither let him respect.

Either the groves.] They were wont to worship and sacrifice to Idols in the
groves, and therefore he would not have them have respect to them, as thinking
to have any benefit by committing Idolatry therein.

But the Scripture does sometimes take Groves also, for Images, See Cap. 27.9
and so may they be here taken.

9.
And in that day.] See Verse 7.

His strong Cities.] i. e. The strong Cities of Jacob.

This Verse has its immediate connection with the fifth verse, and is an
amplification of what was there said: And the Prophet speaks particularly what
shall befall the strong Cities, least any should think that what he spoke,
might only befall those which lived in Villages and weaker Towns.

His strong Cities shall be as a forsaken bough and an uppermost branch, which
they left.] The meaning is, that the strong Cities of Israel, shall be laid
desolate, and though they be full of Inhabitants, yet shall their Inhabitants
be so consumed or carried away, as that there shall be few left therein: As the
fruitful bough or uppermost branch of an Olive tree or the like, though it be
full set with Olives or other fruit, when the gatherer com^ to gather the
Olives or fruit thereof, yet there is but little fruit, and few Olives left
thereon, when he leaves it, or forsakes it, and comes away.

A forsaken bough.] That is called a forsaken bough, which the gatherer
forsakes when he has gathered all the fruit thereof which well he can, or
which he intends to gather.

And an uppermost branch which they left.] i. e. And as an uppermost branch of
an Olive, or other fruit tree which they (which gathered the fruit thereof)
left, when they had gathered it so near, as they could well gather it.

The utmost boughs, and uppermost branches of a tree, bear most, and most fair
fruit, as having the most benefit of the Sun: Therefore does the Prophet make
choice of these here, to intimate the most and best sort of People of Israel
lived in the Cities.

Because of the Children of Israel.] i. e. Because of the iniquity of the
Children of Israel.

The meaning is, that this desolation shall befall the strong Cities of Israel,
for the iniquity of the Children of Israel which dwelt therein, because they
have forsaken their God.

And there shall be desolation.] i. e. For there shall be desolation throughout
the whole Land, as well in the strong Cities, as in the Villages and weaker
Towns.

Because thou have forsaken, etc.] This relates not to what went before, but to
what follows.

10.
The God of thy Salvation.] i. e. God thy Savior, O Israel.

Of the Rock of thy strength.] i. e. Of thy strong Rock.

A Substantive of the Genitive Case is put here for an Adjective.

A Rock is put here, Metaphorically, for a Protector or Defender; and that
either because a Rock is a Refuge for the Coney (who has her holes therein)
when she is persecuted, Psalm. 104. v. 18. Or because they which are on an high
Rock, are safe from the assault of an enemy, Psalm. 27. v. 5.

Therefore shall thou plant pleasant Plants.] i. e. Therefore though thou shall
plant pleasant Plants, etc.

And shall set it.] i. e. And shall set thy ground.

Here is a Relative without an Antecedent.

With strange Slipps.] i. e. With Slipps or Plants which are brought out of
another Country.

We bring not out of foreign Countries any thing, but that which is rare and
excellent: Wherefore strange Slipps may be taken for choice, rare, and
excellent Slipps.

11.
In the day.] i. e. And in the day, supple, in which thou shall plant thy
Slipps and Plants.

Thou shall make the Plant to grow.] i. e. Thou shall water thy Plants which
thou have planted, that they may grow: And by this thy pains thou shall make
them grow.

He puts Plant for Plants, a Singular for a Plural number.

And in the morning.] i. e. And in the day following.

The morning is put here for the whole day, by a Synechdoche; and the day
following, for a great while after.

Shall thou make thy seed to flourish] i. e. Shall thou water thy seed, and use
all care and diligence that it may grow up and flourish: And by this thy pains
and care thou shall make it grow up and flourish.

But the Harvest.] i. e. Yet the fruit which comes of the Plant, or of the
seed, through thy labor.

The Harvest signifies, not only the time in which fruit uses to be ripe and
gathered, but the fruit it self also, and so is it here taken.

Shall be an heap.] i. e. Shall be as an heap.

The note of Similitude is often left to be understood.

But why should the Harvest, or Fruit, coming of that Seed, or those Plants, be
as an heap?

Answer. Because as an heap, supple, of Corn, would be presently devoured by
such an Army as Salmaneser had: So should the fruit or those plants be devoured.

Or Because as an heap, supple, of dung, is trodden under the feet of those
which walk in the streets: So should the Fruit coming of those Plants, or
Seeds, be beat down, and trod under the feet of the Assyrians.

In the day of grief.] i. e. In the day, in which Salmaneser shall cause thee
to grieve, because of the miseries which he shall bring upon thee.

And desperate sorrow] He calls it desperate sorrow, because there was no hope
of joy to succeed it, or lessen it.

12.
Woe to the multitude of many People.] By these People understand those which
joined with the Syrians, at the time that Salmaneser made war against them: For
no doubt, but the Syrians had many, which dwelt about them, to aid them at that
time, and had many kind of People in their Army, and that they did put much
confidence in the strength and greatness of these their Associates.

Which make a noise like the noise of the Sea.] The more men there be in an
Army, the greater noise they make: This therefore shows the greatness of the
Syrians Army.

And to the rushing of Nations.] i. e. And woe to the rushing Nations, i. e. to
the Nations which make a great noise as they go or march along.

He puts the rushing of Nations, for the Nations that rush, or that make a
rushing: per Metonymiam adjuncti,

That make a rushing like the rushing of many waters.] i. e. That make a great
noise as they go or march along, like the noise of many waters, which are
carried with a violent stream down some steep place.

Note, that this latter part of the verse is but a repetition of the former And
that to rush, or make a rushing, signifies, to make a great noise as they go
or march along.

13.
The Nations shall rush, like the rushing of many waters.] i. e. The Nations,
which are gathered together in the Syrians Army, shall come on boldly upon
their enemies, and set upon them with a noise, like the noise of many waters
falling down a steep Rock, etc.

We may understand the twelfth verse, of the noise which this people made in
their march, and this place we may understand, of the noise, or shout, or cry,
which they were wont to make at the onset or joining of battle, of which see
Cap. 5. v. 30. and Cap. 42. v. 13.

He puts Nations here, not for whole Nations, but for many of several Nations,
which served the Syrians in their Army, by a Synechdoche.

But God shall rebuke them.] i e. Yet God shall chide them, and beat them back,
and make them flee.

Here is a (...), more meant than the word signifies. A rebuke signifies only
a chiding. But here is more meant than a chiding, for there is beating back,
and causing them to flee also: But it shows withal, the power of the chider,
that he can do this, that is, that he can beat back such an Army with the
breath of his mouth only, and cause it thus to flee.

And they shall flee afar off.] i. e. And they shall be put to flight, and
flee as fast, and as far, as every man's feet can carry him.

Like a rouling thing] v. g. As the Thistle-down, or the like.

14.
Behold at even-tide trouble, and before the morning he is not.] By this he
shows, in how short a time the Syrians shall be routed, and quite overcome by
the Assyrians, after the Assyrians and they meet and join battle, in as short a
time as is between the evening and the morning.

Or it may be, that when the Assyrians and Syrians first joined battle, they
fought with equal courage and force till toward evening, and at even-tide the
Syrians were beaten back, and were forced to give ground, and so had the worst
of it; but yet they were not quite vanquished, because of the night coming on:
Yet fearing another Conflict, they took the benefit of the night, and fled out
of the field before the morning, which the Assyrians perceiving, made after
them, and pursued them with all the power they could.

Trouble.] Because of the meeting of their two Armies: and because they, to
wit, the Syrians, had the worst of it.

He is not] i. e. They are not, supple, to be seen in the field, because they
are all fled.

He is put for They: A Singular for the Plural number: And he means thereby
the Syrians, and those which served the Syrians in this Army.

This is the portion of them that spoil us.] By these spoilers he means, the
Syrians of Damascus, and the ten Tribes of Israel, and other their
neighbour-Nations, which were always ill-affected toward the Jews, and did
always infest them, when they espied their opportunity.

And the Lot, etc.] By a Lot he signifies, a portion, in allusion to the
portion of the Land, which fell to every Tribe of Israel by Lot, Josh. 14. v. 2
and 15. v. 1, etc.

Note, that these last words are spoken in the person of the Jews, and contain
an Epiphonema of the whole Prophecy.

Note, that many interpret this latter part of the Chapter, to wit, from the
twelfth verse hitherto, of the overthrow which the Angel gave to the Assyrians,
2 Kings 19. v. 35. and the words will very well fit thereto: But being that it
may be as well understood of the overthrow of the Syrians, and those which were
joined with them, and it is knit with the burden of the Syrians, I had rather
interpret it of the overthrow of the Syrians than the Assyrians.

ISAIAH. CHAP. XVIII.
WOE to the Land shadowing with wings.] i. e. Woe to Ethiopia, which is a land
which shadoweth and defends her Children or Inhabitants, with her Mountains,
as it were with Wings.

Ethiopia was a Land environed with Mountains, which are a great defense to
the Inhabitants thereof, from foreign Invasions. These Mountains he compares
to wings, and because they are a Defense to the Inhabitants of the Land, He
says, that the Land shaddoweth her Inhabitants therewith, alluding to a Henn
which shadoweth her Chicken with her wings, and so defends them. See the like
Phrase Psalm. 17.8. and 36.7. and 57.1.

This Prophecy was fulfilled, 2 Kings, 19.9. when Tirakah King of Aethiopia
denounced war against Assyria, and went in expedition against it, whilst
Sennacherib King of Assyria was absent, and busied in his wars against Judah
and Jerusalem.

The Ethiopian came at this time against the Land of Aethiopia, but not
against Sennacherib himself, who was at this time with his Army making war in
the Land of Judah, for the Lord suffered him not to come against Sennacherib,
first because he would not use his help against Sennacherib: That his own
immediate Providence for Jerusalem might the better and more clearly appear:
And Secondly, that the Aethiopians might not partake of the spoils of the
Assyrians, which God would give wholly to his own People.

Which is beyond the Rivers of Aethiopia.] i. e. Which lies by the Rivers of
Aethiopia.

By this he describes what and he means, for what land lies by the Rivers
of Aethiopia but Aethiopia?

Concerning the taking of the Preposition. Beyond, for By, or near to, See Cap.
9.1.

2.
That sends Ambassadors.] Supple, To Assyria, to denounce War against it.

By the Sea.] i. e. By the Red Sea.

Even in vessels of Bullrushes.] In Egypt and in Aethiopia, they were wont to
make Barks and Vessels of Bullrushes, as we may read in Pliny, Diodorus
Siculus and others.

Upon the waters.] Supple, Of the Sea.

Go ye swift messengers, etc.] These are the words of the Land of Aethiopia (or
rather of Tirakah King thereof) to the Ambassadors, which she sends to denounce
war against Assyria. q. d. Go make haste my messengers, and denounce war
against Assyria quickly, for now I am come and set upon her before she is well
prepared for my coming, while Sennacherib and his Army are abroad warring in
other Countries.

To a nation scattered and peeled.] By this Nation he means Assyria, which he
calls a Nation scattered, because at this time the Assyrians were scattered
and dispersed, some remaining at home, and others being upon service abroad, in
an expedition against Judah, etc.

And he calls it, peeled, because at this time Sennacherib (as the Ethiopian
thought at lest) had picked out all the best Soldiers and ablest men thereof,
to serve him in his wars abroad.

To a People terrible from their beginning hitherto.] i. e. To a people which
have been terrible of a long time to all Nations, which dwell near them.

For the Assyrians were a warlike people, and still adding some dominion or
other to their Empire, by the sword.

A Nation meted out and trodden down.] q. d. But now no longer a terrible
People, but a People metedou^ for present destruction, and a People which shall
be trodden under feet, etc.

This the Ethiopian speaks out of confidence (of the occasion and opportunity
which he had got) that he should destroy Assyria.

A nation meted out.] Supple, For destruction, that is, q. d. which God has
appointed to destroy. Or rather which I Tirakah have determined to destroy, for
it is not like that the Ethiopian would speak so religiously of Gods
providence. Or (to speak as Heathens use to speak) which the Fates or Destiny
have appointed to destruction.

This he speaks, as I said, because of the great opportunity which he had got
to go against Assyria, whilst Sennacherib and all his men of war, were
abroad, as though heaven had given him this opportunity for no other end, than
that he should destroy Assyria.

Note, that this, meted out, is used here Metaphorically, for appointed to
destruction. By a Metaphor from Artehitects, who when they are to pull down
part of a building, they mete, or measure with a line or rule so much as they
are to pull down.

As for the Phrase you may read the like, 2 Samuel 8.2.

And trodden down.] i. e. And subdued or vanquished.

He alludes to the manner of Conquerours, who were wont to tread upon the necks
of those which they have vanquished. Or to straw upon the Dunghill, or dirt in
the streets which is trodden of every foot.

And note, that he uses here, a Preterperfect tense for a Future, because he
made himself as sure to destroy them and vanquish them, as if he had done it
already.

Whose land the Rivers have spoiled.] Assyria lay low (a great part of it) and
was washed, as with other, so with those great and violent Rivers Tigris and
Euphrates, which washed away much ground from Assyria, and did it much hurt
certainly, by its overflowings and breaking down the banks thereof, which
were made by the labor and industry of men, to preserve their ground, and
Cities from the violence of the waters.

And it is probable that at this time, some great hurt and desolation was made
in Assyria, by the inundation of the Rivers there, that makes him to call it a
Land which the Rivers had spoiled.

Note, that the Embassage or Message it self, which was given to these
Messengers, is not here expressed but left to be understood: And the
circumstances of the Place show that the Substance of the Embassage was, to
denounce war, in the name of Tirakah King of Aethiopia against Assyria.

3.
All ye Inhabitants of the world, etc.] These are the words of the Prophet in
his own Person, exhorting the world to observe what the event will be of the
Ethiopians boasting and great confidence.

See ye when he lifts up an Ensign on the Mountains.] i. e. When Tirakah
King of Aethiopia lifts up an Ensign upon the Mountains, for his Soldiers
to come together into a body, that they may march into Assyria, then observe
what the event will be.

When he blows a Trumpet hear ye.] This is a Repetition of the former-words.

Perhaps he refers the lifting up of an Ensign, to the Foot: And the blowing a
Trumpet to the Horse forces.

4.
For so the Lord said unto me.] i. e. For thus has the Lord spoken unto me.

I will take my rest.] q. d. I will tarry at home and take my ease, I will not
go with Tirakah King of Aethiopia and his Army to Assyria.

This Rest is a Rest secundum quid. And the Prophet brings in God speaking
here, as a man.

And I will consider in my dwelling place.] Supple, What the Assyrians do
there against that, and against my People which dwell before me.

By Gods dwelling place, understand Jerusalem, where God dwelt in the Temple
which was his house.

At this time Sennacherib, King of Assyria, had sent his Lieutenants to
besiedge, or block up Jerusalem, intending himself to follow with the rest of
his Army, when he had cleared all other places, therefore the Lord says, I
will consider in my dwelling place.

Like a clear heat upon the herbs, and like a Cloud of dew in the heat of
harvest.] q. d. To which dwelling place of mine, and the People which dwell
there before me, I will be a comfort, and refreshing against the Assyrians.

A clear heat upon the herbs is comfortable to the herbs, and refreshes them
after a great and cold rain, And a mist or a dewie Cloud refreshes the
harvest man, as he is laboring in the field, in a hot harvest day, hence a
clear heat upon herbs, (Supple, after a great rain) and a Cloud of dew in the
heat of harvest, are put Metaphorically for a comfort and refreshing.

A Cloud of dew.] i. e. A dewie Cloud.

A Substantive of the Genitive case is put here for an Adjective.

Note here, that when the Prophet says, that God said, He would take his rest
and would not go along with Tirakah King of Aethiopia, in that long expedition
against Assyria, He prophesies that Tirakah shall be beaten by the Assyrians,
and his Army destroyed; For they prosper not with whom God will not go along.
And when he says, that God said, he would be to Jerusalem like a clear heat
upon herbs: and like a Cloud of dew in the heat of harvest. He prophesies
that Sennacherib and his Army (which warred against Jerusalem) should be
overthrown, by the hand of God.

5.
For before the harvest.] i. e. But yet before the harvest.

For is put here, for But, or But yet.

Before the harvest.] i. e. Before the great hopes which Tirakah, King of
Aehiopia, has of destroying Assyria, be accomplished.

The harvest literally taken, signifies here, the ripe Grapes, or fruit of the
Vine. q. d. But before the Grapes are full ripe, and fit to be gathered: But
Allegorically, it signifies, the accomplishment of Tirakahs hopes.

Note, that this and the next verse consists altogether of Allegories, where
Tirakah King of Aethiopia is likened to a Vine, his Army to the spriggs and
branches of that Vine, the hopes which he had of subduing and destroying
Assyria, to the perfect budd' and flower of the Vine: The full accomplishment
of his hopes, to the harvest or ripe fruit of the Vine: The Assyrian to a
Gardner, which uses to cut down the sprigs and branches of his Vines, yea, and
the Vines themselves to, when he sees good, etc.

When the budd is perfect.] i. e. When the bud of the Vine is perfect, that is,
when it is full and ready to blow into a flower, that is, when Tirakah's hopes
are at the height.

By this bud is meant Allegorically the great hopes which Tirakah, the King of
Aethiopia had, of subdueing and destroying Assyria: which hopes grew after the
advantage he took of Sennacherib's absence, from the greatness of his own
Army, for from thence these his hopes sprange, as the bud and the grapes spring
from the branch of the Vine, etc.

And the sour Grape is ripening in the flower.] Grapes when they are young and
small are sour, hence he says sour grapes, for grapes which are young.

And grapes when they are first in the flower, are grapes only in potentia,
though they begin actually to knot in the flower and to increase in the flower
as the flower does decrease.

By sour grapes in the flower are meant, the aforesaid hopes of Tirakah King
of Aethiopia: And the ripening of these grapes signifies, his endeavors of
bringing his hopes to pass.

He shall both cut off the sprigs with pruning hooks, and take away and cut
down the branches.] By this He is meant Allegorically, Esarhaddon, the Son,
or the Lieutenant of Sennacherib King of Assyria, who made head against Tirakah
King of Aethiopia when he invaded Assyria) whom he here compares to a Gardner.

And a Relative is put here, without an Antecedent.

By the Sprigs are meant the mean men and Common Soldiers of Tirakah's Army.

By the Branches the great men and Commanders and Officers thereof.

6.
They shall be left together.] i. e. And they, both sprigs and branches shall
be left all of them, etc.

Together.] i. e. All of them as Chap. 1. v. 28.

They shall be left together unto the fowls of the Mountains, and to the
Beast of the earth.] For what end, they shall be left to them, the next words
signify.

And the fowls shall summer upon them.] Birds use to feed upon the sprigs and
branches of trees, that therefore which he says here, is this, that the Birds
shall find meat for themselves upon the sprigs and branches of this Vine, (when
they shall be cut down) all the summer following.

And all the beasts of the earth shall winter upon them] Beasts use to browse
upon the sprigs and branches of trees, especially in Winter, when grass is
short. That therefore which he says here is this, that the beasts of Assyria
shall brouse and feed upon the sprigs and branches of this Vine all the Winter.

And the meaning of these two Phrases is this, that the Carkases of the
Aethiopians shall be meat for the fowls of the Mountains, and the beasts of
the field, a Summer and a Winter, that is, a whole year.

Where note, that the Assyrians did cast out the Aethiopians which they had
slain, and would not give them a burial.

In that time.] i. e. Yet in that time.

He means the time in which the aforesaid things should be done in Assyria,
that is, in which the Army of Tirakah should be destroyed in Assyria (in the
absence of Sennacherib) by the Assyrians.

Shall the present be brought unto the Lord of Hosts of a people scattered and
peeled, etc.] q. d. The Assyrians, which are abroad with Sennacerib warring
against Jerusalem shall be overthrown, and part of their spoils shall be
brought by the men of Judah and Jerusalem, as a Present to the Lord of Hosts.

He alludes here to the gift or present which was wont to be offered to the
Lord out of the Spoils and Prey which was taken in war, of which read Numb.
31.28. and 2 Samuel 8.11.

Of a people scattered and peeled] That is, of the Assyrians, See v. 2.

The Prophet here repeateth all those contumelious words, which Tirakah King of
Aethiopia used in the description of the Assyrians, v. 2. approving them as
true, but yet such as might be better used by others than by the Aethiopians:
Therefore he repeates them with a kind of Sarcasme, deriding thereby Tirakah
and Aethiopia, who first used them.

A Nation meted out.] These words are governed of those, from a people
terrible, by Apposition.

Meted out.] i. e. Appointed by God himself to destruction.

Whose land the Rivers have spoiled.] See v. 2.

To the place of the name of the Lord of Hosts.] i. e. To the Temple of God,
which is his place.

The name of the Lord, is put here, Periphrastically, or Metonymically, for the
Lord himself.

Or, To the place of the Name of the Lord of Host, may signify, To the place
which is called by the name of the Lord of Hosts, which place is his Temple,
and is called the Temple of the Lord of Hosts.

The Mount Sion.] This is governed of the former words, by Apposition.

Mount Sion was a Mount in Jerusalem, upon which the Temple of God was built,
and may here be put for the Temple it self by a Metonymie.

ISAIAH. CHAP. XIX.
THE Burden] See Chap. 13.1.

The Lord rides upon a swift Cloud] i e. The Lord will ride upon a swift
Cloud, as upon an Horse. That is, The Lord will come with spread into Egypt.

And the Idols of Egypt shall be moved at his presence.] i. e. And the Idols of
Egypt shall be moved with fear and trembling, to see him come,

He speaks of Idols, though they be but stocks and stones, as of men, by a
Metaphor or Prosopopoeia.

And the heart of Egypt.] i. e. And the heart of the Egyptians.

Egypt is put by a Metonymie, for the Egyptians, the Inhabitants of Egypt.

The heart of Egypt shall melt.] See the meaning and reason of this Phrase,
Chap. 13. v. 7.

In the middst of it.] i. e. In it, or them.

A Periphrasis of the Hebrews.

2.
And I will set the Egyptians against the Egyptians.] i. e. I will set the
Egyptians at variance, and at fighting one with the other.

The prophet speaks here in the Person of God.

This Prophecy relates near unto the same times to which the former Prophesies
did. For Sethon (the Priest of Vulcan) King of Egypt was Contemporary with
Sennacherib King of Assyria, for Sennacherib waged war against Sethon. After
the death of Sethon, Egypt was divided under twelve Kings, whereof Psammitichus
was one, which Psammitichus the other eleven expelled, and banished into the
Marshes of Egypt, but he at length got a power of men, and made war against
all the other eleven Kings, and overcame them, and slew them, and so came to
rule all Egypt, over which he ruled Lordly at first, that he might be feared
(as many Conquerours use to do) and that he might suppress them, which had a
hand in his banishment, though the latter part of his Reign was with much
Clemency.

And Kingdom against Kingdom.] He speaks this by Anticipation, for as yet
Egypt was in one Kingdom.

3.
And the spirit of Egypt shall fail.] i. e. And the judgment or counsel of
the Egyptians shall fail.

By the Spirit is meant here, sound judgment or counsel: For the Hebrews
among many significations, which they have of this word spirit, any habit or
quality of the mind they call by the name of Spirit.

By Egypt is meant the Egyptians, by a Metonymie.

In the midst thereof.] See v. 1.

And they shall seek to Idols.] Supple, For Counsel and direction in these
their streights.

The Devils were wont to be in the Idols of the Heathen, and give Answers to
those that came to ask counsel of the Idols: Hence Saint Paul speaking of
Sacrificing to Idols, says, that the things which the Gentiles sacrifice to
Idols, they sacrifice to Devils, 1 Cor. 10.20.

And to the charmers, and to them which have familiar spirits, and to
wizzards.] Happily by these he means the Priests and Mystae of the Idols: But
see Chap. 8. verse, 19.

4.
And the Egypians will I give over into the hand of a cruel Lord.] By this
Lord is meant Psammitichus, who when he was in subduing the eleven Kings and
their Party, Lorded it with cruelty, though when he had quitted all, he Reigned
mildly.

5.
And the waters shall fail from the Sea, etc] That which the Prophet says
from this to the eleventh Verse, is an amplification of one and the same thing,
which is this, to wit, that it should be so with the Egyptians as if there were
no water in the Sea: in regard of traffic and commerce, by sea. For as if
there were no water in the Sea, there could no Ships go, and so there would be
no traffic and commerce between People and People, Port and Port: So should
there be no traffic for the Egyptians by Sea at this time.

The reason why there was no traffic by sea at this time, was because the
Carians and Ionians took part with Psammitichus in his wars with the eleven
Kings, who being strong by sea took all the Vessels and Ships of Egypt which
stirred out, and made them Prize, so that few durst stir abroad.

And the River.] He means the River Nilus, which was navigable in all parts of
it.

Shall be wasted and dried up.] What he means by these you may understand by
the Notes, or these words, The waters shall fail from the Sea.

6.
And they shall turn the Rivers far away.] i. e. And Nilus, and other Rivers
of Egypt shall be turned away out of their wonted Channels, and their Channels
left dry.

The meaning of this place is, that there should be no more traffic upon the
Rivers with Beats and Barks, than if the Rivers were quite dried up, and
turned out of their Channels.

The Brooks of defense.] i. e The Brooks which defend, Supple, Egypt.

The Brooks being many in Egypt were a defense to it, so that it could not be
so easily over-runne by an Enemy, as other Countries might: Hence the Brook^ of
Egypt might be called Brooks of defense, taking defense actively.

Or they may be called Brooks of defense, q. d. fenced Brooks, or Brooks which
have a defense, because they were fenced and kept in with banks and heaps of
earth, that their waters might not easily overflow: and so defense is taken
passively.

7.
The reeds and flags shall wither] Supple, For lack of water.

The Prophet does here Rhetorically amplify the matter which he has in hand,
and say over again, what he said before.

The Paper Reeds by the Brooks.] i. e. The Paper Reeds which grow by the Brooks.

Of these Reeds was writing-paper at the first made, and from thence has our
Paper also its name.

By the mouth of the brooks.] i. e. By the brinks or banks of the Brooks.

He puts here the mouth, by a Synechdoche, for the lips, which are part of the
mouth: And by the lips he means Metaphorically the brinks of the Rivers or
Brooks, because as the mouth has two lips, so has a Brook or River two
brinks or banks, on each side one.

Be driven away.] i. e. Wither or dry away.

This is a Metaphor taken from cattle which are driven away by Thieves and
Robbers, from the place where they fed.

Or from Birds which are driven away from their food or prey, and not suffered
there to be.

8.
The Fishers also shall mourn.] Viz. Because the waters shall be dried up. For
the waters being dried up, their trade fails, there are no more fish for them
to take.

And all they that cast Angle into the brooks] i. e. And all they that were
wont to angle for fish in the Brooks.

And they that spread nets upon the waters.] i. e. And they which use to spread
nets upon the waters to catch fish thereby.

Shall languish.] i. e. Shall pine away and even faint, supple, For grief of
mind, that their trade of fishing, by which they live, fails them.

9.
Shall be confounded.] i. e. Shall be ashamed, Sulppe, because they have no
flax to make their works of: For the Rivers and Brooks being dried up, the
flax, which was fed by them, must needs dye.

They are said (in the Scripture phrase) to be ashamed or confounded who are
frustrate of their hope: These men therefore being frustrate of the flax, which
they hoped for, that they might make their wonted works of it, are said to be
confounded or ashamed when the waters fail, whose failing causes the flax to
wither away.

10.
And they shall be broken in the purposes thereof, all that make sluices and
ponds for fish.] i. e. And all which make sluices to let in waters out of the
Rivers into fish ponds, and all that make Ponds to keep fish in, either for
pleasure or profit, shall be broken in the purposes of your work, because the
waters shall be dried up, for which they made their sluices, and dug their
ponds.

Shall be broken in their purposes.] i. e. Shall fail and come short of the
intents and purposes, of what they take in hand.

Thereof.] i. e. Of their works, that is of the Sluices and the Ponds, which
they make and intend for fish.

11.
Surely the Princes of Zoan are fooles] Zoan was an ancient City of Egypt,
Numb. Chap. 13. verse. 22. called also Tanais.

The sense is, q. d. the Counselors of that King, which shall be the King of
Zoan or King of Tanais at that time, here prophesied of, shall be fools in
that day, in which the Lord shall punish Egypt with civil wars.

He puts a present tense for a future, and speaks here of the Princes of Zoan,
and Noph and the Kings, as though the Kingdom of Egypt were already divided
into twelve Kingdoms, which was not so divided at the time in which he
prophesied, though it was at the time of which he Prophesies.

The Counsel of the wise Counselors of Pharaoh is become brutish.] i. e. The
Counsel of the Counselors of that King of the twelve which ruled in Zoan,
shall be as the Counsel of a fool, which is no wiser than a brute beast.

The meaning is, that the Counsel, which their Counselors shall give, shall be
no wiser to prevent the judgments which God shall bring upon Egypt, than the
counsel of a fool.

He derides the State Counselors and wise men of Egypt, because the Egyptians
had a high conceit of themselves for wisdom and policy, and were highly
esteemed for them abroad by others: And calls Pharaohs Counselors, wise
Counselors by an Ironie.

Of Pharaoh.] Pharaoh was a common name of all the Kings of Egypt, as Caesar
was of all the Roman Emperors.

How say ye unto Pharaoh, I am the son of the wise.] q. d. With what face can
you say unto your King (glorying and baosting as you do) that ye are wise.

He uses an Apostrophe to Pharaoh's State Counselors.

I am the son of the wise.] This he speaks in the person of one of Pharaoh's
privie-Counsellors, or Counselors of State, by a Mimesis.

I am the son of the wise.] By this he would show that Pharaoh's Counselors
thought they had wisdom and Policy, as it were by inheritance.

The son of ancient Kings.] The chief Counselors of the Kings of Egypt were
the Egyptian Priests. And they derived their Pedigree from the Ancient Kings,
of that Country: who (therefore because they were accounted wise and Politic)
would be accounted wise and politic too.

Ancient Kings.] The Egyptians boasted much of their Antiquity, and the
antiquity of their Kings.

Where are they? where are thy wise men?] q. d. Where are they which brag thus
of their wisdom.

He uses an Apostrophe here to the King.

And let them tell thee now, and let them know what the Lord of Hosts has
purposed] Here is an (...), or a transposition of sentences. The Order is this,
let them know what the Lord has purposed upon Egypt, and let them tell thee
now: And the sense is this, Let them hearken to me, and let them know what the
Lord of Hosts has purposed to do upon Egypt, and when they know, let them tell
thee, I pray, what course thou were best to take, to avoid what he has
purposed.

The first And, is here Redundant.

When he says, let them tell thee now: It is as if he should say, let them
tell thee, I pray, and the words are spoken with a Sarcasme.

That a (...), or a transposition of Sentences is not unusual in Scripture,
see Chap. 28. verse. 1. and Hebrews, Chap. 2. v. 9.

Note, that what the Prophet speaks here to the King of Zoan, (i. e. to one of
the eleven Kings of Egypt which expelled Psammitichus) and his Counselors,
must be understood of the King of Noph also, and of all other the Kings of
Egypt, (which reigned at that time) and their Counselors, as spoken to them
also.

13.
The Princes of Zoan are become fools.]

The Prophet speaks this, as though he had heard what Counsel the Princes or
State-Counsellours of the several Kings of Egypt, had given to their
respective Kings, when he had told them, what the Lord of Hosts had purposed to
do upon Egypt.

The Counsel which these Counselors gave every one to his King, was to look
to his own, one in this, and another in that manner: They never thought or
advised that the eleven Kings should join together in one, as one, against
Psammttichus: So whilst every one fought singlie in his own defense, they were
at length all overcome by their common enemy.

The Princes of Noph are deceivd.] i. e. The State-Counsellors of the King of
Noph are deceived in their Counsels, giving that for good counsel to their
King which is pernicious.

Noph was a famous City in Egypt called once Memphis, now Grand Cairo.

By the Princes of Noph, he means the State-Counsellors of one of the eleven
Kings of Egypt, Viz. that King who had Noph in his Kingdom, where the board of
this Council was.

And what he says of the Counselors of this King must be understood of the
Counselors of all the other Kings of Egypt also.

They have also seduced Egypt.] q. d. Not only men of the common sort, but
they also (who are of the Grandees and Oracles of the land) have seduced the
Egyptians by giving unto them pernicious Counsel.

Even they that are the stay of the Tribes thereof.] i. e. Even the Princes and
Counselors which are, by their places, the stay of the respective Kingdoms,
in which they live, even they have seduced the Kingdoms in which they lived,
by their Counsels and brought them to ruin.

The stay] These Princes are called the stay of their Country, because they
are so by their places, and should be so by their Actions and Counsels.

Note that this word, stay, is a M^taphoricall word, of which Chap. 3.1.

Of the Tribes.] i. e. Of the several divisions, or several Kingdoms of
Egypt.

14.
The Lord has mingled a perverse spirit in the midst thereof.] i. e. The
Lord has mingled folly with the drink in Egypt, and has made the Princes and
state-Counsellours of Egypt to drink thereof.

I said, verse 3. that the Hebrews call any habit or quallity or act of the
mind (be it good or bad) by the name of Spirit, by reason whereof he puts a
perverse spirit here for folly, and he calls it a perverse spirit, because it
was contrary to sound counsel.

When he says, the Lord has mingled a perverse spirit in the midst thereof,
he compares the perverse spirit, either to some poison, or to some
intoxicating drink which is mingled with ordinary drink: and he would have us
by mingling of this perverse spirit, to understand also that the Lord gave the
Princes and state-Counsellors of Egypt, the Cup which he mingled with that
perverse spirit, and made them to drink of it. For they which mingle a Cup
after that manner, mingle it, that it may be drunk.

The meaning of this place is, that the Lord had infatuated the Counsels of the
Princes and State-Counsellors of Egypt.

And they have caused Egypt to err in every word thereof.] That is, and they,
to wit, the Princes of Zoan, and the Princes of Noph, the stay of the Tribes of
Egypt, (being made drunk with the Cup of this perverse spirit) have made the
common Egyptians (which were ready to do what they advised them to) to err in
whatsoever they did, as if they were drunk also with the same Cup.

To err in every work.] To err in the work which they undertake, signifies
here, to run to and fro, backward and forward, and to be very busy in a work,
but so, as that they cannot get out of it, or bring it to a good end.

That this is the meaning of these words, both the next words and the verse
next following show.

As a drunken man staggereth in his vomit] A drunkard in his drunkenness,
being not able to stand, falls down upon the ground where he disgorgeth his
filthy stomach: From whence while he strives to rise, he staggers and falls
back again into his beastly vomit: and thus does he often strive to rise,
and often staggers and falls back again, into his vomit, which the Prophet
calls, staggering in his vomit.

This place might hapily seem more plain if it had been thus rendered. And they
have caused Egypt to stagger in every work thereof, as a drunken man staggereth
in his vomit.

15.
Nither shall there be any work for Egypt.] i. e. Neither shall there be any
work which shall be profitable for Egypt.

Which the head or tail branch or rush may do.] i. e. Which the highest or the
lowest, strongest or the weakest shall be able to perfect, or bring to pass,
q. d. none of all the Egyptians shall be able to do that, which is profitable
for their welfare.

Concerning those Metaphorical words The head or tail, branch or rush. See
Cap. 9.14.

May do.] i e. Can do.

16.
In that day.] i. e. At that time in which God shall afflict the land of Judah
by Sennacherib.

Here is a Relative put without an Antecedent.

And this is the beginning of a new Sermon.

Shall Egypt be like unto women.] i. e. The Egyptians shall be very much
afraid, and in that like women, for women are naturally timorous and fearful.

Because of the shaking of the hand of the Lord of Hosts which he shakes over
it.] i. e. Because of the judgments of God, with which he shall threaten them.

This Phrase is Metaphorical, and is borrowed from a man which shakes his rod
over his Child, or Servant when he threatens him, and makes as though he would
whip him, though he whips him not.

The judgments with which he threatened them, and of which they were afraid at
this time, was an invasion or war to be made upon them by Sennacherib: for
the Egyptians, when they heard that Sennacherib had invaded Judah, were afraid
of themselves, least Sennacherib, when he had subdued and destroyed Judah,
should invade Egypt and lay that waste also: And this fear was not a causeless
fear: For when our neighbors house is on fire, we had need to look to our own,
the judgments inflicted upon our neighbors, are our admonitions and
threatenings to us. And besides this, it is likely that Sennacherib had
threatened the Egyptians by word of mouth, that he would fall upon them, so soon
as they had conquered all Judah.

17.
And the land of Judah shall be a terror unto Egypt.] i. e. And the men of
Judah shall terrify the Egyptians and make them afraid.

Why the Land of Judah should be a terror unto Egypt, and how, he shows in
the latter part of this Verse.

Every one.] i e. Every Egyptian.

Which makes mention thereof.] i. e. Which makes mention of the land of Judah.

Because of the counsel of the Lord of Hosts which he has already determined,
against it.] i. e. Because of the Counsel of the Lord of Hosts which he has
already determined, and would then execute upon the land of Judah, or because
of those judgments which the Lord should then execute upon the land of Judah
according to his determinate counsel.

He puts the Counsel of the Lord which he had determined to execute, for the
judgments and punishments which he would execute according to his counsel and
determination, per Metonymiam causae.

The judgments and punishments here spoken of were executed upon the Land of
Judah by Sennacherib, and his mighty host, which the Egyptians hearing of by
certain reports, were afraid, least that Sennacherib and his host when they
had done with the Land of Judah, would begin with Egypt, and when they had once
begun would make an end with it. Yea, likely it is, that the Assyrians
threatened to war against Egypt so soon as they had vanquished the land of
Judah.

18.
In that day.] i. e. At that time, Suple, in which Sennacherib shall invade and
oppress the land of Judah.

Shall five Cities in the land of Egypt speak the language of Canaan.] i. e.
Many Cities in the Land of Egypt, shall speak the Hebrew language.

As upon other occasions before, so when Sennacherib first invaded the Land of
Judah, many of the men of Judah ran away out of their own land, for fear of the
Assyrians, and betook themselves into Egypt, Cap. 11. v. 11, 15. And while
they were in Egypt, they lived religiously, observing the Jews religion, By
whose holy example many of the Egyptians were won to forsake their Idols, and
to cleave to the Lord of Hosts, which proved happy to Egypt; For by reason of
this did the Lord in his mercy spare Egypt.

Because of these Jews which ran thus into Egypt, and those Egyptians which
were converted by them, and learned of them the Hebrew language, does the
Prophet say That five Cities in the Land of Egypt should speak the language of
Canaan.

Five Cityes] i. e. Many Cities.

He puts a certain number for an uncertain.

Shall speak the Language of Canaan] i. e. Shall speak the Language of the
H^brews, which lived in the Land of Canaan

By this is meant not only that the Hebrews, which fled out of the Land of
Judah (which was part of the Land of Canaan) but that some Egyptians also
should speak the Langu^ge of Canaan, which they should learn of the Hebrews,
which fled for fear of Sennacherib into Egypt.

And by this we must also understand that the Hebr^ws and Egyptians should
confess and praise God together in those Cities of Egypt. And that the
Egyptians should have knowledge of the Law of God, which was written in the
Hebrew tongue.

In a more sublime sense, the Prophet prophesies here of the calling of the
Gentiles by the Gospel.

And swear to the Lord of Hosts.] Supple, That they will serve him, and that he
shall be their God.

One shall be called the City of destruction] Whatsoever this City was, or for
whatsoever reason it was so called, surely this was the name thereof, Viz.
Ir-heres, which is here interpreted, the City of destruction.

Some, and they not few, render Ir-heres, the City of the Sun; and think that
that famous City Heliopolis (which signifies the City of the Sun) was the City
here meant, but most likely it is, that the Prophet here meant some famous City
of Egypt, and perhaps famous for the Idolatry there excercised: And the
Prophet names this City by name, as a thing which should be strange that the
Jews should live in such a City after their own Law, and openly profess the
true ^od there, where so much false worship and worshipping of Idols was
practiced, and that many of the Egyptians there, should serve the Lord with
them.

19.
In that day there shall be an Altar to the Lord in the midst of the land of
Egypt.] i. e. In that day there shall be many in the Land of Egypt, which shall
openly worship the Lord and serve him, both Hebrews and Egyptians.

The Altar, which he here speaks of, was not an Altar for Sacrifice (for that
was unlawful) but an Altar for a memorial, that they which built it did
acknowledge and testify thereby, that the God of Israel was their God.

Nor must we think that there was any such Altar indeed built in Egypt: But the
Prophet alludeth to that Altar which the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the
half Tribe of Manasseh built for this purpose in the borders of Jordan, Josh.
22. v. 21, 22. etc. and thereby would express that there were such in Egypt as
should publicly worship God, and give such sufficient testimonies thereof as
the Reubenites, and Gadites, and the half Tribe of Manasses did by the Altar
which they built: For it is usual with the Prophet to express like things by
like.

And a Pillar in the border thereof to the Lord.] These are the same for sense
with the former words: And the Prophet seems here to allude to that Pillar or
that Stone which Joshua set up Josh. 24. verse. 26. etc.

20.
And it shall be for a sign, and for a witness to the Lord of Hosts in the
middst of the Land of Egypt.] Supple, That there be many in the Land of Egypt
which are addicted to the worship of God, and serve him.

He shows here the end why that Altar, which he mentioned in v. 19. should be
erected. And showing for what end that Altar was erected; he would have us to
understand by that, for what end the Pillar also was erected; For both were
erected for one end.

For they shall cry unto the Lord.] i. e. And they shall cry unto the Lord.

He puts For for And.

They.] i. e. Those five Cities, that is, the Inhabitants of those five Cities,
which shall speak the language of Canaan in Egypt, and which shall erect an
Altar in the midst of the Land of Egypt, and a Pillar in the borders thereof.

Shall cry unto the Lord because of the Oppressors.] i. e. Shall cry unto the
Lord for his help against the Assyrians, that he would keep the Assyrians off
from Egypt, who were likely, and perhaps, had threatened to invade it, and
destroy it, so soon as they had laid waste the land of Judah.

Because of the Oppressors.] i. e. Because of the Assyrians, who were likely,
and perhaps, had threatened to make war upon Egypt, so soon as they had
vanquished the Land of Judah.

The Assyrians deserved the name of Oppressors, because they did oppress all
adjoining Nations with Tribute, with the sword, or with some one kind of
oppression or other: And therefore is the Assyrian called the Oppressor, Cap.
14.4. And the treacher^us dealer, Cap. 21.2. And the Leviathan, and the
piercing Serpent, Cap. 27.1. And the Lion, and the ravenous beast, Cap. 35. v.
9. And the Spoiler, Cap. 33. v. 1.

He shall send them a Savior and a great one, and shall deliver them.] By this
Savior is meant the Angel which destroyed in the Camp of the Assyrians an
hundred fourscore and five thousand in one night, Cap. 37.36, By which
destruction of the Assyrians, the Egyptians were delivered from the fear which
they were in of the Assyrians.

This Angel he may well call a great one, for it was a great work of Salvation
and deliverance which he wrought, and the power and strength of an Angel is by
many degrees greater than the power and strength of any man.

And a great one.] i. e. And that a great one to.

21.
And the Lord shall be known unto Egypt] And the Lord shall be yet farther
known unto Egypt, and more Egyptians shall serve him: For when it shall be
heard in Egypt that the Lord destroyed an hundred fourscore and five thousand
of the Assyrians in one night, by his Angel, the Egyptians shall begin to
consider who the Lord is, which is able to do this, and so, many knowing his
power shall cleave to him and serve him, who before worshipped Idols.

The word, known, is not so to be taken here, as though the Lord should now be
first known to Egypt, (for he was known to Egypt before this Savior was sent,
as appears verse. 18, 19, 20.) But it signifies a farther knowledge which
Egypt should have of the Lord, and that more particular Egyptians should come
to have knowledge of him.

And the Egyptians shall know the Lord.] This is a Repetition of the former
sentence.

And shall do sacrifice and oblation.] No Sacrifice and oblation could be
lawfully done or offered but in Jerusalem, thither therefore they should have
come, if they would have offered to the Lord, as the Eunuch of the Queen of
Candace did Act. 8. v. 27.

But by doing Sacrifice and Oblation to the Lord, we may, by a Synechdoche,
understand the worship of God in general. And then to do Sacrifice and
Oblation to the Lord, will signify any kind of worship of the Lord whatsoever.

Yea, they shall vow a vow unto the Lord.]

A vow made unto the Lord was an Act of Religion, and showed him to be the
Lord's Servant who made it, yea, it argued more devotion toward God, than
barely to do Sacrifice and Oblation: For many Sacrifices and oblations were of
bounden duty, but a Vow was left to the liberty and choice of him that vowed it.

And perform it.] This he adds, because it is better that thou should not
vow, than thou should vow and not pay. Eccles. cap. 5. verse. 5.

22.
And the Lord shall smite Egypt.] q. d. And in those days, or after those
days, the Lord shall smite Egypt, and vex it with civil wars.

The smiting which he here speaks of, is the burden or calamity which he
prophesied of against Egypt, from the first verse to the fifteenth.

He shall smite and heal it.] q. d. But though he shall smite Egypt, yet he
shall heal it again.

He speaks of the calamities and miseries which the Lord would send upon Egypt
under the Metaphor of a wound made by striking: And of the deliverance from
those calamities under a Metaphor of healing that wound.

And they shall return.] i. e. For they shall return: And for For.

They.] i. e. The Egyptians, yet not all ^he Egyptians, but they which shall
know the Lord, etc.

Here is a R^lative again without any ^ormall Antecedent.

Return.] Supple, With weeping, fasting, and prayer.

Even to the Lord.] He says even to the lord Emphatically. Because there might
otherwise be some doubt of the Egyptians returning to him from whom they had
gone so far, by worshipping such base things as ^hey had worshipped.

And he shall be entreated of them.] i. e. And ^e shall hear their prayer.

And shall heal them.] i. e. And shall deiver them from their affliction and
calamity.

A Metaphor, of which we spoke but now.

23.
In that day.] About the time that these things shall come to pass, or
somewhat after.

There shall be an highway out of Egypt to Assyria] q. d. There shall be such
traveling of the Egyptians into Assyria, and of the Assyrians into Egypt, as
that they shall make an highway or beaten road, by their traveling to and
fro, from Egypt to Assyria.

The meaning is, that when Psammitichus should have full possession of Egypt,
there should be a firm peace, and great Commerce, between the Assyrians and
Egyptians, though they had been long enemies before.

And the Egyptians shall serve with the Assyrians.] Who the Egyptians and
Assyrians should serve is not here expressed, but may be understood by the next
verse: They should serve Israel that is, the men of Judah, which were the
Children of Israel.

And this is a great wonder that the Egyptians and Assyrians, which had been so
great enemies to Israel, should now serve Israel.

They shall serve.] To serve signifies here, to do well to, and to endeavor to
pleasure and to exercise acts of civillity and love to, See Gal 5.13.

24.
In that day shall Israel be the third with Egypt and with Assyria.] i. e. For
in that day Israel shall be the third with Egypt, and with Assyria.

He gives a reason here why he said, that the Egyptians should serve Israel
with the Assyrians.

Israel shall be the third with Egypt and with Assyria.] i. e. Israel shall be
joined in league and amity with the two People of Egypt and Assyria.

By Israel understand the Jews, the sons of Israel, as Cap. 1.3.

This league and amity of Israel with Assyria lasted all Hezekiah's time, See 2
Kings, 20. v. 12.19.

Even a blessing in the midst of the land.] q. d. And these three shall be
blessed, yea, even a blessing in the midst of the land: an Ellipsis.

A blessing, when the Abstract, blessing, is put for the Concrete, blessed,
(after the manner as it is here put, and used) it signifies exceeding blessed.

In the midst of the land.] The midst of the Land is put Periphrastically,
for the Land. And by the Land is understood the Earth in general: Or the Land
in which each of these three, the Assyrians, Egyptians, and the Israelites
dwelt in particular.

25.
Whom the Lord of Hosts shall bless saying, etc.] He gives a reason here why
he said, that they should be a blessing, which reason is, because God should
bless them saying, etc.

Saying blessed be Egypt, etc.] Dei benedicere, est benefacere, Who God says
is blessed, is blessed and happy indeed, made happy and blessed by God's word.

Egypt my people.] Egypt is put here for the Egyptians, whom God calls his
People, because at this time many Egyptians did worship God truly. See verse,
18, 19, 20. etc.

And Assyria the work of my hands.] By Assyria he means the Inhabitants of
Assyria, by a Metonymie. And these he calls the works of his hands, because
he had made them so great a nation as they were.

And Israel mine inheritance.] By Israel are meant the Children of Israel,
which God calls His Inheritance, because he took them to be a Peculiar people
to himself, Deuteronomy. 14. verse. 2.

ISAIAH, CHAP. XX.
IN the year that Tartan came unto Ashdod etc.] Tartan was one of Sennacheribs
Captains, 2 Kings 18.17. Ashdod was a Town or City of the Philistines in
which Dagon had a Temple. 1 Samuel 5.1.

By the coming of Tartan unto Ashdod, is meant his coming to besiege Ashdod,
whom Sennacherib his Master sent thither for that purpose.

At this time Ashdod (as it is probable) was under the Power of Hezekiah King
of Judah, 2 Kings 18.8. to which Tribe it did of right belong, Josh. 15.47.

When Sargon King of Assyria,] When Sennacherib King of Assyria, for the Kings
of Assyria were wont to have many names.

Sent him,] Supple, Against it, to besiege it.

2.
At the same time spoke the Lord by Isaiah the Son of A^os, saying,] Note,
that these words are suspended here, and taken up again in the third verse:
For, what the Lord spoke by Isaiah the Son of Amos, is not here set down;
but it is set down in the third verse, after those words, And the Lord said.

Go and loose the Sackcloth from off thy loins,] Note here, that th^se words
God spoke not by Isaiah, but to Isaiah, and upon occasion of those words which
he spoke to Isaiah, (and Isaiah's doing according to them.) He spoke by Isaiah,
to the men of Judah and Jerusalem, that which follows in the next verse: So
that those words, namely, At the same time spoke the Lord by Isaiah the Son
of Amos, saying; are suspended (as I said) until the third verse.

And here ye must understand these or the like words, For the Lord had said to
Isaiah, q. d. For the Lord had said to Isaiah, Go and loose the Sackcloth from
off thy loins.

Loose the Sackcloth from off thy loins,] He speaks thus, not because they
wore this Sackcloth only about their loins (for their whole Garment was of
Sackcloth) but because this Garment of Sackcloth being a loose Garment, was
girded about them with a Girdle, which they wore upon their loins.

The Sackcloth,] This Sackcloth was made of Camels hair or the like.

Sackcloth does often signify in Scripture a mourning Garment, and so some
take it; to signify in this place, saying, that Isaiah mourned at this time,
because of the Misery and Captivity of the ten Tribes of Israel, which were
carried away by Salmanezer; but others think that it signifies such a garment
as the Prophets did usually wear. For Prophets were wont to wear Sackcloth
which was made of hair, Zach. 13.4. Such a one did Elias wear, 2 Kings 1.8.
And such a one did John Baptist wear Matthew. 3.4.

Naked,] It is not to be thought that the Prophet walked about stark naked,
but only that he walked without his Sackcloth, though he wore a lower Garment,
or a Shirt. The Prophet therefore was naked only secundum quid; and when he
says that he was naked, he uses a Synecdoche Integri, putting naked (which
properly signifies to be destitute of all Clothes) for, being without some
certain Clothes, this same word is used after the same manner, 1 Samuel 19.24.

By this, His walking naked and barefoot, the Prophet might well signify the
Captivity of the Egyptians and Ethiopians; for Captives used to be stripped of
their uppermost Garments by the Conquerors, and left in their poor under
Clothes; yea, and they were often taken away too, and worse were given they to
wear.

3.
And the Lord said,] Here the Prophet resumeth those words; viz. At the same
time spoke the Lord by Isaiah the Son of Amos, saying, etc. verse 2. q. d.
But as I said, At that time spoke the Lord by Isaiah the Son of Amos, saying.

Like as my Servant Isaiah, etc.] This is that which the Lord spoke at the time
aforesaid by Isaiah the Son of Amos.

For a sign and a wonder upon Egypt and Ethiopia,] i. e. For a Sign of what
shall come upon the Egyptians and the Ethiopians.

A wonder.] This word Wonder, is here of the same signification with the word
Sign.

4.
So] i. e. According to that sign, and in the same habit and fashion, viz.
naked and barefoot; yea, in a far worse fashion and habit.

So shall the King of Assyria lead away the Egyptians prisoners, and the
Ethiopians Captives,] The King of Assyria here spoken of was Esarhaddon, who
was Viceroy, or Deputy-King in his father Sennacheribs absence, and ruled in
Assyria as King, while Sennacherib was waging war against the Jews in the
Land of Judah.

Or, we may take this King for Sennacherib himself, for that a King may be said
to do, which he does by his Deputies or Ministers.

The Ethopians, which he here speaks of, were they which marched along with
Tirakah their King against Assyria, 2 Kings 19.9. And the Egyptians were they
which joined themselves with the Ethiopians in that expedition.

Even with their buttocks uncovered,] i. e. Even with short Garments that shall
not be long enough to cover their buttocks and privy members.

To the shame of Egypt.] To have the buttocks and privy parts naked and
uncovered causes shame in any people which have any thing of civilitie in them.

What is here spoken of Egypt or the Egyptians, may be understood also of
Ethiopia or the Ethiopians.

5.
And they shall be afraid,] i. e. Those Jews which trusted in the Ethiopians
and Egyptians for help against Sennacherib King of Assyria shall be afraid;
Supple, of Sennacherib and his Army.

He puts here an Antecedent without a Relative, as though he pointed at them of
whom he spoke; and he speaks especially of those Jews which dwelt out of
Jerusaem: for, they were always most distrustful of God, and sought for help
from the Arm of Man.

They were no doubt afraid of Sennacherib and his Army before this, but now
their fear was much increased.

And ashamed of Ethiopia.] i. e. And ashamed that they relied upon the
Ethiopians for help.

Note, that these words of Ethiopia, relate not to those words, shall be
afraid, but only to these, shall be ashamed.

When we expect and hope for great matters from any, and come short of our hope
and expectation, we wax ashamed.

Ethiopia their expectation.] i. e. Ethiopia from which they expected aid
against Sennacherib and his Army.

He puts expectation for them from whom they expected aid. The Act of the
Object by a Metonymy.

It is likely that the unbeleeving and distrusting Jews, when they heard of
Sennacheribs expedition against Judah, sent to Ethiopia for aid, as well as to
Egypt: Or, that when they heard that Tirakah King of Ethiopia, came up to war
against Assyria, Cap. 37.2. They expected that his making war against the
Assyrians would prove their peace, and Sennacheribs overthrow.

And of Egypt their glory,] i. e. And of the Egyptians of whose friendship and
aid they gloried or boasted.

He puts glory here for the object in which they gloried.

That the unbeleeving or distrusting Jews sent for aid to Egypt, against the
Assyrians, See Cap. 30. and 31.

6.
And the Inhabitant of this Isle] i. e. And the Inhabitants of this City, viz.
Jerusalem.

The Inhabitants of Jerusalem did at this time put more confidence in God, and
build more upon his promises then the other Jews did.

The Inhabitant] He puts the Inhabitant Collective, for the Inhabitants.

Of this Isle,] i. e. Of this City, to wit, Jerusalem.

An Isle or Island, as it is most commonly taken, signifies a piece of land
environed on every side with water; yet the Hebrews do call not only such
lands Islands, but even such also as lie upon the seacoasts, though they are
part of the Continent; yea, they call any Country in general an Isle or
Island, (as Cap. 41. v. 1, 5. etc.) though it be not near to any Seas or
Waters: And that beca^se as Isles or Islands are severed from the Continent by
waters; so is every particular Country and Land severed from other Lands and
Countries by the peculiar Laws and Customs which it has; and not only
Countries and Lands, but a single house also which stands alone, dis-joyned and
separated from other houses, and has an empty space of ground about it on
every side, whereon no building stands, is called Insula, that is, an Isle or
an Island, because such a house is like an Island which stands in the sea, or
in some lake, and is encompassed with waters, and by them severed from other
parts of the earth: And if for this reason a lone house may be called an Isle
or Island, much more may a City.

But another reason there is for which Jerusalem may be called an Isle here, to
wit, because God was to it at this time a place of broad rivers and streams,
Cap. 33. verse 21. And did encompasse it so that none could approach to it on
any side, because of those rivers and streams, and that which is so
encompassed with rivers and streams, may well be called an Isle.

Shall say] Supple, In derision of them which trusted in Egypt and Ethiopia.

In that day,] Supple, In which the King of Assyria shall lead away the
Egyptians and the Ethiopians Captives; and in which they (which are mentioned
in the former verse) shall be afraid and ashamed of Ethiopia their expectation,
and Egypt their glory.

Such is our expectation] What the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, (which trusted in
God more then in man) say here; they say in the person of those which trusted
in man more then in God, by a Mimesis, that they might the more deride them.

Such is our expectati^n.] i. e. Such are they become from whom we exp^cted
aid, viz. Prisoners and Captives, etc.

Whither we flee for help,] i. e. To which or to whom we flee for h^lp at this
time.

To be delivered,] i. e. For this end that we may be delivered out of the hands
of the Assyrians.

And how shall we escape?] i. e. And how shall we escape the hand of the King
of Assyria, when as the Ethiopians and Egyptians which were stronger then we,
and on whom we relied, could not escape it.

We have interpreted this speech, as spoken sarcotically and in derision; yet
it may be interpreted also, as spoken in grief and in earnest; for though God
promised to defend Jerusalem at this time, and many godly men which were in
Jerusalem did believe that promise and rely upon it, yet there were many
ungodly men also in Jerusalem at this time, Cap. 22.13. which did not believe
the promise of God, but relied more upon the help of man, such as were the
Egyptians and the Ethiopians, and of these may this place be understood, as
spoken by them.

There be that by the Inhabitant of this Isle, understand those Jews which
were in Ashdod, who were besieged at this time by the Assyrians, and there is
some probability for this their opinion, because the Prophet makes special
mention of the Assyrians fighting against Ashdod, verse 1. And they which dwelt
in Ashdod might be called the Inhabitants of the Isle, as the word Isle
signifies the Seacoast; for Ashdod stood on the seacoast, and the inhabitant
of this Isle, because the Prophet might point as it were at Ashdod, when he
said This Isle.

ISAIAH, CHAP. XXI.
THe burden of the desert of the Sea,] i. e. The heavy calamity and
affliction which shall befall those people which dwell in the Wilderness, which
is by the Red sea, as it was revealed to me by a vision.

He puts the desert, for the people which dwelt in the Desert, by a Metonymy;
and by the Sea, he means the red Sea, by a Synechdoche.

By the desert of the sea, therefore are meant the Edomites which dwelt in the
Desert or Wilderness of Sur or Etham, which was near to the Red sea.

As whirlewindes in the South pass thorow] i. e. As whirlewindes, which arise
in the South, pass through the Wilderness from the one end thereof to another.

He speaks of the South, in respect of Judah where he lived, where were great
Deserts and Wildernesses without wood or tree to break or hinder the force of
the wind; there therefore a high and great wind must needs be speedy and
rush with a mighty force, where there was nothing to hinder or break the force
thereof.

So it cometh] i. e. So an heavy calamity, or destruction, or declaration
shall come upon those which dwell in the desert of the sea, it shall come
speedily and with a mighty force.

From the Desert] By the Desert, here he means not the Wilderness of Shur, or
the Wilderness of Etham, which were by the Red sea, as he did in the first
words of this verse; But he means that Desert which lay near to Media, through
which the Medes marched when they came first against Babylon, and then against
Edom.

From a terrible Land.] This may be a repetition of the former words; and by
the terrible Land he may mean the Desert or Wilderness next before said, which
was terrible, because of the wild beasts which were therein. Or, by this
terrible Land he may mean Media it self, which proved terrible to Edom and
many other people; and so this terrible Land may signify the place from which
this calamity first came, and the Desert the place through which it came.

This is the direct burden of the desert of the sea, to wit, the great
calamity, or destruction and desolation which shall come upon it by the Desert
from a terrible Land.

2.
A grievous vision is declared unto me,] i. e. Grievous things are declared to
me in a vision concerning Babylon, etc.

He puts a vision here per Metonymiam Actus, for the things declared by a
vision: And note, that he makes the object of these visions, not only things
seen, but also things heard.

It may be here asked, of what and of whom this vision is meant: But the answer
to this is plain, it was of Babylon, and her calamity and fall, as appears
verse 9.

A second question will be, Whether this vision of the fall and calamity of
Babylon, is to be taken as a new burden distinct from the burden of the
Desert of the sea mentioned in the first verse, or as a part of that burden?

Answer. If any one will take it for a new burden, I quarrel him not; but
yet I take it as a part of the former burden, to wit, as part of the burden
of the Desert of the Sea.

A third question therefore will be, How the burden or fall of Babylon, will
concern the burden of those which lived in the Desert of the sea.

Answer. It will concern them, as the burden of Rezin and Syria, concerned the
burden or calamity of the ten Tribes of Israel, Cap. 9. verse 11. For as it
was a great part of the calamity of the ten Tribes, that Rezin and Syria which
were their confederates, should be engaged in a War; yea, overcome when they
had need of their help. So it was to Edom, that Babylon should be overcome,
from whom they expected aid against all that did oppose them, or make War upon
them when they had need of her help.

Again, it is very likely that many of the Desert of the sea did serve the
Babylonians in their martial affairs, and therefore the fall of Babylon must
needs be their calamity.

Again, the fall of Babylon was a forerunner of the calamity of the Edomites;
for in that day that Babylon should be destroyed by the Medes, the Lord would
beat off from the channel of the River, unto the stream of Egypt, says our
Prophet, Cap. 27.12. That is, he would make all Lands desolate which were in
league with the Assyrians from Euphrates in Assyria, to Nilus in Egypt.

For the connection therefore of these words with the former, it may be this,
q.d. Neither can Babylon or the Assyrians your confederates help you, for a
grievous vision is declared unto me, etc.

The treacherous dealer deals treacherously,] Here begins the relation of the
vision, and these words concern the reason why such miseries should befall
Babylon.

By the treacherous dealer he means the Assyrian, which was treacherous in
all his dealings, making leagues and covenants and contracts with other
Nations, but keeping none of them longer then he could get advantage by them,
and breaking them when it was advantageous for him. Thus dealt he with other
Nations, thus dealt he with the Jews, Cap. 33.8. and 2 Kings 18. verse. 14, 15,
16, 17. etc. Where he took a great price to leave his hostility and to return
out of Judah, and yet he returned not, but wasted it, and besieged Jerusalem.

Deals treacherously.] i. e. Has dealt treacherously with all nations, and
especially with the Jews, and so continues.

Note, that whereas treacherous dealing is one part of hostility (for dolus an
virtus quis in host requirit?) it may be put here by a Synecdoche, for all
manner of hostility.

The spoyler,] i. e. The Assyrian which is wholly given to spoil Nations, Cap.
10. 7.

Spoileth,] Has and does continue to spoil Nations, and among them the Jews
which are my people.

Note, that these words are spoken in the Person of God.

Go up O Elam,] q. d. Therefore go up O Elam, and fight against Babylon the
royal City of the Assyrian, that treacherous dealer and spoiler.

O Elam,] Elam is put here for the Elamites which were the children of Elam,
mentioned Genesis 10.22. per metonymiam efficientis.

The Elamites were next neighbors to the Medes, and therefore they joined with
the Medes in their expedition against Babylon.

Besiege] Supple, Babylon.

O Media,] O ye Medes.

He puts the Land of Media here for the Inhabitants of the Land of Media.

Note, that that which is here prophesied against Babylon, is the same with
that which is prophesied against it, Cap. 13. 17. For the same Prophesies are
often repeated.

All the sighing thereof,] i. e. All the sighing which Babylon has made (by
her oppression) in the nations which live about her.

This is Genitivus Efficientis.

Have I made to cease.] i. e. I will make to cease by destroying Babylon.

He puts a Praeterperfect tense for a Future.

3.
Therefore are my loins filled with pain,] Note, that these words are not part
of the vision; but the Prophet in the midst of his narration of the vision,
inserts these words, to show the greatness of the misery which should befall
Babylon, which was such as that he himself at the hearing of it and every one
which heard of it, was sorely afflicted at the hearing thereof.

We may say with some, that the Prophet speaks these words in his own person:
Or, with others, that here are these words to be understood, viz. Every one
which sees it, or hears of it, especially they which dwell in the desert of
the Sea shall say, q. d. Therefore every one which sees the misery of Babylon,
or hears of it, especially they which dwell in the desert of the sea shall
say, my loins are filled with pain, etc. so great shall the misery thereof
be.

My loins are filled with pain,] These words are allegorical, alluding to a
woman in travile, as Cap. 13. v. 8. And by the pains of a woman in travail; he
would signify the grief of the mind, by a Metaphor.

I was bowed down] Yea, I was pained as a Woman when she is in her strongest
travel.

He alludes to the gesture of traveling Women when they are in their
strongest travel. See 1 Samuel 4.19.

At the hearing of it.] i. e. At the hearing of this dreadful news of Babylon.

4.
My heart panted,] Supple, for fear.

The night of my pleasure] i. e. The night which was wont to be pleasant to
me, in giving me rest from my toil and labor.

He puts here a Substantive of the Genitive Case for an Adjective, as the
Hebrews often do.

Has he turned into fear unto me.] i. e. He has made terrible and fearful
unto me so that I cannot sleep; or, if I do sleep I am troubled and afrighted
with fearful dreams.

Note, that by He, is meant God, who showed this vision to Isaiah, and who
was the chief Author and Commander of Babylons destruction; or, else we may
understand this place indefinitely, q.d. The night of my pleasure is turned
into fear unto me.

5.
Prepare the table,] q. d. Lay the cloth, and get all things ready for dinner.

Note, that this is part of the vision which the Prophet interrupted upon the
occasion aforesaid, and now resumeth and goes on with.

This is spoken in the person of the King of Babylon to his servants, with a
kind of Sarcasme, to show how secure the Babylonians should be when the
Medes came upon them, but it was spoken in the vision.

Watch in the watchtower,] This is spoken in the person of the King of
Babylon, to one of the Watchmen of the City or Palace of Babylon, who was
wont to watch in some eminent place or Tower of the City or Palace, that he
might give notice of what company he espied a far off drawing nigh toward
the City or Court, lest an enemy should come upon them unawares.

This manner of watching has bin used of a long time in some of our
Port-Towns.

Eat, drink,] This is spoken in the person of the King of Babylon to his
Prince^, as they sat with him at Dinner.

Arise ye Princes] i. e. Arise from the Table, O ye Princes.

This is spoken in the person of a Messenger to the King of Babylon and his
Princes, as they sat at dinner, who brings in word from the Watchman, of the
approach of a great Army of an enemy: at which time many others also run
hastily in with the news, and bid them arise from dinner, to withstand their
enemy and defend themselves.

And anoint the shield.] i. e. And make every one his shield ready to defend
himself and fight for his Country.

They were wont when they were to go out to battle, to scour their sheilds and
anoint them with oil, and that for two reasons; first, that they may be
bright and resplendent to dazzle the eyes of their enemies; secondly, that they
might the better keep off the blow of a Sword, or the falling down of a Dart,
which have more advantage upon a rugged and rusty, then upon a smooth and
slipperie Shield; and to this does the Prophet allude when he says, Anoint the
shield.

Here ends this vision.
6.
For thus the Lord said unto me, etc.] Moreover, thus the Lord said unto me.

For, is put here for Moreover, as it is in many other places.

Go set a Watchman,] Supple, to watch in a Tower.

The Lord that he might give the greater testimony of the fall of Babylon, bids
the Prophet set some one as a Watchman (when he himself would) in a
Watchtower, and there (he says) he would confirm the fall of Babylon by
another vision, which he would show to that Watchman.

I do not conceive that the Watchtower in which this Watchman was set by
Isaiah, was in Babylon, but in some part of Judea, from whence the Lord showed
him Babylon, and the approach of these Charets toward Babylon, in a vision.

Let him declare what he sees.] Supple, In that vision which I will show him
while he stands to vvatch.

And he saw a Charet, etc.] q. d. And I Isaiah set one as a Watchman in the
Watchtower, and he in a vision saw a Chariot, etc.

He puts here a Singular for a Plural number; a Charet, for Charets, by an
Enallage.

The Charets which he speaks of were such Charets as they were wont to use in
War.

With a couple of horsemen,] i. e. With a couple of Riders in each Charet.

In warlike Charets there were wont to ride two men, one whereof drove the
horses, or whatsoever beast drew the Chariot, the other fought in the Chariot,
and these two he calls a couple of horsemen; taking horsemen in opposition to
footmen, as they are usually taken, especially in Military affairs.

A Charet of Asses and a Charet of Camels,] q. d. One of these Charets is drawn
by Asses, the other of these Charets is drawn by Camels.

By the Charet of Asses are signified the Forces of the Elamites, who made use
of Mules and Asses, as their Neighbors the Persians did.

By the Charet of Camels are signified the Forces of the Medes, who made use of
Camels, as their neighbors the Bactrians did.

The Elamites joined with the Medes in their expedition against Babylon, as
was observed verse 2.

And he hearkened diligently.] to wit, Whether God would speak to him and
reveal what these two Charets and men meant.

8.
And He cried a Lion,] i. e. And he whom Isaiah set in the Watchtower, when he
had seen two Charets, and hearkened diligently to hear from God what those two
Charets meant, and God spoke not, at lenght cried out as a Lion, that is, He
cried out with a loud voice, that is, earnestly, saying, etc.

A Lion] i. e. As a Lion, that is, aloud; for a Lion when he roares, roares
aloud.

Note, that the Hebrews do often leave the note of similitude to be understood,
and so it is left here.

My Lord,] q. d O God my Lord.

I stand continually upon the Watchtower, in the day time, and I am set in my
ward whole nights.] q. d. I have stood continually day and night in the
Watchtower, in which thy servant Isaiah has set me; Supple, And has seen
nothing.

It seems that the Lord did not presently show this vision to this Watchman,
but kept him a while in expectation, to exercise his patience, and to see how
diligent and vigilant he would be in his place; and he mentions his diligence
and vigilance, because God is most ready to reveal himself to such as be
diligent and faithful in their calling, and to hear them.

In my ward,] i. e. In my Watchtower.

Here one word is repeated by another.

9.
And behold] i. e. But now behold, Supple, on a sudain.

Here comes a Charet of men, with a couple of horsemen,] q. d. Here come two
Charets with men in them, a couple of horsemen in each Charet; Supple, And
thou have not told me what these Charets and men mean, but yet tell me I
beseech thee.

And he answered and said,] i. e. And the Lord answered and said to the
Watchman.

Babylon is fallen, is fallen, etc.] q. d. Babylon shall be destroyed, it shall
certainly be destroyed by those charets and horsemen; that is, by those which
are signified by those Charets and Riders, that is, by the Medes and the
Elamites their associates.

He puts here a Preterperfect for a Future tense.

He has broken into the ground.] i. e. I the Lord will break into the ground.

The Lord speaks here of himself in the third person by an Enallage, and uses
the Preterperfect tense for a Future.

10.
O my threshing and the corn of my floor,] The Prophet speaks here in his own
person, and uses this Apostrophe to the Jews, whom he calls threshing and
corn in the floor, because of their diverse afflictions with which they had
been, and were, and should be afflicted by the Assyrians.

The word threshing is to be taken here passively, for the thing threshed; and
by the threshing and the corn in the floor, he means one and the same thing,
viz. the corn of the floor, which is laid on the floor to be threshed.

It is usual in the Scripture to call Affliction metaphorically by the name of
threshing, and those which are afflicted threshed. See Cap. 41.15. Jer. 51.33.
Mich. 4.13. And so does the Prophet call them here.

But why does he call them his threshing, and the corn of his floor?

Answer. Because they were his brethren and kinsmen of the same blood and
nation, and living in the same Land with him; so that by saying thus, it is as
if he should say, O my afflicted brethren, or, O the persecuted and oppressed
men of my country.

That which I have heard of the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel] Supple,
Concerning Babylon and those which live in the Wilderness near unto the Red
Sea, which are your deadly enemies, and which have threshed you as the corn is
threshed on the floor, etc.

Have I declared unto you.] Supple, For this end, that you may receive comfort
thereby, when you hear that they which afflict you are your deadly enemies,
shall be themselves afflicted and destroyed.

11.
The burden of Dumah,] i. e. The burden of the Ismaelites which descended
from Ismael by Dumah.

Dumah was the Son of Ismael, Genesis 25.14. and is put here by a Metonymy for the
Sons of Dumah, which were Ismaelites.

He called to me out of Seir,] i. e. A certain Edomite of Mount Seir, called to
me who am an Ismaelite, out of Mount Seir, as I passed along thereby, saying,
etc.

They which dwelt in Mount Seir were Edomites the Sons of Esau, who was called
Edom, Genesis 36. verse 7, 8, 9.

Mount Seir was either directly in the way from Babylon to the Land of the
Ismaelites; or, else this Ismaelite took his way by Mount Seir homeward,
because he thought it the safest way.

That which the Prophet here tells of was showed to him by the Lord in a
vision, and what he saw or was represented to him in that vision, was an
Ismaelite descended from Ismael by Dumah, speaking as he here speaks in these
two verses.

That therefore which is here spoken, is spoken in the person of a Son of Dumah
an Ismaelite, who being in Babylon as a Soldier when Babylon was taken and
destroyed by the Medes, made an escape, and hasted as for life homeward,
traveling night and day; he took his way from Babylon to his own Country by
Mount Seir, where a certain Edomite of Mount Seir seeing him traveling thus in
the night, and guessing him to be a Soldier by his habit, and somewhat
marvelling why he traveled so late in the night, and imagining that it was
upon more then an ordinary occasion that he thus traveled, asked him the cause
of his so late traveling; the Ismaelite tells him that he was a Soldier in
Babylon, and that Babylon was taken and destroyed by the Medes, and that the
Medes had sent out armies to subdue not only Babylon, but all that had any
confederacy with Babylon, from the River Euphrates, even to the River Nilus;
and that he escaped and ran for his life to his own Country. The Edomite (and
some that were with him) hearing him tell that the Medes had taken and
destroyed Babylon, and had sent out Armies to subdue all the confederates of
Babylon, from Euphrates even to Nilus, would not altogether believe him, but
made as if they would go toward Babylon to enquire the truth of the Ismaelites
words; whereupon the Ismaelite says unto them, if ye will enquire, enquire;
But the Edomites were not gone far, but they fall into a doubt, whether they
should go or no; which the Ismaelite perceiving, calls to them to return,
saying, Return, come; intimating thereby, that it was true which he had told
them, and that all was lost, they were undone.

To me] i. e. To me who am an Ismaelite, and a son of Dumah, as I passed by
Mount Seir homewards from Babylon, where I was a Soldier, and from whence I
escaped when Babylon was taken and destroyed by the Medes.

Watchman,] i. e. Soldier.

Soldiers may be called Watchmen, in an honorable way, because they lie
abroad in the fields and observe the motions of the enemy, and watch over the
City or Land which they fight for, that they may preserve it.

What of the night?] i. e. Why or what is the reason that thou travellest thus
in the night?

This phrase is curt and short, and thus to be understood.

Note, that the Particle Of, is not here a note or sign of the Genitive Case,
but a Praeposition, and answers to the Hebrew Praefix Mem, and to the Latin
Praeposition De, and as the Hebrew Praefix Mem, does sometimes signify In, as
Job. 19. verse. 26. And the Latin Praeposition De, does sometimes signify the
like; as when Plautus says de die, in the day; and Iuvenalde nocte, in the
night; so does Of, in this place, and of the night is as much as in the night.

What of the night?] The Edomite doubts his question here, out of the great
desire he had to know why this Soldier traveled so late, for he guessed it to
be an extraordinary occasion which made him travel so in the night, and perhaps
he asks as one that had heard of the Medes expedition against Babylon, and
desired to know what the event thereof was, and thought that this Soldier
could resolve him; therefore seeing the Soldier traveling so fast on his way,
he asks him the question twice out of earnestness, as we use to double our
question in the like case.

12.
The Watchman said,] i. e. I said.

The Soldier speaks of himself in the third person.

The morning comes and also the night.] q. d. The morning comes to some, and
the night to others; that is, Some rise and some fall, and in particular the
Medes they rise, having got a great victory over Babylon, and Babylon is
fallen, and we and all that were confederates with her are undone, and shall
fall with her.

The morning signifies prosperity rising and increasing; Prosperity as I may
call it in its spring, and the night adversity; adversity after a time or state
of prosperity.

But secondly, the morning may not only signify prosperity, but it may
signify Gods judgments also, and so it signifies Ezech. 7.7. in these words;
The morning is come unto Thee, O Thou that dwell in the Land. Where the
morning is put for judgments in allusion to that, that judgment was wont to
be executed in the morning, Psalm. 101.8. Je. 21.12. Being therefore the morning
may be put for judgments, and the night does commonly signify calamities, as
Micah. 3.6. The sense of this place may be this, judgments and calamities (are
come upon Babylon, and they) are coming upon us; for note, that the words of
this place may be rendered out of the original word for word, thus; the morning
and the night are come.

But thirdly, may not the morning be taken for the East, because it dawneth
from the East, and rises in the East? And may not the night be taken for the
West, because the Sun (which causes the night by its setting) sets in the
West? And may not the morning and the night, that is, the East and the West be
taken for the people of the East, and the people of the West? If so, then the
sense of this place may be this, The people of the East, and also of the West
(having joined themselves with the Medes, and overthrown Babylon) are coming
against us. And this might the soldier conceive of the Army of the Medes, that
it consisted of all people of the world through fear: for if fame speak that
Army great, fear would speak it greater. Quisque pavendo dat vires Famae.
Lucan.

If ye will enquire, enquire ye,] When the Ismaelite or Soldier which came
from Babylon, told the Edomite and those which were with him, that Babylon was
destroyed by the Medes, and that the Medes had sent out their Armies to conquer
all which were confederates with Babylon, from the River Euphrates, to the
River Nilus, they would not believe it, but made as if they would go toward
Babylon to enquire whether it were so or no; which when the Ismaelite
understood, he bid them in a kind of Ironicall manner go and enquire if they
would, saying, if ye will not believe me, but will enquire whether it be so or
no what I have told you; Go, enquire.

Return,] When the Edomite and they that were with him, had gone a little way
toward Babylon, as though they would have gone to enquire the truth of what
the Ismaelite told them, they stood at a stand, as men doubting whether they
should go any further or no; which the Ismaelite perceiving, calls to them to
come back again, saying, Return, come.

Come] This word may be taken as a word of exhortation, and he may exhort them
to return, lest the Medes should meet with them by the way and slay them; Or,
he may hereby exhort the Edomites to join with the Ismaelites in a common
defense, so that they might (if possible) defend themselves against their
common enemies, seeing Babylon was destroyed, and the Assyrians in whom they
trusted were overcome.

13.
The burden upon Arabia,] i. e. The burden which shall fall or be laid upon
Arabia. What is meant by the burden, See verse 1.

By Arabia is meant Arabia Petraea.

In the Forest in Arabia shall ye lodge, O ye traveling companies of
Dedanim.] Some take Dedanim for a City of Arabia Petraea; others (and they the
greatest part) for a people called Dedanim, or the Dedanites which were the
children of Dedan, which was the son of Jockshan, the son of Abraham by
Keturah, Genesis 25.3.

Those Dedanim or Dedanites the children of Dedan, inhabited part of Arabia
Petraea, and are here put by a Synecdoche for all the Arabians of that Arabia.
And that which the Prophet here says of them is, that they shall be feign to
fly away out of their Cities and dwellings, and to lodge and sculke in the
Forests of Arabia deserta, among the trees and woods, and rocks and holes
thereof, to hide themselves there from the fury of the Assyrians under
Sennacherib who shall persecute them and destroy their Cities.

It is believed that when Sennacherib intended to march against Judah, he took
Arabia Petraea in his way, and did first subdue that, and make it desolate, and
that is that which Isaiah does here prophecy of.

In Arabia,] i. e. In Arabia Deserta, whither they shall flee out of Arabia
Petraea to save themselves.

O ye traveling companies of Dedanim.] I conceive that he calls them
traveling companies, because they were given to merchandise, and to travel in
companies from one noted place of traffic to another, as the Ismaelites and
Midianites did, of which we read, Genesis 37. verse. 25.28. Or, he may call them
traveling companies from this occasion, that they were feign to flee away in
companies, and to travel through Forests and desolate places, to save their
lives from the Assyrians, by a prolepsis.

14.
The inhabitants of the land of Tema brought water to him that was thirsty,
etc.] q. d. Ye shall be oppressed with hunger and thirst, while ye flee through
Arabia Deserta, and be glad if the inhabitants of that land will bring you
bread to eat, and water to drink, lest otherwise ye perish.

Note here the Enallage of the person and number, for the Prophet changes the
person here, speking of the traveling companies in the third person, whereas
he spoke to them in the second person just before: He speaks also here as of
One in the Singular Number, whereas in the former verse he spoke to them as to
many in the Plural Number.

Note also, that he uses here a Praeterperfect tense for a Future.

The inhabitants of the land of Tema.] The Land of Tema was in Arabia Deserta,
and had its denomination from Tema the Son of Ismael, which was the Son of
Abraham by Agar, Genesis 25.15. And by the Land of Tema, is meant all Arabia
Deserta, by a Synecdoche.

The inhabitants of the Land of Tema, brought water to him that was thirsty,
they prevented with bread him that fled.] Note, that the Prophet intends not by
these words to commend the charity of the Arabians of Arabia Deserta, but to
set forth the misery of the Arabians of Arabia Petraea, which should be such,
as that if it were not for the Arabians of Arabia Deserta (which were a poor
people in respect of them, and whose country was barren in respect of theirs)
they should perish by Famine, and therefore should be glad of a little bread,
and a little water from their hands.

They prevented with their bread him that fled.] They shall meet you with bread
when ye flee from the face of the Assyrians, lest otherwise ye should perish
for want of food before ye could come to ask it.

15.
For they fled from the sword.] i. e. For ye shall flee from the sword of the
Assyrians, etc.

He continues still the third person, but changes the Singular number again
into a Plural, and uses a Praeterperfect tense for a Future as before.

He gives a reason here why he said, Him that fled, and shows withal, that the
traveling companies of Dedanim shall have need of bread and water, because
they shall be forced to flee from the sword, and shall take no victuals with
them to sustain them in their flight, as having not time to make provision for
themselves.

16.
For thus has the Lord said unto me,] i. e: Moreover, thus has the Lord said
unto me.

For, is put here for Moreover, as verse 6.

Within a year according to the years of an Hireling.] i. e. Within one precise
year. See cap. 16. v. 14.

From what time this year should begin, whether from the time of the Prophets
delivering this Prophecy; or, whether from the time that they should come to
pass which he prophesied against Arabia Petraea, is doubtful: I think it
probable, that it takes its beginning from the time that the Assyrians invaded
Arabia Petraea, and laid it wast; for within a year after that, it is probable
that the Ethiopians did wage War upon and destroyed the Kedarens. So that
within a year, is as if he had said, within a year after this.

And all the glory of Kedar shall fail,] i. e. All the glory of Kedar shall be
cut off.

The Particle And, is here redundant, as it is also in Cap. 16.14.

The glory] i. e. The great multitude in which they glory, Metonymia Effecti.

Of Kedar.] i. e. Of the Kedarens the children of Kedar.

Kedar was the son of Ismael, Genesis 25.13. Whose posterity from him were called
Kedarens: These Kedarens dwelt in Arabia Deserta, and dwelt in Tents, Psalm.
120.5. And they may be taken here for all the Arabians of that Arabia by a
Synecdoche.

17.
And the residue of the number of Archers] It appears by this, that these
Kedarens had most of their Soldiers slain before the time here prophesied of;
but by whom they were slain it is not certain, yet it may be that they were
slain by the Assyrians which wasted Arabia Petraea, while they followed those
Arabians into Arabia Deserta, who yet destroyed not all the Inhabitants of
Arabia Deserta, but having greater employments elsewhere, admitted of their
submission, and yielding themselves and so departed: for which submission and
yiedling of themselves to the Assyrians, it is not unlikely that the Ethiopians
set upon the Kedarens or Arabians of Arabia Deserta in the way as they marched
against Assyria, and that by them was this prophecy fulfilled.

Of Archers,] It seems that the chiefest strength of the Keda^ens or Arabians
of Arabia Deserta, consisted in their Bow-men or Archers.

Shall be diminished.] viz. By the Ethiopians, as Tirakah King of Ethiopia
marches against Assyria, 2 Kings 19.9.

ISAIAH, CHAP. XXII.
THe burden of the valley of vision,] i. e. The misery or a Prophecy of that
misery which shall befall Jerusalem.

Jerusalem is here called the valley of vision, because it did abound with
visions, which the Lord sent to it by his Prophets (though few did regard those
visions) as a fruitful valley abounds with corn.

He puts vision here for visions, a singular for a plural number.

Or, therefore it is called the valley, because Jerusalem was situate in a
valley (at least a great part of it) for a great part of it was situate at the
foot of Mount Sion, and the Psalmist says, that the Mountains stood round
about Jerusalem, Psalm. 125.2. And therefore the valley of visions, because it
abounded with visions of the Lord, as was said before.

What aileth thee now] i. e.] What is the matter with thee now?

These are the words of the Prophet himself (though in a vision) to Jerusalem,
which though it were a City consisting of many of all ages, yet he speaks to
it here as one single person, by a Prosopopoeia.

What aileth now?] The Prophet saw in a vision all the people of Jerusalem
weeping and wailing upon their house tops, about the time that Salmaneser
invaded the Land of Israel, and made such havoc of the people thereof; and
seeing them so to weep and wail upon their house-tops, he expostulates with
them in a vision, to know what was the reason of that their weeping; and when
they tell him the cause of their weeping, he taking occasion from their answer;
prophesies that they shall have the same cause of weeping themselves, for
themselves ere long were.

That thou art wholly gone up to the house tops?] i. e. That thou art wholly
(men, women, and children) gone up to the house tops to weep.

The houses of Jerusalem and of the Eastern people, were built flat on the
tops, so that a man might walk on the tops thereof, and do many things thereon:
thither were they wont to go up to lament and weep, every one in the days of
public calamity, Cap. 15.3. Jer. 48.38.

2.
Thou that art full of stirs,] i. e. Thou that art usually full of stirs,
proceeding from mirth.

A tumultuous City,] i. e. A City where there is usually much meeting, and much
noise of Pipes and Viols, and all manner of music, and dancing and revelling.

A joyous City,] i. e. A City in which there is wont to be shown much joy.

The slain men are not slain with the sword, nor dead in battle.] q. d. If
there should be War in thy Land, and thy children within thee should be slain
with the sword, or dye in battle, I would not wonder that thou art wholly gone
up to the house-tops to weep and lament: But now because there is no such
matter, but they which dye in thee, dye not by the sword, nor are slain in
battle, I much wonder that thou art gone up thither and do so lament.

3.
All thy Rulers are fled together,] Between this and the former Verse I
conceive that these words are to be understood, viz. And what aileth thy
Rulers? for etc. q. d. And what aileth thy Rulers? for all thy Rulers are fled
together.

All thy Rulers] i. e. All the Rulers and chief men of thy Land which lived in
several places of the Land for the good of the people, especially they which
lived in the utmost part thereof toward the Land of Israel.

Are fled,] Supple, From their own dwellings into thee, as into a strong hold,
for safety.

Therefore did these Rulers flee to Jerusalem for safety, because they were
afraid of Salmaneser and his Army, lest they should come and fight against the
Cities of Judah, and destroy them, as they had fought against the Cities of the
ten Tribes of Israel, and destroyed them.

Note, that what the Prophet asks here, he asks not out of ignorance, but
that he might take occasion from Jerusalems answer, to prophecy what he had to
prophecy against her.

Together,] i. e. Every one of them. See Cap. 1.28.

This relates to the word all: q. d. All thy Rulers, every one of them.

They are bound by the Archers,] i. e. They are as men which are taken and
bound by the Soldiers of their Enemies to be carried away into captivity; for
as such men look pitifully, and weep and lament, so do they.

The note of similitude, viz. As, is here to be understood. See cap. 21.8.

By the Archers understand any kind of Soldiers.

If the Rulers of the Land were thus fearful, and did look so pitifully, and so
lament, what must be thought of the common people?

Are bound] i. e. Are as bound.

This is a repetition of the former sentence.

Together] i. e. Every one of them.

This relates to the word All, as before.

Which have fled from far.] i. e. Which have fled from the farthest parts of
thy Land, the Land of Judah, into thee, because thou art the strongest City of
the Land, encompassed with strong walls, and fortified with good bulwarks.

4.
Therefore said I, look away from me,] Hitherto the Prophet spoke in his own
person to Jerusalem: now Jerusalem answers the Prophet in her person: For
this is as it were a Dialogue between the Prophet and Jerusalem, yet all in a
Vision.

The answer which Jerusalem gives for her going up to the house-tops is this,
that she went thither to weep and lament, because the daughter of her people
was spoiled.

Therefore said I, look away from me, I will weep bitterly,] q. d. Therefore
went I wholly up to the house-tops, because I said, look away from me, I will
weep bitterly, labor not to comfort me: and therefore I said, look away from
me, I will weep bitterly, labor not to comfort me, because of the spoiling of
the daughter of my people, etc.

Here is a Brachylogy, a great deal contained in a little.

Therefore] This relates to that which follows, namely to that, because of the
spoiling, etc.

Said I,] Supple, To those which would fain comfort me.

Look away from me,] i. e. Think not to comfort me; and therefore come not to
me, neither look upon me or visit me for that end.

I will weep bitterly, labor not to comfort me, because of the spoiling of the
daughter of my people.] i. e. For I will weep bitterly, and will not be
comforted, because the daughter of my people is spoiled.

Note, that by the daughter of my people may be meant Samaria only, which was
the chief City of the ten Tribes; for the Hebrews use to call a City by the
name of a daughter or virgin, as was observed Cap. 1.8. And the spoiling here
spoken of, was that which was made by Salmaneser and his Army, 2 King. 17.5. at
which time they besieged Samaria, and vexed it with all hostility three years,
and then overcame it. Or the daughter of her people may be taken collective for
the daughters, and thereby may be meant, not Samaria only, but also all the
Cities of Israel, which were all spoiled by Salmaneser's Army.

Jerusalem calls the people of the ten Tribes, her people, because of the
neerness of kindred and blood which was between them two; for the Jews and the
ten Tribes of Israel were all the children of one man, even Jacob, who was also
called Israel.

It may be here objected, That it is a thing unlikely that the men of Jerusalem
should lament thus at the spoiling of the ten Tribes of Israel (when they were
spoiled by Salmaneser) who would rather rejoice at it, and comfort themselves
in it, because they were their bitter Enemies.

Ans. That which is here spoken of Jerusalem weeping, because of the spoiling
of the daughter of her people, was represented only in a Vision; and that
which is represented in a Vision, is not to be conceived always as a thing
really and actually done.

But suppose this to have been actually done, there would be no absurdity in
the supposition: For though the men of Judah and Jerusalem might comfort
themselves in the thoughts of the destruction of the ten Tribes, before this
destruction came, yet might they lament it when it did come. So did the people
of Israel desire to cut off the Tribe of Benjamin, who when they had near cut
it off, were sorry, and wept for what was done, Judge. 21.6.

Again, Jerusalem might lament and weep, because of the spoiling of the
daughter of her people, because she her self was in fear of being spoiled,
while the daughter of her people was in spoiling.

5.
It is a day of trouble,] Supple, To the daughter of my people.

And of treading down,] i. e. And a day in which the Assyrians under Salmaneser
do tread her down.

And of perplexity,] Supple, To her the daughter of my people.

By the Lord God of Hosts,] The Assyrians were but Gods rod and instrument in
this trouble, treading down and perplexity of the ten Tribes; but God himself
was the chief cause thereof; and therefore he says, it was done by the Lord
God of Hosts.

In the valley of Vision,] These words relate to those which went immediately
before; q. d. By the Lord God of Hosts, which dwells in the valley of Vision,
that is, in Jerusalem.

By the valley of Vision is meant Jerusalem: see verse. 1. And the Lord is said
to dwell in Jerusalem, Psalm. 135.21. and that because of his especial presence
in the Temple which was there.

Breaking down the walls,] i. e. And a day of breaking down the walls, Supple,
of Samaria, etc. by the Assyrians.

And of crying to the mountains,] i. e. And a day of the crying (of the men of
Samaria and Israel) to the mountains.

Of crying to the mountains,] i. e. Of the crying of the men of Samaria and
Israel one to another, to fly unto the mountains, there to hide themselves,
because the Assyrians had broken down their Cities.

Perhaps To the mountains were the words of their cry, as if they should say
and cry one to another, To the mountains, To the mountains, etc. Or by crying
to the mountains may be understood loud crying, whereby their cry went unto the
mountains, and did echo again from thence.

6.
Elam] See cap. 21.2.

At this time the Elamites were at the command of the Assyrians, though
afterward they would not obey them, but helped to ruin them.

Bare the quiver,] i. e. Bears the quiver, Supple, against Israel; q. d. The
Elamites war against the daughter of my people with Bow and Arrows.

A preterperfect tense is put here for a present.

With charets of men and horsemen,] q. d. Coming against her with Charets of
men and horsemen.

With charets of men] He calls those charets of men here, which military men
used to ride and to fight in: and he calls them charets of men, to distinguish
them from Charets or Wagons, which were to carry provisions in, and other
necessaries for War.

Kir] By Kir he means the Medes.

We read of one Kir, a chief City of Moab, Isa. cap. 15.1. But this is not
that Kir, but the Kir here meant was Kir a chief City of the Medes, of which 2
Kings 16.9. which City by a Metonymy signifies the Medes of Kir; and the Medes
the inhabitants of Kir are taken by a Synecdoche for the Medes in general.

Note, that the Medes were under the Assyrians at this time, though afterward
they revolted and became their matters.

Uncovered the shield.] i. e. Makes use of the shield against her.

The shield is a defensive piece of Arms, but by it understand offensive Arms
also.

He says, uncovered the shield, for made use of the shield, alluding thereby
to the cases and covers wherein they were wont to put their Shields or Bucklers
when they had no use of them, and out of which they took them, when they made
use thereof.

7.
And it shall come to pass that thy choicest valleys shall be full of Charets,
etc.] i. e. And it shall come to pass, that thy Suburbs and thy Valleys which
are without thy walls shall be full of the Charets of the Assyrians, O
Jerusalem.

Here the Prophet speaks again to Jerusalem in his own person, and fore-tells
the doom which shall befall her, by Sennacherib.

And note, that the Prophet did here interrupt Jerusalem before she could give
a full answer to the doubts or questions which he moved to her in the first,
second, and third verses; and upon occasion of those words; And Elam bare the
Quiver with Charets of men, and with horsemen, etc. Foretold that the Assyrians
should bring the like misery upon her under Sennacherib, as they and their
accomplices the Medes and Elamites had done upon the Kingdom of Israel under
Salmaneser.

At the gate.] i. e. At thy gates.

A Singular for a Plural number.

He seems to have pointed to the gates of Jerusalem when he said, The gate,
showing thereby what gate he meant.

8.
And he discovered the covering of Judah,] i. e. And Sennacherib King of
Assyria, shall demolish and beat down the fenced Cities of Judah.

See this fulfilled, 2 Chronicles. 32.1. And 2 Kings cap. 18. verse. 13.

He puts here a Relative without an Antecedent, and a Praeterperfect or
Praeterimperfect tense for a Future.

The covering of Judah] By the covering may be meant any wall, or fort, or
fortification, or place of defense, whereby men defended themselves from their
enemies in the time of War, and that by a Metaphor from a covering which is
spread over any thing to keep it safe from dust and soil, and any thing which
may mar it: And to discover the covering signifies properly to take away the
covering from off the thing which is therewith covered; and metaphorically to
beat down any wall, or fort, or fortification, or place of defense, which
metaphorical signification is the signification of this place.

But being that by the covering may be meant any wall, or fort, or
fortification, or place of defense; what is that which is called the covering
of Judah?

Answer. By the covering of Judah is meant the walls and fortifications of the
fenced Cities of Judah, which were broken down and laid waste by Sennacherib, 2
Kin. 18.13.

The covering therefore is put for the coverings, a singular for a plural
number.

The discovering of the covering of Judah, that is, The beating down and taking
of the fenced Cities of Judah, did nearly concern Jerusalem; wherefore
Jerusalem when Sennacherib began to encamp against them, and to take them,
began to look and provide for her self, as it is here prophesied, 2 Chronicles. 32.
verse. 2, 3. etc.

And thou did look in that day to the Armor of the house of the Forest.] i.
e. And at that time when Sennacherib shall begin to discover the coverings of
Judah, that is, To fight against the fenced Cities of Judah, and to take them,
thou will look to the Armor which thou have laid up in thy Armorie or Magazin
of Arms, to see that it be in good plight, and in a readiness, that thou may
use it to defend thy self.

He puts a Praeterimperfect tense for a Future.

Of the house of the Forrest] i. e. Of the house of the Forest of Lebanon.

This house of the Forest of Lebanon was the Armorie of the Kings of Judah,
and it was situate in Jerusalem, 1 Kings 7.2. Here were the golden Targets and
Shields kept which Solomon made, 1 Kings 10.17. And hence were those Targets
and Shields taken by Shishak King of Egypt, when he came up against Jerusalem.
1 Kings 14. verse. 25.26.

It was called the house of the Forest of Lebanon, either from that house
which (some affirm from 2 Chronicles. 8.6.) Solomon built in the Forest of Lebanon,
for the same use as this was built, viz. to be an Armorie or Magazine; or,
because of the great number of Cedar-pillars, and great store of Cedar-wood
which were used about that house, which Cedars and Wood were brought from
Lebanon (which was famous for Cedars) which pillars were so many, and store of
Wood so great, as that the whole Forest of Lebanon seemed to have been cut
down to make pillars, and yield materials for that house. See 1 Kings 7.2. Or,
it might be called the house of the Forest of Lebanon, because it was
pleasantly seated and planted about with trees and groves ( Eccles. 2. v.
4.5.6.) which were no less pleasant then the Forest of Lebanon it self; for
it is not unusual for a like place to give denomination to a like: Wherefore
as all Universities were called Academies, from that famous place of Learning
in or near to Athens called the Academie, so might every pleasant grove or
place of trees be called Lebanon, from that renowned Forest of Lebanon; and
this house because it stood among such trees, might be called the house of the
Forest of Lebanon.

9.
Ye have seen also the breaches of the City of David that they are many,] q. d.
Ye will also view the City of David, to see what reparations it wants, and ye
shall find that the breaches thereof are many, and that it wants much
repair.

Of the City of David] The fort or strong hold which was built upon Mount Sion
in Jerusalem, which the Iebusites hold, and which David won from them, was
called the City of David, 2 Samuel 5.7.9. In this Fort or strong Hold there were
many breaches and ruinous places, which came by the neglect which long peace
brings with it.

And ye gathered together the water of the lower poole] i. e. And ye will
gather together the waters of the lower poole into hollow places and ditches,
which ye shall make for that end.

They gathered together these waters that they might have plenty of waters near
at hand, wherewith to temper the mortar which they should use in building and
repairing the breaches of the City of David, and for such other ends as the
waters of the old poole were gathered for, of which verse 10.

10.
And ye have numbered the houses of Jerusalem,] i. e. And ye will make choice of
a certain number of houses in Jerusalem, (as many as will serve your turn) that
you may pull them down, and have the materials thereof, wherewith to repair
the City of David.

It was a case of necessity which made them to pull down houses for the
materials thereof, because the materials thereof were near at hand, and ready
fitted in a manner for the building, which they could not have elsewhere in so
short a time, the Assyrian being in the Land, when the counsel of the King of
Hezekiah advised him to repair the City of David, 2 Chronicles. 32.2, 3.

Of Jerusalem] Jerusalem seems to be opposed here to the City of David, and
therefore to be taken for the lower City of Jerusalem; for there was an upper
and a lower City thereof.

And the houses] i. e. The houses of Jerusalem which ye shall make choice of to
pull down for their materials.

Have ye broken down] i. e. Will ye break down?

Note, that in all this place he puts a Praeterimperfect and Preterperfect
tense for a Future, after the Prophetique manner.

To fortify the wall.] i. e. To repair and fortify the wall, Supple, of the
City of David, wherein were many breaches through the long neglect which peace
causes.

He puts wall, for walls; a singular, for a plural number.

11.
Ye made also a ditch between the two walls for the water of the old poole,] i.
e. Ye will also make a deep trench or ditch between the two walls, therein to
receive the water of the old poole.

The reason why they gathered these waters into a ditch or trench was, that
they might have plenty of waters themselves when they were besieged, and that
they might debar the Assyrians the besiegers, of as much water as they could.
See 2 Chronicles. 32. verse 3, 4.

Between the two walls] These two walls may happily be those which we read of,
2 Kings 25.4.

Of the old poole,] This old poole was that which is also called the upper
Poole. cap. 7.3. and cap. 36.2.

But ye have not looked unto the maker thereof.] q. d. But ye will not look up
unto him that is the author of that, that is, of Sennacheribs discovering the
coverings of Judah, and fighting against him.

Note, that these words, But ye have not looked to the maker thereof, relate to
those, Thou did look in that day to the Armor of the house of the Forest,
etc. and they contain an Antithesis to them, as if he should say, when ye shall
hear that Sennacherib is come against Judah, and discovers the covering of
Judah, ye will look in that day to the Armor of the house of the Forest, etc.
But ye will not look to him which is the cause or author of Sennacheribs coming
against Judah, to humble your selves before him, and request his help; yet will
look unto your weapons and fortifications, that ye may strengthen your selves
by them. But ye will not look to the Lord, to make him your strength, who is
able to turn Sennacherib and his Host back (as being the author of their
coming) and to preserve you against his whole Army.

Unto the maker thereof] i. e. Unto him which is the cause thereof, and which
made Sennacherib and his Army to come against Judah, and to discover the
coverings thereof.

He borrows this word Maker, from a Potter, and uses it here metaphorically
for the cause or author of a thing.

Thereof] That is, of Sennacheribs coming into Judah, and discovering the
coverings thereof.

This sentence is the Antecedent to this Relative thereof, which is not yet
here formally set down, but to be gathered from the eight verse.

That the Hebrews do often leave the Antecedent of the Relative to be
understood, is not unknown, and here it is so left, but not hard (as you see)
to be understood.

The maker thereof] That the Lord was the author of Sennacheribs and his
Assyrians coming into the Land of Judah, and fighting against the Cities
thereof, and discovering the coverings thereof; you may see cap. 10. v. 5, 6.
cap. 37.26.

By saying The Maker thereof, The Prophet intimates that the Lord was able to
preserve them from Sennacherib and his Army: For if he was the author of their
coming, he might be the cause of their going back again.

That fashioned it long ago,] i. e. That contrived it in his mind, and
decreed it long ago, v. 2. that Sennacherib and the Assyrians should invade
Judah, and fight against it, and discover the covering thereof.

He alludes here in the word fashioned, to a Potter fashioning his pots upon
his wheel, as he did to a Potter, in the word maker.

See the like manner of Allusion or Metaphor for the same purpose. Cap. 37.26.

Note, that what the Prophet speaks here, he speaks not of all the Inhabitants
of Jerusalem, but of some of them; for many of them were good and godly, and
sought the Lord, and relied upon him for preservation against the Assyrians,
though many were such as he here describes, and looked not to the Lord for
help, but trusted in their Armor, and in their walls and fortifications; and
because there were in Jerusalem good and bad; he speaks of Jerusalem sometimes
as of a good, and sometimes as of a wicked person; as he has occasion to speak
sometimes of the good, sometimes of the evil of her Inhabitants.

12.
And in that day] i. e. And in that day in which the forementioned things
shall come to pass.

Did the Lord of Hosts call to weeping] i. e. Shall the Lord of Hosts call you
to weeping.

God called them to weeping at that time by his Prophets whom he sent
opportunely to exhort them to bewail their sins, when his judgments were upon
them; yea when he sends his judgments upon a people, he may be said to call
them to weeping by his very judgment; for the judgments of God are to humble
us, and make us sorry for our offenses.

To baldness] i. e. To shave their heads.

To shave the head was a sign of great sorrow, and used in the days of public
calamity.

But you will say, that God did forbid his people to shave their heads, Levit.
19. verse. 27. and Deuteronomy. 14.1.

Answer. God did forbid his people to shave their heads, and to make themselves
bald for the dead, as those alleged places testify; but he did not utterly
forbid them so to do in all cases; for they might lawfully shave their heads,
and make themselves bald in the case of a common or public calamity, as
appears, Micah. 1.16. And at such a time did they make themselves bald, and
shave off their hair, because the hair is a great ornament, and in time of
public calamity they laid aside all ornaments.

And to girding with sackcloth.] i. e. And to put on sackcloth, and to gird it
to you with a girdle of leather, or the like.

In the time of mourning, they were wont to put on sackcloth, as appears,
Psalm. 30.11. and 35, 13. and 1 Chronicles. 21 16.

13.
And behold,] i. e. But behold.

And for But.

Slaying of Oxen,] Supple, For Feasts.

Let us eat and drink] i. e. And crying one to another, and saying, let us eat
and drink, that is, let us be merry while we have time to live.

For to morrow] i. e. For after a little while.

We shall dye.] Supple, By the hand of the Assyrians.

These are the words of most desperate wicked men.

Note, that these sinners seem not to be the same with those which he spoke of
before, v. 11. for though they looked not to God, yet they looked to the house
of their armor, and to their fortifications, and trusted in them against their
enemy; But these men trusted neither in God, nor in their armoury, and
fortifications, but made account, that as the Assyrians had vanquished all
places that they fought against, so they would vanquish Jerusalem, and
therefore they thought to rejoice whilst they might, and to recompense the
shortness of their life with the fill they intended to take in pleasure.

14.
And it was revealed,] Therefore it was revealed.

And, for Therefore.

It was revealed in mine ears by the Lord of Hosts,] q. d. This which follows
was spoken by the Lord of Hosts in my hearing, saying.

The Prophet speaks here in his own person.

This iniquity] That is, this iniquity which is mentioned, v. 11, 12, 13.

Shall not be purged from you] i. e. Shall not be forgiven you.

He alludes to the legal purgations for expiation of offenses.

Till ye dye.] That is, so long as ye live, for plagues shall follow you after
plagues, and misery after misery, and cross after cross, to your dying day.

It may be objected against what is here said, that the Prophet says, that the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem which shall be in Jerusalem when Sennacheribs Army
besieges it, shall be forgiven their iniquities, Cap. 33.24. How therefore
does he here say, That their iniquities shall not be purged from them.

For answer to this, see notes on cap. 33.24.

15.
Thus says the Lord God of Hosts,] Supple, to me Isaiah.

Here begins a new Sermon, or at least a new matter.

Unto this Treasurer,] i. e. Unto this man which is the Treasurer of the Kings
Treasure.

Even to Shebna] This Shebna was not that Shebna of which we read, Cap. 36.22.
but another, though of the same name.

Which is over the house] Supple, Of the King, to govern and rule all the Kings
family.

It is believed, that the reason why the Lord denounced that which is here
written against Shebna, was because Shebna distrusting the providence of God,
and his Word concerning Judah, when Salmaneser (was depopulating and destroying
the Ten Tribes) thought it best for the men of Judah to send to Salmaneser, and
to render themselves to him, lest otherwise he should come and destroy them, as
he had done the men of the Kingdom of Israel, and to this he would have
persuaded the men of Judah and Jerusalem.

16.
What have thou here?] i. e. What Land of inheritance have thou here?

No stranger, which was not of the seed of Jacob, could by right inherit or
possess any of that Land which was given to the sons of Jacob.

And whom have thou here?] i. e. And whom have thou here of kin to thee? q. d.
Thou have no inheritance here, nor have thou any kindred here; for thou art a
stranger (as Doeg was, 1 Samuel 21.7.) therefore thou should not have made thee
such a magnificent sepulcher here as thou have made.

It seems that Shebna, being of great honor in the Kings Court in his
lifetime, was desirous of a glorious and magnificent Monument, in or near to
Jerusalem, after his death; but knowing that the wills of the dead are not so
punctually performed as they intended, would make himself such a Monument while
he himself was living, a Monument too too glorious and magnificent for him,
considering what he was by birth, a stranger, and a stranger of base parentage
(as is thought) though his wit and natural parts raised him.

That thou have hewed thee out a sepulcher here,] i. e. That thou have caused
so magnificent and glorious a sepulcher to be hewn out for thee here, out of a
Rock in such an eminent place.

Here,] i. e. In or about Jerusalem, the chief City of the Land.

As he that heweth himself a sepulcher on high,] i. e. As a King, or some great
man of the Land, who causes his sepulcher to be hewn out of some eminent rock.

And that graveth, etc.] This is a repetition of the former sentence: and from
these two sentences I guess, that among the men of Judah, ordinary men had
their sepulchers ordinarily on the plain ground; but the Kings and Nobles and
great men had their sepulchers in eminent rocks and places.

That graveth] i. e. That heweth, or cutteth out, or causes to be hewed or cut
out.

An habitation] i. e. A sepulcher: For a sepulcher is as an house or place of
habitation to the dead.

For himself] Supple, To dwell in when he is dead.

In a rock.] Whereof there were many in Judah.

17.
Behold the Lord will carry thee away with a mighty captivity,] q. d. It
seems by thy hewing out for thy self such a sepulcher, in or near to
Jerusalem, that thou believe, that as thou live here, so thou shall dye
here; but behold the Lord will carry thee away with a mighty captivity; he will
surely violently turn and toss thee like a ball into a large Country, and there
shall thou dye.

With a mighty captivity,] So that thou shall not escape out of their hands
which carry thee away captive.

And will surely cover thee.] i. e. And then he will clothe thee with a witness.

To cover signifies here to clothe.

Shebna was at this time adorned with a robe of honor, a robe befitting the
chiefest man in the Kings Court, verse: 21. A long robe which happily had a long
train appendant to it, in which Shebna did pride himself, and with which he was
puffed up above all that were in the Kings Court.

The sense therefore is, q. d. Thou art now clothed with a robe of honor, and a
long robe, with a train appendant to it, which makes thee proud and
high-minded; but then when the Lord shall carry thee away captive, he shall
clothe thee with a witness: for he shall clothe thee as captives are clothed,
that is, with base and ragged garments, and garments of disgrace, garments
which shall scarce cover thy buttocks, and that shall pull down thy proud and
haughty mind.

But yet it may be that it is not this robe which the Prophet jerks at, but
some mantle or covering, which Shebna out of his pride and stateliness might
use, which might be gorgeous and as rich as could be bought or made, for the
matter of it; and unusual, and altogether affected, for the fashion of it.

These words, And will surely cover thee, are to be read as it were with a
parenthesis, and were occasioned by that word captivity going next before them:
For captives used to wear clothes so short, as would scarce cover their
buttocks. See cap. 20.4.

18.
He will surely violently turn and toss thee like a ball into a large Country,]
q. d. As a ball is tossed to and fro in play, and is easily struck or banded
afar off; so shall thou be tossed to and fro, and shall be carried away afar
off into a large Country.

Captives are tossed to and fro from one place to another, and delivered from
one hand to another, as the Army marches, or as their Convoy are employed in
service, now one way, now another.

Violently] i. e. This signifies, that they shall drive Shebna before them,
perhaps with knocks and blows, as hard-hearted Soldiers drive their prisoners
which draw back, or are unwilling to go of themselves, or make no such haste as
they would have them.

Into a large Country,] i. e. Into Assyria, which was a large Country, and of
vast Dominions.

By these words he signifies the place into which Shebna shall be carried away
captive, and intimates that he should endure an hard and cruel captivity; for
the Assyrians were cruel, and without mercy to their captives, Cap. 14.

The question will be here, How and when this Shebna was carried away captive?

It is likely that this Shebna was put out of Court, and banished the Land
(being a stranger) or the City at least, for some displeasure or other which
the King conceived against him, probably for the reason mentioned in Notes,
verse. 15. And that the Assyrians under Sennacherib, meeting with him when they
came into Judah, took him, and sent him away captive, among other captives
which they had, into Assyria, or the Dominions thereof.

There shall thou dye,] Hence may that appear which I said before, That this
Shebna was not that Shebna which was Secretary to Hezekiah, Cap. 36. verse. 22.
though he were of the same name.

And there] i. e. And when thou art there, or then; for Adverbs of Place be
sometimes put for Adverbs of Time.

The Charets of thy glory,] i. e. Thy Charets which now thy glory forsooth
rides in, in Jerusalem.

Of thy glory,] i. e. Of thee which art now so glorious.

A man's glory may be sometimes put, by a Metonymical Periphrasis, for a man
himself; as a Kings Majesty, for a King: and so may it be put here, yet not
without a Sarcasm or Irony.

Again, a substantive of the Genitive case is put often by the Hebrews for an
adjective; and so Of thy glory may be put for glorious: q. d. Thy glorious
Charets.

By his glorious Charets is meant the great honor which he received from the
King; for such was Shebna's honor, as that he was the chief of all the Kings
Court, and so next to the King: And the Eastern Kings were wont to honor their
Favorites, and to show their love and respect to them by the horses and charets
which they gave them to ride in, or upon, as appears Genesis 41.43. Esth. 6.8.

Shall be the shame of thy Lords house,] q. d. Shall be a blot to Hezekiah and
his house, because he so much honored thee, whom the Lord himself shall so
abase and dishonor, and as it were stigmatize and mark out for thy unworthiness.

19.
I will drive thee from thy station,] i. e. I will drive thee from that
honorable place in which thou art set.

He speaks here in the person of God.

Thy station,] A station signifies sometimes an Harbor for ships, sometimes a
place appointed for Soldiers to stand and watch in; here it is taken
metaphorically for a Place or Office.

Shall he] i. e. The King Hezekiah. A Relative is put here without an
Antecedent, after the manner of the Hebrews: or else the Lord speaks here of
himself in the third person.

In this pulling down of Shebna from his honor, God was the principal Cause,
Hezekiah (if yet Hezekiah be here meant) was but his instrument.

20.
In that day] Supple, In which I shall drive thee from thy station, etc.

He speaks still in the person of God.

I will call my servant Eliakim, etc.] That which is here spoken of Eliakim,
you may see fulfilled 2 King. 18.18, 37.

I will clothe him with thy robe,] i. e. I will place him in thy Office, and
honor him with that honor which thou now have in thy Masters the Kings house.

The robe was an Ensign of an honor, and a badge of some eminent place: and it
is likely that he that was over the Kings house, had a peculiar robe
appertaining to his Office.

Thy robe] He means either the same individual robe which he wore, as though
that robe was to pass from hand to hand; or else he means a robe like to him,
and the same every way for fashion, to signify the same Office in which he was.

And strengthen him with thy girdle,] As Nobles and men in place had gallant
robes according to their place; so had they also girdles suitable to their
robes, wherewith they were girded.

He says, And strengthen him with thy girdle, for And gird him with thy
girdle, because it is a strength to the back to be girded about the loins.

He may also allude to the strength, that is, to the power which a great man
has by his Office, whereof the girdle is here a badge.

I will commit thy Government into his hands,] He speaks that plainly here
which he spoke in a Figure before.

Thy Government,] i. e. The Government which thou have.

And he shall be a Father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem,] i. e. And he shall
be a Prince and Ruler over the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

He says, He shall be a Father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for He shall
be a Prince and a Ruler to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, to show, that he shall
be a good Prince and a good Ruler over the inhabitants of Jerusalem and the
house of Judah; for a good Prince and a good Ruler rules after a fatherly
manner, and with the like affection to the people as a father bears to his
children.

It seems that he who was the Kings Treasurer, and which was over his house,
was by his place a Prince also, and a Magistrate and Ruler over all the people
of the Land, as the Kings Treasurer and other great Officers heretofore had
great authority in our Land, by virtue of their places in the Court.

The house of Judah.] i. e. The children of Judah which was the son of Jacob.

Concerning the sense of the word house, and the reason thereof, see cap. 3.6.

22.
And the key of the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder,] q. d. And I
will give him the chiefest power and authority in the Kings Court.

The key or keys are a Symbol or Ensign of the chiefest Power and Authority;
for he which has the keys of an house can open and shut the doors thereof, and
go in and out at his pleasure, and let in and keep out whom he will: And hence
it is, that Kings and Conquerors, when they take possession of Cities, have the
keys thereof delivered to them, by which Ceremony they are known to be, yea
they are actually made Lords thereof, and the City is become subject to them.

The Key] i. e. The Keys. A singular for a plural number.

Of the house of David] i. e. Of the house of Hezekiah the King, who was the
son of David.

David is put here, per Metonymiam Efficientis, for the son of David: Or else
every King of Judah might be called David, from David that pious King and
Prophet, as every Emperor of Rome was called Caesar, from Julius Caesar the
first Emperor thereof.

Will I lay upon his shoulder,] This he says, either in allusion to Porters of
Cities, and of great men's houses, who having many (and those heavy keys) to
carry, cast them over their shoulders, and so carry them for their greater
ease: Or in allusion to the Government signified here by the Keys, which is
indeed a burden, and burdens are usually laid upon the shoulders, and so born.

So he shall open and none shall shut, and he shall shut and none shall open.]
Supple, The doors of David's house.

By this is Allegorically meant the absolute power which Eliakim should have in
the Kings Court, which should be such, as whatsoever he commanded should be
done, and whatsoever he forbids should not be meddled with.

23.
I will fasten him as a nail in a sure place, etc.

A nail is to be taken here for a peg or pin which is driven into a post or
wall, and whereon they use to hang Cups and Pots and Flagons, and the like.

Eliakim is here likened to a nail fastened in a sure place; first, in regard
of that high place which he had in the Kings Court; for as such nails use to be
fastened on high, over the heads of men; so Eliakim was advanced above all the
servants of the King. Secondly, in regard of the tenancy of his place; For as a
nail which is fastened in a sure place, holds its own, and does not fall; so
did Eliakim keep his place, and lost it not, nor was removed from it, as Shebna
was. But thirdly and lastly, He is likened to a nail fastened in a sure place,
chiefly in respect of that power which he had to advance his kindred, as appears
by the next Verse: For as a nail, which is droven in, and fastened in a sure
place, bears whatsoever cups or vessels hang upon it, and breaks not; and
whatsoever is hanged upon it, hangs aloft; so had Eliakim power to advance all
his kindred to honor, and to sustain them and keep them in it; and his power did
not fail in advancing any one of them, or keeping them in their place to which
he advanced them.

In a sure place,] This he says, because many walls moulder, and many posts
fail, into which such nails or pins are driven.

And he shall be a glorious throne to his fathers house,] i. e. And I will make
him as a glorious Throne to all his kindred.

This signifies the same thing as a nail fastened in a sure place did: For
first, Being that a throne is a stately seat, and elevated and lifted up aloft
from the ground, it signifies the honor and high place that Eliakim should have
in the Kings Court. Secondly, Being that the throne is never wanting to the
Palace, or the Kings Palace is never without the Throne; it signifies that
Eliakim should never be removed from the place which he had in the Kings Court.
But thirdly, and that chiefly, As a throne sustaineth him that sits thereon,
and he that sits thereon sits on high, because a Throne is mounted aloft;
it signifies, that Eliakims kindred should rest upon him for honor and
preferment, and he should advance them every one: And for this chiefly was he
said to be a glorious throne to his fathers house.

But you will say, that thrones are only the seats of Kings; and if Eliakim
should be as a throne to his kindred, it would imply, that he should make them
Kings.

Ans. As thrones are the seats, so crowns are the wearing only of Kings; yet,
by a Metaphor, crowns are attributed to meaner men, as Prove. 12.4. and 14.24.
and 16.31. and 17.6. And as the Crown, so may the Throne also be attributed to
them by a Metaphor.

To his fathers house.] i. e. To his Fathers family, that is, to his kindred.

24.
And they shall hang upon him all the vessels of his fathers house,] i. e. All
the vessels of his fathers house shall hang on him. For the Verb is to be taken
here indefinitely.

These words relate immediately to those, I will fasten him as a Nail in a sure
place, and show in what Eliakim shall be like a Nail: he shall be farther like
a Nail in this; That as the vessels which are hung upon a nail depend upon the
nail, and the nail bears them up aloft; so shall all the kindred of Eliakim
depend upon Eliakim for honor and advancement; and they shall have honor and
advancement by him.

Upon him] He speaks of Eliakim as of a nail or pin, by a Metaphor.

All the glory of his fathers house,] By the glory of his fathers house, he
means, first, the glorious cups and flaggons, and such like vessels, which
belonged to his Fathers house.

But secondly, he means all his kindred, which he here signifies under the
Metaphor of Cups and Flaggons, etc. And these may he call the glory of his
fathers house or family, not only because they are signified by those glorious
vessels, but also because a family has cause to glory of such as they were,
because they were virtuous before Eliakim preferred them, and were honorable by
his preferment.

The offspring and the issue,] q.d. Yea, the offspring and the issue of that
offspring, that is, sons and sons sons, the least and youngest of his kin.

He speaks of the offspring and of the issue here, as of vessels which are
hung upon a pin or nail.

He mentions these particularly, to show, that Eliakim shall advance all his
kindred; for if any of them should be neglected, and not advanced, it would be
such as these are.

Note how the Prophet in this Allegory passes from his Allegory to the thing
meant by the Allegory, and returns from the thing meant to his Allegory again.

All the vessels of small quantity,] He expresses here, under terms of his
first Allegory, what he said plainly just before, to wit, the offspring and
the issue; that is, even Nephews and Neeces of his kindred: q. d. Not only the
Brothers and Sisters, and the Sons and the Daughters, but also the offspring
and issue of them.

From the vessels of Cups to all the vessels of Flagons.] Here is an Elleipsis
thus to be made up: q. d. All the vessels of his fathers house shall they hang
upon him, from the vessels of Cups (which are the smallest) to the vessels of
Flagons (which are the greatest vessels which used to be hanged upon a nail,)
that is, He shall advance all his fathers kindred, from the highest to the
lowest, from the youngest to the eldest.

The vessels of Cups] i. e. Cups which are vessels.

This is sach a manner of phrase as was observed Cap. 14.32.

To all the vessels of Flagons.] i. e. To the greatest vessels, the vessels of
Flagons.

All signifies here the greatest, the most for number, the greatest for qu
ntity: Not much unlike to this is the acception of this word, Ephesians. 1.3.

The vessels of Flagons.] i. e. Flagons which are vessels.

The like phrase as a little before.

What is said of the Nail in this Verse, the like is left here to be understood
of the Throne: q. d. And upon him shall sit all the glorious persons of his
Fathers house, from the child to the old man. But the Prophet seems to leave
it to be understood, because it may be easily understood, by what he had said;
and because he was to take occasion, by the Metaphor of the nail, of another
matter, which he prosecuteth in the next Verse.

25.
The Nail that is fastened in the sure place,] By this is meant Shebna, whom he
calls the Nail fastened in the sure place, by an Irony, because he accounted
himself as a Nail fastened in a sure place: for he did believe that he should
never be put out of his place or office, much less that he should be banished,
(whereupon he built for himself such a stately sepulcher in Jerusalem, verse.
16.) though afterward he was put out of his place, and banished.

And the burden that was upon it shall be cut off.] Supple, And fall with it.

By the Burden he means the vessels which hung upon that Nail.

The meaning is, That Shebna should have a fall from the place of honor in
which he stood; and when he fell, all those which he had advanced to honor, and
relied upon him, should fall with him.

All Court-Creatures, which are made by any Favorite, observe the Favorite more
then they do the King; and are ready to hear him in whatsoever he shall say,
though it be prejudicial to King and Kingdom: It is likely therefore that all
that were advanced by Shebna, were drawn by Shebna to partake with him in that
for which he was expelled the Court, and banished; and therefore they all lost
their places when he lost his.

ISAIAH, CHAP. XXIII.
THe burden of Tire,] i. e. The calamity, or the Prophecy of that calamity
which shall befall Tire. See cap. 13.1.

Tire was a Colony of the Sidonians, and a famous City of Phaenicia, famous for
riches and for traffic. It is reported to have been an Island in ancient
times, and encompassed round about with the Sea, until the days of Alexander
the Great; who when he went about to conquer it, by casting huge heaps of earth
and stones into the Sea, which was between that and the continent, joined it to
the Continent, and of an Island made it a Peninsula.

This Prophecy was fulfilled by Nebuchardnezzar, at or about the time that he
vanquished Judah, and carried away the Inhabitants thereof captive to Babylon.

Howl ye ships of Tarshish,] i. e. Ye shall lament and mourn O ye Merchants of
Tartessus, which pass over the Sea in Ships.

He puts an Imperative Mood for a Future Tense.

Ye ships] i. e. Ye Merchants which travel in ships. Metonymia Subiecti.

Of Tarshish,] By Tarshish is meant Tartessus in Spain, (which is now called
Tarusa) a City which used and had great commerce and traffic with Tire.

For it] i. e. For Tire.

Is laid wast] i. e. Shall be laid wast and desolate.

A Praeterperfect for a Future Tense.

So that there is no house,] i. e. So that there shall be no house, Supple, to
entertain strangers, but every house shall either be broken down or shut up for
fear. See Cap. 24. 10.

No entering in,] Supple, For any strangers into any house to be entertained or
lodge there, so that ye Tartessians cannot lodge in Tire, as ye were wont, to
follow your Trade there.

From the Land of Chittim it is revealed to them,] q. d. Ye shall hear from the
Land of Chittim these news of Tire.

He prevents an objection; for it might be asked, how the ships of Tarshish
should come to hear this of Tire: to which he answers, that they shall hear of
it from Chittim.

Note here the Enallage of the person, for he passes from the second to the
third person, speaking of the Merchants of Tartessus in the third, to whom he
spoke in the second person just before.

From the Land of Chittim] i. e. From the Land of the Chittimites, that is,
from Cyprus.

Chittim was the Son of Javan, which was the Son of Japhet, the Son of Noah,
Genesis 10.4. And he is put here by a Metonymy for his Sons the Chittimites, which
inhabited Cyprus.

The men of Cyprus living not far from Tire, might quickly make it known in
Spain, (as being great Seafaring men, and having great commerce and daily
voyages into Spain) that Tire was distressed.

2.
Be still ye Inhabitants of the Isle] q.d. Ye have bin very tumultuous and full
of stirs of joy and mirth, but now ye shall be still and quiet, O ye
Inhabitants of Tire.

He says be still, for ye shall be still, after the Prophetique manner, using
an Imperative Mood for the Future Tense.

He makes an Apostrophe here to the men of Tire.

Of the Isle,] He says of the Isle, for of Tire, because Tire was then an Isle
or Island, as was observed in the first verse; Moreover the Hebrews call all
Maritime places, Isles or Islands.

Thou whom the Merchants of Sidon have replenished,] i. e. Thou Tire whom the
Merchants of Sidon have filled with riches, and made rich by their Merchandise
and commerce with thee.

Note what an Enallage the Prophet here uses, speaking to the Inhabitants of
Tire as to one single person, whereas he spoke to them as many in the very next
words before; Or, else the Prophet may be understood to convert his speech from
the Inhabitants of Tire to Tire her self, q. d. And be still O Tire, thou whom
the Merchants, etc.

Zidon] Zidon was a famous Mart-town in Phoenicia, not far from Tire.

That pass over the sea] i. e. Which travel by sea from place to place, and
Country to Country, for Merchandise.

Have replenished.] Supple, With Merchandise or Riches.

In this and the next verse, the Prophet intimates the great riches and
happiness of Tire, that her misery prophesied of, may appear the greater.

3.
And by great waters the seed of Sihor, the harvest of the River of her
revenue,] Here is another Enallage, viz. An Enallage of the person, where he
speaks of Tire in the third person, whereas he spoke to her just before in the
second.

The sense therefore is, q. d. And whose revenue is the seed of Sihor, even the
harvest of the River which is brought to thee by great waters.

By the great waters] i. e. By the Sea.

The seed of Sihor] i. e. The Corn or whatsoever grows of seed in Egypt.
Metonymia Materiae.

By Sihor is meant Nilus, that famous river of Egypt, which by its overflowing
made Egypt so fruitful, and was to it in stead of rain, which was rare there,
Deuteronomy. 11. v. 10, 11, etc.

The Corn, etc. of Egypt is called the seed of Sihor, that is, of Nilus, either
because it sprung up and grew by reason of the fertility which Sihor, that is,
Nilus caused in Egypt by its overflowing, or because Sihor or Nilus is put here
for Egypt it self, the river of Egypt, for the land of Egypt through which it
passes.

The harvest of the River] That is, Of the River Nilus.

The word harvest signifies here the ripe fruits and corn, not the time of
harvest; and this is a repetition of the former words.

Is her revenue,] He calls the Corn of Egypt the revenue of Tire, by a
Metaphor, because it was as duly brought into Tire when it was ripe (and there
sold) as the rent or revenue of land is to the Landlord. Or, therefore it might
be called the Revenue of Tire, because Tire had land of her own in Egypt, from
which she had a great return of corn yearly.

And she is a Mart of Nations.] q. d. Thou who art a Mart of Nations.

He calls Tire a Mart of Nations, because all the Inhabitants of the known
world came there to traffic.

4.
Be thou ashamed O Zidon,] q. d. Blush ye and be ashamed, O ye Sidonians (which
were the builders of Tire, and which did people it at first) to see the misery
of Tire, and to hear her moans and not to be able to help her.

Men are then ashamed when they have hopes of a thing and cannot attain to
their hopes, when therefore the Prophet bids the Sidonians be ashamed, or tells
them that they shall be ashamed; he intimates that the Sidonians should hope,
and perhaps attempt to relieve Tire, but should not be able to do it.

Here the Prophet uses an Apostrophe to the Sidonians.

The sea has spoken, even the strength of the sea,] By the sea and the
strength of the sea, he means Tire, which he calls the sea, per Metonymiam
Adjuncti: because it was situate in the sea, and compassed about by the sea,
as being an Island. And he calls it the strength of the sea, because it was the
strongest of all Maritime places, and the Tyrians were stronger by sea then any
other people whatsoever, that dwelt upon the Mediterranean.

I travel not, nor bring forth children, neither do I nourish up young men, nor
bring up virgins.] Note, that the Hebrews have neither Optative, nor Potential,
nor Subjunctive Mood; here therefore is used an Indicative for an Optative, and
the sense is, q.d. would to God I traveled not, nor brought up children, nor
nourished up young men, nor brought up virgins.

This Tire speaks, and thus she wishes, because of the misery which was like
to befall her Children, that is, her Inhabitants.

5.
As at the report concerning Egypt, so shall they be sorely pained at the
report of Tire.] q. d. As the nations were afraid and troubled when they heard
what befell the Egyptians, when they were drowned in the red sea, Exodus 15. v.
14, 15, etc. So shall they be troubled and grieved at the report which they
shall hear of the miseries of Tire, as many as shall hear of it.

Note, that the Suppositum, or Nominative case, Nations, is here left to be
understood. See the like cap. 24.22.

Be sorely pained] He speaks of such pains as a Woman has in her travel; but
transferres these pains to the grief and anguish of the mind, by a Metaphor.

This grief and anguish of mind did proceed from a fear which they had, lest
their turn should be next, or out of the apprehension which they had of the
loss of trade which they should suffer by this desolation of Tire.

6.
Pass ye over to Tarshish] This is an Apostrophe to the Tyrians, and he
counsels them here to pass over the Sea to Tartessus, that they may be out of
danger there, which they could not be at home; and no doubt but many Tyrians as
they had opportunity fled thither at this time.

To Tarshish] Tartessus was (as was said) a City of Spain which had great
commerce and correspondency with Tire; thither therefore he wishes them to
fly, both because they were their friends, and because it was remote from Tire,
the whole length of the Mediterranian sea being between.

Howl ye Inhabitants of the Isle] i. e. Lament as ye go O ye Tyrians, for the
miseries which shall befall you.

Ye Inhabitants of the Isle.] i. e. Ye Tyrians. See verse. 2.

7.
Is this your joyous City,] i. e. Is this your Tire, the City which has known
nothing else but joy?

He speaks with a Sarcasme here, laughing at the vain confidence and boasting
of these men of Tire.

Whose antiquity is of ancient days?] q. d. And your ancient City whose
antiquity is of a long time.

The antiquity of Tire was from the times of Agenor, of which the Tyrians
boasted, and thought Tire their City above all misery, because she had so long
continued.

Her own feet shall carry her afar off to sojourn.] q. d. For all her joy, and
for all her antiquity, she shall be glad to fly for safety to far places, when
the Babylonians shall come against her; and that not in Charets or on
horseback, but on foot, as delicate and tender as she is.

Note, That that is attributed to Tire which was done but by some Tyrians; for
not all but some Tyrians only fled at this time, and that therefore he speaks
of Tire as of a person, by a Prosopopoeia.

To sojourn.] That is, to live in a strange land.

8.
Who has taken this counsel against Tire?] q. d. Who has determined to bring
this misery upon Tire, and thus to afflict her?

The crowning City,] q. d. Which is as it were the crowning City.

The note of similitude is often left to be understood.

He calls Tire as it were a crowning City, because the Tyrians became as
Princes and Princes fellows (whose chiefest Ornament is a Crown) because of the
abundant wealth which they got by their traffic and merchandise at home,
whither all kind of Merchants brought their commodities to sell.

Whose Merchants are Princes,] i. e. Whose Merchants are as Princes for wealth
and riches.

Whose traffiquers are the honorable of the earth.] i. e. Whose Merchants are
as the honorable of the earth, that is, as Princes.

This is a repetition of the former sentence.

9.
The Lord of Hosts has purposed it,] q. d. The Lord of Hosts has taken this
council against Tire, and has determined to bring this misery upon her, and
thus to afflict her.

Her he gives an answer to the question moved in the eight verse.

To stain the pride of all glory,] i. e. That he may pull down the pride of
all the glorious Ones of Tire, and make it contemptible.

To staine] This word is used here metaphorically, and the Metaphor is taken
from a fair cloth which is spotted and stained with ink or the like, whereby
the beauty and luster thereof is marred.

Of all glory,] i. e. Of all the glorious Ones.

He puts glory here, for that which has glory in it, or which is glorious, per
Metonymiam Adjuncti, and by these he means such as he called Princes, verse 8.

All the honorable of the earth,] i. e. All the Merchants and Traffiquers of
Tire, which are the honorable of the earth.

Yet not only the pride of all the glory, and of all the Merchants and
Honorable men of Tire was hereby stained, but also the pride of all the glory,
and of all the honorable men of the whole earth; for the bringing down of the
pride of all the glory, and all the honorable men of Tire showed that the
pride of all the glory, and all the honorable men of the whole earth could be
pulled down as easily; and therefore that their lofty estates were but fickle
and uncertain, which was a blot and a stain to them, and made them
contemptible and to be despised.

Here he shows not only that this affliction of Tire was from God, but the
end also why he afflicted her.

10.
Pass through thy Land as a River, O Daughter of Tarshish,] These words are
Ellyptiall or defective, and thus to be made up, q. d. Pass through the sea
from Tire, to thine own land with all speed, O Daughter of Tarshish.

As a River] i. e.] Speedily, for a River is speedy in its course, and stays
not.

O Daughter of Tarshish,] i. e. O ye Citizens of Tartessus.

He speaks to such Tartessians as were in Tire when it was besieged by
Nebuchadnezzar.

By Tarshish he means Tartessus, as before, verse. 1. and 6. And by the
Daughter of Tarshish, he means the City of Tartessus, as cap. 1. v. 8. And by
the City of Tartessus, the Citizens and Merchants thereof: as Kir is taken for
the Inhabitants of Kir, Cap. 22.6.

So that by the reason of the Merchants of Tartessus which were at Tire, the
daughter of Tartessus might be said to be at Tire, and be admonished to flee
from thence, as Tire by reason of her Inhabitants might be said to travel a
far off upon her feet to sojourn abroad, v. 7.

There is no more strength.] Supple, Left in Tire to withstand or drive away
her enemies; and so by consequence it will not be safe to stay there.

We may guess by this, that Tire and her friends the Tartessians, made all the
strength they could to oppose the Babylonians, and did encounter them; but in
the encounter were worsted, yea broken to pieces, and not able to make any head
against them again.

11.
He stretched out his hand over the Sea,] Supple, To smite it.

By He, is meant the Lord of Hosts; by the Sea is meant Tire, as verse. 4. and
so the Tyrians: And when he says he stretched out his hand over the sea, he
alludes to a man which stretches out his hand that he might strike.

He shook the Kingdoms,] i. e. He shall make the neighboring Kingdoms which
shall hear what he does to the Tyrians to shake and tremble for fear; for they
seeing or hearing what God does to Tire, the strength of the sea, shall justly
fear lest the like should befall them.

The Lord has given a Commandment against the Merchant City to destroy the
strong Holds thereof.] God is brought in here as a General or Commander in
chief commanding such and such a Regiment or Company of Soldiers to storm or
pull down such and such Forts of the enemy.

What Commandment God gave here, he gave to the Babylonians which he sent
against Tire, which yet is not so to be understood, as though God gave them any
open or express command, (for this speech is but metaphorical) but only so as
that God by his secret providence did direct the Babylonians to the pulling
down of these strong Holds of Tire, and enable them for it.

The Merchant City,] i. e. Tire.

The strong holds thereof.] i. e. The strong Holds, and Walls, and Bulwarks
thereof.

12.
Thou shall no more rejoice,] i. e. Thou shall not rejoice yet a while.

Note, that the Hebrews are often very Hyperbolicall in their expressions of
times, as was observed, cap. 2. v. 2. And so is the Prophet here; for though
these words may seem to signify as much as never, and to exclude all time, yet
they signify only, not for a while, and exclude but only some time, as may
appear by the seventeenth verse. So we read, 2 Kings 6.23. That the bands of
Syria came no more into the land of Israel: yet in the very next verse it
follows, And it came to pass after this, that Benhadad King of Syria,
gathered all his Host, and went up and besieged Samaria, which was the chief
City of the Land of Israel.

Virgin] He calls Tire Virgin, either because of her worldly beauty and glory,
by a Metaphor from Virgins, which are the fairest and most beautiful of their
Sex: Or, because she was never subdued and ravished as it were before with
Foreign forces.

The Daughter of Sidon,] By the daughter of Sidon, he means Tire, which he
calls the Daughter of Sidon, because it came as it were out of the bowels of
Sidon, as the Daughter does out of the bowels of her Mother: For Tire was a
Colonie of the Sidonians, built by the Sidonians, and peopled at first by the
people which came out of Sidon.

Where note, that the Daughter of Sidon, signifies otherwise here, then when it
is said the Daughter of Tarshish, verse. 10. and the Daughter of Sidon, cap.
1.8. and the Daughter of Jerusalem, cap. 37.22.

Pass over to Chittim] i. e. Pass over the sea to Cyprus.

Chittim is Cyprus, so called from Chittim the Son of Javan. See verse 1.

He mentions Chittim, because of thr near alliance which was before the
Cypriots and Tyrians.

There also shall thou have no rest.] q. d. But there shall thou have but
little rest and quiet.

These words show that the former were spoken by a Rhetorical concession, q.
d. Go, pass over to Chittim thy dear friend, that there thou may be at
quiet; but for all that, when thou come thither thou shall have but little
rest.

The Babylonians had taken Cyprus at the time here prophesied of, and Lorded it
there, which was the reason that the Tyrians could have no rest or joy there.

13.
This people] Supple, Which once dwelt in the Wilderness, but now dwells in
that Land, to wit, the Land of the Caldeans.

Was not] Supple, In the Land of the Caldeans where now they dwell.

Till the Assyrians founded it for them that dwell in the wilderness,] i. e.
Till the Assyrian gave it to them which dwelt in the Wilderness to dwell in,
who now dwell in it and inhabit it.

There is a Metaphor in the word founded, for because a house is built and the
foundations thereof laid, that it might be an habitation for man.

Therefore is the Assyrian said here to found, that is, to lay the foundations
of the Land of the Caldeans for these men to dwell in, because he provided it
for them, and gave it to them for a dwelling place.

Note, that it was the manner of the Assyrians, when they vanquished any Land,
to remove the old Inhabitants thereof out of it, into some remote Countries,
and to bring far dwellers to dwell there. See 2 Kings cap. 17.24. The
Assyrians therefore when they had vanquished the Land of the Caldeans, did
remove the ancient Inhabitants thereof, and brought them which dwelt in the
Wilderness before, to dwell there in their room.

Them that dwell in the Wilderness,] i. e. Them which dwelt in the Wilderness.

Dwell is put here for dwelt.

By these words he shows what they were whom the Assyrian brought into the
Land of the Caldeans to dwell, when he carried the Caldeans thence, they were
such as lived in the Wilderness in Tents, like the Arabes Scenitae, and
Scythians.

Note here, that these words according to their right order, should follow
those this people, and the order and sense of this verse hitherto is this,
Behold the Land of the Caldeans, this people that dwelt first in the
Wilderness, and now dwell in it, that is, in the Land of the Caldeans; was not
in it, that is, in the Land of the Caldeans, till the Assyrian founded it for
them.

The like trajection of words we shall find 2 Cor. 4.4. where we read, In whom
the God of this world has blinded the minds of them which believe not; for,
to them which believe not, in whom the God of this world has blinded their
minds.

They set up the Towers thereof,] i. e. The Caldeans built the strong Towers
and places of refuge in Caldea.

Here is a Relative without an Antecedent nigh to it.

They raised up the Palaces thereof,] i. e. The Caldeans built the stately
Palaces which were in the Land of the Caldeans.

And he brought it to ruin.] i. e. And the Assyrian did ruin and destroy them.

It for them, a singular for a plural number.

The sense of this place is this, the Caldeans built strong Towers of defense,
and large Palaces and Buildings in their Land, and rooted themselves there;
yet notwithstanding their towers of defense, and their Palaces, the Assyrian
brought their Land to ruin.

That which the Prophet says here is this, that the Caldeans were an ancient
people, and had in their Land many Towers of defense, and large Buildings of
strength; yet notwithstanding the Assyrians did vanquish them, and destroy
their Land. And he says it for this end, that he might make it appear, that if
the Assyrians were able to vanquish the Caldeans, which were an ancient and
strong people, and had many places of strength and defense in their Land; the
Babylonians would be able to vex and afflict the Tyrians, (as here he
prophesies of it) and lay Tire waste also.

14.
Howl ye ships of Tarshish,] q.d. Howl therefore ye Ships of Tarshish. See
verse 1.

For your strength is laid wast,] i. e. For Tire which you said was so strong,
shall be laid wast. See verse. 1.

He puts strength here in the Abstract, for strong in the Concrete, to signify
the exceeding strength of that which he speaks, q. d. Your exceeding strong
City Tire, etc.

And he calls it their strength, Or, their exceeding strong City; because it
should prove to be so exceeding strong only in their report, and in their
sayings, it should not prove so indeed. So when we hear a man speak highly of
any thing which proves otherwise, we say to him, that is, or, this was, your
so and so.

15.
In that day] i. e. At the time in which she shall lie wast.

Tire shall be forgotten,] Supple, Of her lovers.

The meaning is, that Tire shall not be frequented with Merchants and
Traffiquers as she wont to be.

Note, that from this place to the end of the Chapter, the Prophet speaks of
Tire under an Allegory, wherein he compares Tire to an Harlot; The Merchants
and Traffiquers which were wont to trade with Tire to her lovers, the gain
which she got by those Merchants and Traffiquers, to the hire which an Harlot
has for prostituting her body, etc.

Seventy years according to the days of one King,] q. d. Seventy years, to
wit, so long as one King and his Seed or Race shall reign.

By this King and his Seed or Race is meant Nebuchadnezzar and his seed, for
Nebuchadnezzars seed was extinguished by Cyprus King of Persia; at which time,
in all probability Tire began to flourish again, as her Neighbor Jerusalem
did; and this was seventie years after Nebuchadnezzar had smitten them, Jer.
25. v. 11, and 12.

Of one King,] i. e. Of one King, and his Seed or Race; for often times though
one individall person be only named or mentioned, yet his seed, or race, or
children are also tacitly included. So God said to Abraham, I am the Lord
which brought thee out of Vr of the Caldees, to give thee this Land, (meaning
the Land of Canaan) to inherit it, Genes. 15.7. But this latter Pronoune Thee,
though it signifies only Abraham's person, yet it includes Abraham's Seed
also, as appears Genesis 13. 15. So Galat. 3.18. Paul says, that God gave the
Inheritance to Abraham by promise, wherein Abraham is included, and Abraham's
seed also, as appears Galat. 3. verse 16. So 2 Samuel cap. 7. verse. 16. The
Lord said to David, Thy Kingdom shall be established for ever before thee, thy
throne shall be established for ever; where in that word Thy, which signifies
plainly David only, David's Sons are also included, as appears in the
twelfth verse of that Chapter.

Shall Tire sing, etc.] He speaks of Tire as of a Woman, by a Prosopopoeia.

Sing as an Harlot.] i. e. Sing merrily as an Harlot uses to sing (when she
would allure Lovers to turn in to her) saying.

16.
Take an harp, etc.] This is the Song which Tire should sing at that time, in
which Song Tire stirs up her self to mirth.

Go about the City] i. e. Go about the streets of the City.

Thou Harlot] These are the words of Tire to her self, who calls her self an
Harlot, for the reason expressed in the next verse.

Thou have bin forgotten,] viz. Of thy Lovers.

The meaning of this Metaphorical phrase is, that she had not bin frequented
with Foreign Merchants as she was wont to be, but had bin as one quite
forgotten by them.

That thou may be remembered.] i. e. That thou may be remembered of thy
Lovers, and that they may come again and visit thee.

He persists in his Metaphor, and the meaning is, q. d. That thou may be
frequented by Merchants as thou were heretofore.

17.
After the end of seventy years] See verse 15.

The Lord will visit Tire,] To wit, In favor and mercy, by delivering her from
the oppression and cruelty of her enemies.

And she shall turn to her hire,] i. e. And she shall turn to her again,
which she was wont to make by Traffic and Merchandise with other people,
which came thither to buy and sell their rich Commodities.

The Prophet continues his Metaphor of an Harlot, and calls her gain her
hire, because she got gain of those with whom she traffiqued by her
Merchandise, as an Harlot does her hire of her Lovers, by the use of her body,
etc.

And shall commit fornication with all the Kingdoms of the World,] i. e. And
she shall trade, and traffic, and Merchandise, with all the Kingdoms of the
World, by which she shall get gain, as an Harlot does an hire by her
fornication.

By her Fornification, therefore he means Metaphorically her dealing and
traffiquing with those Merchants which came to her.

With all the Kingdoms of the world] Purple and Scarlet were the wearing of
Kings, and for these Tire was famous; and for these doubtless did the
Merchants of all Kingdoms which were about Tire, deal at Tire, that they
might be able to furnish their several Kings therewith.

Upon the face of the earth.] i. e. Which are upon the face of the earth.

18.
And her Merchandise,] i. e. And the money, riches, and treasures, which she
gains by her merchandise. Metonym. Efficientis.

And her hire,] i. e. And her gain, or the money which she gains by her
traffic.

He persists still in the Metaphor of an Harlot. See verse 17.

Shall be holiness to the Lord,] What he means by this, those words show
which follow soon after, to wit, her Merchandise shall be for them which dwell
before the Lord, which are a repetition or exposition of these words.

The Lord therefore is taken here for the people, Or Servants of the Lord, to
wit, the Jews, or two tribes, by a Metonymie; And Holiness is put for Holy,
An Abstract for a Concrete, q. d. Her Merchandise and her Hire shall be holy to
the Lord, that is, they shall be set apart for the people or servants of the
Lord.

But may a thing be said to be Holy to any Creature, though that Creature be
the Lords Servant?

Answer. Though we should grant that a thing could not be said to be holy to a
Creature, yet it may be said to be holy to the Lord, even then when the Lord is
put Metonymically for the Servants of the Lord. For in Metonymicall speeches,
words are often so joined with words, as if there were no Metonymie or Figure
in them.

It shall not be treasured or laid up,] q. d. Tire shall not hoard up much of
her gains which she gets by her merchandising.

The Tyrians, as they got much by Traffic, so they spent much in luxury and
jovialty.

For her merchandise shall be for them which dwell before the Lord,] For the
money, I say, which she gains (a great part of it) shall come to the Jews,
the people of the Lord, which are nigh to Tire.

This Particle For, relates to the words immediately going before, as showing a
reason why the gain of Tire should not be treasured nor laid up.

Her merchandize] i. e. The money which she gains by her merchandise.

A Metonymy as before.

For them which dwell before the Lord,] By this he means the Jews, whom he
describes by this, that they dwell before the Lord, either because they dwelt
in the land of Judah in the presence of the Lord, who had his Temple there
among them, in which he dwelt, and in which he did manifest his presence; Or,
because the Land of Canaan was called the Habitation of the Lord, (Exodus
15.13.) And therefore might Gods people which dwelt therein be said to dwell
before the Lord: Or, because the Jews were the Servants of the Lord. Cap.
41.8. For Servants are described by this, that they dwell or stand continually
before their master, 1 Kings 10.8.

To eat sufficiently,] i. e. To eat to the full.

This speech is defective, and thus to be made up, q. d. which she shall give
to them in exchange for Corn, and Wine, and Cattle, and other things, that she
may feast her self therewith, and eat to the full.

And for durable clothing.] q.d. And which she shall give to them for fine
cloth for her own wearing.

Durable clothing.] By durable clothing he means cloth made of fine wool; for
the finer the wool is (caeteris paribus) the more lasting is the cloth.

Tire being but a City, could not have Corn, and Wine, and Cattle, and Wool
of her own; but she bought all these of other nations, and with all these and
the best of every sort of these, did the Land of Judah abound; wherefore Judah
being nigh to her, she bought these commodities most of the Jews.

This the Prophet seems to add in this last verse, as a reason why the Lord
would visit Tire, and be favorable to her after so many years affliction,
viz. for the Jews sake, because the Jews the Servants of God, should be gainers
by her prosperity and plenty.

If any think that the Prophet does prophecy in this verse, that many of the
Tyrians should at the time here spoken of, turn Proselytes, and worship the
true God, and offer of their wealth to the Lord for his Service and Temple, and
mainteinance of his Ministers the Priests and Levites which dwell before him, I
shall not contend with him.

ISAIAH, CHAP. XXIV.
BEhold the Lord makes the Earth empty,] This Prophecy concerns the land of
Israel, or of the ten Tribes, as it was to be wasted and made desolate by
Salmaneser: For although the Prophet has prophesied of this before, yet does
he prophecy of it again: and usual it is with the Prophets to prophecy often of
the same thing in diverse words.

The Lord makes the Earth empty,] i. e. The Lord will make the Earth empty of
Inhabitants, and will leave none to dwell in it.

A present for a future tense.

The Earth] i. e. The Land of Israel, or of the ten Tribes.

He puts the Earth in general for the Land of Israel in particular, which was
but a little part of the Earth, per Synecdochen Integri.

And makes it waste,] This is a repetition of the former sentence.

And turns it upside down,] This is also a repetition of the former sentence.

Note, that these words are Metaphorical, taken from a Dish or Platter, or the
like, out of which will fall whatsoever is in it, if it be turned upside down.

And scatters abroad the Inhabitants thereof.] This was fulfilled when the
ten Tribes fled, some one way, and some another; and some were carried into
captivity into one place, and some into another, under Salmaneser.

2.
And it shall be, as with the people, so with the Priest, etc.] His meaning is,
That all of all sorts of people shall partake of this calamity, none shall
escape.

Vsury] Usury is the increase of money lent above the principal.

To him.] i. e. To him which takes usury.

3.
The Lord] Viz. Of Israel, or the ten Tribes.

For the Lord has spoken this word.] Supple, And therefore it shall come to
pass, for he cannot lie.

4.
The Earth mourns,] i. e. The proud inhabitants of the Land of Israel shall
mourn, because of the miseries which shall come upon them.

The Earth is put here for the inhabitants of the Earth, that is, of the Land
of Israel.

And fades away,] i. e. And shall pine away with grief like a fading flower.

The world languisheth] By the World he means the Land of Israel, or rather the
inhabitants of the Land of Israel, putting the whole World for a very little
part thereof, by an Hyperbolical Synecdoche: And these he says shall languish
and consume away through grief, because of the miseries which shall come upon
them.

The haughty people of the Earth do languish,] i. e. The haughty people of the
Land of Israel shall pine away.

These words are an exposition of those words which went before in this Verse.

5.
The Earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof,] q. d. For not only
the inhabitants of this Land are defiled; but so great is their wickedness, as
that the Land it self, which is under them, is also defiled therewith.

This contains the reason or cause why God will afflict the Land of Israel, as
is here prophesied.

This phrase savoreth of an Hyperbolical Metaphor; for nothing can be truly
polluted with sin but the reasonable Creature. The like phrase to this we read
Lev. 18.27. and Numb. 35.33. by which the Holy Ghost would only set forth the
enormity of the sins there committed.

Because they have transgressed the Laws,] Supple, Which God gave them to keep.

By the Laws understand the Moral Laws, which God gave them for direction of
their life and actions; and the judicial Laws which he gave them for the well
governing of the Commonwealth.

Changed the Ordinance,] i. e. Changed the Ordinances.

A singular for a plural number.

By the Ordinances understand the Prescripts of the Ceremonial Law, which
concerned the worship of God; and especially that Ordinance whereby God
commanded his people that they should offer their burnt-offerings only in the
place which the Lord made choice of, Deuteronomy. 12.14. which was Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles.
6.6. which Jeroboam foully changed, when he set up his golden Calves, the one
at Bethel, the other at Dan, that the people might not worship the Lord at
Jerusalem, but their gods (as he called them) at those places, 1 King. 12.28.
And that whereby God appointed the sons of Aaron only to be Priests, and gave
them the Priests Office, Numb. 18.7. which Jeroboam changed, when he made
Priests of the lowest of the people, which were not of the sons of Aaron, no,
not of the sons of Levi, 1 King. 12.31.

Broken the everlasting Covenant,] By the everlasting Covenant is here meant
that Covenant which God made with the Israelites by Moses, in which the
Israelites promised for their parts to do all that God commanded them, and to
obey him, Exodus 24.7, 8. which because they did not, they are said hereto break
the Covenant.

Note, That the breaking of this Covenant was no more then the transgression of
the Laws, and changing and not observing of the Ordinances; wherefore he does
repeat here in other words what he said before, the more to exaggerate their
sin.

Object. But how could that Covenant which God made with the Israelites by
Moses be called an everlasting Covenant, when as that was to have an end?

Ans. It might be called an everlasting Covenant, either because it was
continually to be kept during the time that it was in force, though it were not
to be in force for ever: or because it was to abide a great while, to wit, till
the coming of Christ, who was the Mediator of the New Covenant: For the Hebrews
call that everlasting, which is to continue any long time: So the Priesthood
under the Law was called an everlasting Priesthood, Number. 25.13. though it were
ordained to last but for a time, and was afterward to be changed, Heb. 7.

6.
Therefore has the curse devoured the Earth,] i. e. Therefore shall the curse
of God devour the Land of Israel.

He puts a preterperfect tense for a future.

As Dei benedicere is benefacere, so Dei maledicere is malefacere: for God does
but speak the word, and it comes to pass, whether for good or evil, I mean the
evil of punishment.

The word Devour is a Metaphorical word, and is borrowed from ravenous beasts,
which devour and eat up the prey which they take.

Are desolate,] i. e. Shall be destroyed, by whose destruction the Land shall
become desolate, and without inhabitants. He uses here Metonymia Effecti.

Therefore the inhabitants of the Earth are burned,] i. e. Therefore the
inhabitants of the Land of Israel shall be consumed.

This is a repetition of the former sentence, and an inference from the fifth
verse, as that is.

And are burned.] i. e. And shall be consumed: A Metaphor from wood, or other
combustible matter, which is consumed by fire.

7.
The new wine mourns,] q. d. The new wine shall be spilt upon the ground in
every place by the Assyrians, who, in despite of the Israelites, and out of
their hatred toward them, shall break out the heads of their Wine vessels, and
let the Wine run out upon the ground.

The Prophet uses here an Hyperbolical Metaphor, giving sense to an inanimate
thing: And because the Wine, if it had sense and reason, would mourn, if it
were thus dealt with, and spilt; therefore does the Prophet put the mourning of
the Wine for the spilling of the Wine, per Metonymiam Effecti.

The Vine languisheth,] i. e. The Vines shall be broken down, and trodden under
foot.

The Prophet puts here Vine for Vines, and uses the same Metaphor and
Figure as he did just before.

Do sigh.] i. e. Shall figh for sorrow.

8.
The mirth of Tabrets.] i. e. The mirth arising from hearing the sound of
Tabrets.

9.
They shall not drink wine with a song,] i. e. They shall not have their Feasts
and banquets and merry meetings as they are wont.

The Hebrews were wont to have music and singing at their Feasts and merry
meetings, to which the Prophet here alludes.

Strong drink shall be bitter to them that drink it.] i. e. They shall take no
more pleasure in strong drink, then they do in the thing that is bitter.

Grief takes away all joy and d^light which we have in the most delightful
objects; yea, it does disaffect the palate it self, that it cannot taste and
relish things as they are.

10.
The City of confusion is broken down] i. e. The City of confusion shall b^
broken down with Rams and Engines of War.

A preterperfect for a future tense.

By the City of confusion understand Bethel, where Jeroboam set up one of his
golden Calves, 1 King. 12. v. 29. which name was given to that place by Jacob,
Genesis 28.19. and called Bethel, that is, the House of God, because God there
appeared to him in a dream. This name the Israelites continued; but the men of
Judah, when once Jeroboam King of Israel had set up a Calf there to be
worshipped, called it no more Bethel, that is, the House of God, but
Beth-Haven, as Hos. 4.15. and 5.8. and 10.5. that is, the house of vanity, or
the house of iniquity; and Kiriath-Tohu, as here, that is, the City of
confusion, because of the confused worship which was there used to the Calves
which Jeroboam set up in that City.

Every house] Supple, In this City, to wit, the City of Confusion.

Shall be shut up.] In the time of a siege, the inhabitants of the City
besieged were wont to shut up their doors, as having no joy to walk abroad and
converse with their neighbors, but choosing rather to weep and lament at home,
as also to avoid the violent and sudden breakings in of Soldiers into their
houses; wherefore the Prophet exhorting the men of Jerusalem to bear the siege
of Jerusalem patiently, thus bespeaks them, Come my people, enter thou into thy
Chambers, and shut the doors about thee; hide thy self as it were a little
while, until the indignation be overpast, Cap. 26.20.

11.
There is a crying for wine in the streets] i. There shall be heard in the
streets a crying and lamenting for want of wine.

This cry might come from within the houses, though it were heard without in
the streets.

Wine was the ordinary drink of the Hebrews, as it is now of many people;
wherefore being that the Assyrians had spilt all their Wine, they must needs
cry for want of drink.

All joy is darkened,] i. e. All joy shall be turned into mourning.

The Prophet speaks here of joy as of light, which is taken away by darkness;
and indeed joy is often resembled to light, and called by the name of light in
the Scriptures.

And the gate,] i. e. And the Gates of the City. A singular for a plural number.

In the gates of the City, their Courts of Justice and public Assemblies were
wont to be held, therefore he mentions these particularly.

13.
When thus it shall be] i. e. q. d. Yet when thus it shall be.

In the midst of the Land] i. e. In the Land, viz. of Israel.

In the midst of the Land is put for in the Land, by an Hebrew Periphrasis.

Among the people,] Supple, Of the ten Tribes.

There shall be as the shaking of an Olive tree, and as the gleaning grapes
when the vintage is done.] i. e. There shall be a few of the many thousands of
Israel left. See cap. 17.6.

14.
They shall lift up their voice,] i. e. Those Jews, which live by the
seacoast, upon the borders of the Land of Israel, shall lift up their voice by
way of rejoicing.

He seems to point at the men of Judah, which lived by the seacoast upon the
borders of the Land of Israel, when he says, They shall lift up their voice,
and so to tell whom he means.

For the Majesty of the Lord,] i. e. Because of the Lord; that is, because of
the goodness of the Lord, which he will show at this time toward them, in
delivering them from the hand of Salmaneser, when he shall destroy the ten
Tribes.

The Majesty of the Lord is put here for the Lord himself; as when we say of a
King, the Kings Majesty, for the King himself: And the Lord is put here for the
goodness and mercy of the Lord, per Metonymiam Subjecti.

They shall cry aloud from the Sea,] He means by these the Jews which lived
in Joppa and other places nigh the sea side, toward the Land of Israel: And he
m^ntioneth their joy more particularly then he does the joy of any other of the
people of the Jews, though all the Jews were delivered at this time, because
they were nigher the danger then any other of that people were, as lying next
to the Land of Israel which Salmaneser destroyed, and were (as is very
probable) much oppressed with the free quarter of Salmanese^'s Army by Land,
and forced with the rest of the maritime Towns to provide him a Navy to fight
against Tire by Sea: For when Salmaneser had destroyed the Land of Israel, he
made War against Tire, and put the Maritime Towns to furnish him with a Fleet
of ships, and to provide for it, and afterward blockt up Tire five years, as
we read in Joseph. lib. 9. Antiquit. cap. 14. In which time all Maritime Towns
suffered, no doubt, much by the Assyrians.

15.
Wherefore glorify ye the Lord in the fires, etc.] I take that which we read
in this Verse to be the song which these men sung; which song begins
abruptly, as passionate songs and sayings often do, whether they proceed from
joy or any other passion: If it were entire, it might be this, The Lord has
delivered us from the Assyrians, wherefore glorify ye the Lord in the fires,
even the Name of the Lord God of Israel, ye that dwell in the Isles of the Sea.

In the fires,] That is, In the fires of understanding and of zeal; q. d.
Glorify ye the Lord with understanding (as understanding what the Lord has
done for you) and with ardency of spirit and true zeal (as giving him praise
for what he has done for you, not lightly and for fashion sake, but feelingly
and heartily.)

Note, that the Preposition In, among the Hebrews, serves in the place of
almost all other Prepositions whatsoever; and here it may be put for With.

Note also, that fire, by reason of its light, may signify knowledge and
understanding; and by reason of its heat may signify zeal and fervency, or
ardency of spirit, by a Metaphor: And he may say fires in the plural number,
not fire in the singular, to signify these two things, understanding and zeal.

Even the Name of the Lord God of Isr^el,] i. e. Even the Lord God of Israel.

Note, that the word Name is here redundant by an Hebrew Elegancy: Or, that the
Name is put for the thing it self whose name it is.

In the Isles of the Sea.] i. e. In Joppa, and the seacoasts where ye live,
and let your songs and exclamations of joy be heard from thence.

Note, that the H^brews call not only those Lands which are environed and
compassed about with the Sea, Isles or Island^, but also those parts of the
Continent which lie near to the Sea.

16.
From the utmost part of the Earth have we heard songs,] i. e. We who live in
Jerusalem shall hear songs of rejoicing from the utmost part of our Land.

By the Earth he means the Land of Judah, by a Synecdoche.

The songs which he means were to be songs of rejoicing, because of their
deliverance from Salmaneser, such as that was verse. 15.

Even glory to the righteous,] i. e. Even songs containing the glory of God,
the righteous One.

Glory may here signify any attribute of God which makes him glorious, and
here it signifies his mercy and goodness, to wit, his mercy and goodness which
he showed to the Jews, and especially those which lived about Joppa, in
delivering them from Salmaneser, per Metonymiam Adjuncti.

It is also further put for songs which contain or speak of that mercy and
goodness of God, and the praises thereof, per Metonymiam Subjecti.

To the righteous,] i. e. To the praise of the righteous One, that is, to the
praise of God.

By the righteous, or righteous One, is meant God, who as he is called the holy
One, (...): so may he be called the righteous One.

He is called the righteous One, because of his faithfulness at this time in
preserving his people the Jews; or because of his goodness at this time to
them: for righteousness is taken sometimes for goodness, even in this sense, as
when Joseph was said to be a righteous or a just man, Matthew. 1. verse. 19.

Note, that a song to the righteous signifies a song sung in the praise of the
righteous. See Notes, cap. 5.1.

But I said,] i. e. But I Isaiah, foreseeing in the spirit what misery would
in a short time after befall my Tribe, the men of Judah, for their sins, by the
Assyrians under Sennacherib, said,

My leanness, my leanness,] i. e. O the sorrow and grief of my heart, O the
sorrow and grief of my heart!

Because extreme grief and sorrow make the body lean (for a merry heart does
good like a medicine, but a broken spirit dries the bones, Prove. 17.22.)
therefore is leanness put here for grief and sorrow, per Metonymiam Effecti.

The Prophet from this place to the end of the Chapter prophecyeth of the
calamity which Sennacherib should bring upon the Jews, and of their delivery at
the last.

The treacherous dealers have dealt treacherously,] i. e. The Assyrians which
are treacherous dealers, will deal treacherously with the Jews. See Notes, cap.
21. v. 2.

He puts a preterperfect for a future tense.

What was here prophesied of, was fulfilled in the days of Sennacherib, of
which read 2 King. 18.19.

17.
Fear and the pit and the snare are upon thee, O inhabitant of the Earth.] i.
e. O ye men of Judah, such miseries and calamities are coming upon you, as you
cannot avoid.

This speech is Metaphorical, and explained in the next Verse.

Fear,] Fear is taken here, by a Metonymy, for that which causes fear; such
are those noises which Hunters make to affright the Deer, or wild beasts,
which they hunt.

O inhabitants of the Earth,] i. e. O ye inhabitants of the Land of Judah.

He puts inhabitant in the singular number, for inhabitants in the plural
number; and the Earth for the Land of Judah, the whole for a part, per
Synecdochen Integri.

Note here, that the Prophet makes his Apostrophe not to all the men of Judah,
but to those only which dwelt out of Jerusalem; for as for those which dwelt
in Jerusalem, he speaks of them in the 22 Verse.

18.
And it shall come to pass,] i. e. For it shall come to pass. And is put for
For.

He who flees from the noise of the fear shall fall into the pit, and he that
comes out of the midst of the pit shall be taken in the snare,] i. e. The
meaning of this place is, That none shall escape for altogether; but he that
escapes one danger shall fall into another.

This speech is Metaphorical, taken from Hunters, who fright wild beasts with
noises, that they may flee from them and fall into the pits which they have
dug for them, and covered over with some light matter or other, that they
might not discern the pit before they are fallen into it: and who set snares
beyond the pits, that if by any way the wild beasts escape the pits, they may
fall into the snares.

Out of the midst of the pit,] i. e. Out of the pit.

This word midst does often abound among the Hebrews.

For the windows from on high are opened,] i. e. For the windows of Gods wrath
shall be opened from Heaven, and he will pour down great showers of his
indignation upon the inhabitants of Judah.

In this expression the Prophet alludes to the windows of Heaven, which were
opened at the Deluge in the days of Noah, Genesis 7.11.

And the foundations of the Earth do shake,] q. d. And so terrible shall the
wrath of God be, as that the very foundations of the Earth shall shake because
thereof.

He speaks here Metaphorically of the Earth, as of an house which has
foundations.

And by a further Metaphor gives unto it sense and apprehension, and fear, as
if it were a living creature. See Notes, cap. 2.19. The Prophet alludes in this
to Psalm. 18. verse. 7.

19.
The Earth] That is, The inhabitants of the Earth, that is, of the Land of
Judah.

Is utterly broken down,] i. e. Shall be utterly destroyed.

A metaphor taken from a stone wall, which is flung down and dashed all to
pieces in the fall. See the same Metaphor used cap. 30. v. 13.

The Earth is clean dissolved,] i. e. The inhabitants of the Land of Judah
shall quite perish.

A Metaphor taken from a potters vessel, or some other solid body, which is
beaten to pieces: for the dissolution here spoken of is not the gentle melting
of a thing, either against the fire, or upon the fire, in water or wine, or the
like; but the violent beating of it into little pieces, of which (as having
quantity) it did consist: and the parting of every whole into his parts,
howsoever it be effected, may be called a dissolution.

The Earth is moved exceedingly.] i. e. The inhabitants of the Land tremble
exceedingly. See cap. 7.2.

20.
The Earth shall reel to and fro like a drunkard,] i. e. The inhabitants of the
Land shall now think of one thing, now another, and shall not tell what course
to take: See cap. 19.14. Or the inhabitants of the Land shall run now one way,
now another, and shall not tell what way to go for safety.

And shall be removed like a cottage,] i. e. And as a Tent or Tabernacle is
pitched in one place over night, and taken down in the morning, and removed to
another place; so shall they lodge in one place in the night, and remove from
thence in the morning, and the next night lodge in another place, shifting
their places and their lodgings, that they not be taken by their Enemies.

And the transgressions thereof shall be heavy upon it,] i. e. And the
punishment due to the Earth (that is, due to the inhabitants of the Land of
Judah) by reason of their transgression, shall fall heavy upon it, that is,
upon them.

Transgression is here put for the punishment which is due to transgression,
per Metonymiam Efficientis.

And it shall fall, and not rise again.] i. e. And the inhabitants of the Land
shall fall, and not rise again.

He alludes to a man falling under an heavy burden, and not able to rise again,
because the burden lies heavy upon him; and to such a burden did he liken the
punishment of their sin just before.

That which is here spoken of the men of Judah, is not to be understood of them
as one aggregate body, or body politic, (for the body politic of Judah
flourished after this punishment as much or more then ever before) but of the
particular men or members of that body, whereof many fell and rose not again,
either because they recovered not their former happy estate, or because they
were slain with the sword, and so went down to the grave: And as the cloud is
consumed and vanishes away; so he that goes down to the grave shall come up
no more, Job 7.9.

21.
And it shall come to pass,] i. e. But yet it shall come to pass.

And for But yet.

The Lord shall punish the host of the high ones that are on high,] By the host
of the high ones that are on high, we may understand the Sun and the Moon, and
the Stars, which are also called the host of Heaven, Deuteronomy. 4.19. And therefore
are called an host, because of their multitude and order; for an host or an
army are not more and more orderly composed, and better ranked, then they are:
and they are called the high ones which are on high, because they are placed in
the Heavens, which are the uppermost parts of the World.

The Assyrians did worship the Sun and the Moon and the Stars, and made Images
and representations thereof, which also they worshipped and carried about with
them in their Camp; and these Images or representations were destroyed when
Sennacherihs Army was destroyed: And because they were destroyed, the host of
the high ones that are on high, that is, the Sun and the Moon and the Stars
themselves are here said to be punished: So the Lord was said to execute
Judgment upon all the gods of Egypt, Exodus 12.12. and Numb. 33.4. (among which
gods were the host of Heaven, as may be gathered, Deuteronomy. 4.19. Amos 5. v. 25,
26. Acts 7. v. 43. for the gods there mentioned were such as the Israelites had
seen worshipped in Egypt, and learned from them:) And upon them is the Lord
said to have executed Judgment, because he flung down their Idols and
Representations, and broke them in pieces, the same night that he brought
Israel out of Egypt.

But some take the host of the high ones that are on high, not for the Sun and
Moon and Stars themselves, but for the Images of the Sun, Moon and Stars, which
the Assyrians carried with them to worship; for the Gentiles called the Images
of things by the names of those whose Images they were, as the Image of Jupiter
is called Jupiter, Acts 14.13.

But you will say, (whether by the host of the high ones that are on high, are
meant the Sun, the Moon and the Stars, or the Images or Representations only
thereof,) Nothing can be said properly to be punished, but such as is endued
with Reason: But neither the host of Heaven, nor their Images have any reason,
Therefore they cannot properly be said to be punished.

Ans. This therefore, that they are said to be punished, is Metaphorical, as
sense and reason is Metaphorically given to Idols, cap. 19.1. Or secondly,
(this being put as a calamity of the Assyrians) the Prophet may speak according
to the sense and thoughts of the Assyrians: Now the Assyrians which worshipped
the Sun and the Moon and the host of Heaven, thinking them to be gods, thought
that they had understanding, and that as they were delighted with the Images
and Representations which were made of them, and with the honor and worship
which was given to those their Images and Representations: So they thought that
they were contrarily affected and grieved, when their Images and
Representations were contumeliously used, and disgracefully broken.

Note, that the Prophet says here, that the Lord shall punish the host of the
high ones that are on high, because the Assyrians worshipped them, and relied
on them for their good success, as in all other their enterprises, so in this
against Judah.

And the Kings of the Earth upon the Earth,] i. e. And the Kings of the Earth
which are upon the Earth.

By the Kings of the Earth are meant the chief Commanders of Sennacheribs Army;
for they were all Kings, cap. 10.8. these God punished by his Angel, 2 King.
19. verse. 35.

Note here, that these two titles, The high ones, and the Kings of the Earth,
are such ambiguous titles as may belong each of them both to the Sun and Moon
and Stars, and also to the Kings which served Sennacherib; for those Kings
might be called high ones, because of their high places and dignities; and the
Sun and the Moon and the Stars might be called the Kings of the Earth,
according to the conceit of the Assyrians, which accounted them as gods, for
God is King of all the Earth, Psalm. 47.7. To distinguish therefore the one from
the other, when he speaks of the Sun and the Moon and the Stars which the
Assyrians accounted as gods, he calls them the high ones which are on high: and
when he speaks of the Princes which served Sennacherib, he says, the Kings of
the Earth upon the Earth.

22.
And they shall be gathered together as prisoners are gathered in the pit,
etc.] i. e. And the Inhabitants of Jerusalem (which is the chief City of the
Land) shall be gathered and shut up in Jerusalem, as prisoners are gathered
together and shut up in a prison or in a dungeon: for so soon as they hear of
the approach of Sennacheribs Army, they shall run every one to his home, and
then as prisoners cannot go out of the prison or dungeon in which they are
imprisoned; so shall not they go out of Jerusalem again, because of the
Assyrians, who shall encompass them, besiege them, and block them up.

Note, that this Conjunction And does not relate to the words which went
immediately before, but to the twentieth verse. And when he says, They shall
be gathered together, etc. he seems to point at the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

In the pit,] i. e. In the prison.

The pit is that part of a prison which they call the dungeon, which is a deep
place under ground, and it is here put for the whole prison it self.

And shall be shut up in prison,] i. e. And shall be shut up as it were in
prison.

And after many days] i. e. After they have been shut up in prison, that is,
after they have been besieged many days.

Shall they be visited.] i. e. The Lord shall visit them in favor and mercy,
and deliver them, by sending his Angel to destroy the Assyrians which besieged
them, which was fulfilled 2 King. 19.35.

This I do conceive to be the most probable meaning of this place: and that as
the Prophet did prophecy against the men of Judah, verse. 17, 18, 19, 20. and
comfort them again with the destruction of their Enemies, verse. 21. So does he
here, in the former part of this verse, prophecy against the men of Jerusalem;
and in the latter end thereof, and in the next Verse, comfort them again.

The only Objection which can be made against this exposition is, That there
is no mention here of the men of Jerusalem, and that there is no Nominative
case to these Verbs, but what is in the former verse.

To which I answer; That the Prophet might point as it were with his finger at
the men of Jerusalem when he spoke of them, and so he needed not to name them,
his pointing at them might be enough to signify whom he meant.

Again, as he does often put a Relative without an Antecedent, and leaves the
Antecedent to be understood by the circumstances of the place; so might he
leave the Nominative case which should go before the Verb to be understood:
Examples whereof we have Cap. 9.3. and 23.5. Mark 8.22. and 4.36. etc.

23.
Then the Moon shall be confounded and the Sun ashamed,] By the Sun and the
Moon some understand the Images of the Sun and the Moon, which may be called
the Sun and the Moon, as the picture of a man is called a man, and as Idolaters
call their Idols by the name of those which they represent: These he says
shall be confounded and ashamed, by a Metaphor, because they could not save the
Assyrians which worshipped them, and relied upon them for their good success.

Some again take the Sun and the Moon for the Sun and Moon indeed, which he
says shall be confounded, by the like Metaphor, because they should not save
the Assyrians which worshipped them as their gods. See Notes, verse. 22.

The Caldee takes the Sun and the Moon by a Metonymy, for the Assyrians
themselves which worshipped the Sun and the Moon: And indeed those Assyrians,
which survived the slaughter made by the Angel, 2 King. 19.35. might well be
said to be confounded and ashamed, because they saw their great hopes and
confident boasting which they made, cap. 36.14. etc. and 37.10. cut off, by the
slaughter of 185000 in one night.

Shall be confounded,] i. e. Shall be ashamed.

When the Lord of hosts shall reign in Mount Sion and in Jerusalem,] i. e. When
the Lord of hosts shall show that he is the King of Sion and Jerusalem, and
that he protects it (which is the duty of a King) by destroying the vast Army
of the Assyrians which did besiege it.

And before his ancients] And abounds, or it is put for And that: q. d. And
that before the Ancients of his people which are in Jerusalem, who shall
glorify his Name, and praise him for it.

Gloriously.] i. e. After a glorious manner, or after such a manner as shall
bring him glory and renown.

ISAIAH, CHAP. XXV.
O Lord, thou art my God, etc.] In this Chapter and the Chapter following are
contained the praises of God, to be sung as it were when those things shall
come to pass which the Prophet prophesied of in the former Chapter.

I will praise thy Name,] i. e. I will praise thee.

This Psalm or Song is penned and to be sung in the person of a man of Judah or
Jerusalem.

For thou have done wonderful things,] What wonderful things the Lord had done
of old, see Psalm. 105, 106, 107. But the wonderful things which he had done of
late, which moved the men of Judah and Jerusalem to praise and exalt him, were
the destruction of Samaria, of which verse. 2. and the miraculous preservation
and deliverance of his poor people which were besieged in Jerusalem, of which
Verse. 4, etc.

Thy counsels of old,] i. e. That which thou have determined and foretold by
thy Prophets of old.

Of old,] i. e. From the beginning of the World hitherto.

Are faithfulness and truth.] i. e. Are faithful and true.

He puts faithfulness and truth for faithful and true, Abstracts for Concretes,
per Metonymiam Adjuncti.

Therefore are Gods counsels called faithful and true, because they were
performed according as he decreed and foretold.

2.
For thou have made of a City an heap,] Supple, Of rubbish; q. d. For (as thou
did determine, and as thou did foretell by thy Prophets) thou have
overthrown and ruined the City of Samaria.

The Prophet proves here by an instance, that the counsels of God are
faithfulness and truth, and that he has done wonderful things; and gives a
reason also why the men of Judah should praise him.

Of a City] By this City he means Samaria, the chief City and Metropolis of
the Kingdom of Israel.

Of a defenced City a ruin,] This is a repetition of the former sentence.

He calls Samaria a defenced City, because it was well fortified, so well
fortified, as that Salmaneser was three years before he could take it, 2 King.
17.5.

A ruin,] i. e. A ruinous heap of rubbish and stones.

He says, a ruin, for a ruinous heap, per Metonymiam Efficientis.

A palace of strangers,] By these words he means Samaria, as he did before.

Samaria was the royal City of the Kings of Israel; and is called here, A
palace of strangers, because of the strange gods which were worshipped, and had
Temples there; such as Baal was, who had an Altar and a House there, and was
there worshipped, 1 King. 16.32.

Of strangers,] i. e. Of strange gods.

It shall never be built.] Note, that this word Never does not always exclude
all time to come, but sometimes a good while only; so that the sense of this
place may be, It shall not be built, or brought to its former splendour, for a
long time again.

3.
Therefore shall the strong people glorify thee,] By the strong people
understand those people which wtre Enemies to the Jews, and were mighty in
strength to oppress them; these people are said to glorify God, because they
were afraid of him, and did fear him because of his great power, which they
could not but acknowledge when they saw that he had overthrown Samaria, and
destroyed the Kingdom of Israel, as he had determined, and as he had threatened
by his Prophets.

These men therefore glorified God, though against their wills.

The City of the terrible Nations shall fear thee.] He puts City for Cities, A
s^ngular for a plural number. And by the Cities of the terrible Nations, H^
mean^th the Cities of those Nations which dwelt nigh unto Judah, and which were
a terror to the Jews, because of their great power and implacable malice.
These Cities hearing of the destru^tion of Samaria, which God destroyed for the
Jews sake, cap. 17.14. might justly fear, least that as God had destroyed
Samaria for their enmities to the Jews; so he might destroy them also.

4.
For thou have bin a strength to the po^r.] i. e. For thou have strengthened
the poor, and delivered him when he was distressed by his enemy the Assyrian,
as thou had decreed and foretold. Note, that this particle for, relates (not
to the third, but) to the first verse; and here is contained another reason,
why a man of Judah should exalt and praise the Lord: and another instance to
prove that the Lord does wonderful things, and that his Counsels are
faithfulness and truth.

A strength.] i. e. He puts a strength, per metonymiam effecti, for the giver
of strength.

To the poor.] i. e. To the Jew when he was in a poor despicable condition.

He considers the Jew in the condition he was in, when Senacheribs Armies had
destroyed all the Land of Judah, but only Jerusalem, and had brought
Jerusalem to great streights.

A strength to the needy.] This is a repetition of the former words.

In his distress.] He speaks of the distress which the Jews were in, when
Senacheribs Army had wasted Judah, and besieged Jerusalem.

A refuge from the storm.] i. e. A place to fly to from the storm. This speech
is metaphorical, and signifies, that the Lord did defend the Jews from the
fury of the Assyrians, as a refuge or covert does defend a man from the storm.

A refuge from the heat.] This is metaphorical, and the same for sense with
the former sentences. He compares the Assyrians here to the heat, and God to a
shadow: for as the shadow of a Cloud, or an house, or Tent or Tree does defend
a Traveller from the scorching heat of the Sun in hot Countries, so did God
defend the Jews in Jerusalem, from the fierce anger and fury of the Assyrians.

When the blast of the terrible on^s.] i. e. When the fury of the Assyrian^,
etc. The Assyrians were at this time terrible to all that dwelt about them,
especially to the men of Judah and Jerusalem, whose fury and anger against
them and their City, He compares to a blast of wind which is violent for the
time: b^t yet it was but as a bla^t, and for a time, because God soon brought
it to an end.

As a storm.] i. e. Was as a violent and fierce storm; for a storm, though it
be there, yet it is fierce and violent.

Is for Was.

Against the wall.] i. e. Against the walls of his City, to wit, Jerusalem,
which the Assyrians desired to ruin.

He says, Wall for Walls: a singular for a plural number.

5.
Thou shall bring down the noise of strangers.] i. e. For thou shall pull down
and abate the wrath of the Assyrians.

By a noise he means wrath, per metonymiam effecti; for angry men brawl and
make a great noise and stir in their passion: wherefore this is given as a sign
of a meek man, that he does not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be
heard in the streets, cap. 42.2.

I conceive that this and that which follows is not part of the Song, but
that the Prophet speaks this by way of prophecy to show, that the Jew in that
day may justly and truly sing that Song, or that part of the Song which is
contained in the fourth verse; for the matter thereof shall prove true. And
therefore I understand that causall Particle, For, in the beginning of this
verse. But if this be to be taken for part of the Song; then is a future tense,
put here for a praeterperfect tense: and the Tenses are here much confounded.

Of strangers.] They were accounted all strangers to the Hebrews which were not
the Sons of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, But he means not here any strangers in
general, but the Assyrians in particular, Per synecdochen Generis: And the
Assyrians were such strangers to the Jews, as that the Jews understood not
their Language: Cap. 28.11. Cap. 33.19.

As the heat in a dry place.] Supple, is abated and brought down.

He speaks of the heat of the Sun, which if it be excessive, is grievous in all
places; but especially in a place of drought.

Even the heat.] Supple, in a dry place.

By the shadow of a Cloud] i. e. By a shadow caused by a Cloud.

He shows here how the heat of the Sun, is abated or brought down.

The branch of the terrible ones,] i. e. The branches of the Assyrians.

He puts branch for branches; a singular for a plural number. And by the
terrible ones, he means the Assyrians, as verse 4.

This Genitive Case is a Genitive of Identity: And therefore when he says, the
branch or branches of the Assyrians, it is as if he should say, the Assyrians,
which I call branches, because I compare them to the branches of a Tree, see
cap. 10.33. where he has the same comparison.

Shall be brought low,] i. e. shall be cut down.

6.
And in this Mountain shall the Lord of Hosts make unto all people a feast of
all things, etc.] The Mountain here meant is Mount Sion in Jerusalem, the
place where God dwelt.

What a mighty slaughter the Lord made of the Assyrian^ when they besieged
Jerusalem, is well known, 2 Kings 19.35. And what a joy it was to all the
Neighboring Nations to hear of this slaughter, we may easily conceive, because
the Assyrians were mighty hunters and oppressors of men, subduing all people
which dwelt near unto them to themselves, and making them their vassalls and
tributaries: that therefore the Prophet might express the joy which all people
should conceive at the slaughter which the Lord would make of the Assyrians
about Jerusalem: he does by way of allegory, make the Lord like the Master of a
Feast, inviting all people to his house, to feed upon the flesh of their
enemies, which he would slay, and to drink and make themselves merry with their
blood which he would shed; for feasts are to make them merry which are invited
thereunto.

A feast of fat things,] i. e. A feast of fat Cattle, as Rams and Lambs, and
Goats and Bullocks; by which are metaphorically meant the Assyrians which God
would then slay: for those which God slaies in his wrath, are often likened to
fat Cattle, as Cap. 34.6. Ezekiel. 39.18.

A feast of wines on the Lees,] i. e. A feast in which there is variety and
plenty of wine, well settled and purged from the Lees or grounds.

He says, W^nes on or upon the Lees, for wines purg^d from the Lees, because
as the wine grows cl^a^, and is purged from the Lees, the Lees fall to the
bottom of the Vessel, and so the wine is above the Lees.

Well refined,] i. e. Well pur^ed.

There are a Repetition and exposition of those words, Wines ^n the Lees.

As by fat things were meta^horically meant the Assyrians which were slain: so
by wine on the Lees is meant the blood of the Assyrians, which was shed in that
slaughter.

7.
He will destroy in this Mountain the face of the covering cast over all
people.] Here is an Hypallage in these words; for he says, He will de^troy the
face of the Covering; for he will destroy the covering of the face. And by the
Covering of the face, he means such a Covering as they were wont to wear
over the face therewith to hide it.

Note, that they which were heavy and sorrowful, were wont to cast a vail or
covering over their faces, in the time of their sorrow and heaviness, as may
appear, 2 Samuel 15.30. and 19.4. and Hierem. 14.3. and Esther 6.12. Hence may
the vail or covering of the face be taken, Per metonymiam adjuncti, to signify
sorrow and heaviness it self. Wherefore when the Prophet says, that the Lord
will destroy the face of the cover^ng cast over all people, his meaning is,
That he would take away sorrow and heaviness from all people, by destroying the
Assyrians which made all people which lived about them to droop, and to be of a
sorrowful heart, because of the cruelty and daily oppression which they used
toward them.

The Lord is said to destroy the face of the covering of all people in Mount
Sion, because from thence he destroyed the Assyrians: and thither he did invite
them, and there interteine all people.

Yet note that a singular number may be put for a plural: and Mountain for
Mountains, both in this and the former verse. And then by the Mountains may be
understood those Mountains about Jerusalem on which the Assyrians were slain
by the Angel.

And the vail that is spread over all Nations.] This is a repetition of the
former sentence.

He will swallow up,] i. e. He will destroy, or take away.

A metaphor taken from such beasts as swallow down their prey without chewing,
through greediness, which is consumed in their stomach.

Death,] i e. Sorrow and grief.

Death is put here per metonymiam effecti, for sorrow and grief: for the sorrow
of the world works death, 2 Cor. 7.10.

This is a Repetition of the former sentence.

Or by Death may be understood the danger of death, in which all people were in
while the Assyrian was in his full power. Or by Death may be meant that violent
Death, whereby the Assyrians destroyed the men of Judah, and all other people,
of which he speaks here as of a person and enemy by a Prosopopoeia.

In victory,] i. e. By victory, he means the victory which the Lord had over
the Assyrians, 2 Kings 19.35. for because the Assyrians made all the Neighbor
people sorry through their continual oppressions, it must needs take away the
sorrow of those people, and glad their hearts, to hear of the victory obtained
over the Assyrians. Or, by victory may be meant the victory not over the
Assyrians but over Death, of which as I said he speaks here as of a person and
an enemy by a Prosopopoeia.

And will wipe away tears from all faces,] i. e. The Lord will take away that
grief from all people which the Assyrians had caused.

This is a Repetition of the former words.

Tears.] Tears are put, Per metonymiam effecti, for grief or sorrow which
causes tears.

Note here that St. Paul uses these words He w ll swallow up death in victory,
to prove the R^esurrection of the just to a life immortal, 1 Cor. 15.54. And
St. John uses these words; the Lord God shall wipe away tears from all faces,
to show the pure joy which the Saints shall enjoy in the Kingdom of Heaven,
Rev. 7.17. and 21.4. And so may they well signify in a second and sublime
sense, and in a second or sublime sense the feast spoken of here verse 6. may
signify also all those spiritual blessings and benefits which the Saints
receive by Christ: for as the affliction of the Jews signifies man's misery by
sin, and the deliverance of the Jews from their affliction signifies our
Redemption by Christ; so may those temporal joys and blessings which the Jews
enjoy at any time after their deliverance out of their affliction, tipifie the
joys and blessings of the Saints whom Christ has redeemed from their sins,
after that their redemption: And therefore while the Prophet speaks of the
temporal joys and blessings of the Jews, he may so temper his speech, as that
by the same words he may signify also the joys and blessings of the Saints
which they receive by Christ.

And the rebuke of his people shall he take away from off all the Earth. q.d.
And though now all people do rebuke and reproach the Jews the people of God in
all places, yet then they shall rebuke them and reproach them no more. For when
they shall hear what their God has done to the Assyrians, their enemies for
their sake, they shall be afraid to rebuke them and reproach them, as
heretofore they have done.

9.
And it shall be said,] Supple, by the men of Judah and Jerusalem.

In that day,] Supple, in which God shall destroy the Army of the Assyrians by
his Angel, and so take away the grief of all people, etc.

We have waited for him.] Supple, till he came to deliver us.

He speaks here of God (...): Or we have waited for him, that is, we have
waited for his salvation.

We will [or shall] be glad and rejoice in his salvation.] This is a repetition
of those former words, he will save us.

Because salvation causes joy and gladness, therefore to say, that they shall
be glad and rejoice in the salvation of the Lord, is as much to say, as the
Lord will save them, per metonymiam effecti.

In his salvation,] i. e. Because of his salvation.

This Praeposition, In, among the Hebrews, serves for almost all other
Praepositions, and here it is put for, for, or, because of.

His salvation,] i. e. The salvation which he will bring us.

It is therefore called his salvation, because he is the Author of it.

Or by his salvation may bemeant his saving power.

10.
In this Mountain.] i. e. In the Mount Sion.

Shall the hand of the Lord rest,] Shall the Lord rest and abide, so that he
will not be far from us in the time of need; but will be ready at hand to help
us at all occasions.

He puts the hand here for the whole man, by a Synecdoche; and therefore the
hand, rather then any other parts, because we hold our weapons in our hands,
whereby we offend and defend.

He speaks of God as of a man, per (...).

And Moab shall be trodden down.] i. e. And he shall tread down the Moabites.

Moab is put here, per Metonymiam Efficientis, for the Moabites, or the
childr^n of Moab, which were at this time the Enemies of Judah, and as it
seems, had lately vexed them, and took spoils from them.

11.
And he shall spread forth his hands in the mid^t of them,] q. d. And he shall
run into the thickest Troops and Companies of the Moabites as they are in
battle; and when he is there, he shall spread forth his hands in the midst of
them, that he may reach the further, and beat all them down that come within
his reach on either hand.

Note here the Enallage of the number, for he speaks here of the Moabites in
the plural number, whereas he spoke of Moab before in the ninth Verse in the
singular number.

Note also, that he speaks of God, (...), as of a man.

As he that swimmeth spreads forth his hands,] And such a one spreads forth
his hands to the uttermost.

And he shall bring down their pride,] i. e. And he shall knock down their
pride, etc. (...).

The pride of those which were slain was brought down with themselves; the
pride of them which survived was pulled down by their conquest and overthrow.

Together with the spoils of their hands,] i. e. Together with the spoils which
they have taken from us, which has made them proud and lofty.

It seems from hence, that the Moabites had vexed the men of Judah, and had had
the better of them at some time or other; or at least, that they had made some
incursions into their Land, and carried away some spoils uncontrolled.

Note, that this is the end and effect of Gods spreading forth his hands; for
by that he brought down the pride of the Moabites with the spoils of their
hands.

12.
And the fortress of the high fort of thy walls] i. e. And the strong and high
bulwarks which are built upon the walls of thy Cities, O Moab, to defend them.

He puts fortress for fortresses, a singular for a plural number; and fort for
forts.

Note here the Enallage of the person and number, for he speaks to Moab by an
Apostrophe in the singular number, whereas he spoke of the Moabites just before
in the plural number.

Shall he bring down.] i. e. Shall he cast down, or break down: (...).

ISAIAH, CHAP. XXVI.
IN that day] i. e. At that time in which the Assyrians shall be destroyed by
the Angel of God.

This song shall be sung,] i. e. Let this Song be sung; for the Hebrews use a
Future tense for an Imperative Mood, or this Song may be sung.

We have a strong City] He means Jerusalem.

Salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks.] i. e. God will appoint
salvation it self in stead of walls and bulwarks, to defend it and protect it:
And where salvation it self is in stead of walls and bulwarks, that City must
needs be safe.

Salvation may be taken here either actively, or passively, or neutrally; if
actively, then by salvation may be meant Gods saving power, which is the cause
of salvation, per metonymiam efficientis: If passively or neutrally, then by
salvation is meant that, by which a thing is said to be formally safe: and
which way soever it be taken, he speaks here of salvation, either as a person
by a Prosopopoeia, or at least as of a thing by it self subsistent.

Note, that he uses a Future for a Praeterperfect tense.

2.
Open ye the gates, that the righteous nation, which keeps the truth, may
enter in] q. d. O ye Citizens of Jerusalem, open ye the gates of your City, and
take in those godly men and constant professors of the truth, which come to you
for a refuge against the Assyrians.

The righteous Nation] He means by these, those godly Jews which lived in
other Cities and Towns of Judah and Benjamin, and ran to Jerusalem to save
themselves from Sennacheribs Army, and would not comply with Sennacherib, and
forsake their Religion to save themselves as others did; and he says the
righteous nation, for those of the nation which are righteous, by a Synecdoc^e
Integri.

Note, that those which were righteous and upright in heart, when they heard
that God had appointed salvation for walls and bulwarks to Jerusalem, that is,
that God would defend Jerusalem and preserve it against the Assyrian, they
believed Gods Word and hasted thither for safety.

Note also, that though this song was to be sung after the Assyrian was
destroyed by the Angel, yet he speaks of those things which went before it,
as though they were then to come, the better to set out what he speaks of to
the life. A thing usual in such subjects.

Which keeps the truth] i. e. Which are constant in the profession of their
Religion, which is the true Religion, and change it not to curry favor with
the Assyrians.

May enter in.] And so be safe from the fury and violence of the Assyrians.

3.
Thou will keep him in perfect peace whose mind is staid on thee.] He uses
here an Apostrophe to God.

Although these words are occasioned by that peace and safety in which God kept
the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and others which (relying upon Gods protection)
ran thither for relief against Sennacherib: Yet I take the words generally, of
Gods presering all which trust in him; for the Divine Singers use to arise from
Particulars to Generals in the praises of God, as may be observed in the Song
of Hannah, 1 Samuel 2. verses 8, 9. And in the Song of the Virgin Mary, Luke
1.50. etc.

In perfect peace,] i. e. In perfect safety.

The Hebrews by the word peace, mean all and every kind of prosperity or good.

Whose mind is stayed on thee.] i. e. Who trust in thee and rely upon thee.

The mind is put for the whole man; and in the word stayed, there is a
Metaphor from a man leaning upon a staff, which stays him up that he falls
not.

4.
Trust ye in the Lord for ever,] This is an Apostrophe to the men of Judah and
Jerusalem, drawn as an inference from, and used by occasion of those words,
Thou, O God, wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee,
because he trusts in thee. q. d. Being therefore that the Lord will keep him
in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on him, because he trusts in him;
Trust ye in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength.

In the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength.] Supple, And therefore he is able
to save you and preserve you always.

5.
For he brings down, etc.] i. e. For he casts down, etc. (...).

The connection is, q.d. Trust in the Lord, trust not in the strength of any
fenced City, for he brings down, etc.

Them that dwell on high,] i. e. Those which dwell in Castles and Forts, which
are built upon rocks and high places, and which are built with walls, and so
are both by nature and art, more impregnable then others, by reason of which
they trust more in the strength of the place, then they do in God.

The lofty City he lays it low,] i. e. The City which is built upon an high
rock or mountain; or, the City which is fortified and encompassed about with
high walls and towers, and so makes the Inhabitants thereof more to trust in
the strength thereof then in God, he demolisheth and brings to ruin.

This Relative It, is redundant.

The foot shall tread it down, even the feet of the poor,] i. e. They which are
weak and of no account for warlike forces, shall cast it down as easily as a
man treads down a flower of the field with his foot.

The foot etc.] The foot is put here for the whole man, by a Synecdoche, and
the foot rather then any other part, because with that we tread, etc.

Shall tread it down,] i. e. Shall easily and without much ado beat it down: a
Metaphor.

The poor.] By the poor he means, by a Metaphor, those which are
contemptible; and contemptible in particular in the matter of warlike strength.

And the steps of the needy.] By steps he means the feet, per Metonymiam
Effecti.

This is a repetition of the former Sentence.

7.
The way of the just is uprightness,] i. e. The actions of the just man are
upright, etc.

The Prophet uses here again his Apostrophe to God which he interrupted in the
two former verses, by an Apostrophe to the men of Judah and Jerusalem.

And by the just man he means those godly and religious men which were in
Jerusalem when Sennacheribs Army did besiege it (as appears by the next verse)
whom he called the righteous nation, verse. 2. These he shows here to be no
hypocrites, but truly godly and religious men, whose sincerity he here
mentions, that he may show that they are such as are worthy of the salvation
of God.

The way] i. e The actions.

The Hebrews often put the way for the actions of man, by a Metaphor, because
we attain to the end which God has propounded to us by holy actions, as we
come by the way to the place to which we would go.

Of the just] i. e. Of the just men, Supple, which hide themselves in Jerusalem
from the Assyrians.

He puts here a Singular for a Plural number, by an Enallage.

Is uprightness.] i. e. Is upright and without hypocrisy.

He says uprightness, for upright, using an Abstract for a Concrete, per
Metonymiam Adjuncti.

Thou most upright] i. e. Thou O God which art the most upright.

Do weigh the path of the just.] i. e. Do examine the ways or the actions
of these just men, and do find them to be truly upright.

Do weigh] i e. Do examine.

This word is metaphorical, taken from the weighing of such merchantable
Commodities as are sold by weight; or, from the weighing of gold in scales, to
know whether it be weight or no.

Note, that the word weight, is to be taken here not only for to examine, but
also to find good upon examination, by a Syllepsis.

The path.] i. e. The way, that is, the actions as before.

8.
Yea, in the way of thy judgments, O Lord, have we waited for thee,] i. e.
Yea, when thy judgments, and chastisements, and afflictions, (brought upon us
by the Assyrians) have been upon us, we have not fainted or started aside, but
have waited for thee, that is, for thy salvation, and for thy coming to deliver
us.

This is a great argument of true and sincere uprightness, not to be offended
because of afflictions and persecutions, but to put our trust in God even when
he does chastise us and afflict us.

Note here the Enallage first of the number, for he speaks of the just in the
Plural number, whereas he spoke of them in the Singular number just before;
then of the person, for he speaks of them here in the first person (making
himself one of the number) whereas he spoke of them there in the third.

Have we waited for thee,] i. e. For thy coming. See cap. 25.9. Or, for thee,
that is, for thy help; or, for thy loving kindness.

The desire of our soul is to thy name,] i. e. The desire of our soul has
been to thee, as to the object thereof; that is, we have heartily desired thee
and thy presence to help us; or, we have heartily desired thy loving kindness
toward us.

A Present is here put for a Preterperfect tense.

To thy name,] i. e. To thee.

An Hebrew Periphrase.

And to the remembrance of thee.] i. e. And to the remembrance of those things
which thou have done for them which trust in thee, and of the promises which
thou have made to us; for by the remembrance of th^se things, are we sustained
in the midst of all our afflictions.

Of thee.] i. e. Of the things which thou have done for them which trust in
thee, and of the promises which thou have made to us; for God may be, and is
often put (especially in the Psalms) for his actions and his attributes, by a
metonymy of the cause and of the subject.

9.
With my soul have I desired thee,] i. e. And I thy servant have also with my
soul desired and prayed for thy mercy and loving kindness toward us thy
people.

In the night] Supple, At which time I have bin waking, when others have been
asleep.

It is probable (which some say) that this Song ended at the eight verse, and
that Isaiah himself foreseeing by this song what God would do for the
righteous and their prayers, and how he would deal with the proud, becomes a
suitor to God for the salvation of the poor Jews from the fury of the
Assyrians, and for the destruction of those Assyrians their proud and deadly
enemies.

Will I se^k thee] i. e. I will seek thy mercy and loving kindness, and pray
for it.

What we desire and seek for truly and sincerely at Gods hands, we pray to him
for; for that is the means appointed to us to obtain from him, for call upon
me in the day of trouble and I will deliver thee, says the Lord, Psalm. 50.15.
Ask and it shall be given you, says our Savior, Mat. 7.7.

Early,] i. e. Betimes in the morning when my spirits are fresh, and before I
do any other thing; yea, while others are yet scarce awake.

For when thy judgments are in the earth] Between these and the former words
we must understand this or the like prayer or petition, viz. Show us therefore
thy mercy and loving kindness, O Lord, and take away thy judgments from us
which trust in thee, and pour them out upon our enemies the wicked Assyrians
which fear not thy Name.

When thy judgments are in the earth] i. e. When thy judgments are upon the
Inhabitants of the earth, that is, upon the Assyrians.

Note, that in, is put here for on, or upon; and that by the earth, are meant
the Inhabitants of the earth, by a metonymy: and by the Inhabitants of the
earth in general, are meant the Assyrians in particular, whom he calls the
Inhabitants of the world, in the next words, and again in the eighteen verse.

The Inhabitants of the world.] i. e. The Assyrians. See verse 18.

Will learn righteousness.] And so by consequence will not use oppression as
now they do toward us.

10.
Let favor be showed to the wicked,] i. e. If thou sparest him that is wicked,
and do suffer him to go unpunished, and to escape thy judgments.

By the wicked in general, he means the Assyrians in particular, by a
Synecdoche.

He will not learn righteousness,] i. e. He will not learn righteousness, and
so by consequence will not leave off to do evil and to oppress.

In the Land of uprightness, etc.] q.d. Yea, though he be in a Land where
uprightness is professed and practise^ (such as the Land of Judah is) and
lives among righteous men, whose example might move him to deal righteously,
yet (if thou do not smite him but sparest him) he will do unrightly.

The La^d of uprightnesse] i. e. The upright Land; for the Hebrews put a
Substantive of the Genitive Case for an Adjective. And a Land is called a Land
of uprightness, or, an upright Land, because of the Inhabitants thereof, which
are upright men, and profess and practice uprightness therein.

He will deal unjustly,] i. e. He will do wrong.

And will not behold the Majesty of the Lord.] i. e. And will not take notice
of the power of God over all men, and of his justice; so as to reverence and
fear him, and leave off to deal unjustly and to do wrong for fear of him.

The Majesty of the Lord,] By the Majesty of the Lord is meant the Lord
himself. See cap. 24.14. And by the Lord himself is meant the power and
justice of the Lord, by a Metonymy.

Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see,] i. e. Yea, though thou
do threaten them for their evil doings, and art ready to smite them, if thou
do not smite them they will take no notice of it, but persist still in their
evil doings.

He alludes here to a man, who when he threatens and is ready to strike, lifts
up his hand to fetch his blow.

But they shall see,] q. d. But yet at length when thy hand falls upon them,
and thou smitest them, they shall see it, and feel it too to their cost.

And be ashamed] viz. So many of them as shall escape death.

For their envy at the people,] i. e. For the evil which they have done to thy
people.

He puts envy here for mischief, proceeding of envy, by a Metonymy.

The Assyrians at this time did mightily vex and distress the Jews the people
of God.

The fire of thine enemies,] i. e. That shame which uses to befall thine
enemies.

Fire is put here metaphorically for shame, because as fire is red, so shame
causes redness through blushing in the face. In the same sense the Prophet
says, their faces shall be as flames, cap. 13.8.

Shall devour them.] i. e. Shall befall them.

Fire is said to consume and devour, as cap. 9.18. Wherefore the Prophet using
the word fire metaphorically, says in allusion to that, it shall devour them;
whereas if he had said shame without a metaphor, he would have said, shall
befall them, or take hold upon them.

By this phrase the Prophet signifies the excess of shame.

12.
Lord thou will ordain peace for us,] i. e. Lord ordain, we beseech thee,
peace for us.

He puts here a Future tense of the Indicative mood, for an Imperative, after
the Hebrew manner.

For thou also have wrought all our works in us,] q. d. For whatsoever has
happened to us, whether it be good or evil, comes from thee, Supple, and
therefore it is in thy power, O Lord, to procure us peace and ordain it for us.

Thou also] This Particle also, is either redundant, or it does relate to
second causes, which though they are principal instruments in the works here
spoken of, yet they are but instruments directed by God, and therefore God also
works these works, though the worldling takes the second causes for the sole
causes, and never looks up to God.

All our works] By works are here meant all events, and all things which
happened to them, which he calls their works; not because they did them, but
because they were done or happened to them, or among them.

In us.] i. e. Among us, or to us; (for In will serve for almost any
preposition whatsoever) q. d. which have happened or have bin done to us, or
among us.

13.
Other Lords besides thee have had dominion over us,] The Hebrews were a free
people, not subject nor tributary by right to any under God, who was their King
and their Lord, Psalm. 44.4. If any one therefore demanded subjection or tribute
of them, or made himself a Lord over them (as the Assyrians did at this time)
he was a Tyrant by usurpation, and a Tyrant by oppression; both which were
grievous to the Hebrews, and from both which the Prophet here in the name of
the Jews desires to be delivered.

Have had dominion,] These words signify a continued act; q. d. Other Lords
besides thee have had and still have dominion over us.

Though the Philistines, and Jebusites, and Syrians, and others have at times
lorded it over the Hebrews, yet he complains here of the Assyrians only, who
only Lorded it over them at this time.

But by thee only will we make mention of thy name,] i. e. But by thy goodness
toward us (and thy goodness only) let us make mention of thee, as of our
only Lord, q.d. But deliver thou us, O Lord, in whom only we trust; deliver
thou us for thy mercy and goodness sake, from all other which have dominion
over us, that we may make mention of thee as of our Lord, and of thee only,
and call none other our Lord but thee alone.

He puts here a Future tense of the Indicative mood, for an Imperative, as
before.

By thee onely] He puts God here for the mercy and goodness of God, per
metonymiam Subjecti. And he says by thee only, because they trusted only in
God, and expected help only from him.

We will make mention of thy name.] i. e. Let us make mention of thee, Supple,
as of our only Lord.

He says thy name, for thee, as cap. 25.1. and 26.8. And when he says, we
will make mention, or let us make mention of thy name, it is as if he should
say, let us call thee only Lord; or, be thou alone our Lord; for to call God
our Lord, and for God to be our Lord, is all one in the Hebrew manner of speech.

14.
They are dead, they shall not live,] q.d. They shall be cut off, they shall
not live which usurp dominion over us, and disturb our peace.

The Prophet shows here, that the Lord has heard his prayer, and will grant
his request in destroying the Assyrians which did Lord it over the Jews.

They are dead,] He puts here a Present or Praeterperfect tense for a Future,
to signify the certainty of what he speaks; and so he does again three or four
times in this verse, and many times in this Chapter.

They shall not rise,] Supple, to live in this world to vex and distress us
any more.

Therefore have thou visited and destroyed them,] i. e. For thou will visit
them and de- them.

He puts Therefore, for For, or Because, as the same word in the Original is
rendered, Genesis 38.26.

Ha^t thou visited] God visits both in anger and loving kindness: when he
visits in loving kindness, he redeemeth and delivers; when he visits in
anger, he afflicts and punishes.

And made all their memory to perish.] Supple, So as that they shall not be so
much as once remembered.

15.
Thou have increased the nation, O Lord,] i. e. Thou will increase our nation,
O Lord, thou will increase the nation of the Jews again, when it is diminished.

The Nation of the Jews was increased at this time, by the return of many
Jews into their Country (upon the wonderful destruction of Sennacheribs
Army) which Jews had fled into other Lands for safety, when Sennacherib first
invaded Judea; at which time also many of other nations being moved by that
miraculous destruction of the Assyrians, forsaking their idolatry, came and
lived in Judah, and so increased that nation, even the nation of the Jews.

Thou art glorified,] i. e. Thou will do that for which thou shall be
glorified, per Metonymiam Effecti.

That which he did here was, that he destroyed the Assyrians, and delivered his
own people, and restored them to peace and happiness again.

Thou have removed it far unto all the ends of the earth.] i. e. Thou will
enlarge the nations, that is, the people of Judah which shall be shut up in
Jerusalem, and there be besieged and imprisoned by the Assyrians, and wilt
remove it thence into all the parts of the Land.

Note that a Praeterperfect tense is here put for a future

This he did when he destroyed the Assyrians, by which the people might go
whither they would without fear.

Far] Supple, From Jerusalem, where they were shut up, and as it were
imprisoned.

Of the earth.] By the earth he means the Land of Judah, per Synecdochen
Integri, as cap. 24.17. etc.

16.
In trouble] i. e. When the Assyrians afflicted and distressed them.

Have they] i. e. The just and righteous men which were in Jerusalem.

Have they visited thee.] i. e. Have they come into thy Temple which is thy
house and there visited thee, and offered up their prayers to thee. See 2 Kings
19. v. 14, 15.

He speaks here of things then to come, as if they had been then already past,
and that for the certainty of them.

17.
Like as a woman with child, that draws near to the time of her delivery, is
in pain, and cries out in her pangs, so have we been.] Supple, In great pain
and anguish of heart, and so have we cried out for very grief, because of the
oppressions wherewith the Assyrians do oppress us.

Note here, how he changes persons, from the third to the first.

18.
We have been with child,] q. d. Yea, we have been yet more like to women with
child, for we have been as it were with child with the hopes of deliverance
from the distress, wherewith the Assyrians do distress us.

We have been in pain,] i. e. We have been in pain and anguish of spirit,
because of our oppressions from which we desired to be delivered.

We have as it were brought forth wind,] But yet when after all our pain and
anguish of spirit, we thought we should have brought forth deliverance
according to our hopes, we did not bring forth deliverance as we hoped.

To bring forth wind is, to bring forth that which is contrary, or at least not
according to our hopes and expectation.

The Prophet seems here to allude to those (...) or those windy eggs which
naturalists speak off, of which comes no bird nor chick, but they prove addle.

Nor does it hinder the allusion, that in the former part of this similitude he
alludes to a woman with child, who is not (...) but (...), i. e. Not such a one
as lays eggs, but brings forth her young alive: for the Prophet does often
mingle Metaphors and Allegories, and allude now to one thing, now to another in
the same sentence.

We have not wrought any deliverance in the earth,] i. e. We have not hitherto
procured from thee any deliverance from the oppression of the Assyrians which
oppress us in our Land.

He shows here what he means by the foregoing words, and what it was with
which they were with child; they were with child with hope of deliverance, and
with hope that the Assyrians should be destroyed; but they brought not forth
this child.

The means by which they would have wrought this deliverance, was by prayer,
which hitherto God had not heard.

Note, that the Proph^t leaves his former allegory here, which if he had
followed, he should have said, we have not brought forth deliverance.

In the earth,] He takes the earth here for Judea, as verse 15.

Neither have the Inhabitants of the world faln] Neither have thou as yet
smitten the Assyrians which now vex us (as thou did the Egyptians and
Moabites which vexed our forefathers) that they might fall.

The Inhabitants of the world] By the Inhabitants of the world he means the
Assyrians, per Synecdochen Integri. And the Assyrians might be called at this
time the Inhabitants of the world, rather then any other people, because of
their large dominions in the world.

19.
Thy dead men shall live,] This is the answer of God to that complaint which
the Prophet made just before in the person of the just nation.

Thy dead men] i. e. Thy men which are but as dead men in thy esteem, and in
the esteem of the world, because no man can see how they can possibly escape
the sword of the Assyrians.

Shall live,] i. e. Shall live again, i. e. Shall escape death and flourish
again.

He persists in the allusion to dead men.

Together with my dead body shall they arise,] i. e. Together with my holy City
Jerusalem, which is accounted but as a dead carcass, shall they arise from the
dead.

He speaks here of Jerusalem as of a woman which first he calls His, in respect
of the love which he did bear to her; for he loved the gates of Sion more then
all the dwellings of Jacob, Psalm. 87.2. Yea, in respect of the marriage by
which he had married her, for he was her husband. Cap. 54.5. Then he calls her
his dead body (in respect of the opinion of men which made no other account but
that the Assyrians would destroy her, as they had destroyed other Cities of
Judah, their power being so great and their wrath so hot against her) and in
allusion to that, that Jerusalem was to God as a Wife, and as his Love, these
words, my dead body sound somewhat amorously, or love-like.

This which is here spoken of, was fulfilled when God destroyed the Army of the
Assyrians which did sorely distress Jerusalem, and the men within her, by
which they in Jerusalem were relieved.

Ye that dwell in the dust,] By them that dwell in the dust are meant dead men,
whom he describes by that, that they dwell in the dust, because the dead are
bruied in the dust of earth.

And by dead men, he means metaphorically those Jews which were in Jerusalem
when Sennacheribs Army besieged it; whom he calls dead men, because every one
thought them to be in so great danger of death, as that they could not possibly
escape it; and Jerusalem was then but as a Grave or Sepulcher, because the
Jews while they were besieged therein could no more go out nor were they like
to go out thence any more then a dead man could or was likely to go out of his
Grave or Sepulchr.

The Lord therefore calls them dead men, not in his own sense (for he knew how
to deliver them) but in the sense of others. See the like cap. 41.14.

Thy dew is as the dew of herbs,] i. e. The blessing which shall light upon
thee, shall be as the dew which falls upon herbs; for as the dew which falls
upon herbs refreshes them, and makes them to flourish; so shall the blessing
which shall light upon thee, refresh thee, and make thee flourish again.

He calls the blessing of God here by the name of dew, because it should be
like unto dew; and he calls it her dew, because it should light upon her, i. e.
Upon Jerusalem, as he calls the dew which falls uon the herbs, the dew of
herbs.

And the earth shall cast out the dead.] i. e. And ye which are accounted as
men which are dead, shall rise out of the earth, where ye are buried.

He seems here to compare the earth or the grave, to the womb which
concurreth actively and vigorously to the casting out of the dead child which
is therein.

These words are metaphorical, and do signify, that the Jews which were in
Jerusalem should be speedily freed from the danger in which they were, and from
the siege with which they were begirt, and should be at liberty to go whither
they would.

So that these words do signify under a metaphor, the same as those words
signify plainly, Thou have removed it far into all the ends of the earth,
verse. 15.

He speaks of the Jews here under the metaphor of dead men, because they were
accounted no better then dead men, and men appointed to be slain by the sword
of the Assyrian.

15.
Enter thou into thy chambers and shut thy doors about thee,] Shut thy doors
and keep thee close a little.

He alludes to the manner of those which are besieged, who, were wont to shut
up their doors, and keep within, during the siege, as having no joy to walk
abroad, but choosing rather to weep and lament at home in their chambers, and in
their closets; as also thinking by this to avoid the violence and fury of
Soldiers, that might chance to rush in upon them unawares. See Cap. 24.10.

That which is here spoken, is spoken in the person of the Prophet, who by
occasion of Gods words mentioned in the two former verses, exhorts the people
of Jerusalem to bear the siege and oppression of the Assyrians patiently,
because they should last but a little time.

Until the indignation.] i. e. Until the indignation and anger of God toward
thee. Cap. 10.25.

21.
The Lord comes out of his place,] i. e. The Lord will come straightway out
of his place.

By the place of the Lord may be meant heaven; or, by the place of the Lord may
be meant the Mercy-seat which was between the Cherubins in the Sanctum
Sanctorum, for there was the Lord wont to sit, 1 Samuel 4.4. Psalm. 80.1. and 99.1.

He speaks here of God (...) as of a man.

The Inhabitants of the earth,] i. e. The Assyrians.

He calls the Assyrians the Inhabitants of the earth here, as he called them
the Inhabitants of the world, v. 18.

The earth also shall disclose her blood,] i. e. For the earth also, etc. q. d.
for even the earth also shall disclose the blood of the Jews (which the
Inhabitants of the earth, that is, the Assyrians have shed, and she has drunk
up) that God may revenge it.

This seems to contain a reason, why God would punish the Inhabitants of the
earth.

The earth also] q. d. For not only those Jews themselves which survive,
shall complain how many of their brethren have bin slain by the Assyrians, and
cry for vengance against them; but the earth also shall disclose her blood, etc.

And shall no more cover her slain.] i. e. And shall no longer cover (and so
conceal) the slain which are buried in her, but shall lay open the bodies of
those Jews which the Assyrians have slain, to the eyes of God, and reveal
them, and call for vengeance upon the Assyrians for killing them.

He speaks of the earth as of a man or woman, which is endued with reason, by a
Metaphor, or Prosopopoeia, and of God as of a man, by an (...).

Though the slaughter of the Jews which the Assyrians made (who in this were
Gods rod) was just in respect of God, who punished them for their sins; yet it
was not so in regard of the Assyrians who waged war upon the Jews; for they
did it out of ambition and tyranny. See cap. 10.7. etc.

ISAIAH, CHAP. XXVII.
IN that day] i. e. At that time in which the Assyrians shall make war upon
Judea and besiege Jerusalem.

A Relative is put here without an Antecedent.

Leviathan] Leviathan signifies a Whale, Psalm. 104.26. but allegorically it
signifies a Tyrant or great King which oppresses and devoureth lesser Kings
and people, as the Whale does lesser fish: In particular Leviathan does
allegorically signify in this place Sennacherib King of Assyria, that great
Tyrant and Hunter of men, whom God punished when he destroyed his Army by the
Ministry of an Angel, and him himself by Adramelech and Sharezer his sons, 2
King. 19.35, 36, 37.

The piercing serpent] A serpent is a name which the Hebrews use as well of
fishes, as of those creatures which we call commonly serpents; for as serpents
creep and glide along on the ground, so do fishes in the waters: See Genesis 1.20.
in the margin there.

A Whale is called a piercing serpent, or a piercing fish, because of his great
sharp teeth which pierce when he biteth.

Sennacherib is called metaphorically, the piercing serpent, because of his
cruelty.

That crooked serpent,] The Whale is no more crooked then other fish, yea as
straight as any: he is crooked only while he swimmeth, and bends his tail or
hinder part of his body to and fro.

The Prophet considers the Whale in that posture here, and by his crookedness
signifies allegorically the fraud and treachery of Sennacherib, who was not
straight and upright in his dealings, but very treacherous and fraudulent.

And he shall slay the Dragon that is in the Sea.] i. e. Yea, he shall slay the
Dragon that is in the Sea.

He puts And for Yea.

A Dragon is one of the greatest kinds of Land-serpents that are, and is a
name which we use only of that kind of Serpents which lives on the Land,
never of any Serpent which lives in the waters: Whereas therefore we read here
of the Dragon in the Sea, it seems to be a borrowed name, and given to the
Whale, being one of the greatest sort of fishes which are in the Sea, by a
Metaphor, from the Dragon, which is one of the greatest kind of Serpents which
are on the Land: So that the Dragon here signifies the same as Leviathan did
before, that is, a Whale; and both of them by an Allegory signify Sennacherib
King of Assyria, which ruled among many people, as the Whale lives among many
waters in the Sea.

This Leviathan, this Dragon, even Sennacherib King of Assyria, did the Lord
punish when he destroyed his Army, and made him himself to fly to his strong
hold, 2 Kings cap. 27. verse. 35, 36. And then slew him, by the hands of his
sons Adramelech and Sharezer, who smote him as he was worshipping in the house
of his God Nisroch, 2 King. 27. verse. 37.

In the Sea,] By the Sea may be meant metaphorically the many people among
which Sennacherib lived, and over which he ruled.

2.
Sing ye unto her,] i. e. Sing ye to her praise, or to her comfort.

He speaks of Jerusalem here, though he names her not.

A vineyard of red wine.] q. d. There is a vineyard of red wine.

Here begins the Song.

A vineyard of grapes, which yield red wine, was the best kind of vineyard:
for the Scripture commends wine for the redness of it, Genes. 49.12. Prove. 23.
v. 31. And Jerusalem was to be commended at this time for the Faith and
Patience which the righteous Nation which was therein showed.

This is spoken here in the person of God.

3.
I the Lord do keep it,] The Prophet alludes here to the Keeper of a Vineyard;
and, by these Metaphorical expressions, signifies the care which God had of
Jerusalem to preserve her from her Enemies.

Le^t any hurt i^,] q. d. Lest any should come over the hedges, or break down
the fence, and spoil the Vineyard; i. e. Lest any should break into Jerusalem
with an Army, and destroy it.

4.
Fury is not in me,] Supple, Against my Vineyard; q. d. I am not angry with
Jerusalem, so as to destroy her, or suffer her to be destroyed.

Who would set the briars and thorns against me in battle?] q. d. But yet who
would advise the briars and thorns, and encourage them, to fight against me in
battle, as though they might do it with safety, or as though I would spare
them, and that there were not fury in me against them, though there be no fury
against my Vineyard?

Understand here these words, But yet.

By the briars and thorns may be understood such as were Enemies to Jerusalem,
and the men thereof; and fitly does he signify the Enemies of Jerusalem, and
the inhabitants thereof, under the Metaphor of briars and thorns: for he had
compared Jerusalem and the inhabitants thereof to a vineyard; and nothing is so
much an Enemy to a vineyard, and does so much annoy it, as briars and thorns.

By this therefore, that the Lord says he will be thus furious against the
Enemies of Jerusalem, he does show forth the greater love to Jerusalem her self.

By their standing in battle against God is meant their sinning against God;
for all such sinners are the Enemies of God, Colos. 1. verse. 21. and their
sinning is a fighting against God, Acts 5.39. Romans 8. v. 7.

This sense of this place agrees with the tenth Verse of this Chapter, etc.

I would go through them,] q. d. If any should advise the briars and thorns to
stand in battle against me, they should know that there is fury in me toward
them; for I would charge through them.

A Metaphor from Soldiers.

I would burn them together.] q. d. I would destroy them every one.

He speaks here properly, when he speaks of burning briars and thorns, (for
they use to be fuel for the fire, and to be burned,) whereas he spoke
allegorically of them before, under the Allegory of Soldiers: where note (as
we have often observed) that the Prophet often mixeth his Allegories with other
allegorical and proper expressions, etc.

Together.] i. e. Every one of them. See Cap. 1.28.

Note, that these words [Who would set the briars and thorns against me in
battle? I would go through them, I would burn them together,] are to be read
with a parenthesis.

5.
Or let him take hold of my strength,] q. d. Or if there be any fury in me
toward my Vineyard, that is, toward Israel, and I am angry with him, let
Israel take hold of my arm, and hold it, that I cannot strike with it; that is,
Let him humble himself, and pray, and desire me to remit my fury and anger, and
be at peace with him, and I will be at peace with him.

He alludes to a servant, or a son, who when his master or father is angry with
him, and takes up a stick or a rod to beat him, lays hold of his masters or
fathers arm or hand, that he might not beat him.

As to lay hold on a man's arm, does hinder him from striking; so does it hinder
God from striking, to humble thy self before him, and to pray to him for pardon.

The meaning therefore of this Allegory and place is, that in case God should
be angry with his people, let them humble themselves, and make use of prayer
(which will prevail with him to hold his hand from striking them) and desire
his favor, and they should obtain his favor, and hold his hand.

Let him, etc.] Here he declineth from the Metaphor of the Vineyard, and by him
means Israel, of whom verse. 6. but the sense is the same; and Israel and the
Vineyard are the same.

My strength,] i. e. My arm, wherein my strength lies to smite.

He puts strength for the arm in which the strength lies, by a Metonymy.

He speaks of God (...).

That he may make peace with me.] i. e. That I may be friends with him.

6.
He shall cause them] By He is meant God.

Note here the Enallage of the person, for the first person is changed into the
third.

Them that come of Jacob,] i. e. The Jews, which are the sons of Jacob by Judah.

To take root,] So that they shall not easily be moved, or rooted up out of
their Land; but shall there be fixed, and flourish, though they are much
diminished by the Assyrians.

He speaks of the Jews here, as of a Vine, by a Metaphor.

Israel,] i. e. The Jews, the children of Jacob, who was also called Israel:
Metonymia Efficientis.

And fill the face of the World] i. e. And fill his own Land.

The land of Judah is sometimes called the World, and sometimes the Earth,
though it be but a little part thereof, per synecdochen integri.

With fruit.] i. e. With children.

A metaphor from the fruit of the Vine, or some other tree.

7.
Has he smitten him?] i. e. Has the Lord smitten Israel?

As he smote those that smote him,] That is, As he smote the Assyrians, which
vexed and distressed him, to wit, Israel.

Or is he slain according to the slaughter of them that are slain by him?] i.
e. Or is Israel slain with such a slaughter as the Assyrians were slain, which
were slain by Israel?

The question will be here, How the Assyrians were slain by Israel, whereas
they were slain by the Angel? 2 Kings 19. verse. 35.

Answ. Though the Assyrians were slain by an Angel, yet because that Angel came
in behalf of the Jews, and as it were a Captain of the Host of Israel (as that
Angel did, Josh. 5. v. 14.) they may be said to have been slain by the Jews,
that is, by Israel: For that is said to be done by an Army, which is done by
one of the Army, yea which is done by an Auxiliary.

He shows here the goodness of God to the Jews, in that, though he did smite
them, yet he did it for their good; he did not smite them so as he did the
Assyrians under Sennacherib, to their utter destruction.

8.
In measure when it shoots forth will thou debate with it,] This phrase is
metaphorical; and the meaning of it is this, That when Gods people Israel
sins, God is not extreme in punishing them, but very moderate.

Note here the Apostrophe to God.

In measure] i. e. By measure; For In is often put for By; and the measure
meant is some little measure, by which they were wont to measure Corn or the
like; From whence comes this Allegory and Proverb, That when any thing is done
with moderation, and without extremity, it is said to be done In or By measure.

When it shoots forth] He speaks of Israel, or the people of the Jews (which
were the people of God) under the metaphor of a Vine or Vineyard; therefore he
says, When it, etc.

When it shoots forth] i. e. When it sends forth or shoots out luxuriant
branches, such as hinder the Vine from bringing forth fair grapes, and
therefore are to pruned and cut off. The meaning is, when Israel sins; for
the sinful actions of a man may be very well compared to the luxuriant
branches of a Vine.

Thou will debate with it] The Prophet should have said; thou will prune it, if
he had stuck to his allegory; but he declines from that (for we debate not with
insensible creatures, and creatures void of reason) and speaks of the Vine now,
as if it were endued with sense and reason both.

But we have observed often the mixture of Metaphors, which the Prophet uses.

Thou will debate with it,] i. e. Thou will chide with it and punish it.

This Debate here must include chastising and punishing, by a Syllepsis.

He stays his rough wind in the day of the East wind] i. e. When the Lord
fans his people, he blows upon them with his East wind, by which he carries
away the chaff, but he stays his rough-wind or north wind, which would carry
away Corn and all.

This seems to be a Proverbiall speech, and is for sense the same with the
former sentence, and shows that God will chastise his people, but not utterly
consume them.

Note here the Enallage of the person, by which he passes from the second
person to the third.

Note also, his transition from the metaphor of a Vine, to the metaphor of
Corn, whick is fanned or winnowed.

9.
By this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged,] q. d. By this
therefore, O Lord, that thou have chastised and smitten Jacob, his iniquity
shall be purged, and he will amend his life.

Jacob] By Jacob are meant the Jews, the sons of Jacob, by a Metonymy.

And this is all the fruit to take away his sin,] i. e. And this is all the
fruit which thou expectest from the chastisements and punishments which thou
layest upon him, to wit, to take away his sin.

His sin] By sin, Idolatry is here meant, if not only, yet chiefly, as the
next words signify.

When he makes all the stones of the Altars as chalk-stones, that are beaten
in sunder, the Groves and Images shall not stand up] These words are defective,
and the defects are thus made up; q. d. Therefore, though thou do smite
Jacob, yet thou will hold thy hand from smiting him, when he beats down the
Altars which he has built to his idols, and when he repents him of his
idolatry, and says, The Groves and Images shall not stand up.

When he makes all the stones of the Altars as chalk-stones, etc.] When he
breaks up Altars as chalk-stones are broken, etc.

He puts the stones of the Altars, for the Altars made of stone, per Metonymiam
Materiae, and by these Altars here, he means those Altars which were built for
Idols.

As chalk-stones which were beaten in sunder,] By chalk-stones he means
lime-stones, which are made of chalk, by burning in a kilne; per Metonymiam
Materiae.

Of these stones they make mortar, and for that end beat them to dust.

The Groves] By Groves some understand here the groves which were planted or
used for places of Idolatry; others by groves understand not here places beset
with trees, (for Groves in the Scripture phrase do not always signify such
places) but Idols called by the name of Groves, as Judge. 3. v. 1. 2 King.
17.10. and ^1.7.

But why Idols should be called Groves, all agree not; some call them Groves,
because they were wont to be set, and worshipped in Groves; others, because
those Idols which are called Groves, were Images of Groves artificially graven;
and indeed Idolaters came by degrees to worship the very trees, and what they
worshipped in it self, they might worship in an Image too: Others say, that by
Groves are meant peculiarly the Idols or Images of Ashtaroth the Goddess of
the Sidonians (of which 1 Kings 11.5. and 2 Kings 23.13.) And that the
Scripture calls them Groves, in allusion to the name Ashtaroth, (for Ascheroth
(which sounds almost like Ashtaroth) signifies Groves in the Hebrew tongue)
that it might both allude to the name Ashtaroth, and show the vanity of that
great Deity which is made of wood, the Tree of a Grove.

10.
Yet the defenced City shall be desolate,] q. d. Yet when thou (O God) take
Babylon in hand, and do punish her for her sins; thou will not deal with her
as thou dealest with Jerusalem, but thou will make her desolate.

He opposes here Gods dealing with Babylon the chief City of the Assyrians, to
his dealing with Jerusalem the chief City of the Jews.

The fenced City] By the fenced City he means Babylon, which was well fenced
and fortified, even at this time.

Concerning this desolation of Babylon, See Cap. 13. and 21.

And the habitation] By this also he means Babylon, which he calls the
habitation, by way of excellency, because it contained exceeding many
Inhabitants for number, and very great ones for quality, for which cause also
it was called the Gates or City of the Nobles, Cap. 13.2.

Shall be forsaken,] Supple, Of its Inhabitants.

And left like a Wilderness] Supple, Where nothing is dressed and trimmed, and
where not men, but beasts only live.

There shall the Calfe feed,] Supple, Without hindrance.

By the Calfe, we may understand other Cattle also.

There shall he lie down] Supple, And lodge in quiet.

And consume the branches thereof.] i. e. And shall eat the leaves and branches
of the choice Trees and Plants which the Babylonians have planted in their
brave gardens, and preserved with all cost and diligence, within the walls of
Babylon.

11.
When the boughs thereof are withered,] q. d. And there the Boughs thereof
shall wither and dye, through the gnawing and cropping of Cattle, or some other
means, and when they are withered and dead, etc.

All this is to be understood by a Sillepsis.

The like to this was threatened to the Ten Tribes, cap. 17. v. 9, 10, 11. which
showed that they had their gardens in high esteem.

The women come and set them on fire,] i. e. The Women shall come and set them
on fire.

A Present for a Future Tense.

By women we may understand the female Sex, whose employments of baking and
seething, etc. require wood; yet some by women understand the Medes (which were
as women for delicacy and habit) and this must needs move the Babylonians, to
hear that they should set their trees on fire, because the Babylonians had the
Medes in much contempt.

And set them on fire,] Not in the place where they grew, but in their
Bake-houses, and Wash-houses, and Kitchens, whither they carried them for their
use.

Yet if we understand these women of the Medes, wanton Soldiers might set
these trees on fire, even where they grew.

For it is a people] i. e. For the Assyrians which are Lords of Babylon, are a
people, etc.

Here is a Relative without an Antecedent.

Of no understanding.] The Assyrians are said to be a people of no
understanding; because they understood not that they were but Gods Instrument
in punishing those which he would punish by them, and therefore they did lift
up themselves, and think that what they did, they did by their own power and
wisdom, etc. And so they oppressed even the Lords people, to their own ruin.
See Cap. 10. from verse 5. to verse 19.

He that made them] i. e. God who made them into so great and powerful a
Kingdom.

And he that formed them.] This is a repetition of the former sentence.

Note, that these words making and forming, are usually spoken of making and
forming a man naturally in the womb, or rather of making and forming a pot; but
our Prophet does often use it metaphorically, for the making and bringing of a
people into one civil body, Kingdom, or Commonwealth.

12.
It shall come to pass in that day,] i. e. It shall come to pass at that time
in which Babylon shall be thus wasted and made desolate.

The Lord shall beat off from the channel of the River unto the stream of
Egypt,] i. e. The Lord will by the hand of the Medes (which shall wast Babylon)
make all (that have any reference to the Assyrians, and dwell between the River
Euphrates, and the River of Egypt) to flee and leave their dwellings.

Shall beat off] i. e. Shall drive away, Supple, from their dwellings.

This phrase is metaphorical, taken from Olives, or other fruit, which are
beaten from their trees with cudgells, etc.

From the channel of the River] i. e. Them that dwell from the Channel of
Euphrates, etc.

To the stream of Egypt] That is even to N^lus.

And ye shall be gathered one by one,] i. e. And ye shall be carefully gathered
together, and brought safe into your own Land, etc.

When the people which had relation to the Assyrians fled by reason of the
Medes, the Jews, or Children of Israel which they had in captivity and bondage,
had occasion and opportunity to return into their own Land again.

These words are Metaphorical, and are taken from Olives or Apples, or the
like fruits, which are gathered one by one, and so laid up in some place
appointed; which Olives, or Apples, or other fruit so gathered, last better
then they which are beaten off or shook down from the tree; and more care there
is taken about such as are so gathered, then there is about that which is
beaten or shaken down.

He seems to oppose this gathering one by one, to that beating off, mentioned
in this verse.

O ye Children of Israel.] Supple, Which are or shall be captives to the
Assyrians between this time and that.

13.
And it shall lome to pass, in that day that the great Trumpet shall be
blown,] Supple, in Jerusalem.

And they shall come, etc.] q. d. And it shall come to pass, at that time (at
which the Lord shall beat off from their dwellings, all that live from the
Channel of the River, to the stream of Egypt) that it shall be with the
Children of Israel, as it is with Soldiers when the great Trumpet is blown: for
as when the great Trumpet is blown, all the Soldiers gather themselves
together; so shall all the Children of Israel (which were in captivity to the
Assyrians, or which were in exile in any place from Euphrates, to the stream
of Egypt) retreat and return home, and gather themselves together to Jerusalem.

The great Trumpet] He says the great Trumpet, alluding to some great Trumpet
waiting upon the General, which was greater then those which did wait upon
ordinary Captains; or else he says a Great Trumpet, because a great Trumpet is
heard farthest off, and they dwelt far off from Jerusalem, even in Assyria
and Egypt, which were to hear it.

And they] i. e. And they of the Children of Israel.

Shall come] Into their own Land.

Which were ready to perish] Through hard usage.

In the Land of Assyria,] Where they were Captives.

When the Assyrians were so hard put to it, as that they were fain to flee
themselves to save their lives, their Slaves and Captives had opportunity to
escape and return into their own Country again.

And the outcasts in the Land of Egypt,] i. e. Those of the Children of Israel
which ran through fear for safety into Egypt (when Salmaneser first, and
Sennacherib afterward invaded the Land of Israel) and were there as exiles
from their own home, shall come to their own home again.

That which brought these outcasts back out of Egypt was, the report of those
great things which the Lord had done for the Jews, and the prosperity which he
had given them in their own Land; yet if any were in hard bondage in Egypt, on
this side Nilus, they had opportunity to escape when all were beat off from the
channel of the river, to the stream of Egypt, verse. 12.

And shall worship the Lord] As they were wont.

In the Holy Mount.] i. e. In Mount Sion where the Temple stood, i. e. In the
Courts of the Temple.

ISAIAH, CHAP. XXVIII.
WOE to the crown of pride, etc.] In this verse there is a great transposition
of words and sentences, which being ordered according to their construction, run
thus; q. d. Woe to the crown of Pride, whose glorious beauty is a fading flower;
To the Drunkards of Ephraim which are in the head of the fat valleys of them
that are overcome with wine.

Woe to the Crown of Pride,] The Crown which he here speaks of was such a Crown
or Garland of Roses, and other fair flowers as Drunkards were wont to use, and
to wear upon their heads in their drinkings; which crown he calls here a Crown
of Pride, that is, a proud Crown; by a Metaphor, because of the beauty and
gayness of it.

This was first invented and used by the Heathen, and of them did the
Israelites learn it.

Of Pride,] That is, Proud or gay.

He puts here a Substantive of the Genitive case, for an Adjective.

By this Crown he means those Drunkards of Ephraim, of whom he here speaks, and
that either because they wore such a crown (as the Heathen did) in their
drinkings; or because as the Crown is wore upon the head, so were they seated
upon the head of the fat valleys.

To the Drunkards of Ephraim] i. e. To the Drunkards of Israel.

He explains here what he meant by the Crown of pride.

Of Ephraim,] i. e. Of Israel, or of the Ten Tribes.

How Ephraim comes to be taken for Israel, or the Ten Tribes. See Cap. 7. v. 2.

Whose glorious beauty is a fading flower,] These words relate to those; viz.
The Crown of pride, whose glorious beauty, he says, is a fading flower,
because it was made of the flowers of the field, or of the gardens which are
fading by nature.

By this is signified, that the estate of these men which here he speaks of
(though it might seem glorious) yet should quickly decay, with all its glory.

Which are on the head of the fat valleys, etc.] These words relate to those;
viz. Woe to the Drunkards of Ephraim, and are words of limitation and
restri^tion, limiting and restringing what he said in general of the Ten
Tribes, to those which lived in Samaria: For by those which are on the head of
the fat valleys, he means those which lived in Samaria.

By the head of the fat valleys, he means Samaria, which was situate on a
Mountain or Hill, beneath which were most fruitful valleys, abounding with
Vineyards, and Olive-yards.

A mountain or high hill may be said to be the head of the valleys which are
about it; for where the earth rises up into a mountain, it is said to lift up
its head; and if the mountain be a head, it must be the head of such parts of
the earth as are below it, and such are valleys.

In the word head, he seems to have an allusion to the Crown of Pride which
he spoke of, which was wore on the head; by which Crown also he meant the
Drunkards of Ephraim.

Of those which are overcome with wine.] Of those which are daily drunk with
wine.

This is the common interpretation of these words, by which he does obliquely
tax other of the Ten Tribes, then those which dwelt in Samaria, for their
drunkenness.

But what if we should interpret them which are overcome with wine, of such as
had so much wine (in the grape) as they could not make?

Surely such may be said to be overcome with wine, for we have more work then
we can do, we say that we have more work then we can overcome, and that our
work has overcome us; and this interpretation will very well agree with this
place, and will show the fatness and fruitfulness of these valleys, in that
they bring forth more grapes, then the husbandman is able to press and make
wine of.

2.
Behold, the Lord has a mighty and a strong one,] q. d. The Lord has in store
a mighty and a strong one.

By this strong and mighty one, understand Salmaneser, who with his strong and
mighty Army besieged Samaria three years, and took it and carried Israel away
captive into Assyria. 2 Kings 17. v. 5, 6.

Which as a tempest of hail and a destroying storme] Supple, Which breaks down
the trees, and smites the plants, and destroys the corn of the field.

As a flood of mighty waters overflowing,] Supple, And drowning all the grounds
about it, and the cattle which are therein, and destroying the corn and fruits
of the earth, and carrying all things before it.

Shall cast down to the earth] Supple, The crown of Pride, the Drunkards of
Ephraim.

With the hand,] i. e. With mere power and might.

The hand is often put for power and might, by a Metonymy.

3.
The Crown of Pride, the Drunkards of Ephraim] See v. 1.

Shall be trodden under feet,] As straw is trodden for the dunghill ( Cap.
25.10.) by Salmaneser King of Assyria.

4.
And the glorious beauty] i. e. And that gay and glorious Crown mentioned v. 1.

He puts the glorious beauty, per Metonymiam Adjuncti, for the glorious and
beautiful Crown, by which he means the drunkards of Ephraim which wore that
Crown. See notes verse. 1.

Which is on the head of the fat valley,] See notes ver. 1.

He puts valley for valleys, a Singular for a Plural number.

Here it appears that when he says, the head of the valleys, he says head,
in allusion to the Crown which is wore on the head, as we observed v. 1.

Shall be a fading flower,] i. e. Shall prove as a fading flower indeed.

As the hasty fruit before the summer,] i. e. It shall be as the rath-ripe
fruit, which is ripe before the summer.

Such fruit as this is, early ripe, or ripe before the summer, is much desired
and greedily eaten.

Which when he that looks upon it sees it, while it is yet in his hand, he
eats it up,] i. e. Which when he which looks upon it, sees to be ripe,
lays not up to spend hereafter, but eats it presently, while it is in his
hand.

The meaning is, that as a man which has early fruit, which he sees to be
ripe, lays it not up, but eats it presently: So should Salmaneser consume and
destroy the Drunkards of Ephraim, and the Crown of Pride presently, and make no
delay therein.

5.
In that day] Supple, In which the Lord shall destroy the Ten Tribes of Israel
by Salmaneser, for the whole Ten Tribes shall be destroyed, with the Drunkards
of Ephraim.

The Lord shall be for a Crown of glory, and for a Diadem of beauty.] i. e. The
Lord shall give a glorious Crown, and a beautiful Diadem to the residue of his
people, that is, he shall make the residue of his people honorable and
glorious, as if they were all Kings.

He says a Crown of glory, for a glorious Crown; and Diadem of beauty, for a
beautiful Diadem; and puts a Substantive of the Genitive Case for an Adjective.

The Crown which he here speaks of, was not such a Crown as he spoke of verse.
1. for that was a Crown of Flowers, this is a Crown of Gold; that was such as
Drunkards wore, at their drinkings; this is such as Kings use to wear at the
day of their Coronation, and he opposes this Crown to that, though he does in
some way allude to it.

A Diadem] A Diadem was a kind of Crown which Kings used to wear upon their
heads, made of purple-silk, and beset with pearls and jewels.

Unto the residue of his people,] i. e. To the other two Tribes, namely the
Tribes of Judah and Benjamin, which Salmaneser touched not.

6.
And for a spirit of judgment to him that sits in judgment,] And he will
give the spirit of judgment to him which sits in judgment.

The spirit of judgement] By judgment is here meant the practical knowledge
of the law, by which he that is a Judge may know how, and be willing to judge
aright.

And as for the word spirit, among many significations which it has among the
Hebrews, it signifies sometimes the habit of the mind, which is a spirit; per
Metonymiam Subjecti; and here it signifies an habit of the mind.

To him that sits in judgement] i. e. To Hezekiah King of Judah, whose
Office it is to sit in judgment and judge between man and man, and cause and
cause, as being King.

And for strength,] i. e. And he will give strength.

To them that turn the battle to the gate,] i. e. To the men of Judah who have
turned or shall turn the battle to the gates of cities of their enemies; That
is, who have made or shall make their enemies to fly before them, and have
pursued, or shall pursue them to their own Cities, and there besiege them.

That turn] i. e. That have turned or shall turn.

What Judah did in this kind by Hezekiah. See 2 Kings 18. v. 7, 8.

To the gate] He puts gate for gates, by the Enallage of number, and Gates for
Cities, by a Synecdoche: and he means the Cities of their enemies.

It is the glory and happiness of a Land to have Justice ministered without
partiality in times of peace; and to have victory to attend it in times of
war, and this is part of the glory which the Prophet here prophesies of and
promises to Judah.

7.
But they also have erred through wine,] i. e. But the residue of the people
mentioned v. 5. That is, the men of Judah and Benjamin also have erred through
wine, as well as the Drunkards of Ephraim.

Note, that the Scripture does often impute that to a whole people, of which
part only is guilty.

Have erred] Supple, From the way of truth, and so by consequence from the way
of righteousness.

Through wine] i. e. Through tippling of Wine.

Are out of the way,] Supple, Of true knowledge, and so by consequence of
righteousness also.

This sentence is a repetition of the former.

The Priest and the Prophet have erred,] If the Priest and the Prophet have
erred, then surely many of the vulgar sort have erred with them; he instanceth
therefore in these.

The Prophet] By the word Prophet, we must no understand here, such a one as
was immediately inspired by the Lord, as the word most properly and commonly is
taken; but we must take it in a larger signification, for a Doctor or Teacher;
and because the Doctors or Teachers of those times were for the most part
Prophets, he might call all Doctors and Teachers Prophets from them.

These latter Prophets might err, the former could not.

They are swallowed up] i. e. Here is something to be understood, viz. Their
ways, as if the words had been these, they are swallowed up their ways; that
is, they have their ways swallowed up; or, they have their ways destroyed;
for that which is rendered here swallowed up, is rendered destroyed, cap. 9.16.
The notes of which place, see for the interpretation of this.

They which have their ways destroyed, must needs err out of their way; To
have their ways destroyed, or swallowed up, signifies therefore to err; and
this, they are swallowed up with wine, is but a repetition of that, They have
erred through strong drink.

That which is here rendered swallowed up, is (as I said) rendered destroyed,
Cap. 9.16. And this word as it has any thing in it signifying destruction, is
metaphorically taken from ravenous beasts, which swallow down what they
destroy, and what they swallow down is consumed in their panch.

Of wine,] i. e. Through bezling of Wine.

Of is put for Through.

They err in vision] i. e. They err in vision or prophecy, speaking that as
the word or vision of the Lord, which is not the word or the vision of the Lord.

They stumble in judgement] That is, they fail and go awry in their judgment
(as a man fails and goes awry which stumbleth in the way) judging and
calling evil, good, and good evil; darkness light, and light darkness; bitter
sweet, and sweet bitter; as Cap. 5.20.

The judgment here mentioned is commonly called in the Schools, Judicium
discretionis.

8.
All Tables,] And so by consequence the Tables of the Priests and Prophets, at
which they did eat and drink, or at which they did fit in counsel.

And filthiness,] i. e. And filthy springs proceeding from over-charging their
stomachs with wine.

So that there is no place clean.] Supple, From vomit and filthiness.

9.
Whom shall he teach knowledge, and whom shall he make to understand doctrine?]
q. d. And when the Lord shall in mercy go about to teach these Priests and
Prophets knowledge by me, or by any other servant of his, and so bring them
into the right way from which they have erred, whom shall he teach knowledge,
and whom shall he make to understand doctrine?

The Prophet, as he complained in the former Verses of the Priests and the
Prophets erring from the Truth, and stumbling; so does he here complain of
their sottishness and dullness and stupidity to learn, by which they should be
brought into the right way of knowledge and truth again. And when he says,
Whom shall he teach knowledge? etc. he does so complain of them, as that he
shows his grief for them, and pity toward them.

Them which are weaned from the milk,] i. e. Them which are as children, which
are but newly weaned from the Mothers milk.

This is an answer to the question going immediately before.

Note, that the Hebrews leave the Note of similitude often to be understood.

And drawn from the breast.] i. e. And those which are as Infants, which are
newly taken from the breast.

This is a repetition of the former sentence.

He compares these men to children newly weaned, not for their Innocence, or
for their Humility, but for their dullness and slowness to learn and understand.

10.
For precept must be upon precept, precept upon precept,] i. e. For they must
be taught like children, by line and by leisure, not much at once, nor too
fast, because of their dullness and incapacity.

Precept must be upon precept,] i. e. They must be taught but a little at a
time, a lesson now, and to morrow, or next day, or a week, or a month hence
another lesson.

Some read precept after precept, and say that the Prophet alludes to a
narrow-mouthed glass or bottle, into which we cannot pour much water at a time,
but only a drop at once, and so but drop after drop; wherefore it will be a
long time before the glass or bottle is full: But I retain our common reading,
and conceive that the Prophet, by saying precept upon precept, alludes to one
who makes up brittle ware, suppose earthen pots, or glasses, or the like, where
he takes time and leisure to lay one pot or glass upon another, lest in making
too much haste, he should break his pots or glasses: And as such a one takes
time to lay pot upon pot, or glass upon glass; so a Schoolmaster, when he is to
teach children, takes time in teaching children lesson after lesson, lest the
child should get no benefit when he is urged with a second lesson, before he
does well understand or retain the first; or lest he should forget his first
lesson by learning a second.

Line upon line,] Understand this of the line in a book, which a child takes
for a lesson: and take it as a repetition of the former sentence in other words.

Here a little, and there a little,] i. e. Now a little, and then a little: For
Adverbs of of place are often put for Adverbs of time.

For with stammering lips and another tongue will he speak to this people.] i.
e. Now with stammering lips and another tongue will he speak to this people.

For is put here for Now.

He speaks this out of indignation; for here we must understand that these
Priests and Prophets mocked the Prophet Isaiah, when he said, Precept upon
precept, etc. For these men professing such knowledge, were vexed to hear
themselves accused of ignorance, and counted as doltish as children; and
therefore they mocked Isaiah, when he told them of it, and when he said,
Precept upon precept, precept upon precept, line upon line, etc. And they
repeated his words in a ridiculous manner, as if they stammered; wherefore
because they stammered out his words in a ridiculous jeering manner, he
threatens them here from the Lord with stammering lips, that is, with a
punishment like to their sin.

Another tongue] i. e. Another tongue then they understand and use; or a tongue
different from their own tongue or language.

Will he speak to this people,] By this people may be meant the people of Judah
in general, whom God would punish with stammering lips for their Priests and
Prophets sake: Or we may understand by this people the Priests and Prophets
only, (though the punishment denounced here against them redounded to all the
Jews also,) for we call a certain company of men of the same calling and
profession oftentimes a Nation or people.

The Lord was said to speak unto this people with stammering lips and another
tongue, when he brought the Assyrians upon them under Sennacherib, whose
language they understood not; and so the Assyrians seemed to them to stammer:
for tongues which we understand not, seem to us as stammering tongues. See
Deuteronomy. 28.49.

Besides the general calamity which the Jews suffered by these stammering
tongues, that is, by the Assyrians, No doubt but many particular Jews received
many a stripe, and many a kick, because they understood not the Assyrians,
which would have them do this or that at their command, while they were under
their power.

Note here, that the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.21. makes use of this place to abate
the conceit which many of the Corinthians had of the gift of (strange) tongues,
above the gift of prophesying: and the force of the Apostles argument for this
purpose consists in this, That God did sometimes send strange tongues to such
as would not believe him, speaking in his Prophets, to punish them: So that
strange tongues were sometimes a sign to the Unbelievers of Gods displeasure
toward them: But the gift of prophesying was given or sent to Believers, not
as a sign at any time of Gods displeasure, but always as a sign of Gods
good will toward them: Now that which is always sent as a sign of Gods
good will toward Believers, is to be preferred before that which is sometimes
sent as a sign of Gods displeasure to Unbelievers: and therefore the gift of
prophesying is to be preferred before the gift of strange tongues.

12.
To whom he said, This is the Rest, etc.] i. e. Whom he would have taught the
right way, that they might have taught others also (according to their place,)
but they would not be taught, but mocked, etc.

To whom he said,] i. e. To which people he said.

What he here said, he spoke to the Priests and Prophets only, who were to
teach and instruct others also.

But you will say, If he spoke to the Priests and Prophes only, how is he said
to speak it to the people?

Ans. I said that by the people may be understood the Priests and Prophets
only; But if by the people we understand all the people of Judah, yet may that
which is spoken only to the Priests and Prophets be said to be spoken to them;
as an University is said to determine a question, whereas it is determined by
the Doctors thereof only; or a message is said to be sent to an University,
which is sent only to the Heads thereof.

To whom he said,] Supple, In love and kindness, by me Isaiah.

This is the Rest wherewith ye may cause the weary to rest,] q. d. This which I
teach you is the Truth of God, wherewith (when ye are instructed) ye may
instruct those which are in error, and desire to come to the knowledge of the
Truth, and bring them out of that their Error, to the knowledge of the Truth.

This is the meaning of these words, which were spoken to the Priests and
Prophets, as they were Priests and Prophets; that is, as they were by their
Calling Teachers and Instructers of the people, and who (as they had erred
themselves at this time, and caused the people to err by their Errors, so)
might have learned the Truth themselves, and have instructed the people also
therein, and by that have brought them out of their Errors, if they would have
harkened.

For the farther understanding of the words, know, that the words are (if not
Proverbial, yet) Allegorical, and that the Allegory is taken from travelers,
and that by occasion of that, that we call falsehood, error; and say of him
which is of a false Opinion, and holds that which is false, That he erreth,
and is out of the way, as Verse. 7.

First then, The holding of a false Tenent, or being of a false judgment, is
likened to the erring or straying of a traveller out of his way.

Secondly, The man which sees that he is in a false Opinion, and desires to
be instructed in the Truth, is compared to a Traveller which knows he is out
of the way, and is weary with wandering out of his way: For as such Traveller
is weary of his wandering; so is such a man weary of his Error, which sees his
Error, and desires to come to the knowledge of the Truth; for his desire to
come to the knowledge of the Truth, shows, that he is weary of his Error: for
a desire of change argues a weariness of our present condition.

Thirdly, The knowledge of the Truth is compared to the Rest which the
Traveller finds when he is weary; for as rest sets an end to the Travelers
former wanderings, so does the knowledge of the Truth to his erring and going
out of the way, who was in an Error before.

Now the words being thus allegorized, may be thus expounded.

This is the Rest,] i. e. This is the Truth.

Wherewith ye may cause the weary to rest,] Wherewith ye may cause those which
have erred and are weary of their Errors, to rest from that weariness, by
bringing them to the knowledge of the Truth, etc.

And this is the refreshing,] Supple, With which ye may refresh them.

These last words are the very same, for sense, with the foregoing words: But
yet, if you think refreshing signifies more then rest, interpret it of the
delight, which Truth, being known, brings along with it, besides the rest or
cessation which it brings from erring.

Yet they would not hear,] i. e. Yet they would not harken to the voice of the
Lord, who offered thus to instruct them in the Truth.

Note, that these words, This is the Rest, are not so to be understood, as if
God had used these formal words to these men: but the meaning is this, That God
would have taught these men his Truth, but they would not be taught it.

13.
But the Word of the Lord was unto them precept upon precept, etc.] q.d. But
the Word of the Lord (which I spoke unto them) was to them as a mocking-stock,
and made them mock: For when I preached unto them the Word of the Lord, they
mocked at it, and cried, Precept upon precept, precept upon precept, etc.

Was unto them precept upon precept,] i. e. Made them cry, and say (in
derision) Precept upon precept, etc:

Precept upon precept, precept upon precept, line upon line, line upon line,
here a little and there a little, etc.] That these men did scornfully reject
the Word of the Lord, and mock at it, is plain, by verse. 14. and 22. and the
scorn and mocks which they showed were showed in these words: For when they
heard the Prophet complain of their dullness and slowness to learn the
Instruction of the Lord, and tell them, that they must be taught like children,
Precept upon precept, precept upon precept, line upon line, here a little and
there a little; They derided the Prophet, and scoffed at him, and repeated his
words, Precept upon precept, precept upon precept, line upon line, line upon
line, here a little and there a little, in a stammering and ridiculous manner,
the more to mock him; yea, so often as he preached to this people the Word of
the Lord, so often did they stammer out these words in a ridiculous and jeering
manner, Precept upon precept, etc. that thereby they might mock the Prophet; as
mockers and scoffers at this day, if they have any thing or word wherewith they
can mock a man, they will mention it and repeat it in a ridiculous manner at
any time, though it has no relation at all to the matter or speech in hand.

The sense therefore of these words will be better known by gesture and
pronunciation then by writing; For these words, Precept upon precept, etc. must
be pronounced after a ridiculous stammering manner, by a Mimesis, in imitation
of them who scornfully repeated them, after a stammering ridiculous manner, in
derision of the Prophet.

Note, that it was all one to mock the Prophet when he preached the Word of the
Lord, and to mock at the Word of the Lord; For God interprets that as done to
his Word, yea, as done to himself, which is done to his Ministers. See Exodus
16.8. 1 Samuel 8.7. Luke 10.16.

That they might go and fall backward,] i. e. By reason of which they shall
fall backward.

Note, that the word That is here a note, not of the Intent, but of the Event;
and that the word Go is redundant, as cap. 2. verse. 3.

That they may fall backward,] By this kind of fall he signifies the greatness
of the misery and calamity which shall befall this people; for a fall backward
is a more dangerous fall then a fall forward: We read of Eli, that he fell from
his seat backward, and his neck brake, and he dyed, 1 Samuel 4.18. but a fall
forward had not been so dangerous.

That they might go and fall backward, and be broken, and snared, and taken,]
These are Metaphors, of which see Notes, cap. 8.15. And by them are here meant
the miseries and calamities and slaughter, which the Assyrians should bring
upon them under Sennacherib.

14.
Wherefore hear the Word of the Lord] q. d. Wherefore, being that you mocked at
the Word of the Lord, and the Word of the Lord was to you Precept upon precept,
etc. that ye might be smitten and destroyed; therefore hear what the Lord has
spoken concerning you.

Ye scornful men] He calls them scornful men, because they scorned the Prophet,
and mocked at his words.

That rule this people.] He means by these, the Priests and Prophets,
mentioned verse. 7. who de jure ruled the people in their kind, but de facto
domineered over them.

15.
Because ye have said,] i. e. Though ye have said within your selves.

Because is put here for Though.

We have made a Covenant with Death, and with Hell are we at agreement,] q. d.
We shall not dye, nor be destroyed by the sword of the Assyrians.

By Hell he means the grave; and he speaks here of Death and of Hell (that
is, of Death and of the Grave) as of certain persons with whom these men made a
Covenant of peace, That neither Death nor Hell should devour them or hurt them,
by a Prosopopoeia: By which he means that these men did persuade and flatter
themselves in this, That they should not be slain or brought down to the grave
by the sword of the Assyrian.

When the overflowing scourge shall pass through,] i. e. When the Assyrians
(under Sennacherib) shall pass through our Land like an overflowing river,
which carries all before it, and destroy the Land.

The overflowing scourge] By the scourge here he means the Assyrians, whom he
calls a scourge by a Metaphor, as Attila was called the Scourge of God, because
God used him as a scourge, to whip and plague many people. And when he calls
them the overflowing scourge, he alludes to a river which rises over his
banks, and overflows the Land.

It shall not come unto us,] q. d. We shall be safe.

He alludes to a man which is upon an hill, or some eminent or high place, in
the time of a flood: For they which are on an hill, or in some high place,
whither the flood comes not, are safe, whereas all are swept away and drowned
which are within the reach of the waters.

For we have made lies our refuge,] i. e. For we will save our selves well
enough, by flattering Sennacherib and the Assyrians, and counterfeiting our
Religion before him.

He uses here first of all a preterperfect for a future tense: then he puts
lies for flattery: For being that every flatterer is a liar, and invents
untruths, that he may please him whom he would flatter; hence lies may be put
for flattery: And he puts lies for counterfeiting also; for these men did
counterfeit their Religion also, and pretend to the Assyrians, that they were
of their Religion (though indeed they were not) that they might ingratiate
themselves with them, and save their lives. Last of all, he speaks of these
lies Metaphorically, as of a place, whither a man flies, when he perceives a
storm rising, to save himself from the storm: because they thought by their
lies to save themselves from the fury of the Assyrians, as a man saves himself
from a storm by a covert or hiding place, which he makes his refuge to flee to.

And under falsehood have we hid our selves,] This is a repetition of the
foregoing sentence. And he means by falsehood here the same as he did by lies
there; of which he speaks also here as of a covert or refuge, as he did of lies
there.

See this Metaphor of a refuge and covert, or hiding place also, cap. 4.6. and
cap. 25.4.

Note here, that the Prophet passes from one Metaphor to another, from the
Metaphor of a flood and a scourge, etc. to the Metaphor of a storm, and a
refuge from the storm.

Note also, that when the Prophet brings these men in, saying, We have made
lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid our selves; he speaks rather as
the Truth was, and as he interpreted it, then as they spoke; for they would not
have called their specious doings lies and falsehood.

Note again, that it is plain from hence, that many which were in Jerusalem
(and they chief men too) because they believed not the Word of the Lord, spoken
by Isaiah concerning the safeguard of Jerusalem, when the Assyrians should come
against Judah; and because they feared the power of the Assyrians, and thought
that Jerusalem would not be able to stand out against it, betook themselves to
humane policy; and leaving Jerusalem, thought to comply with the Assyrians, and
to make their peace with them, who nevertheless failed in their purpose, and
were destroyed, when as they might have been safe, if they had never stirred
out of Jerusalem.

16.
Therefore thus says the Lord God,] i. e. Yet thus says the Lord God.

Take Therefore for Yet, and put an emphasis upon the words, The Lord God: for
he opposes these to those words, Because, or Though ye have said, Verse. 15. q.
d. Though ye have said, etc. yet thus says the Lord, etc.

Behold I lay in Sion, etc.] q. d. Behold I lay indeed in Jerusalem a
foundation for those which believe; but yet I lay judgment to the line, for the
wicked which believe not, etc.

This is the sense in brief of this and the following Verse.

Sion,] i. e. Jerusalem. See cap. 1.8.

I lay in Sion, for a foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner
stone, a sure foundation,] By the foundation and stone here mentioned may be
meant the Word of Promise, which God made to the inhabitants of Sion; that is,
to the inhabitants of Jerusalem; that notwithstanding the threatenings of the
Assyrians, they should be safe: For as a house, which is built upon a strong
foundation, is safe, notwithstanding the blowing of the winds, and the falling
of the rain, and the beating of the floods, because it is founded upon a strong
foundation: So were as many safe as were in Jerusalem, and relied upon the Word
of Promise, which God made, notwithstanding the fury and threatenings of the
Assyrians, because they relied upon the Word of God, which is as a sure
foundation, and which endures for ever.

See the like Metaphor, Cap. 14.32.

Yet because, in the second and more sublime sense, this foundation is
interpreted of Christ, 1 Pet. 2.6. We may interpret, and perhaps with more
probability, this of Hezekiah, who, as in other things, and elsewhere, he is a
Type of Christ; so may he be in this, and here: And Hezekiah may be said to be
laid in Sion for a foundation, because he was the foundation of safety against
the Assyrians, to all which remained in Jerusalem: For God promised to save
Jerusalem, and all that kept themselves within her for his sake: and he might
be well called the foundation of that safety, of which he was so principal a
Cause, by a Metaphor.

A stone,] He means such a stone which used to be laid for a foundation of a
building, which is great and durable.

A tried stone,] i. e. A stone tried, and found fit for such an use, as to lie
for a foundation.

A precious corner stone,] i. e. A corner stone, or chief stone of great worth:
And Hezekiah might be called a precious corner stone, because of his great
virtues.

In the Hebrew dialect, the corner signifies that part of a building which by
its own strength alone sustaineth and upholdeth the whole structure: Hence
Magistrates and Princes, which are the props and upholders of the Commonwealth,
are called the corners, Judge. 20.2. 1 Samuel 14.38. Isai. 19.13. The corner stone
therefore, in the Hebrew phrase, is as much as a sure foundation-stone: So that
all these words, A stone, a tried stone, a corner stone, signify but one and
the same thing.

A sure foundation,] Hezekiah might be called a sure foundation, because as a
sure foundation cannot easily be shaken or overthrown; so Hezekiah could not be
shaken in his faith by the threats of the Assyrians, nor could the Assyrians,
with all their power, overthrow him, or Jerusalem (which God had given him) by
force of Arms.

He that believeth] Supple, That which I say, or that Promise which the Lord
has made.

Shall not make haste.] Shall not need to make haste, or will not make haste,
Supple, Out of Jerusalem, to run into Egypt, or Pathros, or Cush, or Elam, or
into any other far Country, to save himself (as many which believed not, did)
at the hearing of Sennacheribs coming against Judah with a mighty Army: nor
will he make haste to comply with the Assyrians, and make his peace with them,
as many others did; but will abide in Jerusalem, and shall be safe there.

What is spoken here of Hezekiah in the first sense, is spoken of our Savior
Christ in the second and more sublime sense, as appears 1 Pet. 2.6. and Romans
9.33. For (as we have often observed, and shall often observe) the temporal
deliverance of the Jews was a type of the spiritual deliverance of the
Christians: As therefore the temporal deliverance of the Jews was a type of the
spiritual deliverance of the Christians; So they which were any way the cause
of the temporal deliverance of the Jews, were a type of Christ our Savior, so
far forth as they were the causes of that temporal deliverance: And the Holy
Ghost, while it speaks of them, does so order the words of the Scripture, as
that the same words which are spoke of them, may oftentimes be applied to
Christ also, yea oftentimes be more properly applied to Christ then to them.

17.
Judgment also will I lay to the line,] q. d. But yet judgment also will I lay
to the line, and bring desolation and destruction upon you, according as I have
threatened you.

By judgment is here meant that desolation and destruction which God brought
upon the men of Judah by Sennacherib: and by the line is meant the threats of
that judgment which God gave out by his Prophets, by whom he threatened a great
desolation and destruction of all in the Land of Judah, excepting those which
believed, and were in Jerusalem only. Now as a Carpenter frames his Work to
his Line; so God says here, that he would bring his judgments to pass
according to those his threats.

And righteousness to the Plummet,] This is a repetition of the former
sentence: And as by judgment he meant the desolation and destruction which the
Lord brought upon the Land of Judah by Sennacherib; so also does he mean by
righteousness: And that desolation and destruction he calls judgment and
righteousness, per Metonymiam adjuncti, because it was just and right, and no
other then the men of Judah deserved.

To the Plummet,] By the Plummet understand the line also to which the Plummet
is appendent, by a Syllepsis.

And the hail shall sweep the refuge of lyes] The sense is, q. d. And all your
flattery and counterfeiting shall do you no good, neither shall they save you
from the Assyrians, for the Assyrians shall destroy you, being out of Jerusalem
among other the men of Judah, for all your lies and flatteries.

In these last words, by the hail understand the Assyrians, whom he calls the
hail, by a Metaphor; because as the hail destroys the fruits of the Earth; so
did the Assyrians destroy both men and cattle in the Land of Judah, yea, and in
other Lands also.

When he says, The hail shall sweep away, he deviates from the Metaphor of
Hail with which he began, and alludes to the Metaphor of a Broom.

By the refuge of lies, he means lies which they made as a refuge; of both
which see verse. 15.

As when the refuge is taken away, to which we betake our selves in a storm, we
are liable and open to the injuries of the storm; so were these men obnoxious
to the fury of the Assyrians, when their refuge of lies was taken away.

Then did the Assyrians sweep away the refuge of lies, to which these men
betook themselves, when they did turn away their ears from their flatteries,
and from their tales, and would hear none of them, but destroyed them,
notwithstanding their lies.

And the waters shall overflow the hiding places,] This is a repetition of the
former sentence.

By the waters he means the waters of a flood, and by them the Assyrians,
because the Assyrians did beat down all before them, as do the waters of a
flood.

By the hiding place he means the falsehood and lies in which they trusted,
Verse. 15. which lies and falsehood of theirs he likens to a hiding place,
because these men did think to avoid the fury of the Assyrians by their lies
and falsehood, as they which get into an hiding place, think to defend
themselves from the storm.

When he says, The waters shall overflow the hiding place, he alludes to the
overflowing of waters, which either beats down little cottages that stand in
the way, or drives the inhabitants from their houses by overflowing their
habitations.

18.
And your Covenant with death shall be disanulled,] q. d. And ye shall dye by
the sword of the Assyrians as well as others.

He alludes here to what he said Verse. 15. Ye have said, We have made a
Covenant with Death.

If by the covenant which they made with Death, Verse. 15. death was not to
seize upon them and kill them; then if that covenant be disanulled, death may
as freely seize upon them and kill them, as any other.

And your agreement with Hell shall not stand,] q. d. And the grave shall
swallow you up as well as others.

He alludes here to those words of the 15 verse, Ye have said -- With Hell we
are at agreement.

If by that agreement which they made with Hell, that is, with the grave, v.
15. Hell or the Grave was not to swallow them up; then if that agreement does
not stand, Hell or the Grave may as lawfully swallow them up, as it does others.

When the overflowing scourge shall pass through,] See Verse. 15.

Then ye shall be trodden down by it.] See this phrase expounded verse. 3.

19.
From the time that it goes forth it shall take you,] q. d. From the time that
the scourge goes forth, supple, before the time that it returns again, it shall
take you one after another, so that none of you shall escape.

It shall take you,] Supple, As an overflowing flood takes a Traveller (it
comes in so fast upon him) that he cannot escape.

Morning by morning,] i. e. Day by day, or every day.

He puts the morning, which is but part of the day, for the whole day, by a
Synecdoche.

Shall it pass over,] Supple, The Land; and destroy and cast down as it passes
over, as a flood does.

Only to understand the report.] i. e. Only to hear it reported what
destruction and desolation the scourge makes in the Land as it passes over it.

20.
For the bed is shorter then that a man can stretch himself upon it,] i. e. For
all your lies, and all your tricks and devices, shall not save you.

Between this and the former Verse, we may understand these or the like words,
viz. Ye shall not therefore be safe, nor escape: q. d. Ye shall not therefore
be safe, nor escape the scourge (though ye said, Ye should live safely in your
Land because of your lies and falsehood, verse. 15.) For all your lies, and all
your tricks and devices, shall not be able to save you.

This speech is a proverbial kind of speech, the meaning whereof (as it is
here used) is this, That their lies and tricks, which they intended to make use
of, should not be able to save them, or do them any good.

Then that a man can stretch himself upon it,] A man stretches out himself
upon his bed for his ease: but upon a bed which is too short for him he cannot
thus ease himself.

And the covering narrower then that he can wrap himself in it.] This is a
Proverbial kind of speech as the former was, and signifies the same thing.

By the covering he means the bedclothes, as Coverlet, Blankets, Sheets, with
which we enwrap or cover our selves, when we go to sleep.

21.
For the Lord shall rise up as in Mount Perizim,] i. e. For the Lord shall rise
up against you, and destroy you, as he rose up against the Philistines, and
destroyed them in Mount Perizim: See the story, 2 Samuel 5. verse. 20.

He shall be wroth as in the valley of Gibeon,] q. d. He shall be wroth with
you, and destroy you, as he was with the Amorites, and destroyed them in the
valley of Gibeon in the days of Joshua, Josh. 10.12. And as he was angry with
the Philistines, and destroyed them in the days of David in the same valley, 1 Chronicles. 14.16.

That he may do his work,] i. e. That he may do that work upon you which he
has determined with himself to do.

His strange work.] The work which God determined to do upon the men of Judah,
was, to destroy them, whom he was wont usually to protect and defend; and
therefore it is called his strange work.

22.
Now therefore be ye not mockers,] i. e. Now therefore cease ye to mock.

He alludes to Verse. 13.

Lest your bonds be made strong,] i. e. Lest there be no means left for you to
escape these judgments.

These words are Metaphorical, taken from a prisoner which is kept in bands and
fetters against the Assizes or day of his trial, whose bands are made the
stronger, the greater and more apparent his offense is, and the more likely he
is to be condemned and suffer, that he may by no means escape: For how much the
more likely he is to be condemned and suffer, by so much the more will he
endevor to make an escape.

The judgments which God threateneth and denounces by his Prophets, are for
the most part Hypothetical, and such as it pleases God to recall upon our
repentance and amendment: But if we repent not, nor amend our lives, they will
surely fall upon us, we shall not escape them: Hence it is that the Prophet
says, Now therefore be ye not mockers (any longer) lest your bands be made
strong.

A consumption] i. e. That there shall be a cosumption.

By a consumption he means a general destruction and desolation.

Even determined] i. e. Even a consumption which he has determined to bring.

Upon the whole Earth,] i. e. Upon the whole Land of Judah; Supple, If you go
on in mocking, and in other sins, and repent not.

The Earth is put here for the Land of Judah, by a Synecdoche, the whole for a
part.

23.
Give ye ear, and hear my voice, etc.] The Prophet here, and in the residue of
the Chapter, prevents an Objection which the Jews might make against what he
had said; for he had said, That God would bring a consumption, even a
consumption determined, upon the whole Land of Judah: Against which they might
object, That the Lord was not wont to deal so with the Land of Judah, as to
bring a consumption upon it, but to defend it, and to protect it; and therefore
would not change from what he had been, from a Protector to be a Destroyer of
the Land.

To which the Prophet here answers, that God is wise, and knows how in wisdom
to vary his actions, according as he sees men to vary in their manners, and not
to do always one and the same thing: and this he proves by a similitude taken
from Husbandry, where they do not always the same thing, nor handle all seeds
after the same manner; but now do one thing, now another; and handle one seed
after this manner, another after that; and that according to the discretion
which God has given them.

24.
Does the plowman plow all day to sow?] All day signifies sometimes at all
times, as Psalm. 25.3. sometimes it signifies continually, as Psalm. 32.3.
sometimes it signifies daily, or every day, as Psalm. 71.8, 15. Isai. 65.2. (And
it comes to signify so, either because All is taken in such places for Every,
or because the day is put for time in general; q. d. All his time:) Sometimes
again a day is taken in a special manner for the time of a man's life: So
Aristotle takes it in the second of his Rhetoriques, cap. 12. when he speaks of
young men, saying, (...), They seem to remember nothing in the first part of
their life time.

Any of these senses will well agree with this place: For the sense of this
place is this, Does the plowman do nothing else but plow?

Does he open] Supple, His ground with his plow?

And break the clods of his ground,] Supple, All his days?

25.
When he has made plain the face thereof,] i. e. When he has plowed the
ground, and broken the clods thereof, and made it plain.

Does he not cast abroad the fitches? etc.] i. e. Does he not sow the fitches,
and other seeds and grain thereon?

In their place,] i. e. In the ground which is most fit for every one of them.

26.
For his God does instruct him to discretion,] q. d. Yea, he does; for his God
does instruct him to do all these things with judgment and discretion.

And does teach him,] Supple, To do these things wisely and discreetly.

The Prophet leaves us here to understand, that if God can instruct the
Husbandman to this discretion, and teach him to do these several things wisely,
in their several, but due seasons; he himself must much more know how to do
wisely, and yet do variously: For he that teaches man knowledge, shall not he
know? Psalm. 94. verse. 10.

27.
For fitches are not threshed with a threshing instrument,] i. e. Moreover the
Fitches are not wont to be threshed with a threshing instrument, wherewith they
thresh Wheat.

For for Moreover, as Cap. 7.16. and 28.11.

A threshing instrument was sharp, having teeth, cap. 41.15. And though this
instrument were fit to thresh out some kind of grain, it was not so fit to
thresh out other.

Neither is a Cart-wheel turned about upon Cummin,] i. e. Neither is a
Cart-wheel wont to be turned about upon Cummin, to get out the seed thereof, as
it is wont to be turned about upon bread-corn, to get out the grain thereof.

They were wont to get out their corn with a Cart-wheel, whereas we beat it out
only with a Flail: But how the Cart-wheel was used, we cannot very well tell,
that use being now forgotten.

With a rod.] The rod is lighter then a staff: and therefore the Cummin was
beat out with a rod, whereas the Fitches were beat out with a staff, because
the Cummin yields a lesser and tenderer seed then the Fitches do, and
therefore cannot bear blows, as the Fitches can.

28.
Bread corn is bruised,] q. d. And bread corn (though it is forced or beaten
out of the straw by a threshing instrument, or by the turning of a Cart-wheel
about upon it, or else by the treading of horses, yet it) is bruised to meal in
a mortar, ( Prove. 27.22.) or in a mill, ( Numb. 11.8.) and not with a threshing
instrument, or with a Cart-wheel, or with horses.

Because he will not ever be threshing it,] i. q. d. The Husbandman will not
bruise it to meal with a threshing instrument, because he will not ever be
threshing it: For though bread corn may be got out of the straw, in a
convenient time, with a threshing instrument; yet it is an endless piece of
work to go about to bruise Wheat or other bread corn to meal with a threshing
instrument upon a floor, besides the loss of the finest flower, which will come
thereby.

Nor break it with the wheel of his Cart, nor bruise it with his horsemen,] q.
d. Nor will he break it with the Wheel of his Cart, etc.

Therefore they would not break the bread-corn to meal with the wheel of a
Cart, nor bruise it to meal with the feet of horses and other cattle, because
if they should do so, the finest of the flower (besides other inconveniences)
would have flown all about, and so have been lost; yea, perhaps to have done
this, would have proved labor in vain; because they could never beat it out to
meal this way.

With horsemen,] i. e. With horses.

He puts horsemen, which either ride upon, or lead Horses, for Horses upon
which they ride, or which they lead, by a Metonymy.

By Horses we may understand other beasts and cattle also which were wont to
tread out the corn, by a Syllepsis. See Deuteronomy. 25.4.

By this it appears, that the Husbandman has, and makes use of, variety of
instruments.

29.
This also comes from the Lord of Hosts,] q. d. This also has the Husbandman
received from the Lord of Hosts, viz. That he can manage these things after so
various a manner, with such wisdom and discretion.

This also, etc.] This word also relates to what was said Verse. 24, 25, 26.

Note, that what the Prophet says here, verse. 27, 28, 29. is the same, for
sense, with that which he said Verse. 24, 25, 26. For as there he showed, that
the Husbandmans works were not always the same, but that he wrought sometimes
after this manner, sometimes after that; so does he here: And as he left us
there to understand, That if God gave men such wisdom and discretion, as to
work variously, and to perform their works after different manners; then much
more did he himself know how to work variously: So does he here.

Who is wonderful in counsel,] i. e. Who is wonderful in his Wisdom, and
inventing or contriving businesses.

He speaks of God, as of a man, (...).

Excellent in working.] i. e. Excellent in His Works.

ISAIAH, CHAP. XXIX.
WOE to Ariel, to Ariel, etc.] Ariel signifies by interpretation, the Lion of
God, or the strong Lion, and it is a name given to he Altar of Burnt Offerings,
by a Metaphor, Ezech. 43.15. Because that Altar did devour the Beasts which
were sacrificed thereon, as a strong Lion devoureth his prey: from this Altar
the whole City of Jerusalem is here called Ariel, by a Synecdoche.

The City where David dwelt,] This is a Periphrase of Jerusalem; for David when
he had took the strong hold of Sion, which is in Jerusalem, from the Jebusites,
he dwelt in it, and called it the City of David, 2 Samuel 5.7, 9. And there he
reigned three and thirty years, 1 Kings 2.11.

The Prophet gives this Periphrase of Jerusalem, that it might be the better
known what he meant by Ariel.

Add ye year to year,] q.d. Add ye yearly feast to yearly feast, one yearly
feast to another; as the feast of weeks, to the feast of Unleavened Bread; and
the feast of Tabernacles, to the feast of weeks; and keep them with joy and
mirth one after another.

The year is put here by a Metonymy, for the yearly feast, or feast which is
kept once every year. As the new Moons are taken for the solemnities (as I may
call them) which were wont to be used the first day of every month, at the
change of the Moon. Cap. 1.14.

Three times in the year were all the Males of Israel to appear before the
Lord, in the place which he should choose, in the feast of Unleavened Bread, and
in the feast of weeks, and in the feasts of Tabernacles, Deuteronomy. 16.16. And of
these does the Prophet seem here to speak, and it is likely that he denounced
this prophecy against Ariel, at one of these feasts, at which time the people
were full of mirth and joy; not without confidence of their outward
performances and observations of these feasts, though inwardly they were full
of wickedness.

Note, that the Prophet uses an Ironical concession in these words, the like
whereof you may read, cap. 50.11.

Some interpret these words thus, add ye a year to a year, as if it had been
the Prophets intent to show, that after a year and a year, that is, after two
years the calamity which is here prophesied against Ariel, should befall Ariel.

Let them kill sacrifices,] q. d. Kill ye your Sacrifices, and make ye merry.

He speaks especially of the sacrifices of Peace Offerings; the flesh whereof
they were to eat, and to rejoice before the Lord, Deuteronomy. 27.7.

Note here the Enallage of the person, from the second to the third.

I will distress Ariel,] i. e. The Prophet speaks here in the person of God,
and what he speaks here was fulfilled when Jerusalem was besieged by
Sennacheribs Host.

The Prophet did often prophecy of this siege of Jerusalem by Sennacherib, as
he did also of other things which he did the more to show the providence of God.

And there shall be heaviness and sorrow,] Supple, In Ariel, that is, in
Jerusalem.

And it shall be to me as Ariel.] i. e. And I will make it as Ariel.

By Ariel may be meant here the Altar of Burnt-offerings which was in
Jerusalem, for the reason given v. 1. And the sense of this place may be this,
q. d. And as in a day of solemnity, many Carcases of Beasts (which are to be
sacrificed) lie dead upon the ground about the Altar of Burnt-offerings; so
shall many carcases and dead bodies of men lie about Jerusalem.

Many carcases of dead men might lie about Jerusalem when it was besieged by
the Assyrians, because many of the Hierusalomitans which were set to defend the
walls, might be slain with arrows and slings, etc. upon the walls; and many
again might be slain upon sallies out of the City upon the enemy.

Moreover, many dead bodies might lie about Jerusalem, because many which dwelt
in the Towns and Villages about Jerusalem and the suburbs thereof, which were
friends to Jerusalem, and were now sacrificing and making merry at Jerusalem,
might be slain by the Assyrians in their several towns and villages about
Jerusalem and in the suburbs thereof, whose deaths might be as grievous to the
men of Jerusalem, as the deaths of their own Citizens.

Or, by Ariel we may understand a strong Lion, (for so this word Ariel
signifies by interpretation) and the sense of this place may be this, q. d. And
as a strong Lion (when he is perc^ived to approach near to the sheepfold or
pastures where cattle feed) is compassed about and set upon by a company of
Shepherds and Contrymen; so shall Jerusalem be encompassed and environed by
the Assyrians, who shall set upon it and besiege it, that they may take it; and
this interpretation very well agrees with what follows.

3.
And I will camp against thee,] He uses an Apostrophe here to Ariel, that is,
to Jerusalem.

Round about] i. e. On every side of thee, and that so close, as that none can
escape out of thee.

With a Mount.] i. e. With a Bulwark or heap of earth cast out of a Trench,
such as besiegers use to cast up, therewith to save themselves against the shot
of the besieged, and to hinder the besieged from fallying out upon their
Quarters, and from making an escape out of the place which they besiege.

God is said to do here what the Assyrians did by his providence and guidance.

But it may be here objected, That this is contrary to what is said cap. 37.33.

For there the Lord said concerning the King of Assyria, He shall not come into
this City, nor shoot an arrow there, nor come before it with shields, nor cast
a banck against it; and yet here he says, I will camp against thee round
about, and will lay siege against thee with a mount, etc. Which Prophecy was
fulfilled by Sennacheribs Host.

Answer. Sennacherib, King of Assyria, sent Tartan, Rabsaris, and Rabshakeh,
from Lackish, to King Hezekiah, with a great Army against Jerusalem, and they
went up and came to Jerusalem, cap. 36. v. 2. and then did they camp against
Jerusalem round about, and lay siege against her with a mount, and raise forts
against her, and fulfill this Prophecy. But while these Princes lay before
Jerusalom, Sennacherib himself was with another part of his Army in other
parts of the Land of Judah, as at Lachish first, and at Libnah afterward, cap.
37. v. 8. From whence he sent Messengers to threaten Hezekiah, and to fright
him into a surrender, by sending him word, That he would come himself in
person, with the Army which he had with him; against which threats the Lord
strengthened Hezekiah by his Prophet saying, That Sennacherib King of Assyria,
(for all his threats) should not come into Jerusalem, not shoot an arrow there,
nor come before it with shields, etc cap. 37.33. Whereby it appears that this
place is not contrary to cap. 37.33. but well agrees with it: For that place
speaks of Sennacherib himself, and that Army which was with him; this place is
to be understood of what was done by that Army which was under Tartan,
Rabsaris, and Rabshakeh.

And thou shall be brought down,] i. e. And thou (which wast high conceited of
thy self) shall be brought down and humbled and crest-faln.

And shall speak out of the ground,] i. e. And thou shall speak, as if thou
spakest out of the ground, that is, out of some cave or cell which is under
ground.

Note, that the Hebrews leave the note of similitude often to be understood.

The sense of this place is, q.d. Thy speech shall not be high and lofty, but
low and soft, as theirs use to be which are in fear and danger.

The voice of those which are in a cell or cave, or mine under ground, seems
not loud to those which are above, but low and soft; Therefore to speak out of
the ground, that is, out of a cell, or cave or mine, which is under ground,
signifies to speak with a low and soft voice, as they which are afraid use to
speak.

And thy speech shall be low out of the dust,] i. e. And thy speech shall be as
if it were spoken out of the ground.

By the dust he means the ground which is but dust compacted.

This is a repetition of the former sentence.

Thy voice shall be as of one that has a familiar spirit,] See this expounded,
cap. 8. 19.

And thy speech shall whisper out of the dust] this is a repetition of those
words, thy speech shall be low out of the dust; but he alludes here to those
which had familiar spirits, which spoke often out of dens and caves of the
earth, to those that came to ask them any question, with so low a voice as if
they whispered.

All these several phrases of this verse signify but one and the same thing,
viz. That they shall be humbled and come to use a lowly and soft speech through
fear, whereas they were high in carriage and speech before.

Yet by these phrases may be signified also, that the people of Jerusalem
should be glad to hide themselves in cellars and places under ground, because
of the arrows and stones which the Assyrians should shoot and sling into the
City.

5.
Moreover the multitude,] i. e. But yet at length the multitude, etc.

I expound Moreover, by But yet.

For the Particle which is here interpreted Moreover, is expounded Yet, verse.
2. and But, v. 8. And the Prophet (after his manner) when he has denounced
Gods judgments against Jerusalem in the former verses, to cast them down, does
here prophecy of the destruction of her enemies, for the comfort of the godly,
to raise them up again.

The multitude of thy strangers] i. e. The multitude of thine enemies.

He calls the Assyrians and their Auxiliaries which fought against Jerusalem,
her strangers, because they were every way strangers to the men of Jerusalem,
strangers in Country, strangers in Blood, strangers in language.

Shall be like small dust,] i. e. Shall be as the small dust of the earth,
which the wind scatters abroad.

The multitude of thy terrible ones] i. e. And the multitude of the Assyrians
thine enemies which shall be terrible to thee, as they are to other Nations.

Shall be as chaff that passes away,] i. e. Shall be like the chaff, which the
wind drives away. Psalm. 1.4.

Yea, it shall be at an instant suddenly] i. e. Yea, the multitude of thy
strangers, and of the terrible ones, shall be like small dust and as chaff that
passes away in a moment.

By this is meant the sudden destruction and dispersion of the Assyrians,
which destruction and dispersion came upon them when they little thought of it;
of which cap. 37. v. 36, 37. etc.

At an instant suddenly.] This gemination or doubling of these words, signifies
the greater speed.

6.
Thou shall be visited of the Lord of Hosts with thunder,] The Prophet uses
here an Apostrophe to the Assyrian which besieged Jerusalem: q. d. Thou shall
be visited of the Lord of Hosts with thunder and with earthquakes, O thou
Assyrian which shall do thus to Jerusalem, and besiedge it.

To visit is a word of contrary significations, for sometimes it signifies to
show favor to, sometimes to punish and afflict; but which way it must be taken
the circumstance of the place must show, here it is taken for to punish and
afflict.

With thunder, and with earthquake, and with great noise, etc.] Some take these
words metaphorically, as if they did only signify a great and grievous
punishment and destruction: But others take them properly, and say, that all
these things happened when God destroyed Sennacheribs Army which besieged
Jerusalem, though they be not recorded in 2 Kings 19. See cap. 30.30.

7.
And the multitude of all the nations that fight against Ariel,] There were
many of many Nations in Sennacheribs Army, which fought against Jerusalem,
therefore he says, The multitude of all the nations, etc.

And her munition] i. e. Against her walls, and bulwarks, and other
fortifications.

He puts an Abstract for a Concrete, munition for places munited, that is, for
places fenced and fortified.

Shall be as a dream of a night vision.] i. e. Shall vanish away as a dream
which a man has in the night while he sleeps.

8.
It shall even be as when an hungry man dreameth, etc.] i. e. The multitude of
all the nations that fight against Ariel, shall even be as when an hungry man
dreameth that he eats and is satisfied, but when he awaketh he is empty and
hungry, as he was before.

In the former verse the Prophet said, that the multitude of the Nations which
fight against Ariel should be as a dream of the night-vision: Now because
there be not only vain dreams which pass away as they come; but serious
dreams which do portend serious things, and things that shall surely come to
pass, such as Joseph's dream was, of which we read, Genesis 37.5. The Prophet
shows here, that he did not compare the multitude of them which fought
against Ariel to such a dream; but to the vainest dream as could be, a dream
which is vain in it self, and vain in its signification, which a dream as a
man that is hungry dreameth, who dreameth in his sleep that he eats, but when
he awaketh, he is as empty and hungry as ever he was.

And behold he eats,] i. e. And behold he eats in his dream, that is, he
dreameth that he eats.

His soul is empty,] i. e. He is empty, for he has not eaten indeed.

The soul is put here for the whole man, by a Synecdoche.

And behold he drinketh] Subaudi, In his dream, that is, behold he dreameth
that he drinks.

He is faint] Supple, For want of drink, having not drunk indeed.

And his soul has appetite,] i. e. And he has an appetite to eat and to
drink, that is, He is still hungry and thirsty; for hunger and thirst are but
an appetite or desire of meat and drink.

He puts the soul here again for the whole man, by a Synecdoche as before.

So shall all the multitude of the nations be that fight against Mount Sion.]
q.d. Even so, I say, shall all the multitude of the nations be which fight
against Ariel.

9.
Stay your selves and wonder] When the Prophet had prophesied of the
destruction of the Assyrians which should besiege Ariel, that is, Which should
besiege Jerusalem, his auditors would not believe this his Prophecy; whereupon
the Prophet calls to those which pass by, or to the faithful party of the
Jews, to stay and wonder at these men, because they would not understand, and
believe so plain a word or vision of the Lord, as this was.

Stay your selves] Supple, All that pass by.

And wonder.] Supple, At the unbelief and blindness of these men.

C^^ ye out, and cry, They are drunk but not with wine,] i. e. Cry ye out and
say, (of these men) They are drunk but not with wine, they stagger but not with
strong drink.

Cry ye out, and cry,] i. e. Cry ye out and say; or, cry ye out, yea, cry,
saying,

They are drunk but not with wine,] This is that which he would have them cry.

They are drunken, etc.] They are said to be drunken (in the scripture phrase)
which have received abundance, and are filled as it were with that, with which
they are said to be drunken (and that by a Metaphor from drunken men, which
have drunk abundance and are full of wine or strong drink) and then especially
when they do by reason of that with which they are said to be drunken, any way
resemble a drunken man in any thing, as this people do here, in that they seem
to be stupid and void of understanding, and to have lost the use of reason for
the time, like to the drunken men that are said to be drunken (in the Scripture
phrase) which have abundance, and are filled as it were with that which they
are said to be drunken, will appear from hence, because they which are said
here to be drunken but not with wine, are therefore said to be drunken, because
the Lord has powered out upon them the spirit of deep sleep, and pouring out,
argues abundance of that which is powered out.

He speaks here of those people in Jerusem which would not believe what he
prophesied unto them concerning the Assyrians encamping against Jerusalem, and
the deliverance thereof, and the destruction of the Assyrians; for though many
in Jerusalem did believe, yet many again believed not.

But not with wine] With what then were they drunk? They were drunk with the
spirit of sleep. v. 10.

They stagger] i. e. They are drunken, for drunken men use to stagger as they
go, Metonymia Effecti.

The sense of this is the very same with the former sentence.

10.
For the Lord has poured out upon you, etc.] This the Prophet speaks in his
own person, and makes an Apostrophe to those unbeleevers which would not
believe this his Prophecy; wherein he gives a reason why they which pass by
may justly wonder and say of them, they are drunk but not with wine, they
stagger, but not with strong drink; And the reason is this, because God had
poured upon them, and so had made them drunken, that is, had filled them with
the spirit of deep sleep.

For the Lord has poured upon you the spirit of deep sleep] He uses a
Metaphor here, taken from liquid things, which are poured out of some vessel in
abundance.

When he says, the Lord has poured upon you the spirit of deep sleep, It is
as if he should say, he has poured upon them a deep sleep without any other
addition; for the word spirit is often redundant among the Hebrews, by an
elegancie.

That which the Lord poured out upon these men, he calls the spirit of deep
sleep, because it made them senseless and blind, as he is senseless and sees
not who is in a sleep.

And has closed your eyes,] Supple, So that you cannot see, that is, So that
you cannot believe what is spoken.

This is metaphorically to be understood of the mind, which is the eye of the
soul.

The Prophets] See cap. 28.7.

The Seers] Prophets were wont to be called Seers. See notes cap. 1.1.

He has covered] Supple, With a veil which he has cast over their faces, so
they cannot see.

This is also metaphorically to be understood, and all these three phrases
signify one and the same thing, to wit, that God had blinded their mind and
their understanding, that they could not understand and believe the vision
which he had delivered to them, concerning Jerusalem, and the deliverance
thereof.

11.
And the vision of all, etc.] And my Prophecy wherein I prophesied to you of
the encamping of the Assyrians against Jerusalem, and the Lords preservation
thereof, and the destruction of the Assyrians, is not understood, that is, is
not believed of you, but is as a word of a book that is sealed.

As the word of a book that is sealed.] The words of a book which is shut and
sealed up, cannot be known or understood, no not by him which is learned,
because he cannot come to read the words which are written in such a book, how
then can he believe them?

Of a book which is sealed.] He alludes to the use of the ancients, which were
wont to seal their books, that is, their rouls, when they laid them by. See
cap. 8.16.

12.
And the book is deliverd to him, etc.] i. e. And the book is unsealed and
opened and delivered to him that is not learned.

I am not learned,] i. e. I cannot read, for I never learned to know letters.

The meaning of all this place is, q.d. The Prophecy whereby I have prophesied
to you of all these things concerning the siege, and the preservation of
Jerusalem, and the destruction of her enemies, is understood and believed no
more by you, then the words of a book which is sealed up, are understood and
believed of a learned man; or, the words of a book which is opened, is
understood and believed of an ignorant and illiterate man.

Note, that by their not understanding here is meant their not believing the
Prophesies of God and his words; for the Scripture uses to tax Infidelity by
the name of Ignorance, because it profits not to know the word of God, except
we do also believe it; as also because before we can believe a thing, we must
know it.

13.
Draw near unto me with their mouth] To draw near to God, is to come to him to
his Temple, where he sat between the Cherubins.

To draw near him with the mouth, is to come to his Temple, and there to pray
and to perform lip-service.

But have removed their hearts far from me,] Their heart was removed from God,
in that they did not heartily serve him and fear him, for if they had heartily
served him and feared him, they would have also believed his words, and in
particular the vision of all which the Prophet here speaks of.

And their fear to me,] By the fear of God, may be meant Synecdochically, all
and any kind of duty which we owe to God, and in particular here it may be
taken for the belief of his word.

Their fear of me is taught by the precept of men.] i. e. They fear me, and
serve me, and believe me, but as they are taught by their false Prophets and
Rulers to fear me, and serve me, and believe my word; so that what they teach
to be my honor, must go for my honor; and what they teach to be my fear, must
go for my fear; and what they teach to be my words, must go for my words, and
must be believed, but no more; no, though I the Lord my self teach that I will
have more honor, and more fear, and more to be beleev^d as my word.

By the precept o^ men] By men here he means men which were not instructed of
God, but were carnal-minded men (yet in some authority with the people) who
judged of the Word of God, as it made for, or agreed to their humor; so that
what agreed not with their humor, they did not allow of, but taught that it was
neither Gods Word, nor to be believed; such were the Prophets, and the Rulers,
and the Seers, verse. 10.

This people here spoken of, were a Type of those which lived in our Saviors
time, and these Prophets, and Rulers, and Seers, a Type of the Scribes and
Pharisees which ruled that people, Mat. 15.8.

14.
I will proceed to do a marvelous work amongst this people,] i. e. As I have
determined, so will I go on with my determination, to do a marvelous work
amongst this people.

Note here the Enallage of the Person, how he passes from the ^econd to the
third person.

A marvelous work amongst this people, even a marvelous work and a wonder,]
that which he calls a marvelous work here, and a wonder, he calls a strange
work, cap. 28.21. which is all one with sense for this: This work is to destroy
these men of Jerusalem by the Assyrians, which he calls here a marvelous work,
and a wonder, for the same reason as he calls the ^^struction of the Jews a
strange work there.

Had these men believed the words of the Lord, as others did, they would have
remained in Jerusalem, and so have been saved as others were which remained
there; but because they believed not, they would not trust themselves in
Jerusalem, but being led by their Prophets, and Rulers, and Seers, went out
from thence, to practice other means for their safety, and so fell into the
hands of the Assyrians, and were destroyed either by the Assyrians, or by the
hand of the Angel while they were mingled among the Assyrians, and took part
with them.

For the wisdom of their wise men shall perish,] q. d. Neither shall the
wisdom of their wise men, nor the understanding of their prudent men hinder my
work, and save them, for the wisdom of the wise men shall perish, etc.

The Prophet prevents an Objection here, for some might object and say, That
there be many wise men among these, which you (O Isaiah) find fault with, and
they by their wisdom and understanding will prevent this marvelous work, and
wonde^ which you speak of.

To this Objection the Prophet answers, That for all their wise men, the Lord
will bring this marvelous work and wonder to pass; For the wisdom of their
wise men shall perish, etc.

That which Isaiah speaks here of the wisdom of these wise men, Saint Paul
alleges to show that God would not make use of the wisdom of the wise men
of the world in man's salvation, 1 Cor. 1.19. And that Saint Paul might well do,
because the temporal Salvation of the Jews was a Type of the spiritual
Salvation by Christ; and these wisemen and their humane wisdom a Type of all
the wisdom and wise men of the world, of whatsoever profession they were; As
therefore the wisdom of these men could not prevail to save them selves or
other of their Country men out of the hands of the Assyrians; no more can the
wisdom of the wise men of the world avail to save men and bring them to
salvation; and these words, though in their first and meaner sense, they show
that these wise men among the Jews, should not save themselves or their
Contrymen from the Sword of the Assyrians; yet in the second and sublime
sense, they show, that the wise men of the world cannot with all their wisdom
deliver a man out of the snares of the Devil, and bring him to salvation.

The wisdom of their wise men shall perish, etc.] q. d. The wisdom of their
wise men shall come to naught.

The wisdom of those wise men is said to perish, and come to naught, because
they could not by their wisdom save this people.

Shall be hid.] This is a repetition of those words, shall perish, for because a
thing which is perished, is not to be seen, and that which is not to be seen,
is as it were hid from our eyes, therefore does he say, shall be hid, for shall
perish, or come to naught.

15.
Woe to them that seek deep to hide their counsels, etc.] i. e. Woe to them which
are close in their counsels, and think that their counsels are perceived by
none.

He uses a Metaphor here, taken from a man, which having a treasure to hide,
digs deep in the Earth to hide it: for the deeper it lies, the safer it is,
and more difficult to be found.

The Prophet denounces this particular woe against those wise and prudent men
which he mentioned Verse. 14. which did not believe, either that the Assyrians
should be destroyed, or that Jerusalem should be delivered from the fury of the
Assyrians, and therefore took, or would take secret counsel, some of delivering
all up into the Assyrians hands, that so they might provide for their own
safety; others of calling in the Egyptians to their aid; others of flattering
with, and insinuating themselves into the affections of the Assyrians, by
feigning themselves to affect theirs, rather then their own Religion, etc.
Which counsel of theirs they carried as close as they could, that it might not
come to Hezekiah's or Isaiah's ears; And they thought that they had carried it
so wisely and closely, as that no man, no not God himself, could know it,
before it were acted, though God knew it, and revealed it to his Prophet.

Here is shown, that the wisdom of the wise men should perish, etc. and so
perish, that they should be so far from helping others, that they should not
avoid the woe themselves; and he takes occasion here of denouncing this woe
against them, by reason of those words which he delivered in the fourteenth
Verse, The wisdom of the wise men shall perish, and the understanding of the
prudent men shall be hid.

And their works are in the dark,] i. e. And whose works (in their own opinion)
are done in such privacy, as that no eye can see them.

He says, And their works, for And whose works, putting one kind of Relative
for another. See the like Cap. 6. verse. 20.

And they say,] i. e. And who say. They for Who, as before.

Who sees us? and who knows us?] i. e. Who (whether he be man, or whether he
be God) sees us? And who (whether he be man, or whether he be God) knows us,
what we do?

16.
Surely your turning things upside down,] i. e. Surely your hiding of things
after this manner, etc.

This phrase is Metaphorical, and alludeth to a writing table, or paper, which
is written but on one side, which writing is hid by turning the table or paper
upside down; to such a table or paper (I say) or to some such like thing, does
this phrase allude.

Note, that the Prophet uses an Apostrophe here to the wise and prudent, which
sought deep to hide their counsel, etc.

Surely your turning things upside down shall be esteemed as the Potters
vessel, etc.] The sense of this whole Verse is this, Surely you turn things
upside down, to hide them from the Lord; but for all your turning things upside
down, and hiding them from the Lord; yet ye are as the Potters vessel: For ye
are the work of Gods hands, as the vessel made of clay is the work of the
Potters hands: For shall ye, that are the work of God, say of him that made
you, He made us not? Now if God made you, and ye are the work of his hands,
then does he understand all your doings, be they never so secret: For shall the
thing framed say of him that framed it, He has no understanding? And (as for
God) he that planted the ear, shall he not hear? And he that framed the eyes,
shall not he see? And he that teaches man knowledge, shall not he know? Psalm.
94.9, 10. Yea, he knows all your thoughts.

Note here, that though the Prophet says, Your turning things upside down
shall be esteemed as the Potters clay; yet his intent is not to liken the
turning of things upside down to the Potters clay, but the men which turned
those things upside down: For in Parables and similitudes we must look upon the
whole body of the sentence, and take the meaning from the whole, not from any
one piece. See what is said cap. 17.5. and 30.13. to this purpose.

Note also, that when he says, that they are as the Potters clay; that is,
that they are Gods creatures, and the work of his hands; his meaning is, that
God knows all their thoughts and actions: For Divinity teaches us thus much,
That if God made us, God knows all our doings, Psalm. 94.9, 10.

Shall be esteemed,] i. e. Are, or shall appear truly to be.

As the Potters clay,] That is, As the vessel which the Potter has made of
clay; Metonymia Materiae: q. d. Ye shall be the work of Gods hands, and so your
doings shall be manifest to God.

For shall the work say of him that made it, He made me not?] q. d. For shall
the vessel which the Potter has made, say of him that made it, He made me not?
Supple, No: No more can ye say of God who created you, that he created you not.

By thinking they could hide their counsel from God, they did in effect say,
That God made them not.

Or shall the thing framed say of him that framed it, He had no understanding?]
q. d. Or if the vessel does acknowledge that it was framed by the hand of the
Potter, shall it say of him that framed it, He had no understanding? Supple,
No; No more can ye (if ye acknowledge that ye were created of God) say of God
which created you, that he has no understanding of you and your ways; for he
understands you and all your ways: yet when ye think to hide your counsels
from God, you do in effect say, He has no understanding.

Note here, that they which think that they can hide their works and their
counsels from the Lord, do not acknowledge that God is their Maker, nor that he
is their Overseer; wherefore they are like a Potters vessel which lifts up it
self against the Potter, and says, Thou did not make me, Thou have no
knowledge or understanding of me.

Note also, that these words, For shall the work say of him that made it, etc.
are not so much a reason to prove, that they were as the Potters clay, that is,
that they were the work of Gods hands, as a reprehension of them which thought
they were not as the Potters clay, that is, which thought not that they were
the work of Gods hand.

17.
Is it not a very little while, and Lebanon shall be turned into a fruitful
field,] Note here, that Lebanon was a famous Hill and Forest, situate on the
North-side of the holy Land, or Land of Canaan, which the Israelites possessed:
But here it is to be taken Metaphorically for the Assyrians, who because they
were high in power and riches, and very proud, are compared to the Hill and
Forest of Lebanon.

Note here also, that fruitful fields are for the most part in valleys: Hence
per Metonymiam adjuncti, we must understand a valley here by the fruitful
field; and by the valley here we must understand metaphorically a low
condition, or men in a low condition, because valleys lie low.

The sense therefore of this place is this, q. d. But for all that, that you
will not believe that the Assyrians which shall besiege Ariel shall be
destroyed, O ye Prophets and Rulers and Seers, which take such secret counsel
to save your selves; yet it shall not be long before the Assyrians, which are
high in power and riches, and are very proud, and shall besiege Ariel, that is,
Jerusalem, shall be brought very low, and be destroyed, and Jerusalem be
delivered, and flourish again.

This is that which these men did most dis-believe, to wit, the preservation of
Jerusalem, when the Assyrians should once lay siege unto it, and the
destruction of the Assyrians; which makes the Prophet here to enforce it again,
and confirm what he said before.

And the fruitful field shall be esteemed as a forest,] i. e. And the fruitful
field shall be as a forest.

Though many things are not such as they are esteemed to be, yet many things
again are such as they are esteemed to be.

By the fruitful field is here meant metaphorically the Jews, which were
besieged by the Assyrians in Jerusalem, and by them distressed and brought into
a very low condition: for fruitful fields are in valleys, and valleys lie very
low.

By a forest is meant determinately the forest of Lebanon, which was situate
on an Hill; or at least some forest which was situate on high, as the forest
of Lebanon was: And by that or such a forest is metaphorically meant an happy
estate or condition; a condition which is high, and a great deal above misery;
a condition opposite to that which we call a low condition, or else men which
are in such an high condition.

So that the sense of this place is this; q. d. And the Jews of Jerusalem, when
they are in their low condition through distress by the Assyrians, shall be
delivered from their distress, and set up on high again, in an happy estate or
condition.

This was performed when the Angel destroyed the Assyrians which besieged
Jerusalem, 2 King. 19.35.

This phrase is used again in the same sense, Cap. 32. Verse. 15.

18.
And in that day] i. e. At that time in which Lebanon shall be turned into a
fruitful field, etc.

Shall the deaf hear the words of the book] By the deaf he means those which
are dull and slow of heart to believe the Prophecy, which he spoke of and wrote
in a book, concerning the delivery of Jerusalem from the Assrians, and the
destruction of the Assyrians which did besiege it: So that he speaks here
Metaphorically, translating the deafness of the body to a slowness of belief in
the Soul.

By the words of the book he means the aforesaid Prophecy, concerning the
delivery of Jerusalem from the Assyrians, and the Assyrians destruction which
besieged Jerusalem, which prophecy the Prophet wrote in a Book, that they might
take notice of it whom it concerned.

The sense of this place is, q. d. Then shall even they which are slow of heart
to believe this Prophecy, believe it, yea, and know it to be tr^e by the event.

And the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity, and out of darkness,]
i. e. And they which are now blind, shall see clearly and plainly the truth of
this Prophecy.

This is a repetition of the former sentence; and whom he called deaf there, he
calls blind here.

19.
The meek also shall increase their joy,] By the meek understand here those
which submitted themselves to the Lord, and readily believed the Vision or
Prophecy, and betook themselves for safety into, and continued in Jerusalem:
And he calls these meek, in opposition to those scorners which did not only
not believe the Prophecy, but reject it with scorn; of whom he speaks verse. 20.
See Iam. 1.21.

These were said to increase their joy at this time, because they had joy
before, joy through the hope which they had by belief of this Prophecy; and
increase of joy by the accomplishment of what they believed and hoped.

In the Lord,] i. e. By the Lord, or by the goodness of the Lord toward them.

The poor among men] By these he means those which were besieged in Jerusalem,
and distressed by the Assyrians, who yet notwithstanding trusted in the Lord
for deliverance.

Shall rejoice in the holy One of Israel,] i. e. Shall rejoice in the Lord, who
shall deliver them from the hand of the Assyrians.

By the holy One of Israel is meant the Lord, the God of Israel.

20.
For the terrible One is brought to naught,] i. e. For the Assyrian, which
besieged and distressed those which were in Jerusalem, shall be destroyed, and
Jerusalem delivered.

He calls the Assyrian the terrible One, because he was terrible to all Nations
which dwelt about him, and especially to the Jews.

He puts a present or preterperfect for a future tense.

These words may be read with a Parenthesis.

And the scorner is consumed,] i. e. But the scorner shall be consumed.

He opposes here the event which should befall the scorner, to the event which
should befall the meek and the poor, which he spoke of verse. 19.

And is put here for But.

By the scorner he means those which would not believe this Prophecy or
Vision concerning Jerusalems deliverance and the Assyrians destruction, but
scorned and mocked the Prophet for prophesying of such things.

He may also allude to those scorners and mockers he spoke of, Cap. 28. Verse.
13, 14, 22.

And all which watch for iniquity shall be cut off,] i. e. And they which watch
to do the Prophet of the Lord a mischief shall be destroyed.

He puts iniquity for mischief, because it is not done without sin in him that
does it.

He means by these also those which believed not the Vision or Prophecy, whom
he describes by their malice, which was such, as they did not only not believe
the Prophet, but seek his ruin: And these men's malice blinded their eyes, that
they could not see and believe.

21.
That make a man an offender for a word,] i. e. That sue a man and pursue him
as an offender, only for speaking a word in the name of the Lord.

The man whom they made an offender, was the Prophets own self, whom they
pursued and accused as an offender, because he prophesied to them the Word of
God: but the Prophet speaks of himself in the third person out of modesty.

And lay a snare for him,] i. e. And seek to destroy him.

He uses a Metaphor here, taken from Fowlers, which lay a snare for birds
which they would take to kill.

For him that reproveth] By this Isaiah means his own self, who reproved
those which believed not this and other his Prophecies and lessons, and that
openly, as Cap. 28.7, 9.

In the gate,] i. e. In the gate of the City, that is, openly before much
people.

The gates of the City were public places, where the Courts of Justice and
other public Assemblies were held.

Yet these words, In the gate, may be referred as well to those words, That lay
a snare, as to those, Which reproves; and then they show, that they would
destroy him under a color of Justice, by accusing him, and bringing false
witness against him in Courts of Justice, to put him to death.

And turn aside the just,] Supple, From his righteousness and integrity; i. e.
which would make a dishonest and wicked man of a just and honest man, by their
calumnies and false accusations.

By the just, Isaiah means himself.

These words are Metaphorical, taken from one man jostling another out of his
way.

For a thing of naught.] i. e. Without any profit or good by it, or for no
profit or good at all that they can get thereby; So some. And this shows the
height of their malice, that they would destroy the Prophet, when they could
get no good or benefit by his destruction.

Or For a thing of naught, that is, for a very small reward; So others, who
think that the Prophet speaks here of such as were hired to bear false witness
against him: Or of corrupt Judges, who had taken a bribe of his Enemies to
condemn him, whose wickedness was the greater, that they would be corrupted to
do such a piece of injustice for a small matter.

How these men were consumed, we told Verse. 14.

22.
Therefore thus says the Lord, etc.] This relates to the 17, 18, 19, 20, and
21 Verses, as an inference deduced from thence: q. d. And because Lebanon shall
be turned into a fruitful field, and the fruitful field shall be esteemed as a
forest; and because the deaf upon that shall hear the words of the Book, etc.
Therefore thus says the Lord, who redeemed Abraham, concerning the House of
Jacob, etc.

Who redeemed Abraham,] God redeemed Abraham out of Vr of the Caldees from
Idolatry, Genes. 12.1. and he redeemed him out of danger in Egypt, Genes.
12.20. and he redeemed him out of the like danger in Gerar, Genesis 20.9. And
Abraham is mentioned as redeemed here, because as the Lord redeemed him, so for
his sake would he redeem his posterity at this time.

Concerning the house of Jacob,] i. e. Concerning Jacob and his children the
Jews: For the Father is part, yea the chief part of the house.

Jacob shall not now be ashamed,] i. e. Being that the Lord will turn Lebanon
into a fruitful field, and the fruitful field into a forest, so that the deaf
shall hear the words of the Book, etc. when this comes to pass, Jacob shall
not now be ashamed, though he has been ashamed heretofore.

The Prophet uses a Prosopopoeia here, whereby he brings in Jacob as though he
were alive, though he were dead long before.

Jacob shall not now be ashamed,] Supple, For the disobedience and infidelity
and unbelief of his children: For they which would not believe the Vision
mentioned, verse. 14. shall be all consumed, and all they which watch for
iniquity shall be cut off: but the meek shall survive, and all they that have
erred shall return into the right way.

The misdemeanor of the son is the shame of the Parents; in allusion to which
he here says, Jacob shall not now be ashamed.

Nor shall his face now wax pale,] Supple, For fear: q. d. Neither shall he now
be afraid (as he has been) lest his children should be utterly destroyed by
the Assyrians, through the wrath of God, so that they be no more a people; for
the Assyrian is brought to naught, verse. 20.

23.
When he sees his children, the work of mine hands.] i. e. When he sees his
children, whom I have delivered out of the hands of the Assyrians.

A deliverance out of eminent and unavoydable danger of death, is as it were a
new Creation; therefore does the Lord call the Jews, the work of his hands,
because he delivered them from the Assyrians.

In the midst of him,] i. e. In the midst of the Land which I gave him, Genesis
28.13.

Jacob himself is put here, by a Metonymy, for the Land which God gave Jacob,
as Moab is put for the Land of Moab, Jerem. 40.11.

Note, that in the midst of the Land is put by an Hebrew redundancy, for in the
Land.

They shall sanctify my Name,] q. d. They, to wit, his children, shall
sanctify and praise my Name for their deliverance out of the hands of the
Assyrians: And if they shall sanctify his Name, He shall see them sanctifying
it, and so shall not be afraid, for them, but rejoice rather.

My Name,] i. e. Me.

An Hebraism.

And shall fear the God of Israel,] i. e. And they shall fear to offend the God
of Israel, and shall serve him and worship him: And if they shall fear the God
of Israel, Jacob shall see that they fear him, and so he shall not be ashamed
for their sakes.

24.
They also that erred in spirit,] i. e. They also that erred in judgment and
opinion, thinking that Jerusalem would not have been delivered out of the hands
of the Assyrians, and that the Assyrians would not have been destroyed as they
were.

He speaks of such that erred rather out of weakness, and by being ignorantly
misled, then out of pride and malice, as those scorners did, mentioned verse. 20.

Shall come to understanding,] i. e. Shall experimentally know, that what the
Prophet prophesied concerning the deliverance of Jerusalem, and the destruction
of the Assyrians, was true.

They that murmured] It is probable that many (otherwise none of the worst)
when they were distressed, and found some hardship in the siege of Jerusalem,
did murmur against Isaiah, who prophesied of the deliverance of Jerusalem, and
did what he could to hold up their drooping spirits with that hope.

Shall learn doctrine.] i. e. Shall learn the Instruction of the Lord, which
shall teach them not to murmur any more at his Prophets, in whatsoever case
they are.

ISAIAH, CHAP. XXX.
WOE to the rebellious children,] i. e. When the report was first spread abroad
of Sennacheribs intent to march out of Assyria with an huge Army, the Jews,
which lived out of Jerusalem in other parts of the Land of Judah (and many also
which lived in Jerusalem) were distracted and in doubt what to do to preserve
themselves: Some thought it best to comply with the Assyrians, and to practice
with them for the surrender or giving up of the whole Land into their hands:
Others thought it best to call in the Egyptians to their aid: And this did they
both in so foul a manner, as that the one scrupled not to profess the Religion
of the Assyrians, and the other of the Egyptians, to save their lives: Only
King Hezekiah, and some few with him, chose rather to trust in the promises of
God which he had promised by Isaiah, then to do as the others did.

Against those which thought it best to call in the aid of the Egyptians, and
endeavored to bring them into help them, does the Prophet here inveigh.

To the rebellious children,] It is rebellion in man to do any thing against
the Will of God (as these men did by distrusting God, and trusting in the arm
of flesh.) See cap. 1.20.

That take counsel,] Supple, How to save themselves from the fury of
Sennacherib and the Assyrians.

But not of me,] q. d. But not of my Prophets, whose counsel is my counsel.

That cover with a covering, but not of my Spirit,] Note, that the word Spirit
is a word of many significations with the Hebrews; but among the many
significations which it has, any act of the Will or Understanding is called
the spirit: And any quality or ability of doing is called the spirit; so that
the spirit may here signify counsel and advice; or it may signify power and
protection: And the meaning of this place may be this; q. d. And which cover
themselves with a covering, but not of my advising, or to which I advised them.
Or the meaning of this place may be this; q. d. And which cover themselves with
a covering, but not with the covering of my power and protection: that is,
which get themselves aid to defend themselves from the Assyrians; but seek not
aid at my hands, nor make me their Protector.

The word covering here mentioned signifies either a garment of cloth, with
which we clothe our selves, to defend our selves in the day from the air; or a
covering which we lay on our beds, to defend our selves from the cold in the
night: But by this covering he means metaphorically the aid and help, with
which these men would defend and preserve themselves from the fury of Assyrians.

To add sin to sin,] i. e. Whereby they add sin to sin; the sin of forsaking
God, and trusting in the arm of flesh), to their sin of drunkenness, cap. 28.8.
and other their sins.

The Particle That signifies here, not the intent, but the event; or if the
intent, the intent secundario, or by consequence.

2.
That walk to go down into Egypt,] Either here is a redundancy in these words,
by putting to walk, to go down, for simply to go down, or else (which I think
rather) by their walking to go down into Egypt, is signified, that they went
down into Egypt on foot, and thus they might go down more privately, and with
the less suspicion of what they went about.

Note, that they went not all into Egypt, whom the Prophet reprehends here; but
they chose men as Ambassadors to go, who went as it is here written, as it
appears v. 4.

And have not asked at my mouth,] i. e. And have not asked of me, whether they
should go or no, or what course they should take.

If they had asked of his Prophets, they had asked of him.

To strengthen themselves] Supple, Against the Assyrians.

He shows here the end of their going into Egypt.

In the strength of Pharaoh,] i. e. With the strength of Pharaoh.

Pharaoh was the common name of the Kings of Egypt, as Caesar was of the
Emperors of Rome.

And to trust in the shadow of Egypt,] i. e. And to procure aid from Egypt, in
which they might trust.

He puts to trust, per Metonymiam Effecti, for to procure that in which they
might trust.

And he puts the shadow for aid, by a Metaphor taken from the shadow of a tree,
or tent, or the like, which defends a man from the heat of the Sun, and from
hail and storms, etc.

Therefore shall the strength of Pharaoh,] q. d. Because ye go down into Egypt
to strengthen your selves in the strength of Pharaoh, and to trust in the
shadow of Egypt, therefore shall the strength of Pharaoh, etc.

3.
The strength of Pharaoh shall be your shame, etc.] The strength of Pharaoh was
their shame, because they relied upon his strength, and that strength could not
help them, nor keep them from being overcome and spoiled by the Assyrians, but
was it self overcome, trodden down, and brought to naught.

They that hope to bring any thing to pass by any means, and cannot bring it to
pass as they hoped, but fail in their hopes, are ashamed; and the more ashamed,
the more pains they took, and the more confident they were of the means of
bringing their hopes to pass.

The Prophet makes his Apostrophe here to the men of Judah in the person of God.

4.
For his Princes were at Zoan, etc.] i. e. This Particle For is here redundant,
as the Particle And is cap. 2.2.

His Princes] i. e. The Ambassadors of Judah or Jacob or Israel.

He calls the Ambassadors of Judah or Jacob or Israel, which were sent into
Egypt on this Embassage, Princes, because they were selected and chosen out of
the chief men.

Zoan,] Zoan was ancient City of Egypt, of which see cap. 19.11.

His Princes were at Zoan,] i. e. His Princes came to Zoan to desire aid and
assistance from the King of Egypt against the King of Assyria whom they feared.

Hanes.] Hanes was another City of Egypt, which was also called Taphnes, seated
in the furthermost parts of Egypt toward Ethiopia.

They came to these two Cities, either because the King of Egypt was first at
one of these Cities, and then removed to the other; or else by each of these
Cities Egypt may be understood by a Synecdoche; and the latter sentence may be
a repetition of the former.

Note, that the Prophet speaks here of a thing to come, as if it were already
past, to show the certainty of that of which he speaks.

5.
They were all ashamed of a people that could not profit them,] Between this
and the former Verse we must understand, by a Syllepsis, That these Ambassadors
obtained aid of the Egyptians, yet could not the aid of the Egyptians stand
them in any stead; wherefore they were all ashamed of a people that could not
profit them, etc.

They were all ashamed of a people that could not profit them,] i. e. All the
Jews which had a hand in sending for the Egyptians, and made use of their aid,
were ashamed of the Egyptians, because though they had obtained aid from them,
yet they could not profit them.

We use to be ashamed of those from whom we expect great matters, if we are
frustrate of our expectation.

But a shame and reproach.] i. e. But a cause of shame and reproach; Metonymia
Effectus.

The Egyptians might well be a shame and reproach to these Jews, when as the
Jews, who served the true God, did lean toward the Egyptians in their
Religion, (who worshipped Birds and Beasts and creeping things) thinking that
that was the best means to make them their friends and associates or helpers.

They might also be a shame and reproach to these Jews, in that these Jews
carried or sent so much treasure to them to procure their aid; and yet when all
came to all, they could not help them.

6.
The burden of the beasts of the South] Supple, Will these men carry to the
Egyptians.

This burden here spoken of, was the riches and treasures which the Ambassadors
of the Jews carried with them, upon the backs of beasts, to purchase the aid of
the Egyptians when they went into Egypt.

Of the beasts] i. e. Of the Camels and Asses.

Of the South,] i. e. Of Egypt, which lay on the South of Judea.

The Beasts of the South,] These Beasts are called the Beasts of the South,
because they were appointed to carry these treasures into the South, that is,
into Egypt: So that this Genitive case is Genitivus finis.

Into a Land of trouble and anguish,] These words from this place to the end of
the Verse, are thus to be ordered: They will carry their riches upon the
shoulders of young Asses, and their treasures upon the bunches of Camels, by
the Land of trouble and anguish, from whence come the young and old Lion, the
Viper and fiery flying Serpent, to a people that shall not profit them.

The Prophet mentions this, the more to upbraid these men with their folly,
for carrying such riches and treasures with so much danger, to so little
purpose.

Into a Land of trouble and anguish,] i. e. Through a Land of trouble and
anguish; for this Land was not the ultimate end or term of their journey.

Note, that this Preposition In, or Into, has the signification of almost all
other Prepositions among the Hebrews, and here it signifies By or Through.

A Land of trouble and anguish,] The Land which he describes is the Arabian
Isthmus, or neck of Land, which lay between the Arabian gulf, or red Sea, and
the Mediterranean Sea; which he calls a Land of trouble and anguish, because
of the troublesome and dangerous traveling that way, both for want of water,
and for great drought and heat; as also because of the wild beasts and
Serpents which bred and harbored there.

They will carry their riches] i. e. Those Jews which desire the aid of the
Egyptians against the Assyrians, will carry, to wit, by their Ambassadors.

Their riches] They carried their riches and treasures into Egypt, that they
might present them to Pharaoh King of Egypt, and his Princes and Counselors,
thereby to make them their friends, and purchase their aid against the
Assyrians.

Upon the shoulders of Asses,] i. e. Upon the backs of Asses.

He puts one part of the body for another next to it.

Bunches of Camels,] i. e. Backs of Camels.

He says, the bunches, for the backs of Camels, because Camels have naturally
high bunches growing upon their backs.

To a people that shall not profit them,] i. e. To the Egyptians, desiring
their aid and assistance against the Assyrians, who with all their aid and
assistance should not profit them at this time. See Cap. 31. verse. 3.

7.
For the Egyptians shall help in vain,] i. e. For the aid which the Egyptians
shall send them shall be in vain, it shall do them no good.

It appears by Rabshakehs speech, that the Jews relied much upon the Egyptians,
when Sennacherib invaded Judea, cap. 36. v. 6. And by this and the next
Chapter, verse. 3. it appears, that they got aid from the Egyptians (though it
be not mentioned in the story, either in the Book of Kings or of Chronicles,)
and that for all that, the Jews were overcome, and they and their ayds
destroyed.

Therefore have I cryed] q. d. Because the aid which the Jews shall look for
from the Egyptians shall be vain, and to no purpose; therefore have I said (by
way of counsel and advice) by my Prophets.

Concerning this] i. e. Concerning the strength wherewith they desire to
strengthen themselves against the Assyrians.

Their strength] i. e. Their way to procure strength, or to strengthen
themselves, is,

To sit still.] i. e. To sit at home, both they and their Ambassadors, and not
to go into Egypt for help, but to rely on me the Lord their God, and on my
Promises, so will I the Lord be their strength.

Surely if the men of Judah, which were without Jerusalem, had relied upon the
Lord as Hezekiah did, and those few which were with him in Jerusalem, the Lord
would have defended them against the Assyrians, as he did Hezekiah and those
which were with him.

8.
Now go, write it before them, etc.] i. e. Because the Jews would not hear the
Word of the Lord, saying, Their strength is to sit still, but would for all
that go down into Egypt to procure Horses and Charets from thence; therefore
does the Lord say to Isaiah, Go now, write it before them in a table, etc.

Write it before them] What he would have written, the following Verses show:
And therefore he would have it written before them, that they might see what
was written of them; that they might know that nothing was written of their
carriage, but what they could not deny to be true; and that they might be
inexcusable when the judgments of God overtook them.

In a table,] They were wont to make writing-tables of some lasting wood, spread
over with wax, on which they wrote with an instrument of Iron, by razing or
graving in the wax.

And note it in a book,] By a Book he means a roll of parchment, which they
were wont also to use for writing.

He would have this matter both written in a table, and noted in a book, that
the memory thereof might be the better preserved.

That it may be for time to come for ever and ever.] i. e. That it may be a
testimony to all that shall come hereafter, that this is a rebellious people,
and that what I denounced against them for their rebellion, shall befall them;
and that what shall befall them from me, shall worthily befall them.

This care the Lord takes, because it is a strange act, and a strange work for
him, thus to destroy his people the Jews, Cap. 28.21. yea, a marvelous work and
a wonder, Cap. 29.14. that all the world may know, that it was not his, but
their faults, that he should deal thus with them, after such an unwonted manner.

9.
That this is a rebellious people,] i. e. That this is a people which refuses
to be obedient to the Word of God (See cap. 1.20.) and will not fit still at
his Word, verse. 7.

Lying children] He calls them lying children, because they were one kind of
people in their words, and another in their deeds. cap. 29.13. As also, because
they promised to do whatsoever God commanded them, and to hear the Prophets of
the Lord, and obey their voice, ( Exodus 26.19. compared with Deuteronomy. 18. v. 15,
15, 17.) (for what their forefathers did, they must be interpreted to have
done, being the same people, and in the loins of their forefathers at that
time, Heb. 7. v. 9, 10.) But they did not observe the Commandments of God as
they promised, neither did they hearken to his Prophets.

The Law of the Lord.] By the Law of the Lord, is here meant any words of the
Lord, See cap. 1.10.

10.
Which say to the seers, see not,] By the seers are meant Prophets, for a
Prophet in old time was called a Seer, 1 Samuel 9.9. because of the visions which
they saw. See notes cap. 1.1.

And to the Prophets, prophecy not unto us right things,] By right things, he
means those things which God revealed to them, and he opposes them to the
illusions and deceits of false Prophets.

Note, that this is not so to be understood, as though they did say unto the
Prophets, Prophecy not unto us right things, and to the Seers, See not, in
formal words; but therefore he says, that they said to the Seers, See not;
and to the Prophets, Prophecy not unto us right things, because they did
discourage the Prophets, and Seers as much as they could, and bring them into
danger, for prophesying to them right things. See cap. 29.21.

Speak unto us smooth things] i. e. Speak to us, or prophecy unto us pleasing
things.

Prophecy unto us deceits.] i. e. Prophecy unto us such things as will put us
in good hopes, and delight us for the present, but will afterward deceive us.

Note, that the people did not term these pleasing and delightful Prophesies
deceits, but because false Prophets did delude the People with such Prophesies;
and so these Prophesies were delusions and deceits indeed; the Prophet calls
them here deceits.

Note also, that it is not to be understood, that the people used these formal
words to the Prophets; Speak unto us smooth things, prophecy deceits, But
because they love, and speak well of false Prophets which speak smooth things,
and hated the true Prophets which prophesied such things as they liked not (and
so as much as in them lay; they discouraged the true Prophets, and heartned the
false, yea as much as if they had done it, in those formal words) therefore
does he say, that they said, Speak unto us smooth things, prophecy unto us
deceits.

11.
Get ye out of the way] By the way is mean the usual way or manner of
prophesying which Isaiah and other Prophets of the Lord used to this people,
which was to tell them of their sins and transgressions, and of the punishments
which God would bring upon them if they repented not.

Because a way is beaten by often going to and fro, and so becomes a way; hence
a way may by a Metaphor signifies the iteration, or repetition, or frequent use
of any lesson or prophecy.

These are still the words of the people, to the Lords Prophets.

Turn aside out of the path] This is a repetition of the former sentence.

Cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from us,] i. e. Cause the Word of the
Holy One of Israel to cease from us, and let us hear it no more.

By the Holy One of Israel, is meant the Word of the Holy One of Israel,
revealed to the Prophets, by a Metonymy.

Yet because the Prophets, when they did pronounce any Prophecy, were wont to
say, Thus says the Holy One of Israel, etc. The Prophet may in allusion
thereto bring in this people saying; Cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from
us, that is, Let us not any more hear thee say, The Holy One of Israel, or,
Thus says the Holy One of Israel; which is as much as to say, Prophecy no more
in the name of the God of Israel.

12.
Because ye despise this Word,] q. d. Because, whereas the Lord said of you,
your strength is to sit still, v. 7. you despise that word, and will not
hearken to it.

And trust in oppression] By oppression he means riches gotten by oppression,
Per Metonymiam Efficientis.

They are said to trust in riches, because they doubt not but by the riches
which they intend to sent into Egypt, (v. 6.) to procure aid from thence
against the Assyrians, on which aid they would rely.

And perverseness.] i. e. And the aid which ye hope to procure from Egypt
against the Assyrians.

This he calls perverseness, because it was contrary to the Word of God who
forbad them to seek to Egypt for aid, and commanded them to sit still at home,
and trust in him; yet so perverse and refractory were they, that they would not
obey.

This and the former word signify the same fault of these men.

13.
This iniquity] Supple, That ye despise this Word of God, and trust in
oppression and perverseness.

This iniquity shall be to you as a breach ready to fall, swelling out in an
high wall, whose breaking comes suddenly at an instant.] The sense is, q. d.
You shall be, by reason of this your iniquity, as a piece of an high wall which
is ready to fall, and swells out, yea that falls and breaks to pieces at an
instant suddenly: For as such a piece of an high wall falls, and breaks to
pieces at an instant suddenly; So shall ye fall, and be broken to pieces, and
destroyed suddenly at an instant, who have committed this iniquity.

It may be here objected against this Interpretation, That the Prophet
compares iniquity to the breach ready to fall, (and so most interpret it: q.
d. As a breach ready to fall, swelling out in an high wall, breaks and falls of
a sudden, and kills those which chance to walk under it; So shall this iniquity
bring a sudden destruction upon you which are the workers of it:) But this your
Interpretation makes the men themselves like the piece of an high wall, which
swells out, and is ready to fall.

Ans. To this I answer; That in parables and similitudes we must look upon the
whole body of the sentence, and take the whole meaning from the whole; not part
from part, lest when we go about too accurately to divide it in pieces, we
destroy the whole. See Notes, Cap. 17.5. upon those words, And it shall be as
he that gathers ears in the valley of Rephaim. See also Notes, cap. 29.16.
The piece of the wall therefore which swelled out, resembles the men which
committed this iniquity, rather then the iniquity it self: And that which
resembles the iniquity was the cleft or crack in the wall, which caused that
piece to swell out, and be ready to fall.

As a breach] A breach may signify elsewhere a crack or a cleft; but here it
signifies a part or piece of a wall, which swells out, and is ready to fall, by
reason of some crack or cleft, or breach which is in it, by a Metonymy.

In an high wall] This wall is to be understood of a wall made of brick or
stone; and he says, an high wall, because the higher the wall is, the more
ready is such a breach or piece of the wall to fall, and the greater is the
fall when it comes.

Whose breaking] i. e. The actual falling of which breach, by which it breaks
asunder into little pieces.

14.
And he shall break it,] i. e. For the Lord, the holy One of Israel, shall
break you, because of this your iniquity.

And is to be taken here for For.

By He is meant the Lord, the holy One of Israel. By It, the sins or workers of
this iniquity. For note, that that which the Lord is here meant to break, is,
the people which committed the forementioned iniquity; not the iniquity which
they committed, as some expound it, nor the breach in the wall mentioned in the
former Verse, as others.

Object. But you will say, that the words run thus; And he shall break it, not,
And he shall break you, or that he shall break them: and this Relative It
relates either to the word iniquity, or to the word breach going before; not to
those, Which despise his Word, Verse. 12.

Ans. It is true, that the Relative Particle It does relate either to the word
iniquity, or the word breach going before, if we look to the Grammar
construction: But (as I said) in such parables and similitudes as these are, we
must not look to the words and Grammatical construction, but to the sense of
the place. See the aforecited place, cap. 17.5. And if we look not to the
words, but to the sense of this place, we shall find, that it relates to those
words, Which despise the Word of God, and trust in oppression and perverseness,
and stay thereon. And because the Prophet compared these workers of iniquity to
the breach in a wall, he might say of them, He shall break It, for, He shall
break them, in regard that he compared them to the breach in a wall: So because
our Prophet compared the holy One of Israel to a fire, he says of the holy One
of Israel, not He, but It shall burn and devour his thorns and his briars in
one day, Cap. 10.17.

As the breaking of a Potters vessel,] i. e. According to the breaking of a
Potters vessel, or earthen pot; or as if a man should break an earthen pot, or
a Potters vessel.

Which is broken in pieces,] i. e. Which a man dasheth with all his might
against the stones, and so breaks into small bits or pieces.

He shall not spare,] i. e. The holy One of Israel shall not spare, Supple,
these sinners.

These words may be read with a Parenthesis.

So that there shall not be found in the bursting of it] i. e. So that there is
not to be found when it is broke.

These depend upon those words, That is broken in pieces.

A sheard to take fire from the harth, or to take water withal out of the
pit,] i. e. A sheard big enough to take fire from the harth, or water out of
the pit.

Poor people, even at this day, use potsheards to take up, and carry fire in,
and to catch up water out of a pond, or pit, or river, for their use.

Out of the pit,] In Judea (which was a mountainous, and so a dry Country, a
great part of it) there were many pits made to save and keep water in for
necessary uses.

15.
In returning] i. e. I said, that by returning, or if ye would return from your
purpose, and alter your resolution of sending for aid to Egypt, and of relying
upon the Egyptians, etc.

This phrase is Metaphorical, translated from the body to the mind.

Note, that these words, I said, are here to be understood.

And rest] i. e. And by rest and sitting still at home, or, if you would take
your rest, and sit still at home, and not go down into Egypt.

Ye shall be saved,] Supple, From the hand of the Assyrian.

In quietness] i. e. In sitting quietly at home, and not traveling into Egypt.

This is a repetition of the former sentence.

And in confidence] i. e. And in trusting and confiding in me the Lord, who
have promised to save you, if you rely on me, and confide on me.

Shall be your strength,] Their strength was said to be in this quietness and
confidence, because if they would have been quiet, and confided in God, God
would have strengthened them so, as that their Enemies the Assyrians should not
have prevailed against them.

And ye would not.] i. e. But ye would not, Subaudi, Harken to the Word of me
the Lord, and believe it; ye would not return and rest at home, ye would not be
quiet and confide in me.

16.
But ye said, No,] q. d. But ye said, No; We will not return and alter our
purpose, we will not rest and sit still at home, but we will go down into
Egypt, and get strength from thence.

We will flee upon horses,] i. e. We will get our selves many good Horses, that
we may (if we be routed and overcome by the Assyrians) flee the faster from
them.

In Judea there were great abundance of Asses, 1 Chronicles. 27. v. 30. therefore
their Princes and chief men were wont to ride upon Asses, Judge. 10.4. and
12.14. But there was great scarcity of Horses; for the Lord had forbidden them
to multiply Horses, Deuteronomy. 17.16. But Judea was not so scarce of Horses, but
Egypt was as full, Deuteronomy. 17.16. and 1 King. 10. v. 28. therefore did these Jews
desire aid of the Egyptians, and send their Ambassadors thither, to procure
good store of Horses thence for this their service.

Therefore shall ye flee,] Supple, Before your Enemies the Assyrians.

This is the judgment threatened against their sin.

And we will ride upon the swift,] i. e. We will get us the swift creatures,
that if need be, we may flee swiftly from our Enemies.

By the swift he means Horses (per Metonymiam Adjuncti) with which Egypt
abounded, which were far more swift then Asses, which were bred in Judea.

Therefore shall they which pursue you be swift,] i. e. Therefore shall your
Enemies the Assyrians be swift also, and shall pursue you and overtake you.

This is a repetition of what was said immediately before: in both which places
the Prophet plays in his words, making the sin and punishment alike.

Note here, that though the Prophet attributes these words, we will flee upon
horses, and we will ride upon the swift, to the men of Judah as spoken by them,
yet it is probable that they never used these formal words; for they were so
confident of the strength of Egypt, as that they were not likely to speak of
flying; but because the Prophet foresaw that they would flee before their
enemies, and that that was all the steed their horses would stand them in,
namely to flee; therefore he brings them in saying, we will flee upon horses,
we will ride upon the swift; so does he bring them in speaking and saying, We
have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid our selves, Cap.
28.15. And Prophecy not unto us right things; speak unto us smooth things,
prophecy deceits, Cap. 30.10. whereas it is not likely that they would use
those formal words, though they did and said as much in effect. See the notes
upon those several places.

One thousand] Supple, Of you Jews.

Shall flee at the rebuke of One,] i. e. Shall flee if they do but hear the
voice of one single Assyrian threatening them.

At the rebuke of five,] i. e. At the chiding or threatening of a very few.

He puts a certain for an uncertain number.

Shall ye flee] i. e. Shall ye all flee.

Till ye be left as a Beacon upon the top of a mountain,] q. d. Till there be
not two of you left together in company.

A Beacon is one only single Post or Pole, whereon there is a pan fastened to
the top, in which they put pitch and flax, or some such like combustible
matter, which they set on fire in the time of danger; this uses to be set on
an high hill, that it may be the more conspicuous and seen the further off.

But happily the Beacon here meant, is only a bare Mast or Pole, set up in an
eminent place by the Seaside.

As an Ensign on an hill.] i. e. As a single Banner which is pitched upon an
high hill. See cap. 13.2.

18.
And therefore will the Lord wait, that He may be gracious unto you; and
therefore will He be exalted, that He way have mercy upon you.] The sense is,
q. d. Yet nevertheless the Lord will wait, and He will be exalted, (for these
words are to be understood here by a Syllepsis, the like whereunto we observed,
cap. 3.6.) And therefore will the Lord wait, that He may be gracious unto you;
and therefore will he be exalted, that he may have mercy upon you.

He uses an Apostrophe to the faithful in Jerusalem.

For the better understanding of this place note, that the destruction which
the Lord threatened against those which went down to Egypt for strength, the
Lord brought upon those men by the Assyrians, whom he brought so suddenly upon
them, as that their destruction is said to have come upon them suddenly at an
instant, verse. 13. And so being suddenly surprised and unprovided, they became
a prey to the sword of their enemies. But though the Lord intended to bring ths
Assyrians against Jerusalem, as well as against other parts and Cities of Judah,
yet he brought them not so suddenly against her as against other Cities and
places; for after the Assyrians came and entered into Judah, and encamped
against the fenced Cities thereof, the men of Jerusalem had time to take
counsel and to fortify their City, and to hunble themselves, and in a solemn
manner to commend themselves to Gods protection, and rely upon him for safety,
before the Assyrians pitched against her, 2 Chronicles. cap. 32. ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, 8. By which means they were able to hold out against the Assyrians,
until the Assyrians themselves were destroyed.

Therefore because the Lord brought not the Assyrians so soon against the men
of Jerusalem, as he did against other the men of Judah, but staid until the
men of Jerusalem had exceedingly well fortified their City, and had humbled
themselves and in a solemn manner committed themselves to the Lords protection;
The Lord is said here to wait.

And therefore etc.] Note, that And, is put here for Yet notwithstanding, for
he opposes here the condition of the faithful in Jerusalem, to the condition
of those which he hitherto spoke of.

Will the Lord wait?] i. e. Will the Lord stay till ye have fortified your
City, and put your selves in a solemn manner under his protection, before he
brings the Assyrians against you.

To wait is put here for to stay, or to tarry, because they use to stay and
tarry, which use to wait for any one.

That he may be gracious unto you,] i. e. That he may show favor unto you;
for, it was Gods favor and mercy to keep off the Assyrians from the men of
Jerusalem, till they had fortified their City, and solemnly committed
themselves to the Lords protection, otherwise they might have been destroyed by
the Assyrians, as well as other the men of Judah.

Will he be exalted?] i. e. Will he defer his punishment intended against you,
that is, He will defer the bringing of the Assyrians against you, etc.

This sense this place requires (for this is a rep^tition of the former
sentence) but how (...) To be exalted, should come to signify, to defer a
punishment, is a question.

Some think that the Prophet alludes to a man correcting his son or his servant
with a rod, who stretches out his arm and lifts up his whole body, and
stands on tip-toe, that he may fetch the greater stroke; but the higher he
lifts up himself, and the further he stretches out his arm, the longer he is
before he strikes; from whom to be exalted, or to exalt himself, may be taken
(say they) for to defer a punishment, or to be long before he strikes, by a
Metaphor.

Others say thus, When God is about to punish, he is said to come out of his
place, (which is heaven) as cap. 26.21. and Mic. 1.3. That therefore he might
punish this people, he came as it were out of heaven; but because he would not
then punish them, but spare them a little longer; he returned on high into
Heaven to his place again. Hence to be exalted (that is, to return on high; or,
to go up to Heaven) signifies (they say) to defer a punishment, and to spare
a while.

Others say thus; When God does any notable thing, he is said to be exalted and
glorified, (Per Metonymiam Effecti.) Because he does that for which he may
justly be exalted and glorified. (See cap. 12.4. and cap. 26.15.

Now because God was willing to show his long-suffering and forbearance a while
longer to his faithful people (which must needs redound to the praise and glory
of God) The Prophet says, he will be exalted, for he will suffer them and
spare them a little longer; Per Metonymiam Effecti.

That he may have mercy upon you.] i. e. That ye may not be destroyed by the
Assyrians.

This (as I said) is but a repetition of the former sentence already expounded.

For the Lord is a God of judgment,] i. e. For the Lord is a God of mercy and
compassion.

Judgment is taken here for mercy or compassion, and so it is taken, Jer.
10.24. where it is said, O Lord correct me, but in thy judgment, not in thine
anger, etc. Where judgment is opposed to anger, and is taken for mercy, or
pity, or compassion.

Or, judgment may be taken here for discretion, and God may be called a God of
judgment, because he knows how to punish one, and how another; how to show
favor to some, and how to deny it to others.

That wait for him,] i. e. That wait for his aid, and for his mercy, and
deliverance, and run not to Egypt for strength, etc.

19.
For the people] Supple, That wait for the Lord, that is, for the aid and
mercy of the Lord at this time.

He makes good that here which he said in the former verse, to wit, Blessed are
they which wait for him; and he speaks of the faithful of Jerusalem here in
the third person, to whom he spoke a little before in the second.

Shall dwell in Sion at Jerusalem,] i. e. Shall dwell in safety at Jerusalem,
Supple, when the Assyrians destroy all the Land besides.

Shall dwell in Sion] Sion was an impregnable Fort in Jerusalem, as appears, 2 Samuel 5. v. 6, 7, etc. Wherefore to dwell in Sion may proverbially signify, to
dwell in safety.

Thou shall weep no more,] Supple, After a while.

The Prophet turns his speech again, to the people of Jerusalem which did
wait for the Lord.

He will be very gracious unto thee.] i. e. The Lord will be very gracious unto
thee, and show thee a great deal of favor.

At the voice of thy cry,] i. e. When thou criest to him for help against the
Assyrians.

When he shall hear it] i. e. When he shall hear thy cry, that is, when thou
shall cry unto him.

He will answer thee] For God to answer us, when we cry or pray, is in the
Scripture phrase, for God to grant our request.

20.
And though the Lord give you the bread of adversity] i. e. Wherefore though
the Lord give you the bread of adversity, etc.

And for Wherefore.

Though the Lord give you the bread of adversity, and the water of affliction,]
q. d. Though the Lord suffer you to be besieged in Jerusalem by Sennacheribs
Army, during which time ye shall have but a little bread, and a little water
allowed you, a is usual in besieged Cities, where every one has his bread and
his drink measured out to him (which he must not exceed) that the store of the
place may last out the longer.

Yet shall not thy Teachers be removed into a corner any more,] q. d. Yet do
not thou evil entreat thy Teachers, and drive them away into corners, by thy
evil usage and persecuting of them.

I take these words, and the words following to verse 23. to be rather an
Admonition then a Prediction; and it is well known, that the Hebrews put a
future tense of the Indicative Mood, for an Imperative.

In general, that which the Prophet here admonishes this people is, to wait
on the Lord, though he does afflict them; which admonition is seasonable,
because in afflictions we are apt to be impatient, and fly off from God; What
should I wait for the Lord any longer? said the King of Israel when Samaria
was long and hard besieged, 2 Kings 6.33. And in particular he admonishes them
not to offer any discourtesie to ^he Ministers of the Lord, and persecute them
so, that they should be fain to hide themselves; and this admonition is also
seasonable, for many had thus evil entreated the Prophets, and persecuted them,
cap. 29. v. 20, 21, 22. And when men expect any deliverance from the Lord, and
it comes not according to their expectation, they wax angry, and vent their
anger upon the Lords servants; thus Jehoram, because God did not deliver
Samaria from the Syrians which besieged it, as he expected, threatened Elisha
the man of God, saying, God do so and more also to me, if the head of Elisha
the son of Shaphat, shall stand on him this day, 2 Kings 6.31. He admonishes
them also to abandon their Idolatry, both because it was most displeasing to
God, as also because many were too ready to seek to idols in their afflictions,
cap. 8.19.

No man can truly wait for the Lord, or his help; but he must wait in the way
of his Law, that is, he must be careful to do his Will, and observe his
Commandments: Therefore while he admonishes this people to use the Lords
Prophets well, and to cast away the rags of their Idolatry, he does admonish
them in effect to wait still for the Lord, and his help.

But thine eyes shall see thy Teachers.] i. e. But let thine eyes gladly see
thy teachers, q. d. But be thou glad to see the Prophets of the Lord, whom the
Lord shall send to thee to instruct thee.

21.
And thine ears shall hear a word behind thee saying, this is the way, walk
ye in it, when ye turn to the right hand, and when ye turn to the left.] q. d.
And let thine ears gladly hear the voice of the Prophets telling you that you
do amiss (when ye do amiss) and directing you into the right way.

This is the sense of these words, and the order of them is this, And when ye
turn to the right hand, and when ye turn to the left, thine ear shall hear, i.
e. Let thine ears gladly hear the word behind thee saying, this is the way,
walk ye in it.

Note, that the words of this verse are metaphorical, taken from guides which
follow children, and direct them in the way which they walk in; who if they see
them turn out of the way, either to the right hand, or to the left, tell them
that they are out of the way, and show them the right way, saying, This is the
right way, walk ye in it.

22.
Ye shall defile also the covering of thy graven Images of Gold,] q. d. Do ye
also cast away as a thing polluted and defiled, the very covering of thy graven
Images which are made of silver and gold.

To defile, signifies here to cast away, as a thing polluted and defiled.

Note, that the graven Images of Idolaters were adorned with Coverings, that
is, with Mantles, and Robes of great value; For Dionysius the Tyrant took away
such a Covering from the Idol of Jupiter Olympius which was very weighty with
Gold, saying, That it was too heavy for the God to wear in the Summer, and too
cold for him to wear in the Winter.

Thou shall cast them away,] i. e. Do thou cast them away.

As a menstruous cloth,] i. e. As a cloth which is stained which the menstruous
blood of a woman, then which nothing was accounted more unclean under the Law,
Lev. 15.19, 20, 21.

Thou shall say unto it, Get thee hence.] i. e. Say thou unto it (in
detestation of Idolatry) Get thee hence.

To it] i. e. To them.

Observe here the Enallage of the number.

23.
Then shall he give thee] i. e. Then shall the Lord give thee,

The rain of thy seed,] i. e. That rain which shall be requisite to make thy
seed to grow.

And bread] i. e. And wheat, and other corn, of which thou art wont to make
bread: Metonymia Materiae.

Of the increase of the Earth.] i. e. Which shall spring up and increase out of
the Earth.

The Prophet prophecyeth here of the great abundance and fertility which should
be in Judea, after the destruction of the Assyrians, and that for the comfort
of those which should survive: For great was the waste and desolation which the
Assyrians were like to make in the Land, and great was the scarcity which the
Jews were like to endure at that time: And a Land which is so wasted and
spoiled by an Enemy (as Judea was like to be by the Assyrians) does not quickly
recover it self, and bring forth fruit as it was wont to do: To show therefore
how gracious God would be to his people, he tells them for their comfort, that
after the Assyrians are destroyed, there should abundance of all things spring
up presently in Judea, etc.

24.
Clean provender.] i. e. Provender which is cleansed from the chaff.

This signifies great plenty and abundance, when they shall have no need of
chaff to mingle among the provender of their cattle, but winnow it out of it.

25.
And there shall be upon every high mountain and every high hill rivers and
streams of water,] i. e. There shall plenty of Rain fall upon the high hills
and high mountains (which are naturally dry,) yea, it shall fall like Rivers
and streams of waters, and make them fruitful which were naturally barren.

In the day of the great slaughter,] i. e. After the day of the great
slaughter, which the Angel shall make in the Camp of the Assyrians, 2 King.
19.35.

In is to be taken here for After.

When the Towers fall.] i. e. When the Towers are fallen.

By the Towers he means the Assyrians, or the Princes and chief of the
Assyrians, which were high and haughty, and which were accounted as a tower,
invincible.

26.
The light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun,] i. e. And the Moon
shall shine as bright as the Sun does ordinarily shine.

And the light of the Sun shall be sevenfold,] i. e. And the light of the Sun
shall be seven times brighter then it uses to be.

As the light of seven days,] i. e. It shall be as if the light of seven days
were put into the light of one day, and should cause the light to be seven
times more intense and greater then usually it is.

By what is here said of the light of the Sun and the Moon, is meant, that
there should be matter of great joy and rejoicing at this time: For as darkness
does, both in divine and humane Writings, signify a sad state of things, and
great adversity: So, on the contrary, light does signify a joyful face of
things, and great prosperity.

We observed also, Cap. 5.30. and elsewhere, that the Scriptures do make the
Heaven and the Earth (after a pathetical manner) to sympathize with men in
great Accidents, as if they were sensible of, and affected with what befell
them. Thus do they make the Heavens to keep in their light in sad Events, as
Cap. 5.30. and 13.10. And here it makes the Sun and Moon to shine more bright
then ordinary, at joyful Accidents.

In the day] i. e. At the time.

That the Lord binds up the breach of his people,] i. e. That the Lord
delivers his people, which shall be besieged by Sennacheribs Army in
Jerusalem and distressed, from all their misery and distress.

Note, that the Prophet uses a Metaphor here, taken from a Surgeon which
binds up the bones of his Patient which are broken, after his Art, and and
knits them together, and so heals them.

The breach] i. e. The broken limbs or bones.

He uses here Metonymiam Adjuncti, a breach for limbs or bones broken.

By this breach, or broken limbs and bones, he means Metaphorically the
distressed estate of the Jews which were besieged in Jerusalem.

And the stroke of their wound.] i. e. And the wound which they received, or
which was made in their flesh by a stroke: Hypallage.

Here he signifies the same things by the wound made by a stroke in the flesh,
as he did before by the breach made in the bones, to wit, the distressed estate
of the Jews, which were besieged in Jerusalem by Sennacheribs Host.

27.
Behold the Name of the Lord cometh] i. e. Behold the Lord comes.

The Prophets puts the Name of the Lord for the Lord himself, after the Hebrew
manner, per Metonymiam Adjuncti: q. d. The Lord comes.

The Prophet proves here what he said verse. 25. That there shall be a great
slaughter of the Assyrians, and that the Towers shall fall.

Comes from far,] i. e. Comes on a sudden and unlooked for, as they come
which come from far, the hour of whose coming we know not of. Or, He comes
from far, i. e. He comes from Heaven. See cap. 26.21.

What the Lord comes for, we shall see in the next Verse.

Burning with anger,] i. e. Being exceeding angry, Supple, with the Assyrians
which besiege Jerusalem.

The Prophet speaks here of God as of a man, by an (...), and alludes to the
boiling of a man's blood about the heart, when he is angry, whereby he is
exceeding hot.

And the burden thereof is heavy,] q. d. and so heavy is his anger, as that the
Assyrians (against whom it is kindled) will not be able to bear it. Or, so
heavy is the burden of his anger, as that he is not able to bear it, and
therefore he will not ease himself of it, by avenging himself upon the
Assyrians.

Note here what a mixture the Prophet uses of Metaphors.

His lips are full of indignation,] i. e. He storms and rages exceedingly.

He alludeth to angry men, which storm and rage exceedingly in their anger.

His tongue [is] as a devouring fire,] This is for sense the same with the
former words: But because the Lord did so storm and rage against the Assyrians,
as that he did destroy them in his anger, the Prophet says, His tongue was as
a devouring fire: Yet happily the Prophet may also allude to the breath which
proceeds from the mouth of an angry man while he storms and rages, which is as
smoke proceeding from fire.

28.
And his breath as an overflowing stream,] The breath of an angry man, while he
storms and rages, proceeds like smoke from his mouth and his nose, yea (as our
Prophet says here) like a stream: For as he takes in more air at such a time,
to refrigerate the heat of his heart; so does he violently send out more again
by respiration, while he chafeth and stormeth.

But the Prophet does not only liken his breath to a stream, but to an
overflowing stream; that is, to a stream of water, which by reason of Snow or
Rain, overfloweth its banks, and reaches up to the middle of a man's neck,
whereby the whole man is welnigh drowned.

Shall reach] He confounds tenses here, for this should be of the same tense
with the former Verbs.

Shall reach to the midst of the neck,] He likeneth the breath of the Lord, in
this his anger, to an overflowing stream, which reaches to the midst of a man's
neck; because as such a stream does drown (as it were) all parts of a man's
body, but only his head; so did the Lord in his anger destroy all the
Assyrians by his Angel, 2 King. 19.35. Sennacherib only, which was their head
(and some few with him) escaping, 2 King. 19.36.

To sift the Nations with a sieve of vanity,] i. e. To destroy the Nations, and
tread them under foot: And this was done by the Angel of the Lord, 2 King.
19.25.

These words relate to those, Behold the Name of the Lord comes, and show the
end of his coming; q. d. The Name of the Lord comes to sift the Nations, etc.

This phrase is metaphorical; for the understanding of which observe, That when
men sift corn with a sieve, that which goes through the sieve (which is
commonly nothing else but dust and trumpery) is cast away, and so comes to be
trodden under foot, as being unprofitable; and that only is reserved and set
by, which remains in the sieve after sifting, which is the clean grain.

Observe secondly, That when we sift corn, we sift it for this end, that we may
sever the dust and trumpery from the good corn or grain: Now if we sift the
corn in a broken sieve, or a wide-hole sieve, so that all passes through, as
well the corn and grain, as the dust and trumpery, we spend our labor in vain;
and such a sieve may be called a sieve of vanity, or a vain sieve, because we
lose our labor in sifting in it.

When therefore the Prophet says, That he will sift them with a sieve of
vanity, his meaning is, that he will sift them in such a sieve, as lets all
through which is put into it. And because, when men usually sift corn, they
fling away that which goes through the sieve, and falls to the Earth, and
tread it under their feet; hence the Prophet says, That the Lord will sift the
Nations with a sieve of vanity, for he will destroy them, and tread them all
under feet, joining two Metaphors together.

The Nations] By this is meant Sennacheribs Army, which besieged Jerusalem, in
which were many men of many Nations.

With the sieve of vanity,] i. e. With a vain sieve.

A substantive of the Genitive case is put here for an Adjective.

What he calls a sieve of vanity, or a vain sieve, I have declared a few lines
before.

And there shall be a bridle in the jaws of the people,] Note, that the word
people is of the plural number, and it signifies those of diverse people which
were in Sennacheribs Army.

Note also, that whereas Sennacherib himself, though he was upon his way so far
as Nob, Cap. 10.32. yet because neither he himself came to Jerusalem to the
siege, nor that part of his Army which was with him, I understand by the people
here, that part of Sennacheribs Army which was with Sennacherib, when that part
of his Army which lay before Jerusalem was destroyed: And these had a bridle in
their jaws; for whereas they were hasting to Jerusalem to strengthen the siege,
the Lord did put a hook into their nose, and a bridle into their lips, and
turned them back, Cap. 37.29. See cap. 31.8, 9.

Causing them to err,] i. e. Making them to flee, as a chased Roe, and as a
sheep which no man takes up (as the Prophet speaks, Cap. 13.14.) which err and
wander they know not whither, until they fall into some pit or other, or be
devoured by some ravenous beast or other.

It is likely that when the news came to the ears of Sennacherib, and those
which were with him, of the slaughter of an hundred fourscore and five thousand
of the Assyrians in one night, that this turned them back from Jerusalem, and
so affrighted them, that they ran confusedly, some one way, and some another,
they knew not whither; and that many of them came short home, they which hated
them having opportunity to slay them, as they found them wandering and
discomfited.

Note, that when the Prophet says, The bridle in the jaws of the people shall
cause them to err, he alludeth to that which was signified by the bridle,
rather then to the bridle it self; for bridles cause not to err, but to go
right rather: But the news of an hundred fourscore and five thousand being
slain in one night (which is that which was signified by the bridle, because it
turned Sennacherib from Jerusalem as a bridle does an Horse) did make
Sennacherib, and those which were with him, to disparkle, and run as chased
Roes or wandering sheep, they knew not whither.

That the Prophet does sometime allude in similitudes to the thing signifying,
and sometimes to the thing signified. See Cap. 16.8. and 22.24.

Or when he says, There shall be a bridle in the jaws of the people, causing
them to err; it is as if he should say, There shall be a bridle in the jaws of
the people, but a bridle of a strange nature; for whereas other bridles cause
the beasts in whose jaws they are to go aright, this shall cause them in whose
jaws it shall be to err. See the like Notes, Cap. 33.20.

29.
Ye shall have a song, etc.] i. e. But ye shall have cause to sing for joy,
because of your deliverance from Sennacherib, and the destruction of his Army.

He uses an Apostrophe here to those which were besieged in Jerusalem.

As in the night when an holy Solemnity is kept,] Some say, that when the
Hebrews were to offer a sacrifice in the morning, they were wont to pass the
night before with songs and a great deal of mirth, and that the Prophet alludes
to this in this place. Others say, that the Hebrews were wont to begin their
solemn Feasts with a song, and a great deal of mirth and joy; and that the
Prophet alludes to this: For they began their Feasts in the Evening, by the
Prescript of the Law.

Others say, that after a solemn Feast day they were wont to sup liberally, and
to sing and use all kind of mirth at this their supper; and that the Prophet
alludes to this.

As when one goes with a pipe to come into the mountains of the Lord,] i. e.
As when one goes with a pipe to the Temple of the Lord.

The Temple of the Lord was situate upon Mount Sion, therefore the mountain is
put for the Temple of the Lord, per Metonymiam Subjecti.

He says, Goes to come, periphrastically, for comes or goes.

The Hebrews which went to the Temple to pay the vows which they had made, or
or to sacrifice, to do any solemn service there, were wont to go thither with
pipes and music. See Psalm. 42.4. etc. and to this does the Prophet here
allude.

This Verse may be read with a Parenthesis.

30.
And the Lord shall cause his glorious voice to be heard,] By the glorious
voice of the Lord is meant Thunder, which was heard at the destruction of the
Assyrians.

It is usual with the Scripture to call thunder the voice of the Lord, as Psalm.
18.13. and 46.6. and 77.18. and 104.7, etc. as if it had proceeded from the
mouth of the Lord; of whom the Scripture often speaks as of a man, by an (...).

This Verse has its connection with verse. 28. the 29th being brought in by the
By, and to be read as it were with a Parenthesis.

And shall show the lighting down of his arm,] Supple, Upon the Assyrians; i.
e. And he shall smite the Assyrians in the sight of all the people.

The Prophet alludes here to the gesture of a man which strikes; for a man
when he strikes, first lifts up his arm, and then lets it down again.

With the indignation of his anger,] i. e. With exceeding great anger.

With the flame of devouring fire,] q. d. That is, With the flame of devouring
fire, or with lightning, etc.

The Particle And is put here for a Note of Exposition or Explication.

The Hebrews gather from this and the like places, that the Assyrians which the
Angel of the Lord destroyed, 2 King. 19.35. were destroyed by fire; and that at
that time there was dreadful thunder and lightning and tempest sent amongst
them; though many others interpret this and the like places metaphorically, as
though thereby were only signified an horrible and sudden destruction.

With scattering.] i. e. With storms which scatter abroad hay, straw, leaves of
trees, etc. Metonymia Effecti.

31.
For through the voice of the Lord] i. e. For by thunder. See verse. 30.

Shall the Assyrian] Supple, Which besieges Jerusalem.

Which smote with a rod.] i. e. Which punished you and distressed you (O ye
Inhabitants of Jerusalem and men of Judah) and not you only, but many other
Nations also. A Metaphor.

32.
Where the grounded staff shall pass,] i. e. Where the report of the grounded
staff shall pass.

He puts the staff for the report of the staff, per Metonymiam subjecti.

The grounded staff] By the staff is meant the strokestruck with the staff, per
Metonymiam Efficientis: And by the stroke is meant Metaphorically the calamity
which God inflicted upon the Assyrian.

He calls this a grounded staff, because it was struck deep into the Assyrian,
and there stuck, and removed not till it had consumed him; as things which are
well grounded lie deep in the Earth, and are not easy to be pulled up.

Which the Lord shall lay upon him,] i. e. With which the Lord shall smite him.

Upon him,] i. e. Upon the Assyrian.

It shall be with Tabrets and Harps,] i. e. It shall be entertained with
Tabrets and Harps, that is, with a great deal of joy and rejoicing: For every
one will be glad to hear of the destruction of the Assyrians which oppressed
them and all people beside.

And in battles of shaking will he fight with it,] i. e. For he will fight with
the host of the Assyrians, and slay them as he did the Midianites.

And for For.

The Prophet compares this slaughter of the Assyrians to the slaughter of the
Midianites, Cap. 9.4. and 10.26. because as the Midianites were all overcome
and slain, without the loss of blood on the Israelites part; so were the
Assyrians all overcome and slain, without any loss of blood on the Jews part:
Which makes me to think, that the Prophet does allude here also to that fight
or battle in which the Midianites were overcome and slain, Judge. 7.19. etc.

And that fight or battle in which the Midianites were overcome, might be
called a battle of shaking from some gesture which the Israelites used at that
time: for the Midianites were put to flight, not by the sword, or any kind of
weapons of the Israelites, but by the Israelites breaking of pitchers, holding
lamps in their left hand, blowing the Trumpets which they had in their right
hand, and crying, The sword of the Lord and of Gideon, Judge. 7.20, 21, etc. Now
though it be not written in the story, that when they cried, The sword of the
Lord and of Gideon, they shook their lamps and their Trumpets which they had in
their hands; yet it is more then probable, that they held them not still, but
shook them both, and waved them over their heads, or some other way, in
confidence of the victory; from which motion or shaking of the Trumpets and
Lamps, this battle might be called The battle of shaking.

This battle might be also called The battle of shaking, for the great fear and
trembling wherewith the Midianites were possessed; for though the Midianites
and their associates were like grasshoppers for multitude, and their Camels were
without number, Judge. 7.12. yet were they so terrified by three hundred men of
the Israelites, as that the whole host ran, and cried, and fled, Judge. 7.21.

With it.] i. e. With the Army or Host, or great multitude of the Assyrians.

He puts a Relative here without a formal Antecedent.

33.
Tophet] Tophet was a place near Jerusalem, in the valley of the son of Hinnom,
2 King. 23.10. where the Idolaters were wont to offer their children by fire to
Moloch; and it was called Tophet from Toph, which signifies a Drum, because
they were wont to beat Drums while their children were burning in the fire, to
drown the lamentable noise and cry which they made.

Here did a great body of the Assyrians encamp, when they besieged Jerusalem;
and here were many of them slain, and all or most buried, as it is probable.

Is ordained] i. e. Is appointed or prepared.

Of old,] i. e. Already, or some time since.

The Hebrew, rendered word for word, is, From yesterday.

Yea for the King it is prepared,] i. e. Yea, it is prepared for Sennacherib
King of Assyria, that is, for his Host or for his Army: for that which is
prepared for the household or Army of a King, is said to be prepared for the
King himself, by a Metonymy: Or, the King may be put Collative, for the Kings;
that is, for the Captains of Senacheribs Army, for they were most Kings; and by
the Kings and Captains may be meant all that were under their command too; by a
Syllepsis.

But by whom was Tophet prepared, and how, and for what end?

Answer. It was prepared by Hezekiah King of Judah, and it was prepared by
removing thence the Image of Moloch, and the Altar and other Instruments of
Idolatry which were there, by which more room was made, and by which it was
able to receive and contain more men then before it was; and it was prepared
for this end and purpose, that the Assyrians which besieged Jerusalem might
there encamp, and might there be slain (a great part of them) and might there,
all or most that were slain about Jerusalem (which were one hundred fourscore
and five thousand) have room enough to be buried in.

For the understanding of which, note that Hezekiah King of Judah, when he came
first to the Crown, removed the high places, brake down the Images, cut down
the Groves, and destroyed all the instruments of Idolatry, 2 Kings 18.4. Now a
noted place of Idolatry was Tophet, 2 Kings 23.10. this therefore Hezekiah
purged, and broke down the Idols, and the Altars, and all other the Instruments
of Idolatry which were set up and used there, and caused them to be carried
thence and destroyed, whereby there was more room, and more of Sennacheribs
men encamped there, then otherwise could have done, and so more were slain
there by the Angel, and more room there was to bury those which were slain by
the Angel in that place; by reason therefore of this the Prophet says, that
Tophet was prepared for the King, that is, for the Army and Captains of the
King, the King of Assyria, and this he says not because Hezekiah had this in
his mind, when he purged Tophet, but because it happened out as pat as if he
had purged it and made room in it, for that purpose: The like kind of phrase
to this, we read, Matthew. 26. v. 12. where our Savior says, that the woman
which poured ointment there upon his body, did it for his burial; not because
the woman had any such intent, but because she did it as opportunely for his
burial, as if she had intended it for that end.

He has made it deep and large,] i. e. Hezekiah has made therein very much
room, by removing the Idols and Altars, and other instruments of Idolatry out
of it.

Here is a Relative without an Antecedent.

He alludes here to the making of a pit or grave (wherein dead bodies are
buried) when he says, He has made it deep and large: And therefore does he
seem to make this allusion, because the Assyrians, which were slain by the
Angel, were all, or most, buried in Tophet, as is probable. Or else he alludeth
here to the making of a prison or dungeon under ground: And therefore may he
allude to that, because that place was as a prison to the Assyrians which
pitched their Camp there, out of which place they could no more escape, then a
prisoner out of a prison or dungeon; because God had determined that they
should not escape thence, till he had destroyed them.

The pile thereof is fire and much wood,] q. d. There is a pile in it, and that
pile is very great, consisting of fire and much wood.

While Tophet was employed to Idolatry, and Moloch was there worshipped, there
was a pile or piles of wood there continually provided, to burn their children
withal to Moloch: To this pile or piles of wood does the Prophet here allude,
and says, that the pile of Tophet, which is prepared for the Assyrians, to
burn them up, and consume them (as the children of Idolaters were wont to be
burned to Moloch and consumed) is very great: by which the Prophet signifies,
either that the Assyrians which besieged Jerusalem should be destroyed by fire
(which is according to the Tradition of the Hebrews,) or that they should be
destroyed as suddenly as if it were by fire (as others are of opinion:) So that
herein is a double allusion, first, to the pile of wood, which was wont to be
provided here for the sacrificing of children: secondly, to the manner of the
destruction of the Assyrians by the Angel, which was by fire, or as in as quick
a manner, as if it had been done by fire.

The breath of the Lord like a stream of brimstone does kindle it.] By this he
denotes the anger of the Lord against the Assyrians, and speaks of God as of
an angry man, (...), and alludes to the breath of an angry man, which is
exceeding hot, and proceeds from his nostrils and from his mouth like a stream.
See Notes, verse. 28.

ISAIAH, CHAP. XXXI.
WOE to them that go down to Egypt] The subject of this Chapter is the same with
the former. See therefore notes on cap. 30.1.

For help] Supple, Against the Assyrians under Sennacherib.

And stay on horses] ii. e. And put their confidence in horses, which they hope
to procure from Egypt.

The word stay, is metaphorical taken from a Staff, which is the stay of a man
which leans on it.

In Charets] i. e. In warlike Charets, which they likewise expect from Egypt.

Because they are many] q. d. Which stay or trust in the number or multitude of
Horses and Charets, because it is great.

But they look not unto the Holy One of Israel,] Supple, To ask strength of him.

Neither seek the Lord,] Supple, For his counsel and advise what he would have
them to do in this invasion of the Assyrians. See cap. 30.1.

2.
Yet he also is wise,] q. d. Yet they might have asked counsel of the Lord, and
sought to him for advice, for he is wise, as well as they whom they make their
Counselors.

And will bring evil,] q. d. And because they have despised his wisdom, in
passing him by and asking counsel at others mouths, he will bring evil upon
these wicked men, whereby they shall know that he is so wise, as to know when
he is neglected, and that he is strong also.

And will not call back his words,] Supple, By which he has threatened to bring
evil upon them.

He threatened a Woe against them in the former Chapter, and he threatens the
like in this.

But will arise] Supple, Like a Lion.

Against the house of evil doers,] i. e. Against the family of these men, which
went down into Egypt for Horses and Charets, and rely upon them, but asked not
counsel at God, nor relied on him.

And against the help of them that work iniquity.] i. e. And against the aid
and auxiliary forces of these men, which have committed this sin, i. e. Against
the Egyptians which come to help them.

3.
Now the Egyptians are men and not God,] The Prophet prevents an Objection
here; for sinful man might say, yea, but it is not so easy a thing as you
speak of, for the Holy One of Israel to overthrow the Egyptians which are these
men's help, and the force of horses which they will bring.

To which the Prophet answers, q. d. Yea, but it is an easy matter for the
Lord to overthrow the Egyptians and their horses, for the Egyptians are men,
not God, and their horses flesh, and not spirit.

Are men,] And therefore weak creatures, yea, they are but as the grass that
withers, and as the flower of the field which fades away, cap. 40.6, 7.

And not God,] For God is but One, but such a One, as the nations are but as
the drop of a Bucket, and as the small dust of the Balance, in comparison of
him, Cap. 40.15.

And their Horses flesh,] And therefore weak and no better then grass, cap.
40.6.

And not spirit,] As God is, who is therefore of great strength, yea
omnipotent, because he is an uncreated Spirit.

When the Lord shall stretch out his hand,] i. e. Therefore when the Lord
smites them.

He alludes to the stretching out, or lifting up of the arm or hand in
striking, and speaks of God (...).

Both he that helpeth] i. e. Both the Egyptians which help these perverse Jews
against the Assyrians.

And he that is holpen] i. e. And these perverse Jews which have help and aid
from the Egyptians.

Shall fall down,] i. e. Shall be beaten down.

They all] i. e. All the Egyptians which come to the help of these Jews, and
all these Jews which procured the help of the Egyptians.

Shall fail together.] Shall perisn together by the Assyrians.

4.
For thus has the Lord spoken,] i. e. Moreover, or But yet, or Yet
nevertheless (for one of these is the Particle For, put) thus has the Lord
spoken, etc.

Is called forth against him] Supple, To keep him from the sheep or greater
cattle which he would make his prey.

He will not be afraid of their voice,] Supple, Whereby they think to fright
him and scare him away.

The Pronoun He is redundant, here after the Hebrew manner.

Nor abase himself,] Nor carry himself basely by running away.

Come down] Supple, Out of heaven, or come down from between the Cherubins.

He speaks of God (...).

To fight] Supple, Against the Assyrian, whose multitude shall not make him
afraid.

For Mount Sion] i. e. For Jerusalem. See Cap. 1.8.

And the hill thereof] i. e. And the hill of Zion.

This is a repetition of the former words.

5.
As birds flying] Supple, Defend their young ones.

Flying] i. e. Extending and stretching out their wings over them as they do
when they fly. See cap. 6. v. 2. Thus hens defend their chickens; or, flying
that is, flying against the Kite or Hawk, or man, which would take their young
ones away; thus many birds which are otherwise timorous, do defend their young
ones.

Defending also he will deliver it,] i. e. He will defend it, and deliver it
from the Assyrians.

And passing over.] i. e. And passing over it, while he destroys all other
the Cities and Villages of Judah which did distrust him, and seek for help to
the Egyptians.

He alludeth to that place of Exodus, cap. 12.13. where the Lord (seeing the
blood upon the side-posts, and the upper door-posts of the houses of the
children of Israel) passed over the Children of Israel, but destroyed the
firstborn of the Egyptians.

6.
Turn ye to him,] Turn ye therefore unto him, O ye inhabitants of Jerusalem.

From whom the children of Israel] i. e. From whom the men of Judah.

I take Israel here for the two Tribes of Judah and Benjamin, as cap. 1.3.
which two Tribes go often under the name of the men of Judah, because Judah was
the chief of the two; and they two only of all the Tribes of Israel, were
faithful to the heirs of David King of Judah.

Have deeply revolted.] By forsaking him and seeking to Egypt, verse. 1.

7.
For in that day] i. e. And in that day, Supple, That the Assyrians shall
distress you, and besiege you.

For is put here for And.

Every man shall cast away his Idol,] i. e. Let every man cast away his Idols.

He puts a future tense of the Indicative mood for an Imperative. See Cap. 30.
verse. 22.

For a sin.] q. d. Whereby ye have sinned against God.

This Particle For is a sign, not of the intent, but of the event.

8.
Then shall the Assyrian] i. e. Then shall the Assyrians which besiege
Jerusalem.

He puts the Assyrian for the Assyrians, the singular for a plural number.

Not of a mighty man,] Supple, But of an Angel. See 2 King. 19.35.

Not of a mean man,] Supple, But of a mighty Angel.

When he says, neither of a mighty man, nor of a mean man, he excludes all
sorts of men.

But he] i. e. But Sennacherib himself King of Assyria.

Sennacherib was not come to Jerusalem; he was coming when the Angel destroyed
his Army, but was no further then Nob, cap. 10.32.

He puts a Relative here without an Antecedent, (...).

Sennacherib himself was not slain by the Angel, as appears 2 King. 19.36. but
escaped and fled into Assyria with fear and shame enough, which to a generous
nature was worse then death it self.

From the Sword,] Supple, Of the Angel.

And his young men] i. e. And his Court attendance, or they which wait upon him.

Or by his young men may be meant that part of his Army which did attend him,
which certainly was of the most able bodyed men (though the Commanders thereof
might be old) and such are young men, 2 Samuel 2.14.

Shall be discomfited.] i. e. Though they brag and boast, and are very lusty,
shall be discouraged and become so heartless, as that they shall tremble and be
afraid at the moving of every leaf.

9.
And he shall pass over to his strong hold for fear,] i. e. And Sennacherib
himself shall run and not stay (for fear) till he gets to Nineveh, that strong
City, and to the Castle of that City, 2 Kings 19.36.

And his Princes] i. e. And his Nobles and chief Commanders of that part of his
army which was with him.

Shall be afraid of the Ensign,] i. e. Shall be afraid if they do but see an
Ensign, thinking when they see it, that some company of their enemies are nigh
at hand, or do pursue them.

Whose fire is in Sion] i. e. Who has fire in Sion, wherewith to destroy the
adversaries thereof; or thus, whose Altar is in Sion, whereon the fire burns
continually to burn the Burnt-offerings which are offered to him: Or thus, who
dwells in Sion, for where a man keeps his fire, there is his habitation.

If God have fire in Sion, he will use it against the enemies of Sion; if he be
honored by sacrifice in Sion, he will preserve Sion for his honors sake: If he
dwells in Sion, he will not suffer the Assyrians to cast him out of his house,
but will defend his dwelling place.

In Sion] i. e. In Jerusalem.

A Synecdoche of the part for the whole.

And his furnace at Jerusalem.] By his furnace may be understood his dwelling
place, by a Metaphor, from such tradesmen which use a furnace in their Trade,
which furnace for their more convenience they have at their dwelling houses;
yea whatsoever is meant by fire before, may be meant by the furnace here,
because a furnace is of no use without fire; and so these may be a repetition
of the former words.

ISAIAH, CHAP. XXXII.
BEhold a King shall reign in righteousness,] By this King he meant Hezekiah
King of Judah, whose praises he here declares; but in a more sublime sense is
meant Christ Jesus, who was King of righteousness, and of whom Hezekiah was a
Type.

Note, that this cohereth with the former Chapter, and contains a reason why
the Lord would destroy the Assyrians, namely for Hezekiahs sake. See the same
reason of the same thing, cap. 9.6. and cap. 10.27. and cap. 11.1.

Note, that as the Lord did destroy the Assyrians which were the enemies of
Jerusalem, and delivered the Jews for Hezekiahs sake; So does the Lord destroy
the spiritual enemies of his Church, redeem his faithful people for Christ's
sake, yea and through Christ.

In righteousness,] i. e. With righteousness, administering Justice equally to
every man.

And Princes] By Princes he means such as this King, to wit, Hezekiah should
make Princes, that is, Judges and Magistrates in the Land.

In judgment.] i. e. With Justice.

2.
And a man, etc.] He repeateth here what he said before; and whereas he said a
King before, he says a man here, but means the same man, viz. Hezekiah.

As an hiding place from the wind,] i. e. Shall be as a place in which a man
may hide himself, or keep himself from the blustering wind.

What is meant by this, we shall show in the latter end of the Verse.

A covert from the tempest,] i. e. A covert in which a man may hide or save
himself from the tempest.

As rivers of water in a dry place,] Rivers of water must needs be a great
comfort to Travelers which travel in dry places, where they may have the
waters of those Rivers to quench their thirst withal.

As a shadow of a great rock in a weary Land,] A shadow, or shady place, is a
great refreshing to those which travel in the Summer time in a hot scorching
wilderness, when they are even scorched with the heat of the Sun.

He mentions the shadow of a rock rather then of a tree, because he speaks of
a wilderness, where there are more rocks then trees.

In a weary Land,] i. e. In an hot scorching wilderness, which tireth and
wearyeth those which travel in it: Metonymia Effecti.

By all these Metaphorical expressions the Prophet means, that Hezekiah
should right those that suffer wrong, and be a great comfort to those that are
afflicted in their misery.

3.
The eyes of them that see] By them that see he means Judges and Magistrates,
whom he called Princes, verse. 1. whose duty is to see and look (though not upon
persons, yet) into the Causes which are brought before them, and that thoroughly
too, before they give sentence.

Shall not be dim,] Their eyes shall not be dim, because they shall look
acutely into the Causes which are brought before them; they shall not be
blinded, either with ignorance or affection, or gifts, which blind the eyes of
the wise, Deuteronomy. 16.19.

He speaks not here of the eyes of the body, but of the mind, that is, the
understanding.

Them that hear] i. e. Them whose duty it is to hear.

By these he means the Judges and Magistrates, as before, whose duty is to
hear (in a Case brought before them) both parties, what they can say, and the
proofs which are brought in every cause.

Shall harken.] i. e. Shall harken diligently and attentively to the proofs and
allegations which are brought on either side in every cause which depends
before them.

4.
The heart also of the rash] i. e. Those Judges and Magistrates which have been
rash and heady in giving sentence in a Cause which has been brought before
them, before they well understood the truth of the Cause.

Shall understand knowledge,] i. e. Shall have perfect knowledge of the Cause,
and understand it thoroughly before they give sentence in it.

Knowledge is put here for the object of knowledge; that is, for that which
ought to be known in a Cause, before the Judge gives sentence.

And the tongue of the stammerers] By stammerers are here meant Judges and
Magistrates, which are soon angry, and easily carried away with Passion, which
blinds the mind, and is a most unfit thing in a Judge or Magistrate.

Note, that anger makes many men to stammer in their speech; so that while they
are in this passion, they cannot speak plain, nor bring out their words
orderly. Wherefore the Prophet calls angry Judges, and Magistrates,
stammerers, per Metonymiam Effecti vel Adjuncti.

Shall be ready to speak plainly,] i. e. Shall speak plainly and readily.

The meaning is, That they shall be temperate men, and men free from passion.

As angry men stammer in their passion; so do the same men, when they are void
of anger, speak plain; hence he puts here, speaking plainly, for vacancy of
anger and passion.

Note, that when the Prophet says, the heart of the rash shall understand
knowledge, and the tongue of the stammerer shall be ready to speak plainly; we
need not understand the rash, and him that understands knowledge, of the same
individual men; nor the stammerers, and those which speak plainly, of the same
individual persons: But it is enough, to make the sense of this place good, if
men of knowledge and of good temper be put in the place of rash men; and men
which speak plainly, in the place of stammerers: For it is usual to speak of
men which succeed one another in the same place or office, as if they were the
same individual men.

5.
The vile person shall be no more called liberal,] i. e. A vile person shall be
no more advanced to the place of a Judge or Magistrate; neither shall he that
is already in that place (if he be vile) continue in that place.

Note, that the word liberal here, is a term of honor, which was wont to be
given to Princes, Judges, and Magistrates, like that of Benefactor, Luke 22.25.
Therefore not to be called liberal, is as much as not to be Prince, Judge, or
Magistrate.

Nor the churl,] i. e. Nor the covetous man.

Be said to be bountiful,] i. e. Shall be called bountiful.

Note, that the word bountiful was wont to be a term of honor, given to
Princes, Judges, and Magistrates, as the terms Liberal and Benefactor: This
therefore is a repetition of the former sentence.

6.
For the vile person will speak villainy,] q. d. For (though a Judge and a
Magistrate should speak nothing but what becomes honest, grave, and wise men,
neither upon the bench, nor elsewhere; yet) a vile person will speak villainy
both upon the Bench, and elsewhere: For out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaks, Matt. 12.34. And he will give villainous judgment against the
upright.

And his heart will work iniquity] i. e. And he will do indeed that which is
unjust.

He says, his heart, for he, by a Synecdoche.

To practice hypocrisy,] i. e. Though he does study to practice hypocrisy,
and makes all villainy any iniquity under a vizard of truth and righteousness.

Here is an (...) of those or the like words, Though he does study.

Hypocrisy is a feigned righteousness, and he practices hypocrisy, that
laboreth to seem just when he is indeed unjust.

And to utter error against the Lord,] Supple, With a show and color of truth.

To utter error signifies here, to give false judgment, or to pronounce a
false sentence; for whatsoever is false is erroneous: And to utter error, that
is, to give false judgment, or to pronounce a false sentence, is said to be
against the Lord, because the Lord has said, Thou shall do no unrighteousness
in judgment, but in righteousness shall thou judge thy neighbor, Lev. 19.15 As
also, because Judges judge not for man, but for the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 19.6.

To make empty the Soul of the hungry,] i. e. That he may take away from him,
who is poor and hungry, that little which he has left to buy him bread;
Supple, under a color of justice, which respects not the person of the poor,
Exodus 23.3.

The Soul of the hungry,] i. e. The hungry.

A Synecdoche of a part for the whole man.

Because Covetousness and Injustice is a most odious thing in a Judge and
Magistrate; there is no Judge or Magistrate so covetous and unjust, but desires
to hide his covetousness and injustice under a vizard of liberality and
righteousness.

These words, To practice hypocrisy, and to utter error against the Lord, to
make empty the Soul of the hungry, may make this place more easy, if we read
them as with a Parenthesis.

And he will cause the drink of the thirsty to fail.] i. e. And he will, by his
iniquity in judgment, extort from the poor all that he has, so that he will
not leave him a penny to buy him a drop of drink when he is thirsty.

This sentence is to be coupled with that, viz. His heart will work iniquity.

7.
The instruments also of the Churl are evil,] i. e. The tricks and devices also
which covetous Judges use, are naught.

He devises wicked devices,] i. e. He inventeth and devises many wicked
tricks and devices, to corrupt and pervert the true meaning of the Law, and to
weaken the proofs of the poor man's witnesses, and to delude the arguments which
are brought in the poor man's Cause.

To destroy the poor with lying words,] i. e. That he may destroy the poor with
these his wicked devices, which are altogether lies.

The sense is, q. d. He devises wicked devices, even lying words, to destroy
the poor thereby, even when he speaks right.

He says, to destroy the poor, for, to destroy the right of the poor: Or he
calls the oppression of the poor, the destruction of the poor, by an Hyperbole;
as he calls it blood or murder, cap. 1.15.

Even when the needy speaks right.] i. e. Even when he, and his witnesses,
and his advocate, speaks right; for all these are meant by Him, because they
maintain his Cause.

The needy.] i. e. He, to wit, the poor.

8.
But the liberal,] i. e. But he which is liberal in his actions and nature, as
well as in his appellation and title.

Devises liberal things] i. e. Devises such things as are beseeming him,
which is liberal in his actions and nature, as well as in his appellation and
title, and so by consequence those things which are beseeming a truly upright
and honest Judge.

And by liberal things] i. e. And because he devises liberal things.

He shall stand] i. e. He shall keep his place, and office, and shall not be
put out of it.

What is here spoken from the first verse of this Chapter hitherto, was
fulfilled when Hezekiah came to the Crown, who was himself a pious and a just
King, and reformed not only the house of God and Religion, but the Kingdom
also, and the Courts of Justice, and the Magistracy; putting out those which
were corrupt, and putting honest and just men in their room.

9.
Rise up ye women that are at ease] Here the Prophet begins a new Prophecy.

Rise up] He bids them rise up, either to denote thereby their lasie posture,
(for delicate women were wont to sit, yea sometimes to ly along on their
Couches and beds of ease.) Or, because he would have them the more attent to
what he speaks, for we are more attent to what is spoken when we stand up, then
we are when we sit or lie along; or he bids them rise up, because he would have
them reverence the Word of God which he had to tell them; for they were wont to
rise up in reverence to the Word of God, when a Message was brought them from
the Lord. See Judge. 3.20.

That art at ease,] i. e. That take your ease and pleasure.

Ye careless daughters,] i. e. Ye women which take care for nothing.

This word Daughters, though it be a Relative term, yet the Hebrews do often
use it for an Absolute, viz. women.

This Prophecy is peculiarly against the women of Judah, by reason of their
pride, and ease, and fullness of bread.

Many days and years] i. e. Before many days and years.

I understand the Preposition To Before, here; for the Hebrews leave the
Prepositions sometime to be understood, as appears cap. 33.14. where these
Prepositions Amongst and With, are left to be understood in the Original,
though they be expressed in the translation.

This Prophecy was fulfilled when Sennacherib entered with his Army and
depopulated Judea.

For the Vintage shall cease,] i. e. For ye shall have no Grape-gathering, for
the Assyrians shall spoil your Vine-yards, and your Vintage.

The gathering.] Supple, Of your Grapes and other fruit.

11.
Tremble,] viz. Because of the miseries which shall come upon you.

Be troubled,] To wit, In mind through grief.

Strip you,] To wit, Of your brave and delicate Apparel.

Gird sackcloth upon your loins.] q. d. Put on sach-cloth and gird it about
your loins.

Sackcloth was the garment for mourners.

12.
They shall lament, etc.] Observe the Enallage of the person here, how he
passes from the second to the third; for by They, he means the careless women
which he spoke to in the former verses.

For the Teats,] Take the Teats here metaphorically, for the pleasant Fields
and fruitful Vines, as the Prophet seems to interpret them in the next words;
for as the Infant is nourished by the two Teats of the Mother, so was this
people by the pleasant Fields and fruitful Vines, one affording meat and the
other drink.

For the Teats] i. e. For want of the Teats.

For the pleasant Fields,] i. e. For want and miss of the pleasant Fields.

For the fruitful Vine,] i. e. For the want and miss of the fruitful Vines.

13.
Upon the Land of my people] i. e. Upon the Land of Judah where the Jews (which
are my people) dwell.

He speaks in the person of God, or if he speaks in his own person, he calls
the Jews his people, because they were his Brethren.

Shall come up thorns and briars] See cap. 7.24.

Upon all the houses] i. e. Upon all the ground where the houses stand; or upon
all the houses which shall be ruined, that is, Upon the ruins of all the
houses.

The houses of joy] i. e. The joyous houses.

He calls them joyous houses, or houses of joy, because the Inhabitants
thereof, were wont to make merry in them.

In the joyous City] i. e. In the Cities of Judah, which are wont to be full of
joy and mirth.

He says City for Cities, a Singular for a Plural number.

14.
Because the Palaces shall be forsaken,] q. d. I say that upon all the houses
of joy in the joyous City, thorns and briars shall come up, because the
Palaces and all the Houses in the Cities shall be forsaken.

This is Causa sine qua non (as the Logicians speak) of that which he said in
the former verse, to wit, of that that upon all the houses of the joyous
Cities, should come up briars and thorns.

By Palaces may be meant here not only the Houses of Kings, but also the
Houses of Nobles, and meaner men, which he may call Palaces, because they were
like the Palaces of Princes for stateliness.

Shall be forsaken,] viz. Of their Inhabitants, and that either because the
Inhabitants shall run into Foreign Lands, for fear of the enemy at home, or
shall be slain by the sword of the enemy, or shall be carried away captives
into the enemies Land.

The multitude of the City] i. e. The Cities which are inhabited with a
multitude of men.

He uses an Hypallage here, and says, the multitude of the City or Cities,
for the City or Cities of the multitude, that is, The City or Cities which are
inhabited with a multitude or very great number of people.

He also puts City for Cities, by an Enallage as before, v. 13.

Shall be left,] i. e. Shall be forsaken of that multitude which does inhabit
it.

For Forts and Towers shall be for Deus] i. e. The Forts and Towers shall be
beaten down, and the ruins thereof shall be for Dens for wild Beasts.

When Forts and Towers, or any other Buildings are beaten down, there happens
often times to be hollow places, caused by cross-falling of the timber; these
places (he says) shall be for Dens of wild beasts.

For ever,] i. e. For a time. An Hyperbole usual with the Hebrews; yet it may
be, that many of those places which the Assyrians ruinated, were never built up
again.

A joy of wild Asses,] i. e. Places in which the wild Asses will rejoice.
Metonymia Adjuncti.

A Pasture of Flocks.] i. e. Places in which Flocks of Sheep and other Cattle
may feed without fear.

They might feed there, because Grass should grow therein; and they might feed
without fear, because there should be no man left to make them afraid.

15.
Until the spirit be powered upon us,] i. e. Until the love and goodness of
God be poured upon us in its effects; that is, Until God shows his love and
his goodness toward us.

Among many significations of this word spirit, it is often taken of the
Hebrews for any quality or passion of the mind, and here it is taken for
goodness or love.

He likeneth here the blessings of God, and the works and effects of his mercy
and goodness, to plenty of waters, because of the abundance thereof, when he
says, the spirit shall be poured forth.

Upon us] viz. Jews.

From on high,] i. e. From Heaven.

And the Wilderness be a fruitful Field,] i. e. And our enemies the Assyrians
which are exalted like a Wilderness, be brought low like a fruitful Field or
Valley, which lies low. See notes cap. 29.17.

The fruitful Field be counted for a Forrest] i. e. And the Jews which at this
time shall be in a low condition, and oppressed by their enemies the Assyrians,
(and therefore like a fruitful Field which lies low) be delivered from their
low condition, and exalted, as a Forest, yea as the Forest of Lebanon, which
was on high on an high hill. See cap. 29.17.

Be counted for a Forrest] i. e. Become as a Forest, even the Forest of
Lebanon. See cap. 29.17.

Note, that Wildernesses and Forests are for the most part the barrenest
places of the earth, and therefore are situate upon Hills and Mountains, and
the highest parts of the earth which are least fruitful, as being furthest from
springs and streams to water them; however, sure we are, that the Wildernesses
and Forests about Judea, and which were best known to the Jews, were seated on
Hills, as the Forest of Lebanon, to which the Prophet seems chiefly to
allude.

16.
Then judgment shall dwell in the Wilderness,] i. e. Then will God inflict his
judgments or punishments upon our enemies the Assyrians, and make them as it
were to dwell among them.

Judgment is put here for judgment which produces punishment.

By the Wilderness he means the Forest or Hill of Lebanon, and by that the
enemies of the Jews the Assyrians, who were lifted up with pride, and who were
at this time high in power and wealth, etc. See v. 15. and cap. 29.17.

He says, judgment shall dwell in the Wilderness, to show that it shall not be
a light judgment which passes away, but such as shall continue upon them, till
it has consumed them.

The effects of this judgment were inflicted by the Angel of God, 2 Kings 19.35.

And righteousness remain in the fruitful Field,] i. e. And the goodness and
mercy of God shall show it self to the Jews (which were at this time like a
fruitful field or valley (which lies low) in respect of their low condition)
by the effects thereof.

By righteousness is meant goodness and mercy, to wit, the goodness and mercy
of God; for righteousness is taken sometimes for goodness and mercy, as Psalm.
112. v. 3, 9. and 2 Cor. 9.9, 10. In which sense also Joseph as called a just
or righteous man, Mat. 1.19.

By the fruitful field is meant metaphorically the Jews in their low
condition, as v. 15.

The righteousness here spoken of, is said to remain in the fruitful field,
because of the continuance of it to the Jews; as judgment was said to dwell in
the wilderness, because of the continuance thereof among their enemies the
Assyrians.

Note that he speaks of judgment and righteousness here, as of two persons, by
a Metaphor or Prosopopoeia.

17.
And the work of righteousness shall be peace,] i. e. And the effect or fruit of
the aforesaid righteousness which shall remain in the fruitful field, shall be
peace and prosperity.

And the effect of righteousness, etc,] i. e. This is a repetition of the
former words.

Assurance] Viz. Of peace and prosperity.

For ever.] i. e. For a long time.

18.
My people] See v. 13.

In sure dwellings.] i. e. In dwellings which shall be safe.

19.
When it shall hail coming down on the Forest,] i. e. When on the contrary,
the wrath of God shall come down and fall upon their enemies the Assyrians,
like storms of hail.

Hail does often signify by a Metaphor, the wrath and anger of God, and the
effects thereof, as cap. 28.2. and elsewhere.

By the Forest, are meant metaphorically the Assyrians, which were the enemies
of the Jews, as v. 13. and cap. 27.10. etc.

Coming down,] i. e. The hail coming down with much violence.

And the City shall be low in a low place.] That is, And Babylon shall be
brought down to a low condition.

By the City is meant Babylon, which was the greatest, or one of the greatest
Cities which were under the Assyrians; and this City was brought low soon after
the defeat of Sennacheribs Army before Jerusalem, for soon after that, it was
taken by the Medes. See cap. 13:

Yet by Babylon, we may understand here, not the material City of Babylon, but
the Assyrians who were the Lords of Babylon, and who at this time warred
against Judah, and perished before Jerusalem; as by Kir, a chief City of the
Medes, was meant the Medes which served under Salmaneser, against Samaria, cap.
22.6.

20.
Blessed are ye that sow beside all waters, that send forth thither the feet of
the Ox and the Ass.] q. d. O ye men of Judah, ye shall also at that time be
happy, for ye shall sow your seeds in grounds which shall be watered, and
therefore very fruitful, and the Corn which you sow shall yield such increase,
and be so rank, as that ye shall be fain to send in your cattle to eat it down.

All waters,] i. e. Abundance of waters, or many waters.

All for Many.

Thither] Supple, Where ye have sowed your seed.

The feet of the Ox and Ass.] i. e. The Ox and the Ass there to feed and eat
down your over-rank Corn.

He puts the feet of the Ox and Ass, by a Synechdoche, for the Ox and the
Ass themselves.

ISAIAH, CHAP. XXXIII.
WOE to thee that spoylest] This place is also to be understood of Sennacherib,
to whom the Prophet makes this Apostrophe.

That spoylest,] Supple, The Land of Judah, and all other Lands.

And thou wast not spoiled,] i. e. When thou wast not spoiled by them whom thou
have spoiled, whereby thou should be provoked to spoil them again.

And dealest treacherously,] Supple, With the Jews and other people. See Cap.
21. verse. 2.

And they have not dealt treacherously with thee,] i. e. When they with whom
thou have dealt treacherously, have not dealt treacherously with thee, whereby
they should provoke thee to deal treacherously with them.

When thou shall cease to spoil,] i. e. When thou shall have spoiled so much,
and so long time, as God will suffer thee to spoil others, and the time
appointed for that is come to an end, etc. that is, (as the Prophet speaks,
Cap. 10.12.) when the Lord has performed his whole work, which he will perform
by thee, upon Mount Sion, and on Jerusalem, etc.

Thou shall be spoiled,] Understand this of Sennacherib, in respect of his Army
which was destroyed by the Angel, 2 King. 19.35. and the spoils thereof taken
by the men of Jerusalem.

When thou shall make an end to deal treacherously,] i. e. When thou shall have
dealt treacherously with all thy neighboring people, so long as God has
determined to suffer thee to deal treacherously with them, and thou shall then
make an end of thy treachery.

They shall deal treacherously with thee.] i. e. Thou shall be dealt
treacherously with.

Understand this of Sennacherib, in respect of his own person, whom his two
sons treacherously slew, as he was worshipping in the house of Nisroch his god,
2 King. 19.37.

2.
O Lord be gracious unto us,] The Prophet uses an Apostrophe here to God, and
considering the great distress which Sennacherib would bring upon Judah and
Jerusalem, prays here to God, for his favor and help at that time.

We have waited for thee,] i. e. We have expected and waited for thy help.

He puts God himself metonymically for Gods help.

Be thou their arm,] i. e. Be thou our defense, to keep us and defend us.

Note here the Enallage of the person, where he puts the third person for the
first.

Note here also, that he speaks of God as of a man, by an (...): And that,
because men defend themselves with their arm, the arm is put here metonymically
for defense.

Every morning,] i. e. Every day, when as they shall call upon thee.

The morning, which is but part, is put here for the whole day, by a Synecdoche.

Our salvation.] i. e. Our Savior.

Metonymia Effecti.

3.
At the noise of the tumult the people fled,] i. e. At the noise of the tumult
the people shall flee.

The Prophet puts here a preterperfect for a future tense.

By the tumult he means that tumult which the Angel of the Lord raised in the
Camp of the Assyrians, when he came to destroy them.

By the people he means those people which served in Sennacheribs Army; for
in that Army there were many of many people.

At the lifting up of thy self] i. e. When thou shall arise, as it were a ^ion
from his Den, or a man from his sleep, to take vengeance upon the Assyrians.

The Nations were scattered.] i. e. The Nations which shall be in Sennacheribs
Army, shall be scattered abroad.

He puts a preterperfect tense for a future, as before.

The Prophet shows here what good s^c^ess his prayers should have, which he
made in the second Verse.

4.
And your spoils shall be gathered like the gathering of the Caterpiller,] i.
e. And your spoil, O ye Assyrian, shall be gathered like as the Caterpillar
gathers her food: for as the Caterpillar gathers her food from the herbs,
without any fear; so shall the Jews gather your spoils (when the Angel of the
Lord has smitten you) and not be afraid.

Note, that though the Caterpillar be not so provident a creature as the Ant,
and therefore cannot be said to gather her food as the Ant does, Prove. 6.8. who
gathers her food together, and lays it up in store; yet may she be said to
gather her food as the creatures in general do, Psalm. 104.28. who are said
there, to gather their food which God gives them, because they pick it up and
eat it, every one after his manner.

He uses an Apostrophe to the Assyrians.

As the running to and fro of Locusts shall he run upon them,] i. e. They shall
run upon them, as the Locusts run to and fro: For as the Locusts run to and fro
upon the grass, and the branches of the trees, upon which they feed, without
any fear: so shall the Jews run to and fro upon your spoils, and shall take
them, and shall not be afraid.

This was fulfilled when the Angel had slain those Assyrians which besieged
Jerusalem.

The running to and fro of the Locust is put here, per Metonymiam Adjuncti, for
the Locusts which run to and fro.

Shall he] i. e. Shall Israel, i. e. the Jews.

Run upon them,] i. e. Upon your spoils.

Note here the Enallage of the number, how he passes from a singular to a
plural number.

5.
The Lord is exalted,] i. e. The Lord will be exalted; i. e The Lord will do
great things, for which he will be worthy to be exalted. See Notes, Cap. 30.18.
and 12.4.

He uses a preterperfect for a future tense.

For he dwells on high] i e. For he dwells in Heaven; and because he
dwells in Heaven, he will do great things, and things worthy of him whose
dwelling is so high.

He has filled Sion with judgment and righteousness,] i. e. He will fill
Jerusalem with the noise of his judgment and righteousness: Of his judgment,
which he will pour out upon the Assyrians which besiege Jerusalem; Of his
righteousness, that is, of his mercy and goodness, which he will show to his
people which are besieged.

See Cap. 3^.16. for the meaning of those words, judgment and righteousness.

6.
And wisdom and knowledge, etc.] For wisdom and knowledge. And for For.

What is meant by wisdom, and what by knowledge, see Cap. 11.2.

And wisdom and knowledge shall be the stability of thy times,] q. d. For this
will the Lord do, because of thy wisdom and knowledge, O Hezekiah, which wisdom
and knowledge of thine shall establish thy Throne, and thy affairs, all thy
days.

He uses an Apostrophe here to Hezekiah, and intimates, that this great
Salvation, whereby God would save Jerusalem from the Assyrians which besieged
it, should be for Hezekiahs sake, and that by reason of his wisdom and
knowl^dge.

See the same reason of the same thing, Cap. 11.1. and 10.27. and 32.1.

The stability of thy times,] He puts stability here, per Metonymiam Eff^cti,
for the the cause of stability, or that which will establish and make sure: And
he puts times here for affairs happening in those times, per Metonymiam
Continentis.

And strength of salvation,] i. e. And the Cause of exceeding strong Salvation
to thee and thy people.

He says, strength of salvation, for exceeding strong salvation; and by it
means the cause of such salvation, per Metonymiam Effecti.

Hezekiahs wisdom and knowledge are said to be the stability of his times, and
the strength of his salvation, because God did in mercy establish the throne of
Hezekiah, and prosper his affairs, and save him and his people, because of his
wisdom and knowledge. See Cap. 9.7.

The fear of the Lord is his treasure,] i. e. The fear of the Lord which is in
Hezekiah, shall make Hezekiah rich, and shall bring him treasures.

He puts treasure here for the cause of treasure, or for that which brings
treasure, per Metonymiam Effecti.

Note here the Enallage of the person, how he goes from the second to the
third; for this also is spoken of Hezekiah.

Such is the goodness of God, as that it pleases him to give gifts to men (as
wisdom, and knowledge, and fear of the Lord to Hezekiah) and then to reward
those men for those gifts.

7.
Behold their valiant ones shall cry without,] i. e. Behold the Messengers, or
Ambassadors, which the Citizens of Jerusalem shall send out of the City, to
treat with the Assyrians for peace, shall not obtain peace at the hands of the
Assyrians; and therefore as they return home, while they are yet without the
City, they shall cry for grief and sorrow of heart.

Their valiant ones] i. e. The valiant ones of the men of Jerusalem, which
shall be sent to treat with the Assyrians.

Those were in particular, Eliakim the son of Helkiah, which was over the Kings
house, and Sh^bna the Scribe, and Asaph the Recorder, 2 King. 18.18. whom he
calls valiant ones, because they were no doubt of great fortitude and valor of
mind: And this shows the greatness of the misery, that it should make even
those which are valiant thus to cry.

Shall cry] Supple, For grief and sorrow. See 2 King. 18.37.

Without,] i. e. Without the City, as they return from the Treaty.

The Ambassadors of peace] i. e. The Ambassadors which Hezekiah and the men of
Jerusalem shall send to treat of peace with the Assyrians.

Shall weep bitterly.] Supple, For grief and sorrow, that they cannot conclude
peace.

This is a repetition of the former sentence.

The Prophet does here set out the misery of the people of Jerusalem, which
they should suffer under Sennacherib, that he might the more extol the goodness
and power of God in their delivery.

8.
The highways lie waste,] i. e. The highways shall be desolate, and without
any man traveling therein.

The wayfaring man cease,] i. e. The wayfaring man shall leave off traveling
on the way.

He has broken the Covenant,] i. e. Sennacherib shall covenant with Hezekiah
and the men of Jerusalem, to return with his Army for three hundred Talents of
silver, and thirty Talents of gold; and shall break that covenant when he has
received his money. See 2 King. 18.14, 15, etc.

Here is a Relative put without an Antecedent.

He has despised the Cities,] i. e. Sennacherib shall despise the Cities of
Judah, destroying them, and glorying that he has destroyed them.

9.
The Earth mourns,] i. e. The Land of Judah shall be wasted and destroyed by
the Assyrians, and therefore mourn.

The Earth is put here, by a Synecdoche, for the Land of Judah, of which he
speaks Metaphorically, as of a woman.

And languisheth,] i. e. And shall languish and pine away, because of her
desolation.

A Metaphor continued.

Lebanon is ashamed and hewn down,] Lebanon was an high Forest, situate on the
North of the holy Land, abounding with tall Cedars and other trees, which
Sennacherib did cut down, to make warlike Ensigns thereof; these trees were the
glory of Lebanon: Wherefore, as when a woman loses her hair, which is her
glory and her covering, and is bare-headed, she is ashamed: so does he say,
that Lebanon shall be ashamed (by a Metaphor) when the tall trees and woods,
which were on it, shall be cut down, and Lebanon thereby left naked.

Note, that there is an (...) in these words, Lebanon is ashamed and hewn down,
for Lebanon is hewn down and ashamed: for the cause of Lebanons shame here,
was, that her trees were cut down.

Sharon is like a wilderness,] Sharon was a most fertile ground for pasturage
and feeding of cattle; but where it lay, it is not certainly known: it is
conjectured to have lien next to Bashan, from 1 Chronicles. 5.16. This may be said
to have been like a wilderness, when it was withered and dried up, as it might
be at this time, by the feeding and trampling of Sennacheribs Horses and
Soldiers.

And Bashan and Carmel shake off their fruits,] What Bashan was, and where
situate, see cap. 2.13.

Carmel was an hill situate in the Tribe of Judah, in which Nabal had great
possessions, 1 Samuel 15.12. and 25.2. There was also another hill of the same
name, which bordered upon three Tribes, the Tribe of Aser, the Tribe of
Zabulon, and half the Tribe of Manasses, in which hill Elias dwelt: Of which
Josh. 19. verse. 26. and 1 King. 18. verse. 19, 20, 42. Both these hills were
very fertile and fruitful.

When he says, that Bashan and Carmel shake off their fruits, it is to be
understood of the Vines, and Fig Trees, and Olivetrees, and such other fruit
trees as grew in Bashan and Carmel, of which he seems to speak here, as of men,
by a Prosopopoea, and alludes to men which are hard-beset by Robbers; for as
they will, so soon as they can, deliver their money to the Robbers, for fear of
further danger of their lives; so these trees shook off their fruits to the
Assyrians, for fear of further danger which the Assyrians might do them.

To this sense does Ovids Nut-tree speak: Possem utinam fructus excutere ipsa
meos.

Or he may allude here to the shaking and trembling of a man in a great fear;
attributing fear (by a Metaphor) to insensible things, as he did shame just
before: q. d. And the Fruit Trees in Bashan and Carmel shall shake and tremble
for fear, and so greatly shall they shake and tremble, as that they shall
thereby shake off their fruits for fear.

Saepe meas frondes vento tremuisse putastis,
Sed metus in nobis causa tremoris erat:
Says the same Nut-tree.

The places which the Prophet here speaks of, were few or none in the Tribe of
Judah: How comes he therefore here to mention them?

Answ. Though these places were not in the Tribe of Judah, yet they were in the
way in which Sennacherib marched, and therefore the Prophet might mention them,
to signify what spoil the Assyrians were like to make about Jerusalem, when as
they made such spoil in the way toward it. Or we may say, that the Prophet,
though he names these places, yet he takes their names rather as appellatives
then proper names, and by Lebanon signifies any woods and groves, by Sharon
any meadows and pastures; by Bashan and Carmel, any fruitful Orchards, and
Vineyards, and Oliveyards, etc. whereof there were many in Judea.

10.
Now will I rise, says the Lord,] Now seeing the affairs of my people are in
so deplorable a condition, I will lie down or sit still no longer, but will
rise (says the Lord) against their Enemies, and deliver them.

He speaks here of future things, as though they were even now present, to
signify the certainty of them.

Now will I be exalted,] Now will I do that, for which I will be exalted; that
is, Now I will take vengeance upon the Assyrians, and I will deliver my people.
See Verse. 5.

11.
Ye shall conceive chaff, ye shall bring forth stubble,] i. e. That which ye
conceive shall prove chaff, and that which ye bring forth shall be but stubble.

This speech is directed to the Assyrians by an Apostrophe: And for the speech
it self, it is Proverbial, consisting of two Proverbs, signifying both the same
thing, to wit, that though they hoped to bring great matters to pass against
Jerusalem, yet they should not be able to do it, their hope should be in vain:
for they hoped to take Jerusalem by force of Arms, but they should not prevail
against it, or take it.

The ground of the Proverbs seem to be taken from a woman, who having companyed
with her husband, thinks she has conceived by him, and is in hope that she
shall bring forth a man-child into the world; but she is deceived, for her
conception was a false conception, and she brings forth naught.

Chaff and stubble are as naught, and so to be here taken.

Your breath as fire shall devour you,] q. d. Your wrath and indignation
against my people, shall be your ruin and destruction.

By their breath he means their anger, per Metonymiam Effecti, because anger
makes a man's breath hot. See cap. 30.33. And their breath, that is, their
anger, is said to devour them as fire, because their anger toward the Jew^,
should provoke God to destroy them by his Angel, in revenge of his people, whom
they oppressed.

12.
And the people] q. d. And the people which ye have gathered together to serve
you in your siege against Jerusalem.

Shall be as the burning lime,] i. e. Shall be as chalk which men burn in a
Kilne, to make lime of.

Therefore shall they be like to such chalk, because they shall be burned in
the fire, as such chalk is burned.

Of lime] That is, Of chalk, of which they make lime.

The burnings of lime are put here, per Metonymiam Adjuncti, for lime or chalk
that is burned.

As thorns cut up, shall they be burnt in the fire.] We have often observed,
that this destruction of the Assyrians is described as done by fire, whether is
was accomplished by fire indeed (as the Hebrews think) or whether it was said
to be done by fire; because it was as sudden and as fearful, as if it had bin
done by fire.

13.
Hear ye that are a far off what I have done, etc.] This is an Epiphonema to
exhort and stir up all people to praise God for this his marvelous act of
destroying the Assyrians; where the Lord is brought in speaking of a thing to
come, as if it were already past.

14.
The sinners in Sion are afraid,] By these sinners he means those which would
not believe Isaiahs Prophecy, concerning the Lords delivery of Jerusalem from
the Assyrians, and the Assyrians destruction (of whom also we read cap. 29. v.
9, 10. And therefore were afraid of the Assyrians, and took secret counsel,
either to surrender all into the Assyrians hands, or otherwise to comply with
the Assyrians, (that so the Assyrians might spare them) and would not trust in
the Lord their God for safety.

As for the connection of these words with the former, it is, q. d. I have told
you that the Lord will preserve Jerusalem, and destroy the Assyrians, yet will
not the sinners in Sion believe it; but are afraid of the Assyrians, and say,
who amongst us shall dwell with the devouring fire, etc:

In Sion] i. e. In Jerusalem:

A Synecdoche of a part, for the whole.

Are afraid,] Viz. Of the Assyrians.

Fearfulness has surprised the Hypocrites,] By the Hypocrites he means those
sinners which he spoke of in the foregoing sentence, whom he calls Hypocrites,
because they did frequent the Temple, and served God with their mouths, but
would not believe his word which he spoke by Isaiah in their heart, nor trust
in him. See Cap. 29.13. Or, he calls them Hypocrites, because they dissembled by
their countenance and carriage, what they had in their mind and thoughts.

Who amongst us] Supple, Say they.

Who amongst us, etc.] q. d. Who even amongst us say they, which dwell in
Jerusalem, though a fenced City.

Who amongst us shall dwell with the devouring fir^] q. d. The Assyrians have
now possessed all the Land, and they which will dwell in the Land, must dwell
with them; but who even amongst us of Jerusalem, can dwell with them in the
Land in safety, so long as he is out of friendship with them; for they are as a
devouring fire, and everlasting burnings to all that are out of friendship with
them, and will not in time submit to them, say they.

Shall dwell] i. e. Shall dwell safely.

They liken the Assyrians to devouring fire, because as the devouring fire
consumes all combustible matter which is near it, so did the Assyrians destroy
all the neighboring people, and all people which they approached to with their
forces, which would not submit to them, and make their peace with them.

Who amongst us shall dwell with everlasting burnings?] This is every way a
repetiti- of the former sentence.

By burnings he means fire; Per Metonymiam Adjuncti: and by everlasting
burnings he means unquenchable fire, or fire that cannot be quenched until it
has consumed all.

Note, that the Hypocrites did not speak these words openly, but they said them
in their heart, where God took notice of them, and revealed them to his Prophet
Isaiah.

Note also, that they spoke them in their heart, out of the fear that they had
of the Assyrians, and out of a desire they had to make their peace with them.

15.
He that walks righteously,] The Prophet here answers the question which the
sinners in Sion make in the former Verse: As if he should say to those sinners;
Ye ask, saying, Who amongst us shall dwell with the devouring fire? Who amongst
us shall dwell with the e^erlasting burnings? As though it were so, that none
could dwell in the Land, no not in Jerusalem in safety, by reason of the
Assyrians, but such as had made their peace with them. But I will tell you who
shall dwell with the devouring fire; I will tell you who shall dwell with the
everlasting burnings: Even he that walks righteously, and speaks uprightly.

By these which walk righteously, and speak uprightly, the Prophet means such
as did believe his words, concerning the preservation of Jerusalem against the
Assyrians, and did trust in God; whom he here describes by their Adjuncts.

Note, that the Prophet describes these men which believed his Prophecy,
concerning the preservation of Jerusalem from the Assyrians, by signs and
attributes, contrary to those by which he described those which would not
believe this his Prophecy, and trust in God for delivery from the Assyrians,
Cap. 29.20, 21. For they which would not believe his Prophecies there, did not
only not believe what he said, but did persecute him, and seek to take away
his life, and took bribes some of them for that end, contrary to what they did,
which believed his sayings here: for they here hated all such wicked doings.

He that despises the gain of Oppressions,] i. e. He that despises gain
gotten, or to be gotten by Oppressions, and therefore will not for gain oppress
the Lords servants, as they did, Cap. 29.21.

That shakes his hands from holding of bribes,] i. e. He that will not take a
bribe to do any wrong, but hates it.

He alludeth here to the manner of men, who if they touched by chance any foul
or unclean thing, shake their hands, that they may cast it off, if perhaps any
part should stick thereunto: whereupon, to shake the hand of, or from such a
thing, comes to signify, by a Metaphor and Metonymy together, to hate that
thing.

That stops his ears from hearing of blood,] i. e. Which will by no means
hear of any counsel or persuasion which tends to the shedding of innocent blood.

Blood is put here for a counsel or persuasion to shed innocent blood, per
Metonymiam Objecti.

And shuts his eyes from seeing evil.] i. e. That shuts his eyes, that he
may not be delighted with the sight of evil; that is, which detesteth all
manner of injustice.

Seeing is put here for seeing with delight.

16.
He shall dwell on high,] i. e. He shall dwell in safety, notwithstanding the
devouring fire and everlasting burnings, and be as safe as he which dwells in
a Castle founded upon an high rock, which no force can approach to.

He shall dwell on high,] i. e. He shall dwell as it were on high, and so
safely; for high places are safe.

His place of defense shall be the munition of rocks,] i. e. The place and City
of defense, where he is, shall be against the Assyrians as strong as any place
which is fortified and environed with inaccessible and impregnable rocks.

His place of defence] i. e. The fenced City wherein he is.

By this place of defense, or fenced City, is meant Jerusalem, as will appear,
as by other circumstances of the Text, so by that, that the sinners which asked
the question, verse. 14. dwelt in Sion, and asked it concerning those which
dwelt in Sion; For who amongst us, say they, that is, who amongst us which
dwell in Sion, or in Jerusalem, shall dwell safely with devouring fire? etc.

The munition of rocks,] i. e. As a place fortified and environed with rocks.

He puts munition here for a place munited, that is, fortified. An Abstract for
a Concrete, per Metonymiam Adjuncti.

Bread shall be given him,] i. e. He shall not be starved out of his strong
hold, as many are, who though they are in such Castles and Forts and strong
holds, as no Enemy can approach unto, yet are fain to yield at length for want
of victuals.

He prevents an Objection here: For they might say, Though the Assyrians cannot
take Jerusalem by force, yet may they in time starve out the men thereof.

His water shall be sure.] i. e. His water shall not fail.

This he says, because many who have been besieged in strong places, have been
fain to yield for want of water, whom no power could hurt.

17.
Thine eyes, etc.] He uses an Apostrophe here to the faithful in Jerusalem,
which were such as he described, Verse. 13.

Thine eyes shall see the King in his beauty] i. e. Thou shall see King
Hezekiah in his glory again.

He says, thine eyes, for thou, by a Synecdoche of a part for the whole.

The glory of King Hezekiah was obscured when Jerusalem was besieged by the
Assyrians, and he did lay aside his royal robe, and put on sackcloth, 2 King.
19.1. but when the Assyrians were destroyed, his glory appeared greater then
ever.

They shall behold,] i. e. Thine eyes shall behold; i. e. Thou shall behold.

The Land that is very far off,] q. d. Though thou art besieged for a while,
and shut up in Jerusalem by the Assyrians; yet after a while, when they are
destroyed by the Angel, thou shall be at liberty to go whither thou will; thou
may then (if thou will) visit the parts of the Land which are far distant
from Jerusalem.

Here he prevents another Objection, which they might make: For they might
object and say; Suppose that Jerusalem could not be taken by force, nor the men
thereof starved out, yet will the Assyrians always besiege it, and so the King
will live in a sordid condition, and the rest of the people will live as
prisoners, and such a life is little better then death.

18.
Thine heart shall meditate terror,] i. e. Thou shall think upon the fear which
the Assyrians did put thee in by his threats, (2 King. 18.17, etc.) Supple,
with a great deal of joy and pleasure.

It is a great deal of joy and delight, for a man to think in what danger he
was, or has been in, when the danger is perfectly past.

Thine heart] i. e. Thou.

He puts a Synecdoche of the part for the whole man.

Shall meditate] Supple, With joy and delight.

Terror,] i. e. The terror and frights thou were in by the threats of the
Assyrians.

Where is the Scribe? etc.] q. d. Thou shall insult over the Assyrians, and
say, Where is the Scribe? For the Angel of the Lord shall destroy them all, and
then thou may insult, and ask where they are; for they shall not be any where
to be found.

Where is the Scribe? etc.] By the Scribe may be meant the Secretary of
Sennacheribs Army.

It is believed, that Saint Paul alludes to this place in 1 Cor. 1.20. and most
likely it is that he does so; but he alludeth only to the words, not to the
sense; a thing usual with all sorts of men, to allude to the words of an Author
or Writer, and yet not to the sense of those words.

Where is the Receiver?] By the Receiver may be meant he which received the Pay
to pay the Army.

Where is he that counted the Towers?] By him that counted the Towers may be
meant the Master of the Engines, who gives out, and takes in, and keeps an
Account of all the Engines of War by tale: For in old time they used movable
Towers, which went upon wheels, and other devices, which they could drive to
the walls of a Town, either to scale them, or do some other mischief to the
Town: And by this one kind of Engine may synecdochically be understood all
other kinds of warlike Engines whatsoever. Or by him that counted the Towers
may be meant he which counted the Towers which stood upon the walls of
Jerusalem, that he might proportion strength and Engines thereto, for the
taking of them.

19.
Thou shall not see a fierce people,] i. e. For after a while thou shall not
see the Assyrians (which are a fierce people) besieging thee, and warring
against thee; for the Angel of the Lord shall destroy them.

A people of deeper speech then thou can perceive,] i. e. A people whose
language thou can not understand.

By this he also means the Assyrians, whose language the Jews understood not, 2
King. 18.26.

Of a stammering tongue,] i. e. A people of a strange tongue.

By a stammering tongue is meant a strange tongue; for Outlandish men seem to
them which understand not their language to stutter and stammer. See Cap. 28.11.

This Verse contains a reason of what was said in the former Verse; that is, a
reason why the people of Jerusalem might insult over the Assyrian, and say,
Where is the Scribe? where is the Receiver? where is he that counted the
Towers? For they might thus insult over the Assyrian, when the Assyrian was not
to be seen alive, and the Angel had destroyed them.

20.
Sion] i. e. Jerusalem.

The City of our solemnites,] Jerusalem was called the City of the Jews
solemnities, because the solemn Feasts and Worship, which God enjoined the Jews
under the Law, were kept there.

Thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation,] i. e. Thou shall see
Jerusalem in peace and quiet, and a place where a man may dwell peaceably and
quietly; notwithstanding that the Assyrians shall besiege it, and trouble it
for a while.

A Tabernacle that shall not be taken down] He may call Jerusalem a Tabernacle,
because as a Tabernacle keeps a man safe, and defends him from the heat of the
Sun, and the wind, and the storm, cap. 4.6. So did Jerusalem by the mercy of
God, protect all that fled to her for refuge, and defend them from the hot rage
and fury of the Assyrians: but though it was like to a Tabernacle for this, yet
the Prophet says, it shall not be like a Tabernacle for that, that a
Tabernacle uses to be taken down; for Jerusalem should not be beaten down by
the Assyrians, as other Cities of Judah were or should be.

A Tabernacle is of that condition, as that it may be stretched out, and folded
up, pitched and taken down again; wherefore we read both in sacred and profane
writings, that only Shepherds, Soldiers, and Pilgrims, and wandering people,
such as the Scythians and Arabians were, and such like make use of Tabernacles,
because they could set them up over night, and take them down in the morning,
and remove them from place to place; though this be the condition of a
Tabernacle, and the Prophet calls Jerusalem a Tabernacle, yet says he, it
shall not be a Tabernacle of this condition, as if he should say, Jerusalem
shall be a Tabernacle, but a Tabernacle of a condition contrary to the
condition of ordinary Tabernacles; for whereas other Tabernacles are moveable,
this shall not be moved, so says he, cap. 30.28. There shall be a bridle in
the jaws of the people, (but a bridle contrary to the condition and use of
other bridles, for it shall be a bridle) causing them to err.

Not one of the Stakes thereof shall ever be removed,] He speaks of those
stakes, to which the cords of the Tent or Tabernacle are fastened, which
stretch out the Tent and keep it out.

When the Tabernacle is to be taken down, these stakes are taken up, and
removed; therefore to signify that Jerusalem shall surely stand, he says, not
one of the stakes thereof shall be removed.

Shall ever be removed,] Note, that the Hebrews are Hyperbolicall in their
expression of time, and that this work ever, signifies not eternity always,
but sometimes a bare time only.

Neither shall any the cords thereof be broken,] He speaks of the cords with
which the Tent or Tabernacle is stretched out, and kept tight and upright; If
these cords should break, the Tent or Tabernacle would fall, or flag, though
the Tent were not removed; therefore to show that this Tabernacle shall be sure
to stand, and stand upright, he says not only, not one of the stakes thereof
shall be removed; but also, neither shall any the cords thereof be broken.

21.
But there] i. e. But in Sion, or in Jerusalem.

A place of broad rivers and streams,] i. e. As a place of broad rivers and
streams.

The note of similitude is here to be understood.

By the place of broad rivers and streams, is meant a broad and deep Channel
in which rivers and streams run, yet not without the rivers and streams, but
with them.

A deep Channel and broad, in which rivers and streams run perpetually, when
it environed a Town or a City, is a great defense to that Town or City, for it
hinders and keeps off all enemies from approaching to it on foot, to hurt it.

In which shall go no Galley with Oars, neither shall gallant Ship pass
thereby.] This shows the City or Town which is environed by rivers and
streams to be yet the safer; for the City or Town which is environed by rivers
and streams, is yet the safer, if it be so that the enemy can get neither
Gally nor Ship into them; for where he can get in a Gally or Ship, he can make
some approaches to it, and so endanger it.

By the Gally or Ship, he means the Gally or Ship of the enemy.

Thereby.] i. e. Through it, or in it.

22.
For the Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King.]
By a Judge, he means here a supreme Judge, and by a Lawgiver, he means a
supreme Lawgiver; so that in effect these three words Judge, Lawgiver, and
King, signify one and the same thing, they signify a Defender: for it is the
Office of the supreme head of a Commonwealth (whether he be called Judge, or
Lawgiver, or King,) not only to defend Subject against Subject within, but
also to defend all that are under him from public Enemies without.

The Prophet in these three words, Judge, Lawgiver, King, seems to allude to
those which at several times were the supreme Officers of the Commonwealth of
Israel, though he observes not the order of time therein: For by Judge he
seems to allude to such an Officer as the Lord raised up (as occasion was)
for the delivery of his people when they were oppressed by a foreign Enemy,
such as was Gideon, Sampson, Jepthah, and others, who were called Judges. By
Lawgiver he seems to allude to Moses, who is called the Lawgiver, Numb.
21.18. who conducted the children of Israel out of Egypt, and who at that time
had the chief rule over them. By King he seems to allude to those Kings which
ruled over Israel after the Judges, such as were Saul, David, Solomon, etc.

23.
Thy tacklings are loosed,] He compares here the Army of the Assyrians, which
besieged Jerusalem, to a ship, to which he makes this Apostrophe.

Thy tacklings are loosed,] i. e. Thy ropes and thy cables, which serve thee
for diverse uses, are loosed by the violence of the tempest.

They could not well strengthen their Mast,] i. e. The Mariners which are
within thee cannot make their Mast stand upright.

Here is a Relative, They, without an Antecedent, a preterperfect for a present
or future tense.

They could not spread the sail,] i. e. The Mariners which are within thee
cannot spread the sail, by reason of the violent storm and tempest.

Where the tacklings are loosed, and the Mast cannot be kept upright, nor the
Sails spread, by reason of a tempest, we can look for no prosperous voyage, but
rather a sudden shipwreck: By this therefore, that the tacklings of the ship
are loosed, and the Mast cannot be well strengthened, nor the Sail spread, is
meant, that the Army of the Assyrians should come to speedy ruin and
destruction.

If you ask; Being that the Army of the Assyrians is compared to a ship, what
is that in the Army which is compared to the tacklings? what to the Mariners?
what to the Mast? what to the Sail?

Ans. In similitudes we must not be too curious, to make part to answer part;
but it is enough that the whole answers the whole: So the ruin and destruction
of the Army answers to the shipwreck of a ship, though the particular parts of
the Army answer not to these particular tacklings and furniture of the ship,
and to the Mariners which are therein.

Then is the prey of a great spoil divided,] q. d. Thou shall be wrecked, and
then when thou art wrecked, that is, when thine Army is destroyed, shall the
prey of a great spoil be divided among the men of Jerusalem.

He puts here a Relative without an Antecedent, and a present for a future
tense: And he either passes from the Metaphor of a ship, to the custom or
manner of Wars, where when the Enemy is vanquished or destroyed, his spoils are
taken and divided. Or else alludeth to the people which dwell on the
Seacoasts, who hearing of the wreck of a ship, come in abundance to carry away
the goods thereof, which are found on the shore.

The lame take the prey,] i. e. They which are weak and impotent shall take the
prey.

A present is put here for a future tense.

He puts the lame here for those which are weak and impotent, and not able to
make resistance, by a Metaphor: And such did the Assyrians esteem the Jews to
be, whom they besieged in Jerusalem, 2 King. 18.23. yet these lame men, that
is, these which the Assyrians esteemed so weak and unable to resist them, took
the prey of their great spoils.

Or when he says, the lame take the prey, the Prophet may signify, that the
spoil of the Assyrians Camp should be so great, as that they that were nimble
and lusty should not be able to make away with it; but they that were lame, and
went but softly, should come time enough to have part of the prey.

24.
The Inhabitant] i. e. The Inhabitants, Supple, of Jerusalem.

He puts a singular for a plural number.

The inhabitant shall not say, I am sick,] In besieged Cities, some grievous
sickness or other, and such as is contagious, uses to assail the Inhabitants
thereof, by reason that they have not that liberty of air, and wholesomness of
diet, and change of raiment, and abundance of necessaries, as they were wont to
have at other times; which sickness consumes many, and rages even after the
siege is broken up. That therefore which the Prophet says, is this, That
notwithstanding that, that the Inhabitants of Jerusalem should be besieged by
Sennacheribs Army, yet they should not be assailed by any sickness, as they
which are besieged are wont to be.

The people that dwell therein] i. e. The people which dwell in Jerusalem.

The people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity.] God is said
(in the Scripture Phrase) to forgive iniquity, when he pardons the punishment,
which he has begun, or has threatened to inflict for those iniquities; yea, he
is said to forgive them, when he pardons those punishments, though he does
inflict afterward other punishments, great and grievous: So we read, that the
Lord forgave his people, though he took vengeance of their inventions, Psalm.
99.8. So Nathan said to David, The Lord has put away thy sin; thou shall not
dye: Howbeit because by this deed thou have given great occasion to the Enemies
of the Lord to blaspheme, the child that is born of thee shall surely dye, 2 Samuel 12.13, 14. Because therefore God delivered his people from the siege of
the Assyrians, and saved them from all those diseases which use to accompany
close sieges, he is said here to forgive them their iniquity.

ISAIAH, CHAP. XXXIV.
COme near ye Nations to hear] The Prophet here calls to all the Nations in the
World to attend to what the Lord will do upon the Assyrians and their
assistants: by which we may understand, that when that came to pass, which the
Prophet does here prophecy of, it was so wonderful, as that the report thereof
filled the whole World. See the like, Cap. 33.15.

And all that is therein,] i. e. And all the Inhabitants thereof.

All things that come forth of it.] All Individuals, which have had their Being
since the Creation, may be said to come forth of the World, because they are,
or have been produced by, and out of some part of the World: I except not man
himself, though his better part be created of God.

2.
For the indignation of the Lord, etc.] This Particle For shows, that there
is something worth their attention, and points at it what it is; It is the
indignation of the Lord upon all Nations, etc.

Upon all Nations,] i. e. Upon all the men of all those Nations which were
joined with the Assyrians against Jerusalem; for Sennacherib, King of Assyria,
had men of diverse Nations in his Army.

Upon all their Armies,] Supple, Which they muster, and bring against Jerusalem.

There were many lesser Armies raised by several people, which were under the
Assyrians dominions (which we may gather from cap. 10.8. and 36.9.) of which
Senacherib made one exceeding great Army.

He has utterly destroyed them,] He will utterly destroy them.

A Preterperfect for a Future tense.

He has delivered them to slaughter,] i. e. He will deliver them to slaughter
to be slain thereby.

He speaks of slaughter as of a person, by a Prosopopoeia, and means that
slaughter which was made by the Angel, 2 Kings 19.35.

3.
Their slain also shall be cast out,] Supple, Into the open air, to be a prey
for the beasts of the field, and fowls of the air.

And their stink shall come out of their carcasses,] i. e. And their carcasses
shall rot, and stink as they lie.

It appears by this, that it was a good while before they which were slain by
the Angel, were all buried.

And the mountains shall be melted with their blood.] i. e. And so much blood
of theirs, shall be shed upon the mountains about Jerusalem, as that it shall
dissolve the very mountains, and make them run down like melted wax.

An Hyperbole.

4.
And all the Host of Heaven shall be dissolved,] i. e. And all the Host of
Heaven shall be as if they were dissolved, or melted, and in melting drop down.

The note of similitude is here left to be understood.

By the Host of Heaven, he means the Sun, and Moon, and Stars, which he calls
an Host; because they are many and orderly, and as obedient to God, as an Army
is to its General. And he speaks of the Host of Heaven, as of wax, or as if
they were made of wax, (by a Metaphor) so that if they did melt, they must
needs drop down.

Therefore he says, that the Host of Heaven shall be as if they were dissolved
and dropped down, because they shall not be seen, but shall be to the eye, as if
they were not.

And therefore shall they not be seen, and be to the eye as if they were not;
because the air shall be so thick, as that it shall hinder the sight thereof;
and the air shall become so thick, by reason of dark and thick fogs, or mists,
or vapors, arising out of the blood and putrefaction of the dead carcasses of
the Assyrians.

An Hyperbole.

And the Heavens shall be rolled together as a scroll] i. e. And the Heavens
shall be as a scroll that is rolled together: For as in a Scroll which is
rolled together, the words and letters, which are therein written, cannot be
seen; so in the Heavens, neither the S^n, nor the Moon, nor the Stars shall be
perceived, because of the darkness of the air intervening between the Earth and
them.

By a Scrol he means a parchment, which the ancients were wont to use in
stead of books; which parchment was writ on but on one side, and when they used
it not, they rolled it up, as we do our Chancery rolls, and Common Court
rolls, and so laid it by.

And all their Host shall fall down, as the leaf falls from the Vine, and as
a falling Fig from the Fig Tree.] This is but a repetition of those words, The
Host of Heaven shall be dissolved, and that, and this, and the middle sentence
signify all one and the same thing, viz. that the Heavens shall be darkened,
and the Host thereof, the Sun, and the Moon, and the Stars, shall not be seen.

The Heavens have their light by the benefit of the Sun, and Moon, and Stars,
which are therein; so that if these should drop down, or fall out of the
Heavens, the Heavens would be dark; hence to signify that the Heavens shall be
dark at the time which he here speaks of, he says, that all their Host shall
fall down; as if he should say, and the Heavens shall be as dark as if all
their Host (by which they have their light) should fall down out of them.

As a falling Fig,] i. e. As a Fig which being either worm-eaten or blighted,
falls from the tree.

5.
For my sword, etc.] i. e. Moreover my sword.

He puts For for Moreover, as cap. 7.16. and speaks in the person of God.

My sword shall be bathed in Heaven] Note, that these words in Heaven, are not
to be referred to those which go next before them, viz. be bathed, for we must
not think that God made this slaughter in Heaven, but to those My sword, and in
particular to that possessive Pronoune My, as it virtually contains in it a
Primitive Pronoune Me, or Of me: q. d. My sword, or the sword of me, who am in
heaven, shall be bathed in blood, etc.

He mentions here his dwelling place, Viz. Heaven, to show that he is God,
and that he will punish the Edomites, not as a man, but as God Almighty. See
cap. 13.6. and cap. 47.3.

Shall be bathed] Supple, In the blood of the Edomites whom I will slay.

By this he shows that he will shed abundance of blood, and slay very many
men.

Upon Idumea,] This judgment befell the Edomites, because they were the most
bitter of all the nations against the Jews; whereas they ought least of all to
have bin so bitter against them, being their brethren according to the flesh;
for the Jews were the Children of Jacob, and the Edomites were the Children of
Esau, Jacobs Brother.

That which is here prophesied against Idumea, was brought to pass by the
Ethiopians, as they marched against Assyria, for they marched in an expedition
against Assyria. See cap. 18.

By Idumea understand the Edomites which dwell in Idumea, by a Metonymy.

Upon the people of my curse,] i. e. Upon the people whom I have cursed.
Genitivus Adjuncti.

By the people of his curse he means the people of Idumea, or the Edomites,
whom he cursed at this time.

To judgment.] i. e. That I may execute my judgment upon them.

6.
The Sword of the Lord is filled with blood, it is made fat with fatness,] i.
e. The Sword of the Lord shall be filled with blood, and made fat with fatness,
etc.

The Prophet speaks here in his own person, and uses a Present for a Future
tense. He speaks also of the Sword of the Lord, as of a Lion or some other
ravenous beast (by a Metaphor) which drinks the blood, and feeds upon the flesh
of other beasts, (as he does also Cap. 31.8.) And yet he allud^s too to the
Sacrifices, and to the Altar, in that he says, It shall be filled with the
blood, and made fat with the blood of Lambs and Goats, and with the fat of the
kidneys of R^ms: For the blood of these beasts were sprinkled upon the Altar,
and the fat and the kidneys ther^of were burnt upon the Altar (as a burnt
offering made with fire to the Lord) Lev. 3.4. and 10.15. and on them did the
Altar feed, as a Lion upon his prey; for which it is called Ariel, that is, the
Lion of the Lord, cap. 29.1, 2. Where note (as has been often observed) That
the Prophet is very frequent in joining or mingling Metaphors.

And with the blood of Lambs and Goats, with the fat of the kidneys of Rams,]
^. e. That is, With the blood of the Lambs, etc. And is a Note of Explication
here, and is put for That is.

The Prophet compares the Edomites here to Sacrifices, and those kind of
Sacrifices especially, in which the blood of the beasts sacrificed was to be
sprinkled round about upon the Altar, and the fat and the kidneys were to be
burnt upon the Altars, Lev. 7.4.

For the Lord has a Sacrifice in Bozra,] i. e. For the Lord has a Sacrifice
of many beasts to make in Bozra.

In Bozra,] Bozra was the chief City of Idumea.

A great slaughter in Idumea,] i. e. A great slaughter to make of beasts for
Sacrifice in Idumea.

The Prophet speaks of the Lord here as of a man, yea, of a Levite or Priest
rather: And by this Metaphor he means, that the Lord would make a great
slaughter and destruction of the Edomites.

7.
The Unicorns shall come down with them,] By the Unicorns (which were accounted
strong beasts) he means Metaphorically, the mighty and potent men of Idumea:
these, he says, shall be brought down, that is, shall be slain with them; that
is, with the Lambs, and Goats, and Rams, mentioned Verse. 6. which (because they
were of the lesser sort of Cattle) do signify here, by a Metaphor, the poor
and meaner sort of men of the said Idumea.

Note here, that the Unicorns were not appointed for any kind of Sacrifice;
therefore the Prophet sticks not close to one Metaphor, but mingles Metaphors,
as even now and often before we observed.

And the Bullocks with the Bulls,] i. e. And the Bullocks shall come down, that
is, shall be slain together with the Bulls.

A Bullock is little, in respect of a Bull; therefore by the Bullocks he
means metaphorically the poorer and meaner sort of people: and by the Bulls,
the great, and rich, and mighty men of Idumea. So that this is a repetition of
the former words, with which kind of repetition the Prophet is much delighted.

And their Land,] i. e. And the Land of the Unicorns, and the Lambs, and the
Goats, and the Rams; the Land of the Bullocks and Bulls.

By this Land is meant Idumea; for by these beasts are meant the Edomites, by a
Metaphor.

With blood,] i. e. With their blood.

And their dust] i. e. And the earth or ground of their Land.

With fatness.] i. e. With the fatness which shall distill from the dead
carcasses of them which shall be slain; or with the fatness which it shall
gather from the blood and putrefaction of the dead bodies of them which shall
be slain, which things make ground very fat.

8.
For it is the day of the Lords vengeance,] i. e. For the day or time in which
this shall come to pass, shall be the day or time in which the Lord will avenge
himself of the Edomites for all the injuries which they have done to his people
the Jews; and therefore he will not spare them at that time.

And the year of recompences] i. e. And the year, or time, in which he will
recompense the people of Idumea for the injuries which they have done to his
people the Jews.

For the controversy of Sion.] i. e. For the wrongs and injuries which the
Edomites have done to the Jews.

Sion was an hill in Jerusalem, and is put here, first for Jerusalem, by a
Synecdoche of a part for the whole; then Jerusalem is put for the inhabitants
of Jerusalem, by a Metonymy of the Subject or Continent: Then the men of
Jerusalem are put for all the Jews, by a Synecdoche of the part.

By the controversy of Sion he means the controversy which Sion has with
the Edomites; and by a Metonymy of the Subject, he means the wrongs and
injuries which the Edomites have done to Sion, which was the cause and matter
of that controversy: In which phrase the Prophet alludes to the nature of men,
which when they have any wrong or injury offered, will have a controversy with
them which offered the injury, concerning the wrong or injury which they
offered, that is, will go to Law with them for that injury. Thus, when the
Israelites had offended the Lord, the Lord is said to have had a controversy
with Israel, Hos. 4.1. And when Judah had sinned against God, God is said to
have had a controversy with Judah, Hos. 12.2. and so again, Mi^. 6.2. In this
sense does our Savior say, If thou remember that thy brother has ought
against thee, Matt. 5.23. ( that is, has any controversy with thee, or Suit
or Action against thee,) for, If thou remembrest that thou have wronged thy
brother.

9.
And the streams thereof shall be turned into pitch,] i. e. And the streams and
rivers of their Land (that is, of the Land of Idumea) shall be turned into
burning pitch, etc.

That which the Prophet means by this, and what follows in this Verse, is
this; That all Idumea (that is, all the Cities and Towns and Villages of
Idumea) shall be set on fire by the Ethiopians, and be and appear in a light
flame, no otherwise then if the streams and rivers of Idumea were all turned
into burning pitch, and the dust into burning brimstone; yea, as if the whole
Land were become burning pitch. In which expression the Prophet uses an
Hyperbole.

10.
It shall not be quenched night nor day,] i. e. That burning pitch (into which
the Land shall be turned) shall burn night and day.

Or, by It is meant the fire thereof: For a Relative is often put by the
Hebrews without an Antecedent: q. d. The fire of their Land, or the fire with
which their Land shall burn, shall burn night and day, and shall not be
quenched.

For ever,] i. e. For many days, or a great while together.

An Hyperbole.

When Towns and Cities are set on fire, and burned down, the fire and smoke
thereof continue for a long time.

From generation to generation it shall lie waste,] i. e. Idumea shall lie
waste and desolate a very long time.

The Hebrews (as we have often observed) are Hyperbolical in their expressions
of times.

None shall pass through it] i. e. No man shall pass through Idumea.

For ever.] i. e. For a long time.

An Hyperbole.

11.
The Cormorant and the Bittern shall possess it,] The Cormorant and Bittern are
solitary birds, which delight most in solitary places, and places not
frequented by men.

It,] That is, Idumea.

The Owl and the Raven shall dwell in it,] The Owl and the Raven are solitary
birds, as the Cormorant and the Bittern are; but the Cormorant and the Bittern
delight most in the waters, the Owl and the Raven in the dry places.

And he shall stretch out upon it the line of confusion, and the stones of
emptiness,] q. d. For the Lord shall mete it and measure it out for destruction
and desolation, and shall destroy and make it desolate accordingly.

And is put here for For: and by He is meant the Lord; and by It, Idumea.

When he says, The Lord shall stretch out upon it the line of confusion, and
the stones of emptiness, he speaks metaphorically, and borrows his Metaphor
from a Mason or a Carpenter (to which here he likeneth the Lord) which when he
is to pull down any part or piece of an old building, he usually measures the
height, and the length and breadth of what he is to pull down.

He shall stretch out upon it the line of confusion,] i. e. He shall measure it
with the line of confusion.

When we measure any thing with a line, we stretch out the line, with which we
take measure, upon the thing which we measure: hence he puts here the
stretching out of the line upon Idumea, for the measuring of Idumea with the
line.

The line of confusion,] This line he calls the line of confusion, because it
is to mete or measure out that which is to be confounded or pulled down.

This Genitive is Genitivus finis.

The stones of emptiness.] i. By stones he may mean rules, such rules as
Carpenters and Masons were wont to measure their work withal, which he calls
stones, because they were perhaps made of some certain polishable stones,
though they were but short, and of no great length: Or by stones he may mean
the Plummet, which Carpenters and Masons use to have tied at the end of a line,
wherewith they take the measure or height of any wall or building: These
Plummets now adays are usually made of Lead, though then they used stones in
stead thereof: He puts therefore stones for a Plummet (per Metonymiam
Materiae,) and a Plummet for a line with a Plummet at the end of it, per
Metonymiam Adjuncti.

These stones, or this line, he calls the stones or the line of emptiness, in
relation to the Land of Idumea, which was to be laid waste, and to be made
empty of the Cities and Towns and Inhabitants thereof, rather then to any
buildings to be pulled down, to which the stones or lines here mentioned are
usually applied: For (as I have observed before, Cap. 30.28.) the Prophet in
his similitudes does often give more respect in his expressions to the thing
signified by his similitude, then to the thing from which his similitude is
taken.

12.
They shall call the Nobles to the Kingdom,] i. e. After this slaughter and
desolation, the common people, which are left alive, shall (hearing of the
death of their King) call for the Nobles of the Land to govern the Kingdom, or
to choose a King out of them.

By They are meant the Commons of the Land of Idumea, which are left alive:
where a Relative is put without an Antecedent; and by the Kingdom is meant the
Government of the Kingdom.

But none shall be there,] i. e. But none of the Nobles shall be left in the
Land.

All her Princes shall be nothing.] i. e. All the Nobles of Idumea shall be
nothing, that is, they shall be slain.

Whom he called Nobles before, be calls Princes here.

13.
And thorns shall come up in her palaces,] i. e. And thorns shall come up in
the places where now her palaces stand. See Cap. 32.13, 14.

In the fortresses.] i. e. In the compass of ground, where her Fortresses and
strong Cities stood.

14.
The wild beasts of the desert shall also meet with the wild beasts of the
Islands] Supple, There; i. e. All manner of wild beasts shall meet there.

The wild beasts of the Desart] i. e. The wild beasts which use to live in
the Desert and Wilderness.

With the wild beasts of the Islands,] i. e. With strange wild beasts, such
as inhabit Islands, and remote places near the Sea. See Cap. 13.22.

The Satyre] See Cap. 13.21.

The Satyr shall cry to his fellow.] i. e. One Satyr shall cry there to
another: so that there shall be more Satyrs there then one.

Shall cry] The cry here meant is a cry of mirth and joy. See Cap. 13.21.

15.
Gather under her shadow] i. e. Gather her young ones under her wings.

He puts her shadow for her wings, per Metonymiam Effecti, because birds
cover their young ones with their wings, as with a shadow.

The Vultures.] The Vulture is a ravenous bird, which loves desolate places.

16.
Seek ye out of the Book of the Lord, and read,] q. d. When this desolation
shall come to pass, which I have spoken of in this Chapter, then take ye into
your hands the Book of this my Prophecy, and read it, and mark it well, and
observe from thence what solitary creatures I have said shall dwell in Idumea
after this desolation.

He calls the Book of this his Prophecy the Book of the Lord, either because he
did write it at the commandment of the Lord, or because he wrote nothing in it
but what he heard of the Lord.

Not one shall fail,] i. e. Not one of these solitary creatures shall fail of
being there.

None shall want her mate,] q. d. Every one shall be there with her mate or
f^llow; and their being there every one with their mate or fellow, shows,
that they shall not come thither to fly away again presently, but shall make
their abode there.

For my mouth it has commanded it,] i. e. For I will command them every one to
come and dwell there with her mate.

The Prophet speaks here in the person of God, and yet speaks of God as of a
man, by an (...), and puts the mouth for the whole man, by a Synecdoche; he
puts also a preterfect for a future tense.

It has commanded it,] The Particle It is redundant here after the Hebrew
manner.

Commanded it,] i. e. Commanded that every one shall come and dwell there.

And his Spirit] i. e. And the Lord.

The Prophet speaks here in his own person; and he speaks of God as of a man,
(...), and puts the spirit, which is but part, for the whole man: Or by his
Spirit, he means his power; for any quality or ability of doing do the
Hebrews call Spirit.

It] This Pronoun It is redundant here by an Hebraism, as it is once before in
this Verse.

Has gathered them,] i. e. Will gather these solitary creatures together in
Idumea (when it is laid desolate) mate with mate.

And he has cast the lot for them,] i. e. And he will give them every one an
inheritance, and a several place of abode, in that Land, viz. the Land of
Idumea.

He puts here a preterperfect for a future tense; and he alludes here to the
division of the Land of Canaan to the Tribes of Israel by lot, of which you may
read Josh. 18.8, etc. where Joshua did cast lots (when the Land was divided
into several divisions) which division should be given to which Tribe for his
inheritance.

And his hand has divided it unto them] i. e. And he will divide it unto them.

He puts the hand for he, a part for the whole man; and by he, he means the
Lord, of whom he speaks as of a man, by an (...).

The Prophet persists still in his allusion to the division of the Land of
Canaan for an inheritance to the several Tribes of Israel, where the Land was
first divided into so many parts, then the lot was cast which Tribe should
inherit which part, Joshua, cap. 18.

Note here, that the division which we spoke of, was before the casting of
lots: for the Land of Canaan was first divided into so many parts; then did
Joshua cast lots what Tribe should inherit what part: The Prophet therefore
uses here an (...), as he does also Cap. 1.6. and elsewhere.

By line,] He alludes here to the manner of measuring and dividing Lands, which
was wont to be done by a line: See Josh. 17.5, 14. and 19.9. where the Hebrew
has it, line and lines, whereas it is rendered portions by our Translators:
See also Psalm. 78.55. where the Kingly Prophet, speaking of the division of
Canaan to the Tribes of Israel, and the manner thereof, says, He cast out the
Heathen also before them, and divided them an inheritance by line, and made the
Tribes of Israel to dwell in their Tents.

From generation to generation.] See verse. 10.

ISAIAH, CHAP. XXXV.
THe wilderness and the solitary places shall be glad for them,] This cohereth
with the former Chapter, and seems to have been delivered at the same time.

And the sense of this place is this; q.d. And when the indignation of the Lord
shall have passed upon all Nations, ( Cap. 34.2.) and his Sword shall have come
down upon Idumea, (Cap. 34.5.) then shall the happiness of the Jews be such, as
that the very Earth or Land of Judah shall be glad, and rejoice for this their
happiness.

The wilderness, etc.] By the wilderness he means Judea, which the Assyrians
made like a wilderness in the days of Hezekiah, by depopulating and laying
waste the Cities and Towns, cutting down the trees and hedges, treading down
the Vines and Vineyards, trampling under feet the grass and fruit of the field,
and killing and driving out the Husbandmen thereof; so that there were none
left to till and manure the ground.

Object. The Prophet did Cap. 32.15. compare the Assyrians to the wilderness,
and the Jews to the fruitful field; How comes he therefore to compare Judea
here to a Wilderness and a Desert?

Ans. The Prophet, when he compared the Assyrians to the wilderness, and the
Jews to the fruitful field, had respect, not to the qualities, but to the
scituations of the wilderness and fruitful field: For because a wilderness
(being a dry barren ground) is situated for the most part on hills, and the
higher parts of the Earth, higher surely then the fruitful field; and the
fruitful field is situate in the valleys, where it may be fed and refreshed
with waters; therefore did he compare the Assyrians (which were high and proud
of heart, and Lords and Conquerors whithersoever they came) to the wilderness;
and the Jews (which were at that time in a poor and low condition) to the
fruitful field: But here he compares Judea to a wilderness, not in regard of
the situation, but in regard of the qualities of a wilderness; for because a
wilderness is untilled, unmanured, unhusbanded, uninhabited, barren and
fruitless, and the Assyrians did depopulate and lay waste Judea (as I said
before,) therefore does he here compare Judea to a wilderness.

And the solitary place,] By this also he means Judea, which he might call a
solitary place, because Sennacherib had made it waste, and desolate, and
solitary at this time; and driven out and slain all the inhabitants thereof,
those only excepted which were in Jerusalem.

For them,] i. e. For the Jews, because of the happiness which shall befall
them.

He puts a Relative here without an Antecedent, (...).

And the Desert shall rejoice, and blossom as a Rose.] By the Desert he means
the Land of Judah, as he did by the wilderness and solitary place; and this is
in a manner a repetition of the former sentence.

When he says, the Desert shall rejoice, he speaks of the Land of Judah as of
a man, by a Metaphor or Prosopopoeia: And because in man a merry heart makes a
cheerful countenance, Prove. 15.13. therefore the Prophet, in allusion to that,
says, that the Desert shall rejoice, and blossom as a Rose; as if its
rejoicing should make it blossom, and put on a new and more cheerful face:
Where, by the By, he prophecyeth also of the great abundance of fruit, and the
great fertility, which shall be in Judea after the destruction of the
Assyrians, of which he also prophesied, Cap. 30.23.

And blossom,] i. e. And flourish.

He uses here a Synecdoche speciei: For though all trees and things which
blossom do also flourish, yet all things which flourish do not blossom: Or else
he alludeth to the blossoming of a Rose.

2.
It shall blossom abundantly,] i. e. It shall flourish abundantly, and be
exceeding fruitful.

Even with joy,] By this understand more then ordinary joy.

The glory of Lebanon shall be given unto it, the excellency of Carmel and
Sharon,] i. e. For the glory of Lebanon shall be given to it. Understand (...)
For here.

Lebanon was a famous Forest, abounding with tall Cedars and other trees, very
pleasant to the eye. See Cap. 33.9. Carmel was also a most fruitful hill, of
which see also Cap. 33.9. Sharon was a place of most rich pastures, of which
also Cap. 33.9. When therefore the Prophet says, The glory of Lebanon shall be
given to the Wilderness or Desert (that is, to Judea) and the excellency of
Carmel and Sharon; the meaning, That every part of Judea shall flourish, and
bear fruit exceedingly: the woods as Lebanon, the hills as Carmel, the Dales as
Sharon, etc.

They shall see the glory of the Lord, and the excellency of our God.] i. e.
The Jews (the inhabitants of Judea) shall see the glory of the Lord, and the
excellency of our God.

But how shall they see the glory of the Lord, and the excellency of their God?

Ans. They shall see it in the effects thereof, that is, in the great store and
abundance of all manner of fruit, which the Lord shall give to the Land of
Judah.

3.
Strengthen ye the weak hands,] q. d. Comfort ye therefore those which are
fearful, and faint-hearted, at the thought of what they shall suffer by the
Assyrians, with these tidings, That the Lord will destroy the Assyrians, and
when he has destroyed them, he will make the Land to flourish, and to bring
forth all manner of fruit in abundance.

This is spoken to all Prophets, and all good men, by an Apostrophe; and this
inference is drawn as well from the former Chapter, as from this.

Fear makes a man to tremble, and his hands to shake, as though there were no
strength in them; for it causes the spirits to retire toward the heart, and
to leave the outward parts destitute: Hence he takes the weak hands here, per
Metonymiam Effecti, and Synecdochen partis, for the fearful man.

Because comfort takes away fear, by which the spirits return from the heart to
the outward parts again, and strengthen them; hence he says, Strengthen the
weak hands, for Comfort them that are fearful.

Comfort the feeble knees.] This is a repetition of the former sentence.

Fear causes the knees, as well to be feeble, and smite one against another,
as to hands to be weak and tremble. See Dan. 5.6.

4.
Behold,] For behold.

Your God will come with vengeance,] i. e. Your God will come and take
vengeance upon the Assyrians, and those that take part with them against you,
etc.

Even God with a recompense,] i. e. Even your God will come with a recompense
to recompense your Enemies for the mischief they have done, or shall do you.

Save you.] Supple, Out of the hands of the Assyrians, and all other which join
with the Assyrians against you.

5.
Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened,] q. d. And then, when he has
taken vengeance of the Assyrians, and has saved you, they which do not now
believe what I have so often spoken concerning our deliverance from the
Assyrians, and the blessings of God toward us, shall see, that that is true
which I have so often spoken. See Cap. 29.18, etc.

And the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped,] This is the same for sense with
the former sentence: q. d. Then they which are dull of hearing, and will not
hear the joyful news of our delivery from the Assyrians, because they believed
it not, shall have their ears unstopped, and their unbelief taken away; for
they shall see the truth of this which they will not now believe. See Cap.
29.18.

6.
Then shall the lame man leap as an Heart,] i. e. Then shall he which sat as a
lame man, pensive and moping, by reason of grief and sorrow, which he conceived
from the miseries which the Assyrians brought or would bring upon the Land of
Judah, leap for joy as an Heart leapeth, which is one of the nimblest of all
creatures.

And the tongue of the dumb,] i. e. And the tongue of him which sat as if he
were dumb, by reason of sorrow and grief; for sorrow and grief cause silence,
Cap. 47.5.

The tongue of the dumb is put here for the dumb: a part for the whole man, by
a Synecdoche.

Note, that this place, from the third Verse hitherto, as in the first or
literal sense, it prophecyeth of that Salvation by which the Jews were saved
from the Assyrians, (which, as I have often observed, was a Type of our
Salvation by Christ;) So, in the second and mystical sense, it prophecyeth of
that Salvation by which Christ saves us from our spiritual Enemies; yea, it
prophecyeth of Christ's coming in the flesh for that end: And those words, God
will save us, as in the literal sense they signify Gods coming by his Angel
(which smote the Assyrians, cap. 37.36) to save the Jews out of the hands of
the Assyrians: So, in the mystical sense, they signify the coming of Christ
(who was true God) into the World, to save men from their spiritual
Adversaries. And those words, Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and
the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped: and then shall the lame man leap as an
Heart, and the tongue of the dumb sing; are so ordered by the Holy Ghost, as
that they do not only signify so as we have said in the Exposition thereof;
but they do also signify, that Christ at his coming should work miraculous
Cures upon the blind, deaf, lame, and dumb; and restore them to their sight,
hearing, limbs, and speech; and that these miraculous Cures should be the signs
of Christ's coming, and tokens by which Christ might be known when he came; as
appears Matthew. 11.4, 5.

7.
For in the wilderness shall waters break out,] For the wilderness shall be
exceeding well watered with the Springs which shall arise out of it, and so by
consequence shall become exceeding fruitful.

By the Wilderness he means Judea, as verse. 1.

He gives another reason here why they should rejoice.

And the parched ground shall become a pool,] By the parched ground he means
the Wilderness, which is dry and parched, by a Periphrasis: and by the
wilderness he means Judea, as v. 1.

When he says, that the parched ground shall become a pool, his meaning is,
that it shall be exceeding well watered, and so by consequence become exceeding
fruitful: for that which makes a wilderness or a parched ground barren and
fruitless, is the want of water.

This is a repetition of what was said immediately before.

Shall become a pool,] i. e. Shall be exceeding well watered, and so become
fruitful.

An Hyperbole.

See the like Prophecy, cap. 30.25. and the like phrase, Psalm. 107.35.

And the thirsty Land springs of water,] This is a repetition of the foregoing
words.

In the habitation of Dragons,] i. e. In the Wilderness where the Dragons dwelt.

Where each lay,] i. e. Where each Dragon lay.

He speaks here of the Land of Judah (which he called a wilderness and solitary
place, verse. 1. for reasons there given) and alludeth here to a true
Wilderness, wherein Dragons and other wild beasts lived; resembling the Land
of Judah to a wilderness in this also, That it harbored Dragons as the
wilderness did.

But how may the Land of Judah be said to harbor Dragons, or be an habitation
of Dragons?

Ans. Because it harbored Sennacherib, and his Princes, and they dwelt or abode
in it for a while, when they expelled the Jews and destroyed them: And it is
usual with the Scripture to call such Tyrants and Oppressors Dragons, as cap.
27.1. and cap. 51.9.

Shall be grass, with reeds and rushes.] i. e. There shall be abundance of rain
or water, to make the ground fruitful: For where grass grows, and reeds and
rushes, there is water in abundance.

8.
And an highway shall be there,] By an highway is meant a way made of stones,
heaped and laid one upon another, or a causey; for the word in the Original is,
Maselul, which signifies such a way, and is derived from the Verb Salal, which
signifies to lift up, or exalt, because such a way is high, being higher
elevated then the surface of the ground near it, by reason of the stones which
are laid one upon another, to make that way. Such a way is usually made in
Fennish, waterish, and springy grounds, where otherwise the ground being soft,
the Travelers would sink in mire and dirt, as they went. And therefore does
the Prophet seem to make mention of such a way in the Land of Judah, because he
spoke of the Land of Judah, but a little before, as of a Land where waters
should break out, and streams; yea, as of a Land which should become a pool,
and springs of water; and where reeds and bulrushes should grow: For, as I
said, in such Lands such kind of ways were made of stones and causeys,
otherwise there would be no, or very ill passing for Travelers.

And a way,] By a way is here meant a common beaten way or road; for the word
in the Original is Derec, which signifies a common beaten way, which is
derived from Darac, which signifies to tread or go upon.

This way here, and the highway mentioned in the words before, are not to be
understood of two several ways, but only of two several qualities of one and
the same way: q. d. There shall be a way there, which shall be both high and
firm, and well beaten by Travelers.

And it shall be called, The Way of Holiness.] i. e. And it shall be called the
Holy Way.

He puts a Substantive of the Genitive case here, for an Adjective, after the
Hebrew manner: Of Holiness, for Holy.

The Way which he here speaks of, and calls, The Way of Holiness, or The Holy
Way, was a way which led to the Temple, which was an holy place, where the Holy
One of ISRAEL dwelt, and where he was sanctified and worshipped.

That which the Prophet means by this, is the same with that which he says
in other words, Cap. 27.13. viz. That they shall worship the Lord in the holy
Mount at Jerusalem.

The unclean shall not pass over it,] i. e. The unclean shall not walk on it.

By the unclean he means the Assyrians, and such as served the Assyrians in
their Wars against Judah.

Note, that the Hebrews held all people, which were neither of their stock, nor
yet circumcised, unclean: Hence we find the uncircumcised and unclean joined
together, Cap. 52. verse. 1. And hence Peter said, that it was an unlawful thing
for a man that is a Jew to keep company, or come unto one of another Nation,
Acts 10. verse. 28. And hence the Jews accused the same Peter, because he went
in to men uncircumcised, Acts 11. verse. 2, 3. And hence the Jews accused Paul
for going about to profane the Temple, Acts 24. verse. 6. because they thought
that he had brought Greeks in thither, Act. 21.28.

By the unclean therefore may be here meant, first, a Gentile, or a man
uncircumcised, in general: Then, per Synecdochen generis, an Assyrian, and such
as served the Assyrians in their Wars against Judah, in particular.

He makes choice of this word [the unclean] in this place, rather then any
other word, thereby to signify the Assyrians, and other Enemies of Judah,
because he spoke of the Way of Holiness just before, to which uncleanness is
opposite.

It made much to the comfort of Gods people the Jews, in the midst of their
troubles, to think, That though they were heavily oppressed by the Assyrians,
yet they should ere long so far be delivered from the Assyrians which
distressed them, and besieged them in their own Land, as that not one Assyrian,
or any other Enemy of theirs, should be left in the Land to vex them, which is
signified by that, that the unclean shall not pass over the way of Holiness.

But it shall be for those,] i. e. But it shall be only for the Jews (which
are a clean and circumcised Nation,) that is, for those Jews which the Lord
shall preserve from the sword of the Assyrians, to walk in.

By Those he means the Jews, where he put a Relative without an Antecedent,
as Verse. 1.

Note, that the word Only, as it is often, so it is here to be understood.

The wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err therein.] q. d. And they, viz.
the Jews (which are a clean and circumcised Nation) shall walk therein so
daily, and so frequently, and by their daily and frequent walking therein, make
the way so beaten and plain, as that wayfaring men, which would travel in that
Way, cannot miss, though they were fools.

9.
No Lion shall be there, nor any ravenous beast go thereon,] By the Lion and
the ravenous beast, he means metaphorically the Assyrian, and such as served
the Assyrian in his Wars against Judah: And the sense of these words is the
same with those, The unclean shall not pass over it, which he here amplifieth;
and which both are like to those, Cap. 49.19. They that swallowed thee up shall
be far away.

Because the Lion and the ravenous beasts are beasts of the wilderness, and he
had likened Judea to a wilderness, verse. 1, etc. therefore does he make choice
of the Lion and ravenous beast for his Metaphor.

Shall go up thereon,] He says, Shall go up thereon, because the way was a
causey, elevated above the plain ground; and therefore he which would walk
thereon, must ascend up, or go up, before he could walk thereon.

But the redeemed shall walk there.] i. e. But those Jews, whom the Lord shall
deliver out of the hand of the Assyrian, they shall walk there.

10.
And the ransomed of the Lord shall return,] i. e. Those Jews which shall be
dispersed (upon the coming of the Assyrians into Judea) into diverse parts of
the World, as Assyria, Egypt, Pathros, Cush, Elam, Shinar, Hamah, and the
Islands of the Sea; or which shall be carried captive away by the Assyrians
into Babylon, shall return from thence into Judea. See Cap. 11.11.

Note, that to redeem and ransom (if they be taken strictly) signify to buy
out with a price, as slaves are bought out of the hands of the Turk: but in a
general notion they often signify, to deliver out of distress, though without
a price.

By the redeemed, mentioned in the former Verse, are meant, those Jews which
remained in their own Country in Jerusalem, and were there saved by the hand of
the Lord from the fury of the Assyrians. By the ransomed, mentioned in this
Verse, are meant, those Jews which were either carried captive into Assyria, or
fled into some other parts of the Earth, to save themselves from the Assyrians;
and were saved there, and brought back, by the goodness of the Lord to them.

He calls them the redeemed, and the ransomed, by anticipation; for as yet they
were not redeemed and ransomed.

Shall return,] Supple, Out of the several places where they have been (as it
were Exiles) into their own Land, the Land of Judah.

And come to Sion,] i. e. And they shall come, Supple, By that way, or upon
that way, to the Temple of the Lord which is in Sion.

By Sion he means the Temple of the Lord in Jerusalem, which was built there
upon Mount Sion, per Metonymiam subjecti.

With songs,] Supple, Of rejoicing upon their solemn Feast days, and upon other
special occasions.

And everlasting joy upon their heads,] He says, And with everlasting joy upon
their heads, because he speaks of joy as of a crown which is wore upon the head.

Everlasting joy,] i. e. Joy which shall long continue, and shall not be
interrupted for many years.

Note, that this word Everlasting does not always signify an infinite
duration, but very often a long time (and yet not very long) only.

They shall obtain joy and gladness,] i. e. For they shall obtain such an happy
condition, as shall make them joyful and glad.

Understand For; for these words contain a reason, why they shall come to Zion
with songs, and everlasting joy upon their heads.

And sorrow and sighing.] Supple, Which the Assyrians have brought upon them,
through their Oppression and Tyranny.

ISAIAH, CHAP. XXXVI.
NOw it came to pass in the fourteenth year of King Hezekiah,] These things
which Isaiah foretold concerning the desolation of Judea, and the siege of
Jerusalem, by the Assyrians under Sennacherib, and the deliverance of
Jerusalem, and the destruction of the Assyrian Army by the Angel, came to pass
in the days of Isaiah: therefore the Prophet makes a short History thereof, and
adds it to his Prophecies, concerning the same, that it might appear to all,
how the event of things answered his Prophecies.

Came up,] With an exceeding great Army.

And took them.] Jerusalem is here to be excepted.

What the Prophet speaks here, he speaks by anticipation; for many things,
which he mentions after this in this History, were acted before Sennacherib
came against and took all the Cities, which he came against and took.

2.
Rabshakeh] This Rabshakeh was Sennacheribs chief Captain.

From Lacish] Lacish was a City of Judah, which Sennacherib besieged at this
time.

To Jerusalem,] Jerusalem was the Metropolis and chief City of the Kingdom of
Judah, where Hezekiah King of Judah was at this time, God having promised by
Isaiah, to preserve that City from the Assyrians.

With a great Army,] To besiege Jerusalem, and take it by force, if Hezekiah
would not yield it upon terms.

And he stood by the Conduit of the upper pool,] i. e. And Rabshakeh stood, etc.

There were two pools about Jerusalem, whereof one was called the upper, the
other the lower pool, from their situation: Upon both these pools (at least
upon the upper pool) there were Conduits made, to conduct water from thence
into the City.

In the highway of the Fullers field,] i. e. In the highway which went
through, or by that field, which was called the Fullers field; which field was
called the Fullers field, because the Fullers were wont to dry their clothes
there, when they had washed them in the pool. See Cap. 7. verse. 3.

3.
Then came forth to him Eliakim,] While Rabshakeh stood at the Conduit of the
upper pool, he called to the King, 2 King. 18.18. that is, He sent to King
Hezekiah, that he might treat with him; but Hezekiah fearing to commit his
person to him, or otherwise to expose it to danger, went not out himself to
treat with him, but sent these three, Eliakim, Joah, and Shebna.

Eliakim, Helkiahs son, which was over the House,] Supple, Of the King; that
is, which was Steward of the Kings House.

One Shebna was formerly Steward of the Kings house, but this Eliakim came in
his room, as Isaiah prophesied, Cap. 22. verse. 20.

And Shebna the Scribe,] i. e. The Kings Secretary.

The Office of a Scribe or Secretary, you may read in part, Esth. 3.12.

This Shebna was not he which was formerly Steward of the Kings house, and
Eliakims predecessor, but another, though of the same name.

The Recorder,] What was the Office of this Recorder, it is doubtful; I
conceive it to have been to keep the Records, and compile the Chronicles of the
most noted things which happened: For such Officers Kings had about them, and
such Records were kept, and Chronicles compiled, as we may see, Esth. 6.1, 2.

4.
Say ye now to Hezekiah, thus says the great King, the King of Assyria,]
Observe here the pride of Sennacherib, or Rabshakeh, or both, in that
Sennacherib is set out here with his greatest Title; but they vouchsafe
Hezekiah no Title at all.

The great King,] It was the manner of Kings, which are proud, and of great
power, to arrogate to themselves great Titles, as Sennacherib did here the
Title of The great King.

What confidence is this in which thou trustest?] The word confidence is to be
taken here, not for the Act (as it is most commonly taken) but for the Object
or thing in which we confide or trust.

5.
I say (say thou) (but they are but vain words) I have counsel and strength
for war,] q. d. Perhaps thou will say, That thou have Forces enough to wage war
with me, and thou have wisdom to manage those thy Forces: but if thou say so,
thy saying will prove but words, there is no such matter; for thou have not
Forces enough to war with me, nor counsel and wisdom, if thou had Forces.

These two things, counsel and strength, are the chiefest requisites for the
happy managing of a War; for one without the other avails nothing: For though
thou have never so great Forces, yet if thou have not wisdom to manage them,
they can stand thee in no stead: and if thou have wisdom to manage an Army, yet
if thou have no sufficient Army to manage, thy wisdom will avail thee little.

Now on whom do thou trust,] Supple, For strength?

That thou rebell^st against me?] i. e. That thou stand out thus against me?

He calls this standing out of Hezekiahs against him, rebellion, because the
Kings of Judah were Tributaries to the Kings of Assyria, 2 King. 18.14. For
there Hezekiah says, He had ^ffended against Sennacherib (by not paying him
his Tribute,) which he would not have said, if the Kings of Judah had not been
wont to pay Tribute to the Kings of Assyria.

Because Hezekiah might say, that he had counsel and strength for War
sufficient to bear him up against Sennacherib, and therefore he would not yield
to him; Rabshakeh goes about here to show, that Hezekiah deceives himself,
that when he had made Hezekiah b^lieve that he was in an error, he might better
persuade him to submit to Sennacherib.

6.
Lo, thou trustest in the staff of this broken reed, on Egypt,] q. d. Lo, thou
trustest in Egypt for strength for war, which is but as a staff made of a
broken reed; and therefore a poor staff to rely upon, and to trust in.

Rabshakeh, that he might show that Hezekiah deceived himself, in saying, that
he has strength for war, thus argues; q. d. If thou have strength for war, it
is either Foreign strength, or Domestique strength; strength which thou
expectest from others, or strength which thou have of thine own. But thou have
neither Foreign strength, or Domestique strength; neither strength for war,
which thou can expect from others, neither strength for war of thine own:
therefore thy words are but vain words, when thou say, I have strength for
War.

Rabshakeh, to make his Minor good, thus argues: All Foreign strength is either
Humane or Divine; But thou have neither humane strength for War, nor yet
divine, in which thou can trust: Therefore thou have no Foreign strength for
War, in which thou may trust.

The Minor of this Syllogism he endevors to prove, partly in this, partly in
the following Verse.

And for that part of the Minor Proposition of the first Syllogism, which said,
He had not strength for W^r of his own, he strives to make good in the eight
and ninth Verses.

In the staff of this broken reed,] i. e. In this staff which is made of a
broken reed.

This Genitive is Genitivus Materiae.

On Egypt,] q. d. Even on Egypt.

Rabshakeh takes it here for granted, that if Hezekiah did expect help from any
Foreign people, he did expect it from the Egyptians: For, as the case stood,
there was no other people that would send him aid: Besides, many of the men of
Judah (though without Hezekiahs privity) had sent into Egypt for strength, Cap.
30, and 31. which Sennacherib hearing of, might think that it was done by
Hezekiah, and that Hezekiah had sent thither for supplies.

Whereon if a man lean, it will go into his hand and pierce it,] On which staff
(made of a reed) if a man lean, it will run into his hand, and pierce it.

A reed, though it be used for a staff, yet if a man leans upon it with his
whole body, it will deceive him, and give him a fall, much more if it be a
broken reed. Moreover, being it is a broken reed (and so sharp and splintry) it
will run into the hand of him which leans upon it with his body, his hand being
between his body and the reed, and next upon the top thereof.

In the choice of his similitude he alludes to the reeds which grew plentifully
on the banks of Nilus, that great River of Egypt.

So is Pharaoh, King of Egypt, to all that trust in him.] q. d. For as a broken
reed, whereon a man leans, will fail him, and will go into his hand (who leans
upon it) and pierce it: So will Pharaoh, King of Egypt, do to all that trust in
him: For he is weak like a reed, and therefore will fail them; and unfaithful
and perfidious, and so will hurt them: He will get their Treasures (which are
the sinews of War) and not profit them ( Cap. 30.6.) and by so doing will he be
a cut to them.

7.
But if thou say, We trust in the Lord our God,] Supple, For strength for
War: q. d. But if thou say to me, We trust not in Egypt, nor in any humane
power for strength; but our trust is in the Lord our God.

Is it not he whose high places and whose Altars Hezekiah has taken away? and
said to Judah and to Jerusalem, Ye shall worship before this Altar?] Supple,
Hezekiah therefore has offended him, and provoked him to anger, by doing this:
How therefore can Hezekiah or ye look for strength from him?

Note, that Rabshakehs Argument is here faulty, and that he assumes that which
is false: For though Hezekiah took away many high places and Altars, 2 King.
18.4. yet those high places and Altars which he took away, were not consecrated
to the God of Israel, but to Idols, yea to Devils.

Before this Altar.] Supple, Only.

He means the Altar of burnt offerings, which was in the Temple at Jerusalem.

8.
Now therefore give pledges,] q. d. But perhaps you will say, that we trust not
in Egypt, nor in the Lord God for strength, but we trust in our own strength;
now therefore, if you do so, Give pledges, etc.

As he endeavored to prove in the two former Verses, that Hezekiahs trust in
Egypt, and in God, was vain; and so, that he could not trust in foreign aid: So
he endevors to prove here, that he had no strength of his own at home, in which
he might trust.

Give pledges, I pray thee, to my Master the King of Assyria, and I will give
thee two thousand horses, if thou be able on thy part to set riders upon them.]
q. d. So certain I am of the small number of Soldiers which thou have, as that
I will give thee two thousand horses, if thou art able on thy part to set
riders thereon; if thou will but give pledges to my Master the King of Assyria,
that thou will restore them presently to him again, if thou have not so many
riders to sit upon them.

A question will be here, How it came to pass that there were so few Soldiers
in Jerusalem?

Ans. Though there were many Soldiers in Jerusalem, yet there might be but few
fit to ride horses, for want of experience; for horses were rare in Judea,
especially among the common people.

But secondly, Consider who it is which says, that there were not two thousand
in Jerusalem able to ride horses; it is Rabshakeh, who was an Enemy and a
Braggadocio, and therefore not to be believed in what he says were there more
or less.

9.
How then will thou turn away the face of one Captain? etc.] q. d. If thou have
not riders sufficient to set upon two thousand horses, how can thou be able
to put to flight one of the least of those Captains which serve my Master in
his Wars, (that I may not say, my Masters whole Army,) Supple, with thine own
Forces or strength?

How will thou turn away the face,] i. e. How will thou put to flight? For to
turn a man's face away, signifies to put a man to flight, and make him to turn
his back.

One Captain of the least of my Mast^rs servants,] i. e. One Captain, which is
counted among the least of those Captains which are servants to my Master.

The Captains which he here speaks of, were the Governors and Princes of those
Provinces which were under Sennacheribs Dominion, which were many: These
Princes and Governors raised many Soldiers out of their several Provinces, to
serve Sennacherib in these his Wars; and had the command of them themselves
under Sennacherib which they raised: And these Princes had more or less
Soldiers under them, as the Provinces which they governed were greater or
lesser.

Of my Masters servants,] These Captains he calls his Masters servants, either
because they served him now in his Wars; or else because Sennacherib ruled as
well over them, as all other his Subjects, with an Arbitrary Government: and so
they were, in that regard, but as servants, to go when he bad them go, and to
come when he bad them come.

And put thy trust on Egypt for Charets and for Horsemen?] q. d. And being that
Egypt is as a staff of a broken reed, how then will thou put thy trust on Egypt
for Charets and for Horsemen?

Here is a Brachylogy, or compendiousness of speech used, by reason of which we
are left to repeat those words here, which are used in the beginning of the
Verse, How then will thou? etc.

Note, that these words are an inference drawn from what he said concerning the
Egyptians in the sixth Verse, as the words immediately going before were an
inference drawn from what he said concerning the smallness of Hezekiahs Forces
in the eighth Verse: For here Rabshakeh makes an application of what he said,
and infers from thence that which was for his purpose against that which
Hezekiah might rely upon.

10.
And am I now come up without the Lord? etc.] Rabshakeh should here have
applied what he said in the seventh Verse, and have drawn this or the like
inference from thence; And how then can thou say, We trust in the Lord our
God for strength? But he adds here another reason first, why they had no reason
to trust in the Lord, before he makes his application and inference: after
which he would have made his application and inference, as before, had he not
been interrupted by Eliakim and Shebna and Joah; and had he not been
transported with anger, upon his interruption, and so forgot it.

The sense of these words is; q. d. And am I now come up with my Army against
this Land, without the Command of the Lord your God?

He puts the Lord for the command of the Lord, by a Metonymy.

Rabshakeh lies egregiously here, when he says, He came not up without the
command of the Lord against the Land of Judah to destroy it; for the event did
show, that the Lord would not destroy Jerusalem by Sennacherib, but rather
destroy Sennacherib.

One might wonder, to see Rabshakeh attribute so much to the Lord here, whom he
did so much vilify and contemn, v. 20. But consider what Rabshakeh was, an
Infidel, a Vaunter, a Braggadocio; and then it is no wonder to see him so
inconstant in his words.

The Lord said unto me, Go up against this Land, and destroy it,] The Devils
were wont to vent their Oracles in their Idols, not only to the Inhabitants of
the Land where they worshipped, but also to strangers: And Rabshakeh might
conceive the like of the Lord, the God of Israel, and therefore say, as he does
here, The Lord said unto me, Go up against this Land to destroy it.

Note here, that Rabshakeh should have made here the like application of what
he said concerning the Lord, in this, and in the seventh Verse, as he did of
what he said concerning Egypt in the sixth Verse, and concerning the strength
of the men of Jerusalem in the eighth Verse: And as he brought Arguments to
prove, that Hezekiah had no reason to say, that he had strength for War; So
should he have brought Arguments to prove, that he had no reason to say, he had
counsel for War: For this was propounded to be spoken of, verse. 5. but Eliakim
and Shebna and Joah did here interrupt him; and their interrupting him put him
into a passion, which made him forget what he had in hand.

11.
Then said Eliakim and Shebna and Joah unto Rabshakeh, Speak, I pray thee, unto
thy servants in the Syrian language, for we understand it, and speak not to us
in the Jews language, in the ears of the people that are on the wall.] Eliakim
and Shebna and Joah would not have Rabshakeh to speak so, as that the people
might understand what they said; doing therein as wise Ambassadors: For it is
the duty of Ambassadors (as much as in them lies) to see to it, that what they
have in Command, or what they have in Treaty, be not divulged to the people,
before it be made known to the King, and he be pleased to divulge it: For many
things are better kept close from the people, then imparted to them.

Speak unto thy servants in the Syrian language,] They mention the Syrian
language rather then any other, because it was Rabshakehs native language.

In the ears of the people which are on the wall.] These people were set on the
wall to defend it, who (being vulgar Jews) understood whatsoever was spoken in
the Jews language, but not what was spoken in any other tongue.

12.
To thy Master and to thee,] Supple, Only.

Rabshakeh directs his speech to one of those three, Eliakim, Shebna, or Joah,
which spoke to him, entreating him to speak in the Syriac language: For they
three did not all speak together (for that would be confusion,) but one was the
mouth of the rest; yet all are said to speak in the former Verse, because what
one spoke was the sense of all.

Has he not sent me to the men which sit upon the wall?] Supple, Also. See 2 Chronicles. 32.9.

That they may eat their own dung, and drink their own piss with you,] That is,
That they may know that they shall be forced to eat their own dung, and drink
their own piss with you; Supple, If they harken not to the great King, the King
of Assyria.

He says, That they may eat their own dung, and drink their own piss, for That
they may know that they shall eat their own dung, and drink their own piss, per
Metonymiam Subjecti.

By eating their own dung, and drinking their own piss, he signifies (by an
Hyperbole) such a famine (caused by the siege which Sennacherib would continue
about Jerusalem) as that they should be glad to eat and drink the vilest and
most stinking things that can be thought of.

13.
Then Rabshakeh stood and cried,] So far was Rabshakeh from harkening to the
just desires of Hezekiahs Ambassadors, as that he spoke the louder in the Jews
language, and showed more indignation and insolency then before.

14.
Hear ye, etc.] He speaks to those which sat upon the wall.

Thus says the King,] i. e. Thus says Sennacherib, the King of Assyria, by
me, to you.

Let not Hezekiah deceive you.] Supple, By telling you that ye shall be
delivered from the Assyrians.

16.
Harken not to Hezekiah,] q. d. Harken not, I say, to Hezekiah, but harken
rather to the King of Assyria.

Make an agreement with me by a Present,] q. d. Make an agreement with me, to
surrender up your City and your selves into my hands, and to become my
Subjects, and confirm this your agreement and surrender of your selves with a
Present.

Or thus; Come and bring me a Present in token that you have agreed to
surrender your City into my hands, and to acknowledge me for your King.

To bring or carry Presents was a thing most usual among the Eastern people:
and among other ends, which they had in so doing, one was this, To acknowledge
that they were willingly subject, and did take him for their King, to whom they
did carry or bring their Presents: and this (among many other places) may be
proved by these two or three following; as Psalm. 72.8, 9, 10, 11. where we
read, He shall have dominion also from sea to sea, and from the river to the
ends of the Earth: They that dwell in the wilderness shall bow before him, and
his Enemies shall lick the dust; the Kings of Tarshish and of the Islands shall
bring presents: the Kings of Sheba and Seba shall offer gifts: Where we have
these phrases signifying all one and the same thing, He shall have dominion;
They shall bow down before him, and lick the dust; They shall bring presents,
and offer gifts to him. And 2 Chronicles. 17.5. where we read, that the Lord
established the Kingdom in the hands of Jehoshaphat, and all Judah brought
Presents to him: where, by their bringing Presents to him, they did
acknowledge, that they took Jehoshaphat for their King. So 1 Samuel 10.27. We
read thus, But the children of Belial said, How shall this man save us? And
they despised him, and brought him no Presents. Whence we may easily gather,
that they which accepted of Saul for their King, brought him Presents, and by
that did manifest themselves, that they did own him for their King; but the
children of Belial would not carry him any Presents, and so did show thereby,
that they did despise him, and would not that he should reign over them. When
therefore it is said here in the person of Sennacherib, Make an Agreement with
me by a Present, there is an allusion to that end which they had in bringing or
carrying Presents; who therefore did carry them, or bring them, that they might
acknowledge him for their King, and themselves his subjects, to whom they did
carry them, or bring them.

And come out to me,] Supple, And bring me your Present, and do homage and
fealty to me, as to your King, and give me possession of your City.

These seem to be reasons why he would have them to come out unto him.

That they which surrendered up their City, were wont to come out of it, (and
for these ends,) see 2 King. 24.12. and Jer. 38.17, 18.

This speech of Rabshakeh to the people was popular, and apt to stir them up to
sedition; for it did put the power in them, to consult and agree of public
affairs without the Kings leave, if not against his will.

And eat ye every one of his vine,] q. d. And then will I break up my siege,
and you may eat every one of his vine, etc.

Eat ye, etc.] This is vox concedentis, non imperantis; the voice, not of
command, but of giving leave, and permitting: q.d. Then shall ye eat freely,
etc.

The waters of his own cistern.] In Judea there were many pits and cisterns
made to keep rainwater in, which they made use of for necessary uses, being
Judea was a great part of it a mountainous, and so a dry place.

17.
Until I come and take you away,] It was the manner of the Kings of Assyria,
and other Eastern Kings, when they did subdue any people, to carry them away
from their Native Country into some other Land, for fear that when they were
return home, they whom they had subdued should rebel again, and be no longer
subject to them.

19.
Of Hamah and Arphad,] What Hamah and Arphad were, see Cap. 10.9.

Of Sepharvaim,] Some take Sepharvaim to have been a City of Syria near the
Sea; others, to have been a City seated upon the River Euphrates.

And have they,] Supple, Which are the Gods of Samaria.

Here is a Relative put without an Antecedent, (...).

20.
That the Lord should deliver Jerusalem out of my hand?] i. e. That any one
should say, that the Lord should deliver Jerusalem out of mine hand?

21.
But they held their peace,] i. e. But the people which sat upon the wall, to
whom Rabshakeh directed this speech, held their peace. See 2 King. 18.36.

The Kings commandment was, saying, Answer him not.] Hezekiah being a more wise
King, foresaw that the Assyrian being proud by his own nature, and more proud
by reason of his Victories, would carry himself proudly and insolently;
therefore he commanded the people which sat upon the walls, if they should hear
Rabshakeh speak proudly to them, not to answer him a word, lest they should by
their Answer the more exasperate him, if it were rough; or terrify the rest of
the people, if their Answer should savor of fear.

Again, by enjoining them silence, Rabshakeh could not so well practice with
them, or know their minds, who would have done any thing to gain the City at
this time.

22.
With their clothes rent.] The rending of their clothes was a sign of grief and
sorrow among the Hebrews, as Genesis 37.34. and 2 Samuel 1.11. Job 2.11. and
particularly a sign of grief and sorrow, together with an holy indignation for
the blasphemy which they heard, as Matthew. 26.65. Acts 14.14.

The reason of the rending their clothes for such occasions, was, to signify
thereby, that their Soul was rent for very grief.

These men rent their clothes here, both because of the blasphemies with which
they heard Rabshakeh blaspheme God; and also for sorrow and grief, that they
were like to make no peace with the Assyrians, Cap. 33.7.

ISAIAH, CHAP. XXXVII.
HE rent his clothes,] To wit, Because of Rabshakehs blasphemy, which was
related to him; and for grief of what was like to happen, by the breaking off
of the Treaty by the Assyrians, if the Lord did not avert it.

And went into the House of the Lord.] i. e. Into the Temple, there to call
upon God for his aid in this time of trouble.

2.
And he sent Eliakim, etc. unto Isaiah the son of Amos,] For what end Hezekiah
sent to Isaiah, we may gather from the fourth Verse; he sent to him to pray for
the remnant of the men of Judah, which were left after the desolation which the
Assyrians had made: and he sent to him, rather then to any other, because he
knew his holiness of life, and that the gift of Prophecy was in him; and that
he had in fore-time delivered to him, that the Lord would preserve Jerusalem
from the Assyrians.

3.
This day is a day of trouble,] i. e. This time is a time of trouble; a time of
trouble, because of the destruction of so many Cities of Judah, and because of
the siege and vexation of Jerusalem.

And of rebuke,] i. e. And a time of reproach, in which we are reproached: For
Rabshakeh does bitterly reproach and taunt both me the King of Judah, and my
people.

As for Rabshakehs reproach of the King, see Cap. 36.14, 15, 16, 18.

This word Rebuke, though it often signifies a reproving or chiding after a
friendly manner, yet here it is taken for reproaching and taunting in a
spiteful way.

And of blasphemy,] i. e. And a day or time of blasphemy; for Rabshakeh
blasphemeth the living God.

Of Rabshakehs blasphemy, see Cap. 26.15, 20.

For the children are come to the birth, and there is no strength to bring
forth.] Before these words understand those, Lift up thy prayer for us: For I
conceive that the Prophet uses a Brachylogy, and that these words, Lift up thy
prayer for us, are to be understood from the following Verse; for otherwise it
will not be easy to find, on what this sentence does depend, except we take
For for And, or for Moreover.

The children are come to the birth, and there is no strength to bring forth.]
This is a Proverbial kind of speech, used when men are in extreme danger or
anguish, and have no humane help to bring them out of it: And it is taken from
a woman in travel, when the child is come to the birth; that is, to the strait
and narrow neck of the womb, at what time she is in her greatest pain, and the
greatest danger; and the woman's strength then fails her, so that she cannot
bring her child forth into the world, that she might be eased of her pains,
and freed from her danger.

4.
Will hear the words of Rabshakeh,] i. e. Will take notice of the words of
Rabshakeh.

And will reprove the words which the Lord thy God has heard,] i. e. And will
punish Rabshakeh, and his Master who sent him, for those their words, which the
Lord thy God has heard, and taken notice of.

To reprove or rebuke, when it is spoken of God, is taken most often for to
punish, as 1 Chronicles. 12.17. Psalm. 6.1. And to reprove words, is to reprove or
punish a man for his words; as, to punish sin, is to punish a man for his sin.

Wherefore lift up thy prayer for the remnant that is left.] Supple, That God
would punish the Assyrians, and spare them.

For the remnant that is left.] By the remnant that is left, he means those
men of Judah and Jerusalem, which were left after that havoc of men which
Sennacherib and his Army had made in the Land of Judah.

6.
Be not afraid of the words that thou have heard, wherewith the servants of the
King of Assyria have blasphemed me.] q. d. Though Rabshakeh and his company did
(by the command of their Master) blasphemously say ( cap. 36. verse 15, 20.)
That I could not deliver you out of the hand of their Master, the King of
Assyria: yet be not thou afraid by reason of these words, for I will deliver
you.

7.
Behold, I will send a blast upon him.] q. d. I will send a blast of wind upon
him, which shall blow him out of this Land, as the Dust or Chaff is blown
before the wind.

This phrase shows how easily God could rid the Land of Sennacherib and his
Forces: And it is Metaphorically to be understood: And what is meant by the
Metaphor is explained in the next words.

And he shall hear a Rumor.] i. e. For he shall hear a rumor.

The rumor which he heard, and which turned him, into his own Land, was the
rumor of the destruction of 185000 of his Army in one night. For note, that
though Sennacherib himself was upon a speedy march, (with that part of his
Army which was with him) toward Jerusalem, to put in execution all Hostility
against that City; yet he came not thither, he came no farther then Nob, Cap.
10.32. And there he heard of that destruction of his Army which lay before
Jerusalem, which turned him with all haste and fear toward his own Land;
and he stayed not till he came to Nineveh, v. 37.

And return.] Supple, upon hearing of that rumor.

Into his own Land.] He returned to Nineveh, verse 37. which was the chief
City of Assyria.

And I will cause him to fall by the sword in his own land.] Sennacherib was
slain with the sword by his two sons Adramelech and Sharezer, as he was
worshipping in the house of Nisroch his God, v. 38.

8.
So Rabshakeh returned, etc.] This relates to the 21, or 22. verse of the
former Chapter.

Note, that though Rabshakeh returned himself, yet he left his Army before
Jerusalem.

Against Libnah.] Libnah was a City of the Tribe of Judah, belonging to the
Priests. Josh. 21.13.

9.
And he heard say,] i. e. And the King of Assyria heard say.

He is come forth to make war with thee.] Tirakah King of Ethiopia came forth
out of his own Country with an Army, not to encounter Sennacherib in Judea,
but to set upon Assyria the Kingdom of Sennacherib in Sennacherib's absence;
See cap. 18.

He sent Messengers, saying,] Sennacherib did not only send a Message by those
Messengers by words of mouth, but he sent by them a Letter also to Hezekiah,
(though it be here omitted for brevity sake, verse 14.)

Sennacherib used all means possible, to terrify Hezekiah to a Surrender,
when he heard of the march of Tirakah King of Ethiopia, that he might the
better attend the motion of Tirakah's Army.

10.
Thus shall ye speak to Hezekiah, etc.] The Assyrian does repeat here, and beat
upon what he said, Cap. 36.14. He does not mention the weakness and
perfidiousnesse of Egypt; nor the scarcity of Soldiers in Jerusalem; As he
did, Cap. 36. v. 6, 8. because now he understood, that Hezekiah did rely only
upon God; and therefore he does endeavor to afright him from that, by telling
him with what ill Success others had relied upon their Gods.

Gozan,] By Gozan he means the people which lived near to the River Gozan,
which was a River of the Medes, 2 Kings 17.6.

Haran,] This seems to have been a City of Media, near the River Gozan, 1 Chronicles. 5.26. Though some make it a City of Mesopotamia, Genesis 11.31.

Rezeph,] There is no other mention of Rezeph in the whole Scripture but here,
and in the same Story, 2 Kings 19.12. And therefore it is not easy to
determine where it was seated: Some therefore place it in Syria, some in
Mesopotamia; others in Arabia.

The Children of Eden.] i. e. The People of Eden.

Eden was a Region of Mosopotamia, in which Paradise was planted, Genesis 2.8.

Which were in Telassar.] It can hardly be gathered from Scripture where this
Telassar was situate: But it seems to have been a Region either of Syria or
Mesopotamia.

Here, upon some occasion or other, did the people which were born in Eden,
dwell at this time.

13.
Where is the King of Hamath, etc.] See Cap. 36.19.

Henah,] This is thought to have been a City of the Medes.

Ivah.] This is thought to have been a Region of the Assyrians.

14.
And spread it before the Lord.] Hezekiah did spread Sennacheribs Letter before
the Lord, for the Lord to se^ it, and to read it, (because the Contents thereof
were chiefly against the Lord) that he being moved with the blasphemies, and
indignities therein contained, might take vengeance upon Sennacherib, and
defend his own people against him. And Hezekiah did this, because the Lord
does often accommodate himself to the fashion of men; and men are eagerly
stirred up to revenge, when they see that which offends them before their eyes.

16.
That dwell between the Cherubins.] In the two ends of the Mercy-Seat there
were two Cherubins, or Angels made of Gold of beaten work: And these Cherubins
did stretch forth their wings on high, and their faces did look one toward
another, Exodus 25. v. 18, 19, 20. Between these two Cherubins was the Lord wont
to manifest his presence and to sit, Exodus 25. ver. 22. Numbers 7.29. Hence was
the Lord said to dwell between the Cherubins, Psalm 80.1. And to sit between
the Cherubins, Psalm. 99.1.

Thou art the God, even Thou alone, of all the Kingdoms of the earth.] This
acknowledgement, or confession, does Hezekiah here make, in opposition to the
many gods of the Nations, which Sennacherib mentioned Cap. 36.18. and Cap.
37.12. And in full belief of this, does he make his prayer to the Lord.

Thou have made heaven and earth.] By Heaven and Earth understand also all
things which are therein contained, by a Metonymie.

He shows by this, that the Right and Title to all the Kingdoms of the earth,
is the Lords, and there is no God truly so called, but the Lord only.

17.
And hear,] Supple, The blasphemous words which Sennacherib has written
against thee.

It is likely that Hezekiah did not only spread Sennacherib's letter before
the Lord, for the Lord to see the blasphemy therein written; but did also read
it himself unto the Lord; and therefore he desires the Lord to hear it, while
he reads it.

And see,] Supple, The blasphemous words which Sennacherib has written in this
Letter.

And hear,] Supple, And see, q. d. yea hear I say, and see, etc.

The living God.] i. e. Thee.

Here is an Enallage of the Person.

18.
Of a truth Lord, the Kings of Assyria have laid waste all the Nations, etc.]
i. e. Hezekiah confesses it here to be true which Sennacherib said v. 12. but
draws a better conclusion from thence then Sennacherib did.

Laid waste the Nations.] This phrase is like that Cap. 24.6. viz. They that
dwell therein are desolate: Look therefore upon the Notes there.

20.
Now therefore O Lord our God save us from his hand, that all the Kingdoms of
the earth may know that Thou art the Lord, even Thou only.] It might be known
to all the Kingdoms of the earth, that the Lord God of Israel was the only
Lord God, if he would but save his people out of the hands of the Assyrians,
out of whose hands no God was able to save his people: For all the Kingdoms of
the earth were persuaded, that the God of every people would do his uttermost
to save his people: whereas therefore other Gods did not save their People, and
the God of Israel did save his, they would conclude, that he was God alone.

That thou art the Lord.] i. e. That thou only art the only Lord and God.

22.
This is the word which the Lord has spoken] i. e. This is the word which I
the Lord have spoken.

He puts the third for the first person, by an Enallage.

The Virgin the daughter of Sion.] So Cap. 1.8. He calls Sion or Jerusalem a
Virgin, for the same reason that he calls her a Daughter, that is for her
beauty.

Has despised thee, and laughed thee to scorn.] i. e. Shall despise thee, and
laugh thee to scorn.

A Preterperfect, for a Future Tense.

The Jews might well despise Sennacherib when all his Army was slain, and his
forces and strength destroyed, and laugh at him when he fled for fear to his
strong Holds. See cap. 31.8, 9. and cap. 33.18.

The Daughter of Jerusalem] i. e. Jerusalem. See cap. 1.8.

Has shaken her head at thee.] i. e. Shall deride thee, and mock thee.

He alludes to the gesture of those which mock and deride, who shake their head
at those whom they deride and mock, as Mat. 27.39. And he puts a Preterperfect
Tense for a Future.

23.
Whom have thou reproached and blasphemed, etc.] He gives a reason here in
this and the six verses following, why the condition of Sennacherib should be
made both despicable and ridiculous; and the reason is this, to wit, because
Sennacherib had reproached and blasphemed the Lord, and arrogantly assumed that
to himself, which was the Lords doing, and had boasted that he would take
Jerusalem by force, which the Lord had said that he would preserve; for which
reasons the Lord would pull him down, and make him an object of contempt and
laughter.

This speech is directed to Sennacherib, by an Apostrophe.

And lifted up thine eyes on high,] i. e. And carried thy self proudly.

He alludes to the gesture of proud men, who lift up their eyes and their head,
and scornfully look upon those whom they despise.

Even against the Holy One of Israel.] i. e. Even against the Lord, the only
God, whom the Children of Israel worship, as the holy and only God.

24.
By thy servants have thou reproached the Lord, etc.] i. e. By Rabshakeh and
his companions, whom thou sentest to Hezekiah, have thou reproached the Lord.

And have said] What follows in this and the next verse, is spoken in the
person of Sennacherib, by a Mimesis.

By the multitude of my Charets am I come up to the height of the mountains,
etc.] Sennacherib speaks here as he did cap. 10.13. attributing that which he
had done wholly to himself, and not acknowledging the hand of God therein,
though what he did he did by the hand of God, as Gods instrument, which was a
reproach to God and a blaspheming of his name.

By the multitude of my Charets am I come up to the height of the mountains.]
q. d. I am come up to the height of the Mountains, by mine own power and
strength, which is great, and which none is able to resist.

To the height of the mountains.] Judea was very mountainous and hilly, and
most of the Cities thereof were seated upon hills and mountains.

By the height of the mountains therefore we may understand, either the most
inaccessable places of Judea, or (...) may understand the Cities thereof, and
in particular Jerusalem, which was the chiefest City of that Land, and the
greatest seated, as is probable.

To the sides of Lebanon.] q. d. Yea to the Walls of Jerusalem.

Lebanon was a famous Forest in the North of the Land of Canaan, which was set
not only with ordinary Trees, but was famous also for tall Cedars, and choice
Firre-trees: And from this Forest is Jerusalem here called Lebanon, by a
Metaphor.

Because Jerusalem was inhabited by much people, as Lebanon was beset with many
ordinary Trees: and because the King, and the Nobles, and the Princes of the
Land (most of them) dwelt there, as many tall Cedars and Firre-trees grew on
Lebanon; Therefore does he liken Jerusalem to Lebanon. For it is usual to
compare a City to a Forest; and the multitude of the people to the multitude
of the ordinary trees, and the King and Nobles to the tallest trees thereof.

Aad I will cut down the tall Cedars thereof, and the choice Firre-trees
thereof.] i. e. Of Lebanon. q. d. And I will destroy the Nobles and Princes of
Jerusalem.

I will enter into the height of his border.] i. e. I will enter into the very
highest part of Lebanon, i. e. of Jerusalem.

Note, that these words, [The height of his border,] are as if he should say,
The very height of his highest part. For, The Border signifies, the utmost
part of a thing.

On the highest places of Jerusalem stood the Temples of the Lord, and the
Palace and stately buildings of the Kings of Judah, which Solomon built, (for
they were built upon Mount Sion.) Into the Temple therefore, and into the
Palace of the King of Judah does Sennacharib threaten to enter, or boast that
he will enter, when he says, I will entter into the height of his Border.

And into the Forest of his Carmel.] He says, And into the Forest of his
Carmel. For, And into the Carmel of his Forest; By an Hypallage, or
Hyperbaton. And the sense of this place is, q. d. I will enter into the height
of his Border, yea into the Carmel of his (that is of Lebanon's) Forest. That
is, into the Carmel of Lebanon, which is a Forest.

Note here, that And is put for Yea, and is a note of asseveration, or
confirmation of what he said just before.

Carmel was a most excellent and pleasant Hill, of which see cap. 33. v. 9. and
cap. 35. v. 2. And it is here taken figuratively for Mount Sion, which was
situate within Jerusalem, and on which the most pleasant objects of Jerusalem
were seated, as the Temple, the Kings Palace, and (nigh unto that) those
goodly Gardens and Orchards which the Preacher speaks of Eccles. 2. ver. 4, 5.
I say Carmel is taken here figuratively for this Mount Sion, as Lebanon is
taken for Jerusalem it self, a little before.

Of his border, of his Carmel,] The Antecedent to this Relative His, is
Lebanon, and His is as much as Its, and the Carmel of his or its Forest, is no
more then His or Its Carmel: For the Forest of Lebanon is but a periphrafis of
Lebanon, which was a Forest.

25.
I have dug and drunk water,] q. d. For so great an Army have I, as that
when I have come into dry places, where there has bin no more water to be had,
I have dug Wells by the multitude of my Soldiers, and have come at water
enough to suffice me and my whole Army for drink and other necessaries.

Sennacherib may seem here obliquely to slight that policy of Hezekiah in
cutting off the waters about Jerusalem, hereby to distress him, when he came
to besiege it, 2 Chronicles. 32. v. 3, 4.

And with the sole of my feet have I dried up all the Rivers of besieged
places.] Understand this place so, that Sennacherib boasts here, that
whenever he came to besiege any place, he came with so great a number of
Soldiers, as that they did presently drink all the Rivers of the place dry: as
if he should say, So soon as ever I come to besiege any place, and set my foot
near to the rivers thereof, I have with the multitude of my men, drunk them up
dry immediately.

A Thrasonicall expression.

With the sole of my feet] i. e. So soon as ever I came, Supple, To places
which I have besieged.

The Hebrews use to put the foot for coming; for see Genesis 30.30. Where Jacob
says thus to Laban, Jehovah has blessed thee at my foot, the meaning is, this
Lord has blessed thee by my coming, and this Preposition With, signifies often
the time or instant in which any thing is done, as Cum diluculo abij; I went
away with the morning light, that is, I went away so soon as ever it was
morning: To dry up therefore with the sole of my feet, may very well be
rendered, To dry up so soon as I came.

So then the sense of this verse is, q. d. When I have come to besiege any
place where there has bin no water, I have not wanted water, for I have come
with such a mighty Army of men, as that my men could dig wells presently, which
should afford me water enough: And on the contrary, when I have come to besiege
any place which abounds with rivers of water, so numerous is my Army, as that
I have drunk all those rivers dry.

After this there is an application left to be understood, q. d. What therefore
is there that I cannot do by my strength? and what places are there that I
cannot subdue by my power?

Note here, that we do not read these reproachful words among Rabshakehs
reproaches above mentioned; yet were they spoken by him, but were there omitted
for brevities sake, because they were here to be rehearsed.

26.
Have thou not heard long ago that I have done it? etc.] i. e. Have thou not
heard long ago, that I did contrive it, and determine it? If thou have not
heard of it, thou might have heard of it.

It, the Antecedent to this Relative, is to be understood from the latter part
of this verse, and it is this. viz. That thou should be to lay wast defenced
Cities into ruinous heaps, q. d. Have thou not heard long ago that I contrived
it, and determined it, that thou should be to lay waste defenced Cities into
ruinous heaps?

Two questions do here arise; first, how this hangs together with Sennacheribs
speech? Secondly, how Sennacherib could come to hear that he should be to lay
waste defenced Cities into ruinous heaps?

Answer. To the first question I answer, That this does not relate to the words
of Sennacherib which went immediately before, but to those words which are
mentioned cap. 36. v. 18, 19, 20. and repeated cap. 37.13. For those words are
here to be understood (though they are here omitted for brevity sake, because
they were there mentioned, as the words which went immediately before, were
there omitted, because they were to be mentioned here.)

To the second question I answer, That God said of Sennacherib, that he was the
rod of his anger, and that the staff in his hand was his indignation, Cap.
10.5. And this he said, because he intended to use him as an instrument to
punish and destroy Cities and Countries; and as he said this, so might he have
said more then this by his Prophets (though their Prophecies came not to our
hands) by which Sennacherib might understand, that what he did, he did but as
the instrument of the Lord, and not as a supreme and independent cause, as he
boasted.

Long ago,] i. e. Heretofore. Hyperbole.

That I have done it,] i. e. That I have contrived it.

A Metaphor from a Potter, as in the word formed; for I have done it, is, q. d.
I have made it.

And of ancient times that I have formed it?] This is a repetition of the
former sentence, and for sense, the same therewith.

Of ancient times,] i. e. Before now.

An Hyperbole.

That I have formed it?] i. e. That I have contrived it, and determined it?

The word formed, is metaphorical, taken from a Potter, or some such like
artist, who makes some rude matter into some handsome form. See the like
phrase Cap. 22. v. 11.

Now I have brought it to passe] i. e. And now I have brought to pass what I
contrived and determined before, to wit, That thou should be to lay waste
defenced Citie^, etc.

That thou should be to lay waste defenced Cities into ruinous heaps.] i. e.
That thou should destroy and lay desolate those Cities (though they be
defenced Cities, and well fortified) which have sinned against me.

27.
Therefore their Inhabitants were of small power,] q. d. And therefore (because
I contrived it, and determined it, that thou should lay waste defenced Cities
into ruinous heaps, and because I would at this time bring to pass what I
determined and contrived) were the Inhabitants of those Cities of small power,
and fainted at thy coming against them; for I struck a fear into their hearts,
who otherwise would not have been so dismayed, and easy to be overcome by thee.

They were as the grass of the field,] Supple, Which withers if the wind
blows upon it. See cap. 40. verse. 7, 8. that is, They were weak and fainted
away, and were not able to resist nor stand before thee.

As grass on the house tops] Which withers with a little heat of the Sun, for
want of root.

28.
But I know thy abode,] i. e. But I know what thou do when thou abidest at
home, and sit even in thy Closet, and what thou do meditate there against
me. Metonymia Adjuncti.

And thy going out, and thy coming in,] i. e. And what thou do, or
meditatest when thou go out, or come in.

These speeches seem to be proverbiall, and to signify all the actions and
counsels of a man both public and private.

And thy rage against me.] q. d. And I know how mad thou art against me, and
how thou reproachest my power, and threatenest me as though I were an idol, as
thou did cap. 36.20. and cap. 37.10. and 24.

29.
Because thy rage against me, and thy tumult is come up into mine ears,] i. e.
Because I have heard thy outrageous and ruffling words, which thou have belched
forth against me.

Thy tumult,] i. e. Thy tumultuous and ruffling words.

Therefore will I put my hook in thy nose,] He alludes here to Fishermen, who
having struck the hook with which they fish, into the nose of the fish, draw
him which way they will in the waters.

And my bridle in thy lips,] He alludes to Horsemen, who by putting a bridle
into the horses mouth, turn him which way they please. James 3.3.

I will turn thee back by the way by which thou came.] This is a proverbiall
kind of speech, signifying as we say, that he should go as he came, or he
should go without his errand.

That which is signified by the hook, and by the bridle, and that which turned
Sennacherib back was, the rumor of the slaughter of an hundred fourscore and
five thousand of his Army which were slain by the Angel, as they lay in siege
before Jerusalem; for when Sennacherib heard of this, he returned in have to
his own place.

30.
And this shall be a sign unto thee,] He uses an Apostrophe here to Hezekiah,
and speaks to him.

This shall be a sign unto thee,] Supple, By which you may know (when
Sennacherib shall return home) that it was I which drove him or turned him
hence.

Ye shall eat this year such as grows of it self,] i. e. Thou, O Hezekiah,
and thy people shall eat this year such corn and grain, etc. as grow of
themselves, without either plowing or sowing.

This year,] He means that present year in which he spoke, in which year they
must have either eaten that which grew of it self, or have pinched for it; for
it was so late in the year before the Assyrians Army was destroyed, and they
which were besieged in Jerusalem were delivered, that seed-time was past; and
for any corn which grew formerly the Assyrians had destroyed all, and cut down
all the fruit trees of the Land.

And the second year, that which springs of the same,] i. e. And the year
next following this, ye shall eat that corn which springs of that which shall
grow of it self this year; for from the corn which shall grow of it self this
year, shall many grains fall, which shall spring up and yield abundantly, so
that all the people shall be satisfied therewith.

Why they should eat that which grew of it self the first of these two years,
we have told before, to wit, because seed-time would be past before they should
be delivered from the siege of the Assyrians. Now the reason why they should
eat the second year of the two, that which grew of the same was, because it was
the seventh year, in which the Lord said, There should be a Sabbath of rest
unto the Land, a Sabbath to the Lord; thou shall neither sow thy field, nor
prune thy vineyard, Levit. 25.4.

And the third year sow ye and reap,] They could not reap what they sowed in
the third year, until the end of the year; therefore miraculous it was, that
those thre^ years so much corn should grow of it self, as should suffice all
the people.

Sow ye and reap, etc.] i. e. Ye shall sow and reap, and shall be no more
hindered by the Assyrians, or any other enemies from sowing and reaping as ye
have bin (though ye might fear lest that Sennacherib should recruite his Army
and come upon you again.)

It augments the former miracle, that they had enough not only for bread to
eat, but also for seed to sow.

And eat the fruit thereof.] i. e. And ye shall eat the fruit thereof your
selves, though of late the Assyrians have eaten the fruit of what ye have sown
and planted.

31.
And the remnant that is escaped of the house of Judah,] i. e. For the remnant
of the house of Judah which is escaped out of the hands of the Assyrians.

And for For.

Shall take root downward and bear fruit upward.] i. e. Shall flourish again
and multiply exceedingly, and sow and reap.

He alludes to a Tree, which being in good proof, shoots forth its roots
downwards, and its branches upwards, on which it brings forth much fruit.

32.
Out of Jerusalem shall go forth a remnant,] i. e. A remnant of the house of
Judah which saved themselves from the Assyrians by being in Jerusalem, shall go
out of Jerusalem (when Jerusalem is freed from those which besieged her) into
all parts of the Land of Judah, and inhabit and overspread it, and sow it, and
reap the fruit thereof.

And they that escape] Supple, The hands of the Assyrian.

Out of Mount Sion] i. e. Shall go out of Mount Sion into other parts of the
Land, and there live in peace and multiply.

By Mount Sion is meant Jerusalem, and this is a repetition of the former
sentence.

The zeal of the Lord of Hosts shall do this.] i. e. The Lord of Hosts will do
this for the ardent love which he bears both to his own honor, and to David
his servant. See v. 35.

This.] Supple, which is here mentioned from the 29 verse.

33.
Therefore thus says the Lord, etc.] This relates to the 29 verse, and
follows that as an inference from thence.

He shall not come into this City.] q. d. Sennacherib shall not force the gates
of the City, and so enter in and take it.

Nor shoot an Arrow there.] i. e. Nor shoot an Arrow at those which stand upon
the Wall, that he might drive them away and so scale the walls.

Nor come before it with shields.] q. d. Neither shall he assault it with armed
men.

When they which besiege a City and would assault it, cannot drive away the
soldiers that are set to defend the Walls, with shooting, they assault it, and
scale the Walls with men armed with shields, and such defensive Armor which
may defend them from the Arrows and Darts of them which are upon the walls.

Nor cast a bank against it.] When they that come before a City, and are
resolved to take it, cannot take it by storm or by assault, that they may
starve it out, they trench and cast a bank against it round about, so that they
which are besieged cannot come out, or have any provision brought in unto them.

The meaning then of this place is, that Sennacherib shall not take Jerusalem
by force, neither shall he assault it with armed men; or closely besiege it
with Trenches, etc. Which understand of Sennacherib himself: For he was not
himself before Jerusalem, though he threatened to assault it, and besiege it,
until he had taken it, and to u^e all manner of hostility against it; and for
that end was coming himself with that part of his Army which was with him
(when his Army which was before Jerusalem was destroyed by the Angel.) But
though Sennacharih did not entrench against it himself, yet part of his Army
did, cap. 29.3. But nevertheless, it used not that hostility, nor did it
besieg^ Jerusalem with such eagerness as Sennacherib threatened, and would have
done, if he had come himself; and presently after this it was destroyed.

34.
By the way that he came, by the same he shall return.] q. d. He shall go as
he comes; or he shall return without his errand.

This is a proverbiall kind of phrase, as I said v. 29.

35.
For I will defend this City to save it.] q. d. For I will defend this City
that I may save it. Or, I will defend this City and save it.

For mine own sake.] For mine honors sake. Because I have made choice of that
City to be the place of my Sanctuary, and my Worship: As also because that I
would show that I am the only Lord God, v. 20. which I should not do, if I
suffered Sennacherib to take Jerusalem.

And for my servant David's sake.] q d. And for the love which I bore to David
thy Father, and because of the promise which I made to him, that I would
establish the Throne of his Kingdom, 1 Kings 2.3. and 2 Chronicles. 7.18. which
would come to naught if Jerusalem should be destroyed at this time.

36.
The Angel of the Lord went forth.] Supple: Out of heaven, or from the presence
of the Lord, who commanded him to slay the Assyrians.

And when they arose,] And in the morning, when those Assyrians which escaped
the sword of the Angel arose: Or, when the men of Jerusalem arose.

A Relative put without an Antecedent.

Behold they were all dead Corpses.] i. e. Behold those hundred fourscore and
five thousand which the Angel had smitten, were all dead Corpses. q. d. Behold
these Assyrians which escaped the sword of the Angel: or the men of Jerusalem,
(when they arose early in the morning) saw those hundred fourscore and five
thousand which the Angel had smitten, all dead Corpses, lying dead upon the
ground.

37.
And Sennacherib King of Assyria] Supple, When he heard of this slaughter.

Departed.] Out of the Land of Judah with much fear.

And went and returned.] i. e. And returned.

Those words [And went] are redundant. See the like cap. 2.3.

At Nineveh.] Nineveh was the chief City of Assyria.

38.
Adramelech and Sharezer his sons smote him with the sword.] It is a
tradition among the Jews, that Adramelech and Sharezer killed their Father,
because he had vowed to offer them as a Sacrifice to his God Nisroch: if he
would appease the minds of those which were angry with him. For many who had
lost their Sons, and Brothers, and Kinsmen in that slaughter which the Angel
made of the Assyrians were discontented with Sennacherib for it; as being the
cause thereof.

They escaped into the Land of Armenia.] This their escape was for fear, lest
they should be punished for their Parricide.

ISAIAH, CHAP. XXXVIII.
IN those days was Hezekiah sick, etc.] Hezekiah fell sick of this disease of
his, about the 14th or beginning of the 15th year of his reign: for after this
he reigned fifteen years, v. 5. And in all he reigned twenty nine years, 2
Kings 18.2. Take fifteen therefore out of twenty and nine, and there remains
fourteen: In the latter end therefore of the fourteenth or beginning of the
fifteenth year, did this sickness happen. It happened therefore while
Sennacherib was warring in Judea, which also appears from the sixth verse of
this Chapter.

Sick unto death.] Hezekiah was said to be sick unto death at this time,
because his Disease was in its own nature deadly, and brought him (as we say)
to the point of Death.

Set thine house in order.] i. e. Set the affairs of thine house in order, as
thou would have them disposed of after thy death. q. d. Make thou thy Will,
and dispose of thy goods as thou please.

For thou shall die and not live.] A Question will presently arise upon these
words; why Hezekiah dyed not, when as the Lord said to him by his Prophet, Thou
shall dye and not live? The Answer is, because this sentence of the Lord was
not absolute, but conditional, and so Hezekiah took it, as is evident by his
praying to God for mercy herein; upon which prayer the Lord restored him to his
health.

It is frequent with God to promise and threaten in terms which seem absolute,
but include a Condition, or have an exception tacitly involved: which condition
or exception the Lord concealeth, that they whom the Promise or Threat
concerns, may be the more earnest with the Lord, to hasten his Promise, or
remove his Threats.

2.
Then Hezekiah turned his face toward the Wall and prayed, etc.] Hezekiah
turned his face toward the Wall as he lay in his bed, that he might pray to
God with the more intention of mind; while he turned his face from those which
stood by, and removed his eyes from distracting Objects.

And prayed unto the Lord.] to wit, to spare his life.

3.
Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee, etc.] To
walk before God, is so to live, as if we had God always before our eyes: And
they that so live strive to please him, as a servant is always diligent and
careful to please his Master when he is in his Masters sight.

In truth.] And not in show and appearance only.

With a perfect heart.] With an heart free from hypocrisy.

Have done that which is good in thy sight.] Have done that which pleases thee.

After these words; understand these words, to wit, Remember this, O Lord, I
beseech thee, and because I have done this, be gracious unto me, and spare thou
my life, and cut not off my days at this time.

Note here first, that holy men did sometimes make mention of their good deeds
before the Lord, in their prayers to him, as did Nehemiah, Nehem. 13.14. and
Jeremiah, Jerem. 15.15. and Hezekiah here.

Note secondly, that when they did make mention of their good deeds before the
Lord, they did it for the most part when they were in troubles and tribulation.

Note thirdly, that though they did make mention of their good deeds, they did
not mention them as meritorious causes of what they prayed for: And this is
plain by Nehemiah, who when he had in the fifth and sixth Chapter of his Book,
and in the thirteenth Chapter and fourteenth verse, and elsewhere, entreated
the Lord that he would remember him, according to his good deeds; in the
thirteenth Chapter, and the two and twentieth verse, he says, Remember me, O
my God, concerning this also, and spare me according to the greatness of thy
mercy.

Note fourthly, that the reason why they mention their good deeds at such time
is, first, That they might the more incline the Lord to mercy; For the Lord is
more ready to show mercy to those which endeavor to live according to his
Laws, then to those which neglect them. Secondly, that they might sustain
themselves against the Pusillanimity and faint-heartednesse which might assail
them, being prone by nature thereto: for the testimony of a good Conscience
produces boldness toward God, 1 Pet. 3.21.

But besides these, Hezekiah might have a special reason to move him to
mention his good deeds, and that is this, because the Lord made a promise to
David, saying, If thy Children take heed to their way to walk before me in
truth with all their heart, and with all their soul, there shall not fail
thee, a man on the Throne of Israel, 1 Kings 2.4. And at this time Hezekiah had
not a Child to succeed him in the Throne.

And Hezekiah wept sore.] viz. Because God had said unto him, Thou shall dye
and not live, v. 1.

It may be asked here, why Hezekiah should weep sore, to hear that he should
dye?

Answ. A general reason may be this: Because in the time of the Law (in which
Hezekiah lived) the hope of eternal life was not so great as it is under the
Gospel; because the glory to come was not so fully revealed then as it is now,
Ephesians. 3.5. therefore was death more feared then now it is. But besides this,
Hezekiah might have many particular reasons for which he wept at the hearing of
his death. As first, because if he should dye, then he should leave Judah and
Jerusalem under the pressure and danger of Sennacherib, and must not see the
delivery of it. Secondly, because he had no Son as yet to succeed him in his
Throne. And it might be a cause of sorrow to him, to think that the Promise
made to David and Solomon, 1 Kings 8.25. should not appertain to him and his
posterity: yea it is inbred by Nature even in good men, to grieve to think that
they should dye Childlesse, and that their Inheritance should come to
strangers. See an example of this in Abraham, Genesis 15.2. Add to this, that
Hezekiah knew that the Messiah was to arise out of the seed of David: therefore
if he should live to have issue, he might hope that the Messiah might arise out
of that, from which hope he should be cut off, by dying at this time. Thirdly,
he might imagine, that they which had ascribed the calamities of his times to
him, because he brake down the Altars and the Images, etc. might be more bold
to ascribe it to him, if he should now dye, and others would be more prone to
believe them, as if his sin in this had hastened his death. Fifthly, He might
think that God did intend to cut him off in displeasure, (which could not be
but grievous to him to think of) because the Prophet came as Gods Herald to
threaten him with death: And for this reason perhaps among the rest, he does
here mention, how he had walked before God in truth, etc.

5.
Thus says the Lord the God of David thy Father,] David is said to be the
Father of Hezekiah, because Hezekiah descended from David, though after many
Generations, Matthew. 1. v. 6, 9. And the Lord in sending to Hezekiah the promise
of Recovery, styles himself, the God of David his Father; that Hezekiah might
know, that he was mindful of the promise which he the Lord made to David, 1
Kings 2.4. which Hezekiah did tacitly mind him of in his prayers. v. 3.

I have seen thy tears.] i. e. I have taken special notice of thy tears, and
am moved to compassion by them.

I will add unto thy days fifteen years.] i. e. I will add to the days
which thou have already lived fifteen years.

6.
And I will deliver thee and this City out of the hands of the King of
Assyria.] It appears from hence, that this sickness befell Hezekiah while
Jerusalem was besieged by Sennacherib's Army. And if ye would know a reason
why then it was not recorded amongst those things which were done in that time,
cap. 37. the reason is plain, viz. Because that so brief an History should
not be interrupted with passages which concerned it not.

Note here, that either Hezekiah prayed for the deliverance of Jerusalem from
the pressure of Sennacherib's Army as well as for the continuance of his own
life: Or that such is the goodness of our gracious God, as that he gives more
to his, then they ask for.

8.
Behold, I will bring, etc.] q.d. Behold, I the Lord will bring, etc.

I will bring again the shadow of the degrees which is gone down in the
Sunne-Diall of Ahaz ten Degrees backward.] By the Sun-Diall of Ahaz, is meant
the Sun-Dial which Ahaz the Father of Hezekiah made or caused to be made in one
of the Courts of the Royal Palace.

By the Degrees which were in the Dial, are meant the lines which were cut or
painted in that Dial, wherewith the half hours were marked: So that while
the shadow passed from one of these Lines or Degrees, to the Line or Degree
next to it, was half an hour: And while it passed on from that Line or Degree
to the next, was another half hour, etc.

By the Shadow of the degrees is meant the shadow which the Gnomon or hand of
the Sunne-Diall casts when the Sun shines upon the Dial: which shadow, as
the Sun goes forward from East to West, ordinarily goes from one degree to
another, that is, from one Line in the Dial to another, (and so shows how
the day passes) and is therefore called, The shadow of Degrees.

The going backward of this shadow ten Degrees, was when the shadow went
backward ten of these Lines; which was caused by the miraculous going back of
the Sun, from the West toward the East. For I conceive that the Sun it self
went back at this time: And so much I gather from 2 Chronicles. 32.31. And Ecclus.
48.23.

So the Sun returned ten Degrees.] By the Sun is meant the shadow of
Degrees which is caused by the Sun; Per Metonymiam efficientis.

By which Degrees it was gone down.] The Shadow is said to go down by
Degrees, when it passes from Lines, which signify more early, so Lines
signifying later times in the day, which is caused by the going of the Sun from
the East toward the West.

10.
In the cutting off of my days.] i. e. When the Lord was about to cut off my
days, and to take away my life.

When he says, In the cutting off of my days, he alludes to the manner of
Weavers, who when they have made an end of their Web, cut it off from the
Thrum.

I shall go to the gates of the grave,] i. e. I shall dye; Metonymia Effecti.
For they which dye, are carried to the grave, there to be buried.

Note, that the Sepulchers of the dead, especially among the Jews, had their
doors and their gates which were made fast; for their Sepulchers were hollow
places, either cut out of rocks, or arched with brick or stone, or the like, as
appears by the Sepulcher of Christ, which was cut out of a rock, Mat. 27.60.
and into which John and Peter entered, John 20. v. 6, 8. and into which those
three women which brought their spices went in, Luke 24.3. as appears also by
the Tombs out of which the two possessed with Devils came, Mat. 8.28. and in
which they dwelt, Mar. 5.3. Hence comes the phrase of the gates of the grave,
and the gates of death, etc.

I am deprived of the residue of my years.] The age of man is threescore years
and ten, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 90.10. to this does Hezekiah seem here to
allude, and as many years of threescore and ten as he had not lived, he calls
the residue of his years.

Or, by the residue of years, he means that time which he might have lived
after this by the course of nature, had it not bin for this violent sickness.

11.
I shall not see the Lord] i. e. I shall not visit the Temple of the Lord.

He puts the Lord, for the Temple of the Lord, by a Metonymy.

In the Land of the Living,] i. e. On the earth, which is the land and place of
the Living.

I shall behold man no more] i. e. I shall never see any man again.

With the Inhabitants of the world.] As they do which live and dwell in the
world.

12.
Mine age is departed,] i. e. That part of the threescore years and ten which I
have not yet lived, is departed from me. See notes verse. 10. for he calls that
his age here, which he calls the residue of his years there.

He speaks metaphorically of his age (though it be a thing successive, and
exists only by the present instant) as of a thing whose parts are all
together, and as it were at once before our eyes.

And is removed from me] i. e. And is removed out of my sight.

As a Shepherds tent,] i. e. As a Shepherds tent, which to day we see pitched
in such a place, and to morrow is removed from that place, and pitched we know
not where.

He says a shepherds tent, because that represents the inconstancy and
uncertainty of our life, more then any other Tent; for the soldiers tent may
stand pitched long in a place, as in sieges and the like; but Shepherds change
the place of their Tent every day, because of the opportunity of fresh pasture
for their Cattle.

I have cut off like a weaver my life,] i. e. I have caused the Lord to cut off
my life, as if a Weaver should cut off his web from the thrum, before it be
finished.

He says I have cut off, for I have caused the Lord to cut off, (Supple, by my
sin) Per Metonymiam Effecti.

He will cut me off] i. e. The Lord will cut off my life.

He says Me, for my life, by a Metonymy.

With pining sickness,] i. e. With a grievous sickness, which makes my flesh
to consume and pine away.

From day even to night will thou make an end of me.] i. e. I said all the day
long, that is, From morning even till night, thou will make an end of me before
the night comes.

Here is an (...) of those words, I said all the day long, which may be
understood partly from the beginning of the tenth and eleventh verses, and
partly from this place.

And the day is here put for the morning, which is but part of the day, Per
Synecdochen Integri.

Here is also an Enallage of the person, where he passes from the third to the
second person.

13.
I reckoned till morning] q. d. When night came, I reckoned and made an account
with my self every hour and minute till the morning.

That as a Lion, so will He break my bones,] i. e. That as a Lion breaks the
bones of a Lamb or a Sheep, which he makes his prey, so will the Lord break
all my bones before morning, and so kill me.

Hence it is conjectured that Hezekiahs sickness was a most vehement fever;
for other sicknesses affect only particular parts, but a fever torments the
whole body.

Note here again an Enallage of the Person from the second to the third.

From day even to night will thou make an end of me.] q. d. And when morning
came again, I said, all the day long from morning even till night, that thou will make and end of me before night comes. See verse. 12. For these words, I
said all the day long, are to be understood here as they are there.

By these sayings Hezekiah shows in what great pain he was in.

14.
Like a Crane or a Swallow, so did I chatter,] q. d. I made a doleful noise
through the extremity of my pain, like the noise of a Crane or a Swallow: Or
thus, q. d. My strength was so spent with the extremity of my disease and my
pain, as that I could not speak plainly and articulately, but did seem to
chatter like a Crane or Swallow, rather then speak like a man.

I did mourn as a Dove,] i. e. I did make a mournful noise, or groan like a
Dove, saying, etc.

Mine eyes fail with looking upward,] i. e. Saying, (for this word is to be
understood) I have lifted up mine eyes toward heaven in prayer to thee, O
Lord, and so long have I lifted them up, that they wax weary and dim with
looking up.

By this is meant, that he had prayed to God for ease, and expected ease from
him, but had not received it.

The zealous and faithful people of God were wont in their prayers to lift up
their eyes toward heaven (which is Gods dwelling place) and to continue them
in that posture as long as they prayed; and when they had obtained what they
prayed for, they ceased to pray for what they had obtained, and so let down
their eyes; but if they obtained not, they still prayed and continued looking
upward till their eyes were weary and dim. Hence comes the phrase, Mine eyes
fail with looking upward; or, I have prayed but obtained not what I prayed for.
This phrase does the Psalmist also use, Psalm. 69.3. and Psalm. 119.82.

I am oppressed,] Supple, By my disease.

He speaks of his disease metaphorically, as of a cruel Creditor which
oppresses his Debtor, and casts him into prison, or delivers him to the
tormentors, as M^tth. 18.34.

Undertake for me.] q. d. Give me ease from this my disease, and release me
from my pain.

He persisteth in the Metaphor of a cruel Creditor, for such a Creditor,
though he oppresses his Debtor, and casts him into prison, and delivers him
to the tormentors; yet if a sufficient man will undertake for his Debtor, to
pay him his debt, he will release him out of prison, and deliver him from the
tormentors.

15.
What shall I say?] q. d. What shall I say? and how shall I be able to express
the loving kindness of the Lord.

He is here suddenly rapt from the expression of his great misery, to the
consideration of the great mercy and loving kindness of the Lord; and these
words are to be conceived as uttered from the thought and meditation of that
which Isaiah said to him, v. 15. that the Lord would add to to his days
fifteen years.

He has spoken unto me and himself has done it,] i. e. The Lord has both
spoken unto me by his Prophet saying, that he will add to my days fifteen
years, v. 5. and he will also do what he has spoken.

In the last of these words, a Preterperfect is put for a Future Tense, to show
the certainty of what he speaks of, as it is often put.

I shall go softly all my years in the bitterness of my soul.] q. d. I will be
sorry all the days of my life, that I have offended so good and gracious a God
as the Lord is to me.

I shall go softly,] i. e. I will mourn Metonymia Adjuncti.

He alludes here to the gesture or pace of those which are penitent and
sorrowful, and mourn for their sins, for such go softly and slowly. See 1
Kings 21.27.

All my years] i. e. All my years which the Lord has added to my days, v. 5.

Note here, that for all this, we must not think that Hezekiah did nothing else
but mourn and go softly all the rest of his life; for this phrase is to be
understood like those which Paul uses, Rejoice evermore, pray without ceasing,
1 Thessalonians. 5. ver. 16, 17. Without ceasing I have remembrance of thee in my
prayers night and day, 2 Timothy 1.3. Praying always with all prayer, Ephesians. 6.18.
Rejoice always, Phil. 4.4. and which the Psalmist uses, I Will sing unto the
Lord as long as I live, I will sing praise unto my God while I have my being,
Psalm. 104.33. I Will call upon him as long as I live, Psalm. 116.2. which kind of
phrases contain a Hyperbole, and signify only frequent and often acts.

In the bitterness of my soul.] i. e. Because of the grief of my soul, which
grief I have conceived from that, that I have offended so gracious a God as the
Lord is.

Note that To In, is put here for To Because of, for the Hebrews use this
Preposition In, instead of many other Prepositions.

Note also, that bitterness is put here (by a Metaphor and Metonymy of the
cause joined together) for grief, because bitter things are grievous to the
taster.

16.
By these things men live,] i. e. By such things as these are, which thou have
done for me, and promised to me, many men (which are never so dangerously sick
and nigh unto death) recover their health again and live.

Note here, that the Hebrews have no Potentiall Mood, but use an Indicative for
a Potentiall, and so an Indicative is here taken for a Potentiall; men live,
for men may live, and by men, are understood men in any dangerous condition of
life, Per Synecdochen Generis.

And in all these things is the life of my spirit,] By all these things which
thou have done for me, and promised me, shall I certainly be revived and live,
who was near unto death, and therefore afflicted with grief and sorrow.

He puts my spirit, for me, a part for the whole man by a Synecdoche, and a
Present for a Future Tense.

By all these things, he means the visitation whereby God did visit him in
mercy by his Prophet; the promise which God made to him of adding fifteen years
to his days, verse. 5. the promise of delivering Jerusalem from the hand of the
King of Assyria, v. 6. God giving him a sign to confirm what he promised, v.
7, 2. His apointing a plaster of figs for his recovery, v. 21. etc.

So will thou recover me.] q. d. As thou have said, so will thou recover me
from my sickness.

17.
Behold, for peace I had great bitterness,] i. e. Behold, for health I had a
great sickness.

He puts peace for health, and peace may signify health, per Synecdochen
Generis; for (after the Hebrew manner of speaking) peace signifies all
prosperity and all good things, under which health is contained.

Again, peace may signify health, because in health the humors of the body
rage not, neither do they so disquiet a man as they do in sickness; and there
is a great harmony and concord between the elements and the qualities of the
body in health, which is not in sickness.

And he puts bitterness for sickness, by a Metaphor; because as bitterness
is grievous to the pallat, so is sickness to the whole body.

To my soul.] i. e. To me.

A part is put here for the wholeman, by a Synecdoche.

Delivered it] i. e. Delivered my soul, that is, delivered me.

From the pit of my corruption,] i. e. From the grave, in which the dead bodies
corrupt and putrify.

For thou have cast all my sins behind thy back.] i. e. For thou have
forgiven me all my sins.

In these words there is contained an elegan^ Metaphor, for because we cannot
see those things which are behind our backs, he says, thou have cast all my
sins behind thy back, for thou beholdest not my sins, and those sins
which God sees not, nor beholdes, he is said to pardon. See Psalm. 51.9.

Note that in the Scripture phrase, God is said to forgive a man his sins,
when he takes away any punishment from him, which he either fears or
suffers by reason of his sins

And here, because he took away that grievous sickness which he had inflicted
upon Hezekiah for his sins, he is said to cast all his sins behind his back, or
to forgive him all his sins. See Notes Cap. 33.24.

18.
For the grave cannot praise thee,] i. e. For the dead which lie in the grave
cannot praise thee.

He puts the grave for the dead which lie in the grave, per Metonymiam
Subjecti, or Continentis.

These words show the end or final cause why God did forgive Hezekiah his
sins, and deliver his soul from the pit, q. d. And therefore did thou cast
all my sins behind thy back, and deliver my soul from the pit of corruption,
that I might praise thee, for they which are dead cannot praise thee, etc.

Death cannot celebrate thee,] i. e. The dead cannot celebrate thee.

He puts death for the dead, per Metonymiam Adjuncti.

They that go down to the pit] i. e. The dead which are carried to the grave
and there buried.

Cannot hope for thy truth.] q. d. Cannot so much as hope for thy truth, much
less can they declare it and praise thee for it.

The truth of God is to be taken here for the goodness and mercy of God shown
to men. (But the goodness and mercy of God in relation to some former promise,
and to be performed according to that promise.) Hence we read goodness, and
truth, and mercy, often joined together, as Genesis 24.27. and 32.10. and Psalm.
115.1. why could not they which went down to the pit, hope for the Lords truth?

Answer. Because all their thoughts perished, Psalm. 146.4.

The living, the living, he shall praise thee,] q. d. But the living, the
living, both can and shall praise thee, Supple, For this thy mercy which thou
have showed me.

Note, that this Particle He, is redundant here, (as it is often elsewherr) and
that by an Hebraisme.

The father to the children shall make known thy truth.] q. d. Fathers shall
make known unto their children the goodness and mercy which thou have showed
to me, and shall praise thee for it.

Thy truth.] i. e. Thy mercy and goodness which thou have shown to me, in
restoring me to my health.

I said that the truth of God is taken for the mercy and goodness of God, but
the mercy and goodness of God as it is showed in relation to some former
promise, v. 18. To what promise therefore does this relate?

Answer. It relates to that, v. 5. I will add unto thy days fifteen years,
or it may relate to that promise which God made to David, 1 Kings 2.4. For by
this mercy of God, whereby Hezekiah was redeemed from the grave, came Hezekiah
to have a Son, who succeeded Him in the Thron, according to the promise of God
made to David.

20.
The Lord was ready to save me,] q. d. When I was sick unto death, the Lord was
ready to save me.

We will sing,] i. e. I and my people, or I and the fathers, and their children
( v. 19.) will sing.

My songs] i. e. The songs which I have made, or shall make in the praise of
the Lord, for his goodness and mercy showed to me.

In the house of the Lord.] i. e. In the Temple.

21.
For Isaiah had said, let them take a lump of figs,] I conceive that these
words are to be referred to those, The Lord was ready to save me, as containing
a reason why Hezekiah was so confident as to say, when he was in most extremity
of his sickness, The Lord is ready to save me. q. d. And therefore was
Hezekiah so confident when he was most sick, as to say, The Lord is ready to
save me, because Isaiah had said, let them take a lump of figs and lay it for
a plaster upon the boil.

Let them taks a lump of figs and lay it for a plaster upon the boil,] Some
conjecture from hence, that the specificall disease with which Hezekiah
labored at this time was the plague; and that the boil here mentioned, was
the plague sore or plague-swelling.

This plaster of figs, (though some think that it had no natural power for
this cure; others, that is was hurtful by nature to this boil, and that
therefore it was the greater miracle that healed it) was certainly proper and
convenient for this boil, yet was there a miracle in it; in that it cured the
boil, more speedily than it could do by nature.

Though this plaster be called a plaster of figs, yet might it consist of
other ingredients as well as figs, though figs gave the denomination to the
plaster.

And he shall recover.] i. e. And Hezekiah shall recover from his sickness.

22.
Hezekiah also had said] Supple, When Isaiah had told him, that the Lord would
heal him, and that on the third day he should go up to the house of the Lord, 2
Kings 20.5.

What is the sign that I shall go up to the house of the Lord?] This question
Hezekiah asked, 2 Kings 20.8. and the sign given him was, that the shadow
should go back ten degrees in the Dial of Ahaz, v. 8. and 2 Kings 20. v. 9,
10.11.

After these words, to wit, Hezekiah also had said, what is the sign that I
shall go up to the house of the Lord? We must understand these or the like
words, and he received this sign of the Lord, That the shadow should go ten
degrees backward, by which it had gone down in the Dial of Ahaz.

Note, that this is no other reason why Hezekiah was so confident as to say,
The Lord was ready to save me. verse. 20.

ISAIAH, CHAP. XXXIX.
AT that time] It was not presently upon Hezekiahs recovery that
Merodach-Baladan sent to Hezekiah, but a good while, after though upon occasion
of his recovery; wherefore the time here mentioned is not to be strictly taken,
but with some latitude, yet at what time he sent, is not very certain; for this
Relative is often put without an Antecedent.

Merodach-Baladan the Son of Baladan King of Babylon] Who, and what this
Merodach-Baladan was, is much controverted; I assent to him who takes him to
have been a Mede, for the Medes did occupy the Kingdom of Babylon after
Esarhaddon, Sennacheribs son, according to the Prophesies which went concerning
the change of that Kingdom, Cap. 13.17. and 21.9. though the Medes were
afterward driven out by Nebopolassar the Chaldean, the Father of
Nabuchodonozer.

This Merodach was deified for his good deserts.

Sent letters and a present to Hezekiah,] It seems from hence and from other
places, that it was an usual thing between Kings and Princes (though they
differed in religion) to use offices of humanity, and to send greeting one to
another, and to signify their joy in the prosperity, and their grief in the
adversity one of another. David did so at the death of Nahash, the King of the
Ammonites, for he sent to Hanun the Son of Nahash, to comfort him by the hand
of his Servants, for his Father, 2 Samuel 10.2. And Toi King of Hamath, sent
Joram his Son with presents to King David, to salute him and bless him, when
he had sought against Hadadezer, and smitten him, 2 Samuel 8. v. 9, 10.

Sent letters] The letters here mentioned, were not only gratulatory, to joy
Hezekiah of his recoverie; but the King of Babylon did also enquire by them,
concerning the miracle of the Suns going back, Cap. 38.8. as you may learn, 2 Chronicles. 32.31.

And a present] This present he sent to joy Hezekiah of his recovery.

It was usual with Princes, when they sent friendly one to another, to send
gifts and presents, and not letters or messages only, for love is better
expressed by gifts and presents, then by bare words.

For he heard that he had been sick and recovered.] Supple, Miraculously.

2.
And Hezekiah was glad of them,] i. e. And Hezekiah was glad of the letter and
of the presents, and of the coming of the Ambassadors: and therefore was he
glad of them, because by them he was honored after such a manner, of so great a
King; as also because he thought that Judea would be the safer now, because of
so great a kings friendship.

And showed them] i. e. And showed the Ambassadors of Merodach-Baladan.

Here is a Relative without an Antecedent.

And showed them the house of his precious things, etc.] How rich Hezekiah was,
and how he abounded in wealth and treasure. See 2 Chronicles. 32.27.

But when Hezekiah was brought so poor by Sennacherib, as that he was fain to
give him all the Silver that was found in the House of the Lord, and in the
Treasures of the Kings house, 2 Kings 18.15. to pay the sum that he laid upon
him: How came Hezekiah to be so rich in so short time?

Answ. Besides other means by which the Lord might enrich Hezekiah, Hezekiah
was enriched by the spoil of the Assyrians which the Angel slew, Cap. 37.36.
and by the gifts and presents which were brought to him from all parts, 2 Chronicles. 32.23.

That which Hezekiah did here in showing the Ambassadors of the King of Babylon
all his precious things, savoured of Vainglory. And seldom it is, that even
the best of men can use the temporal blessings of God as they ought.

And it was not only vainglory in Hezekiah thus to do, but want of judgment
too; for it is dangerous for a Prince to show his Riches to strangers: For this
only thing has often allured the Barbarous Nations to invade the Roman Empire.

3.
What said these men? And from whence came they unto thee?] Isaiah asks these
questions, that he might take occasion by Hezekiah's Answer to show Hezekiah
his folly.

Hezekiah said, They are come from a far Country to me, even from Babylon.]
The Prophet asked two Questions: But here is mentioned an Answer only to the
last of them. And some say that Hezekiah gave answer only to the last, and
therefore blames him as though he had omitted that which concerned the glory of
God, and boasted of that which did make for his own Renown. But this
Interpretation may seem to be too harsh against Hezekiah; yet it is written,
that in the business of the Ambassadors of the Princes of Babylon, who sent to
him to enquire of the wonder that was done in the Land, God left him to try
him, 2 Chronicles. 32.31. Others say that Hezekiah gave an answer to both Questions,
but one of them is here omitted; because the Prophet took an occasion only
from his last Answer to reprehend him.

This Answer of Hezekiah savours of vainglory also, and was spoke out of
boasting.

6.
Shall be carried to Babylon.] This was fulfilled hy Nebuchadnezzar King of
Babylon, 2 Kings 24.13.

7.
Of thy Sons that shall issue from thee, which thou shall beg^t shall they
take away.] This was fulfilled 2 Kings 24.15. and 25.7.

And they shall be Eunuchs in the Palace of the King of Babylon.] An Eunuch
signifies properly a man which is gelt: And he is so called, (...), i. e. from
the care and charge which he had of the Beds: for they were wont to be employed
by great Princes in their Bed-Chambers, and in the care and custody of their
Wives and Concubines, because they were more nimble and serviceable then women,
and yet chaste, by reason of their being gelt.

And because these were so near to Princes and their Wives and Concubines,
hence all great Officers in the Kings Court were called Eunuchs, though they
were not gelt nor employed in the Bedchamber about the Kings Wives and
Concubines as Eunuchs were: Yea any Courtier might be called an Eunuch, Per
Synecdochen speciei.

Though their Office be never so great in a foreign Kings Court: yet it is a
grief and misery for Kings, and the Children of Kings to be Servants, though
to Kings, upon such a way as these were.

8.
Good is the word of the Lord which thou have spoken.] These words may signify
Hezekiah's submission to the judgment of God here denounced against him. For
by this kind of speech did inferiors signify, that they submitted themselves
to the sentence of their Superiors, though it were bitter. See 1 Kings 2.
verse 38. and 42. Yet the Hebrews do so interpret this place, as if Hezekiah
had therefore said, that the Word of the Lord was good; Because the judgment
thereby denounced was not to fall upon him in person, nor in his days, but
only to fall upon his Children in after times. And indeed these words, For
there shall be Peace and Truth in my days, seem much to favor this
Interpretation of theirs; and much more, as they are recorded in the same
story, 2 Kings 20.19. They therefore reprehend Hezekiah here, for that he
seemed not to be much touched with that which should fall upon his People, and
upon his Children, being that he himself was not to taste of that Cup. But if
Hezekiah offended here, he humbled himself afterward, 2 Chro. cap. 32. v. 26.

He said moreover,] q. d. And he did not only say, that the Word of the Lord
was good; But he did moreover show a reason why he said, It was good.

Th^re shall be peace and truth in my days.] i. e. There shall be a sure or
firm peace in my days; for though this judgment shall take away peace when it
comes, yet it shall not come so long as I live.

For understanding of this sense; Note first, that the word Truth is to be
taken here for Firmness and Assurance; as to speak the Truth is taken for to be
constant and firm, Ephesians. 4.15. And that upon this ground, because the Hebrew
word Emeth signifies Firmness and Assurance as well as Truth; and this word
Truth must be thought to be of equal signification with its Original Emeth.

Note secondly, that in these words [Peace and truth] that is, [peace and
assurance] or, peace and firmnes] there is a figure called (...); and two words
are used to express one thing, Peace and Truth, that is, Peace and Assurance,
or Peace and Firmness, to express a sure and firm Peace: The like to which we
observed cap. 4.5. in those words [A smoke and a cloud by day] for a smoaky
Cloud by day.

Jer 14.13. we read this, [I will give you assured peace;] yet in the Original
there are the same words as are in this place of Isaiah, to wit, Sheloth Emeth.

There shall be peace and truth in my days.] It may be here asked, how Hezekiah
came to know that there should be peace and truth in his days.

Answ. Hezekiah might easily gather it out of the Prophets words recorded in
this place: For the threats here are not that he, but that his Sons should be
taken away and made Eunuchs in the Palace of the King of Babylon: yea, it may
be that the Prophet told him in plain terms, that the judgment which God had
denounced against him at this time should not fall out in his days, though it
be not expressed, but omitted for brevity sake, and left to be understood out
of these words; for such kind of Brachylogie is often used. See cap. 32.24.

In my days.] i. e. All the days of my life.

Note, that the peace here promised to Hezekiah was only a Security or
Assurance, that he should not be infested from Babylon during his life.
Therefore notwithstanding this he might have war, especially an offensive war
with other Nations, as it is probable he had with the Philistines, Cap. 11.14.

ISAIAH, CHAP. XL.
COmfort ye, comfort ye my people, etc.] The Prophet having foretold the
Captivity of the Jews (wherein they were carried captive into Babylon by
Nebuchadnezzar and Nebuzaradan, one of the Captains of Nebuchadnezzar,) that he
might comfort the godly (who were carried into Captivity for the wickedness of
other men) he does in this last part of his Book prophecy to them of their
deliverance out of their Captivity, which should be glorious; and their
flourishing estate in which they should live when they were come back into
their own Land; and the Security and Safety which they should live in there;
and the great Victories which they should atchieve, etc.

And note, that when all the blessings of God, bestowed upon the Jews, had in
them a shadow of those blessings which we receive by Christ; those blessings
which Isaiah mentions here from this place, to the end of this Prophecy, do
in a most eminent manner shadow forth those blessings which we receive by
Christ: the very words of the Prophet being so directed by God, as that they do
oftentimes more simply and clearly signify those things which we enjoy by
Christ, then those things which Isaiah would first signify thereby; that is,
then the blessings which God would bestow upon the Jews, by and after their
deliverance from their Captivity.

Comfort ye, comfort ye my people,] Comfort ye my people the Jews which are in
captivity; Comfort them with the joyful news of their deliverance.

Says your God.] i. e. Says your God, ye Jews, to his Prophets.

2.
Speak comfortably to Jerusalem.] q. d. Speak ye comfortable words to
Jerusalem, O ye my servants.

To Jerusalem.] By Jerusalem he means the material City of Jerusalem, which
he here speaks to as a person, by a Metaphor, or Prosopopeia.

Her warfare is accomplished.] i. e. Her great labor and hardship which she
has suffered in her captivity, is at an end.

Her warfare.] Because warfare is full of labor and hardship, therefore is
warfare put here for labor and hardship.

And when he says, Her warfare is accomplished; he seems to allude to those
years in which a man might be compelled to serve in war, and after which age he
was free from that burden.

For she has received at the Lords hand double for all her sin.] Some
interpret these words thus; For she shall receive at the Lords hands twice as
great blessings, as she has suffered punishments thereat.

And so blessings are here to be understood, and sin is to be taken for
punishment for sin, as it is also taken Cap. 5.18. and a Preterperfect-tense is
put for a Future.

This place thus expounded, has its like Cap. 61.7.

But others expound these words thus: q. d. For she has suffered great
punishments at the Lords hands for her sin: Supple, By which the Lord is now
moved to pity and compassion toward her, upon her repentance: As a Father is
moved to pity his Child, whom he has grievously chastised for his faults, when
he sees him sorry for his faults.

Note that the word, double, signifies with the Hebrews as much as great and
abundant; as Jer. 17.18. Bring upon them the day of evil, and destroy them with
double destruction: And 1 Timothy 5.18. Let the Elders which rule well be counted
worthy of double honor. In both which places double is put for great or
abundant.

Note also that (...) punishments is to be understood in the word double.

This was delivered by the Prophet long before the Jews were in captivity, yet
it is spoken as though the Jews were even then in captivity, and had been long
therein. Thus do Prophets speak of things to come, as if they were present.

3.
The voice of him that cries in the wilderness,] i. e. The voice of the Crier
is heard in the wilderness, saying; or, I hear the voice of the Crier crying in
the wilderness, and saying: (...).

He speaks as though he heard the voice of him that cried; and by this he
shows the certainty and the suddenness of the Jews delivery, and return, out
of the captivity of Babylon.

In the wilderness,] He means the wilderness between Babylon and Judea.

Prepare ye the way of the Lord,] i. e. Prepare ye the way in which the Lord is
to walk, or march, from Babylon to Judea, with his people the Jews.

How they should prepare the way of the Lord, he shows in the following words
of this and the next Verse.

Make straight in the Desert a highway for our God.] i. e. Make in the
wilderness an highway for our God to walk in, and let it be straight.

Straight.] By straight is meant, not only that which has no windings and
turnings, but also that which has no risings and fallings, but is plain; and
that by a Syllepsis.

When as the way here spoken of was for the Jews to pass out of Babylon into
their own Land: Why he says it was for their God, I shall tell at the fifth
Verse.

In the Desert.] Between Babylon and Judea there were great Deserts and waste
places, to which the Prophet here alludes.

4.
Every valley shall be exalted,] i. e. Let every valley which is in the way be
filled up, and evened, or made plain with the other gro^nd.

He puts here a Future tense for an Imperative mood. And this Verse is an
Exegesis of the latter part of the former Verse.

And every mountain and hill shall be made low:] i. e. Let every mountain and
hill be dug down, and levelled with the other ground.

And the crooked shall be made straight.] i. e. And let the crooked ways be
made straight.

Because of great Bogs and Mires and Precipices, and the like accidents in the
way: Many a way goes crooked and winding, to avoid those Bogs and Mires and
Precipices, which would be made straight, to the great advantage of the
Traveller, if those Bogs and Mires and Precipices were filled with stones and
earth, etc. And to such has the Prophet here respect.

5.
And the glory of the Lord shall be revealed.] i. e. For the glorious Lord
shall come out of Babylon, and march openly with his people to Judea through
the wilderness.

And, is put here for For.

He puts also the glory of the Lord here, for the Lord himself which is
glorious, per Metonymiam Adjuncti. And he says, shall be revealed, for shall
come openly; as it is said, The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7.

And all flesh shall see it together.] i. e. And all people shall see him,
Supple, as he passes by.

He seems to allude here to the manner of men, who when any great Prince is to
pass by, with a great company attending him in a glorious manner, they gather
themselves together in great multitudes, and stand to see him as he passes by.

Note here, that what the Prophet says in the third and fourth Verses of this
Chapter, is spoken in allusion to what was wont to be done for great Princes
and their Retinue, when they were to remove from place to place, who had
Harbingers and way-makers sent before, to take care that the way, by which they
were to pass, was clean, and plain, and even; and workmen to do what they
commanded them, in preparing the way.

This whole description of preparing a way for the Lord, is brought only to
signify, that the Jews, in their return out of captivity from Babylon into
Judea, should have an easy passage thither, without any stop in their way.

What we read of here, Xerxes had done for him by his servants in aftertimes
to the full sounding of the letter; of whom Justin reports, Quod montes in
planum deducebat etc. Convexa vallium aequabat. Justin. lib. 2. cap. 10. fin.

The Prophet says, Prepare ye the way of THE LORD, and make straight an
highway for OUR GOD: And he says, that the GLORY OF THE LORD shall be
revealed; that is, That the GLORIOUS LORD shall pass gloriously from Babylon to
Judea in the sight of all men.

But why is it that he speaks thus?

Ans. When the Israelites were redeemed from the bondage in which they lived in
Egypt, the Lord himself brought them out, and marched before them: For the Lord
went before them by day in a pillar of Cloud, to lead them the way; and by
night in a pillar of Fire, to give them light to go by day and by night: Exodus
13.21. In allusion therefore to what God did then, when he delivered the
Israelites out of Egypt, the Prophet speaks here of God, when he should deliver
the Jews out of Babylon; as though God would in a visible and glorious manner
march before them then also, as he did when he brought them out of Egypt,
though indeed he would not: For note, that the Hebrews do often understand like
things by like, and so describe them. See Notes Cap. 4.5. And see Cap. 52. v.
12. where he says to the Jews, The Lord will go before you, and the God of
Israel will be your rearward.

For the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.] i. e. For the Lord has spoken it,
who cannot lie, and therefore what he has spoken shall come to pass.

The Prophet speaks of the Lord as of a man by a Prosopopoeia; and puts the
mouth, which is but part, for the whole man, by a Synecdoche.

3.
The voice of him that cries in the wilderness.] What is meant by these words
as they are taken in the first sense, and as they concern the Redemption of the
Jews out of Babylon, ye have heard: Now in the second and more sublime sense,
by [the voice of him that cries in the wilderness] the Holy Ghost means John
the Baptist, Mat. 3.3. For as the Crier here cries to the people to prepare
the way of the Lord, so did John the Baptist cry to the people of his time to
repent, and so to prepare a way for the coming of the Lord Christ. And as the
voice of this Crier was heard in the wilderness which lay between Babylon and
Judea, so was the voice of John heard in a wilderness too, to wit, the
wilderness of Judea, Matt. 3.1.

Where note, that as by the captivity of the Jews in Babylon is signified our
spiritual captivity and misery under sin and Satan; so by the deliverance of
the Jews out of that their captivity, is signified our spiritual Redemption by
Christ Jesus: In the Prophecy therefore of the deliverance of the Jews out of
the captivity of Babylon, there be many passages, which, as in a first sense
they concern things which appertain to the deliverance of the Jews; so, in a
second sense, they concern things which appertain to the Redemption which was
wrought by Christ Jesus.

6.
The voice said, Cry:] i. e. A voice said to me, Cry.

And he said, what shall I cry?] i. e. And I said, what shall I cry?

The Prophet speaks of himself here in a third person. The like may you read of
one speaking of himself in the third person, cap. 21. verse. 12.

All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as the flower of the
field.] i. e. And the voice said unto me, cry, and say with a loud voice thus;
All flesh, that is, all men, which are made of flesh, are as the grass; and all
their glory and goodliness is as the flower of the field.

The Note of similitude is here left to be understood.

7.
The grass withers, and the flower fades, because the Spirit of the Lord
blows upon it:] As when a red burning wind blows upon the grass, or upon
the flower, the grass withers, and the flower fades, because thereof: Even
so (for the Apodosis is left to be understood) when God is angry with all, or
any kind of flesh; that is, when he is angry with any men, whatsoever they
are, he can easily consume them, even with the breath of his nostrils, and they
shall perish.

By the Spirit of God is meant the wind (which he brings out of his treasures,
when he would have it blow, Psalm. 13.7.) and yet not any wind, but that which
the Countryman calls a red wind, which bliteth Trees, and Herbs, and Flowers.

Surely the people is grass.] q. d. Surely therefore the people that thou art
afraid of (even the people of the Babylonians) are as grass.

8.
But the Word of our God shall stand for ever.] q. d. But the Word of our God
shall never fail; And therefore the Word whereby he has spoken comfort to you,
and promised you deliverance out of the Babylonish captivity, shall stand firm,
and come to pass, maugre the Babylonians.

You may gather, by what has been said, what coherence these three last Verses
had with the former. The coherence is this.

In the five first Verses the Prophet prophecyeth to the Jews Deliverance out
of the Babylonish captivity; but the Jews being at this time sore oppressed,
and seeing themselves weak, and the Babylonians strong and mighty in power,
were like to give but little credence to the Prophets words, and despair of
ever being delivered. That therefore they might lift up their heads, and hope
for deliverance according to the Word of God, and might not fear the strength
and mighty power of the Babylonians, the Lord did for their sakes, by way of
prevention, show the Prophet a Vision, in which the voice of the Lord bids the
Prophet to tell his Countrymen, that all flesh (and the Babylonians as well as
others) were as grass; therefore they need not fear them, or any other men.

9.
O Sion, that bring good tidings,] i. e. O Jerusalem, that bring good
tidings to the other Cities of Judah, etc.

This seems to begin a new Sermon.

Sion is taken here for Jerusalem, a part for the whole: And he speaks to the
material Jerusalem, as if she were a person indeed, as he does often elsewhere
by a Prosopopoeia.

The good tidings which Sion here brings are mentioned in the tenth and
eleventh Verses.

Get thee up into the high mountain:] Supple, and there proclaim the good
tidings which thou bring, that they may be the Father-head.

O Jerusalem, that bring good tidings, etc.] This is a repetition of the
former sentence, with which repetition the Prophet is much delighted.

Say unto the Cities of Judah,] i. e. Say unto other the Cities of Judah.

He speaks here of the Cities of Judah as of women, by a Prosopopoeia, as he
did of Sion or Jerusalem.

Behold your God.] i. e. Behold your God comes unto you: See Verse. 3.

10.
Behold the Lord will come with a strong hand,] Behold the Lord himself will
come with a strong hand against the Babylonians who hold us captive, and will
deliver us out of their hands.

And his arm shall rule] i. e. And he shall now rule. He shall rule over us, as
a King over his Subjects, though till now the Babylonians have had dominion
over us: And he shall rule over the Babylonians as a Lord over his Vassals, and
a Conqueror over his Enemies, though hitherto they have reigned as Conquerors
and Lords themselves.

He speaks here of God, as of man, by an (...): and puts a part, to wit, the
arm, for the whole man, by a Synecdoche; the arm, I say, wherein the strength
of man is most seen.

For him,] These words are redundant, by an Hebrew elegancy.

Behold his reward is with him:] Supple, To reward all such of his people as
have waited for him.

And his work] i. e. And his reward. Work is put here for the reward of a work,
by a Metonymy: And this is a repetition of the former sentence.

Is before him.] i. e. Is in a readiness. See Cap. 62.11.

11.
He shall feed his flock like a shepherd:] q. d. He shall bring his people out
of Babylon into their own Cities; And while he brings them, he shall be to
them as a shepherd is to his flock which he feeds, and for which he provides
whatsoever is needful.

He shall gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom,] i. e. He
shall gather the lambs together, and take them up in his arms, and carry them
in his lap or bosom. The meaning is, that he shall take care and provide even
for the poorest and weakest of all the Jews, and bring them into their own Land
safe again.

And shall gently lead those which are with young.] Supple, Lest he should tire
them, or kill them by hard travel.

He says, And shall lead those which are with young, because Shepherds were
wont to go before their sheep, as well as follow them: for their sheep knew
them well, and were taught to follow them. See Psalm. 80.1. Joh. 10.4.

That which the Prophet means by this Metaphor of a Shepherd, is only this,
That the Lord should bring his people the Jews out of Babylon (where they were
in captivity) into their own Land, with as great care and safety as a Shepherd
does lead his flock from place to place.

12.
Who has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand?] The Prophet speaks of
God here as of a man, by an (...): and a vast and great man is he who can hold
all the waters of the Sea, and all Rivers and Fountains in the hollow of his
hand, and therewith measure them.

And meted out Heaven with a span,] He speaks of God as of a man, as before:
and a vast and great man is he, whose stand is so big, as that he can therewith
span the Heavens at once.

And comprehended the dust of the Earth in a measure,] He speaks still of God
as of a man: and a vast man and strong is he, that can put all the dust of the
Earth in a measure, and as easily take it up as we can a measure of dust of a
pint or less.

And weighed the mountains in the scales, and the hills in a balance?] He
speaks still of God as of a man: And a vast man he is, and of great strength,
which can weigh all the mountains of the Earth in scales, and all the hills
thereof in a balance, as easily as we can weigh that which is but of a dram
weight.

Note that after those words, viz. Who has measured the waters in the hollow
of his hand? and meted out Heaven with the span? and comprehended the dust of
the Earth in a measure? and weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills in a
balance? These or the like words are to be understood, Has not the Lord?

In this Verse the Prophet shows the power and might of God; And that he does
two ways: First, by describing God as a man of a vast stature, which he does
while he says that he measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, and meted
out the Heavens with a span, etc. And secondly, by telling that the Lord made
Heaven and Earth, which he does while he tells us that he measured the
Waters, and the dust of the Earth, and meted the Heavens, and weighed the hills
and the mountains.

Note, that when God created all things, he created them in measure, and
number, and weight, as the Wiseman speaks, Wisd. 11.20. Therefore it is, that
the Prophet, when he would tell us that God created the Heavens, and the Earth,
and all things therein contained, (thereby to show us Gods might, and his power
and strength) says, That he measured the Waters in the hollow of his hand, and
meted out Heaven with a Span, and comprehended the dust of the Earth in a
measure, and weighed the Mountains in Scales, and the Hills in a Balance:
alluding to Architects, who measure the particular parts of their buildings,
and the materials thereof, that they may be proportionable, part to part, and
all and every part to the whole.

But it may be asked here, how the Prophet comes here to speak of Gods power
and might?

Ans. He does it to prevent a tacit Objection. For whereas the Prophet said,
that the Lord would come with a strong hand against the Babylonians, and
deliver his people which were in captivity, etc. A weak Jew might object and
say, Yea, but is the Lord God of might enough to come against that mighty
people the Babylonians, and to deliver his people, which are in captivity under
them, out of their hands? etc. To which the Prophet here answers, That he is
of might enough to come against the Babylonians (as mighty as they are) and to
deliver his people, which are in captivity under them, out of their hands, when
he says, Who has measured the Waters in the hollow of his hand? etc. For he
that could do that (and the Lord did it) had might enough to come against the
Babylonians, and deliver the Jews out of their hands: For he that could do
that, had not his equal for might and power.

13.
Who has directed the Spirit of the Lord? or, being his Counselor, has
taught him?] q. d. Who was the Lords Counselor, to direct him and teach him
how he should make the World, and order the things therein contained, when he
had made them?

14.
Who instructed him and taught him in the path of judgment?] i. e. Who
instructed the Lord, and taught him in the way of judgment? that is, Who
instructed him, and taught him wisdom and discretion, when he built and ordered
the World?

These Interrogatives have the force of Negatives: q. d. There was none which
did instruct him; He did all these things by his own wisdom and judgment.

It may be asked, How the Prophet comes to speak here of the wisdom and
judgment of God? To which I answer, That the Prophet does it to prevent a
tacit Objection which a weak Jew might make: For a weak Jew might go on, and
say, Yea, but the Babylonians are a subtle and politic people, as well as a
strong: Though therefore we should grant that God had strength enough to come
against the Babylonians, yet he may not have judgment and discretion enough to
manage that strength: And vis consilii expers mole ruit sua; Strength without
judgment and discretion will ruin it self. In answer to which, the Prophet
here says, that God wanted not judgment and discretion to manage his strength:
For who has directed the Spirit of the Lord? etc.

15.
Behold the Nations are as a drop of a bucket,] i. e. The Nations are as a
thing of naught in respect of God.

As a drop of a bucket,] i. e. As a drop of water which hangs to the side or
bottom of a bucket, which if it falls off, no body regards.

And are counted as the small dust of the balance:] This is a repetition of
the former sentence.

By the small dust of the balance is meant any light thing that sticks to the
scale or balance, and is of no moment (so light it is) to turn the scale any
way.

He takes up the Isles as a very little thing.] i. e. He can take up the Isles
as if they were but a very little thing, and cast them whither he will, and
shake out the inhabitants thereof, and then what will become of the inhabitants?

By the Isles understand (after the Hebrew manner) those Lands which lie near
to Seas or Rivers, especially Mesapotamia, Assyria, Armenia, which were under
the Babylonians. Yea, by the Isles may be understood any Lands, or any
Countries: as Cap. 20. verse. 16. Cap. 41.1.

16.
And Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, nor the beasts thereof sufficient for a
burnt-offering.] i. e. And when we consider the greatness and power of our God,
all the trees of Lebanon would not be sufficient for wood, nor all the beasts
thereof sufficient for a burnt-offering, if we should go about to offer him a
burnt-offering answerable to him, and worthy of him.

17.
Before him] i. e. In respect of him. They are counted to him,] i. e. They are
counted or esteemed of him; or, they are accounted and esteemed in comparison
of him.

And vanity.] i. e. They are counted vanity; i. e. less then naught.

A question may here be asked, Why the Prophet does thus vilify the Nations in
the 15, 16, and 17 Verses? And how these Verses cohere with the former?

Ans. The Prophet does vilify the Nations here in answer to another tacit
Objection which a weak Jew might make. For a weak Jew might say; Suppose God
had power and strength enough to come against the Babylonians, and to deliver
his people out of their hands; and wisdom and discretion to manage that
strength: yet surely he has not power and strength to come against all those
Nations which will join with the Babylonians; For the Babylonians have many
Nations to join with them when they go forth to battle. In answer to this
Objection, the Prophet says here, That the Lord is able to deal with all
Nations, though all Nations should join with the Babylonians: For behold, says
he, the Nations are as a drop of a bucket, etc.

18.
To whom then will ye liken God?] q. d. To which then of the Heathen gods will
ye liken our God, that ye should as meanly esteem of our God as of him.

The Prophet takes occasion here to speak against Idols and Idolatry. For
whereas the Jews, which were to be carried into captivity into Babylon by
Nebuchadnezzar, were to live among Idolaters; they were to be admonished of the
Law of God, which forbad Idols; and of his Nature, which was such, as that it
was not like silver or gold, or the work of man's hand; that they might not be
drawn from God to serve Idols, as the Babylonians did.

What likeness will ye compare to him?] q. d. Which of the Heathen gods will ye
compare to him, that ye should so highly esteem of any of the gods of the
Heathen, as ye do of him?

What likeness] He calls the gods of the Heathen Likenesses, because they
were but Idols; the likenesses of something in Heaven above, or in the Earth
beneath, or in the Water under the Earth.

19.
The workman melts a graven image,] i. e. The workman melts Silver, or
Copper, or Brass, or some other baser metal, and casts it into an Image,
which after he polisheth by engraving.

And the Goldsmith spreads it over with gold,] i. e. And the Goldsmith does
afterward gild it over, or overlay it with thin plates of gold.

And casts silver chains.] These chains were either to put upon the neck of
the Idol for ornament (as some say,) or they were to fasten the Idol to some
wall or post, that it should not fall, as others say.

20.
He that is so impoverished,] i. e. He that is so poor.

That he has no oblation,] i. e. That he has no money to buy Brass, or Copper,
or Silver, or Gold, to offer for an oblation to his God, that an Image or Idol
may be made thereof.

An Oblation is taken here for Silver, or Gold, or Brass, or the like metal;
And Oblation in general, for such an oblation in special, by a Synecdoche: Then
it is taken per Metonymiam efficientis, for money or means to purchase, Silver
or Gold, or the the like metal, which he may offer to make an Image or Idol
thereof.

Chooses a tree that will not rot:] Pliny praises the Cypress, and the Vine,
and the Juniper tree, and the Mullerry tree for this purpose.

That shall not be moved.] Supple, Because it is nailed, or otherwise fastened
to some wall or post. So that the work of the cuning Workman was, first to
make a graven Image out of the Tree; then when he had made it, to fasten it to
some place or other.

Here is left to be understood some such words as these are: And will you liken
your God to one of these graven Images? Or one of these graven Images to our
God?

21.
Have ye not known? etc.] i. e. Have ye not known that which I tell you in the
next Verse, viz. That God sits upon the circle of the Earth? etc.

From the beginning?] Supple, Of the World.

From the Foundations of the Earth?] i. e. From the time that the Foundations
of the Earth were laid; that is, from the time that the World was first created.

The laying of the Foundations of the Earth are put by a Synecdoche membri, for
the Creation of the World; of which he speaks Metaphorically, as of a House
which has Foundations.

22.
It is he that sits upon the Circle of the Earth:] It is God which sits
as a King and Governor upon the Circle of the Earth.

The Circle of the Earth:] By the Circle of the Earth may be meant the Earth
its self, which is of a round figure: Or by the Circle of the Earth may be
meant the Heavens, which environ the Earth, as the circumference of a Circle
does the center thereof.

Are as grasshoppers,] i. e. Are as very little things in respect of him.

That stretches out the Heavens:] i. e. It is he that stretches out the
Heavens, etc.

23.
That brings the Princes to nothing:] i. e. It is he that brings the
Princes and the great ones of the Earth to nothing. By this he intimates how
easily God can destroy the King of Babylon, and his Nobles, and his Princes.

The Judges of the Earth,] Whom he called Princes before, he calls Judges
here; for Princes are Judges in their Dominions.

As vanity.] i. e. Less then naught. See Verse. 17.

24.
Yea, they shall not be planted,] yea, they shall not be sown, yea, their stock
shall not take root in the Earth:] Those Princes and Judges which he spoke of
in the former Verse, were such as were already in honor and in a flourishing
condition, which notwithstanding he says the Lord brings to naught. Here he
says, That the Lord cannot only bring Princes and Judges, which are in honor,
and in a flourishing condition, to naught: But (if he so please) he can blight
those (which never were in honor) from the very womb, that they shall never
flourish or attain to any honorable condition so long as they live, though they
were born of honorable Parents, to honorable places.

Yea, they shall not be planted, etc.] Yea (if he please) they shall be as
plants which shall never be planted: they shall be as seeds or kernels which
shall never be sown; they shall be as stocks of trees which shall never take
root in the Earth: For as Plants, which shall never be planted, must needs
wither away, and by little and little become as dry sticks; and as seeds and
kernels which are not sown, cannot grow up and flourish; and as a stock of a
Tree (though it be set in the Earth, yet) if it takes no root, dries away and
rots: So shall those Princes and Judges, whom God would not have to flourish,
be in a contemptible condition from the very Cradle.

He shall also blow upon them, and they shall wither.] He persists still in the
Metaphor of Plants, which, if they lie out of the Earth in the open air and
wind, are quickly dried up, and wither.

The Prophet speaks all these glorious things of God, that the Jews may have no
thoughts of God, but such as are worthy of God; and that they might not think
of making God like to any Idol, or any Idol like unto him: and by the way
intimates, that he is able to bring down the King and Princes of Babylon, that
the Jews might not despair of their delivery.

25.
To whom then will ye liken me, or shall I be equal,] See Notes Verse. 18.

Says the Holy One?] i. e. Says the Lord, which is the Holy One, even the
Holy One of Israel.

26.
Lift up your eyes on high,] i. e. Lift up your eyes toward Heaven.

And behold who has created these things,] i. e. Behold and tell me who has
created the Stars.

By these things he means the Stars, which he speaks of, as though he pointed
at them at this time.

That brings out their host by number:] q. d. Who is he which brings them out
by number daily, while he makes them to arise at their determined times?

Their host] i. e. Them, to wit, the Stars, which are as an Host or Army, for
number and order.

By number:] He may be said to bring out the Stars by number, because all the
Stars rise not at a time, but only a certain number of them: or because they
arise in their order, this first, that second, that third, etc.

He calls them all by their names,] q. d. Our God knows them all, and all
their names perfectly: And he calls them all by their names to come forth,
(as a Master calls his Servants by their names,) and they come at his Call,
and obey his Will.

The Call, whereby God calls his Stars by their names, to come forth, is an
effectual Call, and therefore is a sign of great power and might in God, who by
calling them to come forth, gives them power to come forth at his Call.

By the greatness of his might,] Supple, Does he do this; that is, does he call
them, and they obey.

Not one fails.] i. e. Not one Star fails to come forth (when he calls it
by name) either through impotency, or disobedience, or any other cause.

Here again the Prophet speaks gloriously of the Lord, as he did verse. 21, 22,
23, 24. and he does it for the same end as he did it there, viz. That the Jews
might have no thoughts of God, but what were glorious; and that they might not
liken him to an Idol, or an Idol to him; and that they might not despair of
being delivered out of captivity, by their distrust of Gods power.

27.
Why say thou O Jacob,] i. e. Why then do thou say O Jacob?

And speak O Israel,] Supple, Saying.

Israel is taken here for the Tribes of Judah and Benjamin; as Cap. 1. v. 3.

My way is hid from the Lord,] i. e. The Lord looks not upon my sad condition,
but it is as hid from his eyes; he takes no notice of the troublesome way
wherein I walk.

And my judgment is passed over from him?] Here seems to be an Hypallage in
this sentence: And my judgment is passed over from him, seems to be put for He
is passed over from my judgment; Supple, as he that will not cast an eye upon
it, or take any notice of it, but purposely goes away as though he would not
see it.

I take judgment here for punishment, or affliction and misery, as it is taken
1 Pet. 4.17.

This complaint is to be taken, as proceeding from the Jews, when they had layn
a long time in the Babylonish captivity; and it is grounded upon that, That
they thought that God was weary of delivering and doing for his people, as he
had done for them and their fathers informer time: as appears by the Answer
which the Prophet gives to this their Complaint in the next Verse, though it be
omitted here for brevity sake.

28.
The Creator of the ends of the Earth.] i. e. The Creator of all the Earth.

Here is a Synecdoche of the parts for the whole.

There is no searching of his understanding.] But yet there is no searching of
his understanding, to tell why your way is hid from him, or why your judgment
is passed over from him.

The Prophet does here meet with a tacit Objection of the Jews; for they might
say, If God did not faint, nor was weary of fighting, and pleading for us, and
delivering us out of our afflictions, and of doing for us as he has done
heretofore; surely he would not suffer us to lie helpless in the depth of this
our captivity so long a time. To this the Prophet answers, That if God lets
them lie so long in their captivity, and has not yet delivered them, it is not
because he is faint or weary, but it is for some other reason.

The Jews ask, For what reason? The Prophet answers, That he knows not for
what particular reason; for there is no searching of Gods understanding: yet
for what reason soever it be, it is not for that that God faints or is weary,
for God gives power to the faint, etc.

29.
He gives power to the faint, etc.] i. e. He refreshes those which be faint.

This the Prophet brings as an argument, to prove, that God faints not: For
how can he faint, which gives power to the faint? Or, how can he be weary,
which gives strength to the weary? The Psalmist uses such a kind of
argument, Psalm. 94.9. saying, He that planted the ear, shall not he hear? and
he that formed the eye, shall not he see?

To them that have no might.] i. e. To them whose strength fails through
weariness.

30.
Even the youth shall faint and be weary,] These words contain not a
prediction, but a concession: q. d. Though even youths (which are strong and
lusty by nature) faint and be weary, etc. yet, etc. Or thus; Even youths (which
are strong and lusty by nature) may faint, and be weary; But they that wait
upon the Lord, etc.

And the young men shall utterly fall.] i. e. And the young men may so fall
through faintness and weariness, that they shall never rise up again.

31.
But they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength:] i. e. But they
that wait upon the Lord, and rely upon him, and stay his good time and leisure,
though they are weary, yet shall they gather new strength.

He tacitly advises the Jews here, to wait upon the Lord, notwithstanding the
length of their captivity.

They shall mount up with wings,] i. e. They shall be so lusty, as that they
shall mount up as it were with wings.

As Eagles.] Which are the strongest and highest-flying of all birds.

ISAIAH, CHAP. XLI.
KEep silence before me, O Islands,] The Prophet alludeth here to the manner of
a Court, in which Causes are pleaded; For he brings in God pleading with those
which worship Idols, concerning his Divinity, and the Divinity of Idols, that
it may be known which of them is the true God, He the Lord, or Idols.

Keep silence before me,] i. e. Hold ye your peace while I plead for my self,
that ye may hear what I can say for my self, and what Arguments I can bring to
prove my Divinity.

These words are spoken in the person of God, as appears by the fourth Verse,
though God speaks as a man, by an (...).

O Islands,] i. e. O ye Inhabitants of the Islands. A Metonymy.

The Hebrews call not only those Lands which are environed with the Seas,
Islands, but those Lands also which lie by Seas and Rivers: Yea, here Islands
may be taken for any Land or Country whatsoever. See Notes, Cap. 20. v. 16.

And let the people renew their strength:] q. d. And when I have said what I
can for my self in my Cause, then let the people, which make and worship Idols,
strengthen themselves afresh with the best arguments they have, either to
refute my speech, or defend their own cause, which they have undertaken in
defense of their Idols.

By that that he says, Let them renew their strength, he intimates a former
contention, in which the Idolaters were too weak in Arguments to defend their
Cause.

Let them come near,] Supple, That they may hear me.

Then let them speak:] q. d. Then when they have heard what I shall say, let
them speak what they have to say.

Let us come near together to judgment.] i. e. Let the people and me come near
together, that (after the pleading, and discussing, or arguing the case) our
case may be judged, and sentence given thereon.

2.
Who raised up the righteous man from the East,] i. e. Who roused up Abraham,
and made him go out of Vr of the Caldees?

By the righteous man here, is meant Abraham, whose righteousness Moses speaks
of, Genesis 15.6. and 18.19. and 23.16.

By the East is meant Vr of the Caldees, which was in the East, in respect of
Judea. See the story, Genesis 11.31. and cap. 12.1.

Here the Lord begins to plead for himself, and his Divinity, against Idols and
Idolaters.

Called him to his foot,] i. e. Called him to follow him, as it were, at his
heels; or called him to travel and make use of his feet. See Genes. 12.1. Josh.
24.3. Hebr. 11.8. how God called Abraham to follow him.

Gave the Nations before him,] i. e. Subdued the Nations before him.

And made him rule over Kings?] i. e. And gave him victory over Kings.

Because that Conquerors do for the most part rule over those whom they
conquer, and lord it over them; therefore to rule over Kings, is put here for
to conquer Kings: And yet the posterity, at least of Abraham, did not only
conquer Kings, but also rule over them.

And that which is here spoken, may be understood not only of Abraham in his
own person, but of Abraham in his posterity: For being that Abraham's children
were in his loins when God called him, God may be said to call them also; as
they are also said, for the same reason, to pay Tithes to Melchisedec, Hebr.
7.9, 10. See more Verse. 9.

The Kings over which God gave Abraham the victory in his person, were
Chedorlaomer King of Elam, Tidal King of Nations, Amraphel King of Shinar, and
Arioch King of Ellasar, whom Abraham subdued, Genesis 14.15. And the Nations here
meant, were those Nations which served under those Kings, in that expedition
which they undertook against the King of Sodom and others, and whom Abraham
overthrew with their Kings, Genesis 14.2.

But note, that the victory which is here said to be given to Abraham over
Kings and Nations, may not be understood only of that victory which God gave
to Abraham in person, but of those victories also which God gave to Abraham's
children, as to Moses, Joshua, and other Israelites: and that which God gave to
them, he was said to give to Abraham, as he is said to have given the Land of
Canaan to Abraham, Genesis 13.15. which yet he gave not to Abraham, but to
Abraham's seed: But therefore he was said to have given it to Abraham, because
he gave it to Abraham's seed, then being in the loins of Abraham. Now to
Abraham, that is, to Abraham's children, God gave many victories, as victory
over the Egyptians, and over the Amalekites, and Moabites, and Ammonites, and
the Canaanites, and the Philistines, and other Kings and Nations which they
conquered and ruled over.

He gave them as the dust to his Sword, and as driven stubble to his Bow.] q.
d. Who made those Nations and Kings to scatter themselves, and fly before the
Sword, and before the Bow of the Righteous man, as the dust and the stubble
which are scattered and fly before the wind.

A prepositive Pronoun is put here for an Interrogative, He for Who.

He mentions the Sword and the Bow, because they were the warlike weapons
then in use: Genesis 48.22. Psalm. 44.3, 6.

3.
He pursued them,] i. e. The Righteous man, even Abraham, pursued them.

And passed safely, even by the way that he had not gone with his feet.] i. e.
And he passed safely, as he pursued them, even by a way which he never passed
in his life before, because God was his guide.

4.
Who has done it,] q. d. Who has raised the Righteous man from the East, etc.
and gave him such victories as these are?

Calling the generations from the beginning?] q. d. And who has not only done
this, that is, raised the righteous man from the East, and given him these
victories; but also has called the generations from the beginning? For he that
did the one, did the other also.

Calling the generations from the beginning?] i. e. Ruling, and having ruled and
bore sway over all people, from the beginning of the World hitherto.

By generations he means men which are generated, or begotten of men, by a
Metonymy: Or, by the generations, he means the men of all generations, that
is, of all ages.

By calling he means ruling, or bearing sway over: For they which bear good
sway, and have good command over their Servants, if they call them, their
Servants come. See the same words used in the same sense, Cap. 40.26. and Psalm.
147.4. And calling, though it be of the present tense, yet, by a Syllepsis,
includes the preterperfect tense also.

I the Lord,] Here he gives an answer to the foregoing questions.

The first,] God is called the First, because he was before all things; and all
things which are, proceed from him as their first and original Cause.

And with the last,] God calls himself not only the First, but also with the
Last: Because he was, and is, and will be with all things from the first to the
last; as the Cause is with the Effect, making them, preserving them, and
governing them.

I am He.] Supple, Which have done this.

5.
The Isles saw it, and feared;] i. e. The Inhabitants of the Islands saw what I
the Lord did for Abraham, and the victories which I gave him and his children,
and feared.

What is meant by Isles or Islands, see Verse. 1.

We do not read, that the Inhabitants of the Isles feared, when they understood
of the victory which Abraham had over Chedorlaomer, and Tidal, and the other
Kings, and the people which were with them, though likely it is they did fear;
and all that happened then, is not recorded: But we read that they feared when
they heard of the victory which Moses had over the Egyptians, Exodus 15.15. and
when they heard of the victories which the Israelites had over the Amorites,
Josh. 2.9, 10, etc.

The ends of the Earth] i. e. They which dwelt in the ends of the Earth.

By those which dwelt in the ends of the Earth, he means those which dwelt a
far off, by an Hyperbole.

D ew near,] Supple, One to another.

And came.] Supple, Together, or to one place.

6.
They helped every one his Neighbor,] i. e. Every one helped his Neighbor, with
counsel and with aid, against Abraham and his posterity, as every one was most
in danger.

Though we read not, that the people helped one another, and combined against
Abraham's person, yet we read that they did help one another, and combine
themselves against Abraham's children, as Josh. 10. v. 3, 5, 33, etc. And they
might have combined also against Abraham himself, though we read not of it.

Be of good courage.] They encouraged one another with this, That they would
make them gods, which should defend them hereafter from Abraham and his
posterity; and which should give them the victory over him and them: For so
st^pid were those Heathen Idolaters, that though they burnt one part of a tree
in the fire, yet with the residue they would make themselves a god, even a
graven Image, and fall down unto it, and worship it, and pray unto it, and say,
Deliver us, for thou art our God: Cap. 44.17.

7.
So the Carpenter encouraged the Goldsmith,] Supple, To join with him to make a
graven Image, which might defend them from their Enemies, and give them the
victory over them.

Note here, that the carpenter did first make the Image out of wood, then the
goldsmith overlayd it with thin plates of gold.

And he that smootheth with the hammer,] Supple, Encouraged him that smote the
anvil.

By him that smootheth with the hammer, understand the goldsmith, which, with
him that smites the anvil, beats out thick wedges of gold into thin plates; or
rather, which smootheth the plates with a smaller hammer, as the other beats
them out with a greater.

It is ready for the sodering:] i. e. The work is almost ready for the sodering.

They were wont to soder the plates of gold together when they had fitted them,
and this was one of the last works. Now the nearer the workman is to the
finishing of the work, the harder he will work to finish it: so that by this
also might he that smootheth with the hammer encourage him that smites on the
Anvil.

And he fastened it with nails, that it should not be moved.] q. d. And so when
he had finished the Image, he fastened it to the wall with nails, that it
should not fall down: And then they all worshipped it, saying, Thou art our
God, defend us from Abraham and his house, and give us always the victory over
them.

All of this, which is not expressed in the Text, is yet to be understood by a
Syllepsis, as appears by that which follows.

8.
But thou O Israel art my servant,] q. d. The people therefore worship Idols,
and serve them; But thou O Israel art my servant, and do worship me.

By Israel is meant the Jews, the people of Israel, per Metonymiam Efficientis.

Jacob,] q. d. Thou Jacob I say, etc.

Jacob is taken here for the sons of Jacob, who was also called Israel, Genesis
32.28. per Metonymiam Efficientis.

Whom I have chosen,] The Lord chose the children of Israel to be his peculiar
people, because he loved their fathers: Deuteronomy. 4.37.

The seed of Abraham my friend.] i. e. The children of Abraham my friend.

Seed is put here for children, per Metonymiam Materiae.

It was a great honor for Abraham to be called the friend of God, as he is here
called, as appears 2 Chronicles. 20.7. Jam. 2.23.

9.
Thou whom I have taken from the ends of the Earth,] i. e. Thou whom I have
taken from Vr of the Caldees, which is a great way hence, and brought hither.

By the ends of the Earth he means a Country a great way off, such as Vr of
the Caldees was, in respect of Judea.

The Lord is said to have taken the people of Israel from Vr of the Caldees,
because he took Abraham from thence, in whose loins they were when he took him:
So Levi was said to pay Tithes to Melchisedec, because he was in Abraham's loins
when Abraham paid Tithes to Melchisedec, Heb. 7.9, 10.

And called thee from the chief men thereof;] Understand this of the honorable
men of Caldea, of whom Abraham was one, whom God separated from the rest, and
his offspring in him, and brought them to Canaan, which he gave them for an
inheritance.

I have chosen thee,] Supple, To serve before me, or to be a peculiar people to
my self.

And not cast thee away.] i. e. And I have not disregarded thee, as men do
those things which they cast away, and as I have disregarded and rejected other
Nations.

This is an Hebrew manner of repetition.

10.
Fear not thou:] q. d. Therefore though all the Nations which are about thee
hate thee, and make them gods, and pray to them to curse thee, and join
together against thee, yet Fear not thou.

I will uphold thee] i. e. I will preserve thee in the midst of all dangers,
that they overwhelm thee not.

This seems to be a Metaphor from a man which is upheld in the midst of deep
waters, that he sinks not, and so be drowned: Or from an old man, who is upheld
by the hand or arm of a younger man, as he walks in rugged ways, that he falls
not.

With the right hand of my Righteousness.] i. e. With the right hand of my
goodness.

He puts a Substantive of the Genitive case here for an Adjective.

Note here, that the Righteousness of God does very often signify in Scripture
the goodness of God, as Psalm. 22.31. etc. And he says, that he will uphold him
with the right hand of his Righteousness, or Goodness, because he would so
uphold him, as that he should see the goodness of the Lord toward him, in his
preservation: Or he says, He will uphold him with the right hand of his
Righteousness, because he would uphold him with his right hand according to
some Promise made to him; for there is a Righteousness which consists in
performance of promises.

11.
Shall be ashamed and confounded:] i. e. They shall be overthrown.

Because they which are confident of a victory, when they are overcome in
battle, are ashamed and confounded, hence he puts to be ashamed and confounded
for to be overcome.

They shall be as nothing.] i. e. They shall be as a thing of naught; or, they
shall be brought to nothing.

12.
Thou shall seek them, etc.] i. e. If thou do seek after them, thou shall not
find them, etc.

And shall not find them,] i. e. Thou shall not find them; for they shall be
destroyed before thou know what is become of them.

Them that contended with thee.] i. e. Them which were thine adversaries, and
practiced enmity against thee.

This phrase is Metaphorical, taken from Courts, where Adversary pleads
against Adversary, and cont^ndeth with him in words.

13.
Will hold thy right hand.] i. e. Will be thy companion in the midst of thy
danger, and go hand in hand with thee: and he is safe which has such a
companion, and walks hand in hand with such a one. Or else this phrase is taken
from a ^ather, which, when any danger is nigh, lays hold on his childe's
hand, that he may keep him, and carry him out of the danger safe.

14.
Thou worm Jacob,] i. e. Thou my people, the sons of Jacob, whom the Nations
tread upon, as a man treads upon a worm.

And ye men of Israel:] i. e. And ye men which are the children of Israel.

And thy Redeemer.] i. e. Which has delivered thee, and will deliver thee out
of all thy troubles.

And seems to be redundant here.

15.
Behold, I will make thee a new sharp threshing instrument that has teeth:] i.
e. I will make thee, as a new sharp threshing instrument that has teeth.

The Note of similitude is here left to be understood.

What kind of instument this was, being now out of use, cannot be so easily
known: only thus much we know, that it was very effectual for quick and clean
threshing of Corn.

Thou shall thresh the Mountains,] i. e. Thou shall beat the mighty men and
people of the Earth, that either oppress thee, or wage war against thee, into
pieces.

By the mountains he means the great men and powerful people of the Earth,
which were exalted above others, as the hills are exalted above the valleys:
and in special, the Babylonians, who evil-entreated the Jews at the time here
spoken of.

God may be said to make his servants as a new sharp threshing in^trument that
has teeth: And they may be said to thresh the mountains, either because they
themselves should subdue their Enemies, and kill them with their own hands; or
because God would subdue them under them, and destroy them for their sakes. And
so did God make the Jews a threshing instrument to thresh the Babylonians,
because he did destroy the Babylonians for their sakes.

And shall make the hills as chaff.] i. e. Thou shall beat the powerful
Nations, that rise up against thee, as small as chaff.

16.
Thou shall fan them,] i. e. When thou have beaten them as small as chaff, thou
shall fan them, etc.

And the wind shall carry them away,] Supple, As chaff.

And the whirlwind shall scatter them:] Supple, As chaff.

By all this Allegorical Metaphor, and the parts thereof, is meant only this,
That they shall destroy their Enemies; or, That God shall destroy their
Enemies, upon their prayers, for their sakes.

And thou shall rejoice in the Lord,] Supple, As in thy Savior and Redeemer,
which saves thee from thine Enemies, and subdueth them under thy feet.

And glory in the Holy One of Israel.] Supple, As in him who has fought for
thee, and done great things for thee.

The meaning is, That God should do such great things for them, as that they
should rejoice, because of them, and glory in him.

17.
When the poor and needy seek water,] By the poor and needy may be meant the
Jews in general, who were at this time poor and needy, as being captive in
Babylon.

And there is none,] i. e. And there is no water to be had to quench their
thirst.

I the Lord will hear them.] i. e. If they call unto me for water, I the Lord
will hear them, and give them water in every place to quench their thirst with.

18.
I will open rivers in high places:] i. e. I will open the high mountains, and
the high rocks, and make rivers of waters to flow out thence, for them to drink
of.

I will make the wilderness a pool of water.] i. e. I will make pools of water
in the dry wilderness, for them to quench their thirst at.

19.
I will plant in the wilderness the Cedar, and the Shittah-tree:] q. d. If they
travel in the wilderness, and are scorched there with the heat of the Sun, and
have no shade to fly to, to refresh them, I will plant in the wilderness the
Cedar and the Shittah-tree, etc. and many other trees, and they shall presently
spring up, and give a shade, for them to fly to, and to refresh themselves.

He alludeth here to their passage through the wilderness, from Babylon to
Judea.

As nothing is more welcome then water to him which is extreme dry; so is there
nothing more welcome to him which travelleth in the hot parching wilderness,
when he is even burnt up with the beams of the Sun, then a cool shady place; as
appears Cap. 25.4. and 32.2. That therefore which is signified by this, That
the Lord will give water to the poor and needy when he is thirsty, and will
cause the trees to spring up in the wilderness to yield them a shade, when they
are even burned up with the heat of the Sun, is this, That he will relieve them
in all their distresses.

20.
That they may see and know,] i. e. That all may see and know, as well other
people, as the people of the Lord.

And understand together,] i. e. And understand all of them. See Cap. 1. v. 28.

That the hand of the Lord has done this,] i. e. That it is the Lord which
has done this for his people, and thus relieved them when they were in
distress.

Has created it.] This is a repetition of the former words.

Note, that when the Scripture speaks of any wonderful work which the Lord
has done, it usually says, that the Lord has created it.

Here ends that speech which the Lord made in the maintenance of his Cause,
and of his Divinity, against Idolaters.

But Idolaters might say against the latter part of the Lords speech, from
verse. 8. hitherto, That they can say as much for their Idol-gods, as the God of
Israel has said for himself: for they can say, That their gods will do great
things for them, if to say so would argue them to be gods indeed.

Ans. What the Lord said there, were not bare words; but what he said, he
intended to perform in the presence of all the World: and he did perform it
soon after, when he delivered his people the Jews out of the Babylonian
captivity, and distressed the Babylonians, and took the Empire from them, and
subdued them by Cyrus, and brought his own people from Babylon to Judea through
the wilderness and the deserts, and so provided for them, as that they wanted
nothing in all their way: and therefore the Lords saying and doing accordingly,
did argue him to be God indeed: And if Idolaters could have said so much of
their Idols, and their Idols could have performed it, the Lord himself would
have said, that they were gods, v. 23.

21.
Produce your cause, says the Lord,] When the Lord had made an end of his
speech, he calls to the Idolaters to open their Cause, and to plead it as well
as they can.

Bring forth your strong reasons.] Supple, To prove that your Idols are gods,
and that you do well in serving them.

22.
Let them bring them forth,] i. e. Let the Idols themselves bring forth their
strong reasons to prove their own divinity.

Here is a Relative without an Antecedent, which Antecedent might easily be
understood, because the Lord did as it were point at the Idols, when he said,
Let them bring them forth.

He would have the Idols plead for themselves, because if they were gods, they
could better plead for themselves, then men could plead for them: and that
Idolaters might not say, when they were overcome, that they were overcome by
their own weakness, (as not being able to plead with the God of Israel,) not by
the weakness of their cause, which their gods were better able to maintain,
then they were.

And show us what shall happen:] i. e. And let them show us what things shall
come to pass hereafter. He speaks here of things to come in general, whether
they are to come to pass within a short time, or whether there will be a long
time before they come to pass.

Let them show the former things,] By the former things he means those things
which are before others in order of event and execution; that is, those things
which will come to pass first before other things, and so are like to come to
pass within a short time.

And know the latter end of them,] i. e. And know the event of them, whether
the event be answerable to what they foretold of them, or no.

Or declare us things for to come.] Or let them declare to us, and show us
things for to come; Supple, a great while hence.

23.
Show us things that are to come hereafter,] Supple, Whether they are such
things as are to come to pass within a short time; or whether they are such, as
that it will be a long time before they come to pass: Show us any things which
are to come to pass hereafter, as I have done, verse. 11, 12, 13, etc.

He uses here an Apostrophe, and speaks to the Idols in the second person, of
whom he spoke in the third just before.

That we may know that ye are gods:] Testimonium divinitatis est veritas
divinationis, says Tertullian, Apolog. cap. 20. The truth of divination, or
foretelling things to come, is a testimony or sign of the divinity of him which
foretells it. For indeed none can originally foretell things to come (I mean
things contingent) but God only.

But cannot Devils foretell what they intend themselves to do? and are not
those things contingent?

Ans. They cannot certainly and infallibly foretell, that that shall come to
pass, which they intend themselves to do, because they may not be able to
perform what they intend, for God may hinder their intentions: So that
originally God only can certainly and infallibly foretell of things to come,
and they who are instructed by him secondarily.

Yea, do good,] Supple, To your servants which worship and serve you, as I have
often done to my servants the Israelites which serve me, (whom I redeemed once
out of Egypt,) and as I have said I will do to them, v. 17, 18, 19.

Or do evil,] Supple, To those which are Enemies to them which serve you, as I
have done to Pharaoh and others, which have been Enemies to the Israelites who
serve me; and as I have said I will do to those which oppress my people, Verse.
15, 16.

That we may be dismayed,] Indeed it would be a cause of wonder, and amazement,
and astonishment, to see Idols, which are but wood and stone, do such things as
these are.

And behold it together.] i. e. And behold it all of us. See Cap. 1. v. 28.

Such things as these are, would draw the eyes of all to behold them.

24.
Behold, ye are of nothing,] i. e. Behold, ye are base things, and things of no
worth.

We must here conceive, that when the Holy One of Israel called upon the Idols
to produce the best Arguments they had to maintain and prove their divinity,
that they had nothing to say for themselves, but stood mute; whereupon the Lord
insults here over them, as a Conqueror over them whom he has conquered,
saying, Behold, ye are of nothing, etc.

And your work of naught:] i. e. And ye, which are the work of foolish men, are
of naught.

This is a repetition of the former sentence: and the word work is taken here
passively, not for the work which the Idols do, but for the work which they
are; for they are the work of the Crafts-man.

Yet some take the word [work] here Actively; and they are of two sorts: for
the first take it of the work of the Idol, and make the meaning of this place
to be this; q. d. Your work is nothing, that is, ye are not able to do any
thing: for though ye have hands, yet ye cannot handle, and though ye have feet,
yet ye cannot walk, and though ye have tongues, yet ye cannot speak. The second
take it of the work of the Idolater done to the Idol, that is, of the worship
and service which Idolaters give to the Idols, putting work in general for
worship and service in particular, by a Synecdoche: And the worship and service
which they give to Idols may be called the Idols work, as the worship and
service of God is called Gods worship and service: And this work, that is, this
worship and service which is given to Idols, may be said to be of naught,
because it is vain and idle, and profits not.

Abomination is he] i. e. Abominable is he.

He puts an Abstract for a Concrete, by a Metonymy.

That chooses you.] Supple, To be his gods.

25.
I have raised one up from the North, and he shall come:] The Lord speaks this
after an insulting manner, as before, to show that He can do what the Idols of
the Heathen cannot.

I have raised up] i. e. I will raise up.

He puts a preterperfect tense here for a future, to show that what he says
shall come to pass, as surely as if it were already done.

One from the North,] He means Cyrus, whom the Lord raised up, that he might
wage war against the Babylonians, and overcome them, and so free the Jews from
the captivity in which they were in under them, etc.

And he shall come:] Supple, At my call.

From the rising of the Sun shall he call upon my Name;] i. e. He shall call
upon me from the East; Supple, To know what my will and pleasure is for him to
do. The Name of God is put here (...), for God himself, as Cap. 30.27. And the
Prophet alludeth here to the manner of good servants, who when they would have
something to do, call upon their Master to know what work he has for them to
do.

Note here, that we must not think, by reason of this, that Cyrus did enquire
of God, while he was in the East, what work it would please the Lord to employ
him in, for Cyrus knew not God, cap. 45.5. But this is only that which is
meant by this place, That Cyrus should do the will and pleasure of God, as
truly and as fully as if he had asked the Lord what his will and pleasure was:
For this speech is only an allusion to what good servants do.

And he shall come upon Princes, etc.] i. e. And he shall come from thence,
that is, from the East, by my direction, and tread upon Princes.

A question will be here asked, How God raised Cyrus out of the North, and how
he is said to come from the East or Sunrising? For are the North and the East
all one?

Ans. Cyrus was a Mede by his Mothers side, for his Mother was Mandane,
Daughter of Astyages King of the Medes; And he was a Persian by his Fathers
side, for he was the son of Cambyses, King of the Persians; and he succeeded
his Grandfather in the Kingdom of the Medes, and his Father in the Kingdom of
the Persians; and both out of Media and Persia did he raise Soldiers when he
warred against Babylon. As therefore he was a Mede, and King of Media, and
raised men out of Media when he came against Babylon, he may be said to come
out of the North, for Media lay North both of Judea and Babylon: And as he was
a Persian, and King of Persia, and levied men out of Persia when he came
against Babylon, he may be said to have come out of the East, as from the
Sunrising; for Persia lies East both of Babylon and Judea.

And he shall come upon Princes, as upon mortar,] i. e. And he shall come and
tread upon Princes as men tread and stamp upon mortar.

By these Princes he means more especially the King of Babylon, and the Kings
and Princes which were subject unto him, and served him.

And as the Potter treads clay.] Supple, So shall he tread upon them.

The Prophet seems to allude to the manner of ancient Conquerors, who were
wont to tread upon the necks of them whom they conquered. See Joshua, cap. 10.
v. 24, 25.

Observe here, that God does clearer and clearer explain the manner how he
would restore the Jews out of the Babylonish captivity.

26.
Who has declared from the beginning,] q. d. Who, or which of all the Idols, or
of all the gods of the Heathen, has d^clared this heretofore, or before it
comes to pass?

From the beginning,] From the beginning being put absolutely, signifies, From
the Beginning of the World, in the Grammatical sense: but, by a Rhetorical
Hyperbole, it signifies any antecedent or foregoing time, and signifies here
Heretofore.

That we may know?] Supple, That he is righteous: (as it follows in the next
sentence.)

And before times] i. e. And heretofore, or before the time that it comes to
pass: q. d. And who has told of this before it comes to pass?

That we may say, that he is righteous?] i. e. That we may confess that he is
righteous, and pronounce in judgment, that he has justly assumed to himself
the Name of God.

The word [righteous] in this place is a Law-term, and signifies such a one as
has the best in a Controversy, or Suit of Law.

Yea, there is none that shows,] i. e. Verily there is none among you all, O
ye Idols of the Heathen, which shows the thing that I say shall come to pass.

Yea, there is none that declares,] This is a repetition of the former
sentence.

Yea, there is none that hears your words.] i. e. Yea, ye are all mute, so
that no man can hear you speak a word concerning the Deliverance of the Jews,
which yet I have foretold: yea, no man can hear you speak any one word at all.

27.
The first shall say to Sion, etc.] q. d. The Lord shall say to Sion by his
messenger.

The Lord speaks here of himself in the third person, and calls himself the
First, as he does also verse 4. the Notes whereof read. Yet by the first may be
meant the first messenger that comes from Babylon to Judea: q. d. The first
messenger that comes from Babylon to Judea, shall say to Sion, etc. So that by
this is showed, that the Jews should speedily be delivered out of their
captivity. He still insulteth over the Heathen Idols.

Sion,] Sion was part of Jerusalem, and is here put for the whole City: And
here he speaks to it, as to a woman, yea a mother, by a Prosopopeia.

Behold, behold them,] i. e. Behold, behold the Jews thy children, which are
scattered all abroad in the Land of their captivity, gather themselves
together, and come to thee. See Cap. 49. verse. 18.

He puts a Relative here without an Antecedent, (...).

And I will give to Jerusalem one that brings good tidings.] For I the Lord
will send to Jerusalem a messenger that shall bring good tidings, to wit, that
her children the Jews are delivered out of the captivity in which the
Babylonians held them, and that they are upon their return to their own own
Land again.

And, is put here for For.

28.
For I beheld, and there was no man,] Between this and the former Verse, we
must understand these, or the like words, as spoken by God, giving sentence in
the Ca^se between himself and the Idols of the Heathen; viz. I therefore am God
alone; for as for the Idols of the Nations they are no gods: q. d. I therefore
am God alone; for as for the Idols of the Nations, they are no gods: For I
beheld, and there was no man, even among them; and there was no Counselor,
that when I asked of them, could answer, etc.

I beheld, and there was no man,] i. e. I beheld the Idols of the Nations, and
there was none, viz. that could answer a word.

There was no man,] i. e. And there was not any one of all the Idols.

The word [man] as it is taken here, signifies no more then any.

Even amongst them;] i. e. Even amongst those Idols.

This Chapter speaks of the Idols of the Nations, as though they were
assembled together in a Court, to maintain their Divinity against the Lord: And
here the Lord does as it were point at them, being so assembled, when he says,
I beheld, even amongst them.

And there was no Counselor,] i. e. And there was no Counselor amongst them
all.

He calls an Idol a Counselor: And Idols might be called Counselors, either
because Idolaters did call them their Counselors, or because they did seek to
them for counsel, though their Idols were mute, and could not answer them: yet
there were many Idols of the Heathen which did answer when their counsel was
asked, and yet not they, but the Devils, and evil spirits which were in them:
for Devils and evil spirits did sometimes lurk in the Idols, to keep men the
faster to Idolatry: And therefore it is, that what the Gentiles did sacrifice
to Idols, they sacrificed to Devils, Deuteronomy. 32.17. Psalm. 106.36, 37. 1 Cor.
10.20, 21. For these Reasons, I say, might Idols be called Counselors: yet I
conceive that there is a more peculiar Reason why Idols may be called
Counselors here, to wit, because they took counsel together at this time, how
they might defend their Divinity against the Holy One of Israel, who denied it.
See Cap. 45.21. He calls them therefore Counselors here by a Sarcasm.

That when I asked of them.] Supple, Whether they had foretold, or could from
their own selves foretell, what I had foretold concerning the Restoration of
the Jews.

29.
They are all vanity,] i. e. All the Idols of the Nations are vain things, and
things of naught.

Vanity is put here for vain: an Abstract for a Concrete.

Their works are nothing:] See v. 24.

Their molten images] i. e. The molten Images which the Nations worship.

The Lord seems to have pointed at the Idolaters which were then in Court, in
the sight of all, when he said, Their molten Images, etc. And to make this
sudden turn or Apostrophe to them, from the Idols.

Are wind] i. e. Are vain empty things.

And confusion.] i. e. And a mass or chaos of Confusion, misshapen things, etc.

He puts confusion here for that in which there is a confusion of things, by a
Metonymy.

ISAIAH, CHAP. XLII.
BEhold my servant, etc.] By the servant of God is here meant Isaiah himself.

But though in the first sense Isaiah be here meant, yet in the second and more
sublime sense, this is to be understood of Christ (of whom Isaiah was here a
figure) Matthew. 12.18. For as Isaiah brought good tidings to the Jews of their
Redemption from the temporal Captivity, which they suffered under the
Babylonians; So did Christ bring good tidings of man's Redemption from the
spiritual Captivity, which they endured under Sin and Satan, etc.

Whom I uphold,] i. e. Whom I will preserve in the work in which I employ him.

He puts a present for a future tense; and uses a Metaphor, of which see cap.
41. verse. 10.

Mine Elect] i. e. Him whom I have made choice of to do my business.

In whom my Soul delights:] i. e. Whom I love, and who is dear to me.

He speaks here of God, as of a man, (...): and puts the Soul for the whole
man, by a Synecdoche.

I have put my spirit upon him,] i. e. I have furnished him with gifts fit for
the work to which I have called him.

By Spirit is meant Metonymice the gift of Gods Spirit.

He shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles.] i. e. He shall denounce my
judgments against the Babylonians for holding my people captive.

When he says, He shall bring forth, he alludes to a man which is an
householder, which brings forth what is needful, out of his treasure or
storehouse, for his servants. See Matt. 13.52.

2.
He shall not cry,] i. e. He shall not be clamorous, and full of noise and cry:
q. d. He shall do what I command him, without passion, or bitterness of spirit.

Nor lift up,] Supple, His voice in passion or anger.

Nor cause his voice to be heard in the streets.] i. e. He shall not be of that
violence of spirit, as they are of, who when they are angry, speak so loud, as
that they are heard abroad in the streets, by those which pass by the doors, or
windows of the house.

3.
A bruised reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax shall he not quench:]
i. e. He shall not be grievous or heavy to any, but meek and gentle to all.

As for these phrases, they are Proverbial and Metaphorical, taken from a man
who treads so lightly, as that if he should tread upon a bruised reed, yet he
would not break it; or if he should tread upon the wiek of a candle with his
foot, which is almost extinguished, yet he would not quite put it out.

Smoking flax.] By flax is meant the wiek of a candle, which was wont to be
made of flax, per Metonymiam Materiae: And that he calls smoking flax, which
rather smokes then burns: and though there is no flame or fire in it, yet the
smoke does give some resemblance of a flame, and makes it more easily to
receive a flame, then if it were quite cold, and smoked not.

He shall bring forth judgment unto truth.] i. e. He shall denounce my
judgments in truth, that is, truly and faithfully, without any mixture of his
own passions.

Unto truth.] Some render the Original here In truth; others render it unto
truth, and say that it signifies as much as in truth: But though there be some
difference in the rendering, I find no difference in the sense.

He may be said to bring forth judgment unto truth, that therefore brings it
forth, that judgment and truth may meet together; or that he may join judgment
with truth: And then do judgment and truth meet, and then are they joined
together, when judgment is denounced or delivered truly and faithfully.

4.
He shall not fail, nor be discouraged,] q. d. But though he be not furious and
violent in execution of his office, yet he shall not be timorous and want
courage; for he shall not fail in doing his office, through fear; nor be
therein discouraged, till he shall have made known Gods judgments in the Earth.

Till he have set judgment in the Earth:] i. e. Till he has made known the
judgments which God threateneth to the men which dwell on the Earth.

These judgments were especially denounced against the Babylonians.

Some think that the Prophet alludes here to the setting of a King or Queen on
their Throne, when he speaks of setting judgment in the Earth. See the like
phrase, Cap. 7.6.

And the Isles shall wait for his Law.] q. d. And when he has made known my
judgments, the inhabitants of the Isles shall look for the fulfilling and
accomplishment of these my judgments; In such credit shall my servant be.

By Isles the Hebrews mean, not only those places which are environed with the
Sea, but those also which are near to the Sea, and to great Rivers and Waters;
as was said cap. 41. v. 1. Yea, every particular Land may be called an Isle, as
we showed cap. 20.6. But by Isles here, are meant, not the Isles themselves,
but the inhabitants of the Isles, by a Metonymy.

His Law.] The word Law is sometimes taken in a large sense, for any Word of
God whatsoever: (See Notes, cap. 1.10.) And here it is taken, first, for the
judgments of God denounced; then (by a Metonymy) for the fulfilling or
accomplishment of those judgments.

This testimony, from the beginning of the Chapter hitherto, the Lord gave of
the Prophet, that his words might find the better entertainment with them that
should hear him while he lived, or read his Writings after his death.

5.
Thus says the Lord,] Thus say I the Lord, Supple, To my servant Isaiah.

The Lord speaks here of himself in the third person.

And stretched them out,] Supple, Like the curtains of a Tent or Tabernacle to
dwell in. See cap. 40. v. 22.

He that spreads forth the Earth, and that which comes out of it:] i. e. I
that made the Earth, and all things that spring out of it.

The Prophet alludeth here to the spreading forth of a sheet, or some other
cloth, or to the spreading forth of a garment, which was folded up before: see
Heb. 1.12. And he alludeth to this (while he speaks of Gods making the Earth,
and all that comes out thereof,) Because when God made the Earth, and that
which comes out thereof, he made them quanta, that is, he gave them quantity
and extension, so soon as ever he gave them their substantial Being.

And spirit to them that walk therein.] i. e. And Breath to every living
creature.

Spirit is taken here for Breath.

Therein.] i. e. Thereon.

The Lord does here magnify his power, First, That he might the more encourage
his Prophet in the execution of that business on which he sets him. Secondly,
That all men may be the better persuaded of the event of what he foretells.
Thirdly, That he might show himself to be greater then the gods of the Heathen
who worshipped Idols.

6.
I the Lord have called thee] i. e. I the Lord have called thee, O Isaiah my
servant, to do the work which I have appointed for thee to do.

In righteousness,] i. e. In good will toward thee; or in that wise, that thou
shall see my goodness toward thee, whilst thou art doing that work to which I
have called thee.

Righteousness is put here for goodness, as it is also cap. 41.10.

I will hold thine hand,] i. e. I will preserve thee: Supple, Until thou have
done all my work.

Concerning the reason of this phrase, see cap. 41.10.

And give thee for a Covenant of the people,] These words must needs be
figuratively, that is, Metonymically understood. The meaning therefore of these
words is this: q.d. I will give thee to be a Remembrancer of my people the
Jews, that thou may put them in mind of the Covenant which they and their
fathers made with me, and they have broken: and to be a means to them to renew
their Covenant again.

For a light of the Gentiles:] i. e. And for a light to the Gentiles.

To, And, is here to be understood.

Isaiah was a light to the Gentiles, in that he showed them the vanity of the
Idols which they worshipped; and taught them, that there was but one God, who
created Heaven and Earth: And this he does in many places of this Book of his
Prophecy.

7.
To open the blind eyes,] i. e. To instruct those which are ignorant, yea very
ignorant; ignorant of the Vanity of Idols, and ignorant of the Unity of the
Godhead, etc.

By eyes he means the eyes of the understanding, which are blind through
ignorance.

Note, that these words, To open the blind eyes, relate to those words which
went immediately before, viz. For a light to the Gentiles.

To bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out
of the prison house.] i. e. And to bring my people the Jews, which are in
captivity in Babylon, out of that their captivity.

To, And, is here to be understood.

Note, that these words, To bring the prisoners from the prisons, and them that
sit in darkness out of the prison house, relate to those words of the sixth
Verse, I will give thee for a Covenant of the people.

The Prophet speaks here of the captivity of the Jews, as of an Imprisonment,
and compares the Land of their captivity to a prison; both because they could
no more get out thence, then a prisoner can get out of a prison: as also,
because it was as irksom to them, as a prison is to a prisoner. Yea, it may be
that many of them were shut up in houses, and there kept to hard work, as in
prisons.

The Prophet is therefore said to bring the prisoners out of prison, that is,
the Jews out of their captivity, because he did by his admonitions bring the
Jews to think of the Covenant which they had broken, and the sins which they
had committed, and bewail them, and amend their lives, and renew their Covenant
with God, which moved God to free them, and deliver them out of captivity, and
bring them to their own Land again.

But you will say, that Isaiah was dead before the Jews were carried captive
into Babylon, which was a long time before their delivery thence; How then
could he so admonish them, as that they should repent them of their sins, and
amend their lives, and renew their Covenant with God, by his Admonitions, and
so move God to deliver them?

Ans. Though Isaiah were dead, yet might he be said to admonish them, because
of his Writings, which he directed to them by a Prophetique Spirit. So Moses,
though he was dead many years before, was said to command the Jews which lived
in our Saviors time, Mark 10.3. And so the Jews called themselves Moses's
Disciples, Joh. 9.28.

And them that sit in darkness out of the prison house.] Though darkness be
oftentimes put figuratively, for misery and affliction; yet I conceive that the
Prophet alludeth here to prisons which use to be dark, having but few windows,
and those small ones too, that the walls of the prison might be the stronger;
and especially to Dungeons, which are under ground.

Note, that this is but a repetition of the former sentence.

8.
I am the Lord,] q. d. I am the Lord, the only God, which created Heaven and
Earth, who am of my self, but give Being to all things, etc.

That is my Name,] i. e. That is the Name by which I am known, and by which I
am distinguished from all others whatsoever.

And my glory I will not give to another, neither my praise to graven Images.]
i. e. And I will not have this my glory, that I am the Lord, given to another;
nor this my praise, that I am the Lord, given to graven Images.

He says, I will not give, for I will not have given.

Whosoever acknowledges or worshipeth any other God then the Lord, he gives
the glory of the Lord to another, and his praise to graven Images: For
whatsoever is God, that must be Lord too.

Now as for the connection of this Verse with the former, know, that the words
of this Verse contain a reason of what was said in the former Verses; that is,
a reason why the Lord would give Isaiah to be a Covenant of the people, to
bring them out of prison, and a light to the Gentiles, to open their eyes.

For to speak of the Gentiles first; The Gentiles they worshipped Idols, and
fell down to their graven Images, taking them (through the ignorance which was
in them) to be gods; and so gave the glory of the Lord to another, and his
praise to graven Images. But that they might not do so any longer, the Lord
gave Isaiah to be a light to them, and to open their eyes, that they might know
that an Idol is nothing, and that there is but one only God, to wit, the Lord;
and that therefore they might leave off to worship Idols, and worship the Lord
only.

And as for the Jews which were in captivity, If the Lord should not have
delivered them out of their captivity, the Heathen would have said (and many a
weak Jew too) that the Lord was not able to deliver them, and that the gods of
the Babylonians were stronger then he; and so would have preferred the gods of
the Babylonians before him, and have worshipped them as well as him, yea them
more then him, yea them and not him; and so have given his glory to others, and
his praise to graven Images: That therefore they might not do so, the Lord gave
Isaiah to be a Covenant to his people the Jews which were in prison, that is,
which were in captivity in Babylon, to bring them out of prison, that is, to
bring them out of captivity. See cap. 48.11.

From the first Verse hitherto, the Prophet has set forth himself, and showed
as it were his commission, that his message might have the better acceptance.

9.
Behold the former things are come to pass,] Hitherto the Prophet spoke in the
person of God: now the Prophet having showed, as it were, his commission from
God, begins to speak in his own person.

Behold the former things] q. d. Behold I have told you heretofore of things
which are since come to pass.

Many things did the Prophet foretell by the word of the Lord, which they which
lived in his days saw fulfilled; as the Invasion of Judah by Rezin King of
Syria, and Pekah King of Israel: And that notwithstanding their threats, they
should not utterly destroy Judah: As also the Invasion of Judah by Sennacherib,
and the saving of Jerusalem out of his hand, and the destruction of his Army:
Which things they which lived in the Prophets days saw fulfilled with their
eyes; and they which lived in the Babylonish captivity knew to be true, and
could not deny. Moreover, he foretold the Jews of their being carried away
captive into Babylon; the fulfilling whereof they of the captivity felt to
their grief.

The Prophet puts them in mind of these things, which he foretold, and they
themselves saw accomplished, that they might the rather believe what he had
more to foretell unto them.

And new things do I declare unto you:] i. e. And now I declare unto you new
things, such as neither you, nor any other man, ever heard of before.

What these new things are, he tells us verse. 13. etc.

Before they spring forth.] i. e. Before they come to pass.

He uses a Metaphor here, from Plants, etc.

10.
Sing unto the Lord a new song, etc.] The Prophet considering the great
goodnesses which he was to tell of, and how worthy they were of praises,
invites the people to sing praises unto the Lord for them, before he tells them
what they are, thereby to make the people the more desirous to hear them: and
when he tells them, he tells them as if the Babylonish captivity were even
then, and as if he were even then among the captives.

A new song:] When the Jews had any extraordinary cause of rejoicing, they were
invited, by way of thanksgiving, to sing a new song; as Psalm. 33.3. and 40.3.
and 96.1. and 149.1. And therefore (it may be conjectured that) this was,
because they had Set-Psalms of Thanksgiving to use upon occasions which
happened ordinarily: But when they had extraordinary mercies showed them, such
as was their Redemption out of Egypt, and their Delivery out of the Babylonish
captivity, they had a new song made, by some holy man of God or other, for that
special occasion.

Ye that go down into the Sea,] i. e. Ye Mariners, and ye which pass through
the Sea with ships, sing ye to the Lord.

And all that is therein, etc.] q. d. Yea, sing unto him, all that is in the
Sea.

By [All that is therein] that is, in the Sea, understand all the Ships which
are in the Sea, and, by a Me^onymy, all those which are in the Ships. This is a
repetition or amplification of the former sentence.

By those that go down into the Sea, understand chiefly the Tyrians, which were
great Seamen, whom the Babylonians oppressed, and whom Nebuchadnezzar besieged
thirteen years: And by the inhabitants of the Isles, understand such Islanders
as had suffered under the Babylonians, (whom the Lord destroyed for their
cruelty to the Jews, that he might redeem the Jews out of the captivity which
they suffered under them;) by reason therefore of the destruction of the
Babylonians, he invites all to rejoice, and to praise God for this their
destruction, who had suffered under them, and were freed from their suff^rings
by this their downfall.

11.
Let the Wilderness and the Cities thereof li^t up their voice,] viz. In songs
of rejoicing.

By the Wilderness he means the Wilderness by the red Se^, in which the
Edomites dwelt, which were ill used by the Babylonians.

The villages that Kedar does inhabit:] Kedar is put here for the Kedarens, the
children of Kedar, who was the son of Ismael, Genesis 25.13. per Metonymiam
Efficientis.

The Kedarens were Arabians, such as they called Scenitae, because of their
dwellings in Tents.

By the Villages therefore are here meant some number of Tents pitched together
in one and the same place; for standing houses of timber or stone these had
none.

Let the inhabitants of the Rock sing.] Supple, For joy that the Babylonians
shall be destroyed.

It is doubtful who he means by the inhabitants of the Rock, whether he
means such in general as dwelt among Rocks, putting Rock in the singular
number, collective, for Rocks in the plural; or whether he means the
inhabitants of Arabia Petraea in particular, whose chief City was called Petra,
which signifies a Rock.

12.
And declare his praise in the Islands.] i. e. And declare his praise in remote
places, as occasion serves.

13.
The Lord shall go forth as a mighty man,] Here is the news which the Prophet
spoke of, verse. 9. And here is the Reason also why he invites those people to
rejoice and sing; for he tells them, that the Lord would go forth against the
Babylonians (who had oppressed them) as a mighty man of war.

This did the Lord do, when he stirred up Cyrus against the Babylonians, and
assisted him to their overthrow.

Note here, that though the Lord does war against his Enemies, by his
instruments and servants, and so subdues them; yet, by a kind of Poetical
Fiction, the Prophet brings him in like a man warring himself, etc. See Cap.
2.10.

He shall stir up jealousy:] i. e. He shall stir up his wrath and indignation
against the Babylonians.

Because jealous men are angry men, and hardly to be appeased, Prove. 6.34.
hence jealousy may be sometimes taken for wrath and indignation.

Anger and indignation do whet a man's valor: hence it is that he says, He
shall stir up jealous^e like a man of war.

He shall cry, yea roar;] He alludes here to the ancient custom of Soldiers,
which at the instant of their onset, and joining of battle with their Enemies,
did use to give a shout and cry aloud: And this they did partly to encourage
themselves, partly to terrify and daunt their Enemies: and the louder their
Cry was, the more effectual it was for these ends. This shout and cry was so
esteemed and regarded among Soldiers, as that they would judge of the event of
a Battle by it. Cato said, Verba plus quam gladium, and voces quam monum hosts
territare, and in fugam veriere: i. e. That words did more affright the Enemy
then the sword, and the voice and cries more then force and strength, and make
them fly.

Against his Enemies.] i. e. Against the Babylonians, who were the Enemies of
his people the Jews, and so his Enemies.

God accounts the Enemies of his people his own Enemies. See Acts 9.4.

14.
I have a long time held my peace:] Supple, Says the Lord; for this is spoken
in the person of God.

The sense is, q. d. I have been patient a long time, and not so much as said
any thing to the Babylonians which have afflicted my people.

Now will I cry like a traveling woman,] q. d. Now will I fall furiously upon
mine Enemies the Babylonians, which hold my people captive.

He alludes to Soldiers, who cry out and give a great shout when they set upon
their Enemies: And by the loudness of the cry, he shows the fierceness of the
assault or onset, and puts the cry for the assault it self.

Like a traveling woman,] A woman (especially a woman which has hard travel)
uses to cry aloud, yea to roar, when she is in her sharpest pain; that is,
when the child is in the birth: Hence it is that the Lord says, that he will
cry like a traveling woman, when he would signify, that he would cry aloud,
yea roar, as it is said v. 13.

But probably this is not all which is signified by this similitude: But as a
woman, when she is in her travel, is in great pain and grief, and desires to be
delivered; So may the Lord signify by this, that he is in great pain and grief
to see his people so oppressed, and that that pain and grief would make him to
cry out as a traveling woman, and take vengeance of his Enemies speedily, that
so he might ease himself by their destruction.

I will destroy, and devour at once.] q. d. I will destroy all mine Enemies in
a moment.

He alludes to an hungry Lion, or other ravenous beasts, which sets upon the
first prey it sees, and when it has killed it, forbears not to eat it, but
eats it greedily, yea swalloweth it down without chewing for very greediness.

15.
I will make waste mountains and hills,] By the Metaphor of mountains and
hills, he means the Babylonians, who were mighty in power at this time,
excelling therein all other people. See the same Metaphor, Cap. 41.15.

And dry up all their herbs,] i. e. And I will put an end to all their glory.

As by mountains and hills he means the Babylonians which did excel in power;
so by the herbs, or grass, growing upon the hills and mountains, he means the
glory of the Babylonians, and whatsoever they esteemed as a glory or ornament
to them: For herbs and grass are the glory and ornament, as of fields, so of
hills and mountains. Turpis sine gramine Campus, and Turpes sine gramine
Montes: As a field, so hills and mountains, are unsightly, if not clothed with
grass and herbs.

And I will make the Rivers Islands,] i. e. I will dry up the Rivers, and turn
them into dry ground.

What he meant by Mountains before, that he means by Rivers here; for Rivers
and great Waters may Metaphorically signify great and powerful Princes and
People, as well as mountains and hills. See Cap. 8.7.

And I will dry up the pools.] This is a repetition of the former sentence.

16.
And I will bring the blind by the way they knew not:] i. e. And when I have
done this, I will bring my people the Jews out of the Land of Babylon, where
they are captive, into their own Land of Judea, by a way which they knew not.

The blind:] He calls the Jews which were in the Babylonish captivity, The
blind, because at this time, when the good news of their delivery out of
captivity was first told them, they would not believe it: So they which would
not believe the like message, are called blind, cap. 29.18.

That Unbelief is called Blindness, see Romans 11.25. Joh. 12.49. As to perceive,
to believe, Cap. 6.9.

I will make darkness light before them,] i. e. I will turn their adversity
into prosperity; so some. But I had rather understand it thus: q. d. In the
night time, when it is dark, I will give them light, so that the darkness shall
be no hinderance to them in their journey.

When the Lord brought the children of Israel out of Egypt, he went before them
by night in a Pillar of Fire, to show them light, and the way wherein they
should go, Exodus 13.21. Nehem. 9.19. To this the Prophet does here allude, and
describes Gods bringing the Jews out of the Babylonish captivity, by what he
did when he brought them out of Egypt: for the Prophet does often express like
things by like, as we said Cap. 4.5.

And crooked things straight.] i. e. And I will make the crooked ways straight,
that they may sooner come to their journeys end. See Cap. 40.4. He says
crooked things for crooked ways, putting a general term for a special, by a
Synecdoche.

17.
They shall be turned back,] But as for the Babylonians, I will send my sword
against them, and they shall turn their backs, and fly before it.

This was done when the Lord sent Cyrus against Babylon.

Here is a Relative without an Antecedent, (...).

They shall be greatly ashamed.] i. e. They shall be subdued and overcome.

They which were in great hope of a victory, are ashamed, and hide their heads
for shame when they are overcome. See 2 Samuel 19.3. Hence may he put [to be
ashamed] for [to be overcome and vanquished.]

18.
Hear, ye deaf, and look, ye blind,] The Prophet speaks here to the Jews in
his own person, whom he calls deaf and blind (as he called them blind, verse.
16.) because of their unbelief; for they would not believe the good tidings,
which God sent to them, of their delivery out of the Babylonish captivity.

Unbelief is a kind of spiritual deafness and blindness, and so it is called
by a Metaphor from the outward Senses: for he that believes not a thing,
regards it no more then if he never saw it, or never heard it.

Hear, ye deaf,] i. e. Harken, ye Unbelievers, to that good news which I shall
tell you.

He iterates to the Jews, again and again, the good news of their delivery out
of the Babylonish captivity, that they may be the better persuaded of it: and
he so speaks, as though the Babylonish captivity were at that present, and that
he were present himself among the Captives at that time.

And look, ye blind,] i. e. And attend, ye Unbelievers, to the words which I
speak.

If you ask, how we may be said to look to, or see a word; see cap. 2. v. 1.

That ye may see.] i. e. That ye may believe; Supple, That that is true which I
have told you, concerning your Redemption out of Babylon.

If to be blind signifies not to believe, to see may signify to believe: Or,
that ye may see; i. e. That ye may know; Supple, What great things the Lord
will do for you.

19.
Who is blind, but my servant?] i. e. Who is so spiritually blind and
unbelieving as my servant? The particle But is to be taken here for the Note of
comparison, As.

These two Verses, viz. v. 19, 20. are spoken in the person of God; therefore
these words [Saith the Lord] may be here understood: q. d. Who is blind, says
the Lord, but my servant? etc.

By his servant he means his servant Jacob; that is, the children of Jacob,
the Jews, which were in the Babylonish captivity.

Because the Prophet called the Jews by the name of deaf and blind, lest he
may seem to call them so, which had not deserved so to be called, he here
justifies his calling them after that manner.

Or deaf, as my Messenger that I sent?] i. e. Or, who is so spiritually deaf
and unbelieving as my Messenger, which I have sent to instruct my servant Jacob?

Blindness and deafness signify here one and the same thing (as I said, v.
18.) that is, unbelief.

By the Messenger is meant the Priest and the Levite, who were Gods ordinary
Messengers to his people, appointed by his Law to teach them. See Malac. 2.7.
Now if Gods Priests and Levites were blind and deaf, then must the people
needs be blind which were instructed by them.

As he that is perfect,] i. e. As he which ought to be perfect, or has
promised and covenanted to be perfect, and is perfect by profession.

The Jews are called perfect here, not because they were so indeed, but because
they ought to have been so, and were so by profession, and might have been so,
if they had made good use of the means of perfection which God gave them. So
Saint Paul calls the Corinthians unleavened, not because they were unleavened
in their Manners, but because they were unleavened by profession: 1 Cor. 5.7.

And blind as the Lords servant?] q. d. And blind, I say, as the Lords
servant. He repeats here what he said in the beginning of the Verse, and by it
augments these men's fault in not believing.

20.
Seeing many things,] i. e. Thou see, or, thou art seeing many words of the
Lord, and many signs which I work to confirm those words.

Note here, that a Participle is put for a Verb, seeing for thou see: Or else
the Verb substantive, Thou art, is here to be understood: q. d. Thou art
seeing, which is as much as thou see.

But thou observest not:] i. e. But yet thou believe not what thou see.

Opening the ears,] i. e. He opens his ears, and receives my words with his
outward ears.

He puts a Participle here for a Verb; or understands a Verb substantive, as
before; and uses an Enallage of the person: For he speaks here of his servant
in the third person, to whom he spoke in the second person immediately before.

But he hears not.] But he does not believe what is spoken.

To observe and hear, signify here one and the same thing, to wit, to believe.
See Notes Cap. 6. v. 9, 10.

21.
The Lord is well pleased] i. e. The Lord is well pleased with you, though he
was angry.

These words, and this whole Verse, relate to the eighteenth Verse, and has
its immediate connection with that: for the two intervening Verses were brought
in by the By, only that God might justify his Prophet, in calling his people
deaf and blind.

For his righteousness sake,] i. e. For his mercy and goodness sake.

He will magnify the Law, and make it honorable.] i. e. He will magnify his
Word, which he has spoken by me his Prophet Isaiah, concerning your Redemption
out of the Babylonish captivity, and make it honorable.

The Law is taken here for the Word of God in general, as it is also taken cap.
1. v. 10. and elsewhere.

Then does the Lord magnify his Law, that is, his Word, and make it honorable,
(I mean, his Word of Prophecy, and of Promise, as this was) when he does fulfill
it, and show by the event, that it came from him.

22.
But this is a people robbed and spoiled, they are all of them snared in
holes,] This is spoken in the person of one of those deaf and blind Jews,
mentioned verse. 18. which objects the present misery of the Jews against that
which the Prophet said verse. 21. to wit, That the Lord was well pleased with
them, and that he would magnify the Law, and make it honorable: For how, says
the deaf and blind Jew, is this likely, being we are a people robbed and
spoiled? etc.

The like Objection we read upon the like occasion, Cap. 49.24.

By this people then are meant the Jews, whom he thus spoke of, because they
were in a very mean and low condition at this time, without all hope of
bettering their estate.

A people robbed and spoiled,] i. e. A people whom the Babylonians have robbed
and spoiled of all their goods, and of all other things, that might otherwise
be a comfort to them.

They are all of them snared in holes,] i. e. They are all kept in holes and
dark places, that is, in dungeons and prisons, and there they lie in chains, so
that they are not able to get out, no more then a bird can get out of the snare
in which it is taken, or the wild beast out of the toil in which it is caught.

They are hid in prison houses:] i. e. They lie in prison houses, as men
forgotten and quite out of mind, so that none think upon them, to set them
free.

The Scripture says of a thing forgotten, that it is hid, as Cap. 41.27.

They are for a prey,] i. e. They are made as a prey to their enemies.

And none delivers;] i. e. And none delivers them out of their Enemies hands.

For a spoil,] i. e. They are made as a spoil.

And none says, Restore.] i. e. And none says to them, which imprisoned them,
and which spoiled them, Restore the men again out of prison, or, Restore the
goods which thou have taken from them: that is, And none is able to rescue
them, or any way to help them.

23.
Who amongst you will give ear to this?] i. e. Who amongst you will give ear to
what I shall now say. This Relative this relates to that which follows, and
he speaks still to those which he spoke to verse. 18. and takes away the
Objection which was made verse. 22.

Who will harken and hear for the time to come?] i. e. Who will harken and hear
what I shall say? that he may believe what God shall speak concerning the
delivery of the Jews out of captivity for the time to come; and that he may
also learn not to sin her^after.

24.
Who gave Jacob for a spoil,] i. e. Who gave us Jews, which are the children of
Jacob, for a spoil to the Babylonians?

Jacob is taken here for the Jews, the children of Jacob; and the Prophet
speaks here, as if the Jews were in captivity to the Babylonians at this time,
and as if he were present with them: And he speaks to them of themselves,
though by an Enallage he uses a third person for a first or second.

And Israel to the robbers?] This is a repetition of the former sentence.

Did not the Lord?] By this he gives them to understand, that as the Lord gave
them for a spoil to the robbers; so the Lord could rescue them again, and
deliver them out of the hands of the robbers; so that they need not doubt of
his power in this matter.

For they would not walk in his ways.] Observe the Enallage of the person here,
how he passes from the first to the third, from we to they.

The Prophet shows the reason here, why the Lord gave the Jews over as a
spoil to the robbers; and the reason is, because they sinned, and would not
walk in his ways: By which he intimates, that being they had broken off their
sins by repentance, the Lord would be willing to take them again out of those
hands, into which he had given them: So that where neither will nor power is
wanting, there is no reason to doubt of the success or effect.

25.
He has poured upon him,] i. e. He has poured upon Jacob, or Israel,
mentioned v. 24.

Note here again the Enallage of the number, how he passes from a plural to
the singular number.

The strength of battle:] i. e. Most vehement wars, such as he was not able to
withstand.

In these words there is an Hypallage; for he says, The strength of battle,
for The battle of strength; and the battle of strength, for strong or most
strong battle: For a Substantive of the Genitive case is often put for an
Adjective.

He has set him on fire round about,] i. e. And the fury of his anger did set
on fire his Cities, and his dwelling places round about.

He says him, for his Cities and dwelling places, by a Metonymy. So Virgil, --
Jam proximus ardet

Vcalegon -- for Jam proxima ardet Vcalegonis domus. Virgil. Aenead. lib. 2.

See the History of that which he here speaks of, 2 King. 25.9. and Jer. 39.8.

Yet he knew not:] i. e. Yet he did not understand, or take notice that this
was from the Lord, as a punishment for his sins; he knew not the cause of it.

And it burned him,] i. e. It burned to the ground, his Cities and dwelling
houses.

Yet he laid it not to his heart.] i. e. Yet he did not seriously consider it;
which if he had done, he would have considered from whom it came, and what was
the cause thereof, and so have repented.

That which the Prophet here says, came not to pass while after he had written
this; yet being endued with a prophetique spirit, he speaks of it, as though it
had been done long before; yea, he speaks as though he himself were among his
Countrymen the Jews in the Babylonish captivity, though he were dead long
before that time.

ISAIAH. CHAP. XLIII.
But now] Supple, That thou know that it was the Lord, which gave thee as a
spoil into the hands of the Babylonians, and that sin was the cause thereof,
and thou have repented thee of thy sins.

Thus says the Lord] q. d. Though heretofore he poured forth the fury of his
anger, and the strength of the battle upon thee, yet now (that thou may know
that he is well pleased with thee, upon thy repentance, for his righteousness
sake) thus says the Lord, that created thee O Jacob, and he that formed thee O
Israel, etc.

Thus says the Lord that created thee, O Jacob,] By Jacob are meant the Jews,
the children of Jacob, per metonymiam efficientis.

The Lord is said to have created Jacob, that is, the children of Jacob,
because he took them to himself for a peculiar people, and made them a
Commonwealth of themselves.

This has its immediate connection with the former Chapter, and had been better
to have been continued with that, than to have been divided from it, and made
the head of a several Chapter, as now it is.

And he that formed thee, O Israel;] This sentence is for the sense, the same
with that which went before; But when he says, he that formed thee, he uses
a metaphor taken from Potters making or forming pots.

For I have redeemed thee] q. d. For I have redeemed thee diverse times out of
the hands of thine enemies, and oppressors, as the Egyptians, the Midianites,
the Philistines, etc. And as I have redeemed thee out of their hands, so will I
redeem thee out of the hands of the Babylonians.

Yet it may be that he speaks here peculiarly of the redemption by which he
redeemed his people Israel out of Egypt, to be to him a peculiar people, and an
holy Nation.

I have called thee by thy name] q. d. Thou art my chosen servant, whom I have
made choice of to serve me in a special manner, and whom I greatly regard.

He alludes here to the manner of great men, who when they call a servant to
them whom they like, and whom they prefer before others, they call him by his
name; whereas they call an ordinary servant, not by his name, but with an
hiss, or a whistle, or the like.

Thou art mine] i. e. Thou art my servant, yea my peculiar servant; and
therefore I will have a care of thee.

These words contain the meaning of those that went immediately before.

2.
When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, etc.] This and the
other sentences which follow in this verse, are proverbiall kinds of speeches,
and signify all one and the same thing, namely, that the Lord will keep him
safe in all dangers.

3.
Thy God] And therefore will protect thee, and provide for thee.

I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for thee] i. e. When
Senacherib King of Assyria warred against thee, and left Ashardhaddon his son
to govern Assyria in his absence; and to supply him with men, and all things
necessary for the absolute conquest of Judaea: And Asharhaddon thought now to
do his utmost, for subduing thee, and destroying thy Land, I diverted him, and
employed his forces against Tirakah King of Ethiopia, and the Egyptians, and
Sabaeans, which accompanied him in his expedition against Assyria, (all whom I
made a prey to the Assyrians sword) and so I preserved thee.

Concerning Tirakah King of Egypt his expedition against Assyria, See Cap.
37.9. and Cap. 18. where the event of his Expedition is foretold, which was,
that he should be overcome by the Assyrians.

Egypt] By Egypt understand the Egyptians, by a Metonymy: And by the Egyptians,
those Egyptians which warred under Tirakah King of Ethiopia (when he went in
expedition against Assyria) by a Synechdoche.

For thy ransome] i. e. That I might deliver thee from the danger of the
Assyrians, and preserve thee.

A ransom properly taken, is the price which is given for the redemption of a
Captive, by the mutual consent of the redeemer, and him of whom the Captive is
redeemed: when therefore he says, He gave Egypt for thy ransom etc. He
speaks Metaphorically.

Ethiopia] Ethiopia is a large Region lying beyond Egypt Southward. Here it is
taken by a Metonymy for the Ethiopians; those Ethiopians which served under
Tirakah their King, against Assyria.

Seba.] Seba was the Son of Cush: Genesis 10.7. which was the father of the
Sabaeans which inhabited Arabia the Happy. And it is taken here for the
Sabaeans the children of Seba or Laba, even these Sabaeans that served under
Tirakah King of Ethiopia in the expedition aforesaid.

For Thee.] i. e. For thy ransom, or that I might deliver thee, from the fury
of the Assyrians.

Since thou wast precious in my sight] i. e. Since the time that I made thee a
peculiar Treasure to my self, Exodus 19.5. That is, since the time that I
brought thee out of Egypt, and cast a favorable eye upon thee.

Thou have been honourable] i. e. Thou have been honorable in the sight of the
Nations, by reason of these great things which I have done for thee.

And I have loved thee] i. e. And I have showed my love unto thee: Metonymia
Efficientis.

Therefore will I give men for thee] q. d. I am I say, The Lord thy God, the
holy one of Israel thy Savior, and I have given Egypt for thy ransom, etc.
and I have loved thee; therefore will I give men for thee, etc.

God is not like man, but whom he loves, he loves to the end, John 13.1. And
his former blessings are a motive to bless again whom he has blessed before.

I will give men for thee] i. e. I will give men for thy ransom, that I may
redeem thee out of the Babylonish captivity.

This was fulfilled when God gave the Babylonians as a prey to Cyrus, by reason
of which the Jews which were held Captives by the Babylonians were delivered
out of that Captivity.

And people for thy life] i. e. And people to save thy life: This is a
repetition of the former Sentence.

5.
I will bring thy seed from the East, and gather thee from the West etc] When
the Babylonians invaded Iudaea, they carried many of the Jews away Captive
into Babylon, which lay Eastward from Iudaea, and many of the Jews fled
Westward, and many Northward, and many Southward to save their lives, and there
lived in a kind of Exile: These therefore does God here promise to bring back
again into their own Land: And he brought those of the Captivity into their
own Land by the means of Cyrus Ezra 1. And the other hearing how mercifully
God had dealt with them of the Captivity, returned to their own Country
again, not without joy and gladness of heart.

I will bring thy Seed] i. e, I will bring thy children, O Jacob, etc.
Metonymia Materiae.

And gather thee] i. e. And gather thy Children: Metonymia Efficientis.

6.
I will say to the North] i. e. I will say to the Northern people, or people
which dwell in the North parts of the earth.

Give up] i. e. Give up my people which is among you, into mine hands.

Bring my sons from farre] i. e. All you which live a far off, bring the
children of Israel (which are to me as my sons) which dwell among you, into
their own Land.

7.
Even every one that is called by my name] i. e. Bring ye even every one that
is mine.

What is Gods is called by Gods name as v.g. The Son of God, the Daughter of
God: As that which is Paul's, is called by the name of Paul, as Paul's cloak:
And what is Peter's is called by the name of Peter, as Peter's sword, etc. And
every thing which is owned, is called by the name of its owner.

For I have created him] i. e. I have made him.

For my glory] i. e. That my glory; That is, that my power, and my fidelity,
and my goodness, may appear in his preservation: And that he may glorify me,
and serve me only, because of these great things which I have determined, and
will do for him.

I have formed him, yea I have made him] supple, that I may be glorified in
him, and by him.

8.
Bring forth the blind people that have eyes, and the deaf that have eares]
Bring forth the Idols, that have ^yes but see not, and have ears but hear
not, Psa. 115.6. This manner of speaking carries contempt with it.

As the Lord, when he had told what he would do for his people the Jews, and
how he would deliver them out of the Babylonians Captivity, made that his
telling or foretelling of this an argument of his divinity. And called upon the
Idolaters and their Idols, to bring what reasons they could; The Idols to prove
their own divinity; and the Idolaters, to prove the divinity which they gave to
their Idols, and in particular to show whether they did ever foretell of that
which God said, He would bring to pass, namely the delivery out of the
Babylonish Captivity, and bringing them to their own Land again: Cap. 42. v.
21, 22, etc. So does he here, and so often as he has occasion, he shows the
vanity of Idols, that his people living amor^ Idolaters in the Babylonish
Captivity might not b^ ensnared with Idolatry.

B^^ng forth etc.] H^ speaks to Idolaters to bring forth their Idols, to plead
for themselves, and their divinity.

Yet because the Jews which were in the Babylonish Captivity are called Deaf
and Bl^nde, Cap. 42.18. Some understand this verse of bringing forth the
Captive Jews out of Captivity: And make it an Amplification of that which went
before, q. d. I will say Bring forth out of Prison and Captivity, or bring
forth out of your Land, the Blind which have eyes, and the Deaf whioh have
ears: So that Gods controversy with Idolaters and their Idols begins not till
the next year. But I think it rather to be understood of Idols, and spoken to
Idolaters.

9.
Let all the Nations] supple, which worship Idols.

Be gathered together] To wit; that they may hear what I can say for my
divinity, and what the Idols can say for theirs, and so know which of us is the
true God, while we plead together.

And let the people be assembled] This is a repetition of the former Sentence.

Who among them] i. e. Who among those Idols which they worship.

Here is a relative without an Antecedent.

Can declare this] i. e. Can declare or foretell that which I have declared and
foretold, concerning the redemption of my people the Jews, out of the
Babylonish Captivity etc.

And show us former things] i. e. And show us things which will come e're long
to pass. See Cap. 41.22.

Let them bring forth their witnesses] q. d. If they say that they have
declared this, and showed former things, or can declare, and show them, let
them bring forth their witnesses, to prove what they say.

That they may be justified] i. e. That Sentence may be pronounced in
judgment, that they speak truth, or that Sentence may be given that the cause
which they maintain is just.

The cause of the Idols here meant is, that they are Gods, and that they do
justly assume to themselves the name of Gods.

This word to justify, is a Law term, and signifies the justness not of the
Person, but of the Cause which is in hand.

Or let them heare] i. e. Or if they cannot bring forth any witnesses, to prove
what they say, let them hear those witnesses which I can produce in my cause,
to prove what I say.

And say] i. e. And when they have heard what my witnesses can say, let them
say and confess.

It is truth] It is true, which I say, and maintain; That is, that it is true,
that I have foretold these things, before they came to pass, and that I
therefore am God only.

10.
Ye are my witnesses] q. d. If ye ask who are my witnesses, ye my people
which have heard what I have said concerning your redemption, are my witnesses,
and must needs certify for me, that I have declared and foretold of your
redemption out of the Babylonish Captivity, before it is come to pass, and
that therefore I am God.

He uses an Apostrophe here to the children of Jacob the Jews.

And my servant whom I have chosen] i. e. And my servant Isaiah whom I have
chosen, to be my servant; He is my witness, that I have declared and foretold
of the redemption of you my people out of the Babylonish Captivity, before it
is come to pass; For I have revealed it to him, and he has made it known
both by word and writing to you.

That ye may know] q.d. So that ye must needs know, supple, that I am he,
that is, that I am God.

And believe me] Supple, When I say that I am he, that is, that I am God.

And understand that I am he] i. e. And understand that I am God, yea the only
God. He is put here (...), for Him which is the highest and greatest He, and
that is God, or He, that is He whom I said my self to be, and that is God.

If the Lord only can foretell things to come, the Lord only must needs be
God, and there is no other God but He, See Cap. 41.23.

Before me there was no God formed] When he says; There was no God formed, he
seems to deride the Gods of the Heathen; for their gods were formed by the Art
and hand of man.

11.
I am the Lord] i. e. I am that true and eternal God, which is of himself,
and from whom all other things have their being.

No Saviour] Supple, which can save his Servants, and deliver them out of all
dangers, and out of the hands of all their enemies as I can.

12.
I have declared] q. d. I have heretofore declared unto you and told you, that
I would save you out of the hands of your enemies: For when Senacherib came
against you with a great Army, I declared and told you, that so many of you as
would believe my words, and rely on me for safety, and would keep themselves
with Hezekiah within Jerusalem, should be safe, and this I told you before it
came to pass.

And have saved] i. e. And I have saved you, as I declared I would do, for
when Senacheribs Host did besiege you, I sent mine Angel, and slew of them an
hundred four score and five thousand in one night, and so delivered you, 2
Kings 19.35.

And have showed when there was no strange God among you] i. e. Yea I have
declared, and showed unto you, that I would save you from the hand of
Senacherib, (and have saved you accordingly) when there was no strange god
among you: And if there was no strange god among you at that time, it must
needs be, that what I declared, I declared of my self, and in that I saved
you, I saved you of my self, and therefore that I am the true God.

In the days of Hezekiah there was no strange god, (at least publicly
worshipped) in Judah: For Hezekiah and all Israel that were with him, at the
keeping of the Passover, destroyed all the Images and the Groves which were in
Judah and Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 30.14. and 2 Chro. 31.1.

Note here, that in this verse, there is an Apostrophe, made to the Jews, the
children of Jacob.

13.
Yea, before the day was I am he] i. e. Yea, before the day was I was God? See
verse 10.

This proves God to be the only God, for the gods of the Heathen were since the
day was made, as being the work of man's hand, and so by consequence are no
Gods.

I am he] God is he which was, and is, and is to come, and though we signify,
that God was, yet we signify it by a present tense, because God is the same to
day as he was yesterday, the same at this present time, as he was in the time
past, without any change or shadow of change at all.

And there is none that can deliver out of my hand.] If there be none that can
deliver out of the hand of the Lord, when the Lord has a mind to punish any
one man or people; It must follow that the Lord is God, and God only; He has
not his equal.

The Lord intimates here, by the By for the comfort of the Jews, which were
held Captive by the Babylonians, that he would surely destroy the Babylonians
by Cyrus, and that no power should be able to deliver the Babylonians out of
his hands.

I will work] i. e. I will do what I please.

14.
Thus says the Lord your redeemer] The Prophet returns here to the Subject
which he treated of in the beginning of the Chapter, to wit, the redemption of
the Jews out of the Babylonish Captivity, which he intermitted at the eighth
verse, to argue against Idols and Idolatry, upon the occasion there spoken of.

For your sakes I have sent to Babylon] i. e. For your sakes I will send Cyrus
with an Army to Babylon to fight against it, and take it.

He puts here a preterperfect Tense, for a future, to signify the certainty of
what he speaks of.

This sending of Cyrus with an Army against Babylon, was advantageous to the
Jews which were in Captivity, for by this means the Babylonians who held them
Captives were destroyed and they were delivered.

And have brought down all their Nobles] i. e. And will bring down all the
Nobles of the Babylonians which does oppress you, and keep you in an hard
Captivity, and will tread upon them as mortar. See Cap. 41.25.

And the Chaldaeans] In the Babylonish Empire the Chaldaeans were the chief of
any other people, the Emperor himself being a Chaldaeans, and Babylon the
head City of the Empire, being in Chaldaea: And hence it may be that he
mentions the Chaldaeans by name in this place: Or therefore may he mention
the Chaldaeans here, because they had more of the Captive Jews then any other
people under them, and used them more hardly.

Whose cry is in the ships] q.d. Who shall be heard to cry, and howl in the
ships.

He puts a Present Tense for a Future here, as he puts a preterperfect tense
for a Future, a little before.

Babylon and Chaldaea have two great Rivers, Tygris and Euphrates running
through them or close to them, navigable Rivers, and certainly as able to
bear as great Vessels, as our Thames which bears Vessels of the greatest
bulk: yea Chaldaea reaches to the Persian Gulf, where the greatest ships may
ride and sail.

At the time which Babylon was taken by Cyrus, no doubt but every Babylonian
and Chaldaean endeavored to escape as well as he could. And as some
endeavored to escape by Land: so others attempted to escape by water in ships;
and of these latter may he say, Their cry is in the ships. Or he may say, that
their Cry is in the ships, or shall be in the ships, not because they which
cried were, or should be in the ships, but because their cry should be so
great, as that it should be heard to the Sea, of those which sailed in their
ships.

Again it was the custom of the Eastern people, when they subdued a Nation,
to transplant the Inhabitants thereof, an example whereof you may see. 2 Kings
17.6. Cyrus therefore might send many of the Babylonians away in ships, and
they as they were in the ships, might howl and cry for the misery which was
come upon them.

15.
Your holy One] i. e. He whom you have made choice of to be your God, and whom
alone you worship, and therefore will preserve and bless you.

Your King] See Cap. 33.22.

This verse relates to that, which went before in the fourteenth verse, and
contains a reason of what is there said: q. d. For your sake I will send to
Babylon, and will bring down, all their Nobles: For I am the Lord, your Holy
One, the Creator of Israel, your King.

16.
Thus says the Lord] q. d. Yea thus says the Lord.

Which makes a way in the Sea] Rather which made a way in the Sea; for this
must be understood in the Preterperfect Tense.

God made a way for his people in the red Sea, when he brought them out of
Egypt, Exodus 14. v. 21, 22. And of this it is, which he makes mention in this
place.

And a Path in the mighty waters] The Lord, when the children of Israel passed
over Jordan, divided the River Jordan, and made a way for them to pass over
dry foot, even when Jordan was so high, as that it overflowed all his Banks,
Josh. 3. v. 15, 16, 17. Some therefore understand this place of this dividing
Jordan, and of the way which he made in it at this time: But I rather take this
to be a Repetition of the former Sentence: Because our Prophet delights in
such Repetitions; and because in the next words, he mentions, that which fell
out at the dividing of the red Sea, and making a way for his people through it,
when their enemies were drowned.

17.
Which brings forth the Charet and Horse, the Army and the Power] Rather
which brought forth the Charets and the Horses, the Army and the Power, supple,
of Pharaoh, to their destruction.

When the Lord brought the children of Israel out of Egypt, he hardened
Pharaohs heart, so that Pharaohs heart, and the heart of all his people, was
turned against the children of Israel; and they said, why have we done this,
that we have let Israel go from serving us? And Pharaoh pursued after the
children of Israel with 600. chosen Charets, and all the Charets of Egypt; and
in the pursuit followed the children of Israel into the midst of the Sea, and
there were drowned, Exodus 14.

This is that which the Lord here mentions; and these things does he mention
in this place, to wit, His dividing of the Sea for the Israelites, and his
drawing out of Pharaohs host, that he might drown it in the red Sea, to put the
Jews in mind of his power, which is such, as that no difficulty can hinder him
from redeeming or delivering his people at any time; and of that love which he
bore to his people: that they remembering these things, might the more easily
be induced to believe those things which he said he would do for them, namely,
That he would deliver them out of the Babylonish captivity, and destroy the
Babylonians their Enemies.

They shall lie down together:] i. e. The Nobles of Babylon and the Caldeans
shall lie down, all of them, in the dust of the Earth; that is, they shall be
all brought down to the Grave.

Death is both in sacred and profane Writers often likened to a sleep, and the
Grave to the Bed, in which we sleep: and the Prophet alludes to the same here,
when he says, They shall lie down together: for he alludeth to men lying down
in a bed to sleep: But his meaning is, that they shall be slain, and brought
down to the pit.

They shall,] i. e. The Nobles of Babylon, and the Caldeans, shall lie down,
etc. of whom he spoke verse. 14.

They shall not rise:] q. d. They shall not awake and rise any more; that is,
they shall not be restored to life again.

He persists in his Metaphor still.

He adds this, that there may be no fear of these men's returning to life again
to vex the Jews and oppress them, or to meditate upon revenge against them: Or
else we may say, that this is an Hebraism, like to that, I have chosen thee,
and not cast thee away, Cap. 42.9.

They are extinct, they are quenched as tow.] i. e. They shall be extinguished
and quenched, as a candle is quenched which is put into the water.

He puts a present for a future tense.

By tow he means the wiek of a candle which is made of tow, per Metonymiam
Materiae; and by the wiek, the whole candle, per Synecdochen partis.

He likeneth the Caldeans to tow, that is, to a burning candle, because of
their rage and hot anger against the Jews their captives. So does he liken
Rezin King of Syria, and Pekah King of Israel, to two firebrarnds, because of
their rage against Judah, cap. 7.4. yet nevertheless they shall be quenched.

18.
Remember ye not former things.] q. d. That ye may know how precious ye are in
my sight, and how great my love is to you, ye shall not need to remember former
things, or to call to mind what I did for you heretofore, when I brought you
out of Egypt; for behold, etc.

19.
Behold, I will do a new thing:] Supple, By which ye shall know the greatness
of my love to you.

Now it shall spring forth:] i. e. It shall come to pass very shortly.

He uses a Metaphor here, from Plants springing out of the Earth.

Shall ye not know it?] q. d. It shall come to pass in your days, that you may
see it, and know it.

This Interrogation has the force of a strong Asseveration.

I will even make a way in the Wilderness, and Rivers in the Desert, etc.] This
is the new thing he said he would do.

I will even make a way in the wilderness,] The wilderness here meant is the
wilderness which lay between Babylon and the Land of Judah, through which the
Jews were to pass, when they went out of the Land of their captivity into their
own Land. This wilderness was very rugged and stony, and ill to go in;
wherefore the Lord says here, that he would make in this wilderness a plain
and easy way for the Jews, when they were to pass through it.

And Rivers in the Desert.] This Desert was a very dry and thirsty Land, where
there was heat and drought more then enough to procure thirst, but no waters to
quench it: Therefore the Lord says here, that he would make Rivers in the
Desert, for his people to quench their thirst thereat, as they passed through
it.

What is here spoken, some understand literally, to wit, That as God gave the
Israelites water in the Wilderness (which he brought out of a Rock, and made
run down like Rivers, Exodus 17.6. Psalm. 78.17.) when he brought them out of the
Land of Egypt into the Land of Canaan: So he would give the Jews waters in
abundance, and cause Rivers to flow in abundance in the Wilderness (in which
they were to pass from Babylon into Judea) when he brought them out of Babylon
thither. But others think, that all that is signified by these expressions, is
this; viz. That the Lord would vouchsafe the Jews high favors in their return
from Babylon home-ward, by the removal of all lets, and the supply of all
necessaries; and that the Prophet does here allude only to that which the Lord
did for the Israelites, when he brought them out of Egypt: for he loves to
express like things by like. See what we said Cap. 4. v. 5.

20.
The beasts of the field shall honor me, the Dragons, and the Owls, etc.] The
beasts of the fi^ld, and the Dragons, and the Owls, may be said to honor the
Lord, because when he gave Waters in the Wilderness, and Rivers in the Desert,
to give drink to his people, his c^osen; they living in the Wilderness and
Desert, did receive benefit by those Waters and Rivers, and quenched their
thirst thereat; so that if they had reason, they would praise God therefore.

Note, that to honor God is an act only of the intellectual or rational
Creatures, if we speak properly: yet, by an Hyperbolical kind of Metaphor, the
Scripture does often attribute those acts, which are the acts of the
intellectual or rational Creatures, to Creatures void of reason and
understanding, yea, to Creatures void of sense. See Psalm. 69.34. and 96.12. and
98.8, etc.

My chosen.] i. e. Whom I have chosen to be a peculiar people to my self.

21.
This people have I formed for my self,] i. e. For I have created this people,
even the people of the Jews, for my self, that I might show my power, and my
goodness, in and for them; and that they might sanctify and praise me.

These words contain a reason of what he said in the nineteenth and twentyeth
Verses: q. d. This people have I formed for my self, therefore I will make for
them a way in the Wilderness, and Rivers in the Desert; I will provide for
their welfare, and they shall show forth my praise.

They shall show forth my praise.] q. d. Therefore I will do that for them, for
which they shall praise me.

22.
But thou have not called upon me, O Jacob,] i. e. But for all your sayings, ye
have not worshipped me, O ye sons of Jacob.

He puts Jacob here for the Jews, which were the sons of Jacob: And when he
says, They have not called upon me, his meaning is, That they have not
worshipped him: For, to call upon God, which is but part of Gods worship, is put
often for the whole worship of God, by a Synecdoche.

Here he prevents an Objection, which the Jews (some of them at least) might
make: For whereas the Lord told them what great things he would do for them in
the former Verses, they might object, If it were true which he said, why would
he then pour out his fury upon them, and give them over into the Babylonians
hands, to be made slaves and captives, for his own wills sake, not for any
demerit of theirs? For as for their part, they truly worshipped him, and served
him.

To this the Lord answers, That it is true, that he gave them over into the
hands of the Babylonians; yet it was not for his wills sake, but it was because
they had sinned against him: for though they say that they worshipped the Lord
truly, yet they did not worship him, but they worshipped Baal, and all the host
of Heaven; and for this he gave them into the hands of the Babylonians, etc.

But thou have been weary of me.] i. e. But for all your sayings, ye have been
weary of my service.

23.
Thou have not brought me the small cattle of thy burnt-offerings] As Lambs and
Kids, etc. Exodus 12.5. q. d. Thou have not offered thy Lambs and thy Kids to me
for burnt-offerings, but thou have offered them to Baal, and other ^trange gods.

With thy sacrifices:] Supple, Of the grea^er Cattle, as Bullocks, etc.

I have not caused thee to serve with an offering,] i. e. I have not been so
highly esteemed of thee, as that thou have troubled thy sel^, or burdened thy
self with offerings for me.

The Cause here mentioned is the final Cause, that is, the Cause for whose or
which sake we do any thing.

The offering here spoken of is such an offering as is called the
meat offering, Levit. 2. v. 1.

And to serve signifies to trouble, or to burden a man's self, because
servitude is troublesome or burdensome to all.

Nor wearyed thee with incense.] i. e. Neither have thou wearyed thy self for
my sake, in bringing Incense unto me.

Incense or frankincense was wont to be put upon the meat offering, Lev. 2.1.

24.
Thou have bought me no sweet Cane with money,] This kind of sweet Cane grew in
Arabia, and being burned, yielded a sweet smell.

This sweet Cane, or sweet Calamus, was an ingredient which went to the
composition of the holy Oil, mentioned Exodus 30. v. 23. But besides the use
which was of sweet Cane in the composition of that Oil, it is conceived that
the Jews were wont to use sweet Cane, and to burn it for a perfume, to the
honor of God: and that they gather, as from other places, so from Jer. 6.20.
And to this they think that the Prophet alludeth here.

Neither have thou filled me with the fat of thy sacrifices:] Whatsoever the
sacrifice was, the fat thereof was to be burned to the Lord, Lev. 3.16.

Neither have thou filled me,] i. e. Neither have thou delighted me.

This filling is properly the filling of a man's self with wine, or strong
drink; which because it is delightful to the drinker, it signifies here
delight; and to be filled therewith signifies to be therewith delighted.

Note, that what this people are here accused of for not doing to the Lord, is
intimated, that they did to Idols and strange gods.

But thou have made me to serve with thy sins,] i. e. But thou have troubled me
and burdened me with thy sins.

To serve] See Verse. 23. to which this place answers.

Thou have wearyed me with thine iniquities.] See cap. 1.14.

Note, that this latter part of the Verse alludeth to the latter part of Verse.
23. by way of opposition.

25.
I, even I am he,] q. d. Yet nevertheless, I, even I am he.

Which blotteth out thy transgressions] i. e. Which seeing thy repentance, will
forget and forgive all thy sins.

This phrase is Metaphorical, and taken from a Creditor, which being satisfied
by his Debtor, blotteth out his Debt out of his Debt-book: By which Metaphor,
sins and transgressions are also called debts, Mat. 6. verse. 12.

For mine own sake,] i. e. Not for thy merits, but for my mercies sake.

And will not remember thy sins.] To wit, So as to persist to punish thee for
them; but they shall be in that regard, as if they were blotted out of my
remembrance.

26.
Put me in remembrance:] q. d. But thou do object and say against what I said
verse. 22, 23, 24. That thou have called upon me, and that thou have brought me
the small cattle of thy burnt-offerings, and that thou have honored me with thy
sacrifices, and that thou have served me with thine offerings, and thine
incense, and that thou have bought sweet Cane for me with thy money; Put me
therefore in remembrance when thou did any of these things.

Note, that the Prophet aymeth especially at those Jews which lived in the days
of Manasseh King of Judah, of whom read 2 King. 21.9.

Let us plead together:] q. d. And whereas I said, that thou have made me to
serve with thy sins, and that thou have wearyed me with thine iniquities, Verse.
25. And thou say, that thou did never make me to serve with thy sins, nor
weary me with thine iniquities, but have been always observant of me, and
therefore I gave thee over into the Babylonians hands undeservedly; come, let
us plead together.

Let us plead together:] i. e. Let us argue the case in open Court; and do thou
bring Arguments to prove, that thou wast always observant of me, and that I
gave thee into the hands of the Babylonians undeservedly: And I will bring
Arguments to prove, that thou have made me to serve with thy sins, and wearyed
me with thine iniquities; so that thou wast deservedly given over into the
Babylonians hands.

Declare thou,] i. e. Lay open thy case, and bring proofs of thine innocence,
and of this, that thou have suffered captivity undeservedly.

The term here used is a Law-term.

That thou may be justified:] i. e. That thou may be pronounced just in
this controversy, and that thou have the better Cause.

This is also a Law-term, used of him for whom the cause is judged.

Note here, that these men had nothing to say for themselves, but stood mute;
wherefore the Lord declares his Cause in the next Verse, that he might be
justified in this his dealing with these men.

27.
Thy first Father has sinned,] i. e. Thy King has sinned, etc.

By this King is meant especially Manasseh, the son of Hezekiah King of Judah,
for whose sins Judah was given into the hands of the Babylonians, Jer. 15.4.

Of Manasses sins you may read 2 Kings cap. 21.

A King is often called Father, yea, every Ruler may be called a Father; see
cap. 22.21. And because a King is the chiefest among Rulers, he may be called
the first Father; that is, first in place and dignity before all other Rulers:
For a thing may be called first, not only in regard of time, but also in
regard of place and dignity.

And thy Teachers] i. e. The Priests, and Levites, and Prophets.

Have transgressed against me.] i. e. Have sinned against God: And if their
King and their Teachers have sinned against God; surely the common people (who
are led by the example of their Kings and Teachers) have not been righteous.

28.
I have profaned the Princes of the Sanctuary,] God is said to have profaned
the Princes of the Sanctuary, because he took away the hedge of his protection
from them, and the rest of his people, by which he separated them from the
Nations, and laid them open to be spoiled by the Babylonians.

In this sense is the word to profane taken, Psalm. 89.39. and to pollute, Isai.
47.6. and Lament. 2.2. For understanding of which words, know, that to profane
and pollute are opposed to to sanctify: and that to be profaned and polluted
are opposed to to be holy. If we rightly therefore understand the notion of the
words, sanctify and holy, we may understand the meaning of (...), to pollute,
and to profane. To sanctify therefore signifies only to separate, by way of
pre-eminence and excellency or dignity: and to be holy signifies to be so
separated. When therefore God has a peculiar care of a people, and does
separate and put a difference between them and others, by his care and
protection of them above others, he may be said to sanctify them; and they
which are thus separated may be said to be sanctified and holy: See Notes, cap.
4.3. As God therefore may be said to sanctify a people, when he separates
them, and puts a difference between them and others, by his care and
protection: So when he deprives them of the care and protection which once he
afforded them, he may be said to profane them, or pollute them.

The Princes of the Sanctuary,] By the Princes of the Sanctuary, understand the
chief Priests, which ministered in the Temple, and ordered things concerning the
worship of God there; who were called the Princes of the Sanctuary, because
they had inferior Priests, and Levites, and Nethinims, to serve and attend them
in their high Calling.

And given Jacob to the curse,] i. e. And have given the children of Jacob, the
Jews, to destruction.

By Jacob, understand the Jews, the children of Jacob, by a Metonymy.

And the curse here spoken of, is such a curse, whereby the thing accursed, or
the the thing given to the curse, was to be destroyed, as Josh. 6.17.

How Jacob, that is, how many of the Jews (which were the children of Jacob)
were killed and destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar and his servants; see 2 King. 25.
v. 7, 21, etc.

And Israel] i. e. And the Jews, the children of Jacob, who also was called
Israel.

To reproaches.] i. e. To the reproach of their Enemies, who in their captivity
taunted them, jeered them, and reproached them.

ISAIAH, CHAP. XLIV.
YEt now hear O Jacob, etc.] This is to be continued with the former Chapter:
And the sense is, q. d. But although I have profaned the Princes of the
Sanctuary, and have given Jacob to the curse, and Israel to reproach, because
of their sins; yet now seeing your repentance, Hear, O Jacob, my servant.

O Jacob my servant.] By Jacob he means the Jews, which were the children of
Jacob: the same also he means by Israel.

2.
That made thee, and formed thee from the womb,] i. e. That made thee a people
from the first time that thou wast a people.

He speaks not of the making and forming of any one particular man, which is
made and formed in his mothers womb; but of the making of a company of men into
a people, or Body politic: yet he aliudes to the making and framing of a man
in the womb of his mother.

Which will help thee,] Supple, In all thy misery and distress.

Fear not:] Supple, The Babylonians, and their gods, though thou art a Captive,
and hardly used in the Land of thy captivity; For I will deliver thee, and they
shall not be able to hinder me. See verse. 8.

And thou Jesurun.] This name Jesurun is taken out of Deuteronomy. 32. verse. 15. where
Moses gives it to the people of Israel; and it signifies right: And it is
therefore given to that people, because God called them to lead a right or
upright life and conversation.

Yet some think it to be an Hebrew diminutive of the Hebrew word Israel, and to
signify as much as Little Israel; as though the Lord had called his people
here by a diminutive name, as Fathers use to call their little children.

3.
I will pour water upon him that is thirsty,] The four sentences contained in
this Verse, signify all one and the same thing, namely, That though the Jews
were at this time in a poor decayed estate, yet God would so bless them, as
that they should be delivered out of it, and should revive and flourish again:
As the dry and thirsty ground, though it be unpleasant and ill-favored to see
to, while it is so; yet being watered, it is hereby refreshed, and recovereth
its greenness, and is clothed again with its former luster.

I will pour water, etc.] by water is meant rain; the plenty whereof is
signified by the word pour.

Upon him] i. e. Upon every Jew.

He speaks of a Jew here, as of a ground, Metaphorically.

Upon him that is thirsty,] i. e. Upon him that is as a thirsty Land; that is,
upon him that is in misery, and wants comfort.

Note, that the thirstiness here mentioned is not the thirstiness of a man
which is hot and dry, and desires drink to quench his thirst, but the dryness
of the ground; for a dry ground is also called a thirsty ground, Cap. 35.7. And
to such a ground is the Jew, in the depth of his misery and captivity, here
compared.

And floods upon the dry ground:] This is a repetition of the former sentence.

I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed.] i. e. I will greatly bless thy children.

By the Spirit of God is here meant Gods blessing, as may appear by the
following words, which are but a repetition of these.

And the blessing of God is called the Spirit of God, by a Metonymy, because it
proceeds from the Spirit of God, or from God who is a Spirit.

By seed are meant here children, per Metonymiam Materiae.

4.
And they shall spring up as among the grass.] i. e. They shall spring up as
young Trees or Plants among the grass, which have moisture enough to nourish
them, and make them flourish.

5.
One shall say, I am the Lords, etc.] q. d. Such blessings will I pour upon
them, as that they shall confess that I am their God, and that they are my
servants, because of the care I have of them, and the favors that I show to
them; though now they say, My way is bid from the Lord, my judgment is passed
over from my God; as Cap. 40. v. 27.

I am the Lords,] Supple, Servant; And therefore shall call himself the Lords
servant, because he shall be sensible of the care which God has of him, and
the blessing which he bestows upon him; and shall, in way of recompense,
resolve to serve the Lord so long as he shall live.

Another shall call himself by the name of Jacob:] And therefore shall he call
himself by the name of Jacob, because he shall see that the Lord has as great
respect to him, as he had to Jacob; and because he shall resolve to serve the
Lord for the blessings which the Lord has bestowed upon him, as Jacob vowed to
serve the Lord, (and did accordingly,) Genesis 28.21.

Another shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord,] Supple, That he is his
servant, and will serve him.

And surname himself by the name of Israel.] Israel is the name of Jacob, and
it was given to him because of the power which he had with God, and prevailed
with him, Genesis 32.28.

For the same reason as one named himself by the name of Jacob in the former
part of this Verse, does another surname himself by the name of Israel in this
latter part: And for the same reason as one said, I am the Lords, for the same
reason does the other subscribe with his hand unto the Lord.

6.
Thus says the Lord, the King of Israel] That the Jews might the more firmly
believe what the Lord had spoken verse. 2, 3, 4. the Lord shows here, that he
is God, and he alone.

When he shows that he is God, he shows sufficiently that he is able to do
what he has said: And when he shows that he is God alone, he shows that he
can work, and none can let him, as Cap. 43. verse. 13.

The King of Israel,] q. d. The Protector of Israel; for Kings are Protectors
of their people.

His Redeemer,] i. e. The Redeemer of Israel, which has heretofore, and will
again redeem Israel.

I am the first,] God is said to be the first, because he was before all
things, and all things were made by him.

And I am the last.] God is called the last, because there is nothing shall
out-last him, being that all things are not only made, but sustained by him.

7.
And who, as I, shall call, and shall declare it?] i. e. For who, among the
gods of the Nations, can tell and declare whatsoever has come to pass? etc.

And, is put here for For: For the Lord proves here, That there is no God
besides himself.

Who, as I, shall call,] i. e. Who can tell so well as I?

Note, that the Hebrews having no Potential mood, do use an Indicative for a
Potential.

And shall declare it?] And can declare, Subaudi, Whatsoever has been, or
whatsoever has come to pass, etc.

The Relative, It, is put without an Antecedent, which Antecedent
notwithstanding may easily be understood by the circumstances of the place.

And set it in order] i. e. And can rehearse whatsoever has been, or
whatsoever has come to pass, etc.

To set in order, signifies here, to set things in order in narration or
speaking, that is, to rehearse things in order.

For me,] Supple, If I should entreat him. This is spoken with a kind of
Sarcasm.

Since I appointed the ancient people,] These words have relation to that which
I said was here to be understood, namely to that, whatsoever has been, or
whatsoever has come to pass: q. d. Who can tell, declare, and rehearse in
order whatsoever has been, or whatsoever has happened, since I appointed the
ancient people?

Since I appointed the ancient people,] i. e. Since I made the ancient people
of the Earth, and appointed them the bounds of their habitations, Acts 17.26.

He says, the ancient people, speaking of them as of one, because in the most
ancient times, all people were as one, till they were divided in aftertimes.

To declare and tell exactly in order whatsoever has happened to the people of
the Earth, since God created them, is that which none but God can do: No man,
nor Angel, nor Devil, much less can any Idol do it; for no man now living has
been since the Lord first made the people of the Earth: And though Angels and
Devils have been ever since the World was first created, yet have they not been
present at every thing which has happened; for their presence is definitive,
they can be but in one place at once: But God is eternal, and in all places at
one time, and is the Cause of whatsoever comes to pass.

And the things that are coming, and shall come,] Here we must repeat those
words, Who, as I, can call, and declare, and set in order? etc. q. d. And who
can tell, and declare, and set in order, like unto me, the things that are
coming, and shall come?

As the Lord proved, That there was no God besides him, by that, that none
could declare and tell in order the things that are past, as he could: so does
he prove, That there is no God besides himself, by this, That none can declare
and tell in order the things which are to come, as he can.

The things that are coming,] i. e. The things which will come to pass ere long
be.

And shall come,] i. e. And the things which shall come to pass a great while
after.

Let them show unto them.] q. d. If any gods of the Nations can do this, let
them show it (I pray, unto) their servants, and make it appear to them that
they can do it.

By the first them understand the Idols, the gods of the Heathen: By the second
them, Idolaters which worship those Idols: Both which Relatives are put here
without their Antecedents.

8.
Fear ye not, neither be afraid,] The Lord speaks here to the Jews in their
captivity, not to be afraid of the Babylonians who held them captives, nor of
their Idols, as though they could hinder him from delivering them: for because
the Babylonians had so prevailed against them, and made such a desolation in
their Land, and carried them away captives, the weakest sort of Jews might
think, that they did this by the power of the gods which they worshipped, and
that therefore there was no Redemption to be expected out of theirs and their
gods hands. The sense therefore of these words is, q. d. Fear not therefore,
neither be afraid, as though I were not able to make that good which I have
told you, or to deliver you as I have said.

Have not I told thee from that time, and have declared it?] i. e. Have not I
told thee of what is befaln thee, before it came to pass? and have not I
declared it to thee by my Prophet Isaiah? For did not I tell you, that I would
deliver you into the hands of the Babylonians? So that by this ye may know,
that I am God; and that it was not the Babylonians, or their gods, that
prevailed against you; but that it was I that delivered you over into their
hands, because ye had sinned against me, ( Cap. 42.24.) Wherefore ye need not
fear, or be afraid of the Babylonians, or their gods, but of me only.

Have not I told thee] Supple, Of that which is befaln thee; that is, of thy
captivity.

The Substantive is here left to be understood.

This is spoken to the Jews, as if they had been even at this time in captivity.

From that time,] Supple, That thou knew not of it; that is, before thou
knew or heardest of this thy Captivity.

And have declared it?] i. e. And have not I declared this your captivity to
you by my servant Isaiah, before it came to pass, and before you heard of it?

Ye are even my witnesses:] i. e. Ye even your selves must needs witness this,
that I told you of it, and declared to you this your captivity, before it came
to pass, and before you ever heard of it: And if ye can witness this, then are
ye my witnesses also, that I am God, and that ye need not fear the Babylonians.

Is there a God besides me?] Is there a God besides me, that ye need to fear or
be afraid of?

As the Lord proved just before, That he was God; so does he go about here to
prove, That there is no God besides him, that the Jews might not be afraid of
those which the Babylonians and other Nations worshipped and called gods.

Yea there is no God.] i. e. Verily there is no God.

Yea is put here for Verily.

9.
They that make a graven Image:] The Lord, that he might prove that there is no
God besides himself, shows here the vanity of Idolaters and Idols, and how
far Idols are from being gods; for the Idols only were they which the weak
Jews thought to be gods, or at least doubt^d whether they were gods or no, and
so feared their power, because they were they which the Babylonians worshipped,
and called gods.

Are all of them vanity:] i. e. Are all of them vain and foolish in their
doings.

An Abstract is here put for a Concrete.

Their delectable things] i. e. Their Idols and Images which they do delight in.

Shall not profit them:] i. e. Shall not help them when they stand in need of
help, and when I shall come to destroy them for your sakes.

And they are their own witnesses:] i. e. For they are witnesses against
themselves.

And for For.

They see not, nor know] i. e. That their delectable things see not, nor know
any thing: And if they see not, nor know any thing, how can they be gods, and
how can they profit them?

That they may be ashamed.] i. e. Wherefore they may be ashamed of such gods,
and confounded to think, that they delight and put their trust in such vain
things.

10.
Who has framed a god, or molten a graven Image that is profitable for
nothing?] q. d. Whosoever has framed a god, or molten a graven Image, that is
profitable for nothing.

That is profitable for nothing,] This is not to be taken as a Note of
distinction, as though he would by this distinguish Images which were
profitable for nothing, from Images which were profitable for something: but as
a Note of declaration, to show, that all Images were unprofitable.

Or molten a graven Image?] i. e. Or has melted Silver or Gold, or any other
metal, and has first cast it, and then made a graven Image of it?

Note, that the Image-maker does first cast his Image in a mold, then polish it
with a graving-tool, or instrument.

By him that has formed a god, and molten a graven Image, is meant the
principal man that is at the charge to make or grave an Image, and which
worshippeth when it is made or graven, and induces others to worship either by
his example, or by his enticing words. So Jeroboam is said to have made two
Calves of gold, 1 King. 12.18. So Ahaz is said to have made molten Images for
Baalim, 2 Chronicles. 35.21. and an Idol, 2 Chronicles. 33.7.

11.
Behold all his fellows] i. e. Behold all his fellows, which have joined with
him in the worship of the god, or graven Image, which he has made.

Those he calls his fellows, which worship those his Idols as he does.

Shall be ashamed,] Supple, Of him, or for him, to think, that they have been
induced by him to worship such a god as his Image is.

And the workmen, they are of men,] For the workmen, which made his god, or
melted his graven Image, are the sons of men, and so men themselves: And how
can they otherwise choose but be ashamed of him, or for him, when they come
seriously to think, that that god, which he induced them to worship, was the
work of a man, or of the son of man?

And is put here for For, and shows the reason why they shall be ashamed.

They are of men,] i. e. They are the sons of men, and therefore but men
themselves.

Let them all be gathered together,] i. e. Let all those, which concurred to
make a graven Image, be gathered together, to maintain the Divinity of their
Image.

This seems to answer an Objection: For one may say, That for all that, that
the Image be made by workmen, which are of men, yet the chief former of it,
and the workmen, will maintain and prove, that it is a god. To which the Lord
here answers, saying, If the chief Former, and the workmen which made the
Image, will maintain, that it is a god which they made, Let them all be
gathered together, etc.

He says, Let them all be gathered together, because many workmen concurred
to the making Image, as you may see Cap. 41.7. Yea, sometimes one made the
eyes, another the hands, another the feet, etc. How miserable gods therefore
must they needs be, which are made by such miserable men!

Let them stand up,] Stand up, Supple, to plead for the Divinity of the Image
which they have made, and to maintain it by Arguments.

Yet they shall fear,] i. e. Though they are all gathered together, and stand
up to plead for the Divinity of the Image which they have made, and to maintain
it; yet when they are met together, and stand up, yea before they stand up to
plead, their conscience shall check them, and their heart shall misgive them,
and they shall fear the event: They shall be afraid that they shall be
overcome, and not able to maintain what they undertook, to wit, That the Image
which they have made is a true God.

And they shall be ashamed together.] i. e. And at length they shall all of
them be ashamed; for they shall be convinced, that there is no Divinity in
their Image, but that their Image is a vain and unprofitable thing.

Together.] i. e. Every one of them; for so does this word often signify. See
Notes, Cap. 1.28.

12.
The smith with his tongs,] He shows reasons here, why the workmen may
justly fear, when they begin to plead for the Divinity of their Image, that
they shall be overcome; and why at length they may be convinced, that there is
no Divinity in their Image, and so be ashamed: And his reasons are fetched from
the efficient, material, and instrumental Cause of an Image; all which are poor
things, and too too mean to produce a God: And if any think that these causes
are not too too mean to produce a God, we must say with our Prophet, that they
have not known, nor understood; for the Lord has shut their eyes that they
cannot see, and their hearts that they cannot understand; as verse. 18. These
causes does the Prophet show, while he does historically describe how an Image
is made.

Note, that while the Prophet describes how an Image is made, he uses an
Analytical method, and proceeds from that which was last in making thereof,
to that which was first.

It may be questioned here, whether the Prophet speaks of several Images, one
made by the smith, and another by the carpenter, or no? I conceive that he
speaks but of one, which is framed first in wood by the carpenter, then
overlayd with plates of gold or silver, or some other baser metal, by the
smith or goldsmith. Consider Cap. 41. v. 7.

The smith with his tongs, both works in the coal^, and fashioneth it with
hammers, and works it with the strength of his arms,] q. d. The Smith does
what he has to do about the Image after this manner; He puts his wedge of Iron
with the tongs into the coals of the fire, and there makes it pliable, and
afterward he fashioneth it (as he thinks fit) with his hammers, and works it
after what manner he pleases with the strength of his arms.

The smith, etc.] The word in the Original signifies an Iron-smith, or (as we
call him) a Blacksmith, which works in iron; and it may be that Image-makers
in those days had that skill in making and beating out plates of iron, to cover
the works of the carpenter, which we are at this day ignorant of: Howsoever, I
doubt not but that the Blacksmith is put here, by a Synecdoche, for any kind
of smith which works in metal, whether the metal be gold, silver, or
whatsoever else it be: And the Prophet names the Blacksmith here, the more to
vilify the Idol, or Image: for of all mettal-smiths, the Blacksmith is one of
the basest, and the matter on which he works it, one of the meanest and
vilest of all metals.

And fashioneth it:] By [it] understand the wedge of Iron.

A Relative is here put without an Antecedent.

Yea, he is hungry, and his strength fails: he drinks no water, and he is
faint.] q. d. Yea, did I say, he works it with the strength of his arms? I
might more truly say, he works it with his feeble arms; for he is hungry, and
his strength fails: he drinks no water, and he is faint.

Yea,] This Particle [yea] seems to be put as a Note of correction, to
correct the precedent words.

13.
The carpenter stretches out his rule,] Supple, Upon a rough piece of Timber
(of which he intends to make an Idol, or graven Image) that he may measure the
length and breadth thereof, and know whether it will be fit for his purpose or
no.

He marketh it out with the line,] viz. That he may cut it to a fit length and
breadth.

He fitteth it with planes,] i. e. When he has cut it to a fit length and
breadth, and rough-hewed it, he smooth^s it with his Planes.

And he marketh it out with the compass,] i. e. When he has smoothed it with
his Planes, he marketh out the parts thereof with the compass, that the parts
of the Image, which he is to make out of it, as the head, breast, arms, legs,
etc. may be proportionable one to another.

And makes it after the figure of a man,] And when h^ has marked it out, he
makes it after the figure of a man.

According to the beauty of a man,] i. e. Yea, according to the beautiful
p^oportion and exact lineaments of a man, that it may represent a man to the
life.

This signifies more exactness of workmanship then was signified by those
words, He makes it after the figure of a man: But by this he seems to deride
the Carp^nter, who thought that he had made a God indeed, when he had made his
Image according to the beauty of a man, and such as might represent a man to
the life.

That it might remain in the house.] i. e. That when it is finished, it may
stand and remain in the house, as a god to be worshipped.

By the house may be meant, either a private house, (for Idolaters had Images
to worship in their private houses, cap. 57.8.) or else a Temple, which is also
called the house of the God to which it is dedicated.

Well said he, that it might remain in the house; for when it was once carried
in thither, and set up there, there it remained; nor was it able to remove it
self a foot out of its place.

14.
He heweth down Cedars, and takes the Cypress and the Oak,] q. d. The
Carpenter heweth him down the Cedars, yea the Cypress, yea he takes the Oak,
etc.

These trees the Carpenter made choice of among the trees of the Forest,
because the wood thereof was the most lasting wood.

But observe the Prophets degradations, how he descends from the Cedar to the
Cypress, which is more vile then the Cedar; and from the Cypress to the Oak,
which is more vile then the Cypress; the more to vilify and abase these Idols
or Images.

Which he strengthens for himself,] i. e. Which he makes strong ones for
himself; that is, which he makes his gods, even his graven Images. See Verse.
17.

Idols, or Images, are sometimes called by Idolaters, the strong; as Cap. 1.31.
Hence when an Idolater makes a god, or an Idol, or a graven Image for himself,
out of an Oak or any other tree, he may be said to strengthen that Oak or that
tree for himself; that is, to make a strong one out of it.

He planteth an Ash,] q. d. Yea, the Carpententer planteth an Ash.

An Ash is a tree of less esteem then a Cedar, Cypress, or Oak: the Prophet
therefore, as though he had not vilified an Idol enough, by saying, it is made
of a Cedar, Cypress, or Oak, tells us, that it is also made of an Ash, yea, of
an Ash which is fit for the fire, and part whereof is burnt, etc.

And the rain does nourish it.] Supple, Until it comes to be a great tree.

15.
Then] Supple, When it is come to be a great tree.

Shall it be for a man to burn,] i. e. It will be fit fuel for a man to burn.

For he will take thereof,] Supple, And make a fire.

Yea, he kindles it,] Supple, And heateth the Oven therewith.

Yea, he makes a god, and worshippeth it,] i. e. Yet notwithstanding this,
that it be to burn, and he takes thereof, and warmeth himself, and kindles it,
and baketh bread; he makes also a god thereof, and worshipeth it.

Note, that the word yea is put here for yet notwithstanding, and some
Translations do so render it. Or after yea we must understand for all this: q.
d. Yea, for all this, he makes a God of it, etc.

And falls down thereto.] Supple, In way of worship.

16.
With part thereof he eats flesh:] i. e. With part thereof he makes a fire,
and dresseth the flesh which he has bought, and eats it.

He repeateth here what he said before, the more to set out the foolishness of
these men.

He rosteth roast,] i. e. He rosteth rost-meat.

And is satisfied therewith.] i. e. And eats, and fills himself therewith.

18.
They have not known, nor understood;] q. d. This the Smith, and the Carpenter,
and their fellows do, yet have they not known nor understood, what they do.

For he has shut their eyes that they cannot see] i. e. For the Lord has shut
their eyes that they cannot see.

By (He) understand the Lord which is the He (...), and by the Eyes understand
the understanding, which is the Eye or Eyes of the Soul.

Yet these words may be understood indefinitely; q. d. Their Eyes are shut that
they cannot see, That is, they are dull of understanding, that they cannot
understand.

19.
And none considers in his heart] Supple, That he has burnt part of that in
the fire, of which he has made himself a God.

Neither is there knowledge nor understanding] Supple, In them.

An Abomination] i. e. An Idol or a graven Image, which is most abominable to
the Lord.

He says Abomination for Abominable by a Metonymy, putting an Abstract for a
Concrete.

20.
He feeds on ashes] This seems to be a Proverb, and to be spoken of such
as think that they have the substance of a thing, when they have only the
shadow: Or, that think they have that which can profit them, when they have
that which cannot stand them in any stead. And it is applied to these men,
because when they had made themselves an Idol? They thought that they had made
them a God which could save them, when as indeed this their god could not
profit them, at all. verse 9.

The reason of the Proverb is this, that Ashes though they are like to the
flower of Wheat, which nourishes a man, yet they that feed on Ashes shall
find no nourishment there by accruing to them, but hurt rather.

He feeds of ashes] Observe the Enallage of the number; how he passes from a
plural number, which he used in the eighteenth verse, to a singular.

A deceived heart] i. e. An heart deceived with this false persuasion or
conceit, that there is Divinity in an Idol, or in a graven Image.

Has turned him aside] Supple, From the Truth, viz. this Truth, that the Lord
only is God, and that an Idol is nothing.

That he cannot deliv^r his soul] i. e. So that he cannot deliver himself,
Supple. from error, or falsehood, to wit, the error or falsehood, which he has
conceived against the Unity of God, and of the Divinity of an Idol.

Is there not a lie in my right hand?] i. e. Is not that which I hold in my
right hand a Lie? That is, is not that which I make so much of a mere Figment,
a thing which I took for a God, but is not a God?

He speaks of an Idol here; And he calls an Idol a Lie, because as a Lie
though it has often times the show of truth, yet it is far from truth, and has
no conformity with the thing, which the words signify: So an Idol, though it
looks like a God, in the sight of an Idolater, yet it is far from being a
God, and has no conformity with the Godhead: For the Godhead is uncreated, an
Idol is made: And an Idol is made of Silver or Gold, or Stone, or Wood: But
we ought not to think that the Godhead is l^ke un^o Silver or Gold, or Stone,
or Wood: graven by Art or man's device. Acts 17.29.

In my right hand] Many conceive that the Prophet alludeth in these words to an
Idol or Image, as the Smith or Carpenter has it in his hands, while he is
making it or forming it. But I conceive rather that it is a Metaphor drawn from
them, which make much of a thing, and hold it fast in their hand, as being
unwilling, either to lose it, or to part with it, and let it go in any wise.

21.
Remember these O Jacob etc.] i. e. Remember these men, which make an Idol, or
Image after this manner, and call often to mind how blind and foolish they
are, and how they are without understanding, that thou by remembering them,
may detest and loath their doings, and the Idols and graven Images which they
make.

We are admonished to remember men sometimes that we may imitate them, and
sollow their doings: But sometimes again that we may bewa^e of doing as they
do, and for this last end, is Jacob here admonished to remember these men.

O Jacob and Israel] These two names signify one and the same man primarily:
and by a Metonymy one and the same children of that one man, for Jacob was
called also Israel, Genesis 32.28. And Jacob and Israel are put here for the
children of Jacob, who was also called Israel.

For thou art my servant] Supple, And being that thou art my Servant, it is not
for thee to dote upon Idols as they do.

I have formed thee] See Cap. 43.1.

Thou shall not be forgotten of me] q. d. I will not forget thee in thy misery,
but rem^mber and deliver thee; Supple, Therefore look not after Idols, but
look after me only.

I have blotted out as a thick Cloud thy transgressions] i. e. I will blot out
thy sins and transgressions, so that they shall no more appear, than a
thick Cloud is to be seen, when the Sun or Wind has scattered or dispersed
it.

He puts a Praeterperfect Tense here for a Future.

In this Metaphor of blotting out sins, the Prophet alluded to the blotting
out of debts entered into a debt book: He mingleth Metaphors therefore, when he
says that he will blot out transgressions as a thick Cloud.

And as a Cloud thy sinnes] q. d. Yea I will blot out thy sins as a Cloud.

The word [Sinnes] seems to signify more here than (Transgressions] did
before: And a Cloud less than a thick Cloud q.d. Yea I will blot out thy most
heinous sins, that they shall no more appear than a thin Cloud, or a Mist,
is to be seen, when the Sun or Wind has dispelled it: For a thin Cloud or a
Mist, is easily dispelled and less to be seen, then a Cloud which is thick:
But if any will contend and say that a Cloud here is the same with a thick
Cloud before: And sins here are the same with transgressions before; then
take [And for Yea] and understand these words; (I say) and repeat these words
(I have blotted out) q. d. Yea I say, I have blotted out as a Cloud thy sins.

Return unto me] q. d. Only return unto me by repentance.

For I have red^emed thee] q. d. For if thou will return unto me, I will
redeem thee out of thy Captivity.

He speaks to the Jews (as I have said before) as if they were even now in
Captivity, and he uses here a Preterperfect for a Future Tense.

23.
Sing O ye Heavens] He speaks unto the material Heavens, though unsensible
by a Prosopopoeia, as Cap. 1.2.

For the Lord has done it] What has he done? Answ. He has redeemed Jacob,
and glorified himself in Israel, as it follows in the end of the Verse.

Shout] Supple. For joy.

Ye lower parts of the earth] i. e. Thou Earth which art in the lower parts of
the world. An Hypallage: Or, by the lower parts of the earth, he means the
Valleys in opposition to the Mountains which are the higher parts of the
earth: For it follows; And break forth into singing ye Mountains.

O Forrest] Forests are situated on high for the most part, like the Forest
of Lebanon which makes them for the most part to be so barren as they are.

For the Lord has redeemed Jacob] i. e. For the Lord will redeem the Jews,
the children of Jacob.

And glorified himself in Israel] i. e. And will get himself glory by the
Sons of Israel. That is, and will get himself glory by that which he will do
for the Jews the children of Israel.

24.
Thus says the Lord thy Redeemer, I am the Lord that makes all things, etc.]
Betwe^ne this and the latter end of this Chapter, the Lord mentions both his
power and his good will toward Jerusalem and her children the Jews, that he
might the better persuade the Jews of what he said verse 23. To wit, that he
would redeem Jacob and glorify himself in Israel: For what will not come to
pass, where neither power nor good will is wanting?

This latter part of the Chapter, is as a reason therefore to enforce these
words; The Lord has redeemed Jacob and glorified himself in Israel, and may
be ushered in with the causall conjunction, For q. d. For thus says the Lord
thy redeemer, etc.

Thy Redeemer] i. e. Who has often redeemed thee, and will yet redeem thee.

That formed thee from the wombe] See verse 2.

That stretches forth the Heavens] i. e. That made and preserves the heavens.

He alludeth to the stretching out the Curtains of a Tent or Tabernacle.

Alone] i. e. Without the help of any other, q.d. And needed not the help of
any Idol to help me. For he seems to speak this especially in opposition
to, and in depression of Idols.

That spreads abroad the earth] See Cap. 42.5.

By my selfe] i. e. Without any other to help me. This is also spoken in
opposition to, and depression of Idols, as that before.

25.
That frustrateth the tokens of the Lyars] i. e. Which makes the Signs and the
Tokens which Astrologers take from the Stars, of future Events, to be vain
and of no effect; So that that shall not come to pass, which they
prognosticate from those signs and tokens in the Stars.

The Token^] i. e. The Signs of future Events, which they gather from the
position of the Stars, etc.

Of the Lyars] By Liars he means Astrologers, whom he calls Liars, because
the Event of things shall not answer their Praedictions and Prognostications,
but happen or fall out clean otherwise than they did prognosticate and
foretell.

He speaks here of frustrating the tokens of Liars; because many A^trologers
did at this time Prognosticate by the Stars that Everlasting happiness and
dominion should be to the Babylonians, and Eternal Captivity and Servitude to
the Jews.

And makes Diviners mad] i. e. And which will make the Divinations and
Praedictions of Diviners and Soothsayers to prove false, whereupon they shall
run mad to see their Divinations and Praedictions of so little worth or truth.

He speaks of making Diviners mad, because many Diviners and Soothsayers did
at this time Prophecy, Peace to Babylon and Mercy, (without hope of
redemption) to the Captive Jews. And when Diviners and Soothsayers speak
confidently of a thing to come; if the thing does not come to pass which they
speak of, they are oftentimes laughed, and mocked, and scoffed at by the
People, at which proud natures not knowing either how to bear it, or how to
avoid it, are so vexed, as that they fret and storm, and run even mad to
think of it.

That turns wise men backward] i. e. Which turns the wise men from wisdom
to folly, That is, which makes the wise men of the earth fools, by
infatuating their Counsels.

He uses a Metaphor taken from a man, which when he either turns or is
turned from a thing, has his back toward the thing, from which he turns or
is turned.

He speaks here of turning wise men backward, and making their Counsel
foolish, because the State Counselors of Babylon (where the Jews were
Captive) were famous for their wisdom and Policy in State Affairs.

From the 24. verse hitherto the Prophet has shown especially the power of
God; from this place to the end of the Chapter, he shows especially the good
will of God to Jerusalem, and so to the Jews, that the Jews may no whit
doubt of their Redemption out of Captivity.

26.
That confirms the word of his servant] i. e. Which will make good the word
of his Prophet Isaiah, which he spoke concerning the delivery of his People the
Jews out of Captivity.

And performs the Counsel of his messengers] i. e. And which will perform
the News or Message which he sent by his Prophets his Messengers, concerning
the Redemption of his People out of Babylon, and Babylons downfall.

The Counsel of his messengers] He says the Counsel of his messengers, for
the message of his messengers; by a Metonymy: because their message contained
the Counsel or determination of God, concerning the downfall of Babylon, and
the Delivery of his People thence.

That says to Jerusalem, thou shall be inhabited] i. e. Which says to
Jerusalem, though thou art now desolate and without Inhabitants (thy
Inhabitants being carried away Captive into Babylon) yet thou shall be
inhabited again; for thy children and thine Inhabitants shall return from
Babylon and dwell again in thee.

He speaks to the City of Jerusalem, as to a Person, by a Metaphor or
Prosopopoeia.

Ye shall be built] i. e. Though the Babylonians have burnt you or beat you
down, with Ramms, and other Engines, yet shall my ancient people the Jews
come out of Babylon where they are Captive and build you, and dwell in you
again.

And I will raise up the decayed places thereof] i. e. For I will raise up the
decayed places thereof. And, for For,

27.
That says to the deep be dry and I will dry up thy Rivers] By the deep I
understand here the River Euphrates, for not only the Sea, but any great River
also may be called the deep, and Euphrates was the greatest River which was
then known. And by the Rivers I understand the waters of Euphrates, and those
smaller Rivers which either came out of, or ran into Euphrates that great River
of Babylonia, For many such Riv^rs there were.

Now as for the meaning of these words in this place, they may be taken
Allegorically, and the sense thereof, may be this: q. d. which say to all
impediments which may hinder the way of my People the Jews in their return
out of Babylon and the Dominions thereof, homewards: Be y^e removed and hinder
not my People.

For understanding of which sense, know that the Jews though they were all
Captive to the Babylonians, yet many of them were carri^d into Captivity beyond
the City of Babylon, so that between the Land of Judah and the place of their
Captivity, ran Euphrates and its other Rivers, which might be a stop and an
hindrance to the ready passage of the Jews, which were to pass from the L^nd
of their Captivity into the Land of Judah their own home: That therefor he
might signify that none of the Jews should be hindered in their passage
homeward out of their Captivity: He says, That says to the deep be dry, and I
will dry up thy Rivers, alluding herein to what the Lord did to Jordan when he
brought his people out of Egypt into Canaan, for at that time he divided the
waters of Iord^n, and made his people a way throu^h the Channel thereof Josh.
3.

Or Secondly, the sense of those words Allegorically taken may be this q. d.
That will destroy the King of Babylon and all his Armies. For by the River
Euphrates and the Rivers thereof, may be meant the King of B^byl n and his
Armies, as by the River and ^s wat^rs is meant the King of Assyria, and the
g^e^t m^ltitude of men which the King o Ass^ria brought ^p with him against
Judah, Cap. 8.7.

Again we may observe, that many take this place l^terally and interpret it of
that Strat^gem (which by the Lord providence) Cyrus used, when he took
Babylon; for when Cyrus took Babylon, he divided the waters of the River
Euph^ates, and divided them into certain deep pits and great hollow places
which he had made for that purpose, by which means the Channel of Euphrates
was passable by foot, through which he led his Army into Babylon, and so took
that great City. Which when he had took, he set the Jews free, and did
accommodate them in a most honorable manner for their return into their own
Land.

28.
That says os Cyrus, he is my Shepheard] Cyrus is called here the Lords
Shep^ea^d, because the Lord appointed him to be as a Shepherd to gather his
dispersed Sheep of the house of Judah together, and bring them home into the
Land of I^dah, as into their own Sheepfold: And this did Cyrus, not by his
own labor and pains, but by his command and authority, Ezra 1.

And shall perform all my pleasure] Supple, Concerning the delivering of my
people the Jews out of Captivity, and bringing them back into their own Land.

Even saying to Hierusalem] i. e. That even say to Jerusalem.

Thou shall be built] That Jerusalem was ruined by the Chaldees or Babylonians
we read, 2 Chronicles. 36.19. and that it was built again by the Jews we read:
Nehem. 2.

And to the Temple, thy foundation shall be laid] That the Temple of the Lord
which was at Jerusalem was q^ite destroyed, we read, 2 Chronicles. 36.19. 2 Kings
25.9. And that it was built again by the Jews, we read Ezra, Cap. 4.5, 6.

The foundations shall be laid] i. e. Thou shall be built; For by the
Foundations understand the whole building by a Metonymy.

ISAIAH, CHAP. XLV.
THus says the Lrd to his annointed] Cyrus is here called the Lords anointed,
because the Lord intended to make him a King, yea a great King; And by calling
him, His anointed, he alludeth to the Kings of Israel and Judah who at their
Inauguration were wont to be anointed with oil, And were therefore called the
Lords anointed, as 1 Samuel 26.16. etc.

Or Cyrus might be called the Lords anointed, because of those eminent gifts
which God gave him, as memory, wisdom, courage, etc. by which he surpassed
ordinary men: For such gifts by which one man surpasses another, may be well
compared to Oil, which being mixed with other liquours, always floateth at the
top.

Or when he says, Thus says the Lord to his anointed, it may be, as if he
should say, Thus says the Lord to his sanctified one, as Cap. 13.3. That is,
to him whom he has separated and set apart for this service, To wit, to subdue
and destroy the Babylonians, and to deliver the Jews out of Captivity, and
bring them into their own Land again. And him whom the Lord has Sanctified,
That is, He whom he has or separated and set apart, may be called The Lords
anointed in allusion both to those Persons, and those things which were
Sanctified, that is, which were separated and set apart for Gods service in the
Temple, For they were so separated and set apart, both persons and things were
consecrated by Annoin^ing, Exodus 40. verse. 9.13.

To Cyru^] i. e. Even to Cyrus.

This Cyrus was King of Persia, and he is here and in other places of this
Prophet, called by this name, a long time, yea above 200. years before he was
borne; the like we read of I^siah, he was called Josiah long before his birth,
1 Kings 13.2.

Cyrus is a Persian name, and in the Persian Language signifies the Sun, so
that this name did portend the great glory which Cyrus should be in. For he
which gave him this name, was able to give him glory also suitable to his name.

Note that in these words, Thus says the Lord to his anointed, the Lord
speaks, and he speaks of himself in the third person.

Who^e right hand I bave holden] i. e. Whose right hand I will hold.

Note here that he puts a Praeterperfect Tense for a Future.

To hold ones right hand may signify, to preserve or keep safe by a Metaphor
from a man which lays hold on a Child's arm or hand when he is in any danger
to keep him safe therein, and bring him out thereof. Or from a man which takes
hold of the arm or hand of an old feeble man, that so he may sustain him and
keep him up from falling. And indeed the Lord did preserve Cyrus and keep him
safe in the midst of all dangers, even until he had wrought the whole work
which he had for him to work.

Or to hold ones right hand may signify, to strengthen a man, by a Metaphor
from a man taking hold of the hand of a Child when he strikes, that he may
add vigor thereto, and make his blow or stroke the greater.

To subdue Nations before him] i. e. That I may subdue many Nations before him,
That is, That he may subdue many Nations by my help.

Cyrus did Conquer and subdue many Nations, for he Conquered and subdued the
Syrians, and Assyrians, and Arabians, and Cappad^cians, and Phrygians, and
Lydians, and Carians, and Phaenicians, and Babylonians. etc. see Zenoph. (...).
lib. 1.

And I will loose the Loins of Kings] i. e. And for whose sake I will strike
fear and terror into Kings.

Fear loses the Loins and the joints of those which are terrified, or put
in fear, as appears Dan. 5.6. Therefore he says, I will loose the Loins of
Kings, for I will strike fear and terror into Kings.

To open before him the two-leaved Gates] i. e. That they may open to him the
Gates of their Cities, and take him in as their Conqueror.

The two-leaved Gates] By the two-leaved Gates he means the Gates of Fenced
Cities, for the Gates of such Cities, do usually consist of two leaves.

And the Gates shall not be shut] q.d. And the Gates of their Cities shall be
surely opened to receive him, they shall not be shut against him.

2.
I will go before thee] This is that which the Lord says to his anointed, even
to Cyrus: And the Lord speaks here, in the person of a way maker, which is
sent sometimes before a King and his Court: sometimes before a General and his
Army, to make their ways even and straight, that they may find no rub or
hinderance in their way.

And make the crooked places straight] i. e. And make the crooked ways
straight, that thou may pass by them with the greater speed: See Cap. 40.3.

I will break in pieces the Gates of Brasse] q.d. I will break in pieces the
Gates of those Cities, which shut their Gates against thee to keep thee out,
and so will make a way for thee to enter in.

The Gates o^ Brasse] i. e. The Gates which are lined with brass or brazen
plates to make them the stronger, yet we read that the Gates of Babylon were
made of massy-brasse, and to these may the Prophet here allude.

The Barre^ of Iron] By the Bars of Iron are meant those Bars with which
the Gates of Cities are made fast, when they are shut, Or Percullises, which
were wont to be set before the Gates of Cities, to defend them, which
Percullises are made Bar-wise and lined with Iron.

3.
And I will give thee the treasures of darkenesse] By treasures of darkness
are meant treasures which are hid in the earth, or in dark holes, as men use
to hide them in the time of War. Or treasures which have been kept close and
have not seen the Sun (as we say) a great while.

Infinite were the treasures which Cyrus got of the People whom h^ subdued, as
Histories tell us.

That I the Lord] i. e. That I who am the only true God.

Which call thee by thy name] i. e. Which call thee by thy name, even by the
name of Cyrus, which argues my respects to thee. Or thus, which c^ll thee by
thy name, that is, which have made choice of thee to be a servant of high
esteem with me.

The like phrase to this we read, Exodus 33.12. I know thee by thy name, which
phrase is taken from the manner of some great Lord or King, who having many
Servants knows not all, nor calls all by their names when he calls them, but
such only which are nigh by office to his person, and in great esteem with him.

Am the God of Israel] Supple. For, for Isreal's sake do I do this for thee,
that thou may deliver Israel, that is, the Jews which were the Children of
Israel, out of the Babylonish Captivity, and show them grace and favor.

4.
For Jacob my Servants sake etc.] i. e. For Jacob my Servants sake and Israel
mine Elect (that thou may deliver him out of Captivity and be good to him)
have I called thee by thy name.

This contains a reason of that which went immediately before.

Mine elect] That is, whom I have chosen to be a peculiar people to my self.

By Jacob and Israel are here meant the Jews or men of Judah, who was the
Son of Jacob, who also was called Israel.

Have I called thee by thy name] i: e. Have I called thee to be my Servant, yea
to be my special Servant, and a Servant of great esteem with me. See verse 3.

I have Surnamed thee] q.d. Yea for his sake have I surnamed thee, and given
thee the honorable name of Cyrus.

The Lord did surname this man by calling him Cyrus long before he was borne;
and when he was borne, by causing men (by his secret working) to give him that
name.

Though thou have not known me] Cyrus was at first ignorant of the Lord, who
was the only true God, and of his law, and of his manner of worship; And
worshipped not the true God of Heaven, but the many gods of the Heathen, after
their superstitious and Idolatrous manner: yet afterward he came to know so
much by the Jews, that the Lord was the true God, Creator of Heaven and Earth:
Ezra 1.2.

Josephus reports in his eleventh Book of Antiquities and first chapter, that
Cyrus read that which is here written of him (for the Jews did show it to him)
and he, when he had read it was animated thereby to deliver the Jews out of
the Babylonish Captivity and show them many favors.

5.
I am the Lord, and there is none else, there is no God besides me] It may be
asked, to what purpose the Lord does mention here, that he is the only God,
and that there is no other God besides him?

Ans. He does it, to show Cyrus that it is he that girded him, that is, which
gave him strength and power to vanquish and overcome Nations.

For that no man was ever great and singular in any kind, without the help of
God, the very Heathen have acknowledged: See Cicero in the very last leaf of
the second Book, de Natura Deorum. Now if no man could be great without the
help of God, Cyrus must needs have his power and greatness from a God: And
being that the Lord is the only God, and there is no God besides him, he must
by consequence have his power and greatness from the Lord.

I g^ de^ th^e] Supple, With a Sword. That is, I have given thee strength for
the Wars, Metonymia effecti.

Though thou have not known me] See verse. 4.

6.
That they may know from the rising of the Sun, and from the West] i. e. That
all, which dwell from East to West may know.

That there is none besides me] i. e. That there is no other God besides me.

I am the Lord] i. e. For I am the Lord, the Creator of Heaven and Earth.

And there is none else] i. e. And there is no God else.

It may be asked, how all people from East to West could come to know that the
Lord was the only God, and that there was no other God besides him, by his
girding Cyrus, that is, by his giving Cyrus power and strength to the Wars.

Ans. By Gods girding Cyrus, that is, by Gods giving Cyrus power and strength
for the Wars, Cyrus came to subdue many Nations, and Babylon by name, which
when he had subdued, according to this Prophecy of him, he made a Proclamation
throughout all his Kingdoms, and put it in writing saying, thus says Cyrus
King o^ Persia the Lord God of Heaven has given me all the Kingdoms of the
Earth, etc. Ezra, Cap. 1.2. Which argues, the Lord to be the only God: (For
they are no Gods which cannot keep the Kingdoms whereof they have undertaken
the protection out of his hands) And thus did all people come to know, that the
Lord was the only God.

This is a second reason why God did so strengthen Cyrus, to wit, that he might
be known to be the only God. The first reason was contained in the third and
fourth verses, to wit, that Cyrus might deliver Israel out of Captivity, and be
good to him.

7.
I form the light, and ^reat darknesse] By the light is metaphorically meant
Prosperity, which is as grateful to the mind of man, as light is to his eyes:
And by darkness is meant Adversity, which is as grievous to the mind of man,
as darkness is to his eyes.

I make peace] By Peace is meant Prosp^rity, for by Peace the He^rewes use to
signify all manner of Prosperity: Per Synecdochen membri.

This is a repetition of the former Sentence.

And creat evill] By evil is meant Adversity, and it is opposed to Peace in
that Notion which we gave of Peace. Adversity is called Evil, rather because
men account it so, then because it is so in it self.

I the Lord do all these things.] Supple, Which I have named, to wit, light and
darkness, peace and evil.

It may be asked, Why the Lord does here mention this, That he is the Author of
prosperity and adversity? etc.

Ans. He does it, that that which he promises in the next following Verse may
be received with the greater credit; and that it may be known that he is able
to do what there he promises.

8.
Drop down ye Heavens from above,] What the Lord would have the Heavens to drop
down, is mentioned in the words following, to wit, Righteousness.

By the Heavens are meant the Skies.

Under this comm^nd, which he gives to the Heavens, and to the Skies, there
lies a divine promise; for what the Lord commands the Heavens and the Skies to
do, that he will bring to pass himself.

Let the Skies pour down Righteousness,] q. d. Yea, let the Skies pour down
Righteousness.

And is put here for Yea; and in the word pour down there is an emphasis: And
th^se words seem to be a correction of the former.

By this the Lord shows the abundance of righteousness which he would send,
which he compares here to rain in abundance.

Righteousness,] By righteousness is meant the deliverance and salvati^n,
whereby the Jews were delivered and saved out of the hands of the Babylonians,
and other the blessings which he bestowed upon them after their delivery and
salvation: And this deliverance and salvation, and these blessings, the Lord
calls righteousness, per Metonymiam Efficientis, because they were an effect of
his righte^usness, that is, of his fidelity or faithfulness in keeping promise:
for God had promised to deliver the Jews, and to save them out of the hands of
the Babylonians, and to bless them exceedingly.

Again, This deliverance and salvation, and these blessings, might also be
called righteousness, because they were an effect of the righteousness, that
is, of the justice of God: for it was a righteous and just thing with God, to
comfort his people, and to deliver them, and to bless them, and to destroy
their Enemies, when they had received at his hands double for all their sins;
as Cap. 40. verse. 1, 2. See 2 Thessalonians. cap. 1. verse. 6, 7.

Note, that when he says, Let the Skies pour down righteousness, he compares
righteousness to the rain: And though righteou^ness be the fruit which should
spring out of the Earth by this rain, yet he calls this rain by the name of
righteousness, because righteousness was produced thereby: So we usually say of
a sweet shower, that it raineth grass, because it causes the grass to grow out
of the ground in great abundance.

But you will say, What is then meant by the Heavens, or the Skies, and their
rain? and what is meant by the Earth?

Ans. Similitudes and Metaphors must not be racked, and every part examined;
but enough it is, if we understand the whole meaning by the whole: but yet by
the Heavens, and by the E^rth, Cyru^ may be understood here, who delivered the
Jews out of the Babylonish captivity, and enriched them greatly, and gave them
many privileges: and by the rain may be m^^nt those means which Cyrus us^d f^r
this purpose.

Let the Earth open,] i. e. And let the Earth open, to receive what the Skie^
pour down.

This Conjunction And, is here to be understood.

And let them bring forth Salvation,] i. e. And let the Skies and the Earth
togeth^r bring forth salvation, as the Earth and the Heavens by their showers
bring forth grass.

By salvation understand here merely the delivery of the Jews out of the hands
of the Babylonians by Cyrus.

And let righteousness spring up together:] i. e. And let righteousness spring
up by their concourse; that is, by the concourse of the Heavens, and of the
Earth together with it, that is, together with salvation.

That rig^teousness and salvation may not signify the same thing in this
place, I conceive that righteousness is to be taken here in a more strict
signification, then it was taken before in this Verse, and that here it
signifies only those blessings which the Lord bestowed upon the Jews by
Cyrus, after he had delivered them, or saved them, out of the hands of the
Babylonians: whereas, in the former part of the Verse, it signified both that
salvation or deliverance, and those blessings too.

I the Lord have created it.] i. e. I the Lord have appointed it to b^ so; or,
I the Lord will create: that is, I will bring it to pass, or, I will have it so.

In this last sense, a preterperfect is put for a fut^re tense.

9.
Woe unto hi^ that striveth with his Maker:] This is spoken to the unbelieving
and murmu^ing Jew: For the unbelieving and murmuring Jew, hearing God say, Drop
down ye Heaven^, and let the Skies pour down righ^^ous^^ss, might, out of an
unbelieving heart, murmur against God, and say to him, Thou say, Drop down ye
Heavens from above, etc. but thou art not able to make the Heavens drop down,
or the Skies to pour down righteousness, as thou say. Wherefore the Lord
does, by way of prevention, first reprove those men for their sauciness and
murmuring against him, in Verse. 9, 10. and then in verse. 11. he assures them
(that are believing) of his power and love to them, and that he can and will
deliver them, and save them, and bless them; as he said Verse. 8.

Unto him that striveth with his Maker:] i. e. Woe to him that speaks against
God to his face, even against God which made him; for God will rebuke him for
it.

This strife is a strife of words.

Let the potsheard strive with the potsheard of the Earth:] q. d. Let one
potsheard strive with another, and let it not strive with the Potter: and let
one man strive with another, and not with God who made him.

Shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it, What make thou?] i. e. Shall
the Clay contemn the Potter, and say to him in contempt, What make thou? If
he should say so to the Potter, the Potter would break it presently in pieces.

What make thou?] This is spoke with contempt, as though the Potter could not
make an handsome pot: q. d. What go thou about to make? do thou go about to
make a neat or handsome pot? that is past thy skill.

Or thy w^rk,] Or shall thy work, O P^tter, say of thee?

He uses an Apostrophe here to the Potter.

He has no hands?] Supple, Able or cunning enough to make an handsome vessel.

When he says, He has no hands, he does not say absolutely that he has no
hands, but relatively; that is, he has not hands fit or cunning enough to make
an handsome vessel.

10.
Woe to him that says to his Father, What begettest thou? q. d. Woe to him, that
being born lame, or blind, or deformed, says to his Father, What begettest
thou? Thou have begotten a lame, or blind, or deformed child; but thou can
not beget a well-favored and perfect child.

Or to the Woman,] Supple, Which brought him forth; that is, to his Mother.

What have thou brought forth?] q. d. Thou have brought forth a lame, or
blind, or deaf, or deformed child; but thou can not bring forth a child
which is of perfect limbs and senses, and which is well-favored.

Whosoever shall say this to his Father, or his Mother, Woe be to him; for
certainly the Lord will judge him for this his repining and irreverent speech
against his Parents. And if they shall not escape judgment, which thus repine
and murmur, and show themselves thus irreverent against their Parents, much
less shall they escape which do irreverently repine and murmur against God.

11.
Thus says the Lord etc.] The Lord, having in the two former verses
reprehended the murmuring Jew for repining and striving against him, does here
assure the meek and believing Jew of his love to his people, and his ability to
deliver them, and bless them, confirming what he said, verse. 8.

And his maker] i. e. And the maker of Israel.

The Lord is said to be the maker of Israel, because he made Israel, that is,
the children of Israel to be a People, yea a peculiar people to himself: But he
speaks here of them as of a single person; and alludeth to a Potter making a
vessel.

Ask me of things to come concerning my sons,] i. e. Ask me how mercifully and
well I will deal with the children of Israel (which are my sons) in time to
come, though now they be captives.

My sons,] The Lord called the children of Israel his sons, because he dealt
with them as a father does with his sons.

And concerning the work of my hands command ye me.] This is a repetition of
the former sentence.

Concerning the work of my hands] Whom he called his sons in the former Verse,
he calls the work of his hands here, even the children of Israel: and he calls
them the work of his hands, in allusion to a Potter, because he was their
Maker; that is, because it was he which made them a people.

Command ye me.] Supple, To tell you what I intend to do with, or for the work
of my hands.

This is like that speech of Moses to Pharaoh, Exodus 8.9. Glory over me, etc.
though it be from a more worthy person; And God speaks of himself, as of a man,
by an (...).

12.
I have made the Earth, etc.] Between this and the former Verse something is
left to be understood, that the sense may be this, viz. And what I shall tell
you concerning my sons, and the work of my hands, I shall be able to bring to
pass; for that you may not doubt of my power, know, that I have made the Earth,
etc. What therefore is too hard for me?

I with my hands have stretched out the Heavens,] i. e. I, even I, made the
Heavens with my hands: Where note, that the Heavens were not first made, and
afterward stretched out like a curtain; but their substance and expansion were
created both at once.

When he says, my hands, he speaks of God, as of a man, by an (...), and
alludes to a workman, who does what he does by the skill and strength of his
hands.

And all their host have I commanded.] i. e. And all the Stars of the Heavens
have I created.

By the host of the Heavens he means the Sun, and Moon, and Stars, which he
calls an host, because of their number and order, in which regard they are
like to an Host or Army.

He says, I commanded them, for I created them; for he commanded, and they
were created, Psalm. 148.5. He said, Let there be lights in the firmament of the
Heaven, etc. and it was so, Genesis 1.14, 15, 16

By this also he may signify the command and power which he has over the Host
of Heaven; for when he calls unto them, they stand up together, cap. 48.13.

13.
I have raised him up in righteousness] i. e. I will raise up Cyrus according
to my word and my promise.

A preterperfect tense is put here for a future.

Him That is, Cyrus.

A Relative is put here without an Antecedent, (...).

In righteousness,] i. e. For my righteousness sake.

In is put here for For: And by righteousness is meant that righteousness which
is observed in keeping promise, which is commonly called fidelity and truth.

Note here, that when God bad his people to ask him what he would do concerning
his sons, and the work of his hands in time to come, verse. 11. that it is to be
supposed that his people did ask him that question, and upon their asking, he
gives them an answer here, saying, I will raise up Cyrus in righteousness, and
I will direct all his ways: he shall build my City, etc.

I will direct all his ways:] i. e. I will direct him in all his ways.

They cannot go amiss, or have any other then good success in their ways, whom
God directs.

He shall build my City;] i. e. He shall build Jerusalem, which the Caldees
have burnt down.

Cyrus is said to have built Jerusalem, because he furnished the Jews with
power and necessaries to build it.

My City;] Jerusalem is called the City of God, because he chose it for the
place of his worship, Psalm. 132.13.

And he shall let go my Captives.] i. e. And when he has overcome Babylon, he
shall let go those children of Israel (which are my sons) which were there in
captivity.

Not for price, nor reward.] q. d. And though he let them go, he shall ask no
ransom of them, but shall let them go freely.

14.
Thus says the Lord, the labor of Egypt, etc.] In the former Verse the Lord
said, that Cyrus would let his captives go, not for price, nor for reward:
therefore here the Lord says, that because Cyrus would let his Captives go,
not for price or reward, that he the Lord would reward him for this his
magnificence to his captives; for the Lord is never behind-hand with them that
serve him.

The labor of Egypt,] i. e. Those riches which the Egyptians have got by their
labor.

And the merchandise of Aethiopia,] i. e. And the wealth which the Aethiopians
have got by their merchandise.

And of the Sabeans, men of stature,] i. e. And the wealth of the Sabeans,
though they be men of a great stature, and therefore lusty and strong, and like
to preserve their own.

Shall come over unto thee,] i. e. Shall come from being theirs, to be thine.

And they shall be thine:] i. e. And the Egyptians, Aethiopians, and Sabeans
themselves shall be thine.

They shall come after thee; in chains they shall come over:] q. d. Yea, the
Egyptians, and Aethiopians, and Sabeans themselves, shall submit themselves to
thee, and yield to thy mercy.

They shall come after thee,] Entreating thy mercy, or entreating thee to
accept of them for thy people.

In chains shall they come over:] i. e. They shall come to thee, with chains on
their hands, or necks, or feet, as Captives, to show their humble submission to
thee.

In chains] They that were taken Captives in War, were wont to have chains put
upon them, either for their more safe custody, or for a sign of servitude: And
to this the Prophet does here allude.

These men, here spoken of, came with chains upon them to Cyrus, as Benhadads
Messengers came to Ahab, King of Israel, with ropes upon their heads, the more
to show their submission, and the more to incline the King to pity: 1 Kings,
cap. 20. verse. 32.

Shall they come over:] These words signify a voluntary yielding and
submission to one part, by leaving and deserting another.

Xenophon writes of Cyrus, that he did not only conquer many people by force,
but that many people did voluntarily, and of their own accord, come in, and
surrender themselves unto him.

They shall fall down unto thee,] i. e. They shall adore thee as their Prince,
by casting themselves down before thee to the ground.

This manner of Adoration was ancient among the people of the East, yet
Arrianus writes, that Cyrus was the first of the Persians who was thus adored.

They shall make supplication unto thee:] i. e. They shall make their humble
request unto thee, for thy favor toward them.

Surely God is in thee,] i. e. Sure God is with thee, and assisteth thee in all
thy expeditions and enterprises.

And there is none else, there is no God.] i. e. And there is none other God
but he which is with thee, and assisteth thee: For as for the gods which other
people trust in, they are not gods, for they cannot deliver their people out of
thine hands.

15.
Verily thou art a God which hidest thy self, O God of Israel, the Savior.] i.
e. O God of Israel, thou which savest thy people Israel out of the hands of the
Babylonians by Cyrus; thou art a God which we Egyptians, and Aethiopians, and
Sabeans, knew not of, before this time, neither do we yet perfectly know thee.

This is an Apostrophe of the Egyptians, and Aethiopians, and Sabeans to God,
who came to have some knowledge of the God of Israel, partly by this Prophecy,
partly by the Proclamation which Cyrus made, Ezra 1.2.

16.
They shall be ashamed and confounded all of them:] i. e. The Babylonians, or
Caldeans, which hold my people captive, shall be ashamed and confounded, all of
them.

They which gloryed in their power, and thought themselves invincible, are
mightily ashamed and confounded, when they are overcome: He says, Therefore
they shall be ashamed and confounded, all of them, because they shall be
overcome by Cyrus, notwithstanding their great strength.

By [they] he means the Babylonians, or Caldeans; where he puts a Relative
without an Antecedent, (...).

Note, that these words have their immediate connection with the thirteenth
Verse; and that which is contained in the fourteenth and fifteenth verses, was
brought in by the By, to show how bountifully the Lord would deal with Cyrus,
for his noble dealing with his people.

They shall go to confusion together, which are makers of Idols.] i. e. The
Babylonians, which are makers and worshippers of Idols, shall be ashamed and
confounded, all of them; for they shall be overcome by Cyrus, and their Idols
shall not help them.

Together,] i. e. All of them. See cap. 1. verse. 28.

Which are makers of Idols.] By makers of Idols, understand, not only who made
them, but those also which worshipped them, by a Syllepsis: And he calls the
Babylonians, makers of Idols, in opposition to Israel, who worshipped the true
God.

17.
But Israel] By Israel understand the Jews (which were captives to the
Babylonians) who were the children of Israel, that is, of Jacob; and who
worshipped the Lord only.

Shall be saved] Out of the hands of the Babylonians, and enjoy freedom and
peace.

In the Lord] i. e. By the power and goodness of the Lord.

With an everlasting salvation:] That is often called Everlasting, by an
Hyperbole, which is only of long durance, though it shall have an end: So
Circumcision is called an Everlasting Covenant, Genesis 17.13. And the Priesthood
of Aaron is called an Everlasting Priesthood, Exodus 40.15.

Ye shall not be ashamed and confounded world without end] i. e. Ye shall be
redeemed out of Captivity, and when ye are once redeemed, ye shall not be
carried away Captives any more.

Because Captivity causes shame, therefore he says: Ye shall not be ashamed
and confounded, for ye shall not be carried into Captivity, or come into your
enemies hands any more.

He uses an Apostrophe here to the Jews.

18.
He has established it] i. e. The Lord has made the Land of Judah stable and
sure.

By (It) understand the Land of Judah in particular, where there is a Relative
without an express Antecedent (...).

Note here that the third person is put for the first by an Enallage, for the
Lord speaks here of himself.

He created it not in vaine] i. e. The Lord did not creat it for no end, but
for a good end and purpose; But for what end and purpose did the Lord creat it?
Ans. He did creat it, that it might be inhabited.

He formed it to be inhabited] i. e. The Lord formed the Land of Judah that it
might be inhabited: And it shall be inhabited by them to whom he gave it, to
wit, by the Children of Judah, which shall return out of Captivity, to dwell
there.

I am the Lord] And therefore am able to do this i. e. to save Israel with an
everlasting salvation, as it is verse 17. and to establish the Land of Judah,
and make it to be inhabited, as it is in this verse.

And there is none else] i. e. And there is no God else, and therefore none
able to hinder me from what I will do.

19.
I have not spoken in secret, in a dark place of the earth] q. d. I am not
like the gods of the Heathen, (which yet are not gods, but devils) who speak
that they might not seem to be dumb: but yet they speak in remote places, and
dark Dens and Caves of the Earth, that they might not be understood; But what
I speak, either to, or concerning my people, I speak openly and plainly.

I said not to the seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vaino] i. e. When I made
choice of the children of Jacob to serve me, I did not say that they should
serve me for naught, but I promised them great rewards for serving me: Such as
the gods of the Heathen could not give to their servants.

To the seed of Jacob] i. e. To the children of Israel.

Seed is put here for Children, Per Metonymiam materiae.

Seek ye me] i. e. Serve me and worship me.

I the Lord speak righteousnesse] q. d. When I promise rewards to my servant^,
and say that I will do such and such things for them; I do not tell a lie, as
the Gods of the Heathen do, but speak that which is true, for I do what I
speak.

Righteousnesse] By righteousness is here meant Truth.

I declare things that are right] This is a Repetition of the former words.

20.
Assemble your selves and come, draw near together, ye that are escaped of the
Nations] q. d. All ye Nations and Heathen, which have escaped the Sword of
Cyrus, Assemble your selves and draw near together to me: Supple, that ye may
understand the vanity of Idolaters, and their Idols.

This is spoken in the Person of God, and is spoken by occasion of that, that
God said that he was the Lord, and that there was no God else.

They have no knowledge that set up the wood of their graven Image] i. e. They
are but fools, and men of no understanding, who set up a graven Image of Wood,
to worship it as ye do.

This the Lord speaks as it were to the escaped of the Nations, being
Assembled together.

21.
Tell ye and bring them nee^] i. e. Tell ye your selves, and bring your Idols
near that they may tell.

What it is which they should tell, follows in a few words after; They should
tell, Who has declared this from ancient time, etc.

Bring them neere] By them understand here the Idols which Idolaters set up,
and worshipped as Cap. 41.22.

Yea let them take counsell] i. e. Yea let the Idols take counsel together
(that if one knows what the other knows not, he may inform him) and then let
them tell.

Who has declared this from ancient time] Who has declar^d this, that Cyrus
has done for my people (in delivering them out of C^ptivity) with all the
circumstances thereof, from ancient time.

He spe^k^s here as if Cyrus had even then d^livered the Jews out of Captivity.

From that time] i. e. From that time in which it was not known or heard of,
see Cap. 48.8.

A Relative is put here without an Antecedent.

Have not I the Lord] Supple, And no God else, told of this from ancient time,
which Cyrus has done for my people, with all the circumstances thereof.

And there is no God else] Here is an (...) of those words, (I therefore am
God) q. d. I therefore am God, and there is no God else beside me.

If it appear that the Lord foretold this, which Cyrus did for the Jews, in
delivering them out of the Babylonish Captivity plainly and distinctly, with
all the circumstances thereof, long before it came to pass: And that the gods
of the Heathen and their Idols knew it not, nor spoke of it, it must needs be,
that their gods must be pronounced as no gods, and that the Lord be
acknowledged for the only God.

A just God] Supple, Which keeps his word, and perform^s what he promises, as
the Lord did to his people.

A Saviour] Supple, Which saves them, which serve him) out of the hands of
their Enemies, as the Lord saved the Jews out of the hands of the Babylonians.

22.
Look unto me, and be ye saved all the Earth] i. e. Wherefore all ye people
which live upon the face of the Earth, even from one end thereof to the other:
Look unto me, as to the only true God, and forsake your Idols, and ye shall
be saved from your enemies.

That which the Lord here speaks to the Inhabitants of the Earth, he speaks
by occasion of those words in the former verse; There is no God else besides
me, etc. q. d. There is no God else besid^s me, wherefore look unto me, and be
ye saved all the ends of the Earth, etc.

Be ye saved] i. e. Ye shall be saved.

And Imperative mood is put here for a Future Tense, as Genesis 42.18. Do this
and live, for, Do this and ye shall live.

23.
The word is gone out of my mouth in righteousnesse] i. e. I have spoken in
truth, and will perform what I have spoken.

And shall not returne] i. e. The word which is gone out of my mouth shall not
return, Supple; without effect or void, but shall be performed. See Cap. 25.
v. 11.

He seems to speak here of the word going out of the mouth and returning
void, as of an Ambassador, which is sent in an Embassy, and returns with
his business undon^.

These words (The word is gone out of my mouth in righteousness and shall not
return) must be read as with a Parenthesis.

That unto me every knee shall bow] Refer this to these words, viz. I have
sworn by my self, q.d. I have sworn my self that unto me every knee shall
bow, etc.

Unto me every knee shall bow] i. e. Every one shall worship me.

And every tongue shall sweare] Supple, to me, that I am the Lord and only
God; Or shall swear, Supple, by me, And so honor me as the only God.

To swear by God is part of Gods worship, and a thing to be done to none but
to the true God. This part of worship in special therefore, is put here for
any the worship of God, in general.

It may be asked, when that which the Lord says here, was or should be
fulfilled, That is, when every one did or should worship the Lord and
acknowledge him to be the true God.

Ans. That which the Lord here speaks, of every ones worshipping him, and
acknowledging him to be the true God, was not, neither shall it be accomplished
or fulfilled until the last day, but then it shall: At which day they that
have not willingly worshipped him, shall worship him whether they will or no,
Romans 14.11.

It may be asked again, to what end the Lord mentions this?

Ans. He does it to persuade all the ends of the Earth, to look unto him, in
this present time: For if all men shall be forced to look unto him and worship
him, whether they will or no at the last day; It is better for them to do it
willingly before that day comes.

These words contain a threatening, which God uses, because the ends of the
Earth seemed to be backward in forsaking their Idols, and looking unto him.

24.
Surely shall one say, in the Lord have I righteousness and strength] i. e.
Surely many a one of every Nation shall say, I have found, or I have seen
Righteousness and Strength in the Lord; Righteousness, in that the Lord is
true in all his words and in all his promises: And Strength, in that he is able
to do for his servants, whatsoever he has a mind to do: And so shall they
confess to the Lord, That he is God.

Shall one say] i. e. Shall many a one say, For this is a kind of Hebraisme
which uses to be rendered by an Impersonall, thus, It shall be said as Cap.
25.9. Which is all one with this: Many one shall say.

That which the Prophet spoke in the former verse, he spoke in the person of
the Lord: But that which he speaks here, and to the end of the Chapter he
seems to speak in his own person, and what he speaks here, he speaks to
persuade all the ends of the Earth, to look unto the Lord that they may be
saved, and not to look unto Idols, (as he did in the former verse) But the
Arguments which he here uses are not so tart, but of a more gentle nature,
then the argument which he used in verse 23.

The argument which he here uses is drawn from the example of others: q. d.
many one of every Nation shall say, That the Lord is Righteous and Strong, and
so shall confess unto the Lord, that He is God. Be ye therefore moved with
their example, and do ye confess that he is the Lord, and look unto him, that
ye may be saved.

Note that the Prophet speaks in this verse only of the heathen, or Nations,
which before this, worshipped Idols; for he speaks of the Jews in the
following verse.

Even to him shall men come] q. d. And to the Lord, even to the Lord shall many
men come, Supple, for Salvation.

Men] i. e. Many men of all Nations.

This is another argument to persuade all the ends of the Earth, to look unto
the Lord.

And all that are incensed against him] i. e. And all that are incensed against
him; for saying that he is the true God, and against his servants for
worshipping him, as the only God.

Shall be ashamed] i. e. Shall be convinced, that he is the only true God, and
so shall be ashamed, that they have been incensed against him, and oppugned him
and maintained Idols.

This is another argument to persuade all the ends of the Earth to look unto
the Lord.

25.
In the Lord shall all the Seed of Jacob be justified] q.d. Moreover by the
help of the Lord, all the children of Israel, which have been accused of error
and impiety for worshipping the Lord as the only true God, shall be justified
and declared upright in so doing.

And shall glory] Supple, Over their adversaries, as those which have had the
better of them. Or shall glory, Supple, in the Lord, as in the only true God,
and their Savior and Justifier.

He mentions this particularly, because the Jews were at this time condemned
and persecuted and hated of the Heathen for worshipping the true God. And it is
another argument to persuade all the ends of the Earth, to look unto the Lord,
that they may be saved.

ISAIAH, CHAP. XLVI.
Bell boweth down, Nebo stoopeth] The Prophet does prophecy in this Chapter,
of the eversion or overthrow of the Idols, or feigned Gods of the Babylonians,
by Cyrus, and that the Jews shall be saved and protected by the Lord, by which
he shows what a difference there is between Idols, and the true God.

Bell boweth downe] q. d. Though Bell has been heretofore bowed down to, and
worshipped; yet he shall now bow down himself and worship Cyrus and his
Persians as a Captive his conqueror.

Bell was the name of the chiefest Idoll-god of the Babylonians, of which when
he says, that it boweth down: he alludeth to a conquered man, bowing down to
his Conqueror; and speaks of the Idol as though it had sense and reason as a
man, by a Prosopopoeia: He alludes also to the taking down of an Image or
Idol, for when a man puts his shoulder to an Image or Idol, to take it
down, the Image or Idol which stood upright, boweth downward to him.

Some think that this Bell had his denomination from Belus who was the first
King of Babylon and the father of Ninus, and who was afterward honored as a
god, and that it was his Image, which is here called Bell: But others because
the Sun was the god which the Babylonians did chiefly worship, take Bell for
the Image or Idol of the Sun.

From this Bell had some of the Babylonian Kings their name as Bel-shazzar, etc.

Nebo stoopeth] Supple, To his Conqueror Cyrus.

Nebo] This was another Idoll-god of the Babylonians, from which many of the
Babylonish Kings had their names; as Nebuchadnezzar, Nebopolaster, etc.

Their Idols were upon the b^asts and upon the Cattle] i. e. The Idols of the
Babylonians were laid upon the backs of the Beasts, and upon the Cattle, that
they might carry them from Babylon into Persia, being now the Prize of the
Persians, who took them under Cyrus.

He uses a Praetertense for a future, to signify the certainty of what is
here spoken. And when he says their Idols, he points as it were at the
Babylonians.

Your carriages were heavy loaden] i. e. The Carriages or burdens in which ye
made up these Idols of the Babylonians, O ye Persians, were heavy laden. That
is, were weighty by reason of those Idols Bell and Nebo, which you packed up in
them, which consisted of massy Gold or Silver or Brass, etc.

The Prophet uses an Apostrophe here to the Persians, which carried these
Idols on the backs of their Beasts to Persia.

They are a burden to the weary Beasts] i. e. They are a heavy burden to the
Beasts which are wearied and tired with the carriage of them.

He calls them the weary Beasts by anticipation. For he calls them the weary
Beasts, because they were wearied with the carriage of the Idols, not because
they were weary before.

2.
They stoop, they bow down together] i. e. Bell and Nebo stoop and bow down
both together. See verse 1

They could not deliver the burden] i. e. Though they were esteemed as gods,
yet they could not deliver the burden, in which they were packed up, out of the
hands of the Persians.

But themselves are gone into Captivity] But the burden and themselves and all
are gone into Captivity.

3.
Hearken unto me O house of Jacob] The Lord, having showed the weakness of
the Babylonish Idols, which was such, as that they were not able to deliver
themselves out of Captivity, does here show his own power, which was such as
that he could and would thereby deliver his people the house of Jacob. By which
he shows how much he himself excels Idols, and how much more happy his
Servants are, then the very gods of the Heathen.

O house of Jacob] i. e. O ye Jews which are the Children of Jacob; See Cap.
2.5.

And all the remnant of the house of Israel] q. d. That is, All ye Jews which
remain alive, after the slaughter made of you by the Babylonians and their
carrying you Captive into Babylon.

And is put here as a Note of Explication, for That is.

Which art born by me from the belly] i. e. Which I have upheld, and tenderly
looked to and took care of, from the first time that ye were a people.

The Prophet alludes here to a mother which carries her young Infant in her
arms so soon as it is born, not being able yet to go.

Which are born] By bearing or carrying in the Arms, understand all care which
a loving mother takes for her child; By a Synecdoche; and applies it
accordingly to Gods care of his people.

From the belly] i. e. From the time you came out of your mothers womb.

Which are carried from the womb] This is a repetition of the former sentence.

4.
And even to your old age I am he] q. d. And what I have been hitherto to you,
the same will I be to you, even to your old age.

I am he] q. d. I will be the same. He puts it in the present Tense, to show
the Lords constancy, and immutability.

And even to hoar hairs I will carry you.] i. e. And I will carry you, and
take care of you, to the very last.

In this the Lord surpasses the care of women, who carry their children only
in their infancy.

Hoare haires] By hoare hairs he means Old age, of which hoare or gray
hairs are a concomitant.

I have made] i. e. I have made you.

The Lord made the Israelites, if we consider them as a Body politic; because
he gave them to be a people of themselves. And if we consider them as
particular men, he made them; because he framed every one of them in his
mothers womb.

And I will bear, even I will carry] i. e. And because I have made you, I will
bear you in mine arms, even I the Lord will bear you, or carry you; q. d.
Though I am the Lord, I will condescend so far as to bear you, or carry you,
because I made you.

And will deliver you] Supple, Out of the Babylonish captivity, where you are
captives.

In th^se three things, to wit, that he made the house of Israel; that he bare
them, and carried them, and that he delivered them; The Lord intimates what
difference there was between himself and the Idol-gods of the H^athen; for
whereas the Lord made his servants; the men which worshipped Idols, made their
Idols; V. 6. whereas the Lord carried his people, Idolaters carried their gods.
V. 7. And whereas the Lord delivered his people, the Idols could not deliver
themselves, V. 2. much less could they deliver those that served them, V. 7.

5.
To whom will you liken me?] q. d. To whom then will ye liken me? will ye liken
me to Bell and Nebo, or any gods or Idols of the Heathen?

Concerning the exposition of these words, see Cap. 40. v. 18.

Here comes in that to which the Lord would have the house of Jacob, and the
Remnant of Israel, to hearken; for that that was spoken between that and this,
was spoken to persuade them to lend a more willing ear to his speech, and that
which he says here, he says upon occasion of Bell and Nebo's stooping, verse.
1, 2.

6.
They lavish Gold out of the bag] i. e. The Idolaters take their Gold out of
their bags, after a profuse and lavish manner.

And weigh Silver in the ballance] Supple, That they may receive a god of the
same weight back again.

They fall down] Supple, to this golden or Silver god, when it is made.

They worship] Supple, it.

7.
And set him in his place] i. e. In his Temple, or some other place, which they
have provided for him.

He standeth] Like a Stock without any motion.

From his place he shall not remove] i. e. He cannot stir from the place in
which they set him: for though the Goldsmith could give him a comely figure,
yet he could not give him power to walk or move himself.

He says, he shall not remove, for he cannot remove; For the Hebrews having no
potentiall mood, use an Indicative for a potentiall.

One shall cry unto him] Supple, To deliver him.

Yet can he not answer, nor save him out of his trovble] After these words, you
must understand these or the like, viz. Will ye then liken me, or compare me,
to such a one, or such a one to me, and make us equal?

Remember this] i. e. Remember that the god of the Idolater is made of Gold, or
Silver, by a Goldsmith, and that it cannot move, or hear, or save.

And show your selves men] i. e. And show that ye are endued with reason, and
not so stupid, as to worship such gods. Or show your selves men; that is, And
show your selves stout and courageous, and such as will not be moved with any
fear, to worship such gods, nor with any allurements to serve them.

Bring it again to minde] q. d. Bring it again and again to mind, that is,
remember oftem what these gods are.

O ye transgressors] He speaks to the Jews, as if they were now in captivity at
Babylon; which Jews had transgressed by Idolatry, by the inducement of
Manasses, 2 Kings 21. And were therefore carried away captive. Isaiah 43.27.
Jer. 15.4.

9.
Remember the former things of old] q. d. And that ye may not serve other
gods, but that ye may serve me only; Remember how great things I promised, and
foretold, and performed of old to your fathers.

For I am God.] Supple, As the things which I have done of old will evidence.

10.
Declaring the end from the beginning,] i. e. Which declare the event of things
a long time before they come to pass.

By the End understand the event of things.

By the beginning is still meant the beginning of the World; for so the
beginning does signify when it is put absolutely: but then by an Hyperbole, it
is put here to signify a time before the falling out of an event.

Saying,] Which says.

My counsel shall stand.] i. e. My determination shall not be altered.

This is to be understood more particularly of Gods counsel and determination,
whereby he had determined to overthrow the Babylonians by Cyrus, and to deliver
the Jews out of the Babylonish captivity; though it may be understood generally
of any counsel or determination of the Lord.

11.
Calling a ravenous bird from the East,] i. e. Who will call a ravenous bird
from the East.

By the ravenous bird is particularly meant an Eagle, and by an Eagle is meant
Cyrus: And Cyrus might be called an Eagle, because as an Eagle flies swiftly,
and seizes strongly upon his prey; so should Cyrus come speedily, and seize
strongly upon Babylon. Secondly, Cyrus might be called an Eagle, because he was
Eagle-nosed, as Histories report; that is, he had a cro^ked nose, like unto an
Eagles bill. Thirdly, Cyrus might be called an Eagle, because, as Xenophon
reports, he gave an Eagle in his Ensign.

From the East,] i. e. From Persia, which lay East of Babylon and Judea.

The man that executes my counsel,] Here he speaks more plainly, what he meant
by the ravenous bird.

The man here meant is Cyrus, who executed the counsel or determination which
God had of subduing Babylon, and of delivering the Jews from the captivity
which they there suffered.

From a far Country;] i. e. From Persia, which lay far from Babylon, and
farther from Judea.

Yea, I have spoken it.] Yea seems to be a Note of asseveration or affirming
here: q. d. Surely or verily I have spoken it.

I have spoken it.] q. d. I have said that I will call a ravenous bird from the
East; a man that shall execute my counsel, from a far Country.

12.
Harken to me, ye stout-hearted,] There were many of the Jews, which were
captive in Babylon, which would not believe the Word of the Lord, and his
Promise concerning the subduing of Babylon, and the delivery of the Jews out of
captivity, who (so often as they heard of it) would murmur against God, and
strive with him. To these therefore does the Lord speak here, averring, that he
would make it good, which he had spoken concerning the Delivery of his people,
though they would not be induced to believe it.

Ye stout-hearted,] i. e. Ye, whose hearts are so stout, as that they will not
submit to the truth of Gods Promise, to believe it.

To believe is a kind of submitting and captivating the understanding, 2 Cor.
10. verse. 5.

That are far from Righteousness.] i. e. Which are far from performing your
promise; and therefore ye think that I am as false as your selves.

By righteousness is here meant fidelity, or faithfulness in keeping promise.

The Jews, the children of Israel, did often promise to obey the Lord, and to
keep his Commandments; as Deuteronomy. 5.27, 28. Psalm. 78.34. 2 King. 23.3. But they
did not do according to their promise, but sinned against the Lord; therefore
he calls them here, men far from righteousness.

13.
I bring near my righteousness,] i. e. The time is near at hand, in which I
will fulfill the promise, which I have made, of redeeming my people out of
captivity.

By righteousness is here meant the things promised, and performed according to
promise, (the performance whereof is from the righteousness, that is, from the
truth and fidelity of the promise) per Metonymiam Efficientis; of which he here
speaks, as of things then existent and subsistent, but only afar off.

And my salvation:] i. e. And the Salvation which I will work for my people,
which are in captivity at Babylon.

I will place salvation in Sion] i. e. I will make Sion a place of safety,
where my people shall dwell safe, when I have brought them out of Captivity.

By Sion is meant Jerusalem.

He speaks of salvation as of a corporeal and visible thing, or as of a person
set to guard or protect a place, by a Metaphor or Prosopopoeia.

For Israel,] i. e. For the Jews sake; or for the good of the Jews, which are
the children of Israel.

My glory.] The Jews are here called Gods glory, per Metonymiam Materiae,
because the Lord would get himself great glory, by saving and delivering them
out of captivity.

ISAIAH, CHAP. XLVII.
COme down and sit in the dust, O Virgin Daughter of Babylon:] By the Daughter
of Babylon is here meant the City of Babylon, of which kind of phrase see Cap.
1. Verse. 8.

He speaks here to the City of Babylon, yea the material City, as to a woman,
yea as to a Queen, by a Prosopopoeia; and prophecyeth here of the overthrow
thereof: And he speaks of it as of a Queen, because the Babylonians had the
Empire at this time.

Come down,] From thy Throne or Chair of State.

Sit in the dust,] To sit in the dust, or on the ground, is a posture of those
which are in misery and sorrow.

Sit on the ground,] This is a repetition of those words, sit in the dust.

The Imperative mood here is put for a Future tense; q. d. Thou shall come
down, and sit in the dust; O Virgin Daughter of Babylon, thou shall sit on the
ground.

There is no Throne, O Daughter of the Caldeans,] i. e. There is no Throne or
Chair of State, to wit, for thee to sit on, O Babylon; for Cyrus has taken it
away.

O Daughter of the Caldeans,] Babylon was seated in Caldea; and therefore is
called the Daughter of the Caldeans, after the Hebrew manner of speaking, who
call a City a Daughter. See cap. 1.8.

For thou shall no more be called tender and delicate.] i. e. For thou shall
not be any more tender and dainty, but shall now be used to much hardness.

Be called tender and delicate.] i. e. Be tender and delicate; for the Hebrews
use to be called very often, for simply to be.

Note, that these words, For thou shall no more be called tender and delicate,
relate not to those that go immediately before, viz. to those, There is no
throne, O Daughter of the Caldeans; but to those, Sit in the dust, O Virgin
Daughter of Babylon, sit on the ground.

2.
Take the milstones, and grind meal,] q. d. Prepare thy self for servile
works, such as Conquerors put their slaves and captives to.

To grind corn was wont to be the work of slaves, and of the baser sort of
servants, not of such as were tender and delicate. See Exodus 11.5.

Take the milstones,] i. e. Take hold of the mill.

The milstones are put here for the whole mill, by a Synecdoche.

Uncover thy locks,] that is, Cast away thy Diadem and precious covering, which
thou wearest upon thy curled locks, and go bare-headed, with thine hair about
thine ears: q. d. Thou have now a Diadem upon thine head, and a precious
covering for thy locks; but thy Diadem, and thy precious covering, shall be
pulled off from thy head by the Persian Soldiers, and thou shall go
bare-headed, with thine hair about thine ears.

Make bare the leg,] i. e. Take off the ornaments of thy legs: q. d. The
Persian Soldiers shall pillage thee of thy stockens, and of the ornaments of
thy legs, so that thou shall have neither shoe nor stocken to wear, but shall
go bare-legged.

Uncover the thigh,] i. e. Lay aside your long-trained Robes, and put on Coats
which will not reach to thy knees: q. d. The Persian Soldiers shall take away
thy Robes and long Gowns, and shall give thee a poor short Coat in stead
thereof.

In these expressions he alludes to the manner of Soldiers, which if they take
an Enemy well apparelled, do pillage him, and strip him thereof, and give him
poor vile garments (or none at all) in stead thereof. So that these phrases,
Uncover thy locks, make bare the legs, uncover the thigh, are passively to be
understood, though they be actively expressed.

Pass over the Rivers.] i. e. Go through thick and thin, yea through Rivers and
waters too, if need be: q. d. You would not adventure to set the sole of your
foot to the ground, for fear of wet, heretofore; but now you shall be made to
wade through rivers and waters.

They that lead away captives into captivity, when they come to waters, stay
not for the going of their captives one by one over a bridge, but force them
through the rivers on foot, like so many beasts, while they themselves go over
the bridge, or ride through the river on horseback.

3.
Thy nakedness shall be uncovered,] This is a repetition or explication of
those words, Uncover thy locks, make bare thy legs, uncover thy thighs: q. d.
Thy naked body shall be seen, for want of clothing.

Yea, thy shame shall be seen,] Yea (which is yet more) thy privy members shall
be seen, for want of clothes to cover them.

I will take vengeance,] Supple, On thee, as a God.

The Prophet speaks this in the person of God.

And will not meet thee as a man.] i. e. And in taking of vengeance, I will not
meet with thee as a man, which is but weak flesh, whose force may be resisted;
but as a God, who is a Spirit, and whose power is irresistible.

Meet thee.] i. e. Punish thee, or revenge my self upon thee: This is a phrase
usual with us in the same sense: For when we say, that we will be revenged of a
man, we say that we will meet him, or meet with him. In which phrase the
Antecedent is put for the Consequent: or, the action for the end thereof: the
meeting for the thing for which we would meet him, which is, to punish him, or
to be revenged upon him.

4.
As for our Redeemer,] This is an answer to an Objection which Babylon might
make: q. d. Ye tell me, O ye Jews, in the Name of your God, that I must come
down and sit in the dust, etc. But who, in the mean time, shall redeem you out
of my hands? To this the believing Jews of the captivity answer, As for our
Redeemer, the Lord of hosts is his Name, the Holy One of Israel is he called.

The Lord of hosts is his name, the Holy One of Israel.] The true God is no
oftener called or described by any other Names or Attributes, then by these,
The Lord of hosts, The Holy One of Israel.

Why the true God is called the Lord of Hosts, see Cap. 1. verse. 9. And why the
Holy One of Israel, see cap. 1. v. 4.

5.
Sit thou silent, etc.] The immediate connection of this is with the fourth
Verse.

Sit thou silent, and get thee into darkness,] q. d. Go grieve and mourn,
because of the miseries which shall come upon thee.

Sit thou silent,] Supple, In sorrow, because of the great miseries which shall
come upon thee: q. d. Thou wast heretofore full of stirs, because thou wast a
joyous City, but now thou shall be silent.

Get thee into darkness,] Supple, And there bewail thy self.

They which are oppressed with true and great grief, do neither love to see,
nor to be seen: therefore they desire to get into darkness, that is, into some
dark place or other, that there they may mourn in secret.

O Daughter of the Caldeans,] See Verse. 1.

For thou shall no more be called the Lady of Kingdoms.] i. e. For the Empire
is departed from thee.

The King of Babylon had many Kings and Kingdoms under him, therefore is
Babylon here called the Lady of Kingdoms.

6.
I was wroth with my people,] i. e. I was angry with my people the Jews for
their sins.

The Lord gives the reason here, why it should be so with Babylon, as he said,
verse. 1, 2, 3, 5. The first reason is, because of her cruelty to the Jews in
their captivity, verse. 6. The second reason is, because of her pride and
arrogance, verse. 7. The third reason is, because of her sorceries and
enchantments, verse. 10. Another reason is hinted by the By, verse. 8. to wit,
because she was given to pleasures, and lived carelessly.

I have polluted mine inheritance,] i. e. I have taken away the hedge of my
protection (whereby mine inheritance was separated from all others) and laid it
common to be trod down by the feet of her Enemies.

Concerning the meaning of this word polluted in this place, see what I said
upon a parallel word, profaned, Cap. 43.28. and upon an opposite word, holy,
Cap. 4. verse. 3.

Mine inheritance,] The Jews, which were the children of Israel, are called
here the Lords inheritance, because God made choice of them to be a peculiar
treasure to him, above all people, Exodus 19.5. Deuteronomy. 7.6. and because they were
as dear to God, and the Lord had as much care of them, as a man has of his own
peculiar inheritance.

And given them into thine hand:] To be chastised and corrected by thee.

Thou did show them no mercy:] q. d. And when they were in thine hands, thou
did show them no mercy.

Upon the ancient have thou very heavily laid the yoke.] i. e. Thou did
grievously afflict and oppress, even the old men of my people, or mine
inheritance, whose age was venerable, and should move pity and compassion even
in an enemy.

They that are cruel to old men, will not spare the younger; the Babylonians
therefore were very cruel to all.

The yoke.] By the yoke is Metaphorically meant all manner of affliction and
oppression; because all manner of affliction and oppression is as grievous to
our nature, as the yoke is to the neck of a young Heifer.

This is the first Reason of Babylons ruin.

7.
And thou said, I shall be a Lady for ever:] i. e. Thou wast so proud and
confident of thine own power, as that thou thoughtest that thou could not be
brought down, no not by God himself and that thou should rule as a Lady over
Kingdoms and Nations for ever.

Here is the second Reason of Babylons downfall, namely, her pride and
arrogance.

So that thou did not lay these things to thine heart,] i. e. So that thou
did not think of these things, which I say shall befall thee; that is, Thou
did not think of thy downfall, and of the captivity and slavery which thou
should suffer.

Object. It may be here objected, that Babylon could not know of those things
which are here said she should suffer; for she had not the gift of Prophecy,
neither were they revealed to her before, how then could she lay them to heart?

Ans. Though she could not lay this misery in particular, with the
circumstances thereof, to heart, which should befall her, yet she might have
laid that misery in general to heart, which might befall her; and that is that
which is meant by these things: q. d. So that thou did not lay to thine heart
such things as these are: Thou did not think that thou could be overthrown,
and become a slave, and a captive.

Pride does so blind the eyes of the understanding, as that it makes those
which are in prosperity to think, that they shall never come into adversity,
Psalm. 10.6. And they which think not of that adversity which may befall them,
do soon fit themselves for destruction from the Almighty, by those many sins
which they are apt to run into: Therefore it was Moses's wish for the children
of Israel, That they would consider their latter end, Deuteronomy. 32.29.

Neither did remember the latter end of it.] i. e. Neither did remember the
latter end of Babylon, that is, thine own latter end; viz. That thou should
come to ruin, as all humane and terrene things do.

In the word It, there is an Enallage of the person, Of it being put for Thine,
the third for a second person: or (which is all one for the sense) another
kind of Pronoun being put for a reciprocal: There is also a passage from the
Metaphor, or Prosopopoeia, to the thing it self; that is, from speaking of
Babylon as a Queen, to speak of it as a material City.

Yet by It, it may be that her Prosperity, or Highness, or her Ladyship, is
here meant: q. d. Neither did thou think of the latter end of thy Prosperity,
or Highness, or Ladyship: For the Hebrews often put a Relative without any
formal Antecedent. And this I prefer before the former Interpretation, as being
more simple and more usual.

8.
Thou that art given to pleasures,] i. e. Thou Babylon, which art given to
pleasures.

Here is obliquely contained another Reason of Babylons downfall, to wit,
because she was given to pleasures.

That dwe^e t carelesl^,] i. e. That sit secure, and free from f^ar.

I am,] Supple, The Lady of Kingdoms, and so shall continue for ever.

And there is none else besides me:] i. e. And there is no other Lady of
Kingdoms besides my self.

This is the common Interpretation of this place.

Yet note, that these words, I am, and there is none else besides me, are words
which the Lord often uses of himself, as Cap. 45.5 18. And it is not unlikely
that the Prophet brings in Babylon with these words, to signify, that Babylon
thought her self a Goddess, yea the only Goddess of the World: for such has
been the condition of proud men, as that forgetting themselves to be men, they
have in the pride and insolency of their spirits took themselves for gods, and
so have thought their state immutable, and their prosperity everlasting. See
what was said, cap. 14.13.

I shall not sit as a widow,] i. e. I shall never be deprived of my King, which
is to me as an Husband.

Neither shall I know the loss of children.] i. e. Neither shall I ever be
deprived of my people within me, which are to me as children: I shall not ever
be deprived of them, either by sword, or by captivity.

9.
But these two things,] The Particle But is redundant here, and the sense
complete without it.

What two things he means, he explaineth by the next words.

The loss of children,] The loss of children came to Babylon when Babylon was
taken by Cyrus, and many Babylonians were slain by the sword, and many carried
away captive into Persia.

And widowhood,] Then came Babylon to widowhood, when her King was either slain
by Cyrus's Soldiers, or deprived of the Kingdom, and carried away captive.

They shall come upon thee in their perfection,] i. e. They shall come upon
thee to the full.

For the multitude of thy sorcerers, and for the great abundance of thy
enchantments.] This is the third Reason, which is directly mentioned in this
Chapter, why Babylon should be ruined.

10.
For thou have trusted in thy wickedness:] i. e. For thou have trusted in thy
sorceries, and thy enchantments, thinking that they shall preserve thee, and
keep thee safe.

Thou have said, None sees me:] q. d. By reason of thy wickedness, that is, by
reason of thy sorceries and enchantments, thou have said, None can see me; that
is, None can come and fight against me: q. d. Thou have said, that thou will
keep War from thy doors by thy sorceries and enchantments.

Note, that the Indicative is put here for a Potential mood.

None sees me:] To see a man, or to look a man in the face, signifies
sometimes to fight with him, or wage war with him. See 2 King. 14. verse. 8, 11.
and 2 King. 23. verse. 29.

Thy wisdom, and thy knowledge, it has perverted thee:] i. e. The skill and the
knowledge which thou have in sorceries and enchantments, has perverted thy
judgment, and made thee thin^, that none can see thee, that is, that none can
come and fight against thee; whereas they shall not only fight against thee,
but subdue thee, and trample thee under their feet.

Note here, that he calls her skill and knowledge in sorceries and
enchantments, her wisdom, because the Babylonians accounted them wise, who had
skill in such things: But he seems withal to call it her wisdom and
knowledge, with a kind of Sarcasm, or Irony.

And thou have said in thine heart, I am, and none else besides me.] And thou
have thought so proudly of thy sel^, through the perverseness of thy judgment,
as that thou have said in thine heart, That thou art, and that there is none
else besides thee.

I am, and none else besides me.] What the meaning of these words are, see
verse. 8.

The skill and knowledge which Babylon had in sorceries and enchantments, might
make Babylon so proud, as to think, that she was, and that there was none else
besides her self; both as it was knowledge, for knowledge puffs up, 1 Cor. 8.1.
and also as it was knowledge in sorceries and enchantments, by which she might
think to make her self immortal (because she thought that she could thereby
keep off all her Enemies from destroying her,) and so sit as a Lady for ever,
yea, as the only Goddess of the World.

11.
Therefore shall evil come upon thee,] i. e. Therefore shall calamity and ruin
come upon thee.

Thou shall not know from whence it rises, etc.] Supple, Before it comes upon
thee.

This the Prophet says in a deriding manner, because that Babylon being expert
in Judiciary Astrology, boasted that she knew all days which were lucky, and
which were unlucky; and that she knew which would produce good, and which evil,
and from whence.

The evil here prophesied of, was that which Cyrus brought upon Babylon, when
he took it.

Thou shall not be able to put it off,] The Prophet speaks this also in a
deriding manner, because Babylon thought, that she could not only know of any
evil to come by her Astrology, but could tell also how to avoid it by her
Sorceries and Enchantments.

Which thou shall not know.] i. e. Which thou shall not know of, before it
comes; and when it comes, thou shall not tell how to put it off.

This is, for sense, the same with that which went before.

12.
Stand now with thy enchantments, and with the multitude of thy sorceries,] q.
d. Stand now armed and furnished with thine enchantments, and with the
multitude of thy sorceries, as it were a Soldier armed with his sword and armor.

The word, stand, is a military word, spoken of a Soldier, which being armed,
has made choice of his ground to stand and fight in; as you may see, Ephesians. 6.
verse. 14.

To a Soldiers standing armed therefore does the Prophet here allude.

That which the Prophet speaks here to Babylon, he speaks in derision and with
a Sarcasm.

Wherein thou have labored from thy youth,] i. e. In the knowledge and skill
whereof thou have taken much pains from thy very youth, or from thy beginning,
that thou might prove excellent herein.

The Caldeans (the chief of whose Cities was Babylon) were time out of mind
given to such unlawful Arts and practices, as these are.

If so be thou shall be able to profit,] q. d. And try whether thou art able to
profit thy self, by keeping off that evil from thee which will come upon thee.

If so be thou may prevail.] Supple, Against the evil that shall come upon
thee.

Prevail.] This is a Military word also, used when one Enemy prevails against
another.

13.
Thou art wearyed in the multitude of thy counsels:] q. d. Thou art wearyed in
the diverse kinds of sorceries and enchantments which thou usest, and all to no
purpose: For now thou advisest with thy self, and think it best to make use
of this sorcery or enchantment; and now thou advisest with thy self, and
think it best to use that; and so thou often advisest with thy self what
sorceries and enchantments to use, and often make use of them; and because
thou see that they are to no purpose, thou art even weary of advising, or of
thinking of any more.

Note here, that what the Prophet would have us understand by this, is this,
That as Balaam said, Numb. 23.23. There is no enchantment against Jacob; so
there should be no enchantment against Cyrus, whom God would bless for Jacob;
that is, for the Jews sake.

Let now the Astrologers, the Star-gazers, the Monthly Prognosticators stand
up.] q. d. Being therefore that thou art wearyed in thy sorceries and
enchantments, and in thy counsels concerning them; let the Astrologers, and the
Star-gazers, and the monthly Prognosticators stand up for thee, as Champions,
and save thee, etc.

This he says in derision of Astrologers, and Star-gazers, and Monthly
Prognosticators, who would take upon them to tell of future evils by the Stars,
and of means to prevent them.

14.
Behold, they shall be as stubble,] q. d. Behold they shall be so far from
saving thee from these things which shall come upon thee, as that they shall
not save themselves; for they shall be as stubble to the fire, etc.

The fire shall burn them, etc.] i. e. They shall be consumed in the
destruction which Cyrus shall bring upon thee, O Babylon.

He speaks here in this Verse of the destruction which Cyrus should then bring
upon Babylon; as of fire, and as of the flame of fire; because as fire and the
flame of fire consume the wood, so should that destruction consume the
Babylonians.

There shall not be a coal to warm at, nor a fire to sit before.] q. d. They
shall be so thoroughly burned, as that there shall not be a coal left of them,
for a man to warm himself at, nor fire left for a man to sit before. The
meaning is, That the Astrologers, Star-gazers, and Monthly Prognosticators,
should be utterly consumed and destroyed, as the stubble, or wood, which is
burned to very ashes.

This phrase is metaphorical, and the Metaphor is drawn from such combustible
matter as is totally burnt to ashes, where there is not so much as a coal of
fire left for any one to sit by, or to warm himself at.

15.
Thus shall they be unto thee, etc.] i. e. Thus also shall they be unto thee,
etc. q. d. And when thy Astrologers, and Star-gazers, and Monthly
Prognosticators fail thee, if thou think to have help from thy Merchants,
thou art deceived; for thus shall they also be unto thee.

Thus shall they be unto thee, etc.] They? Who? Ans. The Merchants which have
traded with thee. Thus? how shall they be? Ans. They shall wander every one to
his quarters: None shall save.

This Particle Thus, relates not so much to what went before in the former
Verses, as to what follows in this Verse.

With whom thou have labored,] i. e. With whom thou have traffiqued.

In traffiquing and merchandising, there is labor and care enou^h, though the
gain sweeteneth all labor and care to the Merchant.

Even thy Merchants from thy youth,] i. e. Even thy Merchants with whom thou
have traffiqued, from the time that thou wast first a City.

Babylon stood very opportune for Traffic and Merchandise, by reason of
Tigris and Euphrates, and other great Rivers, which running by her, and through
her, emptyed themselves into the Persian gulf.

This is not to be understood, as if those particular Merchants which did first
traffic with Babylon, should be then living; but it only signifies, that
Babylon had been a Mart of old, and that there had been there a continuance and
succession of Merchants traffiquing with it from the beginning, without
interruption, as if the same Merchants had always lived. These Merchants then
can no otherwise be said to be the Merchants which labored with her from her
youth, then an Army may be said to be the same, as it was at the first, after
many years, wherein every individual Soldier is dead, which served first in it;
because it was never disbanded: And as a River may be said to be the same now,
as it was a thousand years ago, though her waters pass away, and are not the
same as they were; because it is never dry.

They shall wander to their quarters,] q. d. When they hear of the evil
approaching, that is, when they hear of Cyrus's approach against thee O Babylon
with his Army, they shall not stay to fight for thee, or to defend thee, but
they shall fly every one to his own home.

They shall wander] i. e. They shall fly, they know not which way.

So do they fly which fly for fear, as that they know not which way they go,
but wander up and down.

To his quarters,] i. e. To his home.

This is the intent of every ones flying, to fly to his own home, though in his
flight he wanders up and down, and flies he knows not whither.

None shall save thee.] i. e. None shall stay to save thee, or defend thee.

ISAIAH, CHAP. XLVIII.
O House of Jacob,] i. e. O ye sons of Jacob.

Which are called by the Name of Israel,] i. e. Which are called the children
of Israel: For being called the children of Israel, they are called by the name
of Israel.

And are come forth out of the waters of Judah,] i. e. And are sprung up out of
the seed of Judah.

The Hebrews do often signify the seed of a man, by the name of dew and
waters, because his seed is liquid, as dew and waters are.

Judah was one of the sons of Jacob, to whom the Scepter was given, Genesis 49.8.
And the Jews thought themselves more honorable then any other Tribe of Israel,
because they sprang out of the seed of this Judah.

Note, that the Jews, many of them, though they did not imitate the works of
Israel, yet they did glory that they were the children of Israel; and the more,
because they were the children of Israel by Judah; and they did love to be
called the children of Israel, and the sons of Judah. Wherefore the Prophet
gives them these Attributes with a kind of Sarcasm: q. d. Hear ye, O house of
Jacob, ye forsooth, which (though ye do not imitate the works of Israel, yet)
love to be called the children of Israel; and which glory in this, that ye are
the sons of Judah, because Judah was the most honorable of all the sons of
Israel, etc.

Note, that the Prophet directs his speech here to such Jews, as did mingle
the worship of Idols with the worship of the true God, while they were captives
in Babylon: And he speaks to them (in the person of God) as if he were present
with them at that time.

Note again, that though all the people of the Jews did not sin in this kind,
yet he speaks to them all, as if they had all so sinned: for so it is, that a
people, or aggregate body, as it may have titles or attributes given to it,
which are verified of it, in respect of the whole considered generally: so may
it have titles or attributes given to it, which are not verified of it,
considered generally, but only in respect of some parts. Hence one and the
same people may, in respect of some of its parts, be called good, and in
respect of others be called evil.

Which swear by the Name of the Lord,] i. e. Which swear by the Lord.

To swear by the Lord, is an honor and worship of the Lord; for he that
swears by him, acknowledges his Omniscience, and that he sees all
transgressions; and he acknowledges his power, and that he is able to punish
all offenders, etc.

And make mention of the Lord of Israel,] Supple, In your Oaths, when ye swear.

But not in truth and righteousness.] i. e. But not sincerely, and with an
honest intent to honor God; but hypocritically, that ye may seem only to honor
him. Or thus; But not in truth, and in righteousness; that is, But not truly
and justly; for when ye use an Assertory Oath, ye swear not in truth, because
ye swear that which is false: and when ye use a Promissory Oath, ye swear not
in righteousness, because ye do not perform what ye promise.

2.
For they call themselves of the holy City,] i. e. Though ye call your selves
Citizens of the holy City Jerusalem, and would be thought therefore to be holy
your selves.

Note, that this Particle For must be expounded by though, according to the
frequent use of that Particle which is here used in the Hebrew Text.

Note also, that here is an Enallage of the person; and that the third person
is put for the second.

Note thirdly, that by the holy City is here meant Jerusalem; and Jerusalem was
called the holy City, because of the Ark on which God sat, and of the Temple in
which he dwelt, both which were there.

Note fourthly, that these words are to have their immediate connection with the
last words of the former verse, namely with those, But not in truth and in
righteousness.

And stay themselves upon the God of Israel,] i. e. And though ye do rely and
trust on the God of Israel, Supple, as ye say and boast.

The Lord of Hosts is his Name.] i. e. Whose Name, or who is the Lord of Hosts.

A prepositive Pronoun is here put for a subjunctive.

3.
I have declared the former things,] i. e. He calls those the former things,
which came first to pass in order of time, before other: and in particular,
those calamities, and that captivity, which befell this people of the Jews by
the Babylonians: For note, though the Prophet spoke this long before the
Babylonish captivity, yet he speaks to the Jews, as though they were then
captive in Babylon, by a Prophetique Spirit.

This is that which he bids them hear, Verse. 1.

From the beginning,] i. e. Before they came to pass. See Cap. 46.10.

And they went forth out of my mouth,] i. e. And I spoke of them.

And I showed them,] i. e. And I told of them.

I did them suddenly.] i. e. I did bring those calamities and that captivity
(which I foretold of) upon you, when you little thought of them.

4.
Because I knew that thou art obstinate] The Lord shows a reason here, why he
told those former things, that is, why he spoke of those calamities, before
they came to pass.

I knew that thou art obstinate,] i. e. I knew that thou art refractory, and
that thou would not give place to my sayings, to believe them.

And thy neck is an iron sinew,] i. e. And that thou would not bow down thine
ear to hear me.

We cannot ordinarily bow down the ear to hear, or harken unto any one, but by
bending of the neck: and if the nerves or sinews of the neck (which are the
instruments of motion) are iron, or of iron, the neck cannot bend.

And thy brow brass.] i. e. And that thou art impudent: And therefore if I had
not told of these things before they came to pass, thou would have been so
impudent, as to say, that I did them not.

Thy brow b^ass.] It is said of an impudent man, that his brow, that is, that
his face (taking the brow for the whole face, per Synecdochen partis) is brass;
or that (as we usually say) he is brazen-faced. The ground of the phrase is
this, (...), Arist. Ethic. l. 4. c. 9. They that are ashamed, blush or look
red; and the reason why they bl^sh and look red, is, because in that passion
the blood flies into the face, and dies the skin: But now if the face were
brass, the blood could not fly into it, for want of veins and pores; neither
could it alter the color thereof, because of its thickness and solidity.

5.
From the beginning,] i. e. Before it came to pass, as the next Verse shows,
which is but a repetition of this.

Declared it to thee,] i. e. Told thee that which I have done.

Mine Idol has done them,] i. e. Not the Lord, the holy One of Israel, but the
Idol which I worship has done it.

Has commanded them.] i. e. Has done these things.

He alludes to the power of the true God, who (when he would have any thing
done) does but speak in way of command, and say, Let it be done, and it is
done; as Genesis 1. v. 6, 9, 11, 14, 20, 24, etc.

6.
Thou have heard,] Supple, Of me, all this which is come to pass, before it
came to pass.

See all this,] Viz. That it is come to pass, as you heard.

And will ye not declare it?] i. e. And will ye not now declare, that I
therefore am the true God?

Here is a Relative without an Antecedent.

I have showed thee new things,] i. e. I have told of things which thou never
heardst of before.

The new things which he speaks of, are the things which concerned the Jews
Delivery out of Babylon by Cyrus.

From this time,] i. e. Things which I now first spoke of, and of which I spoke
not from the beginning, that is, of which I spoke not of heretofore.

Even hidden things,] i. e. Things hidden heretofore from thy knowledge.

And thou did not know them.] Supple, Before I now told thee of them.

7.
They are created now,] i. e. They are now revealed to thee by me.

He says, They are created now, for They are now revealed, by a Metaphor,
because as things have a Being by Creation, which they had not before; so they
have a kind of Being, when they are first revealed, which before they had not.

And not from the beginning,] i. e. And not heretofore.

Even before the day,] Supple, That thou knew of them.

When thou heardest not of them,] i. e. When thou had not heard of them, were
they created or revealed to thee.

Lest thou should say,] Supple, When they came to pass.

Behold I knew them.] Supple, Before they they came to pass, for mine Idol told
me of them.

8.
Yea, thou heardest not,] Supple, Of them, before I told thee.

Yea, thou knew not,] Supple, Of them, before I made them known unto thee.

Yea, from that time that thine ear was not opened,] i. e. Yea, I told thee of
them at that time that thou had heard nothing of them.

To open the ear, or to have the ears opened, is put here for to hear, as Psalm.
34.15.

For I knew thou would deal very treacherously with me,] q. d. And this I
did, because I knew thou would deal very treacherously with me, and say when
they came to pass, That thine Idol had done them, and that thine Idol had told
thee of them in fore-time.

It is treachery in us, when we profess in words, that we are Gods servants,
and ought to worship him, if we give in deed that to Idols which is due to God.

And wast called a transgressor from the womb.] i. e. And wast a transgressor
from the womb.

To be called is put here for to be: A nominal word for a real. See the like
cap. 9. verse. 6.

From the womb.] i. e. From the first time that I made thee, to be to my self a
people: A Metaphor of which, see Cap. 46. verse. 3.

Concerning the transgressions of Israel from the womb, read Psalm. 78.

9.
For my Names sake will I defer mine anger,] q. d. Yet for all this, though
thou wast a transgressor from the womb, I will defer mine anger toward thee
for my Names sake.

For my Names sake] i. e. For mine own sake, lest the Babylonians should
blaspheme and say, that I was not able to deliver my people, if I should not
deliver them out of their captivity. See verse. 19.

Will I defer mine anger,] i. e. Will I slack mine anger; for anger deferred
slacketh and waxes cold.

And for my praise will I refrain for thee,] i. e. And for thy sake, and for my
praise sake, that I may be praised for my mercy toward thee, will I refrain
and keep in mine anger.

For two ends does the Lord say here, that he will refrain his anger toward
the Jews: The first is for the Jews good; for is it not good for them, if God
shows mercy to them? The second is for his own praise sake, that men may
praise him for his mercy. And of these two ends, the praise of God is the
chiefest and ultimate end: and the good of the Jews is but subordinate to this.

That I cut thee not off.] Supple, Totally or wholly.

10.
Behold I have refined thee, but not with silver:] i. e. Behold I have put thee
into the furnace of affliction, to refine thee; and I have refined thee, but
not as silver is wont to be refined.

Note, that the Preposition With, is put here for a Note of Similitude or
Comparison; and in the word Refined is included both the intent of the Lord in
putting them into the furnace, and also the event: and the sense of the words
is this; q. d. I have put thee into the furnace of affliction, and I have
refined thee, but not with that exactness as men refine silver; for they which
refine silver, keep it in the furnace, till all the dross of it be wholly
consumed: But I have not, nor will not keep thee in the furnace of affliction,
while all thy dross is taken away; (lest I should wholly consume thee, while I
refine thee,) but I have dealt and will deal more moderately than so with thee.

Note that this verse is an answer to a Tacit Objection which a Jew might
make; For whereas the Lord said in verse 9. That he would refrain his anger,
for their good and for his own Praise, that he cut them not off: A Jew might
object and say; If thou did not intend to cut us off, why did thou put us
into the furnace of affliction? To which the Lord here answers, that he did it,
to refine them: and he did refine them, but not as they refine silver. By this
therefore was the iniquity of Jacob to be purged, and this was all the fruit to
take away his sin, as Cap. 27.9.

I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction] q.d. Though I have put thee
into the furnace of affliction, yet I did it only that I might make thee
precious, and I have made thee precious.

I have chosen thee] i. e. I intended and have made a choice one or precious
one of thee, more choice and more precious a great deal than thou wast.

To choose, is put here, for to make precious, Per metonymiam effecti; for that
which is made precious, every one will be ready to choose: See Cap. 49.7.

Note here that in these words I have chosen thee, is included both Gods intent
in putting them into the furnace, and the Event answerable to the intent.

In the furnace of affliction] By the furnace of affliction is meant, those
miseries which the Jews endured in Babylon, which he compares here to a
furnace in which silver is tried and refined: By a Metaphor.

11.
For mine own sake] q. d. For mine honors sake, that my name be not polluted
and dishonored, and that my glory be not given to another, etc.

Note that those words relate immediately to the ninth verse, and that the tenth
verse was brought in by the by, to answer a Tacit objection of the Jews.

Even for mine own sake] q. d. I say even for mine honor sake.

This repeating of his words show how jealous God is of his honor,

Will I do it] i. e. Will I defer mine anger, and refrain it, from cutting
thee off, verse 9.

For how should my name be polluted?] i. e. For how would my name be
blasphemed, and mine honor stained and polluted; Supple, If I should not
defer mine anger and refrain it from cutting thee off totally.

If the Lord should have persisted in his anger until he had utterly cut off
the house of Jacob, The Gentiles would have blasphemed him, and spoke evilly
and disgracefully of him, and have said, that he was not able to deliver his
people out of the hand of the Babylonians.

And I will not give my glory to another] q.d. And if I should not do it, I
should do that, for which the Gentile would give my glory to their Idols, but
I will not have my glory given to another.

To give, is put here for to have given.

If God should not refrain his anger, that he cut not off the house of Jacob,
the Gentiles would say that the gods of the Babylonians were more powerful then
he, and that he was not able to save his people, out of their hands, and so
would give that glory and worship to them, which is due only to him the Lord,
as being the only true God.

12.
Hearken unto me O Jacob] This has its immediate connection with the foregoing
words. viz. I will not give my glory to another, That is, to Idols: For the
Lord having said there; that he will not give his glory to another, That is, to
Idols, he would teach the house of Jacob, that he is the only true God: And
that the Idols of the Heathen are not gods, that they may not give that glory
which is due and proper to him, to Idols, q. d. I said; I will not give my
glory to another, that is, to Idols; Being therefore I am so jealous of my
glory, hearken unto me O house of Jacob, and know, that not they but I am the
true God.

Jacob] Jacob is put here Per Metonymiam effici^ntis for the Jews the children
of Jacob.

And Israel] Israel is put here for the Jews the children of Israel, Per
metonymiam efficientis.

My called] i. e. Whom I have called above all people of the world, to serve
me, and to be a peculiar people to my self.

I am he] i. e. I am he (...), that is, I am the most high and the most mighty
God.

I am the first, I also am the last]] q. d. I am he before whom none was, and
after whom none shall be.

Mine hand also has laid the foundation of the earth) i. e. I have also laid
the foundation of the earth with mine own hand.

He speaks of God here as of man (...) and puts the hand which is but part of
man for the whole man.

The foundation of the earth] He either speaks of the earth as of an house,
which has a foundation, by a metaphor: Or, we must take the foundation of the
earth in the same kind of speech as when St. Paul says, the sign of
Circumcision, Romans 4.11. And so we must conceive that the world is as an house;
and the earth (which is the lowest part of the world) is as the foundation
thereof.

And my right hand has spanned the Heavens] i. e. And I made the Heavens with
my right hand.

He speaks of God as of a man Per (...) and alludes to a Carpenter, or
Architect, which when he is to make any part of an house, does first measure it
out with his rule, or his span, that he might make it in just measure: And this
his measuring, is put here by a Syllepsis for the whole framing and making
ther^of. See Cap. 40. v. 12.

When I call unto them, they stand up together] i. e. When I command them to
do any thing, they are ready to do my commands.

He alludes here to the matter of dutiful Servants, whom if their master
calls, they stand up, and are ready to do what their master would have them
to do: And indeed the earth and the heavens too are Gods servants. Psalm.
119.91.

This is an argument by which the Lord proves himself to be the true God.

14.
All ye assemble your selves etc.] The Lord called here to the Gentiles or
Nations which worshipped Idols, and bids them come in, in the sight of the
house of Jacob to maintain the divinity of their Idols, that the house of Jacob
seeing that they were not able to maintain the Divinity of their Idols against
the Lord, might not be led away to Idols, but serve the Lord.

Which among them] i. e. Which among all your gods or all your Idols.

He puts here a relative without an antecedent (...) pointing as it were to
their Idols.

Has declared these things] i. e. Has declared these things which I have
declared concerning the destruction of the Babylonians or Chaldaeans by Cyrus.

Here he puts again a Relative without an Antecedent.

The Lord has loved him etc.] i. e. The Lord has loved Cyrus.

Note that the Lord speaks here of himself in the third person.

Note also that this Relative (Him) is put without an Antecedent, but thereby
is meant Cyrus.

Note again, that because neither the Idolaters, nor their Idols could say,
that they had declared the things concerning the destruction of Babylon by
Cyrus, The Lord does here (as it were insulting over them) declare, what Cyrus
should do to Babylon, to show that whatsoever had been declared concerning
that, he had declared it. And this is an argument to show the Jews that the
Idols of the Heathens were no gods. And a second argument to show that he was
the only God.

The Lord might be said to love Cyrus in that he gave good success to his
Armies, and to his expeditions.

He will do his pleasure on Babylon] i. e. Cyrus shall do upon Babylon what
the pleasure of the Lord is to be done thereon.

It was the pleasure of the Lord that Babylon should be overthrown.

And his arm shall be heavy on the Chaldaeans] i. e. And the Arm of Cyrus
shall light heavy upon the Chaldaeans to afflict them and destroy them.

He alludeth to a man, which strikes with a strong blow, and the fall of whose
Arm is heavy.

He mentions not here the delivery of the Jews out of Babylon (though that
was part of those things which were declared) but only the overthrow of the
Babylonians: Because all the doubt was of the overthrow of the Babylonians,
being they were so potent; And none doubted but the Jews might be delivered
out of their Captivity, if the Babylonians were overthrown.

I, even I have spoken] Supple, it, and therefore it shall come to pass.

Note the Enallage again of the person, how he passes from the third to the
first person.

I have called him] Supple, To do my pleasure.

I have brought him] Supple, Out of Persia in an expedition against Babylon.

A Praeterperfect Tense is put here for a Future.

And he shall make his way prosperous] i. e. And whatsoever he undertakes,
shall succeed well.

16.
Come ye near unto me] Supple, O ye Sons of Jacob.

This the Prophet speaks in his own person.

This, from this place to the end of the Chapter may be well accounted as part
of the former Sermon, or at least it may be well joined with it for the
principal Subject of this is to show, what prosperity should befall the Jews
after the Arm of Cyrus had been upon the Chaldaeans, And the former Sermon
ended with that, that the Arm of Cyrus should be upon the Chaldaeans and
prosper.

Hear ye this] That I shall speak unto you verse 17, etc.

I have not spoken in secret from the beginning] q.d. I have not spoken any
thing in private at any time heretofore, but have openly made known unto you
all the mind of the Lord, which has been revealed unto me.

That which the Prophet speaks here from this place to the end of the verse,
is not that which he chiefly bids them hear, (for that follows in verse 17.)
but it is a Prooemiall speech, to win their attention, and to make them the
more to heed, what he has to speak.

The argument is not much unlike unto that which St. Paul uses to the Elders
of Ephesus, Acts 20.20. Ye know how I kept nothing back with was profitable
unto you but have showed you and have taught you publicly, etc.

From the beginning] i. e. At any time heretofore.

From the time that it was, there am I] q. d. I have not been negligent in the
performance of my duty, but from the time that I have been called to be a
Prophet, I have been diligent in my calling.

From the time that it was] i. e. From the time that the gift of Prophecy was,
Supple, given to me, or was in me.

Here is a Relative without an Antecedent.

There am I] i. e. Therein have I spent my labor and travel, and do yet
spend it.

Note that this verb (I am) though it be of the present Tense, yet by a
Syllepsis it comprehends the time past also.

Note also, that where a man spends his whole labor and travel, there he may
be said to be himself, Per Metonymiam efficientis.

The like argument to this which the Prophet here uses, to move attention,
does the Apostle use 1 Cor. 15.10. His grace which was bestowed upon me, was
not in vain but I labored, etc.

And now the Lord God and his spirit has sent me] i. e. And now at this time
has the Lord sent me to you with this message.

And his spirit] Many of the ancients do interpret this spirit of the Holy
Ghost the third person in the blessed Trinity; But yet because the Scripture
speaks often of God as of a man by an (...). And the Spirit is taken
oftentimes for the Soul. The Sense may be this: And now the Lord God, yea his
soul has sent me; q. d. And now the Lord God has sent me, yea he has sent
me with all his Soul: Which expression signifies a great deal of Affection
of him that sends to him to whom he sends.

This is the third argument by which the Prophet would move attention, and how
powerful an argument this is; Eglon King of Moab may show, who when Ehud said
unto him: I have a message from God unto thee; Eglon arose presently out of his
Seat: Judges 3.20. which argument is the stronger, when it is enforced with the
love of God.

17.
Thus says the Lord etc.] This is that which the Prophet speaks to them to
hear verse 16.

Thy Redeemer] q.d. Which has redeemed thee out of the hands of the
Egyptians, and Moabits, and Midianits, and Assyrians, and will redeem thee
out of the hands of the Babylonians.

The holy one of Israel] i. e. The holy one whom Israel worshippeth.

I am the Lord thy God which teaches thee to profit] i. e. I am the Lord thy
God, which teaches thee such things, as that if thou observest them, thou
shall profit thy self by them, for in observing my words, there is great
reward.

Which leads thee by the way which thou should goe] i. e. Which directs
thee (as a guide does a Traveller) in the way wherein thou should go, if
thou would be safe and happy.

The Commandments of God, are often compared to a way, because as by walking
in the way, we come to the place which we desire: So do we come to the
happiness, which we long after, by keeping the Commandments of the Lord.

Note that that which the Lord speaks here, in this and the two following
verses, is not that which he chiefly intends in this speech; but that which he
chiefly intends, is to tell the house of Jacob of their delivery out of Babylon
and of the afflictions which shall befall the Babylonians their enemies; verse
20, 21, 22. And in this 17, 18, 19. verses, he does insinuate himself into the
heart of his people, by manifesting his love, and compassion toward them, that
they may receive what he has to say to them, with the greater desire and
belief.

18.
O that thou had hearkened to my Commandements] i. e. O that thou had obeyed
my Commandments heretofore.

This passionate Speech, shows the love and compassion which the Lord had to
his people.

Then had thy peace been as a River] i. e. Then had not thy peace failed, but
had been as a River, which runs continually and is not dried up: And as a River
waters the earth, and makes all things to flourish and look green. So should
thy peace have cheered thee and made all things to flourish within thee.

This peace which th y enjoyed was taken away by the Babylonians, because of
their sins.

And thy righteousness as the waves of the Sea] The keeping of Gods
commandments is righteousness; But it is not that which is here meant by
righteousness, but the fruits of that righteousness and the blessings which
God would have bestowed upon his people, for keeping his commandments, Per
Metonymiam efficientis. If therefore they had kept Gods commandments, the
blessings which God would have bestowed upon them as fruits of that their
Righteousness, should have been as the waves of the Sea, Supple, for abundance.

19.
Thy Seed] i. e. Thy children. Metonymia materiae.

Should have been as the Sand] Supple, for number.

And the offspring of thy bowels] i. e. And the offspring, which comes out
of thy bowels.

Like the gravel thereof] i. e. Like the gravel of the Sea. So some,
understanding Sea from verse 18. Others, like the gravel, that is, like the
little stones of the Sand; Supple, for multitude.

His name should not have been cut off] q.d. Thou should not have been cut
off, Supple as thou have been by the Babylonians, by reason of which, thou art
diminished, and become few in number.

He speaks not here of a total cutting off, as verse 9. but a Partial.

His name] Note that his name is put here, for (He) and (He) is put for thou by
an Enallage of the Person: For he speaks here of the house of Jacob in the
third person, to whom he spoke in the Second immediately before.

Note that the word (name) does often signify a person, as Act. 1.15. The
number of the names together were about an hundred and twenty, that is the
number of the persons, together were about an hundred and twenty: And Rev. 3.4.
Thou have a few names even in Sardis which have not defiled their garments,
that is, thou have a few persons even in Sardis which have not defiled their
garments.

Note Secondly, that this word name taken in this Nation, is sometimes added
Periphrastically to another word, signifying or intimating a Person: And yet
augmenteth not the signification thereof, as Isa. 30.27. The name of the Lord
comes from far, that is, the Lord comes from far, etc. Cap. 48.9. For
my names sake will I defer mine anger, that is, for mine own sake will I
defer mine anger; And 1 John 32.3. This is his commandment, that we should
believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ, That is, this is his
commandment, that we should believe in his Son Jesus Christ. Now as the word
name is Periphrastically added in those places without any augmentation of the
signification, so it is here; and so His name, is no more than He.

Nor destroyed] Supple, As thou have been of late by the Babylonians.

Note that the Prophet speaks to the house of Jacob, that is, the Jews, as if
they were Captives in Babylon, at this time.

From before me] Note that the Jews while they dwelt in their own Land, were
said to dwell before the Lord, by reason of the Lords presence in his Temple at
Jerusalem, Cap. 23.18. When therefore they were slain by the sword, or dyed
with hunger and hard usage, either in their own Land, or in Babylon, whither
they were carried captive, they were said to be destroyed from before him.

20.
Go ye forth of Babylon] q. d. O ye house of Jacob which are captive in
Babylon, go ye out of Babylon the place of your Captivity, and be ye free,
etc.

This is that which the Prophet chiefly calls to them to hear, verse 16. So
that we must repeat those words again (Come ye near unto me, hear ye this,
thus says the Lord) q. d. Come ye near unto me I say, hear ye this; thus
says the Lord, Go ye forth of Babylon, etc.

The Prophet speaks here as though Cyrus had already vanquished the
Babylonians, and given the Jews leave to depart into their own Country.

Fly ye from the Chaldaeans] To fly signifies here to make haste, but not as
he which flies for fear, lest that he should be apprehended and taken: But as
he that is newly set at liberty when he was in bondage; for such love to hasten
from the place of their bondage, to their own homes, and hasten with a great
deal of joy.

From the Chaldaeans] By the Chaldaeans and the Babylonians are meant all one
people, who are called Babylonians from the chief City Babylon: and Chaldaeans
from Chaldaea the chief Country, wherein Babylon stood.

With a voice of singing] i. e. With a great deal of joy and gladness of
heart.

Declare yee] What they should declare, he tells in the latter end of this and
in the next verse; and he speaks to them here as if they had been even then
already redeemed and bought back into their own Country: And as if the Arm of
Cyrus had been then upon the Babylonians to vex them and destroy them.

Utter it even to the end of the earth] i. e. Utter it so as that all people
may hear it, even they also that dwell in the end of the earth.

The Lord has redeemed his servant Iacob] Supple, Out of the Babylonish
Captivity.

Iacob] by Jacob understand the Jews, the children of Jacob.

21.
And they thirsted not when he led them through the desarts] By the deserts are
meant those deserts which lay between Babylon and Iudaea, in which deserts the
Jews were like most of all to want water to quench their thirst as they
returned from Babylon into their own Country.

Note, that that which the Prophet means by this and that which follows in
this verse, is this, that the Jews should want nothing in their return from
Babylon homewards, but the Lord would abundantly provide for them, whatsoever
they should want: And he alludeth here, to what the Lord did for Israel when he
bought him out of Egypt: for the Hebrews do often express like things by
like, as was said, Cap. 4.5.

He caused the waters to flow out of the rock for them] The Prophet alludeth
here to what the Lord did for Israel in the way from Egypt, Exodus 17.6. Numb.
20.11.

He clave the rock also] i. e. Yea he clave the rock to give them water to
drink.

Note, that the word (Also) is put here for the word (Yea) for this is but a
Repetition of what went before, in more earnest terms.

22.
There is no peace says the Lord unto the wicked] But there is no peace or joy
says the Lord to the Babylonians who afflicted Jacob, but sorrow and
affliction.

This also is part of that Song or Proverb which he would have them sing or
say, verse 20.

No peace] Peace signifies among the Hebrews all manner of joy and
prosperity, but here by no peace understand not only the want of joy and
prosperity, but the contrary also thereto, viz. Sorrow and Calamity.

To the wicked] By the wicked in general are here meant the Babylonians in
particular which afflicted the Jews and brought them under them: Of whose
wickedness you may read Cap. 47. verse 6, 7. etc.

ISAIAH, CHAP. XLIX.
LIsten O Isles unto me] The Prophet Isaiah speaks here in his own person, but
as he speaks, he is a Type of Christ, and many passages of this his speech
will better agree with Christ the Antitype, than with him the Type, but yet
agree with him too.

Listen O Isles] i. e. Listen to me all ye which dwell in Isles, Metonymia
Continentis.

By the name of Isles, may be meant not only Isles or Islands as we call them,
that is, parcells of the earth environed with Seas or waters, But also all
parts of the earth adjoining to Seas and waters, for these also are commonly
called Isles among the Hebrews, yea all the Kingdoms and Countries may be
called Isles by a Metaphor, because every Country is bounded by its several
Laws and customs, and severed from other Countries and Kingdoms by their
several Laws and customs, as Isles are severed from other parts of the earth
by Seas and waters.

And hearken ye people from farre] i. e. And hearken ye people which live
afar off.

He speaks here to the Heathen, and speaking to those which dwelt afar off
from him, he excludes not those which dwelt nearer hand.

But the question may be asked, why he speaks to the Heathen? Answ. He speaks
to them because he has something to say, which concerns them verse 6. And
because the Lord would have all to know, that he is the Savior of the Jews
and their Redeemer (verse 26.) That they might forsake their Idols and look
unto him and be saved, as Cap. 45.22.

The Lord called me from the wombe] i. e. The Lord called me to be his Servant
and to do his work so soon as ever I was borne, yea so soon as ever I was
conceived in the womb.

To say that I was so or so from the womb is a proverbiall kind of speech
(and oftentimes Hyperbolically used) as Psalm. 22.10. Psalm. 58.3. Isa. 48.8.

But yet the Hebrews, as in many other places, so in this, take the words
properly, and say that Isaiah was called to be a Prophet from the womb,
because the Lord intending to make him a Prophet did give him a good
temperature of the Brain (which is requisite for a Prophet) while he was yet
in his mothers womb. Not because every one which has a good temperature of
brain is presently a Prophet, but because every Prophet has a good
temperature of brain.

From the bowels of my mother has he made mention of my name] i. e. From the
bowels of my mother, has he called me by name.

This is a repetition of the former Sentence.

He has made mention of my name] i. e, He has called me by name.

Note that the Prophet uses here a Synechdoche generis: For every one that
makes mention of a man's name does not call him, though every one which calls
him by name, makes mention of his name.

Note that Gods calling of him by name, shows that he was in high favor with
God, and that he had a great office in his house. See Cap. 45.3.

Note that the Prophet does very much magnify himself, for the favor which
he had with God from this to verse 8. And this he does first, that by showing
the glory of the Type, he might set forth the greater glory of the Antitype:
Secondly, that the message which he is sent about might the more willingly and
believingly be received and embraced.

2.
And he has made my mouth like a sharp Sword] The Lord made the Prophets mouth
as a sharp sword by putting his word into his mouth, or because of his word
which proceeded out of his mouth. For the word of God is as a Sword, Ephesians.
6.17. Yea sharper then any two edged Sword, Heb. 4.12.

The word o^ God is likened to a Sword, First because it pierces the very
heart, Examples, whereof ye have Act. 2.37. and 7.54. Secondly, because it
separateth between virtue and vice, by teaching what is good and what is evil.
Thirdly, because it cutteth off sin, by the threats which are therein
contained against sinners, and by the promises which are thereby made to those
which forsake sin. Fourthly, because it cuts off error and heresy by
teaching the truth.

In the shadow of his hand has he hid me] i. e. He will preserve me and keep
me safe from those that persecute me, Supple, that they shall not destroy me,
until I have finished the whole work which I have to do.

The Prophet alludeth to a man, which when he would keep a thing safe while he
has it in his hand, closes his hand, and so keeps it, which he does as it
were hide it therein.

By the shadow therefore of the hand he means the hollow of the hand, which
being closed becomes dark as a shadow.

He that can span the heavens with his hand, Cap. 48.23. And measure the waters
in the hollow thereof, Cap. 40.22. He can hide the Prophet in his hand with
ease.

Which of the Prophets have not your Fathers persecuted, said Stephen to the
Jews, Act. 7.52. It is but needful therefore that God should hide this his
Prophet in the shadow of his hand, to preserve him, while he has finished the
work about which he has sent him.

And he made me a polished shaft] i. e. And he made me as a polished Arrow,
whose feathers are trimmed, that it may fly the better, and whose head is
scoured, that it may pierce the deeper.

As the mouth of the Prophet was likened to a sharp Sword a little before: So
is he himself here likened to a polished shaft or Arrow, and that for the same
reason, to wit because of the word of God which was given him in charge, which
word as it was compared to a Sword before, so it is here compared to an Arrow,
because as an Arrow pierces the heart, So does the word of God. And as an
Arrow kills and destroys: So does the word of God kill and destroy sin
and error.

If there be any difference here between the meaning of the Sword and the
Arrow, it consists in this, that the mouth of the Prophet is called a Sword,
because of the word which he had to speak to the Jews who were near to him;
for a Sword is a weapon that is used against those that are nigh at hand: And
he is called a Shaft or an Arrow, because of the word which he had to speak to
the Gentiles who were remote from him: for a Shaft or an Arrow is a weapon
which is used at a distance.

In his Quiver has he hid me] i. e. He will hide me, from those which
persecute me: and keep me safe from their fury.

This phrase is the same with that, viz, In the shadow of his hand has he hid
me. But the Metaphor is taken here from an Arrow which men keep in a Quiver,
that it may not be broken, nor the feathers thereof marred.

3.
O Israel] i. e. O thou Son of Israel. Metonymia efficientis.

The Lord called Isaiah Israel or the Son of Israel indeed, because he was a
true son of Israel indeed; like unto Israel his Father, in obedience.

In whom I will be glorified] i. e. By whom I will be glorified. In, is put
here for By.

This denotes the end why the Lord hid his servant Isaiah, and preserved him.

But how did God intend to be glorified by Isaiah?

Ans. The Lord intended by the Ministry of Isaiah to bring the Jews again to
him by repentance which had gone away from him by their sin, verse 5. And this
bringing of them back to the Lord was for the glory of God: For God glorified
himself by delivering them out of Babylon upon their repentance, which he
would not have done if they had not repented. Again by the Ministry of Isaiah
many Heathens were convinced of their Idolatry, and turned to the Lord as the
only true God, and worshipped him only, and so glorified him.

4.
I have labored in vaine] q. d. Lord do thou think to be glorified by my
Ministry? That is not likely, for I have hitherto labored in vain; and there
is little turning to thee, though I have labored what I can.

Yet surely my judgment is with the Lord] Yet surely, (and this is my comfort)
the Lord is my Judge, who will Judge me not according to the event of my
labor, but according to the Labor which I have taken.

And my worke] i. e. And the reward of my work: Metonymia efficientis.

With my God] And if his reward was with God, God would not keep it from him,
but would give him his reward in due time, according to his work.

5.
And now says the Lord] q.d. And even now after I have spent so much labor in
vain, though the Jews have not profited by my Ministry, yet the Lord says,
etc.

This shows that God accepts the labor of the workman, though his labor
be in vain.

That formed me from the womb to be his servant] i. e. That called me from the
womb to be his servant, etc. See verse 1.

There is a Metaphor in that word (formed) borrowed from a Potter.

To bring Jacob again to him] i. e. To bring the Jews (which were the
children of Jacob) to him again by repentance, which had gone away from him by
their sins.

Though Israel be not gathered] Supple, To me, by thy Ministry, i. e. Though
the Jews the children of Israel repent not, nor return to me the Lord, through
thy Ministry, etc.

They which turn to the Lord by repentance are gathered together, and come to
him for salvation, as Chickens are gathered to the Hen, and come to her for
warmth, Matthew. 23.37. Hence not to be gathered, is put here for not to turn by
repentance. Yet it may be that the Prophet alludeth to that gathering of the
Jews by which they gathered themselves together to return to their own home,
of which see verse 18. and Cap. 60.4. which they could not have done if they
had not repented as they did by Isaiahs Ministry. For had they not repented,
the Lord would not have raised up Cyrus to deliver them, who when Cyrus had
delivered them, and gave them leave to return home, gathered themselves
together for that end, whereas they were dispersed in the Land of their
Captivity before.

Yet shall I be glorious in the Lord] i. e. Yet shall thou be glorious in mine
eyes, who am the Lord, notwithstanding thou have lost thy pains.

Note here the Enallage of the Persons, for I the first person is put here for
thou the Second: And the Lord the third person, is put here for me the Lord the
first person: For it is to be noted, that the Lord speaks here to Isaiah.

And my God shall be my strength] i. e. And I thy God will be thy strength, and
will strengthen thee, against all thine enemies, which persecute thee, and
imagine evil against thee.

Note that there is the like Enallage of Persons here as was just before.

6.
And he said] i. e. Moreover the Lord said.

It is a light thing that thou should be my servant to raise up the Tribes
of Jacob] q. d. To raise up the Tribes of Jacob, is but part of the work for
which I have called thee to be my servant.

It is a light thing] The whole work of the Lord is compared here to a
certain weight, part of which weight if compared to the whole, is but light in
respect of the whole, therefore to say it is a light thing, It is as if he
should say; It is but part of my work which I intended for thee, etc.

To raise up the Tribes of Jacob] i. e. To raise up the Tribes of Jacob from
their sin, and from the misery into which they are fallen by reason of their
sin.

Quest. How could Isaiah raise up the Tribes of Jacob from their sin and
misery?

Answ. By preaching unto them, and telling them of their sin, and
transgressions, and of Gods mercy toward them, if they would repent, and so
bringing them to repentance, upon which their iniquity should be forgiven, and
their punishment taken away.

The Tribes of Jacob] By the Tribes of Jacob understand the Tribe of Judah and
the Tribe of Benjamin, which two Tribes kept their Alleagiance to the house of
David, (when the other revolted) and made up the Kingdom of Judah.

And to restore the preserved of Israel] i. e. And to restore those Jews which
are preserved from that destruction which the Babylonians made to their former
happiness.

And he was said to raise up the Tribes of Jacob; So may he be said to restore
the preserved of Israel, and by the same means.

I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles,] q. d. For thou shall not
only be my servant, to raise up the Tribes of Jacob, and to restore the
preserved of Israel, but I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles.

Isaiah was a light to the Gentiles by his Doctrine, whereby he did convince
many of their ignorance, and turned them from the vanity of Idols to the
knowledge and service of the true God: which Doctrine of his you may read of,
Cap. 41, 45, 46, etc.

That thou may be my salvation to the end of the Earth.] q. d. That thou
may be the Conduit-pipe of my salvation, to convey it to the end of the Earth.

Salvation is put here metonymice, for the Conduit-pipe, or instrument of
conveying Salvation.

Isaiah conveyed salvation to the Gentiles by the wholesome Doctrine which he
preached, and by the godly instructions which he left them, by which they
forsook their Idols, and looked unto the Lord, and were saved. In the same
sense Saint Paul said, that he did magnify his Office, that he might save some
of those which were his flesh, Romans 11.14.

Unto the end of the Earth.] i. e. To the Gentiles which live afar off, even at
the end of the Earth.

7.
Thus says the Lord,] i. e. Moreover thus says the Lord, etc.

And his Holy One,] i. e. And the Holy One of Israel.

To him whom man despises,] i. e. To me whom wicked men despise and mock at.

The Prophet speaks here of himself in the third person.

Wicked men did despise and mock at the Prophet, because he prophesied evil
against them, by reason of their sins. See cap. 28.13, etc.

To him whom the Nation abhors,] i. e. To me whom the Nation of the Jews
abhors. Yet understand not this of the whole Nation of the Jews, but of the
wicked only of that Nation.

To a servant of Rulers,] i. e. To me, who am a Subject of the Kings of Judah,
and obedient to those Rulers which are under them.

The Hebrews call a subject a servant.

Kings shall see, and arise,] q. d. Though wicked men despise thee, and abhor
thee, and though thou be a Subject, and under command; yet Kings, when they see
thee, shall rise up from off their thrones in way of honor to thee.

It was a sign of honor, to rise up before a man, Lev. 19.32.

Hezekiah King of Judah did greatly honor and respect the Prophet Isaiah,
because of his Office.

Princes also shall worship,] Supple, Thee.

He speaks of civil worship and respect.

Eliakim, and other the Princes of Hezekiah which feared the Lord, did greatly
honor and respect Isaiah, because of the Word of the Lord which was with him,
as Hezekiah did.

Because of the Lord] Supple, Who has called thee from the womb to be his
servant; that is, because thou art the Lords servant.

That is faithful,] Which will faithfully perform whatsoever he has promised
by thee.

And the Holy One of Israel,] i. e. And because of the Holy one of Israel.

This is a repetition of those words, Because of the Lord.

And he shall choose thee.] For he shall make thee precious in their eyes.

And is put here for For.

To choose signifies here, by a Metonymy, to make precious; because in those
things of which we have our choice, we choose that which is precious before
that which is vile and refuse. See cap. 48.10.

8.
Thus says the Lord,] Moreover thus says the Lord.

In an acceptable time have I heard thee,] q. d. Thou have prayed to me in an
acceptable time; for I have heard thee, and will grant thy request.

In an acceptable time] The Prophet seems to allude here to the manner of
Kings, who at some certain times were very free in their gifts and grants, and
denied no reasonable Request or Petition which was made to them at that time,
as the day of their Coronation, the Birth of their firstborn, the getting of
some great Victory, receiving some eminent Deliverance, etc. And such a time
the Prophet calls here an acceptable time, because it was a time in which the
King was well pleased.

In a day of salvation have I helped thee,] q. d. And thou have prayed to me
for help against thine Enemies, in a day, as it were, of salvation; and I have
granted thy request, for I will help thee against them.

In a day of salvation] What he calls an acceptable time before, he calls a
day of salvation here: and he calls it a day of salvation, in allusion to the
day in which a King had received some great salvation and deliverance.

Have I helped thee,] i. e. I have promised to help thee.

That Isaiah did pray unto God at this time, is intimated in that, that God
says that he had heard him.

But what was it which he prayed for?

Ans. We may gather from the following words, what he prayed for: That
therefore that he prayed for, was this; First, That it would please God to
preserve him, and keep him safe from his Enemies, which were many, until he had
performed his Ministry. Secondly, That it would pleale him so to bless his
Ministry, about which he was sent, that thereby the people of the Jews, which
were carried into Babylon by reason of their sins, might be reduced to their
obedience, and so redeemed out of the Babylonish captivity, and return safe
into their own Land again.

It may be here objected, That Isaiah was dead long before the Babylonish
captivity; how therefore could he reduce the captive Jews to their obedience,
and so bring them out of captivity again.

Ans. Though Isaiah were dead a long time before the captivity of the Jews in
Babylon, yet may he be said to reduce them to obedi^nce, and so bring them out
of captivity again; because they were reduced to their obedience by the reading
of his Writings, which he, by a Prophetique Spirit, wrought for them, and to
them: and when they returned to their obedience, the Lord raised up Cyrus to
deliver them out of captivity, and send them home free. So was Moses said to
teach, and to be a Master, ( Mark 10.3. and Joh. 9.28.) though he was dead long
before.

That the Jews in their captivity had these Prophecies and Writings of Isaiah
among them, and read them, and believed them, and were bettered by them, is
evident by that, that they showed Cyrus out of them those things that concerned
himself; by which he was not a little moved to deliver them, and send them home
free out of captivity.

That which is here spoken of Isaiah, is in a more sublime sense spoken also of
Christ, as well appears 2 Cor. 6.2. of whom Isaiah was here a Type. As
therefore Isaiah prayed to God, that He would preserve him against his Enemies,
that they might not destroy him, until he had performed his Ministry, and God
heard him: So did Christ pray, that God the Father would save him from death,
and was heard in that he feared, Heb. 5.7. And as Isaiah was a Covenant to the
people, and prayed that the Jews might be delivered out of their captivity by
his Ministry, and was heard: So was Christ a Covenant to the people (in that he
was the Mediator of the new Covenant between God and man,) and he makes
continual intercession for us, that we may be delivered out of the power of
darkness, and come to his heavenly Kingdom, Heb. 7.25. and is heard in this his
intercession.

I will preserve thee,] i. e. For I will preserve thee out of the hands of
thine Enemies, so that they shall not destroy thee, until thou have finished my
work.

And give thee for a Covenant of the people,] i. e. And I will make thee a
Restorer or Reviver of the Covenant, which was between my people and me.

Isaiah is said to be a Covenant of the people, because he was the Restorer or
Reviver of the Covenant, which was between the people of the Jews, and their
God.

But how did Isaiah restore or revive the Covenant, which was between the
people of the Jews, and their God?

Ans. He did it by his Sermons to the Jews: For whereas the Jews had broken and
forsaken the Covenant which they had made with God, by their sins, and were
therefore sent into captivity. By reading of Isaiahs Sermons they were touched
in heart, and repented them of their sins, and renewed their Covenant with God,
as they had done before this in the days of Josiah, and as they did after this
in the days of Nehemiah.

Of the people,] i. e. Of the people of the Jews.

To establish the Earth,] i. e. That thou may make the Land of Judah stable
and sure, that I destroy it not for the sins of my people, but preserve it for
my people to dwell in. See cap. 45.18.

Upon the repentance of the Jews, and their renewing their Covenant with the
Lord, the Lord would not destroy the Land of Judah, but preserve it for the
Jews to dwell in: Wherefore because the Jews repented, and renewed their
Covenant by Isaiahs Ministry, Isaiah is said to establish the Earth, that is,
the Land of Judah.

The Earth,] By the Earth is meant the Land of Judah, which was but part of the
whole Earth, per Synecdochen Generis.

To cause to inherit the desolate herita^es.] i. e. That thou may cause the
people of the Jews (which are carried away captive into Babylon, and who have
left their heritages, which they had in the Land of Judah, desolate) to return
into their own Land, and inherit their desolate heritages again.

He speaks as if the Jews were captives even then when he spoke.

As Isaiah was said to establish the Earth; so is he here said to cause to
inherit the desolate heritages.

9.
That thou may say to the prisoners, Go forth;] Supple, Out of prison; that
is, That thou may bring the Jews, which are captive in Babylon, out of the
Land of their captivity.

By the prisoners he means the Jews which were captives; for captives are
often resembled to prisoners, and the Land of their captivity to a prison. See
cap. 42. verse. 7.

To them that sit in darkness,] i. e. To the Jews, which are in sorrow by
reason of their captivity: or to the Jews which are in dark places, such as
prisons are.

They which are overwhelmed with sorrow, do love to get into dark places, where
they may neither see, nor be seen, there to weep: (See cap. 47.5.) Hence they
that are in darkness may be put here for them which are in great sorrow: And
yet (as I said) the Prophet by darkness may mean Prisons, per Metonymiam
adjuncti: For prisons are usually dark; and this darkness the Jews made not
choice of, but were forced to.

Show your selves,] i. e. Come out of the dark places, in which you have hid
your selves, and show your selves in the light.

They which get into dark places by reason of sorrow, come not out thence into
the light, until they have shook off their sorrow: When therefore he says,
Show your selves, it is as if he should say, You have no longer cause to be
sad, be ye therefore joyful. Yet if we take darkness for prisons, the meaning
of these words are, Come ye out of prison, out of the prison which was dark,
and wherein no man could see you, into the light where ye may be seen.

They shall feed in the ways, etc.] Between this, and that which went
immediately before, we must understand these or the like words; For the Jews,
which are prisoners in Babylon, shall come forth out of their prisons; and they
which are there in darkness shall show themselves, and shall return into their
own Land to inherit the desolate heritages thereof; and as they go, they shall
feed in the ways home-ward, etc.

The Prophet shows here how plentifully the Lord will provide for the Jews in
their return out of captivity into their own Land. See the like, cap. 48.21.

They shall feed,] i. e. They shall have abundance of food whereon to feed.

He alludeth here to the feeding of sheep or cattle, but speaks of the Jews
themselves.

They shall feed in the ways,] And if God provideth food for them in the ways,
they need not go out of their way, nor slack their journey for want of food.

And their pastures shall be in all high places.] q. d. And though they travel
over Hills and Mountains, which are usually dry and barren, yet shall all the
Hills and the Mountains, over which they travel, yield them pastures in
abundance.

He alludeth still to the feeding of sheep or cattle.

10.
They shall not hunger and thirst,] Supple, By the way which they go, though
their way be through the deserts. See cap. 48.21.

Neither shall the heat nor the Sun smite them,] q. d. Though they are to
travel through an hot scorching Wilderness, as they travel from Babylon to the
Land of Judah, yet shall not the heat nor the Sun hurt them, or offend them.

Neither the heat, nor the Sun,] i. e. Neither the heat of the Sun: (...).

For he that has mercy on them shall lead them,] i. e. For the Lord, who has
mercy on them, shall lead them, Supple, as a careful and skilful shepherd
leads his flock.

The Lord speaks here of himself in the thi^d person, and alludes to a shepherd
leading his sheep: for shepherds were wont not only to follow their sheep, and
drive them, but also to go before them, and lead them. See Psalm. 80.1.

Even by the springs of waters shall he guide them.] He persists still in the
Metaphor of a shepherd.

Where springs of waters are, there are waters enough to quench and keep from
thirst; there are pastures for food adjoining to the springs, by reason of the
moisture; and there are vapors arising from the springs, to allay the extremity
of heat with their coolness; and Willows growing thereby, to shadow from the
scorching beams of the Sun.

11.
And I will make all my mountains a way,] i. e. And I will pull down all my
mountains by which they are to go, and make them low, that I may make away over
them, yea, an easy way for the Jews to pass. See cap. 40.4.

The meaning of this phrase is, That the Jews shall find nothing to hinder them
in their way home-ward, no not in the mountainous Wilderness.

The Lord speaks here of himself in his own person, though he spoke of himself
in the third person in the Verse before.

He speaks also of himself as of a way-maker, which makes a way for a King and
his Court, or for a General and his Army: whereas he spoke of himself before,
as of a shepherd.

And my highways shall be exalted:] And my highways, or Causey-ways, Supple,
which lie through the valleys, shall be exalted; that the mountains being
pulled down, and the highways or causey-ways of the valleys exalted, the whole
way from Babylon to Judea may be plain and even, without Hill or Dale.

In valleys, because the grounds are for the most part moorish and rotten, they
use to make a way of stones, and the like, higher then the surface of the
ground, which therefore he calls an Highway, and we usually a Causey.

Behold these shall come from far,] q. d. And moreover, behold these Jews,
which are now in the East, shall come from the East to their own Land.

By these he means the Jews which were in the East, after the Land of Judah
was wasted by the Babylonians; whom he names not, because he does as it were
point at them with his finger.

From far,] i. e. From the East; for so does the Context require that we should
interpret it. The Prophet therefore uses a Synecdoche generis, and puts a
far place in general, for the East in special.

And lo these from the North,] i. e. And lo these Jews which are now in the
North, shall come from the North to their own Land.

And from the West,] i. e. And these which are in the West, shall come from the
West, etc.

And these from the Land of Sinim.] i. e. And these which are in the South,
shall come from the South, etc.

The Land of Sinim.] Sinim is the name of a people, which are also called
Sinites, Genesis 10.17. These dwelt in the South of Judea, about the Wilderness of
Sin: Wherefore their Land in particular, is put here for any Southern Land in
general.

Though when the Babylonians invaded Judea, they carried away most of them
which escaped the sword captives into Babylon* yet many escaped into all the
quarters of the Earth, where they lived as Exiles, until they heard of the
delivery of their Countrymen out of Babylon, and of Cyrus's favor to them; at
the hearing of which, they also returned to their own home again.

13.
Sing O Heaven, and be joyful O Earth,] He speaks to the material Heaven, and
the material Earth, as though they had sense and reason, by a Prosopopoeia, as
he does cap. 1.2.

The Prophet speaks here in his own person: and having showed his authority
from God, and Gods respect to him in order to his Ministry, in the former part
of this Chapter; he does here begin to tell the message which God gave him in
charge to tell, and which was part of his Ministry.

For God has comforted his people,] i. e. For God will comfort his people the
Jews, which have suffered much misery, and sorrow by reason of the Babylonians.

He puts here a Preterperfect for a Future tense.

Upon his afflicted] i. e. upon his afflicted people the Jews.

The comfort and mercy which is here promised, consisted in bringing the
afflicted Jews home to their own Land, yea even to Jerusalem, after the
Babylonish captivity.

14.
But Sion] i. e. But Jerusalem. Jerusalem was the mother of the Jews, as St.
Paul intimates, Gal. 4.25.

By Sion is meant Jerusalem: and the material City of Jerusalem is brought
here in the person of a woman; yea, of a mother speaking and complaining etc.
by a Prosopopoeia, as Cap. 40.9. And under the feigned person of Sion is
showed, the State and condition of the Jews at the time here spoken of.

But Zion said, the Lord has forsaken me, etc.] In the former verse it was
said, that God would comfort his people, and would have mercy upon his
afflicted; but Zion when she heard of it, did hardly believe it, but says she
here, surely that is not so, for the Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has
forgotten me: And this she says in a kind of despair, having been sorely
oppressed by the Babylonians.

But it may be asked, what it concerned Zion to hear, that God would comfort
his people, and show mercy upon his afflicted, and what she should be the
better for it; that she should say (when she heard of it) in despair, Surely
it will not be so, for the Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me?

Answ. The comfort and mercy which is here spoken of, was the bringing in of
the afflicted Jews into their own Land again, and to Sion the holy City. And
if they were once brought into their own Land again, and to Sion the holy City,
then should Sion have joy in their prosperity, as a mother in the prosperity of
her children: and then should her walls, and her houses which the Babylonian,
had broken down, be builded up again. And then should her inhabitants be to her
again as the ornament of a bride. V. 18.

But Zion said, etc.] But Zion has said heretofore, and says still, etc.

This word [said] denotes a continual saying, and signifies not only the
time past, but also the present time, by a Syllepsis.

The Lord has forsaken me, aad my Lord has forgotten me] i. e. The Lord has
cast me off, and will take no more care of me, nor any way pity me. How then
can he comfort his people, and have mercy upon his afflicted; for their comfort
is my comfort, and their joy is my joy?

When the Lord has cast any one off, so that he will take no more care of him,
or show him any pity, he is said in the Scripture Phrase, to have forsaken him,
and forgot him.

15.
Can a woman forget her sucking childe] The Prophet speaks this in the person
of God, and answers to the complaint of Sion, and shows that the Lord has
not forgotten her.

Or the Son of he^ wombe] i. e. Or her S^cking child, which is a Son, and a
Son of her own womb?

Yea they may forget] q. d. Verily (though it be unlikely, yet) women may
forget their Sucking children, and the Sonn^s of their womb.

Note here the Enallage of the numb^r, how he passes from a Singular to a
P^urall number.

16.
I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands] i. e. I have writ Sion, upon
the palm of my hands, that it may b^ to me as a memorial of thee, and so
often as I see or read it, I may remember thee.

By this he would show that he is always mindful of Sion. And he alludeth to
those who that they may remember some one thing or business, which they would
not forget, put some sign, or memorial thereof upon their hands, which some
do by tying a thread about their fingers: Others by writing the thing, or name
of the thing, which they would remember upon some part of the hand either back
or palm, etc. See Exodus 13.9.

I have graven etc.] That is, I have written thy name upon the palms of my
hand, so that it cannot be blotted out.

He uses a Metaphor from a Graver in Stone, or Brass, or the like, whose
engravings are not easily blotted out or defaced.

Thee] i. e. Thy name, viz. Sion.

Thy walls are continually before me] i. e. Thy ruined walls are continually in
my thoughts, yea in my sight, and it pittieth me to see them in the dust.

17.
Thy children shall make hast] q. d. Therefore thy children (which shall build
up thy walls again) shall make have to come unto thee.

By the children of Sion, are meant the Jews which were in Captivity in
Babylon, or else where in exile.

Thy destroyers and they that made thee waste shall go forth of thee] i. e.
The Babylonians which destroyed thee and laid thee waste shall go forth of
thee, and give place to thy children.

Note that when the Jews were carried away Captive into Babylon, many
Babylonians inhabited their Cities, either of their own private voluntary
mind, or by the public authority of their King, who when he conquered a
Country, and carried away the Inhabitants thereof, sent other of his own
Subjects to Inhabit there: And these, says the Lord to Sion, shall go forth
of thee.

18.
Cast up thine eyes round about] i. e. Look toward the East, and toward the
West, toward the North, and toward the South.

He speaks still to Sion.

And behold] He speaks as though the Jews which were scattered abroad by the
coming of the Babylonians into Judaea, were even then gathering themselves
together, to return into Judaea again in kenne of eye.

All these gather themselves together, and come to thee] q. d. All these whom
thou see are Jews, which gather themselves together to come to thee.

He speaks as though he pointed at them with his finger.

In the former verse he said to Sion that her children should make have to come
to her, here he says that they are coming already.

Thou shall surely cloth thy self with them all as with an ornament] q. d.
They shall all come, and when they are all come, they shall be as great an
Ornament and a glory to thee by reason of their multitude, as the Robe is to a
King or Queen.

He alludeth to a glorious Robe; wherewith a King or Queen is clothed, when he
says, Thou shall cloth thy self with them all as with an Ornament.

When he says Thou shall surely cloth thy self with them all as with an
Ornament* He speaks not so much of their quality, as of their number, as may
appear by the content; For the glory of a City, consists also in the number
and multitude of the Inhabitants.

And bind them on thee as a Bride doth] Supple, Her Jewels, or Bracelets, or
her head attire, q. d. And they shall be as great an Ornament to thee, by
reason of their number, as the Jewels, or Bracelets, or Head attire, which
she binds on her, are to a Bride.

These are the same for sense with the former words, only the Metaphor or
Allusion is different.

19.
For thy waste and thy desolate places, and the Land of thy destruction shall
even now be too narrow by reason of the Inhabitants] q. d. For they which shall
come and inhabit thee, shall be so many in number, and their multitude shall
be so great, as that thy waste and thy desolate places, and the Land of thy
destruction shall even now be too narrow to contain the Inhabitants thereof:
because of their number and multitude.

Thy waste and desolate places] i. e. Those places which lay waste and desolate
in thee for want of Inhabitants.

The Land of thy destruction] i. e. Thy Land which is destroyed by the
Babylonians.

He says the Land of thy destruction, for, thy Land which is destroyed,
putting a Substantive of the Genitive Case for an Adjective or a Participle
after the Hebrew manner.

Even now] i. e. So soon as ever they (to wit, thy children which gather
themselves together to come to thee) shall be come to thee.

And they that swallowed thee up] i. e. And the Babylonians which destroyed
thee, and now dwell in thee, etc. See verse 17.

He says swallowed thee up, for, destroyed thee, by a Metaphor from a Lion or
Bear, or some such ravenous Beast or other, which is wont to swallow down his
prey.

And they that swallowed thee up shall be far away] Read these words as with
a Parenthesis.

20.
Thy children which thou shall have] i. e. These words have their immediate
connection with the foremost words of verse 19. viz. with those, Thy wast and thy
desolate places, and the Land of thy destruction shall even now be too narrow
by reason of the Inhabitants; And are for sense the same with them.

The children which thou shall have] Supple, Even now.

He speaks as though the Jews which were in Captivity in Babylon and
dispersed elsewhere, were even now coming to Sion or Jerusalem their mother.

After thou have lost the other] Supple, Which thou had before the
Babylonians besieged thee, who slew some, and carried others of thy children
away Captive, and made others to fly into foreign Lands.

Shall say again in thine eares] i. e. Shall say again to thee, or, in thine
hearing.

Againe] This relates to such time or times, before the Babylonish Captivity,
in which Jerusalem was very populous, so that many of the people thereof, were
feign to dwell in other Cities and Villages of Judah; For they which did so,
did in effect say; The place is too straight for me.

The place is too straight for me] i. e. The place wherein we dwell, is too
little for us, we must seek us a dwelling elsewhere.

For me] i. e. For us: For here is an Enallage of the number; The Singular
being put, for the Plural.

Give place to me that I may dwell] q.d. Give me a place elsewhere, that I may
have a place to dwell in.

21.
Then shall thou say in thine heart] i. e. Then when thy children shall come to
thee, and they shall be straightned for want of room to dwell in thee, thou
shall wonder to see that they are so many, and shall say within thy self

Who has begotten me these?] i. e. By whom have I these so many children?

Seeing I have lost my children] Supple, Which I had.

She lost her children when the Babylonians slew many of them, made many to
fly away for fear of their lives, and carried the rest away Captive into
Babylon.

And am desolate] i. e. And am without an husband.

The Lord was her husband, and had married her, but had put her away Cap. 50.1.
So that she was at this time desolate and without an husband.

A Captive and removing to and fro] And she which is a captive removing to and
fro, has but little propension to the procreation of children.

A Captive] Supple to the Babylonians.

Removing to and fro] Conquerours use to hurry their Captives, from place to
place, and City to City, at their pleasures, and seldom suffer them to abide
long in one place.

Ob. It may be here objected, that Sion being a City, could not remove from
place to place to and fro. Ans. What is said in this Chapter of Sion, and
attribut^d to her, is spoken of her and attributed to her by a Prosopopoeia, by
which figure she may be made as well to remove from place to place, to and fro,
as to speak.

But what is spoken of Sion in this Chapter, and attributed to her; is spoken
of her and attributed to her, to set forth the condition of the Jews, as it
was at that time, (as I said before.)

And who has brought up these?] And who has nourished and brought up all
these?

Behold I was left alone] Supple, without children, and none of them all were
with me; therefore I could not nourish them, and bring them up.

These where they had been?] q. d. Where have all these been? wheresoever they
have been, they have not been with me, so that I could not bring them up.

22.
Thus says the Lord God, behold I will lift up mine hand to the Gentiles] q. d.
Moreover thus says the Lord God, Behold etc.

In the 18, 19, 20, verses the Lord assured Sion that her children should come
to her, to comfort her. Here, that he may yet further comfort her, and show her
how mindful he was of her, she shows the manner how they shall come to her,
and how happy she shall be, when she has received them.

I will lift up mine hand to the Gentiles] i. e. I will call the Gentiles to me.

He alludeth to one man beckning to another with his hand to come to him.

And set up my Standard to the people] i. e. And I will gather the people or
Nations together.

For what end he will call the Gentiles to him, and gather the Nations
together, he shows in the next following words.

This phrase is the same for sense with that which went immediately before: but
he alludes herein, to a Captain, which sets up his Standard for his soldiers
to come together and to be in a readiness for what march or service he shall
appoint them.

And they shall bring thy sons in their armes] i. e. and they shall bring thy
sons to thee in their arms, as nurses use to carry their little ones.

And thy daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders] i. e. And they shall
carry thy daughters to thee upon their shoulders. Supple, on soft beds or
palate, as they which are weak were wont to be carried. Mark 2.3.

The meaning is, that the Gentiles shall carefully provide and accommodate the
Jews with all things necessary and convenient for their return from Babylon,
and other parts of the world to their own Land.

How this was fulfilled in part, read Ezra 1.

23.
And Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and Queens thy nursing mothers] i. e.
And after thy sons and daughters are brought to thee, Kings and Queens shall
be as careful to provide and show kindness to thee, as nursing fathers, and
nursing mothers are to their Foster-children.

Kings shall be their nursing fathers.] This was fulfilled in Cyrus, Darius,
Artaxerxes, (whose good deeds to the Jews are mentioned in the book of Ezra
and Nehemiah, and Assuerus, of whom we read Esther 8.7, etc. And Alexander the
Great, and his successors, and especially Demetrius, whom Josephus writes of:
All which were exceeding good to the Jews, and to Jerusalem, and to the
Temple, and gave them many gifts and privileges.

And their Queens thy nursing mothers] This was fulfilled in the Queens of
some of those forementioned Kings, and particularly in Ester, as may be seen in
the book which bears her name.

They shall bown down to thee with their face toward the earth, and lick up
the dust of thy feet.] This (as some think) is not to be understood of the same
Kings and Queens, which were nursing fathers, and nursing mothers to Sion. But
of others, as of the Kings of Edom, and of Moab, whom the Jews subdued, after
their return out of the Babylonish captivity: for to bow down so low as to the
earth, and to lick the dust of the feet, is not the gesture, say they, of Kings
which are friends and benefactors, but of enemies which are subdued, and of
such as worship rather out of fear and flattery, than of love, as will
appear, Psalm. 72.9. Isaiah 60.14. Exodus 11.8.

The sense therefore is, say they, q. d. And those Kings and Queens which will
not be as nursing fathers, and nursing mothers to thee, shall bow down to thee
with their face to the earth, and shall lick the dust of thy feet, for thou
shall subdue them, and bring them under thee.

When therefore he says, They shall bow down to thee, He does as it were point
at those which would not be nursing fathers, and nursing mothers to Sion; but
would rather envy her, and hate her.

But though these phrases taken in their prime and proper sense, signify as
they aforementioned say; yet by an Hyperbolicall Synecdoche, putting one
species of respect, for any respect in general, they may signify such respect
as Kings which are friends and benefactors show even to their inferiors: And
then the same Kings which are nursing fathers to Sion, and the same Queens
which are nursing mothers, may be said to bow down to her with their faces
toward the earth, and lick up the dust of her feet, because of that civil
respect which they they gave unto her.

They shall bow down with their face toward the earth.] This shows respect
and reverence to him to whom we bow, but a submissive respect and reverence in
the prime and proper sense of the words.

And lick up the dust of thy feet] Many to show their extreme submission, and
reverence and respect to others, have kissed the very footsteps where they have
trod, and licked up the dust which clove to their feet.

And thou shall know that I am the Lord] i. e. And thou shall know by those
things, which I will do for thee, that I am the only God: for I will do such
things for thee, as none but the true God can do.

For they shall not be ashamed which wait for mee] i. e. For they which wait
with patience upon me, in expectation and hope of salvation from my hand, shall
not be disappointed of their hope and expectation.

They which hope and look for great matters, if they fail of their hope and
expectation, they are ashamed. Hence he may be said not to be ashamed, which
obtains what he hops for.

24.
Shall the prey be taken from the mighty?] q. d. The Babylonians are mighty in
power, and I and my children are their prey: They have taken us by the sword,
and kept us captive; and has any one so great strength as to deliver us out of
their hands?

This is spoken in the person of Sion, who doubts of the Lords sayings
(concerning the coming of her children to her again) of her own happiness after
their coming to her) because of the great power which the Babylonians had; and
therefore does she object thus against the Lord, Shall the prey be taken from
the mighty?

That which made Sion doubt of the delivery of her children, v. 14. was the
distrust which she had of the love of God: That which makes her doubt here, was
the conceit which she had of the great power of the Babylonians, which she
thought invincible.

Or the lawful captive delivered?] Supple, From the terrible.

This is but a repetition of the former words.

The lawful captive] That is called a lawful captive here, which is taken in a
lawful war; and that is called a lawful war, which is denounced between people
and people, according to the Law of Arms, before it be begun; though otherwise
that same War may be very unjust and injurious, in respect of the Law of God,
and of the Moral Law. Now a Captive which is taken in such a war, as is
denounced before it be begun, shows the power of the Conqueror more, then
that Captive does, which is taken in a war which was not denounced. For in a
war which is denounced before it is begun, he that begins the war, relieth upon
the greatness of his own strength, and believes that he can master the Enemy
by mere force, and therefore is more terrible in power: But he that wageth a
war, and denounces it not, has more confidence in the unpreparedness of his
Enemy, and such like advantages, then in his own power, and therefore is not so
much to be feared for his strength, as the other is.

25.
But thus says the Lord, even the captives, etc.] This is the Lords Answer to
Sions Objection.

Even the captives of the mighty shall be taken away,] i. e. Thou and thy
children, though ye be lawful captives of the mighty Babylonians, yet shall ye
be taken away out of their hands.

And the prey of the terrible shall be delivered;] q. d. And though ye be the
p^ey of the Babylonians, which are a terrible Nation, yet shall ye be delivered
from them.

For I will contend with him that contendeth with thee.] i. e. For I the Lord,
who am Almighty, and can do whatsoever I please, will fight against the
Babylonians which fight against thee.

Concerning this phrase, see cap. 41.12. and cap. 54.17.

26.
I will feed them which oppress thee with their own flesh; they shall be
drunken with their own blood, as with sweet wine.] i. e. I will set the
Babylonians, which oppress thee with hard captivity, one against another, and
they shall fight one with another, and slay one another in great number.

The phrases here used are metaphorical, taken from wild beasts, which fight
with, and kill one the other; and when they have killed one the other, eat the
flesh, and suck the blood, one of the other.

Their own flesh -- Their own blood.] This is not to be understood of the flesh
and blood of their own natural and individual bodies, but of the flesh and
blood of their Kinsmen and Countrymen: For these (especially Kinsmen) are said
to be of the same flesh, and of the same blood, because they came out of the
loins of the same forefathers.

That which is here spoken, might be fulfilled, not only by the Civil Wars of
the Babylonians (if any such were, (for we have not Records extant of all
things memorable,) but also when many Babylonians served under Cyrus against
other the Babylonians.

The mighty One of Jacob.] i. e. The mighty One, whom Jacob serves, and who
protecteth Jacob.

By Jacob he means the Jews, the children of Jacob.

The Lord, though he calls himself most usually, the holy One of Israel, and
the holy One of Jacob, as cap. 29.23. yet here he calls himself, the mighty
One of Jacob, to show his power, and that in opposition to the Babylonians,
whom Sion in her Objection called The Mighty.

ISAIAH, CHAP. L.
THus says the Lord, Where is the bill of your mothers divorcement, whom I
have put away?] This (as I conceive) must be continued with the former Chapter,
and be part of that Sermon: For whereas the Lord speaks there of what great
things he would do for Sion and her children, and that he would deliver them
from the terrible, and take them away from the mighty Babylonians, who
possessed them as captives, and as their prey: The Jews, the children of Sion,
were ready to say, If the Lord will do such great things for us, and will now
at length deliver us from the terrible, and take us away from the mighty; Why
did he forsake us at the first, when we deserved it not? For why did he sell us
which were his children, when he had no reason to do it? And why did he put
away our mother (to whom he was married) as though she had been defiled and
unclean, whereas there was nothing to be blamed in her? This Objection
therefore of theirs the Lord prevents, saying, Where is the bill of your
mothers divorcement, whom I have put away? Or, which of my Creditors is it to
whom I have sold you? etc.

Where is the bill of your mothers divorcement, whom I have put away?] This is
spoken in the person of the Lord, to the Jews which were in captivity in
Babylon.

But who is meant here by the Mother of these Jews?

Ans. Sion or Jerusalem, whom Paul also intimates to be the Mother of the
Jews, Galat. 4.25. And of this Sion or Jerusalem, even the material City, does
the Prophet speak, as of a woman, yea of a mother, by a Prosopopoeia, in chap.
3. verse. 26. and in chap. 49. and so also does he here in this place.

Where is the bill of yours mothers divorcement, whom I have put away?] When
any one did put away his wife, he was by the old Law to give her a bill of
divorcement, to show that she was divorced from her Husband, Deuteronomy. 24.1. And in
this bill were the reasons oftentimes set down, why the man did put away his
wife: The Lord therefore, who had been married to Sion, and put her away again
(in allusion to this Law, and in allusion to such a Bill, in which the causes
of divorce were set down) calls to the Jews for the Bill of their Mothers
divorcement, that he might clear himself thereby, and show that he put her away
not without cause (as they surmized,) but for her uncleanness, as the Bill
would testify.

Or, which of my Creditors is it to whom I have sold you?] It was a Law (or
Custom at least) among the ancient Hebrews, that Parents, if they grew poor,
and could not tell how to pay their debts, might sell their children to their
Creditors, thereby to satisfy them; as appears Exodus 21.7. To this Law or
Custom does the Lord here allude: And to clear himself of that which the Jews,
which were captive in Babylon, were ready to say, to wit, That he had sold
them; he bids them name the Creditor to which he had sold them, that it might
appear that he sold them not.

For your iniquities have you sold your selves,] Supple, Into the hands of the
Babylonians.

When the Lord had bid these Jews to name the Creditor to which he had sold
them, they named the Babylonian. But when they had named the Babylonian, the
Lord showed them, that it was not he that sold them, but that it was they who
had sold themselves, and that for their iniquities: so that the Lord does not
only clear himself of what they objected to him, but lays the fault of all
wholly upon them themselves.

Quest. But it may be asked, how the Jews could be said to sell themselves to
the Babylonians to be their captives for their iniquities?

Answ. The Lord among other punishments threatened his people, that if they
sinned and did commit iniquity, they should be carried away captive into their
enemies Land, and should there pine away in their iniquity, Levit. 26. v. 33,
38, 39. Yea, he threatened the Jews by his Prophets, that they should be
carried away by the Babylonians in particular, if they sinned: Now therefore if
they would buy sin, and the pleasure of it, they knew the price; they must sell
their peace and liberty for it; they must become captive to the Babylonians, if
they would have it. Well, sin they would, because it was pleasant; therefore
having had sin, they must pay for it; they must go into the hands of the
Babylonians, for this was the price of their sins: For, as (according to Paul's
saying) the wages of sin is death, Romans 6.23. so is death and captivity, and
all other miseries, the price of sin also.

And for your transgressions is your mother put away.] Supple, From me, who was
her Husband: so that I put her not away without a lawful cause.

But a Jew might here say, What justice or equity is in this, that a Mother
should be put away from her Husband for the trangressions of her Children?

Answ. To put away a Mother for the transgressions of her Children, if she be
not thereby defiled and made unclean, is against justice and equity: but if she
be defiled and made unclean by her Childrens transgressions, it is not against
justice or equity to put her away: for a Husband might put away his Wife, if he
found any uncleanness in her, Deuteronomy. 24.1. Now the case of Sion or Jerusalem was
so, that if the Children within her did transgress, she her self was also
defiled and polluted, and became unclean by their transgressions. For if the
Land was defiled by the sins of them which dwelt therein (as it was Isai. 24.5.
Jerem. 2.7. and 3.9. and 16.18. and Numb. 35.33, 34. Levit. 18.28.) and if the
Sanctuary of God was also defiled by the sins of the people which dwelt about
it (as it was Levit. 16.16.) then surely was Sion and Jerusalem also defiled,
and made unclean by the transgressions of her Children, that is, by the
transgressions of them which dwelt in her; and therefore might Sion be justly
put away for the transgressions of her children.

And for your transgressions is your mother put away.] Note, that th^se words
relate to those, Where is the bill of your mothers divorcement, whom I have put
away? And are grounded upon that, That the bill was produced and read, and that
it was contained in the bill, that Sion was put away for the uncleanness which
she had contracted by the transgressions of her children; for upon that does
the Lord conclude against them here, saying, Behold I have not put away your
mother without a cause (as ye say,) but for your transgressions is your mother
put away.

2.
Wherefore when I came was there no man,] Supple, To receive me.

When I called, was there none to answer:] i. e. And wherefore when I called to
you, was there none to answer me? q.d. Wherefore did no man receive me, when I
came to you? And when I called to you, wherefore did no man answer me?

The Prophet seems to allude to one man's coming to another man's house, where
there was no body at home to entertain him, or to answer, when he called and
knocked.

The Lord sent his servants the Prophets to the Jews, so soon as they were
carried away captive, to exhort them and stir them up to repentance, that he
might have mercy upon them, and deliver them from that captivity and misery,
upon their repentance, into which they had brought themselves by their sins.
B^t when the Prophets came to them in the Lords Name for this purpose, they
would not receive them, nor would they answer or harken, when they called upon
them to hear the Word of the Lord.

Note here, that that which was done to the Prophets of the Lord, the Lord
takes as done to himself; and what they did in his Name, he interprets as done
by himself; according to that of our Savior to his Disciples, He that
receives you, receives me; and he that receives me, receives him that sent
me, Matthew. 10.40. This for the explication of these words: Now for the
connection; Note, that these words are spoken in answer to a tacit Objection of
the Jews which were in captivity: for whereas the Lord had said, that he
would deliver them, though they were captives and a prey, out of the hands of
the terrible and mighty, Cap. 49.25. and in answer to a former Objection of
theirs, had told them, That they had sold themselves for their sins, and that
their mother was put away for their transgressions, verse. 1. They might object
and say, Be it so, that we had sold our selves for our sins, and that our
mother was put away for our transgressions; yet being thou say, that thou will deliver us out of the hands of the mighty and the terrible which oppress
us, thou would have delivered us long ago, if thou had been able to deliver
us: For what else was the reason why thou did not deliver us long since?

To this he answers, That the reason why he did not deliver them long since,
was, because he came unto them, and none of them would receive him; and he
called to them, and none would answer him. And until they had received him, and
answered him, and repented, and amended their lives, he would not deliver them:
The reason was not, because he wanted power and ability to deliver them; for he
had power and ability to deliver them, as he shows in the next words.

Note, that the Lord answers this their Objection in an interrogatory manner,
to make it more tart for their obstinate and pervicacious spirits.

Is my hand shortened at all, that I cannot redeem?] q. d. Is my power less
then it has been, that you should think that I cannot redeem you, and that you
should say, that this is the reason why I did not deliver you before this, to
wit, because I was not able?

My hand] i. e. My power, or my strength.

The hand is put here, per Metonymiam signi or subjecti, for power and
strength, because the power and strength of a man is known by his hand and arm.

The connection of these words with the former is apparent by what I have
already said upon this Verse; and it is this: q. d. The reason why I redeemed
you not long ago, was, because ye received me not when I came unto you, and ye
answered me not when I called you: It was not because I was not able (as ye
surmize) to deliver you; for am I not able to deliver? Is my hand shortened,
that it cannot redeem? etc.

Behold at my rebuke I d^y up the Sea,] q. d. Behold at my rebuke I can dry up
the Sea: i. e. Behold, if I do but chide the Sea, the Sea will be dried up.

Note, that he puts here an Indicative for a Potential mood, for the Hebrews
have no Potential.

The Prophet alludeth to that which is written Psalm. 106. v. 9. He rebuked the
red Sea also, and it was dried up: Where the Psalmist speaks of that which
the Lord did to the red Sea, when he brought the children of Israel out of
Egypt, Exodus 14.16, etc.

This, and what follows, are Arguments by which the Lord proves the
greatness of his power.

I make the Rivers a Wilderness,] i. e. I can make the Rivers as dry as a
Wilderness.

He alludeth here to the Lords making a way through the River Jordan, Josh. 3.
verse. 13.

Their fish stinketh, because there is no water, and dies for thirst.] i. e.
So that the fish of Rivers shall dye with thirst, for want of water; and stink,
being dead.

Here is an (...) in these words.

3.
I clothe the Heavens with blackness,] q. d. I can cover the face of the
Heavens with black clouds, and make great darkness upon the Earth.

And I will make sackcloth their covering.] i. e. I can can cover them with
clouds, as it were with sackcloth.

Sackcloth was wont to be made of hair, Rev. 6.12. yea, of black hair, as this
and the like expressions prove.

This is a repetition of the former phrase; and in them the Proph^t alludeth to
the great darkness which the Lord caused in Egypt, Exodus 10.21.

4.
The Lord God has given me the tongue of the learned,] The Prophet speaks
this of himself; and he might truly speak it, for his language is most pure and
eloquent, and his expressions admirable upon every occasion.

I take this to be the beginning of a new Sermon.

That I should know how to speak a word in season to him that is weary:] i. e.
To him that is weary, Supple, with afflictions: For afflictions are as a
burden, and will in time weary the stoutest man.

A word of Comfort handsomely delivered, is seasonable to him which is weary
with afflictions.

He wakeneth morning by morning; he wakeneth mine ear to hear,] i. e. And he
instructs me every morning, morning after morning.

He wakeneth,] i. e. The Lord wakeneth.

What the Lord wakeneth, the Prophet does not here tell, but suspendeth it,
while he resumeth the word again; but he wakeneth his ear.

He wakeneth mine ear] i. e. He wakeneth me.

The ear is but a part, put here for the whole man, by a Synecdoche; and
therefore the ear, rather then any other part, because the Lord did awaken the
Prophet with his voice, by calling to him; and the voice is received by the
ear, as being the Object of the sense of Hearing.

To hear] Supple, His Instructions, and his Will.

As the learned.] i. e. As Masters (which are learned) Supple, do; that is, As
Masters that are learned use to waken their Scholars in a morning, that they
may rise and come to School, to learn what he intends to teach them.

By this we may understand what frequent Revelations the Prophet had, and that
the Lord came to him in the morning to acquaint him with his Will, before he
was awake; except we say, that the Prophet does only use a Metaphor here, a
Metaphor drawn from a Schoolmasters dealing with his Scholars.

He wakeneth morning by morning.] As the Prophet showed in the former words,
that God gave him an eloquent tongue; so he shows here, that the Lord did
also furnish him with matter for his tongue, lest the Prophet might seem to
have words, and nothing else; or words without matter.

5.
The Lord God has opens mine ear,] i. e. Moreover, the Lord God, when he
had given me the tongue of the learned, and instructed me with his mind,
commanded me to go and declare his mind unto his people.

This is the meaning of these words, as the words immediately following will
give us to understand.

Has opened mine ear,] i. e. Has commanded me to go, etc.

Note, that to have the ear opened, signifies to hear, as Cap. 48.8. And as to
have the ears opened, signifies to hear; so to open the ear, signifies to
speak to: For he that speaks, does by his voice pierce into the ears of the
Hearer, and so as it were open his ears: The Lord therefore has opened mine
ear, is as much as if he should say, The Lord has spoken to me: and (by a
Synecdoche Generis, putting speaking in general, for commanding in particular)
The Lord has commanded me to do this or that. But what he commanded, is to be
gathered from the circumstances of the place; and the circumstances of this
place tell us, that he commanded him to go and declare his Mind, or his Will,
unto his people.

And I was not rebellious,] i. e. I was not disobedient to him.

Neither turned away back.] This is a repetition of the former sentence, and
alludeth to servants, which when they will not do what their Masters would have
them to do, turn their back upon their Masters, and are gone.

6.
I gave my back to the smiters,] q. d. But though I knew I should meet with
scourges, and scorn, in the execution of the message about which the Lord sent
me; yet did I not refuse to go, but I willingly gave my back to the smiters,
and my cheeks to him that plucketh off the hair.

I gave my back to the smiters,] i. e. I gave my back to the whippers to whip
it.

Thus may we interpret it, if Isaiah was thus used, that is, whipped upon the
back by those which hated him; concerning which notwithstanding we have no
relation extant.

But that Isaiah was mocked, is certain, from Cap. 28.13. And they which mock,
and make a fool of a man (as we use to say) among other scornful doings, do
usually clap him on the back: To give the back therefore to the smiters, may
signify willingly to be mocked, and made a fool of.

And my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair:] i. e. And my cheeks to them
that plucked off the hair which grew thereon.

This is the wont of mockers and scoffers, to pull them by the beard whom they
mock and scoff, which they do some of them so hard, as that they pluck off the
hairs thereof.

Isaiah, as in many other things, so in this, was a Type of Christ; and what is
here spoken of Isaiah in this verse, was more fully fulfilled in Christ,
according to the letter, then was in him: Mat. 26.67. and 27.26.

I hid not my face from shame,] i. e. I did not hide my self for fear of any
reproachful usage.

From shame,] Shame is put here for reproachful usage, per Metonymiam Effecti,
because reproachful usage uses to cause shame, (though not in such as Isaiah
was) yet in other kind of men.

And spitting.] This also they use which contemn and mock a man; they spit at
him, yea, even in his face.

7.
For the Lord God will help me,] i. e. For I said the Lord God will help me,
and assist me, while I am about his message.

Therefore shall I not be confounded,] i. e. Therefore shall I not be ashamed,
though they mock me, and contumeliously use me never so much.

Therefore have I set my face as a flint.] i. e. Therefore, to wit, because I
said the Lord God will help me, am I resolved not to be ashamed,
notwithstanding all the mockings and contumelious usings which I meet with in
the execution of my calling.

A face of flint may signify a face that will not be ashamed or blush, because
they which are ashamed and blush, look red; and the reason why they look red,
is, because in that passion the blood flies to the face, and dies the skin,
which it could not do if the face were flint.

8.
He is near that justifies me, etc.] This is an answer to a tacit Objection
which may be made; For whereas Isaiah said, verse. 4. That God did waken his ear
morning by morning, and that he had opened his ear, verse. 5. A Jew might say to
Isaiah, that he was a counterfeit, and that the Lord God never spoke to him, or
sent him; but that he ran, when he was never sent.

To which the Prophet here answers, that in saying that God wakened his ear,
and that God had opened his ear, he had spoken nothing but the truth; and that
God, who was near, would justify him in what he had said.

He is near that justifies me,] i. e. God, who will justify me in my sayings,
and maintain that I have spoken nothing but the truth, is near at hand, ready
to justify me, and to maintain my cause.

Who will contend with me?] i. e. Who dares implead me for speaking false?

He alludeth to the usage and courses of the Courts, where the Accuser and the
Accused, the Plaintiff and Defendant, do plead their cause one against another;
which pleadings one against another, he calls here contentions.

Let us stand together:] i. e. If any one will contend with me, let him come,
and let us stand together, and contend each with other, or plead one against
the other, before the Judge.

He alludeth to the standing together of the Plaintiff and Defendant, or
Accuser and Accused, before the Judge, to plead their cause.

Who is mine adversary?] This is the same with that, Who will contend with me?

Let him come near.] q. d. If any such be, let him come near, and plead against
me.

9.
The Lord God will help me,] Supple, In the maintenance of my cause.

Who is he that shall condemn me?] i. e. Who can justly condemn me, either as
an adversary, by making it good, that I have spoken otherwise then true; or as
a Judge, by giving sentence against me?

They all shall wax old as a garment,] i. e.

All mine adversaries, which contend with me, or condemn me, shall be consumed,
and waste away as an old garment.

Shall wax old,] i. e. Shall be consumed and waste away.

This he speaks in allusion to a garment, which we say waxes old, not so much
in regard of durance of time, as of the decaying, and rotting, and growing
thredbare thereof.

The moth shall eat them up.] q. d. Some plague or other shall consume them,
and eat them up, as the moth eats up an old garment.

By the moth is meant some such plague or other, as the Lord uses to send upon
obstinate and rebellious sinners to consume them, by a Metaphor taken from a
moth, which eats woollen garments.

10.
Who is among you that fears the Lord?] This Sermon begun, as I said, at the
fifth verse, and from that place hitherto the Prophet has spoken of his own
commendation, partly by asserting the truth thereof, partly by answering
Objections made against it; and this he did, not out of vainglory, but to
vindicate himself and his authority from contempt, that his Ministry might be
the more fruitful: Here he having vindicated himself and his authority from
contempt, begins his message; and first he addresseth himself to those which
were obedient to Gods Word, saying, Who is among you which fears the Lord?

That fears the Lord,] i. e. Which fears to offend the Lord.

The fear of the Lord is put Synecdochice, for all manner of worship and honor
due to the Lord.

That obeys the voice of his servant,] i. e. That obeys the Word of the
Lord, which he speaks to him by his servant.

Of his servant,] By the Lords servant here, may be meant Isaiah himself, whom
God sent with this message to his people.

That walks in darkness,] q. d. Though he does live in misery, and
affliction, and sorrow.

Darkness is put often in the Scripture for misery, and affliction, and sorrow.

The Prophet speaks to these Jews, as if they were even now in misery and
affliction, by their captivity in Babylon.

And has no light,] i. e. And has no joy or comfort at all, or hope of
comfort, that he can see.

As darkness is often put for misery, and affliction, and sorrow: so light is
put for prosperity, and comfort, and joy.

Let him trust in the Name of the Lord,] q. d. Let him trust in the Lord, and
he will deliver him, and send him prosperity and joy.

In the Name of the Lord,] i. e. In the Lord.

And stay upon his God.] i. e. And rely upon his God for deliverance, for he
will deliver him.

A Metaphor from a man leaning or staying himself upon a staff.

11.
But behold all ye that kindle a fire,] q. d. But behold all ye that sin
against God.

He makes an Apostrophe here, to the sinners and disobedient.

Sin is compared here to a fire, and well it may be, because as fire consumes
the wood in which it is, so does sin destroy the wicked man. See cap. 9.18.

That compass your selves about with sparks] This is the same with the former
sentence; For sin is like sparks of fire, which compass tow, or some such
combustible matter: For as such sparks do quickly set the tow on fire, and
consume it; so does sin speedily consume the sinner whom it does beset.

Walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks which ye have kindled:] q.
d. Go on and sport your selves in the pleasure of your sins.

This is an Ironical concession, like that of the Preacher, Eccles. 11.9.
Rejoice O young man in thy youth, and let thine heart cheer thee in the days of
thy youth; and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes:
But know thou, etc.

As he resembles sin to fire, so he resembles the pleasure of sin to the
light of the fire, (because all light is pleasant, and cheareth the spirits,)
and to the sparks of the fire, because children use to make their pastime and
sport with the sparks of fire.

This shall ye have of mine hand,] i. e. But this shall ye have of me: q. d.
But take this from me, or thus much I will tell you.

Of mine hand,] i. e. Of me. A part put for the whole man, by a Synecdoche.

Ye shall lie down in sorrow.] i. e. Ye shall dye in your sorrowful condition;
that is, in the captivity under which ye groan; for ye shall never be delivered
out of it.

Ye shall lie down.] i. e. Ye shall dye. See cap. 43.17.

ISAIAH, CHAP. LI.
HArken to me ye that follow righteousness,] This is to be continued with the
last part of the foregoing chapter, as part of the Sermon there begun.

He turns his speech again to the obedient, and those which fear God, to whom
he addressed himself at the first, Cap. 50.10.

Look unto the Rock whence ye are hewn,] This is a proverbial kind of speech,
the meaning whereof is explained in the second verse. By the Rock therefore is
meant Abraham and Sarah, the Father and Mother of the Jews; not Abraham alone,
for he is but a partial cause of children; but Abraham and Sarah together: For
in procreation of children, the man is not without the woman, nor the woman
without the man. By those which are hewn out of the Rock are meant the Jews,
which were the children of Abraham and Sarah, and which are here resembled to
the stones which men hew out of a Rock.

And to the hole of the pit whence ye are dug.] i. e. And to the pit, or
quarry, from whence ye are dug.

This is a repetition of the former sentence.

The hole of the pit.] The hole of the pit is put periphrastically for the pit
or quarry it self, which is an hole.

2.
Look unto Abraham your father, and Sarah which bare you,] This is an
explanation of those words which went immediately before.

For I called him alone,] i. e. For I called him out of Vr of the Caldees, when
he had no children, Genesis 12.1.

The Prophet speaks here in the person of the Lord.

Him] i. e. Abraham your father.

Alone,] i. e. When he was without children.

And blessed him,] He blessed him with abundance of wealth.

And increased him.] He increased him by giving him a seed as the Stars of
Heaven for multitude.

When God called Abraham out of Vr of the Caldees, Sarah went along with him,
Genesis 12.5. And when he blessed him and increased him, he blessed and increased
Sarah also. But yet Sarah is not mentioned here in any of these particulars,
because God appeared only to Abraham, Genesis 12.1. and blessed him, and
increased him principally; and Sarah only for his sake.

3.
For the Lord shall comfort Sion,] q. d. Look, I say, unto the Rock from whence
you are hewn, etc. Look unto Abraham your father, etc. For as the Lord called
Abraham alone, and blessed him, and increased him; So will he call Sion, though
she is now alone, as cap. 54.6. and 49.21. and will bless her with abundance of
wealth; and will increase her, by giving her many children, as cap. 49.20.

By Sion is meant Jerusalem, of which he speaks as of a woman, by a
Prosopopoeia.

Hence you may see to what end the Prophet did bid the righteous to look to the
Rock from whence they were hewn, etc. and to look to Abraham their father, etc.
v. 1, 2. It was, that they might, by what he says of Abraham, v. 2. believe
that the Lord was able to do what he says in this verse, that the Lord would
do for Sion: for that which he says here, that the Lord would do for Sion, is
in a manner the same that he says the Lord did for Abraham, verse. 2.

But if that which, he says, the Lord would do for Sion here, be in a manner
the same, as that was, which, he says, the Lord did for Abraham, verse. 2. why
does he not say, the Lord will call Sion alone, and bless her and increase her,
(as he said of Abraham, verse. 2.) but says, The Lord will comfort Sion?

Ans. Before this call of Abraham, Abraham had been never called of God; nor
had he been blessed with that wealth which he afterward enjoyed, neither had
he had any children at all; so that he was not grieved for the loss of these
things, because he never had these things to lose: But Sion had been called of
God, for she had been the wife of God, but was put away; and had been blessed
with much wealth, but was bereft of it; and had had many children, but was
deprived of them by the Babylonians; by reason of which she was in much sorrow
and grief of heart at this time: Therefore does the Prophet say of Sion, The
Lord shall comfort Sion, rather (then as he did of Abraham) the Lord shall call
Sion alone, and bless her, and increase her, though her comfort consisted in a
manner in the same things.

He will comfort all her waste places, and he will make her wilderness like
Eden, and her Desert like the Garden of the Lord.] These words are an
amplification or declaration of those words which went immediately before, to
wit, of those, The Lord shall comfort Zion, and tell how the Lord would comfort
her.

He shall comfort all her waste places,] By the waste places of Zion are meant
those dwelling places, which the Babylonians had either broken down, or made
desolate without inhabitant; these places, he says, the Lord would comfort, by
building up those which were broken down, and filling both the one and the
other with children of Zion, that is, with Jews. See cap. 49.9.

If the Lord would fill the waste places of Zion with children of Zion, then
would God call Zion again, though she were alone, that she might have children
by him: and then would he increase Zion with children, as he did Abraham, verse.
2.

And he will make her wilderness like Eden,] i. e. And he will make all the
Land of Judah, which lies now untilled and neglected, and fruitless as a
wilderness, like unto Eden for beauty fruitfulness, by which she shall gather
great store of wealth.

Like Eden,] Eden was the most fruitful and pleasant Country of the East, in
which the Lord planted Paradise, Genesis 2.10

And her Desert like the garden of the Lord,] q. d. Yea, he will make her
Desert like the Garden of the Lord.

By the Garden of the Lord is meant Paradise, or that Garden which the Lord
planted in Eden, Genesis 2.10.

Therein.] i. e. In Sion, by reason of the comforts which the Lord will give
her.

4.
Harken unto me,] This is spoken in the person of God to the Jews, as if they
were now in captivity in Babylon.

For a Law shall proceed from me,] i. e. For I will give a command concerning
your delivery out of Babylon.

Note, that the word Law, among the Hebrews, signifies not only a Law
strictly taken, but also any Word of God whatsoever. See cap. 1.10.

And I will make my judgment to rest] Supple, Upon Babylon, which vexes you,
and uses you cruelly in your captivity.

A judgment is said to rest upon a people, when it remains long upon them.

For a light of the people.] i. e. That the Heathen may know by this my
judgment, which I will make to rest upon Babylon, that I am the Lord.

That is said to be a light to the people, which is any way the cause to them
of saving knowledge.

5.
My righteousness is near,] i. e. My truth and fidelity is come near unto you,
to make good that promise which I made to you concerning your delivery out of
Babylon.

Righteousness is taken here for fidelity and truth, of which he speaks as of a
person, by a Prosopopoeia.

My salvation is gone forth,] i. e. My saving power is gone forth, to wit, to
save you out of the hand of the Babylonians.

Salvation is put here for Gods saving power (as it is also put sometimes for
God himself, as cap. 12.2.) per Metonymiam Effecti: And he speaks of it (as he
did of righteousness) as of a person, yea, as of a Champion, by a Prosopopoeia.

And mine arm shall judge the people:] And I will punish and smite the
Babylonians, and other people that join with them to afflict you my servants
the Jews.

The Isles shall wait upon me,] q. d. The Heathen when they shall see my
judgment upon the Babylonians, and those that join with them, shall know, that
I am the true God, and shall forsake their Idols, and wait upon me for
Salvation in their distress.

The Isles] Concerning the meaning of this word Isles, see cap. 49.1.

And on mine arm shall they trust.] i. e. And they shall trust in me, by reason
of my power and strength.

The arm is put here for the whole man: The arm (I say) which argues a man's
power and strength.

This came to pass, when many Heathen, seeing what the Lord did to the
Babylonians for his people the Jews sake, forsook their Idolatry, and became
Proselytes.

6.
My salvation shall be for ever,] i. e. My saving power shall never fail. See
v. 5.

And my righteousness.] i. e. And my truth and fidelity, by which I perform
whatsoever I have promised.

7.
Harken unto me ye that know righteousness,] He speaks to the righteous among
the Jews which feared him.

That know righteousness,] i. e. That love righteousness, and make much of it.

The people in whose heart is my Law] i. e. The people which love my Law.

Fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be afraid of their re^ilings,] q. d.
Though the Babylonians, who hold you in captivity, reproach you, and revile
you, and call you by ignominious names; yet being they are but men, fear them
not, neither be afraid of them.

8.
For the moth shall eat them up like a garment,] i. e. For the sword, or some
plague or other, shall consume them, as the moth consumes a garment. See Cap.
50. verse. 9.

And the worm shall eat them like wool;] i. e. And the sword, or some plague or
other, shall consume them, as the worm eats and consumes the wool.

But my righteousness shall be for ever, and my salvation from generation to
generation.] i. e. But my Truth and my saving Power shall never fail; and if
they never fail, then shall ye be safe, when they which reproach you shall be
consumed.

9.
Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of the Lord,] The Prophet speaks this to
the Lord in his own person: yet it may be understood of the Lords speaking thus
to himself, and stirring up himself for this work. See the like, cap. 63.11.

Because the Lord had suffered his people to lie in captivity a long time, and
did not show his power in their deliverance, he might seem to be like a man
asleep; therefore he says, Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of the Lord;
Supple, That thou may deliver thy people out of Babylon, as thou have
promised.

Put on strength,] He alludeth to a man's putting on his garments when he
awaketh, which he did put off, and lay aside, when he went to sleep.

O arm of the Lord,] i. e. O powerful God.

He speaks of God, as of a man, by an (...), and puts the arm, which is but
part, for the whole man, by a Synecdoche; as Verse. 5.

As in the ancient days, and in the generations of old:] Supple, When thou
did bring the children of Israel out of the Land of Egypt, and out of the
house of bondage.

Art not thou it that has cut Rahab?] i. e. Art not thou He which did cut
and hew the Egyptians to pieces?

It] This relates to that, O thou arm of the Lord; by which, as I said, is
meant the Lord himself.

Rahab] By Rahab is meant Egypt, and by Egypt the Egyptians; as Psalm. 87. v. 4.
And Egypt was called Rahab, because of her pride; for Rahab signifies one that
is proud; and Egypt carried her self proudly, at least toward Israel, Exodus
18.11.

And wounded the Dragon?] Supple, Even to death?

By the Dragon he means Pharaoh King of Egypt, whom the Lord overthrew in the
red Sea: For the Prophet calls tyrants by that name. See cap. 27.1.

10.
Art not thou it which has dried the Sea? etc.] He means, by the Sea, the
red Sea, which the Lord divided, and through which he made a dry way for his
people of Israel to pass, when he brought them out of Egypt: Exodus 14.21.

The waters of the great deep,] q. d. Even the waters of the red Sea, which was
very deep.

For the ransomed to pass over?] i. e. For the Israelites which thou did
redeem out of Egypt, from the bondage which they suffered there, to pass over.

This is mentioned here, to strengthen the faith of the people in God: For if
God had power to do such things heretofore, he has as much power to do the
like now, and to redeem his people out of Babylon now, as he had to redeem them
out of Egypt in times past.

11.
The redeemed of the Lord] i. e. The Jews, which are now in captivity in
Babylon.

He calls these Jews the redeemed of the Lord, by anticipation; for as yet
they were not redeemed, though afterward they were.

Shall return,] Supple, Out of Babylon, where they are captive.

And come with singing unto Sion,] i. e. And come back with a great deal of joy
to Jerusalem.

Everlasting joy shall be upon their heads,] He resembles joy to a crown,
therefore he says, that it shall be upon their heads: q. d. They shall be
crowned with everlasting joy. See cap. 35.10.

And sorrow and mourning.] Supple, Which they now suffer by reason of their
captivity.

12.
I, even I am he that comfort you,] This is spoken in the person of the Lord
to Zion; who fearing the great power of the Babylonians, could not receive that
comfort from the promises of God, as she should do.

I, even I, etc.] q. d. I the Lord, who am the true and Almighty God, even I am
he that comfort you, etc.

That comfort you,] i. e. That comfort you now by my promises of your
redemption, and will comfort you hereafter by performing what I promise.

Who art thou, that thou should be afraid of a man that shall dye?] q. d.
What a fearful woman art thou, that thou should be afraid of the Babylonians,
because they are many, which yet are but men, and shall dye?

This was that which made the Lords promise, of the redemption of the Jews out
of Babylon, so hardly to be believed, to wit, the strength and abundance of men
which the Babylonians had; and therefore the Lord would take this Objection or
stumbling block away.

Who art thou?] This in the Hebrew is of the Feminine gender, and therefore is
spoken to Zion, whom he speaks to, as to a woman or a mother, by a
Prosopopoeia; as cap. 49.14.

And of the son of man which shall be made as grass?] i. e. And of the son of
man, which shall be cut down, and wither as the grass.

This is a repetition of the former sentence.

The son of man] Every man livin^, as he is man himself, so is he the son of a
man.

13.
And forgettest the Lord thy Maker,] i. e. And art not mindf ll of the power of
the Lord which made thee, who because he made thee, will have mercy upon thee.

That has stretched out the Heavens, and laid the foundations of the Earth?]
Supple, And therefore is of exceeding great power, power enough to turn the
Babylonians to nothing.

Has stretched out the Heavens,] i. e. Has made the Heavens. See Cap. 45.
verse. 12.

And laid the foundations of the Earth?] See cap. 55.13.

And have feared continually every day,] Supple, Lest thou and thy children
should be destroyed by hard usage, and by famine.

Because of the fury of the oppressor,] i. e. Because of the fury of the
Babylonian, which oppresses thee and thy children.

As if he were ready to destroy,] i. e. As if he, i. e. the Babylonian, thy
oppressor, would instantly destroy thee and thy children, by hard usage, and by
starving.

And where is the fury of the oppressor?] i. e. And what, I pray you, is become
of the fury of the Oppressor?

This is to be pronounced with contempt, to vilify the power and fury of the
Babylonian, when Zion feared.

And he speaks as if the Babylonians were already destroyed.

14.
The captive exile hasteneth, that he may be loosed,] q. d. Behold,
notwithstanding all the fury of the Oppressor, the captive Exile already
hasteneth, that he may be loosed.

The captive Exile] i. e. The Jew which is captive in Babylon, and lives there
as an Exile, or banished man.

Hasteneth, that he may be loosed,] i. e. Makes haste already, that he may be
loosed, supple, out of prison, that is, out of the Land of his captivity, from
being a captive any longer.

He likeneth the Land of Babylon, in which the Jews were captive, to a prison,
and alludeth thereunto; as cap. 42.7.

He speaks here, as though the captived Jews were even then hastening to get
out of their captivity.

But how did they hasten, that they might be loosed? Ans. By sending Zorobbabel
to Cyrus, to entreat him to let them go free: And this was after Cyrus had
subdued Babylon; so that the Lord might well say, as he did Verse. 13. And where
is the fury of the Oppressor?

And that he should not dye in the pit,] i. e. And that he should not dye in
the dungeon, as many of his Brethren have dyed, through such hardness as he
has there suffered heretofore, and which you are now afraid of.

By the pit is meant that part of the prison which is called the Dungeon, which
is as a pit under ground. But by this also he means Babylon, or the Land of
the Jews captivity, by a Metaphor.

Nor that his bread should fail.] i. e. And that he might not be starved in
captivity for want of bread, as many of his brethren have been, and which you
now fear: Supple, And he shall prevail.

15.
But I am the Lord thy God that divided the Sea, etc.] The Lord prevents an
Objection here which Sion might make: For Sion might say, But for all this, I
have cause to be afraid, and to fear continually every day; for the Babylonians
are men which are maliciously bent against me; and their fury is such, as that
it cannot be withstood: To which the Lord here answers, saying, I Will grant that
the Babylonians are men maliciously bent against thee; but yet I am the Lord,
who am more mighty then all the men of the Earth; thy God, who will have a care
of thee and protect thee; whose friendship is more to be esteemed of, then
their enmity to be feared; who divided the sea, whose waves roared, and
therefore am able to chastise them, be their fury never so great and tumultuous
against thee: The Lord of Hosts is my Name, therefore can I give victory to
whom I please, and trample under feet whom I will.

That divided the sea, whose waves roared;] He alludes to the division which he
made in the red Sea for his people Israel to pass through, which he divided
notwithstanding the roaring of the waves: Exodus 14. v. 16, 21.

The Lord of Hosts is his Name.] i. e. The Lord of Hosts is my Name.

He puts here the third for the first person; for the Lord speaks here of
himself.

This Name, The Lord of Hosts, intimates a great deal of power; and the Lord
mentions it here, to uphold Sion against the conceit which she had of the
great power of the Babylonians, her Enemies or Oppressors.

16.
And I have put my words in thy mouth, etc.] And that it may be known, that I
have not only power to redeem thee O Zion, and thy children the Jews, but will
also to restore all prosperity and joy to you, (and where power and will meet
together, the effect must needs follow,) I have put my words in thy mouth O
Isaiah.

The Lord makes a sudden Apostrophe to Isaiah.

And have covered thee with the shadow of mine hand,] See cap. 49.2.

That I may plant the Heavens, and lay the foundations of the Earth,] q. d.
That I may plant the Heavens, and lay the foundations of the Earth, Supple, As
I have determined to plant, and lay them, upon the Jews repentance; i. e. That
I may make new Haevens, and a new Earth, according to what I have decreed, when
the Jews have repented.

That these words are not literally to be understood, but only Metaphorically,
is plain and manifest, and denied by none.

Quest. But what is it which is meant by them?

Answ. The meaning is, as if he should say, that I may put a new face on
things, and make the Heavens to give their light, and the Earth to flourish and
be verdant, as when they were at first created; that is, That I may bring back
all joy and gladness into the Land of Judah, where there is now sorrow and
grief, etc.

For the understanding of which sense, note, that the Scripture says of the
Heavens in times of great calamity that they are darkened, and that the Stars
of Heaven give not their light, neither does the Sun and the Moon cause their
their light to shine; as cap. 50.30. cap. 13.10. And on the contrary, in times
of great prosperity it says of the Heavens, that they give their light, and
that the light of ths Moon is as the light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun
is sevenfold, as the light of seven days, etc. as cap. 30. v. 26. Therefore to
make new Heavens, is to make the Heavens to give their light as brightly and as
clearly, as when they were at first created, and that signifies to give or
reduce great prosperity and great joy.

And as for the Earth, during the time of the Babylonish captivity, the Land of
Judah was accounted as a Wilderness, and as a Desert, because of the barrenness
and squalidity thereof, verse. 3. When therefore the Lord says, that he will
lay the foundations of the Earth, his meaning is, that he will make the Earth
to flourish, and be as verdant as when it was at first created; and that
signifies, that he will take away that barrenness and squalidity under which
the Land of Judah lay during the captivity, and make it as Eden, yea, even as
the Garden of the Lord, as it was at the first Creation, (as is said, verse. 3.)

Where note, that by the Heavens are particularly here meant the Heavens, which
were over the Land of Judah, as cap. 5.30. And by the Earth is particularly
meant the Land of Judah, as cap. 24.17, etc. and that by a Synecdoche.

By this therefore that the Lord says, That he will plant the Heavens, and lay
the foundations of the Earth, is meant, that he will make the Land of Judah a
joyful and a fruitful Land.

But it may be here asked, How it is to be understood that the Lord here says,
that he put his words into Isaiabs mouth, etc. that he the Lord might plant the
Heavens, and lay the foundations of the Earth; that is, That he the Lord might
give great prosperity and joy to the Land of Judah, and make the Land of Judah
a joyful and a fruitful Land?

Ans. As the Lord took away all prosperity and joy out of the Land of Judah,
and made it a barren and a doleful Land, because of the sins of the Jews which
dwelt therein; so he was determined to reduce all joy and prosperity into it,
and to make it a fruitful and a flourishing Land again, if the Jews would
repent them of their sins. That therefore they might be induced to repent, he
put his words into Isaiahs mouth, and covered him with the shadow of his hand,
that upon his words they might repent, and upon their repentance he the Lord
might bring back all joy and fruitfulness into the Land of Judah. And thus is
the Lord said to put his words into Isaiahs mouth, that he the Lord might plant
the Heavens, and lay the foundations of the Earth.

That I may plant the Heavens,] Here is a Metaphor taken from a Gardiners
planting Trees or Herbs.

And lay the foundations of the Earth,] Here is a Metaphor from a Builder.

And say unto Sion, thou art my people.] This might the Lord say, when he had
brought back the Jews out of Babylon to Sion, and clothed Sion with them as
with an ornament, as cap. 49.18. which he did when they turned to the Lord.

Thou art my people.] Supple, Whom I will protect, as a King his Subjects, from
all thine Enemies.

Because of the sins of the J^ws the Lord denied them his protection, and gave
them over into their Enemies hands, to wit, the Babylonians, for a while: but
upon their repentance he received them into his favor and protection again.

17.
Awake, awake,] q. d. Thou O Jerusalem, which art drunken with the cup of Gods
fury, and fallen into a deep sleep through thy drunkenness, Awake, awake.

Stand up,] q. d. Arise, and stand upon thy legs.

He alludeth here to drunken men, who can neither keep open their eyes, nor
stand upon their feet, so long as the wine is within them; but when they have
slept that out, they both awake, and get upon their legs.

The calamity and affliction with which God afflicted Jerusalem at this time,
is here compared to a cup of wine, or rather some poisoned drink, with which,
so long as Jerusalem was drunk, Jerusalem is to be understood to have been
under affliction; but so soon as she had digested it, it is to be conceived
that her affliction was at an end.

O Jerusalem,] He speaks to the City of Jerusalem, as to a woman, yea a mother,
by Prosopopoeia; and by this puts her in comfort, that her calamity is come to
an end.

Which have drunk at the hand of the Lord the cup of his fury,] i. e. Which
have drunk that cup which the Lord mingled in his fury, and gave thee with his
own hands to drink.

Thou have drunken the dregs of the cup of trembling,] i. e. Thou have drunk
off that cup, which the Lord gave thee to drink, to the very bottom.

The cup which the Lord gave Jerusalem to drink, is here called the cup of
trembling, ab effecto, because it caused trembling in those which drunk it.

The dregs] In a cup which is mingl^d with poison, or any bitter stuff, the
poison, or the bitter stuff, sinketh to the bottom, and lies there as dregs:
The dregs therefore, as they are the lowest in a bitter potion, or potion of
poison; so they are the bitterest and strongest of all the potion. To show
therefore the grievousness of Jerusalems affliction, the Prophet says, that
she drunk up the very dregs of the cup of trembling. See Psa. 75.8.

And wrung them out.] q. d. Thou have not left a drop behind.

A Metaphor from those which wring such clothes which have lien in water, till
they have wrung out thereof every drop of the water.

Note here, that the Prophet preventeth a tacit Objection: For because he said
to Jerusalem, Awake, awake, O Jerusalem, which have drunk at the hand of the
Lord the cup of his fury, by which he intimates that Jerusalems misery was
drawing to an end; It might be objected, that Jerusalems case was so miserable,
and she so comfortless and void of friends, as that she was never likely to
recover her former state, or see any happy days. That therefore the Prophet
might prevent this, he acknowledges the state of Jerusalem to be exceeding
miserable, and that Jerusalem had no friends to comfort her; and this he does
from these words, Thou have drunken the dregs of the cup o^ trembling, to verse.
21. But he says, that notwithstanding this her miserable and comfortless
condition, the Lord would comfort her, and redeem her out of her misery: And
this he does from Verse. 21. to the end of the Chapter.

18.
There is none to guide her among all the sons which she has brought forth,]
He alludeth here to one that is drunk, and can scarce stand upon his legs, who
has need of some body to hold him up, and to guide him to his house, or his
bed, there to sleep while he is sober; and so persists in the Metaphor which he
used in the former Verse.

By the sons of Jerusalem are meant the Jews, which had been inhabitants of
Jerusalem, but now put out by the Babylonians.

The Prophet shows here the miserable condition of Jerusalem, which she was
in when the Babylonians did afflict her, and keep her captive, and speaks of
it, as if she even then suffered it.

Note here the Enallage of the person, how he passes from the second to the
third; for he speaks of Jerusalem in the third, to whom he spoke in the
second person just before.

Neither is there any that takes her by the hand, of all the sons which she
has brought up.] This is a repetition of the former sentence.

That takes her by the hand,] Supple, To stay her up, or uphold her, or guide
her, etc.

This must add to the misery of Jerusalem, That all her children should be
taken away from her, or else brought to as bad a condition as her self, so that
none could help her, or afford her any comfort.

19.
These two things are come unto thee, etc.] Here in this Verse he shows what
was meant by the cup of trembling, and the cup of the Lords fury, mentioned
Verse. 17.

Note here the Enallage of change of person again, how he returns again from
the third to the second person.

Who shall be sorry for thee?] i. e. Who shall pity thy case? q. d. And there
is none to pity thee.

Pity is a grief or sorrow, conceived at another man's misery.

Desolation and destruction, and the famine and the sword:] q. d. Desolation
and destruction, that is, the famine and the sword.

Note, that that middle Particle, And, is a Note of declaration or explication,
and signifies as much as, that is. For the two things which he says are come
unto Jerusalem, are the Famine and the Sword; but he names them twice: for
desolation and famine are the same, and destruction and the sword are the same.

Desolation] By desolation is meant famine here, per Metonymiam Effectus,
because famine causes a desolation in Cities.

Destruction] By Destruction is meant the Sword, per Metonymiam Effectus,
because the Sword works destruction, and destroys whithersoever it comes.

Note, that because it could not well be understood what he meant by desolation
and destruction in this place, therefore he adds the famine and the sword, to
explain his meaning.

By whom shall I comfort thee?] q. d. And yet there is no man to comfort thee:
For as for the Babylonians, they reproach thee, and revile thee, verse. 7. and
use all cruelty to thee, cap. 47.6. And as for thine own children, they are in
as sad condition as thy self, and are not able to afford thee any comfort; for
they have fainted, etc.

It is some ease to one in misery to have some body to pity him, and to think
that he has some friends left to comfort him: but to know that there is none
to pity, nor a friend left to comfort, this breaks the very heart.

20.
Thy sons have fainted,] i. e. Thy sons have fainted, or are faint, for want of
bread and food to strengthen them.

They lie at the head of all the streets,] i. e. They lie some dead, some ready
to dye, through famine and the sword, at the entrance of every street.

Quest. What streets of what City are here meant?

Ans. The streets of the City of Jerusalem may be here meant: But then
understand this of that which happened presently after the taking of Jerusalem,
for not long after the Jews were carried from thence captive to Babylon. Or the
streets of the City of Babylon may be here meant, where no doubt but many Jews
dyed in the streets, in the time of their captivity, for want of food, and by
reason of that cruelty which was used to them.

As a wild Bull in a net,] Understand here, they are; q. d. They are as a
wild Bull in a net: i. e. Some of thy sons have fainted, others be dead, or
ready to dye, at the head of every street. And if any be in health and strength
of body, yet being he is in chains, and in prison and captivity, he is but as a
wild Bull in a net, or toil, whose strength can avail him nothing, so that
none of thy sons are able to comfort thee.

Note, that these words, Thy sons have fainted, they lie at the head of the
streets, they are as a wild Bull in a net, are not to be understood
collective, but disjunctive, or distributive, as I have expounded them.

They are full of the fury of the Lord,] i. e. They are full of the calamities
and miseries, which the Lord in his fury has poured out upon them.

The fury of the Lord is put here, by a Metonymy, for calamities and miseries
proceeding from the Lords fury.

The rebuke of thy God.] This is a repetition of the former sentence.

Rebuke signifies properly a chiding; but as Gods blessing is not mere verbal,
so is not his rebuke and his cursing; but whom he rebukes, or curses, he
afflicts.

Therefore hear now this, etc.] q. d. Though thy misery be thus great, and thou
have none to comfort thee, no not of all thy sons, neither King, nor Prince,
nor Priest, etc. yet notwithstanding I will comfort thee.

Therefore is put here for yet notwithstanding.

Thou afflicted,] i. e. Thou Jerusalem which art afflicted.

And drunken, but not with wine.] i. e. And drunken, but not with wine and
strong drink, which are pleasant to the palate, and with which most men are
drunk; but with a bitter potion, a potion of poison, a potion which I the Lord
mingled for thee to drink in my fury.

22.
That pleads the cause of his people,] Supple, Against their Enemies; And
will now plead thy cause against the Babylonians, which afflict thee and
oppress thee.

He which pleads a man's cause for him in a Court of Justice, is said to defend
him, and to contend for him: and from hence to plead a man's cause, is taken for
to defend a man in any kind whatsoever, and to fight for him, and be his
friend.

Behold I will take out of thine hand the cup of trembling,] Supple, Which I
gave thee to drink, verse. 17.

By this is meant, that he would afflict Jerusalem no longer.

Even the dregs of the cup of my fury,] This is put, by an Hypallage, for Even
the cup of the dregs of my fury. For Jerusalem had left no dregs in the cup,
she had drunk them up clean, as all Expositors expound the seventeenth Verse.

By the cup of the dregs of his fury, is meant the cup in which were those
dregs of his fury which Jerusalem drunk up, and wrung out.

Thou shall no more drink it again.] q. d. Thou shall not be thus afflicted any
more.

Note, that these words, no more, do not always signify Eternity, but
sometimes a long space of time only, as suppose time within the memory of man.

23.
But I will put it into the hand of them that afflict thee,] But I will fill it
up again, and put it into the hands of the Babylonians which afflict thee, for
them to drink.

The meaning is, that he would deliver Jerusalem out of the hands of the
Babylonians which afflicted her; and would give the Babylonians into the hands
of the Persians to be afflicted by them.

Which have said to thy Soul,] i. e. Which have said to thee.

Here is a synecdoche; For the Soul, which is but part, is put for the whole
woman: for he spoke of Jerusalem as of a Mother.

Bow down, that we may go over,] Supple, Thee: i. e. Lie down flat on the
ground, that we may trample upon thee.

And thou have laid thy body as the ground, and as the street to them that went
over,] Supple, Thee: q. d. And thou have been fain to lay thy body flat on the
ground to them, and they have trampled upon thee, as upon the ground whereon
they walk.

The Eastern Conquerors were wont to tread upon them whom they had conquered:
So Joshua and the men of Israel did put their feet upon the neck of the Kings
whom they had conquered, Josh. 10.24. And in allusion to this it is said, Psalm.
110.1. The Lord said to my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine
Enemies thy footstool. And some did thi^ with more pride and insulting then
others did. But whether our Prophet does allude to this custom or no, I cannot
say; only I say, that by those expressions he would show the proud carriage,
and the cruelty of the Babylonians toward Jerusalem and the Jews.

ISAIAH, CHAP. LII.
AWake, awake,] This may be joined with the foregoing Chapter.

He speaks here to Jerusalem, as he did cap. 50. verse. 17. and bids her, awake
out of her drunken sleep, which was caused by the cup which she drank of, cap.
51.17. intimating thereby, that the end of her miseries was at hand.

Put on strength,] This strength is opposed to the trembling which the cup of
the Lords fury wrought, cap. 50.17.

He speaks of strength here Metaphorically, as of a garment: and when he has
called to Jerusalem to awake, he bids her put on her strength, in allusion to a
man, which when he awakes in a morning, puts on his garments.

O Zion,] i. e. O Jerusalem.

The Prophet speaks here in his own person.

Put on thy beautiful garments,] i. e. Put on thy best apparel, such as thou
usest to wear at festival times, and times of joy.

He alludeth to the manner of women, who have one garment for times of
mourning, others for times of joy: and intimates, that a time of joy was
approaching to Jerusalem, by her redemption, and the redemption of her children
out of captivity, when he bids her, put on her beautiful garments.

O Jerusalem, the holy City;] Why Jerusalem is called the holy City, see Cap.
48. verse. 2.

He speaks to Jerusalem, as to a woman, yea a mother, by a Prosopopoeia, as
before.

From henceforth there shall come no more into thee the uncircumcised, and the
unclean.] i. e. The Babylonians shall no more come into thee, who have of late
come into thee, and trod thee down.

By the uncircumcised and unclean are generally meant the Heathen: see cap. 35.
v. 8. but here, by a Synecdoche generis, the Babylonians.

2.
Shake thy self from the dust,] q. d. Arise from off the ground on which thou
fittest, and shake off the dust which is upon thee: that is, as if he should
say, Leave off thy mourning.

He alludeth to the manner of Mourners in old time, which were wont in their
heaviness to sit on the ground in the dust. See cap. 3.26. and cap. 47.1.

Arise] From off the ground.

And sit down,] Supple, On thy wonted Throne. See cap. 47.1.

Loose thy self from the bands of thy neck,] i. e. Loose the iron bands from
off thy neck. An Hypallage.

He speaks of such iron bands as Captives were wont to wear about their necks:
which bands they wore either in token of their captivity, or that they might be
either linked thereby one to another, or to some posts, that they ran not away.

O captive Daughter of Zion.] i. e. O Jerusalem which art now a captive to the
Babylonians.

Daughter of Zion.] i. e. The Daughter of Zion is put here for Zion, that is,
Jerusalem. See cap. 1.8.

3.
Ye have sold your selves] i. e. Thou and thy Children the Jews have sold your
selves.

How the Jews sold themselves into the hands of the Babylonians, see cap. 50.
verse. 1.

For naught,] i. e. Without money; for the Babylonians gave them no money to
serve them as they did.

And ye shall be redeemed without money.] i. e. And ye shall be freed, yet ye
shall not give money to the Babylonians to set you free: for ye shall be
redeemed by force out of their hands.

4.
My people went down aforetime into Egypt to sojourn there,] Supple, And when
they were there, the Egyptians did grievously afflict them, but I delivered
them out of their afflictions.

All this is here to be understood.

Of the Israelites going down into Egypt, read Genesis 46.6. Of their affliction
in Egypt, read Exodus 1.8, etc. Of their delivery, read Exodus cap. 12, 13, 14.

And the Assyrian oppressed them without cause.] i. e. And after that,
Sennacherib the King of Assyria did oppress my people, having no just cause (on
his part) so to do: Supple, But I did redeem them out of his hands.

All this is here to be understood also.

Concerning Sennacheribs oppressing the Jews, and their delivery from his
oppression, see Cap. 36, 37, of this Book.

5.
Now therefore] Supple, That I delivered my people first out of the hand of the
Egyptian, and then out of the hand of the Assyrian; and the Babylonian has now
carried my people the Jews into captivity, and does there use them with all
cruelty.

What have I here?] i. e. What do I see in the Babylonian, Supple, which I saw
not in the Egyptian and Assyrian?

That my people is taken away for naught:] Supple, By the Babylonian; and I
should not take them out of the hand of the Babylonian, as well as I did take
them out of the hand of the Egyptian and Assyrian.

All this is here to be understood: so that there is a great Brachylogy or
curtness of speech in these two, viz. the fourth and fifth Verses.

For naught:] i. e. Without cause, as verse. 4. Or without money, as verse. 3.

They that rule over them,] i. e. The Babylonians which rule over my people.

Make them to howl,] i. e. Make them to cry and make pitiful lamentation, by
reason of the cruelty with which they use them.

The Lord gives reasons here, why he should deliver his people out of the
hands of the Babylonians, as well as he did out of the hands of the Egyptians
and Assyrians; yea, why he should rather do it: For the Babylonians used his
people more cruelly, then either the Egyptians or the Assyrians did.

And my Name continually every day is blasphemed.] Supple, By the Babylonians,
who say that I am not able to deliver my people out of their hands.

This Blasphemy of the Babylonians was occasioned, partly by the Jews
themselves which were in captivity, because they staggered at the power of God,
and doubted whether he were able to deliver them out of the hands of the
Babylonians or no. See cap. 49. v. 24. cap. 50. v. 2, etc. and Romans 2.24.

My Name] i. e. I.

6.
Therefore my people shall know my Name,] i. e. Therefore my people shall know
me; to wit, How powerful I am, and how faithful in my words to them: and they
shall know me to be such, by my delivery of them out of Babylon.

They shall know in that day, that I am he that does speak.] i. e. They shall
know in that day in which I shall deliver them, that I, who now speak unto
them, am the Lord God: For in that day I will do that, which none but the Lord
God can do.

In that day,] Supple, In which I shall deliver them out of their captivity in
Babylon.

Here is a Relative without an Antecedent.

I am he] i. e. By He is meant He (...), to wit, the Lord God.

I am he that does speak.] Here is an Hypallage, or transposition of words:
For, I am he that does speak, is put for I that do speak am he.

7.
How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that brings good
tidings,] The good tidings here spoken of, are the good tidings of the Jews
deliverance out of the hands of the Babylonians. And the Prophet here, to show
the certainty of this, that the Jews should be delivered out of the hands of
the Babylonians, speaks as though the Jews were already delivered, and that a
Messenger were in sight, which brought news from Babyl^n to Jerusalem of their
deliverance: And therefore he says of the Messenger to them which stood by, as
though they saw him coming, Behold, how beautiful upon the mountains are the
feet of him that brings good tidings! etc.

How beautiful -- are the feet of him, etc.] i. e. How welcome is he, and how
does the sight of him rejoice our hearts!

The feet, which are but part, are put here for the whole man, by a Synecdoche.

They are said of the Hebrews, to have beautiful feet, which come with joyful
news, because men willingly behold their coming (which is performed by the
feet) and are rejoiced at it.

Upon the mountains,] Jerusalem was compass^d about with mountains: Therefore,
as though this Messenger were coming over the mountains toward Jerusalem, he
says, How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet, etc.

That publishes peace,] i. e. That tells abroad, that prosperity and happiness
is befaln the Jews in Babylon, by their delivery by Cyrus.

That brings good tidings of good,] Supple, Which is befaln the Jews in
Babylon.

That publishes Salvation,] i. e. That tells abroad, that Salvation is come to
the Jews in Babylon.

Salvation,] By salvation is meant the delivery of the Jews out of captivity.

That says unto Sion,] By Sion is here meant Jerusalem, the holy City, which
he speaks of as a woman or mother, by a Prosopopoeia.

Thy God reigns.] God is said to reign in general, when he does show, by any
act worthy his greatness, that he is King; and in particular here he is said to
reign, because he showed his Kingly Power in the delivery of his people out of
the hands of their Enemies the Babylonians.

That which Isaiah speaks here of a Messenger bringing good news of peace and
salvation, befaln the Jews in Babylon, Saint Paul speaks of the Apostles and
Ministers of Christ preaching peace and salvation by Christ: and this may both
do; Isaiah in the first, Saint Paul in the second and sublime sense: For (as I
have often said) as the temporal miseries of the Jews under their Enemies were
a type of our spiritual miseries under Sin and Satan, that grand Enemy of
mankind: so were the Deliverances of the Jews out of those miseries, types of
our deliveries by Christ, and of that Salvation which we have by him. And the
Holy Ghost does often so order the words of the Prophets, that they shall
signify as well one, as the other, word by word in particular.

8.
Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice,] i. e. Thy watchmen, which shall stand
upon thy towers, shall lift up their voice, and cry, and shout aloud for joy, O
Sion.

He alludeth to the Watchmen which use to stand upon the Towers of great
Cities, to give notice of any danger, or any great company approaching to the
City. See cap. 21.5.

Why these Watchmen shall lift up their voice, he tells a little after, viz.
because they shall see when the Lord brings again Zion.

But why does h^ mention the Watchmen here, rather then any other?

Ans. Because they shall see, when the Lord brings Si^n again, before any
other, as being placed in the high Towers, and set purposely to watch what
companies approach to the City.

With the voice together shall they sing,] i. e. They shall sing with a loud
voice.

Together] This word signifies All.

For they shall see] Supple, From the Towers whereon they stand.

They shall see eye to eye,] i. e. They shall see very plainly and evidently,
and not be deceived in their sight.

When the Lord shall bring again Sion.] The Preposition To is here to be
understood, as also it is left to be understood in the Hebrew Text, cap. 35.10.
and cap. 51.11. though it is there expressed in our Translation, and not here:
The sense therefore of this place is this; When the Lord shall bring again to
Sion: that is, When the Lord shall bring his people back again out of Babylon,
the place of their captivity, to Sion their own City.

Here is such an (...), as in those words, cap. 49.8. To cause to inherit the
desolate heritages. Yet by Sion may be here meant the Jews, the children and
inhabitants of Sion; either as the same Jews are called Jacob, because they are
the children of Jacob, cap. 41.14. Or as Kir is taken for the Citizens and
Inhabitants of Kir, cap. 22.6.

9.
Ye waste places of Jerusalem,] See cap. 51.3.

The Lord has comforted his people,] Supple, Which were in captivity in
Babylon, by setting them free again.

He has redeemed Jerusalem,] Supple, Out of her captivity: For she also was a
captive, verse. 2. and cap. 49.21.

He speaks of the City of Jerusalem as of a captive.

He speaks also, as if the Lord had comforted his people, and redeemed
Jerusalem already at this time. And so do the Prophets often speak, before the
thing they speak of is come to pass, to signify, that it shall as surely come
to pass, as if it were already come.

10.
The Lord has made bare his holy arm,] i. e. The Lord has showed his peerless
power, viz. in overthrowing the Babylonians (whose power was thought
invincible,) and in delivering and bringing back again his people out of
captivity.

Note here, that the arm of the Lord is put for the power of the Lord; and
therefore is it put for the power of the Lord, because the Prophet speaks here
of the Lord as of a man, by an (...): and the strength and power of a man is
seen in his arm.

Again, because that a man, when he would show his arm, must strip up the
sleeve of the arm, and make it bare, he puts the making bare of the Lords arm,
for the showing of his power.

His holy arm,] i. e. His matchless arm, his peerless power: For the word holy
signifies that which is separated from other things by way of excellency. See
Notes, cap. 6.3.

And all the ends of the Earth] i. e. All they which dwell at the ends of the
Earth, that is, All the Heathen.

Shall see the salvation of our God.] i. e. Shall see the Salvation which our
God has wrought for his people, which were captive to the Babylonians, by
Cyrus.

11.
Depart ye, depart ye,] This is spoken in particular to the Levites which were
in Babylon, intimating that they might go freely thence out of captivity: and
it is spoken, as if Cyrus had already subdued Babylon, and vanquished the
Babylonians, and given the Jews leave to depart thence to their own Land.

Go ye out from thence,] i. e. Go ye out from Babylon.

Here is a Relative put without an Antecedent, (...).

Touch no unclean thing,] q. d. Touch no unclean thing, thereby to defile your
selves, and make your selves unclean.

The unclean things here mentioned, were such as caused legal uncleanness in
those that touched them, or such as those were which we read of, Levit. 11.24,
25, 26, etc. and Lev. 22.4, etc. which uncleanness was not to be upon the
Levites, when they did any way minister about the vessels of the Lord, that is,
about the vessels of the Temple or Sanctuary, because they were holy things.

Go out of the midst of her,] i. e. Go out of her, that is, out of Babylon.

Be ye clean,] i. e. If ye are clean, keep your selves clean: If ye are not
clean, but are defiled by touching some unclean thing, be ye cleansed and
purified, that ye may be clean.

That bear the vessels of the Lord.] i. e. O ye Levites.

By the vessels of the Lord are here meant the vessels of the Sanctuary, or of
the Temple, which were consecrated to the service of the Lord; which kind of
vessels the Levites were appointed to carry, Numb. 1.50. and 2.8, etc. By these
therefore which bore the vessels of the Lord are meant the Levites, which were
appointed to carry those vessels. See Ezra 8.30.

Note here, that when the Babylonians had taken Jerusalem, Nebuzaradan, one of
the Captains of Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, carried the vessels of the
Temple away into Babylon, 2 King. 25. verse. 14, 15, etc. These vessels there
continued during all the time of the Jews captivity; and when Cyrus delivered
the Jews out of captivity, he gave them also these vessels of the house of the
Lord, which were brought from Jerusalem, to carry to Jerusalem back again, Ezra
1. verse. 7, 8, etc. And being that the Levites were by their Office to carry
them, he says to the Levites, Touch no unclean thing, be ye clean, ye which
bear the vessels of the Lord.

12.
For ye shall not go with haste, nor go with flight,] i. e. The Prophet
prevents an Objection here: For whereas he bids the Levites which were unclean,
to purify themselves, they might object and say, It may be we shall not have
time to purify our selves: for we may go out of Babylon in haste, and by
flight; and they which go in haste, and by flight, cannot find so much time
and leisure, as to purify themselves. To prevent this Objection therefore, the
Prophet says, Ye shall not go out with haste, nor go with flight.

For the Lord will go before you, and the God of Israel will be your reerward.]
He gives a reason here, to prove, that they should not need to go out with
haste, nor go with flight: And the reason consists in this, that they that go
out of any place in haste, or go with flight, they haste and fly because they
are in fear: But they which shall go out of Babylon need not to be in fear of
any thing; for they need not to fear any thing, who have the Lord to go before
them, and the Lord to come after them, Psalm. 23.4. But they which shall go out
of Babylon shall have the Lord to go before them, and the God of Israel to be
their reerward: Therefore they need not go in haste, or go with flight.

For the Lord will go before you,] Supple, as a Captain, and will secure you
against all that shall go about to oppose you, or set upon you in the front.

And the God of Israel will be your reerward.] q. d. And the God of Israel will
march in your Rear, and come behind you, and defend you, so that none shall
fall upon your backs.

13.
Behold my servant shall deal prudently,] This is the beginning of a new
Sermon, wherefore many make it the beginning also of a new Chapter.

That this and the next Chapter is meant of Christ, at least in the second and
more sublime sense, no Christian ever denied, and many Jews have confessed it:
For indeed no Scripture of the Old Testament has so many plain characters of
Christ together, as this has; which are so plain, as that they might seem
rather to have been written after Christ's time, then to have been foretold of
Christ so many ages before.

But yet (I doubt not) but that as it is understood of Christ in the second and
more sublime sense; so it is to be understood of some other in a first and
meaner sense. But of whom it is so understood is a question, yet I take it to
be understood of the Prophet Jeremy, as being, by reason of his many
sufferings, a most express type of Christ; and to him it will very well agree.

Behold my servant shall deal prudently,] q. d. Behold my servant Jeremy shall
behave himself wisely, in the execution of that Prophetical Office, into which
I shall put him.

He speaks here in the person of God.

He shall be exalted, and extolled, and be very high,] Jeremy was in great
esteem and account with the Caldeans in his life time, Jer. 39. verse. 11, etc.
and cap. 40. And his memory was precious with Alexander the great, and others,
after his death.

14.
As many were astonished at thee (his visage was so marred, more then any man,
and his form more then the sons of men.) q. d. As many shall wonder to see or
hear that he should be so despitefully used, and cast into prison, yea into a
dirty dungeon, and there pine with hunger and stink, and noysomness, etc.

Note here first, that a preterperfect tense is put for a future. Note
secondly, that To thee is put for To him, a second for a third person; and that
the second and the third person are used here promiscuously of one and the same
man, to wit, Jeremy. Note thirdly, that Jeremy is here said to have his visage
marred more then any man, and his form more then the sons of men, because
Jeremy was much changed in his countenance because of his hard usage and cruel
imprisonment, which is able to alter the countenance of any man, and to make
the most beautiful face to look ill-favored.

Concerning Jeremy's hard usage and imprisonment, see Jerem. 37. v. 15. cap.
38. v. 6, 28, etc.

15.
So shall he sprinkle many Nations,] Supple, With astonishment and admiration:
that is, So shall he make many Nations to admire at him, even to astonishment,
etc.

Understand this especially of the Babylonians, and the Nations which were
under them.

As they admired at Jeremy, to see or hear of his pitiful looks, which he had
by hard usage, verse. 14. So here they shall admire at him for his gift of
Prophecy, and other virtue, which they shall see and understand to be in him.

Shall he sprinkle] This word is used here Metaphorically.

So Pindarus, Pyth. Od. 8.

(...)
(...).
I adorn Alcmaon with Crowns,
And I besprinkle him with an Hymn.
The Kings shall shut their mouths at him,] The Kings shall admire at him, even
to silence.

Understand this especially of the King of Babylon, and the Kings which served
him.

Silence, as it is a sign of other things, so it is sometimes a sign of wonder
and admiration.

For that which had not been told them, shall they see,] i. e. And they shall
see; that is, And they shall believe that which he had foretold, and which they
never heard before from any of their Wizzards.

For is put here for And.

That which had not been told them,] Supple, By any of their Wizzards or
Southsayers, but was told them by him.

Shall they see,] Shall many Nations and their Kings believe.

To see is sometimes taken for to believe. See Notes, cap. 6.10.

And that which they had not heard] i. e. And that which they had not heard
from any of their Wizzards or Southsayers, but they heard from him.

Shall they consider.] i. e. Shall they think upon, as they which seriously
think upon that which they believe shall surely come to pass.

The Nations and their Kings, which saw many things exactly fulfilled in their
days which Jeremy had foretold, were thereby induced to believe many other
things which Jeremy had foretold, though they were not at that time as yet
fulfilled.

That which Jeremy foretold, and the Kings and Nations believed; and that which
they heard from him, and considered, may be meant especially (and is meant, as
I conceive) of that which Jeremy prophesied of the Jews being in captivity, and
serving the Babylonians seventy years; of which see Ierem. 25.11.

ISAIAH, CHAP. LIII.
WHo has believed our report?] This must be continued with the end of the
former Chapter: for the better Connection whereof, some understand the
Adversative Conjunction But: q. d. But who has believed our report? i. e. B^t
who, supple, among you, O ye men of Judah and Jerusalem, have believed what I
Isaiah, and other the servants of the Lord, have reported to you, supple,
concerning your delivery out of the Babylonish Captivity?

The Prophet here foreseeing that the Nations and Kings would reverence Jeremy,
and believe what he prophesied to them concerning their happy success, takes
occasion, from their readiness to believe what Ie^emy prophesied to them of
their good success, to complain of the Jews slowness to believe what he and
other servants of the Lord prophesied to them concerning the happy event of
their captivity out of Babylon: q. d. The Gentiles will believe Jeremy
prophesying to them of their good success; but ye Jews will not believe me, nor
any other servant of the Lord, prophesying to you of your deliverance out of
Babylon.

And to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?] i. e. And who (among you, O ye
men of Judah and Jerusalem) has believed, that the power of the Lord is such,
as I and other the Lords servants have delivered to you? that is, That it is
such, as that he is able thereby to deliver you out of the hand of the
Babylonians, be the strength of the Babylonians never so great.

To whom] Supple, Of you, O ye men of Judah and Jerusalem.

The arm of the Lord] i. e. The power of the Lord.

The arm of the Lord is put here for the power of the Lord, by a Metonymy, as
cap. 52.10.

That which made the Jews to despair, and not to believe what the Prophets
prophesied concerning their delivery out of Babylon, was, the great strength of
the Babylonians, and that world of men which were under them, and ready to
serve them: wherefore, to remove this obstacle out of their minds, the
Prophets often alleged the power of God, and put them in mind of that, though
they did not listen to it with that ear as they should have done, nor believe
it.

Revealed] i. e. Revealed with effect; that is, with that effect which was
intended, which was, that they should believe what was revealed.

Thus much of the first or meaner sense of this Prophecy, as it concerned
Jeremy: I return now to the second or sublime sense, as it concerns Christ.
CHAP. 52. Verse. 13.
Behold my servant] These are the words of God the Father, concerning his Son
Jesus Christ.

Christ Jesus, though he were the Son of God, yet might God call him his
servant, in respect of that work which he gave him to do, Joh. 4.34. and 9.4.
and in that, that Christ took upon him the form of a servant, Philip. 2.7.

Shall deal prudently,] Supple, In the managing of that work which I shall give
him to manage.

He shall be exalted, and extolled, and be very high.] These words signify all
one and the same thing, viz. That Christ should be exalted both in Heaven and
Earth, for the wise managing of his Fathers work.

14.
As many were astonished at thee,] i. e. As many shall wonder at him.

He puts a preterperfect tense for a future, and thee for him, by an Enallage
of the person.

His visage was so marred more then any man,] This was fulfilled in Christ,
when he was buffeted, spit upon, scourged, crowned with thorns, etc. Matthew. 27.
For the sufferings of Christ after this manner could not but man his visage,
though it were in it self very comely.

And his form more then the sons of men.] This is a repetition of the former
sentence.

15.
So shall he sprinkle many Nations,] Supple, With admiration.

The Kings shall shut their mouths at him,] q. d. The Kings of the Gentiles
shall be even silent, and not able to speak for wondering at him.

For that which had not been told them, shall they see,] i. e. And that which
had not been told them by any other then by Christ and his Apostles and
Servants (which shall be inspired by him) shall they see and believe.

Shall they see,] i. e. Shall they believe. See cap. 6. v. 10.

That which he says here, that the Gentiles and their Kings should believe,
was, the Gospel of Christ, which was preached unto them in its due time, and
which they believed being preached unto them. See Romans 15.21.

And that which they have not heard] Supple, From any other, then from Christ,
and his Apostles and Servants.

Shall they consider.] Supple, With faithful and believing hearts.

This last is a repetition of the foregoing sentence.

Note here, that the Holy Ghost has so ordered the words of the Prophet, as
that they do not only signify what Jeremy prophesied of in the first and
meaner sense, and what the Babylonians believed; but they signify also what
Christ and his Apostles preached to the Gentiles, and they received.

Note again, that the prosperous success of the Babylonians over the Jews
(which was here especially meant in the first sense) seems to have been a type
of that happy and prosperous estate, which the Gentiles should enjoy, and do
enjoy, by Christ, over their spiritual Enemies, which is here meant in the
second and sublime sense: For probable it is, that the temporal happiness which
the Nations enjoyed, and the success which they had in their worldly affairs,
was sometimes a type of the spiritual happiness which the Gentiles were to have
by Christ.

CHAP. 53.
1.
Who has believed our report?] q. d. But who among you, O ye Jews, has
believed our report? That is, q. d. But though the Gentiles have believed the
Gospel, and will believe it, yet who among you, O ye Jews, has believed the
Gosp^l which we have preached unto you?

We understand To But here, as many Interpreters also do.

This is spoken in the person of Christ and his Apostles to the Jews, and
hereby the unbelief of the Jews is foretold and prophesied of, Joh. 12. verse.
38. Romans 10. verse. 16.

And to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?] i. e. And to which of you (O ye
Jews) is the Gospel so revealed by us, as that he does believe it.

This is a repetition of the former sentence; and by the arm of the Lord is
meant the Gospel o^ Christ.

But how comes the arm of the Lord to signify the Gospel of Christ?

Ans. The arm of the Lord signifies the power of the Lord, (as was said in the
first Exposition of this place:) And therefore, because the Gospel is called
the power of God unto salvation, Romans 1.16. may the arm of the Lord be put to
signify the Gospel, which is the power of God, by a Metonymical Metaphor.

Note, that Isaiah and other Prophets of the Lord, preaching to the Jews of
their delivery out of the Babylonish captivity, and the Jews of that time not
giving credit to what Isaiah and the other Prophets preached, were a type of
Christ, and of his Apostles and Disciples, preaching to the Jews the Gospel (in
the time of the Gospel,) and of the infidelity of the Jews then living, in not
believing the Gospel which was preached to them. And that which Isaiah and
other Prophets of the Lord preached to the Jews, concerning their delivery out
of the Babylonish captivity, might well be a type of the Gospel preached to the
Jews in after-days: for the delivery of the Jews out of their temporal and
bodily afflictions, was a type of the spiritual and eternal Salvation which
they had by Christ, which Salvation is contained in the Gospel.

2.
For he shall grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry
ground:] Having explained the Text from the thirteenth Verse of the foregoing
Chapter hitherto, according to the second and sublime sense thereof, I return
now to the first and meaner sense of what follows.

For he shall grow up] i. e. Now Jeremy shall grow up.

Note, that the Particle For is not a Conjunction causal here, but signifies
as much as Now: as where it is said, Now the Birth of Jesus Christ was on this
wise, Mat. 1.18. And now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled, etc.
Mat. 1.22.

The Prophet does here describe that servant of the Lord, which he spoke of,
Cap. 52.11. even Jeremy, and foretells what manner of man he should be, and
what should befall him in his life time, and in his death.

Before him] i. e. Before the Lord, Supple, As a Servant before his Master: For
this phrase intimates the relation of a Servant to his Master. See 1 King.
10.8.

As a tender plant, and as root out of a dry ground:] Note, that these words
[out of a dry ground] relate as well to those [a tender plant] as to those [a
root.] Now a tender plant, or a root, which springs out of a dry ground, does
not thrive so well, as that which grows in a fertile soil, neither is it so
luxuriant, but small, and slender, and skragged.

The Question therefore will be, Why Jeremy is here compared to a tender plant,
or root, growing up out of a dry ground?

Ans. Some say, to signify, that he should be a man of a meagre and spare
body: Others, to show, that he should be a man but of small fortunes, and of
little wealth and worldly estate.

As a root] By a root understand here a sprout sprouting out of a root, by a
Metonymy, as cap. 11.10.

The Prophet, by likening Jeremy here to a tender plant and root, seems to
intimate, that Jeremy should serve the Lord in his tender y^ars; and so he did,
for the Lord called him while he was a child, Jer. 1. verse. 6.

He has no form or comeliness:] i. e. He shall not be a man of any amiable
face or lovely countenance.

He puts a preterperfect tense for a future.

When we shall see him] i. e. When he shall be born, and shall live among us.

There is no beauty that we shall desire him.] i. e. We shall see no loveliness
in his visage.

Jeremy is thought to have been a man of a sad, wan, and meagre countenance.

3.
He is despised and rejected of men,] i. e. He shall be despised and
disrespected of men.

He puts here a present or a preterperfect tense for a future, as before.

A man of sorrow,] i. e. A man full of sorrows, and as it were composed thereof.

And acquainted with griefs:] i. e. And a man which feels griefs thoroughly.

This speech is metaphorical, and seems to be taken from such, who not only
know one another by sight, or by hearsay, but are familiarly conversant and
thoroughly acquainted one with another, by conversing long together.

We hid as it were our faces from him.] To wit, As though we scorned to look
upon him, or as though we abhorred him.

4.
Surely he has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows,] q. d. Whereas Jeremy
has been a man of sorrows, and acquainted with griefs, truly we were they
which did put him to these griefs, and to these sorrows, by those afflictions
which we laid upon him.

The griefs and sorrows which Jeremy did bear, they call their griefs and their
sorrows, because they proceeded from them, and they were the cause and authors
of them, by that hard usage with which they used him.

This is spoken in the person of those good and godly Jews, which lived after
the taking of Jerusalem by the Babylonians, who by a (...) reckon themselves
among those wicked Jews which persecuted and tormented Jeremy.

Yet we esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted.] q. d. Yet we
esteemed him as stricken of God, and smitten and afflicted by his just
judgment; As though he had had been a most notorious sinner, and that God would
not suffer him to escape, but would stir up the people to take vengeance of him
for his sins, and particularly for his prophesying against Jerusalem, and
against the Temple, Jerem. 26.9.

Note, that we must understand those words, Of God, as well after stricken and
afflicted, as after smitten.

5.
But he was wounded for our transgressions,] q. d. But he was not stricken of
God, and smitten and afflicted by him, in way of vengeance; but he was wounded
of us, through our hardness of heart, and hatred, and malice against him.

For our transgressions,] i. e. Through our transgressions; to wit, Because we
were wicked.

Note, that the Hebrew Prefix, Mem, signifies Through, as well as For, and
denotes the efficient cause, and whatsoever is reducible thereto, as well as
the final: and therefore the Preposition From must either be taken here in the
same latitude as the Hebrew Prefix Mem is; or else (while we interpret the Text
according to the first and meaner sense) we must render Mem, Through, or By
reason of.

Note secondly, that by the transgressions here spoken of, are meant the Jews
hardness of heart, by which they would not believe what Jeremy prophesied; and
their hatred and malice which they conceived against him, because he prophesied
not unto them pleasing things, but such things as they could not endure to hear
of: For because he reprehended them for their sins, and prophesied of their
overthrow, and the overthrow of the City and of the Temple, and of their
captivity by the Babylonians, they conceived such hatred and malice against
him, as that they thought no affliction or punishment too much for him, no
though they killed him.

He was bruised for our iniquities:] This is a repetition of the former
sentence.

The chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are
healed.] q.d. Yet we said, ( Supple, when we wounded and bruised him, that) the
chastisement of our peace was upon him, etc.

Understand here those words, Yet we said; for those and the like words are
often left to be understood, as cap. 33.14. Ioh. 7. v. 28. Acts 1. v. 4.
Understand also those, When we wounded and bruised him; which are easy to be
understood, from the foregoing words.

The chastisement of our peace was upon him,] i. e. That chastisement was upon
him, which would appease the wrath of God, and procure our peace.

As Ahab thought of Elijah, that he was he which troubled Israel, 1 King.
18.17. So did the Jews think at this time of Jeremy. And as our Savior said to
his Disciples, that the time comes, that whosoever kills you, will think
that ^e does God service, Joh. 16.2. So did the Jews think even now concerning
Jeremy, that they did God good service in persecuting and afflicting him; yea,
they thought it a meritorious work, and that God, though he had threatened them
with the sword, yet he would give them peace for afflicting and persecuting him.

And with his stripes we are healed.] i. e. And by the stripes which we lay
upon him, shall we be healed; that is, shall we be delivered from the grief and
fear which we conceive from that calamity which is threatened against us.

This is, for sense, the same with the foregoing words: and as for the phrase
and metaphor of healing, we have the like, Jerem. 6.14.

6.
All we like sheep have gone astray,] i. e. All we have erred from the
Commandments of the Lord, and have sinned against him.

The Law of the Lord is often likened to a way, and the transgression thereof
to a going astray, and erring from that way.

We have turned every one to his own way,] i. e. Every one has followed his
own lusts, and what likes him best.

And the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all.] i. e. And yet the Lord
has suffered us all to afflict him and smite him, as though he were the only
sinner, and we were all innocent.

And is put here for Yet.

The Lord has laid on him] i. e. The Lord has suffered us to lay on him.

Note, that Verbs Active do often carry with them the signification of
permitting or suffering among the Hebrews.

The iniquity] Iniquity is taken here for punishment and affliction proceeding
from their iniquity; that is, proceeding from their hatred and malic^, as the
cause thereof, and lighting upon Jeremy, per Metonymiam causae.

7.
He was oppressed,] The Prophet speaks here again in his own person, and he
speaks of things to come as of things present or past, after a Prophetique
manner.

Yet he opened not his mouth:] To wit, through impatience, but bare all
pati^ntly.

He is brought as a Lamb to the slaughter,] i. e. He was brought to his
sufferings as a Lamb is brought to the slaughter: for as a Lamb goes quietly
to the slaughter, so did he to his sufferings, showing all meekness and
gentleness of spirit therein.

Note here the confusion of tenses, how the preterperfect and the present tense
are confounded together, and used as if they were the same tense.

As a sheep before the shearers is dumb,] Sheep, though they are under the
hands of the shearer, are dumb, and cry not, though the shearers cut off their
fleeces, and take them away.

So be opens not his mouth.] Viz. Through anger and impatience, though his
Enemies dealt never so ill with him.

8.
He was taken from prison, and from judgment,] Jeremy was put into prison (to
which he was condemned, under a show and pretense of justice) by Zedekiah King
of Judah, Jerem. 32.2. and he was delivered thence by Nebuchadnezzar King of
Babylon, Jer. 39.11, 12, 13, 14.

From judgment,] i. e. From Imprisonment, which he calls judgment, because he
was condemned to it (as we said) under a show or color of justice.

And who shall declare his generation?] i. e. Yet who can declare the men of
his generation? that is, the men of his age, amongst whom he lived, to wit, how
wicked and malicious they were?

And is put here for Yet, or But yet: And by his generation is meant the men of
his age amongst whom he lived, as Matthew. 11.16. Acts 13.36. And who shall
declare, is put here for who can declare; the Future tense of the Indicative
mood for a Potential.

For he was cut off from the land of the living] q. d. For though the
Babylonians did deliver him out of prison, yet at length the Jews (amongst whom
he lived) took him and put him to death in Egypt.

It is likely that the Jews which fled into Egypt, and lived there, had leave
from the King of Egypt to exercise Authority and Jurisdiction among themselves,
and that by this Authority and Jurisdiction they did put Jeremy to death.

For the transgression of my people was he stricken.] i. e. He was slain
through the wickedness of my Brethren and Countrymen the Jews.

For is put here for Through. See Verse. 5.

9.
And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death;] i. e.
And when he was dead, he was buried among the wicked, and among the rich.

Jeremy being condemned and put to death in Taphnes, a City of Egypt, as a
Malefactor, by the Jews, who had leave from the King of Egypt to exercise
Authority and Jurisdiction among themselves while they were in Egypt, was no
doubt buried by the Jews, as a Malefactor, among the Malefactors; and so did he
make his grave with the wicked. But afterward his body was removed and buried
among the Kings of Egypt, because of the high esteem which the Egyptians had of
him, by reason of his sanctity of life, and of the gift of Prophecy, which was
in him. Yea, Alexander the great removed his bones from Taphnes to Alexandria,
and there adorned them with a rich monument; And so did Jeremy make his grave
with the Rich in his death.

Because he had done no violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth:] i. e.
Because he had not offended either in deed, or in word: For there was no
violence in his actions, nor fraud in his speech.

Note, that these words relate to those which went immediately before, to wit,
to those, with the rich in his death, as containing a reason why he was so
honorably interred, which was, because he was a righteous and an holy man.

10.
Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him,] q. d. Though he had not offended
either in deed or in word, yet it pleased the Lord to suffer them to bruise him.

To bruise him,] i. e. To suffer them, to wit, the Jews, among whom he lived,
to bruise him. See verse. 6.

He has put him to grief,] i. e. He has suffered them to put him to grief.

When thou shall make his Soul an offering for sin,] q. d. Yet when thou shall
bruise him, and put him to grief; i. e. Yet when thou shall suffer the Jews to
bruise him, and put him to grief.

The Prophet makes an Apostrophe here to the Lord.

His Soul] i. e. Him.

Here is Synecdoche partis; for a part is put for the whole man.

An offe ing for sin,] Note here, that the word in the Original, which is here
rendered an offering for sin, is ASCHAM, which signifi^th properly and
primarily sin; but by a Metonymy it may signify sometimes an offering for sin,
sometimes a punishment for sin, and sometimes him which is afflicted or
punished for sin; yea, by a Catachrestical Metonymy, it may not only signify
a punishment for sin, and him that is punished for sin; b^t a puni^hment or
affliction in general, which is inflicted upon a man, not for sin, but with a
pretense only of sin, and for a subject of affliction and punishment; that is,
For any one which is afflicted and punished, if he be afflicted or punish^d as
if he were guilty, though he be not guilty: As the word CHETE, which signifies
sin as ASCHAM does, signifies sometime, by a Metonymy, a punishment injustly
inflicted, because it is inflicted, not upon one that is guilty, but upon one
that is only thought to be guilty: as will appear Genes. 31.39. And sometimes
again it signifies him that is so punished.

That therefore which is here rendered an offering for sin, must be rendered a
punishment, or a subject of punishment and affliction; or else we must
interpret an offering for sin, a punishment, or subject of punishment and
affliction, making To an offering for sin of eq^al latitude with the Hebrew
word ASCHAM; for which we may have a warrant even from the Apostle: For the
Apostle does sometimes make a word of another language to be of equal latitude
with an Hebrew word, though in its own nature it is too narrow for it: So does
he make the Greek word (...), which signifies to speak the truth, to be of
equal signification with the Hebrew word AMAN, which signifies not only to
speak truth, but also to be firm and constant, Ephesians. 4.15. But more of this in
the Preface.

Note, that whereas many passages of this book have a twofold sense, one
relating to some History before Christ, another to something more nearly
concerning Christ; and this Prophecy relates both to Jeremy as the Type, and
to Christ as the Antitype: And whereas the words in the Hebrew Text are so
ordered and chosen, as that they do signify both these senses, which cannot so
well be expressed in any other language as in that: The Translators of our
Bible aimed more at that sense which immediat^ly concerned Christ (as being
more sublime, and as it were the kernel, whereas the other is but as it were
the shell) then at the other. Wherefore they not having words to signify both
senses, so fit as they are signified in the Hebrew, chose words which signified
what is immediately prophesied of Christ the Antitype, rather then what is
prophesied of the Type.

The Lord is said here to make Jeremy a punishment, or a subject of punishment
and affl ction, because he suffered the Jews to punish him and afflict him; who
though he spoke nothing to them, but the Word of the Lord, yet did they punish
him and afflict him as a Malefactor; as for other reasons, so because he
prophesied against Jerusalem, and against the Temple, Jer. 26.

He shall see his seed,] q. d. He shall even then beget children.

By seed he means children, but not natural children, but spiritual, begotten
not by the seed of the flesh, but by the seed of the Word. Thus does Saint Paul
call himself a father, and s^ith, that he begot the Corinthians through the
Gospel, 1 Cor. 4. v. 15. See the like, 1 Pet. 1.23. In a word, Those whom Je
emy won to God by his Ministry, are here called his seed, or his children.

It is a greater wonder for Jeremy to beget spiritual children in his
afflictions, then if he had been never afflicted: for afflictions occasion
offenses, and are as stumbling blocks in the way of those which would come to
God.

He shall prolong his day^,] q. d. And though thou do bruise him, and put him
to grief, yet he shall prolong his days.

Jeremy lived a long time, considering his afflictions and persecutions; yea,
he lived a good while after he was carried away into Egypt.

And the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hands.] i. e. And he shall
convert many, and bring them into the right way which have erred; which is a
work which is well pleasing to the Lord, and which it was the Lord will and
pleasure to commit to him.

11.
He shall see of the travel of his Soul,] i. e. He shall see the fruits of his
pains and travel which he shall take, in converting and turning many to God.

The travel of his Soul,] i. e. His travel.

The Soul, which is but a part, is put here for the whole man.

And shall be satisfied:] i. e. And shall take content and delight therein.

These words contain a Metaphor, and a Metonymy; the Metaphor is taken from a
man which has hungered and thirsted, and now is satisfied with meat and drink:
The Metonymy consists in that, that such fullness or satisfaction brings
content and a kind of delight with it. Now as a man, which has been pinched
with hunger and thirst, takes delight and content in his fullness, when he is
satisfied; so did Jeremy, who hungered and thirsted after the Conversion of the
Jews, take delight and content in their conversion, whom he had converted.

By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many,] i. e. My servant
Jeremy (who notwithstanding the calumny of the Jews) is a righteous man, and
performs my work uprightly, shall, by the knowledge which he has of my Will
and of my Law, bring many who have sinned to repentance, whereby they shall be
justified from their sins.

For he shall bear their iniquities.] i. e. For he shall take away their sins.

He speaks of sins or iniquities here, as of dirt or filth (by a Metaphor,)
which he that takes away, that he might cleanse the place which is defiled
herewith, takes up upon his shoulders in a Basket, and so carries or bears
away.

Jeremy took away the sins of many, by preaching to them the Word of God, and
by reclaiming them by his holy conversation.

If Paul may be said to save some by his preaching and conversation, Romans
10.14. and he which converteth a sinner from the error of his way, may be said
to save a Soul, Jam. 5.20. Then may Jeremy also be said to justify many, and
to bear or take away their iniquities, by his preaching and holy living.

12.
Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the
spoil with the strong, etc.] This is spoken of Jeremy in the person of God, and
that which the Lord says here of Jeremy, was performed when the Babylonians
took Judah and Jerusalem: For when the Babylonians had took Jerusalem, and had
conquered Judah with the sword, Nebuzaradan, Captain of the Guard of King
Nebuchadnezzar, did so much respect Jeremy, as that he gave him victuals and a
reward, and gave him the choice of his dwelling, to dwell where he himself
would: Jer. 40.5. See also Jer. 15.11.

Therefore I will divide him a portion, etc.] This Relative word Therefore,
relates not so much to what went before (though it may also relate to that) as
to what follows after in this Verse, to wit, to that, Because he has poured
out his Soul unto death, etc. q. d. Because he has poured out his Soul unto
death, etc. Therefore I will divide him a portion, etc.

I will divide him a portion with the great,] i. e. I will divide him a portion
with the Babylonians, which are great in power: For when the Babylonians have
overcome Judah and Jerusalem, and taken the spoils thereof, they shall give
Jeremy a portion of the spoils, and of the Land which they have taken.

And he shall divide the spoil with the strong,] This is a repetition of the
former sentence.

Because he has poured out his Soul unto death:] i. e. Because he did not fear
death, but did willingly hazard his life in preaching the Word which I gave him
to preach, and in performing the work in which I employed him. See Jerem. 26.
verse. 13, 14, 15.

And he was numbered with the transgressors,] i. e. And because he was
accounted as a Malefactor for doing my work, and preaching my Word, and was
imprisoned and used as a Malefactor.

And he bare the sin of many,] And because he bore the sin of many.

Jeremy may be said to bear the sin of many, either because he brought them to
repentance, and so bore, that is, took away their sin, of which see verse. 11.
Or because he suffered many grievous things at the hands of the Jews, through
their hatred and malice toward him; of which see verse. 5. And in this last
sense, the sin of many, is taken for the hard usage and punishment which they
did inflict upon Jeremy through their sin, that is, through their hatred and
malice which they bore against him, by a Metonymie: And this last Sense seems
most agreeable to this place.

And made intercession for the transgressours] i. e. And because he made
intercession and prayed to God to have mercy upon them, who did persecute and
imprison him.

VERSE 2.
For he shall grow up before him] Having interpreted this Chapter from the
second verse hitherto in the first and meaner sense, I return to the Second
verse to interpret this Chapter from thence to the end, in the second and more
sublime sense.

For he shall grow up] i. e. Now the Messiah (called the Servant of the Lord,
Cap. 52.13. shall grow up.

Before him] i. e. In his Service.

As a tender Plant, and as a root out of a dry ground] i. e. As a tender Plant
and as a root which springs out of dry ground; For as a plant or root which
springs out of a dry ground does not thrive so well as that which grows out
of a fertile soil, neither is so luxuriant, but is small and slender and
skragged: So Christ shall not be (in regard of worldly riches) any great man;
neither shall he abound with worldly wealth.

So far was Christ from having any abundance of worldly riches, as that he
had not of his own where to lay his head, Matthew. 8.20.

By saying that he shall grow up as a tender plant, he intimates that the
Messiah should be employed in the Lords work in his tender years, and so he
was, Luke 2.46.

He has no form and comeliness, and when we shall see him, there is no
beauty that we should desire him] This some would have to be understood of
Christ all the time of his mortality: And they which do so, do and must apply
it to the outward condition and estate of Christ in respect of wealth and
honor and worldly pomp; For they cannot apply it to the feature and form and
beauty of his body: For it is generally received that Christ was a man of a
goodly countenance and frame of body, and to him do many apply that of the
Psalmist according to the letter: Thou art fairer than the Children of men,
grace is powered into thy lips etc. Psalm. 45.2.

Others would have this to be understood of Christ only in his latter days,
and days of his suffering, in which days though Christ was naturally
beautiful, and of a lively countenance, his beauty was much marr^d, and his
countenance d^formed by the spittings, buffettings, wounds, and griefs which he
sustained.

3.
He is despised and rejected of men] i. e. He shall be despised and rejected of
men.

He uses a Praeterperfect T^nse for a Future after a Prophetique manner, to
show the certainty of what he speaks of.

Christ was sufficiently despised when they said of him in contempt, This
fellow, Mat. 12.24. and 26.61. And when they called him Glutton, Wine-bibber, A
friend of Pvblicanes, and Siners: Matthew. 11.19. And when they said he was a
Samaritane and had a Devil, John 8.48. And when they put a Crown of Thorns
upon his head, and a robe upon his back, and a Reed in his hand, and bowed the
knee before him, and mocked him, saying; Hail King of the Jews, Matthew. 27.29.
etc.

And rejected of men] To omit how often Christ preached unto the people, and
was not heard, and how often he would have gathered Jerusalem as a Hen
gathers her Chickens under her wings, but she would not. Matthew. 23.37. Then
was he rejected to the full, when they asked Barabbas, and refused Jesus,
Matthew. 27. v. 17.20.

A man of sorrows and acquainted with griefes] Then was Christ truly a man of
sorrows and acquainted with grief, when he was wounded with Thorns, b^ffeted
and spit upon, and forced to carry his own Cross, and at last was crucified as
a Malefactor, Matthew. Cap. 26.27.

And we hid as it we^e our faces from him] Supple, O^t of our hard hearts as
not affording him any pity: Or out of disdain, as not vouchsafing to give him
a kind look.

This is spoken in the person of those Jews and others, whose heart God had
touched with the sight and hearing of Christ's sufferings, and which did
afterward believe in him: See Luke 23. v. 47.48.

4.
Surely he has borne our griefs and carried our sorrowes] q. d. He has borne
many griefs, and carried many sorrows, especially on the Cross; But surely
those griefs and these sorrows which he has borne, and which he has
carried, are our griefs and our sorrows, that is, are griefs and sorrows
which he sustained for us and for our sins. See 1 Pet. 2.24.

By Griefs and Sorrows are meant Metonymi^e the Torments and punishments
which Christ suffered, which torments and punishments caused griefs and
sorrows, and those torments and punishments they call theirs, beca se Christ
suff^red them for their sins.

St. Matthew applies this passage of the Prophet, to Christ's delivering those
which were vexed with Devils, and healing all those which were sick, Matthew, 8.
v. 16, 17. As though the Prophet had foretold these things of Christ in these
words: But how can St. Matthew say that these words are to be understood of
Christ's casting out Devils and healing those which were sick, when as they
are to be understood of Christ's sufferings?

Ans. What Christ suffered, he suffered for this end, that he might take away
our sins and all the miseries which are come upon us by reason of our sins,
such as is the power of the Devil over us, sickness, diseases, death, etc.
The Prophet therefore prophesying that Christ should bear sorrows, and carry
griefs, did by consequence prophecy that he should take away our sicknesses
and diseases, and all other miseries which befell us by reason of our sins. And
our Savior Christ that he might assure us that it was He which should take
away all our miseries, and sicknesses, and distresses, and sin, which was the
cause of all according to this Prophecy of Isaiah, would give us as it were a
pledge thereof in this; That he healed many which were sick, and cast out
devils while he yet lived upon the earth. And hence it is that St. Matthew used
this prophecy as he did, Mat. 8.16, 17.

But Note here that though St. Matthew had alleged this Prophecy
sufficiently to his purpose, if he had taken them in the same general Sense as
the Prophet spoke them: yet because the words also which the Prophet uses will
in a particular manner serve his purpose, he uses them in a particular manner
for that end, and makes this the particular sense of them: Himself took our
griefs and carried our sorrows, Or Himself took our infirmities, and bore
our sicknesses. As if he said, Himself took away the Infirmities and
sicknesses with which we were vexed; contracting the general Sense of the
words, to a particular contained in the General.

We observed a passage not much unlike to this. Cap. 9.1.

To take infirmities and to bear sicknesses, signifies in St. Matthews sense
to take away infirmities and sicknesses, and that by a Metaphor taken from a
man which when he takes away any filth or sweepings of a House or Stable, puts
them in a basket, and takes the basket and sets it upon his shoulders, and
so bears it away.

Yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God and afflict^d] Supple, For his
own sins, as though he had been some transcendent sinner, whom Gods vengeance
would not suffer to go unpunished.

5.
But he was wounded for our transgressions] q. d. But he was not smitten and
afflicted for his own sins, but he was wounded for our transgressions: for if
we had not sinned, he had not been wounded.

He was bruised for our iniquities] This is a Repetition of the former Sentence.

The chastisement of our peace was upon him] q.d. He was chastised, That is, He
was wounded and bruised, that he might purchase our peace, and make peace
between God and us, which were at enmity before; See Ephesians. 2. v. 16, 17.

And with his stripes are we healed] Supple, Of our sins which are the wounds
and diseases of our soul. See 1 Pet. 2.24.

6.
And the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all] i. e. And the Lord has
laid on him the punishment which was due to us all for our iniquities.

Iniquity is put here Per Metonymiam Efficientis, for punishment which is the
effect of iniquity.

The Lord is said to have laid on Christ the iniquity, That is, the punishment
due to us all for our iniquities, though he was crucified by the hands of men,
because they which crucified Christ and tormented him, did no more then God had
determined that they should do, Acts 4. v. 27, 28.

7.
He was oppressed and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth] This
speaks the great meekness and patience which Christ should show in the midst
of all his sufferings; Read 1 Pet. 2.23.

8.
He was taken from prison and from iudgement] i. e. He was taken from the
Prison, That is, from the Judgment seat, Supple, and was carried to Golgotha
the place of execution. See John 19. v. 13, 14, 15.

We read not that Christ was any otherwise in Prison, then that he was in the
custody of Soldiers, sometimes in one place and sometimes in another; the last
in which he was thus Prisoner, was at the Judgment seat, John 19.15. etc.
Wherefore I take the Conjunction, And, here for a note of declaration, and
Judgment for the Judgment seat or place where men accused were wont to be
judged, as Cap. 3. v. 14. And that by saying (And from Judgment) He declares
what he means by saying from prison.

For who shall declare his generation] i. e. And who can tell of the men of
that age in which he lived, To wit, how wicked they were and maliciously bent
against him.

For he was cut out of the Land of the living] q.d. For though the Judge had
pronounced him innocent John 18.38. And he had done no viol^nce, neither was
any deceit found in his mouth, yet did they put him to death.

For the transgression of my people was he stricken] i. e. Through the
transgression and wickedness of my people was he slain, for beca^se they were
maliciously bent against him, therefore did they slay him. See Acts 2.23.

Note that the Fathers do for the most part understand those words (And who
shall declare his Generation) of the eternal and divine Generation of Christ:
And it will agree very well with the Context, if we take And, for, Yet, and the
For following for And. q.d. Yet who can declare his eternal Generation? That
is, Yet for all this, was he God eternally begotten of the Father by a divine
and eternal Generation, which no tongue is able to declare: And he was cut out
of the Land of the living, etc.

When a man hears such things as these are concerning Christ, except he be
deeply rooted in the faith of Christ's divinity, he will be ready to stagger at
the belief of Christ's Godhead; Therefore it may be very opportune here, to
mention his eternal Generation, and to say in the sense of the Fathers; Yet
who can declare his Generation?

9.
And he made his Grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death] i. e.
And when he was dead, he was buried in the Vale, which lay at the Foot of
Golgotha where the Malefactors which were publicly p^t to death were wont to
be buried or cast out. And he was buried in the Sepulcher of Joseph of
Arimathea, who was a rich man, Matthew. 27.57. Matthew. 27.70. whose Sepulcher was
hewn o^t of a rock, in a part of that Vale, though remote from that particular
part of that Vale, where the Malefactors were either cast out or buried.

Adri^homius in his description of Jerusalem and the places adjacent, makes
Golgotha, where Christ suffered, a Mount. And in one part of the Valley which
lies at the foot of that Mount; He says, The Malefactors which were put to
death on Golgotha (the place of public execution) were either cast out or
buried; And in another part thereof he places the Sepulcher in which our
Savior was buried. So that Christ may be said to be buried with the wicked, in
that he was buried in the same Vale in which the Malefactors were buried
(though he was not buried just in that place of the Valley in which they were
buried;) And he may be said to be buried with the rich, because he was buried
in the Sepulcher of Joseph of Arimathea, who was a Rich man.

Again, certain it is that our Savior Christ suffered upon Golgotha, which
was the public place of execution, where all Malefactors, which were condemned
to death, suffered. And being that Golgotha was the place where Malefactors
which were condemned to death suffered; it is not to be doubted but the
Malefactors which were put to death, were buried either there, or nigh
thereunto: For such is the custom of all places even at this day to bury those
which are put to death, either in or nigh to the place of their suffering,
except some friend beg their bodies of the Magistrates to dispose of them
elsewhere. As therefore the place in which the Malefactors were buried, was in
or nigh to the place of their suffering; So was the Sepulcher in which Christ
was buried nigh to Golgotha where he suffered, John 19. v. 41, 42. So that
Christ (though he were not buried in the place where Malefactors were buried)
he was buried nigh unto it. And therefore we may interpret this place thus,
viz. (He was buried nigh to the wicked, yet with the rich when he was dead]
taking the first Praeposition and with, for nigh to: And the conjunction, And,
for, Yet.

Because he had done no violence, neither was there deceit in his mouth] i. e.
Because he had done no evil, either in word or deed.

Refer this Clause to the words immediately going before, namely to those
(with the rich in his death) For the cause why Pilate granted the body of Jesus
so speedily to Joseph of Arimathea, was certainly because he took Jesus to have
been a just man and a man without fault, John 19.6. And for the same reason
also did Joseph desire the body of Jesus, and lay it decently in his own
Sepulcher.

10.
Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him, he has put him to griefe] q. d. But
though he had done no violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth, yet has
it pleased the Lord to suffer him to be bruised and put to grief.

When thou shall make his soul an offering for sinne] i. e. Yet when thou have
made him a Sacrifice for the sin of thy people, q.d. yet when thou have
delivered him up to death for us, as Romans 18.32.

He either confoundes Tenses, Or, puts a Future for a Praeterperfect Tense by
an Enallage.

His Soule] His soul is put by a Synecdoche for him: And the Prophet makes
here his Apostrophe to God.

He shall see his seed] i. e. He shall have many children borne to him, and
shall see them and enjoy them.

By Seed he means Children and those spiritual Children, such as they are
which are faithful and believe; for such are called his Children, Hebr. 2.13.

If I be lifted up from the earth (says our Savior of himself) I will draw
all men unto me, John 12.32. Our Savior therefore had more which believed in
him after his death, then he had while he lived among men, and this is that
which the Prophet here foretells.

He shall prolong his dayes] i. e. After he has been made an Offering for
sin; that is, After he has been delivered over to death, he shall rise
again and live for ever to make intercession for his Seed, See Hebr. 7.25.

And the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hands] This is the will of
him which has sent me (says our Savior) that every one which sees the Son
and believes on him, may have everlasting life, John 6.40. And he is able to
save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to
make intercession for them says the Apostle Heb. 7.25. The will therefore, and
pleasure of the Lord must needs prosper in his hands.

Note here the Enallage of the Person; how he passes from the second to the
third person.

11.
He shall see of the travail of his soul] He shall see the fruit of all his
travail, and pains, and grief which he has sustained.

His soule] The soul which is but part, is put here for the wole man.

His travaile] i. e. The fruit or effect of his travail. A Metonymie.

And shall be satisfied] i. e. Aed shall take full content and delight in
seeing the fruit of his travail.

A Metaphor of which before.

By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many] The knowledge here
spoken of, is a knowledge joined with power; Such a knowledge as St. Peter
speaks of, 2 Pet. 2.9. When he says the Lord knows how to deliver the godly
out of temptation. Or particularly, the knowledge here spoken of is that
knowledge whereby Christ knew how to obey, and was obedient even unto death,
the death of the Cross, Phil. 2.8. for the Apostle teaches us that Christ
learned obedience by the things which he suffered: Hebr. 5.8. As therefore a
Physician is said to heal a sick man by his skill, because he knows what is
good to take away his disease, and knows how to temper and apply it, and does
temper it, and apply it accordingly: So may Christ be said to justify many by
his knowledge, because he knew that by his patient suffering man might be
justified (for by his stripes are we healed v. 5.) And knew how to suffer
obediently and patiently.

Note that this is spoken in the person of God, of Christ, his Son, and
Servant.

Shall my righteous servant] i. e. Shall Christ my Son and Servant, who is
just and righteous in all his ways.

Justify many] viz. As many as shall believe in his name.

For he shall bear their iniquities] i. e. For he shall take away their
iniquities.

This thus expounded relates to that word (Justify) as showing what that
means.

Or thus, (He shall bear their iniquities) i. e. He shall bear the
punishments which are due unto them for their iniquities, Supple. By which
means he knows that he shall free them from their sins.

This last way Iniquities are put for the punishments due to iniquities. By a
Metonymie.

12.
Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great] i. e. And therefore will
I divide him a portion, etc. Understand (And) here.

And I will divide him a portion with the great] How these words may be applied
to Ie^emy I showed before, but how they can be applied to Christ, (...) and
(...).

That is, word for word, I know not, For who are those great ones with whom he
should have a portion divided? I therefore take it, that these words as the^
are here read, are not to be interpreted of Christ (...) and (...), i. e. word
by word, but only in gross: And though they showed of Jeremy particularly how
God did honor and reward him, yet they show only in General and in Gross of
Christ that God would honor and reward him without mentioning any particular
or special manner how he would do it: So that speaking of Christ, these words
(I will divide him a portion with the great] signifi^ no more than this, I will
highly honor him and reward him. But if you would know, what particular honor
and reward the Lord gave his Son and Servant Christ Jesus; read among other
places, Ephesians. 1. v. 20, 21, 22, 23. and Phil. 12. v. 1.81, 91, 101.11.

But for the understanding of this, That these words (I will devide him a
portion with the great) signify no more than this (I will highly honor him
and reward him:) know this, that those places of Scripture which carry two
senses in them, are Historical (as I may call it) and a Mystical; though they
carry the Historical sense word for word, yet they carry the Mystical sense
for the most part but in Gross, though here and there, there be sometimes such
sentences interserted as apperteine according to the words themselves, not
only to the Historical, but also to the Mystical sense, of which I spoke
more at large in the Preface.

And he shall divide the spoil with the strong] This is the same for sense
with former words.

Because he has poured out his soul unto death] i. e. Because he has not
spared his life, but parted with it to the uttermost.

By His soul is here meant His life by a Metonymie: for Life is nothing else
but the Union of the soul with the body, which Union is maintained by the apt
dispositions of the body to retain it.

When he says he has poured out his soul, he uses a Metaphor taken from the
pouring out of water out of Buckets.

He says; He has poured out his soul unto death, in pursuance of that
Metaphor, Of pouring out of water out of a Bucket, where the water is so poured
out to the last drop as that there is not a drop thereof remaining.

And he was numbered with the transgressours] i. e. And because he was accounted
as a Transgressour (though he were innocent) and was put to death amongst
Transgressors.

This was fulfilled when he was crucified between two Thieves Mark 15. v. 27,
28.

And he bare the sin of many] i. e. And he bare what the malice of the Jews
and the Gentiles under Pontius Pilate could lay upon him: See Acts Cap. 4.27.

By Sin understand here the Torments and Afflictions, which were the effect
of the sin, That is, of the malice and envy of the Jews, etc. By a Metonymie.

And made intercession for the transgressours] i. e. And because he made
intercession for these, who (through envy and malice) did put him to death.

ISAIAH, CHAP. LIVE.
SIng O barren, thou that did not bear,] i. e. Sing for joy, O Sion, or O
Jerusalem, thou which have been like a barren woman, and bore no children.

He prophecyeth here of the joyful deliverance of the Jews out of the
Babylonish captivity, as he did cap. 49.51, 52. and elsewhere: And he speaks to
the material City of Sion, or Jerusalem, as to a woman, by a Prosopopoeia, whom
he calls barren, and one that did not bear, because all the time of the
Babylonish captivity she was empty of Jews (which were to her as children) for
they were all carried away into Babylon, and there was none left in her to
increase the Nation. See cap. 49.21.

Cry aloud,] Supple, For joy.

Thou that did not travel with child;] This is a repetition of those words,
Thou that did not bear.

For more are the children of the desolate,] i. e. For more shall thy children
be, O thou which wast desolate, and as a widow, and as one forsaken of her
Husband, during the Babylonish captivity, etc.

He changes the person here, and speaks of Sion or Jerusalem in the third
person, to whom he spoke in the foregoing words in the second; and he uses a
present for a future tense.

Sion or Jerusalem was called desolate, and as one forsaken of her Husband,
because God (who was her Husband, verse. 5. and cap. 62.5.) had forsaken her,
cap. 50.1. And therefore, as a woman which is desolate and forsaken of her
Husband bears not children; so was Jerusalem barren, and without children,
while God had forsaken her; who might be called her Husband, as in other
regards, so in this, that while he had a favor to her, he did increase her
children within her, as a woman multiplyeth her children by her Husband.

Then the children of the married wife.] i. e. Then thy children were, when
thou had an Husband, any time heretofore, and wast a married Wife.

The meaning is, that Jerusalem, though she had been afflicted, and brought
into captivity by the Babylonians, and had her Children or Citizens carried
away from her; yet now she should be more populous then ever she was at any
time before that her captivity.

Note, that when he says, More are the children of the desolate, then the
children of the married woman, he speaks as though he spoke of two several
persons; but he speaks but of two several states or conditions of the same
person. So we say of a man that is changed from what he was, that he is another
man, though not his substance, but his condition only is changed.

This which I have given, is the first sense of this place: But Sion here (as
she became fruitful after her widowhood) was a Type of the Church of Christ: So
that, in the second and sublime sense, this place is to be understood of the
Church of Christ, as will appear Gal. 4.27. For as Sion, while God had put her
away from being his Wife, and had given her over to be spoiled by the hands of
the Babylonians, was barren, and brought forth no children; but when he took
her to him to Wife again, she increased in children as the Stars of Heaven for
multitude: So the Church of Christ, while she was a stranger to the bed of
Christ, and was without the seed of his Word, ( that is, while all Nations were
suffered to walk in their own ways, Acts 14.16. and were given over to the god
of this World to be blinded by him, Acts 17.30.) brought forth no children unto
God: But when Christ took her to his bed, Ioh. 3.29. and redeemed her out of
the hand of Satan, and gave her the seed of his Word, she so increased in
children, as that all the ends of the Earth were full of her issue: So that she
far exceeded the Synagogue of the Jews, when it was most populous.

Note here, that Sion, as she was considered before the Babylonish captivity,
was a Type of the Synagogue of the Jews: but, as she was considered after the
Babylonish captivity, was a Type of the Church of Christ. As therefore Sion was
more populous after the Babylonish captivity, then ever she was before; so was
the Church of Christ more populous, then ever the Synagogue of the Jews was.

Wonder not that I make Sion a Type of the Synagogue, and the same Sion a Type
of the Church, upon diverse considerations; For Saint Paul makes her a Type of
the Synagogue, Gal. 4.25. and a Type of the Church, Romans 9.33.

It may be objected here, That the Church of Christ was not the Church of
Christ before Christ married her; therefore the Church of Christ was never
barren.

Ans. We call all Nations the Church of Christ, out of which Christ took his
Church: For all Nations were the Church of Christ materially, and in potentia,
before he actually married them. Again, by a Prolepsis or Anticipation, That
may be said to be, which is not yet, but only shall be: The Church of Christ
therefore might be called the Church of Christ, before she was actually married
to Christ.

2.
Enlarge the place of thy Tent,] i. e. Enlarge the place wherein thou stand,
and make thy self bigger.

He compares Jerusalem here to a Tent, and the manner of speech is, as if we
should say, London, enlarge thy City; that is, London, enlarge thy self.

Why he would have Jerusalem to enlarge her self, he tells in the next Verse.

And let them stretch forth the curtains of thine habitations,] i. e. And let
the curtains of thine habitations be stretched forth, that they may compass and
take in the more ground.

These words, Let them stretch forth, may be taken here impersonally.

Note, that by the curtains of her habitations are here meant the curtains of
her Tent; for a Tent is made of several Curtains, as that was Exodus 26.1. And
the curtains of a Tent may be said to be stretched forth, either when they are
made larger by addition of more c^oth, or when they are strained; by either of
which means the Tent takes up the larger compass of ground to stand upon.

He calls it the curtains of her habitations, because a Tent is made for men to
dwell under.

Lengthen thy cords,] He speaks of those cords which keep up the Tent upright
and tight, which must be lengthened, if the Tent or the Curtains be enlarged:
For as a Tent is bigger or lesser, and takes up more or less room; so are the
cords thereof to be longer or shorter.

Strengthen thy stakes.] He speaks of those stakes, to which the cords were
fastened, which keep the Tent tight or upright.

The larger a Tent is, and the longer the cords, the stronger had the stakes
need to be, and the deeper driven into the ground: Therefore when he bids
J^rusalem, stretch forth her curtains, and lengthen her cords, he bids her also
to strengthen her stakes.

3.
For thou shall break forth on the right hand, and on the left,] i. e. For so
many shall thy children be, as that thou shall not be able to contain them; but
thou shall break out on the right hand, and on the left, with the abundance of
thy children which shall be within thee.

The meaning is, that the multitude of the Jews which should come out of the
Babylonish captivity, etc. should be so great, and so increase, as that (when
she had stretched out her Curtains, and done all) she should not be able to
afford them room enough to dwell in, but they should be fain to go, some one
way and some another, to find them dwellings. See cap. 49.20.

On the right hand, and on the left,] i. e. As some say, Southward and
Northward; as others, Eastward and Westward: but, by a Synecdoche, by these two
sides understand all sides; q. d. On every s de.

Thy seed shall inherit the Gentile^,] i. e. Thy children shall inherit those
places which the Gentiles do inhabit, and have inhabited since their captivity.

And make the desolate places to be inhabited.] i. e. And make the places which
lay desolate without inhabitants (through the desolation which the Babylonians
made) to be inhabited again.

4.
Fear not, for thou shall not be ashamed] The Jews (whose dispositions the
Prophet does here personate in Sion or Jerusalem) when they were in captivity,
did fear the power of the Babylonians, so as that they did not think that they
could be delivered out of their hands, though the Lord promised them
deliverance by his Prophets. To prevent therefore this fear of theirs, and to
stir them up to believe and hope for what he had told here in this Chapter, he
bids Jerusalem not to fear, for she should not be ashamed.

Thou shall not be ashamed,] i. e. If thou do hope, and look for what I have
told thee, thou shall not fail in thy hope and expectation.

Because they which look for great matters, and fail of their expectation, are
usually ashamed, (for they are by that exposed to the derision of men,)
Therefore, to signify that Jerusalem shall not fail of her hope and
expectation, he says, she shall not be ashamed.

Neither be thou confounded,] i. e. Neither be thou confounded or troubled with
fear.

This is the same, for sense, with those words, Fear not.

As other passions, so fear, among the rest, does oftentimes so confound and
trouble a man's reason, as that he cannot see what is best for himself:
therefore he says, Be not confounded, Supple, with fear.

For thou shall not be put to shame,] This is a repetition of those words, Thou
shall not be ashamed.

For thou shall forget the shame of thy youth,] q. d. For as I tell thee, and
as thou hopest, so shall it come to pass; It shall come to pass, that thou
shall have so many children, as that they shall be a greater ornament and a
greater glory to thee ( cap. 49.18.) then the shame which thou have sustained:
so that thou shall be so far from being put to a new shame, as that thy old
shame shall be taken away.

Thou shall forget the shame of thy youth,] i. e. So great shall thy glory be,
( Supple, through the multitude of thy children which thou shall have,) as that
this thy glory shall make thee forget the shame of thy youth.

The excess of one contrary makes us forget that ever we were under the other:
So the great prosperity which Joseph was in, in Egypt, made him forget all his
former troubles and miseries, Genes. 45.51. To show therefore the great glory
that Sion should be in, he tells her, that by reason of that, she shall forget
all her former shame.

The shame of thy youth,] i. e. The shame which thou have sustained in thy
youth.

The shame here especially meant, consisted in her barrenness, in allusion to
that, that barrenness was a shame and a reproach under the Law, as appears,
Genesis 30.23. Luke 1.25.

As barrenness was a shame and reproach to women in general, so must it have
been a greater shame and reproach to a woman to have been barren in her youth,
and in the flower of her days, then to have been so in her old and decaying age.

The question will here be, What time was the time of Sion's youth here
mentioned? I take it to have been the time between the building of the Temple
by Solomon, and the end of the Babylonish Captivity; For Zion and her people
the Jews were never in a more flourishing estate then in that time: And if we
divide the time of the State and Commonwealth of the Jews into three parts (as
the age and life of man is usually divided) we shall find, that that time
which was between the building of the Temple, and the deliverance out of the
Babylonish Captivity, was the middle time, (which is the most flourishing time
of life:) For from the deliverance of Israel out of Egypt, (which time was, as
I may so call it, the time of Isreal's birth; for while Israel was in Egypt, he
was but as it were an embrio in the womb; but when the Lord brought him out of
Egypt, he made him a People and Commonwealth of himself:) I say, from the
deliverance of Israel out of Egypt to the building of the Temple by Solomon
were 480 years; from the building of the Temple by Solomon to the end of the
Babylonish captivity were 452 years; from the end of the Babylonish captivity
to the Incarnation of Christ, 525 years. So that that shame, which he calls the
shame of her youth here, I take to be the same with the reproach of her
widowhood, mentioned in the next sentence; for our Prophet is frequent in such
repetitions: And it is called the shame of her youth, because it happened to
her in her youth.

And shall not remember the reproach of thy Widdow-hood] This is a repetition
of the former sentence; And what he calls the shame of her youth there, he
calls the shame of her Widdow-hood here; Because this shame and reproach befell
her, when God had put her away from him from being his wife: Cap. 50.1. which
was all the time of the Babylonish captivity.

5.
For thy maker is thy Husband] And therefore will do the office of an Husband
to thee, in protecting thee, and delivering thee, and in giv^ng thee children,
by which thy shame and ^eproach shall be taken away.

Ob. If the Lord were Sions Husband, how could Sion be a Widow?

Ans. The Lord had married Sion and afterward put her away, and then took her
to wife against So that between the Lords putting her away and taking her
again, Sion was a Widow.

Ob. But a man when he had put away his wife, and she became another man's,
could not take her for his wife again, Deuteronomy. 24.4.

Ans. What man could not do, which was under the Law, God might do, which was
above the Law. Therefore thus we read Jer. 3.1. They say; If a man put away his
wife, and she go from him, and become another man's, shall he return to her
again? shall not that land be greatly polluted? But, thou have played the
Harlot, yet return again to me says the Lord.

The Lord of Hosts is his name] The Lord of Hosts is He; And therefore he is
able to subdue the Babylonians, which cause thy fear and thy shame.

Thy Redeemer the Holy one of Israel] i. e. And the holy One of Israel is thy
Redeemer, who as he is able, so also is willing to Redeem thee o^t of the
hands of the Babylonians, and to take away thy reproach, because he is the Holy
One, That is, because he is the God of Israel.

The God of the whole earth shall he be called] To wit, because he will make it
manifest by his power (which he will show in your Redemption) that he is Lord
of all the earth, and that he can do therein, whatsoever he pleases.

6.
For the Lord has called thee] i. e. For the Lord has called thee, Supple, to
his Bed, or to be his wife again.

These words relate to those words, thou shall forget the shame of thy youth,
and shall not remember the ^eproach of thy Widdowhood any more, verse. 4. As a
proof thereof, as the fifth verse was.

As a woman forsaken] i. e. Who wast, or when thou wast as a woman forsaken of
all her friends.

How Sion was forsaken, See Lament. 1.2.

Note that this Particle, As, is not to be taken here as a note of Similitude,
but of Identity as it is often taken. For Sion was not only as a woman
forsaken, but a woman forsaken indeed.

And grieved in spirit] i. e. And who wast, or when thou wast as a woman
grieved in spirit and mourning because she was afflicted, and had none to
comfort her.

And a wife of youth] i. e. Yea who wast, or when thou wast as a wife which had
played the Harlot in her youth.

The Prophet may call her a wife of youth which is naught and played the Harlot
in in her youth by the like Metonymie, as he calls the waters which drowned
the world in the days of Noah, the waters of Noah: v. 4.

A wife which is naught and plays the Harlot in her youth, proves the most
notorious strumpet of all; For lust reigns in her more than it does in the
aged, and her affections are hotter and more unbrideled.

When thou wast refused] i. e. When the Lord had refused thee and cast thee off
from being his wife: and therefore thou could not expect to be taken to be
his wife again.

That the Lord should call Sion, when she was as a woman forsaken and grieved
in spirit, speaks the great goodness and loving kindness of the Lord to her;
for such a woman seldom finds friends: But that he should call her again,
and make her his wife when she had played the Harlot in her youth, and he had
put her away for her whoredoms, speaks yet his greater goodness and loving
kindness. And as to say, that the Lord called her as a woman forsaken and
grieved in spirit: And a woman of youth when she was refused, speaks the
loving kindness and goodness of the Lord to Sion: So may it cheer Sion and
make her more confident of the goodness and loving kindness of the Lord. For
otherwise she had good cause to doubt whether the Lord would look upon her, and
call her to his bed, when she was as a woman forsaken and grieved in spirit:
And when she had played the Harlot in the days of her youth, and had been
divorced for her whoredoms.

7.
For a small moment have I forsaken thee] It was seventy years that the Lord
forsook Sion: Jer. 25.11. Yet this is but a small time, and but as a very
little moment in regard of that time, in which he had or would have had mercy
upon her, if she had kept his Covenant, v. 10.

Have I forsaken thee] Supple, And given thee over to be afflicted by the
Babylonians.

But in great mercy will I gather thee] This is spoken in relation to the Jews
the children of Sion, which as they were scattered here and there in many
Countries in the time of their Captivity; so did the Lord gather them together
out of those Countries when he brought them back to Sion: See Cap. 44.18.

Note here that he speaks of the Jews as of Sion her self; And of Sion her
self as of the Jews, when he says, I will gather thee. And that because of
the great relation and Jove which was between Sion and her children. So Christ
says, Saul, Saul, Why persecutest thou me? Acts 9.4. when he persecuted only
those that believed in Christ, because of the great affection and love which
was between Christ and those believers.

8.
I hid my face from thee] i. e. I was angry with thee.

A Metaphor taken from men, who will not look upon those with whom they are
very angry.

This verse is a repetition of the former; And this repetition is for the more
vehement Asseveration of what is spoken.

With everlasting kindnesse] i. e. With kindness which shall endure a long
time, or many Generations.

9.
For this is as the waters of Noah] i. e. For this, That I have been wrath with
thee, shall be as the waters of Noah.

In what his anger shall be like the waters of Noah, he shows in the ensuing
words.

The waters of Noah] by the waters of Noah he means The waters which
overwhelmed the earth, and drowned all living Creatures in the days of Noah.

I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth] He
alludeth to Genesis 9.11. where the Lord says, I will establish my Covenant with
you, neither shall all flesh be cut off any more by the waters of a Flood,
neither shall there any more be a Flood to destroy the earth.

Obj. You may say that in that place of Genesis God does not Swear or make
mention of any Oath: How therefore is it said here; I have sworn that the
waters of Noah should no more go over the earth?

Ans. In that place of Genesis, there is no explicit mention made of any Oath,
but yet it is implicitly involved, that God did swear at that time, for God
says there, that he will establish a Covenant: Now solemn Covenants were wont
to be confirmed with an Oath. Hence I have made a Covenant with my chosen, I
have sworn to David my servant says the Lord Ps. 89.3.

Nor rebuke thee] i. e. Nor chide thee: But where God chideth, he punishes
too, even by his chiding, for his words are operative.

10.
For the Mountains shall depart, and the Hills be removed] i. e. For the
Mountains may depart and be removed out of their place.

Neither shall the Covenant of my peace be removed] Neither shall the Covenant
which I have made with thee; In which Covenant I for my part, have bound my
self to give thee my peace.

Note here that the word peace, signifies all manner of good things, and all
prosperity in the Hebrew Dialect: And all good things and all prosperity are
from God; So that God may well call peace his peace.

Yet the Covenant of my peace may be put for my covenant of peace: but which
way soever we take it the Sense is the same.

Note that the peace and mercy which God promised to the Jews was by covenant:
Now in a covenant there be two parties, and each party has his condition and
part of the covenant to perform; wherefore if the Jews performed not their
part in the covenant, and observed not the condition to which they were bound,
God was not bound on his part to perform what he promised, because his
promise was conditional.

Note that when he says, Neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, he
speaks of his covenant as of a corporal thing, and alludeth to the removing
of the Hills, which he speaks of a little before in this verse.

11.
O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, etc.] This is an Apostrophe to the
Temple of Jerusalem which the Babylonians burned down, and was built again
after the Babylonish captivity: To which Temple he speaks (as he did to Sion)
as to a woman, and a woman afflicted and tossed to and fro, By a Prosopopoeia.

As Sion; so the Temple is here a Type of Christ's Church which is called the
House of God: Hebr. 10.21. 1 Timothy 3.15. and 1 Pet. 4.17.

Note that the Prophet speaks this to the Temple, in the person of God.

Afflicted] To wit, by the Babylonians.

Tossed with tempest] This is a Metaphor taken from a ship, which is tossed and
driven to and fro in the Sea, by tempestuous winds and weather.

And not comforted, behold, etc.] i. e. And which have no man to comfort thee,
behold, Supple, I the Lord will comfort thee.

I will lay thy stones with fair colours] Josephus writes that the very
outside of the Temple which he saw was curiously wrought with stones of diverse
colors: And what stones were provided for the Temple which Solomon built, See
1 Chronicles. 29.2. And the same stones did they use in building and adorning the
Second Temple (as far as they were able to procure them) as were used in
building and adorning the First,

And lay the foundations with Saphir] A Saphir is a precious stone (worn now
in Rings) of a sky color.

12.
And I will make thy windows of Agates] An Agate is the name of a precious
stone, which is sometimes of one, sometimes of another color.

And thy Gates of Carbuncles] A Carbuncle is a precious stone, red and
sparkling, so called ab igniti carbonis color, i. e. From the color of a live
fire-coale.

And all thy Borders] i. e. And all the Borders of thy Building.

13.
All thy children shall be taught of the Lord] i. e. The Lord shall teach all
thy children: For he shall send his servants the Prophets, as namely Haggai,
Zachary, and Malachy to thy children, that they may teach them and instruct
them in his ways.

Thy children] By her children are meant the Jews who were wont to go up and
worship in the Temple.

All thy children shall be taught of the Lord] These words as they are meant of
the children of the Temple in the first sense, so in the second and more
sublime sense, they are meant of the children of the Church even the Church of
Christ whom the Father will teach whatsoever they are to learn or believe,
John, 6.45. The children of the Temple being herein, a Type of the children of
the Church.

And great shall be the peace of thy children] i. e. And thy children shall
enjoy great prosperity.

14.
In righteousness shall thou be established] i. e. Thou shall be established
in peace and prosperity, as I have said, or according to my word.

By rtghteousnesse understand the truth and fidelity of God in performing what
he says or promises.

Or thus: In righteousness thou shall be established: i. e. Thou shall be
established in peace and prosperity by thy righteousness; i. e. By walking
uprightly before me; where In is put for By.

Thou shall be far from oppression] i. e. Thou shall be far from being
oppressed by any as thou have been of late, and art still oppressed by the
Babylonians.

Oppression is taken here passively.

For thou shall not feare] i. e. For thou shall not have cause so much as to
fear aany oppressor.

And from terrour] i. e. Thou shall be far from the dread or terror of
oppression.

15.
They shall surely be gathered together] i. e. Behold they which wish thee
evil, and which are maliciously bent against thee, shall gather themselves
together to hinder thy building and thy peace.

Here is the Relative, They, put without an Antecedent, But by They, are meant,
They which did wish evil and were maliciously bent against the Temple and
Nation of the Jews.

What is here spoken, we may read fulfilled in Sanballat and others, Ezra 4.
and Nehem. 6.

But not with me] i. e. But not with my commission or order, and therefore they
shall not prevail against thee.

Shall fall] i. e. Shall perish.

For thy sake] i. e. Because of the love which I bear to thee.

16.
Behold I have created the Smith that blows the Coals in the fire, and that
brings forth an Instrument for his work; And I have created the water to
destroy] q. d. I have created both the Smith whtch makes the Arms and weapons
which are used in Battle, and the Soldier which uses these Arms and weapons.
Supple, And therefore being that I have created them, they are in my hands and
under my power: And I can make the Smith either to make me Arms and weapons at
all, or only such Arms and weapons as shall do those which use them no
service: And I can make the Soldier either to be quiet and fit still, and not
to fight against thee, or else to take the foil and fall himself by the Sword.

This is brought as an argument to confirm and show, that the Lord was able to
do what he said before.

That blows the Coals in the fire] To wit, to make the fire the hotter, and
more fervent, that he may therein heat his Iron and his Steel of which he
makes his work, and so soften them.

And that brings forth an Instrument for his worke] i. e. And that brings
out his hammer and other tools that he uses about his work, for to make and
finish the work which he has to do.

That brings forth an Instrument] Supple, Out of the place in which he uses
to lay them.

An Instrument] i. e. His Instruments or Tools.

A Singular is put here collect^ve, for a Plural number.

For his worke] i. e. For to work his work, v. g. A Sword or a Sphere, or
the like.

The Waster] By the Waster understand the Soldier, whose employment is War
which is the mother of desolation.

The Waster to de^troy] q. d. The Soldier which is made to destroy.

17.
No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper] q. d. Therefore the Smith
(which I have made, and which is under my power) shall not make any weapon
which shall be able to prosper or do any service against thee, or hurt thee.

And every tongue that shall rise against thee in Judgment thou shall
condemne] q. d. And every Waster or Soldier which shall rise against thee to
destroy thee, shall fall and be destroyed himself.

This is the sense of these words; And thus should the Prophet have spoken, if
he had continued that kind of speech with which he begun, to the end: But he
changes his speech to an Allegory before he has done, yet the sense is the
same, for the sense is, that every enemy that shall rise up against her, shall
fall before her.

He begun this speech with the Soldier, but before he has finished it he
changed it unto a Metaphor of an Accuser or Adversary accusing or pleading
against a man in a Court of Justice. See the like change Chap. 3. v. 6, 7. etc.

Every tongue that shall rise against thee] i. e. Every one that shall rise up,
and accuse thee, or plead against thee.

He puts the Tongue here which is but a part for the whole man by a Synecdoche,
and the Tongue rather than any other part, because with that he accuses and
pleads.

That shall rise] He seems to allude to the manner of those which use to
plead, who if they sit before, rise up and stand when they begin to plead.

In Iudgement] Judgment may be taken here for the Court of Judgment or
Justice, as Cap. 3.14.

Thou shall condemne] q. d. Thou shall not only quit thy self of him, but
shall convince him of falsehood, and cause him to be punished for his false
accusation.

To condemn is taken here for to convince and show him worthy of condemnation
by arguing; For to condemn by Sentence is the office only of the Judge.

This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord] q. d. That which I have
said, is the privilege and the blessing of those which serve the Lord
uprightly.

This is the heritage] He seems in this word to allude to the division of the
Land of Canaan by Lot, where every Tribe had his peculiar Inheritance allotted
to it. Josh. 11.23.

And their Righteousness is of me] q. d. For the reward of their
righteousness, and of their upright service, is of me; I am he that rewards
them for it, and I will reward them after this manner.

And is put here for For: And Righteousness is put by a Metonymie for the
reward of righteousn^sse.

Says the Lord] Supple which is able to do what he says.

ISAIAH, CHAP. LV.
HO every one that thirsts ome etc] i. e. Ho every one which desires true
kn^wledge come, etc.

This is spoken in the person of God.

This Particle, Ho: is a note of calling to, and is used when we call to any
one to hearken to what we say.

Thirst is a desire of that which is moist and cold, and is often put for
desire in general.

This speech is directed to the Gentiles and particularly to those Gentiles
among whom the Jews lived in the time of their captivity. And those Gentiles
are hereby invited to come to the knowledge of the true God, even the God of
Israel, and to join themselves with his people the Jews in his service, and
so to become Proselytes.

Note here, that in the time of the Law, many Gentiles did forsake their Idols
and their Idolatry, and join themselves to the Lord God of Israel, and became
his servants, which kind of Gentiles so forsaking their Idolatry, and joining
themselves to the Lord and serving him, the Jews called Proselytes: Of which
they made two kinds; one kind was of them, that worshipped the true God, the
God of Israel, but were not circumcised, nor did they conform themselves to
the Mosaicall rites and ceremonies, but were only tied to the observation of
those precepts which the Hebrew Doctors therefore call the Precepts of the
sons of Noah, because all the Sons of Noah were bound to observe them:
Which Precepts were in number Se^ven.

1.
To renounce Idols and all Idolatrous worship.

2.
To worship the true God, the maker of heaven and earth.

3.
To abstain from bloud-shedding.

4.
Not to uncover ones nakedness, that is to abstain from all unlawful
conjunction.

5.
To abstain from robbery.

6.
To administer justice.

7.
To abstain from eating the flesh with the blood, which they call the eating
of any member of a beast taken from it alive. These kind of Proselytes they
called The Proselytes of the Gate; because they were suffered to dwell among
the Jews within their Gates or Cities, though they did not conform themselves
to all the Ordinances of Moses as the Jews themselves did; which they would
not have been suffered to do if they had not observed so much as they did. And
from these Proselytes were they also which observed as much as they did, called
Proselytes of the Gate, though they lived not among the Jews, but lived
elsewhere; because they were under the same condition; such was Naaman the
Syrian, the Eunuch, Cornelius, etc.

The other kind of Proselytes were such as were circumcised and took upon
them the observation of the whole Law of Moses, and these were called
Proselites of the Covenant, and were accounted almost (for privileges and
observances) as Jews, such were Vriah the Hittite; Achior in the book of
Judith, etc.

Note here again, that though in the first sense these Gentiles before
mentioned are here invited to join themselves to the Lord and worship him as
Proselytes: yet in the second and more sublime sense. This is a Prophecy of the
calling of the Gentiles to the Church of Christ, where the Jews and Gentiles
are made both one, Ephesians. 2. verse. 14.

Come ye to the waters,] i. e. Come ye to that knowledge which will satisfy
your desires, as waters satisfy the thirst of him which is thirsty.

By waters he means metaphorically the true knowledge of the true God; in
which knowledge there is that true content to be had, which no other knowledge
can afford, and will satisfy a man's desire, as waters will quench his thirst.

And he that has no money,] q. d. Yea, let him come that is poor, and has no
money.

This he says in opposition to those which desired to learn humane Arts and
Sciences, which he that desired to learn, had need to have been rich, because
the Masters of those Arts and Sciences would not teach them without great
rewards: But they which would learn the knowledge of the Lord need not to have
been rich; the poor might learn it as well as the wealthy; he that had no money
as well as he that had: for the Lords servants taught the knowledge of the Lord
freely.

Come ye, buy and eat, yea, come, buy wine and milk, etc.] The Prophet is not
content to call the knowledge of God, waters; but he calls it also wine and
milk; because it did not only satisfy the desire, as waters satisfy and
quench the thirst; but it does also feed the Soul, as wine and milk do feed and
nourish the body; yea, it is as the chiefest delicates to the Soul: For by
these two, to wit, wine and milk, the Scripture does not only signify food
necessary for the sustenance of life, but dainties and delicates too, as Genesis
49.12.

Without money, and without price.] This is said in opposition to those who gave
great sums of money to their Masters to learn humane Arts and Sciences: q. d. Ye
need not take care for money, or agree for a price, for learning the knowledge
of God, as you use to take care for money, and agree for a price with your
Masters of humane Arts and Sciences; but this knowledge shall be taught you
freely.

2.
Wherefore do ye spend your money for that which is not bread?] q. d. Wherefore
do you give so much money to the Masters of the Arts, to learn of them those
Arts which bring no fruit or profit at all with them?

He persists still in his Metaphor, whereby he likened the knowledge of God to
meat and drink, which nourish and refresh the body, because this knowledge is
the only food of the Soul: q. d. Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is
not so much as bread, which is the necessary sustenance of man's life? much less
is it wine or milk which are the dainties and delicates thereof.

Which satisfies not,] Supple, Your hunger.

This is a repetition of those words, Which is not bread.

Eat ye that which is good,] q. d. Eat ye not that which is not fit to nourish
you, but eat ye that which is good, not only to nourish you, but to make you
fat.

He persists still in his Metaphor, and compares the knowledge of God to that
which is good to nourish, yea, to fatten the body; and humane science, to that
which is but bran or hulks, and has not any nourishment in it.

And let your Soul delight it self in fatness.] i. e. And delight your selves
in that which will not only feed you, and nourish you, but make you fat.

The Soul is put here for the whole man, by a Synecdoche.

Fatness is put here for food which will fatten, per Metonymiam Effecti.

3.
Incline your ears,] He alludes here to the manner of men, which bow their
heads toward him which speaks, when they desire to hear distinctly what he
says.

Come unto me;] He that comes to the Servants and Prophets of the Lord, comes
to the Lord. See Luke 10.16.

Hear,] i. e. Hear my words, and keep them, and obey them.

And your soul shall live:] i. e. And ye shall live: q. d. And your lives shall
be preserved, yea, ye shall live happily and plentifully.

He still alludeth to bread and wholesome food, which preserve the life, and
keep men fat and in good liking, which bran and hulks cannot do.

I will make an everlasting Covenant with you,] That is oftentimes called
Everlasting which lasts only a long time, as the Priesthood of Aaron was
called everlasting, although it was to last but during the Law, and was to be
abolished by the death of Christ: Exodus 40.15.

Even the sure mercies of David.] q. d. And I will even give you (by that
Covenant) the sure mercies of David.

That these words, I will give you, are here to be understood, we may learn
from Acts 13.64.

But what are those which are here called the mercies of David?

The mercies which are here called the mercies of David, are those mercies and
blessings which David so often speaks of in the Psalms, and which are there
promised, in the Name of God, to all which serve and fear him, and lead a godly
life, whether they be Jews or Gentiles; as Psa. 34.15. and 37. v. 4, 11. and
84.11, etc. where the Promises, being made in general terms to them which fear
God, and lead a godly life, are made as well to the Gentile as to the Jew, as
we may gather from St. Paul's arguing from that general word, Whosoever, Romans
10.11.

But why are these called the mercies of David?

Ans. Because they are so often repeated in the Book or Psalms of David; and
because they were made upon the particular occasion of David's fear and trust in
God; and because David had had often experience of them.

But why are they called the sure mercies of David?

Ans. Because they shall be certainly performed; for God who has promised them
is faithful in his Word, and will therefore perform them, because he has said
it.

Note here, that the Apostle Paul, preaching of the Resurrection of Christ from
the dead, brings this as an argument to prove, that God raised Christ from the
dead now no more to return to corruption; to wit, that the Lord said (to the
Gentiles here in Isaiah) I will give you the sure mercies of David, Acts 13.34.
And a great question it is, how Paul can prove the Resurrection of Christ from
the dead, and so as not to dye again, from these words.

Ans. These words, I will give you the sure mercies of David, as in the first
sense they signify those temporal and corporeal blessings, with which God
would reward all that served him, and feared him, in the time of the Law: So,
in the second and sublime sense, they signify those spiritual and eternal
blessings, with which God would reward all them which served him in Jesus
Christ, in the time of the Gospel; the former being a type of the latter. Now
Saint Paul draws his Argument from these words, as they are taken in the
second and sublime, not as they are taken in the first sense.

But how can he draw such an Argument from these words, though he takes them in
the second and sublime sense?

Ans. For answer to this, we must know, that God sent his Son Jesus, while he
lived on Earth, only to the Jews, as may appear Matt. 15.24. and again, Mat.
10.5. And the Gospel was not so much as to be preached to the Gentiles, till
after Christ's death, as appears Joh. 12. v. 20, 23, 32. nay, not till after
his Resurrection, Matt. 28.19. no, not till after his Ascension; for the
Apostles were to tarry at Jerusalem until they were endued with power from on
high, that is, until they had received the Holy Ghost, Luke 24.49. and they
could not receive the Holy Ghost till Christ had ascended up to his Father,
Joh. 16.3, 7. Which things premised, it is plain, that the Resurrection of
Christ may be irrefragably proved from those words of God to the believing
Gentiles, I will give you the sure mercies of David; for the Gentiles could not
receive those mercies, nor had they any title to them, before they believed;
and they could not believe, except they had heard the Gospel; and they could
not hear without a Preacher, and none could preach before he was sent, Romans
10.14, 15. and none could be sent, until Christ were risen from the dead, and
was ascended into Heaven.

But though Christ's Resurrection from the dead may be proved from these words,
how can it be proved from these words, that Christ should never dye again after
he was risen?

Answ. The temporal Salvation which was promised in the Old Testament, was a
type of the eternal Salvation which is promised in the New Testament: And as in
the first sense, temporal salvation is one of the mercies which God says he
will here give to the Gentiles that would know his Name, in the time of the
Law, Psalm. 34.17, 19, 20, etc. So, in the second sense, eternal Salvation is
one of the mercies which are here promised to the Gentiles which believe, in
the time of the Gospel, Romans 10.10. Now that Christ may bring a Believer to
eternal Salvation (and God brings none to Salvation but by Christ) it is
req^isite that Christ himself should live for ever, Heb. 7.25.

4.
Behold I have given him for a witness to the people,] i. e. Behold I have
given him to be as a witness to the Nations, to testify to them, that I am the
only true God, and that therefore I alone am to be worshipped as God.

He speaks to those whom he called and spoke to in the first Verse; and here he
shows them to whom they should go for knowledge.

By ^im he means the servant of the Lord, mentioned cap. 52.13. that is,
Jeremy.

But as in the first since, Jeremy is here meant; so Christ Jesus is here meant
in the second and sublime sense.

Note, that the Relative, Him, is put here without its Antecedent, as the
Prophet often puts it.

A Leader and Commander to the people.] i. e. For a President to go before the
people, and to teach them by his practice and example, that the God of Israel
is the true God.

It is the part of a Leader and Commander to march before his Company; hence he
uses the Metaphor of a Leader and Commander for a President or Example.

5.
Behold thou shall call] Supple, To the knowledge and worship of the Lord.

The Lord makes an Apostrophe here to Jeremy, who was in this a Type of Christ.

A Nation,] He means not a whole Nation, but many of a Nation, by a
Synecdoche.

And Nations which knew not thee] i. e. And many of many Nations which knew not
thee.

Shall run unto thee,] Supple, To be instructed in the knowledge and worship of
the Lord by thee.

Because of the Lord thy God,] i. e. Because the Lord thy God is with thee.

And for the holy One of Israel,] This is a repetition of the foregoing words.

For he has glorified thee.] i. e. For he has endowed thee with many
excellent gifts, and made thee glorious in the sight of the Nations.

He speaks here to Jeremy as though he were then present, when as he was not as
yet born.

6.
Seek ye the Lord] i. e. Seek ye the favor of the Lord, and make your peace
with him.

He speaks still to the Gentiles, or Heathen, which he spoke to verse. 1. to
wit, to them which had not turned to the Lord.

While he may be found,] i. e. While he is willing to show favor to you, lest
if you neglect to seek his favor while he offers it, he shut up his favor and
loving kindness in displeasure for your neglect and obstinacy.

The speech here used is Metaphorical, taken from a man which may be easily
found while he is not far from us; but cannot be found, if he go into a far
Country which we know not of.

Call ye upon him while he is near.] This is a repetition of the former
sentence.

7.
Let the wicked forsake his way,] i. e. Let those which are wicked among you
cease to do wickedly.

A man's actions and conversation is often likened to a way which we walk in, in
Scripture.

And let him return unto the Lord,] i. e. And let him take a new course of
life, such as is well-pleasing to the Lord.

This speech is Metaphorical too, taken from a Traveller which has been out of
his right way, and is to return into his right way again.

Pardon,] To wit, His transgressions; as his Idolatry, and other sins which he
committed in his Gentilism.

8.
For my thoughts are not your thoughts,] i. e. For my thoughts are not as your
thoughts; for when ye are offended, ye think wholly upon revenge, and cannot
freely pardon him in your hearts which has offended you: But though I am
offended, yet can I heartily think upon pardon, and how I may deal well with
him that has done ill to me.

Note, that the note of similitude, As, is here left to be understood, as it is
often elsewhere.

Neither are my ways your ways.] i. e. Neither are your doings and dealings
with men as my doings are; for I use to deal well with them which offend me,
but you use not so to do.

The note of similitude, As, is here again to be understood.

9.
So are my ways higher then your ways,] By ways are here meant deeds or
actions, by a Metaphor, as verse. 8.

Though it be generally true, that all the actions and deeds of God do as far
exceed our deeds and actions, as the Heaven does exceed the Earth, yea
infinitely further; yet understand this place particularly of the mercy and
goodness and clemency of the Lord: q. d. As the Heaven does far exceed the
Earth, so does my clemency, and mercy, and loving kindness to men, far exceed
yours.

10.
For as the rain] i. e. And as the rain: For for And.

As the rain comes down, and the snow from Heaven, i. e. As the rain and the
snow come down out of the air.

Heaven is often put for the Air; so the birds of the Air are called the foul
of Heaven, Ier. 3.9.

And returns not thither:] Supple, Without watering the Earth, and making it
fruitful; for otherwise the rain and the snow are drawn up again by the Sun in
vapors.

11.
So shall my Word that goes out of my mouth,] i. e. So shall the Word which I
speak become effectual; and whatsoever I say, shall come to pass.

It shall not return unto me void.] i, e, It shall not be ineffectual, as
their words are which cannot perform what they say.

Note, that the Prophet uses here a Metaphor taken from an Ambassador, which a
King sends out upon some business; but he cannot effect what his King gave him
in command, and therefore returns re infecta, But God says, that his Word
shall not return so.

12.
For ye shall go out with joy;] q. d. Wherefore (because I have often said it)
ye shall go out (O ye my people the Jews) with joy, out of the Land of your
captivity, where ye have been kept in hard bondage.

For is put here for Wherefore; and the Lord makes a sudden Apostrophe to the
Jews, upon occasion of what he said concerning his Word in Verse. 10, 11. and in
consideration of those often promises, which he had made to the Jews, of their
Redemption.

And he led forth with peace;] For the Lord will go before you as your Captain,
Cap. 52.12.

The mountains and the hills shall break forth before you into singing.] q.d.
So great shall your joy be, as that the very mountains and the hills shall sing
for joy before you, as ye go from Babyl^n to Jerusalem, to to see your joy.

The Prophet does often give sense and reason to inanimate things, after a
Poetical manner.

13.
Instead of the Thorn shall come up the Kirr-tree, and instead of the Bryar
shall come up the Mirtle-tree,] q. d. For instead of those which have afflicted
you, there shall arise those which will profit you, and entreat you with all
kindness.

Note, that the Causal Particle, For, is here to be understood, and to be
referred to those words, Verse. 12. For ye shall go out with joy, and be led
forth with peace.

The Thorn and the Bryar are prickly plants, which will prick those which have
to do with them; by which are here meant in particulur Nebuchadnezzar King of
Babylon, and his race, which did afflict and oppress the Jews with hard bondage
in the time of their captivity: But the Fir is a tree, which, besides other
commodities, yields a covert from the tempest, and a shadow from the scorching
heat of the Sun: and the Myrtle, besides many other benefits yields a sweet Oil
which refreshes the senses, and makes Wine which comfort the stomach; it
yeildeth also pleasant and fragrant branches, to trim up and adorn the house.
By the Fir therefore and the Myrtle is here meant Cyrus, who subdued the
Babylonians, and so delivered the Jews out of their hands, and sent them home
into their own Country with many royal favors: of which read Ezra 1.

And it shall be to the Lord for a name,] i. e. And this which the Lord will do
for you, shall bring to the Lord great renown. Or thus; q. d. And this which
the Lord will do for you, shall be a thing so notable and so glorious, as that
God shall thereby purchase himself a new Name: q. d. As God purchased himself a
new Name when he delivered Isaac, and was called therefore Iehovah-jireh, Genesis
22.14. And as Generals and Emperors by their great achievements get new names,
as Scipio got him the name of Africanus by his Victories in Africa, etc. So
shall God get him a new name for his great redemption of, and munificence to
his people. Which yet understand not so, as though God had any new name
thereupon, but that he deserved a new name thereby.

For a name] i. e. The cause of a name.

Take the word Name, either properly, or for renown.

For an everlasting signe] i. e. And for an everlasting Trophy and monument of
his goodness to his people.

That shall not be cut off] i. e. That shall never be pulled down or abolished.

He alludeth to the custom of conquerours who set up lasting Trophies and
monuments for their glory in token and remembrance of some memorable victory
obtained, or some great matter performed by them: but their Trophies and
monuments are abolished by time, but this of the Lord, shall not be cut off.

ISAIAH, CHAP. LVI.
Keep ye judgment, and do justice] i. e. Keep my Law, and do that which is
your bounden duty therein, O ye Jews, which are captive in Babylon.

Judgment and Justice are taken here for that duty which we owe to God in
keeping his commandments: and therefore is it called judgment and justice,
because God may justly exact it of us, and we wrong God if we do it not.

For my salvation is near to come] i. e. For my saving power wherewith I will
save you from your enemies, and deliver you out of the Babylonish captivity, is
at hand to save you.

Concerning the notion of this word Salvation, as I have given it, See Cap. 51.
Verse. 5, 6.

And my righteousnesse] i. e. And my faithfulness whereby I have promised to
save you: see Cap. 51. verse. 6, 7. concerning the notion of this word also.

To be revealed] i. e. To come so that it may be seen of all men; see cap. 40.5.

2.
Blessed is the man that does this] This relative this, relates to that, To
wit, that that keeps the Sabbath, from polluting it; And keeps his hand
from doing any evil, and blessed is such a man, for he shall be redeemed out of
captivity and brought home with joy to Sion.

That keeps the Sabbath from polluting it.] q. d. That is, That keeps holy
the Sabbath day, and does nothing therein whereby to profane it.

By keeping the Sabbath from polluting it, understand by a Synecdoche all other
precepts also of the first Table, and the whole duty of man to God.

And keeps his hand from doing evil] Supple, To his neighbor.

By this is meant our whole duty which we owe to our neighbor, and so is to be
taken for all the precepts of the second table, so that by these Two, Keeping
the Sabbath, and Keeping the hand from doing evil, is meant the keeping of the
whole Law of God, that which he called judgment and justice, verse. 1.

3.
The son of the stranger] i. e. The stranger which is not of the seed of
Jacob, nor a Jew born.

That has joined himself to the Lord] i. e. Which has joined himself to the
Lord by says and love, as to the only true God, and worshippeth him
faithfully, and so is become a Proselyte.

The Lord has utterly separated me from his people] i. e. The Lord has put a
difference between me and his people the Jews, so that I shall never approach
so near to him as they do, nor shall I and my offerings be so well accepted of
him as they and their offerings are.

Such a thought as this is, might happily come into the mind of a Proselyte,
wherefore the Lord prevents this thought here and answers it verse 6.

Neither let the Eunuch say] An Eunuch signifies him which is unable for
generation, and who is without possibility of issue.

And so is an Eunuch called, because they, which attended on great personages
in their bed-chambers and about their wives, were wont to be gelded to keep
them chaste: For (...) dicitur quasi (...).

I am a dry Tree] i. e. I am as a dry Tree, for as a dry Tree can never bear
Fruit, so can I never have children.

Such a thought as this is might trouble an Eunuch, because children were
promised as a great blessing to those which keep the Law. Deuteronomy. 28. v. 4.11.
Wherefore the Lord prevents this his thought, and to encourage him in his
obedience, tells him, he will recompense this his incapability of this part of
the reward of obedience to his Law, by giving him a better reward than of
children.

4.
And take hold of my Covenant] Supple, To keep it.

By This covenant is here meant that covenant which God made with the
Israelites by the hand of Moses, in which covenant it was the peoples part to
keep the commandments of the Lord; And the Lords part to perform the promises
that he there makes to them which keep his commandments: This covenant might
strangers enter into, and those that did enter into it, were called Proselytes
of the covenant.

5.
In mine house] i. e. Within my Temple.

And within my walls] i. e. Within the Walls of my Temple.

A place] Supple, in the Bed-role, or Catalogue of devout and famous men.

And a name] Supple, Among the names of those famous men, which are written and
recorded in a Bed-role or Catalogue in my Temple.

Better than of sons and of daughters] i. e. Which name shall be better than
the name that comes by sons and daughters; though sons and daughters do
propagate a man's name, and give him the honorable name of Father.

Note that the word (Name] is here to be repeated; And the name of sons and
daughters is such a name as accrueth to a man by having sons and daughters;
For these Genitives cases of sons and of daughters be Genitivi efficientis.

Note here, that in the time of the Law, the names of those which had done
worthily, were wont to be preserved and to be read at times in the congregation
together with their praises; Which was done, as to give God thanks for such
famous men; So to incite others to imitate their virtues: Of this custom the
son of Sirach seems to make mention, Ecclus. Cap. 39.16. and Cap. 44.15.
and a catalogue we have in him of such men, Cap. 44. v. 16. etc. and Cap. 45.
Cap. 46. Cap. 47. Cap. 48. Cap. 49. Cap. 50. In imitation of this custom the
primitive Church had her Dipticks which were two leaved tables or boards, bound
like an Oblong book. In the one column whereof were written the names of such
men of noted piety as were yet alive: and in the other a like catalogue of such
famous men as were already departed.

I will give them an everlasting name] q.d. For whereas the name which comes
and which is propagated by sons and daughters often fails, by their
failing: This name, which I will give them in my house, shall never fail.

Therefore is it said, I will give them an everlasting name; because their name
should be preserved and registered in the catalogue of famous and pious men^,
and be remembered after their death (yea perhaps so long as the Temple stood) as
their names were which are mentioned Ecclus. Cap. 44, 45, 46, etc.

Everlasting] See Cap. 55.3.

7.
Even them will I bring to my holy mountain] i. e Even them will I bring to my
holy Temple there to worship me, as mine own people the Jews do.

By the holy mountain is meant mount Moriah or mount Sion on which the Temple
stood; which is called the holy Mountain, because God did separate and
sanctify that for the place of his worship, That is, to build his Temple
there: And by this Mountain is meant the Temple it self which stood upon that
Mountain, by a Metonymie.

Of strangers that joined themselves unto God, there were two sorts (as we said
Cap. 55.1.) One called Proselytes of the Gate, others called Proselytes of the
Covenant; These last, (of whom this place is to be understood) were accounted
as Jews, they worshipped in the same Court of the Temple where the Israelites
did, whither others might not come; they were partakers with them in all things
both divine and humane. In a word they differed nothing from Jews, but only
that they were of a Gentile race.

I will make them joyful in my house of Prayer] God might make them joyful in
his house of Prayer, That is, in the Temple, by giving them many blessings, of
which they might make songs and Psalms, and sing them with Instruments of
music in the Temple. He might also make them joyful by granting those
Petitions and Prayers, which they made to him in the Temple.

In my house of prayer] i. e. In my Temple which was ordained for to be an
house of prayer for all that would, to offer up their prayers there. Read 1
Kings 8. v. 22. and so forward.

For mine house shall be called an house of prayer for all people] i. e. For my
Temple shall be an house of prayer, not for the Jews only to pray in; But for
the Gentiles also which will join themselves to me, and take upon them the
observation of my Law, as they do.

Shall be called] i. e. Shall be.

The Hebrews do often use vocal words and Verbes for Real.

Of prayer] By prayer may here be understood by a Synecdoche, all the worship
of God.

8.
The Lord God which gathers the outcasts of Israel] i. e. The Lord God which
gathered the outcasts of Israel when they were dispersed by reason of the
Assyrians Cap. 11.11. And which will gather together these sons of Israel
which are now captive in Babylon, and which fled or now remain in other places
of the earth for fear of the Babylonians when they invaded the Land of Judah.

Of Israel] By Israel he means the Jews the children of Israel: and those
Jews which were dispersed upon the coming of the Assyrians and Babylonians
into the Land of Judah, he calls the Outcasts of Israel, because they were as
exiles in a strange Land, and driven out of their own country by their enemies.

Yet will I gather others to him besides those that are gathered to him] q.d. I
have gathered some Proselytes to my people, who worship me, and I will yet
gather other Proselytes to them besides those which are already gathered, that
they also may worship me.

Note here, that when the Assyrians invaded the Land of Judah, and many Jews
fled for safety into other countries, God when he had slain the Army of the
Assyrians brought those Jews back again into their own Land; and when he
brought them back, many others of other Nations joined themselves with them,
which afterward aboade by the Jews and ran the same fortune as they did:
See Cap. 14. v. 1, 2. And these are they which are here intimated to have been
first gathered to Israel, That is, to the Jews the children of Israel.

Note secondly, that when the Jews were delivered out of the Babylonish
captivity by Cyrus, many Babylonians and men of other Nations being won by
the conversation of the holy and religious Jews, went along with them, and did
enter themselves into the worship of God, and these are they which he says,
should be gathered unto Israel besides the former.

It may be asked here, why, and to what purpose, and upon what occasion, the
Lord says here, The Lord God which gathers the outcasts of Israel, says,
yet will I gather others to him, besides those that are gathered to him?

Ans. He says it upon occasion of those words Mine house shall be called an
house of prayer for all people verse. 7. For the Lord having said, Mine house
shall be called an house of prayer for all people, shows here, that he will
gather of all people to Israel, That is, to his people the Jews to worship him
with them in his house of prayer, That is, in his Temple: And he says it, to
show that he will accept of the Gentiles which come unto him, and will by no
means cast them off.

9.
All ye beasts of the Field come to devoure] Note here, that this is the
beginning of a new Sermon or Prophecy; And that this and the next Chapter
following would have been better put into one, than thus disjoined.

Note Secondly, that the Prophet does here and in the next Chapter show the
reason of the Jews captivity, and this he does first to clear the justice of
God, and to make it appear that it was not for naught that he gave them over
into the Babylonians hands: Secondly, that he might show the Jews that they
had need to turn to God by repentance, who had gone so far from him by their
sins.

Note Thirdly, that while he shows the reason of the Jews captivity in
Babylon, he speaks as if the Jews were then committing those sins for which
they were afterward carried into Babylon: And again, while he shows by what
means they which were in captivity might be delivered out of their captivity,
he speaks of the delivery, of those which repented, out of captivity, as
though the time of their delivery were even then at hand; joining as it were
these times together which were many years distant (the better to show the
dependency of one matter upon the other) and seeing both these as near at hand
by a prophetique spirit.

All ye beasts of the Field ccme to devoure] i. e. All ye Beasts which
frequent the Fields come and destroy Israel.

Yea all ye beasts in the Forrest] i. e. Yea all ye beasts which dwell in the
Forest, come and devour him.

The Prophet compares here the enemies of Israel (That is of the Jews which
were the children of Israel) to wild beasts; And Israel or the Jews to a
flock of sheep: and when he calls to the wild beasts of the Field to devour;
By the wild beasts of the field, he seems to mean Foxes and Badgers, such as
were wont to frequent the fields and to prey upon the sheep which fed therein,
but not to make such a slaughter among them, and to destroy them with sueh a
destruction as the beasts of the Forest were wont. And by the beasts of the
Forest he seems to mean Lions and Bears and Dragons, whose might and fury
was greater than that of the Foxes and Badgers, and which when they fell upon a
flock of sheep made a greater slaughter among them, and were not so easy to be
driven away. By the beasts therefore of the field are signified more impotent
enemies and such as do less hurt: And by the beasts of the Forest more
potent enemies, and such as could hurt: more particularly by the beasts of the
field may be meant the Moabites, and Ammonites, and Edomites, and Philistines:
By the beasts of the Forest may be meant the Chaldaeans or Babylonians which
did overcome the Land of Judah, and burn the Cities thereof with fire, and
carry away the Inhabitants captive: So that the sense of this place is; q. d.
Ye Moabites, and Ammonites, and Amalekits, and Edomits, and Philistines, come
ye and devour Israel, yea, rather come ye Babylonians and ye Nations which
serve them, and devour him.

10.
His watchmen are blinde] i. e. The Watchmen of Israel are blind.

Here is a Relative without an Antecedent.

By Watchmen he means the Priests and the Prophets, That is, The teachers of
the people: And therefore does he term them Watchmen, because as Watchmen were
set to watch, and to give notice of the approach of an enemy: So was it the
duty of the Priests and Prophets to watch over the people for their spiritual
good, and to forewarne them of sin and of those judgments which were like to
fall upon them for their sin.

He gives a reason here why he would have all the beasts of the field, yea
all the beasts of the Forest to come and devour.

Are blinde] That is, are ignorant; For so he expounds himself in the next
words.

Blindness is properly of the eye of the body: but by a Metaphor it is
translated to the understanding, which is as the eye of the mind and
signifies ignorance.

They are all ignorant] Supple, Of that which they ought to know and teach the
people, That is; They are ignorant of the Law of God.

They are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark] They are all like dumb Dogs which
cannot bark,

The note of similitude is here left to be understood.

He likeneth the Priests, and the Prophets to dumb dogs which cannot bark;
because they did not reprehend the people for their sins: For as it is the
duty of dogs to bark at Thieves: So it is of Priests and Prophets to reprehend
sin.

Sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber] He persists in the Metaphor of dogs,
and by these qualities of a dog, he signifies the laziness of those Priests
and Prophets which loved their ease and would take no pains in their calling.

11.
Yea, they are greedy dogs which have never enough,] He persists still in his
Metaphor of dogs, and shows them to be like dogs in this also, that they are
greedy of gain, as dogs are of meat.

And they are shepherds that cannot understand:] He calls them shepherds here,
whom he called watchmen before, and whom he reprehended and described under the
Metaphor or similitude of Dogs; and therefore does he call them shepherds,
because they should feed the people committed to them, and guide them in the
right way, as shepherds do their flocks.

That cannot understand:] He said, that they were blind, and ignorant of the
Law of God, verse. 10. And here he shows, that they cannot heal that
blindness, and overcome that ignorance, because partly their Idleness, partly
their Covetousness, and looking after gain, hindered them from studying the Law
of God, and meditating therein, whereby they might come to understand.

Yet some make these a mere repetition of those words, to wit, His watchmen are
become blind.

They all look to their own way, every one for his gain from his quarters.] q.
d. They all of them have their several ways and practices to get money, and they
are every one wholly intent upon those their ways and practices.

This is the sense of these words; but the words themselves seem to be
Metaphorical, and the Metaphor to be drawn from a man, who expecting some
welcome guest, stands at the door of his house, and looks that way which his
guest is to come, to see if he can see him coming.

To their own way,] Under the Metaphor of a way, he means their practices and
courses to get money; which he calls their own way, either in opposition to the
way of God, as not being the way in which God would have them to walk in, but
which they themselves either chose or found out for themselves; Or else because
every one of them had his own peculiar way to get gain.

For his gain,] He does here compare gain to a welcome guest, which a man
expects at his house.

From his quarters.] i. e. From his house or place of abode.

This appertains to the Metaphor last mentioned.

12.
Come ye, say they, I will fetch wine,] q.d. Moreover the Priests and the
Prophets say, either to their fellow-Priests and Prophets, or to the people
whom they invite to drink with them, Come, I will fetch wine, and we will be
merry.

To morrow shall be as this day,] q. d. We have been merry to day, and we will
be as merry to morrow as we have been to day. This day has been abundant with
wine, and strong drink, and mirth; and to morrow shall be as abundant as this.

And much more abundant.] q. d. Yea, to morrow shall abound with more wine, and
strong drink, and mirth, then this day does, or has done.

These are the sins in part, which were the cause that the Jews were so
destroyed by the Babylonians, and carried away captive into Babylon. Other sins
also there were, which follow in the next Chapter, which (as I said) should
have been joined with the last part of this Chapter, or the last part of this
Chapter with that.

ISAIAH, CHAP. LVII.
THe righteous perish, and no man takes it to heart:] e. i. Moreover the
righteous man dies, and no man takes it into consideration, Supple, why God
takes him away.

This (as I said) should have been continued with the end of the foregoing
Chapter.

And merciful men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken
away from the evil to come.] q. d. And merciful men are taken away by death,
that they might not see the evil which is to come upon the Nation, (as Josiah
was taken away, 2 Kings 22.2, 20.) yet no man considers that they are taken
away that they might not see the evll to come.

These are a repetition or explanation rather of the former words.

If men would seriously consider and think with themselves, that good men are
taken away from the evil to come, they would think of the evils, and of the
judgments which hang over their own heads, and humble themselves, and break
off their sins before their judgments fell upon them: But when they will not be
admonished of Gods judgments, nor think upon them, but put far from them the
evil day, they give themselves liberty of sinning, and do in a manner scorn
and puff at the threatenings of the Almighty, which must needs provoke the Lord
to anger.

2.
He shall enter into peace] i. e. The righteous man which perishes or dies,
shall go to the place where he shall be freed from all the troubles and
molestations of this world, and shall enjoy perfect Rest.

They shall rest in their beds,] i. e: The merciful men, which are taken away
out of this world by death, shall rest in their Sepulchers as in their beds.

Each one walking in his uprightnesse] i. e. Even every one of them which have
walked uprightly in his ways, and turned or staggered not either to the right
hand, or to the left.

3.
But draw near hither, ye sons of the Sorceresse, the seed of the Adulterer,
and the Whore] q. d. But draw near, ye which are wicked, and hear what I say to
you; ye shall not enter into their peace, nor rest in your beds as they do; but
ye shall live to be tormented and afflicted without Rest, and when ye die ye
shall be brought down to the grave with blood, or one grievous plague or other.

This sense this Adversative Particle But seems to require; and thus by order
of words should the Prophet have spoken: But because he called the wicked among
the Jews, the sons of the Sorceresse, and the seed of the Adulterer, and the
Whore, they mocked him, and made a mouth, and drew out their tongues at him;
whereat the Prophet was transported with an holy anger and indignation against
them; and being thus transported, did as it were forget what he was about to
say: But yet, for sense, he says that, verse. 20. which he should have said
here, in formal words.

Draw near hither] Supple, To hear what I have to say to you.

Ye sons of the Sorceresse,] i. e. Ye which are given to Sorcery and to
Witchcraft.

This is an Hebrew Idiomie, or an Hebrew kind of speech, in which the son of
the Sorceresse is as much as the Sorcerer.

That the Jews were given to sorcery and witchcrafts, see 2 Kings 21.6.

The seed of the Adulterer, and the Whore.] i. e. Ye bastards, which are not
the sons of Israel, as ye call your selves, but the sons of adultery or
fornication, and begot between an Idol and an Idolater.

Note here, that the Scripture does every where liken Idolatry to Adultery and
Fornication, and the Idolater to a Whore, and an Idol to an Adulterer.

The Jews gloryed to be called the children of Israel; but the Prophet tells
them here, that they are not the true and legitimate children of Israel, but
Bastards; for if they had been the true and legitimate children of Israel, they
would have been like to their father Israel; but they were nothing like him,
for he did abhor Idolatry, but they were mad with the love of Idols: they were
not therefore his sons, but the sons of the Adulterer and the Whore, that is,
of an Idol and an Idolater, and so born of fornication or adultery.

When our Savior Christ told the Scribes and Pharisees, that they did the
deeds of their father, the Scribes and Pharisees said unto him, We are not born
of fornication. Job. 8.41. As if they should have said, We are no Idolaters, we
are not born of Idolatry, we have no Idol for our Father, nor Idolater for our
Mother. The same manner of speech does the Prophet use here, when he calls
the Jews the seed of the Adulterer and the Whore, as the Scribes and Pharisees
used there; when they said, We are not born of fornication; the Prophet
affirming that of the Jews here, that the Scribes and Pharisees denied of
themselves there.

But how can any one though he be an Idolater, be said to be the son of an Idol
as of an Adulterer, and of an Idolater as of a Whore?

Ans. When an Idol and an Idolater do so far prevail upon a man, as to make him
to take the Idol for his god, and to imitate the Idolater in the worship which
he gives to the Idol, he may be called the son of the Idol which he takes for
his god, and of the Idolater whom he imitateth in the worship of that Idol: For
men are called the children of that God whom they worship, and the children
also of them whom they imitate. And the conjunction of the Idol and the
Idolater in this work is illegitimate, and therefore an act of fornication or
adultery; and the Idol is an Adulterer, and the Idolater a Whore, because the
Idolater was married to another, even to the true God.

4.
Against whom do ye sport your selves?] q. d. With whom do ye make your selves
merry, and at whom do ye laugh?

Such was the impudency and impiety of these men, as that they would laugh at
the Prophets of the Lord, which were sent to tell them of their sins and
transgressions, as though they were guilty of no such matter, See 2 Chronicles.
36.15, 16. But while they laughed and mocked at the Prophets of the Lord, they
laughed and mocked at God himself who sent them. See Luke 10.16.

Aga nst whom make ye a wide mouth, and draw out the tongue?] q. d. Who is he
whom ye mock? Do ye not mock the Lord himself, while ye mock his Prophets?

They which mocked were wont to make a wide mouth, and to put out their tongue
at him whom they mocked, in a jeering manner: Hence, to make a wide mouth, and
to put out the tongue, are put here, by a Metonymie, for to mock.

Are ye not children of transgression, and a seed of falsehood?] q.d. Ye mock at
me for calling you the sons of the Sorceresse, and the seed of the Adulterer
and the Whore; but did I call ye otherwise then ye are? For, are ye not
children of transgression? that is, Are ye not the sons of the Sorceresse? And,
are ye not a seed of falsehood? that is, Are ye not the seed of the Adulterer
and the Whore?

Are ye not children of transgression?] i. e. Are ye not Sorcerers?

He puts transgression here in general, for sorcery or witchcraft in
particular, because sorcery or witchcraft was a notable sin, and a notable
transgression of the Law.

A seed of falsehood?] i. e. Children born of Adultery, that is, of Idolatry;
and so the seed of the Adulterer and the Whore?

Falsehood is to be taken here for Adultery and well it may be so taken; for
Adultery is the breach and falsifying of that promise and Covenant which is
made in Wedlock, wherein the Wife promises to be true to her Husband and his
bed. And then again Adultery is to be taken Metaphorically for Idolatry,
because in Idolatry the Idolatrous Jew breaks his Faith to God, whereby he
promised to be true to him and his glory, as an Adulteress breaks the Faith
and Promise which she made to her Husband.

5.
Enflaming your selves with Idols] i. e. Stirring up your selves, and provoking
your selves to a spiritual lust, by running to, and looking upon Idols, and
then committing fornication with those Idols, to satisfy this your lust.

This is a greater sin, thus to inflame themselves, then if they were by
accident or occasionally enflamed.

Note, that the Scripture does every where speak of Idolatry as of Adultery and
Fornication, and liken Idolaters to Whoremongers and Adulte ers, and the Idol
to a Whore; because as Whoremongers and Adulterers love those women which it is
not lawful for them to love, after their manner; so do Idolaters love Idols
with the diminution of that love which they owe to God, which is not lawful for
them to do. In allusion therefore to this does he here say, Enflaming your
selves with Idols.

Under every green tree,] This he says, because Idolaters were wont to set up
their Idols, and to sacrifice to them, and perform their services to them, in
groves and woods, and under green trees. See Deuteronomy. 12.2. and 2 King. 16.4.

Under every green tree,] Supple, Where ye see an Idol standing.

Slaying the children in the valleys,] i. e. Slaying your children to the honor
of your Idols, in the valleys.

It was a savage kind of practice which the Canaanites used, who used to burn
their sons and their daughters in the fire, to their gods, Deuteronomy. 12.31. Yet
this practice did the Israelites learn from them; and Manasseh King of Judah
made his children thus to pass through the fire, 2 Chronicles. 33. v. 6.

In the valleys,] He alludeth to the valley of the son of Hinnon, which was a
valley near Jerusalem, where they made their children pass through the fire to
Moloch, 2 Chronicles. 33.6. and 2 King. 23.10. A valley very much noted for the
Idolatry which was committed therein.

Under the clefts of the rocks.] Many mountains consisted of rocks which
branched out over the valleys underneath; and it may be that under these
branches of the rocks Idolaters chose to do their service to their Idols,
because they defended them from the Sun, and from the rain, which they were
subject to, if they served their Idols farther off in the open air.

Otherwise you may take, Under the clefts of the rocks, for a repetition of
those words, In the valleys, (which kind of repetition our Prophet often
uses;) for every valley is under or beneath an hill or mountain, and the hills
and mountains of Judea were very rocky.

6.
Among the smooth stones of the stream is thy portion,] q. d. The Idols which
are set up among the smooth stones of the stream, they are the gods which thou
delightest in.

Among the smooth stones of the stream] i. e. Among the stones of the rivers;
which stones the waters of the rivers, by long washing, have made smooth.

Is thy portion,] i. e. Are thy gods, which thou delightest in.

As God is called the portion of the godly, Psalm. 16.4. Jer. 10.16. So are
Idols called here the portion of Idolaters, because Idolaters made the Idols
their gods.

Note here, that a portion signifies often in Scripture an inheritance, in
allusion to that division which was made of the Land of Canaan, when it was
divided into several parts or portions, and those several parts and portion
were given for several inheritances to the several Tribes and Families of
Israel, Josh. 13, etc. And God is called the portion or inheritance of the
godly, in allusion to such an heritage; because the godly do as much trust and
delight in God, as rich men do in their inheritance and possessions: yea, as an
inheritance or possessions make a man rich; so does God enrich them that serve
him. And because the Lord is thus called the portion or inheritance of the
godly; therefore are the Idols here called the portion of the Idolaters,
because the Idolaters made them their gods.

Note again, that Idolaters did not set up their Idols, and sacrifice to them
in one only kind of place, but in diverse; sometimes they set them up in
groves, under the green trees thereof; sometimes in valleys, though dry;
sometimes by rivers, sometimes in mountains, sometimes in their houses,
sometimes in the Temple, etc. So that what are here spoken, from verse. 5. to
verse. 9. are not to be understood of one and the same Idols, set up in one and
the same place; but of several Idols, set up and worshipped in several places;
and thereby is signified the mad love which the Jews had to Idolatry. See St.
Jerome upon this place.

Note here again, that whereas he says, Among the smooth stones of the stream
is thy portion; it is not to be understood by these words, that Idolaters set
up their Idols in the streams, or in the rivers, (for certainly they did not
set them up in the rivers, or in the streams,) but only that they set them up
nigh unto the rivers or streams, upon the shoars thereof; upon which shoars,
because there were many stones cast up by the inundation of the rivers at some
times, these Idols might be said to have been set up, or stand, or be among the
stones of the stream.

But why then did not the Prophet say, Nigh to the rivers, or stream, or
waters, is thy portion? but, Among the smooth stones of the stream is thy
portion?

Ans. He does it, to show obliquely the vanity of their Idols, and to signify,
that when their Idols were set up among the stones of the stream, like was set
up among their like: For their Idols were but stones, and therefore were well
seated among stones.

If they should say, that though their Idols were stones, yet they were smooth
polished stones, and therefore better then the stones of the stream: The
Prophet prevents them, when he calls the stones of the stream, smooth stones;
for he says the stones of the stream had been smoothed and polished with the
long washing of the water, and therefore as good as their Idols in this also.

Note once again, that here he speaks to Jerusalem, whereas he spoke before
to the Jews, for he changes both the Number and the Gender; and he speaks to
her as to a woman, by a Prosopopoeia; yet in her he sets out the condition and
Idolatry of the Jews themselves.

They, they are thy lot:] i. e. These, even these Idols, which are among the
smooth stones of the streams, are thy lot.

Here is a Relative put without a formal Antecedent; but yet the Antecedent is
easy to be understood.

What he called a portion before, he calls a lot here, in allusion to the
division of the Land of Canaan by lot; for because when the Land was divided,
every portion was given to every Tribe for an heritage, by lo^, (Josh. 13.6.
and 14.2.) therefore he calls an heritage a lot.

He doubles his word here, saying, They, they, for the greater emphasis.

Even to them have thou poured out a drink offering, to them thou have offered
a meat offering:] q. d. Even to these have thou sacrificed.

By the Law of God, unto every sacrifice of a beast there was to be added a
certain quantity of wine for a drink offering, Numb. 15.5, 7, etc. and this
wine was to be poured out upon the Altar (but not upon the fire) says
Maimonides: There was also a certain quantity of flower to be added for a
meat offering, Numb. 15.4, 6, etc. What therefore the Lord required by his Law
to be done to him in his sacrifices, Jerusalem did do unto her Idols in their
sacrifices.

Should I receive comfort in these?] i. e. Can I receive comfort by these
doings? q.d. You have grieved my Spirit by your sins which you have committed
against me, and therefore you should seek to comfort me again; but can I be
comforted, in the grief I am in, by such doings as these are? No, I am a great
deal the more vexed and grieved by them.

He uses an (...) here.

In these] i. e. By these: In for By.

7.
Upon a lofty and high mountain have thou set thy bed,] Supple, For thy Lovers
and thy Sweet-hearts to come and lie with thee: that is, Thou have committed
fornication upon the high mountains: that is, Thou have committed Idolatry upon
the high mountains, by sacrificing unto Idols thereon.

Note, that Idolatry is often called in Scripture Fornication and Adultery, by
a Metaphor; because as in Adultery the woman which commits Adultery breaks
the Covenant of Wedlock, and leaves her Husband, and cleaves to another man;
so in Idolatry, the people which are bound by Covenant to love God as their
Husband, break that Covenant, and leave God to cleave to Idols.

Note further, that because carnal fornication and adultery is committed on the
bed, hence, by a Metaphor, he says, Upon the mountain have thou set thy bed;
for thou have committed Idolatry on the mountain.

Note yet further, that the Canaanites, and the people adjoining (of whom the
Jews learned their Idolatry) did sacrifice to their Idols on high and lofty
mountains in stead of Temples: Hence he says, Upon a lofty and high mountain
have thou set thy bed.

Note fourthly, that when he says, On a lofty and high mountain, he speaks not
of any one determinate mountain, but takes mountains, col^ective, for
mountains.

Even thither wentest thou up to sacrifice,] Supple, To thy Idols.

He shows in these words, what he meant by those, Upon a lofty and high
mountain have thou set thy bed.

8.
Behind the doors also, and the posts, have thou set up thy remembrance,] i.
e. Behind the doors, and the posts of thine house also, thou have set up thine
images, to put thee in remembrance of thine Idol-gods, and have worshipped them.

It is observed, that Jerusalem did here set up her Images in the same places
where God commanded his people to write his Commandments, that they might
remember them, to keep them, Deuteronomy. 6.9.

Thy remembrance,] He calls the images which Jerusalem did set up behind the
doors and the posts of her houses, her Remembrance, because she set them there,
to put her in remembrance of her Idol-gods, (suppose Saturn, Jupiter, and the
Host of Heaven, etc.) Or else he might call them, Her Remembrance, ironically;
because she did set them up in those places, in which God commanded his people
to write his Commandments, that they might put them in remembrance of their
duty to him, so often as they saw them, or read them.

For thou have discovered thy self to another then to me,] i. e. For thou have
discovered thy privities or naked parts to others (which are not thy Husbands)
more then to me (which am thy Husband;) that is, Thou have suffered others to
lie with thee besides my self, and so have played the whore with them: The
meaning is, that she had worshipped other gods besides the Lord, and so had
committed Idolatry with them.

He persists still in the Metaphor of Adultery and Fornication, by which, as I
said, is meant Idolatry.

Thy sell,] i. e. Thy nakedness, or privy parts. Synecdoche integri.

And art gone up,] Supple, Into thy bed, to lie and play the harlot with them.

Thou have enlarged thy bed,] Supple, That thou may receive many Lovers and
Adulterers at once: q.d. It is not one Idol which thou worshippest, but many.

And made a Covenant with them,] i. e. And did break that Covenant of Wedlock
which thou made with me, and did make a Covenant of Wedlock with them,
which yet is not Wedlock, but Adultery; for thou wast married to another man,
even to the Lord.

He persists still in his Metaphor, speaking of Idolatry as of Adultery and
Fornication; therefore by the Covenant here, is meant in the first place, that
covenant or bargain which an Harlot makes with her Lover, wherein she
covenanteth to let him have such and such use of her body, and to have of him
so much or so much money for her hire: And then by this covenant is meant the
covenant of Idolatry, whereby the Idolater covenanteth with his Idol-gods by
their Priests, thus and thus to worship them.

These Jews made a Covenant with God in their Fathers, in Mount Sinai, Exodus
24.7. and here perfidiously they break that Covenant, and make a new Covenant
with their Idols.

Thou lovedst their beds wheresoever thou saw them.] i. e. Yea, so
extraordinary was thy lust, as that thou did not stay till thy Lovers came
and courted thee, that they might lie with thee; but thou did rather court
them, and offer thy self to lie with them, wheresoever thou did meet them.

He persists still in his Metaphor of an Harlot and Adulterer, and by this
shows the extreme sway wherewith the Jews were carried to Idolatry.

9.
And thou wentest to the King with ointments] And thou wentest to Moloch of
thine own accord, to entice him to lie with thee.

By the King is meant Moloch, which he calls the King, either because they
prefered him before all other Idols, or in allusion to the Hebrew word MELECH,
which signifies a King.

Moloch was the abomination of the children of Ammon, 2 King. 11.7.

When he says, Thou wentest to the King with ointments, etc. he alludeth to
the manner of Whores, who when they were to go to the bed of some great
personage, to prostitute their bodies, and to play the whores with him, were
wont to anoint themselves with sweet ointments, and perfume themselves with
choice perfumes, that he might take the more pleasure in them: And the literal
meaning is, that they went to Moloch to commit whoredom with him: but the
metaphorical meaning is, that they did worship Moloch and sacrifice to him.
And by that that is said, they went to the King with ointments, and increased
their perfumes, is meant, that they carried sweet odours to Moloch to burn
before him, and that they offered to him many precious gifts for the purchasing
of his favor, more then they did to any other of their Idol-gods.

Note here, that when he says, thou wentest to the Kings with ointments, he
means not, that they worshipped Moloch in the valley of the son of Hinnon,
for that he spoke of verse. 5. but that they went to the Temple of Moloch in the
Land of the Ammonites, there to worship and sacrifice to him where his chief
dwelling was, and as it were there to allure him to come and take a dwelling
among them; and this they did before Manasseh, set up the Image of Molo^h in
the valley of the Town of Hinnon, and was an occasion that Manasseh did
afterward set up his Image there.

And did increase thy perfumes] q. d. And though when thou wentest into
other thy lovers, thou did use perfumes, yet when thou wentest to Moloch
thou did increase thy perfumes.

By this is intimated that they did worship Moloch more than any other
Idol-God, and had him in higher esteem; and did offer him more and richer
gifts than they did to any other God.

And did^t send thy messengers afar off] For thou did send thy messengers
far off to buy thee costly ointments and perfumes, to annoint and perfume thy
self, as suppose into Arabia Foelix and other places, where the best Spices
and odours for ointments and perfumes grew.

Or thus: And thou did^t send messengers far off] q. d. And thou did send
messengers into Assyria, Chaldaea, and Egypt, and to other far countries, to
get thee lovers and sweet-hearts from thence also: By which is meant that they
worshipped foreign gods: and brought in the gods and Idols of remote Nations
into their own Lands, and worshipped them there.

And thou did debase thy self even unto Hell] i. e. And when thou had
obtained the good will of thine Adulterers, thou did prostrate and cast down
thy body to them as low as hell: That is, thou did become the basest whore
that ever was; That is, thou did become the most notorious Idolater in the
world.

The Prophet does persist still in his Metaphor of Adultery and Fornication:
And when he says Thou did debase thy self, he alludes to a whores casting
her self down, and prostrating her body on the ground to the lust of her
Adulterer, which is called here a debasing her self, and which is elsewhere
called humbling as Deuteronomy. 21.14. Judge. 19.24. Such a one the Greeks call (...).

Even unto hell] i. e. Very low.

There is an Hyperbole in these words.

10.
Thou art wearied in the greatness of thy way]] i. e. Thou have taken a great
deal of pains and labor in these thy Idolatrous courses, and even wearied
thy self, but all in vain, for though thou have wearied thy self, yet thou
have received no profit at all by thine Adulterers, That is, by thine Idols.

Note here, that the Prophet uses a Metaphor taken from Travelers, to whom
because they are wearied or may well be wearied when they have traveled a
great way, he compares these Idolaters which had taken a great deal of pains
in their Idolatrous ways, and therefore might well be wearied thereby.

Note secondly, that this word (in vain) is here to be understood.

Yet said thou not, there is no hope] i. e. And yet thou did not consider
with thy self and say, There is no hope, Supple, in mine Idols, That is, I
cannot hope ever to receive any good from them.

Thou have found the life of thine hand] i. e. Surely thou have found those
that can strengthen thine hands, and enliven them to any work that they should
not be weary.

He speaks of their Idols, and uses an Ironie in this his speech.

The life] i. e. Those which can give life and strength. Metonymia effectus.

Thine hand] i. e. Thine hands; A Singular for a Plural number collective.

Note that he passes here from the Metaphor of a Travellour, to the Metaphor
of a Workman who labors with his hands.

Therefore thou wast not grieved] i. e. Therefore forsooth thou wast not weary,
nor were the pains and the Travel which thou tookest in thine Idolatrous
courses, grievous to thee.

By these words Thou have found the life of thine hand, therefor thou wast not
grieved; The Prophet seems to prevent an objection: for beca^se he said Thou
art wearied in the greatness of thy way, yet said thou not, there is no
hope; Jerusalem might say, I am not wearied in the greatness of any of my
ways. To which the Prophet here answers by an Irony; saying,

Thou have found the life of thine hand, therefore forsooth thou wast not
griev^d.

11.
And of whom have thou been afraid or feared, that thou have lied etc.] q.d.
But what are these thy Gods, that thou have broken thy promise and thy covenant
made with me, for fear of them?

These words are spoken with contempt of those Gods whom Jerusalem feared.

Or feared] i. e. Who are they whom thou have feared?

That thou have lyed] i. e. That thou have brok^n thy promise and the covenant
which thou made to me; by which covenant and promise I became thy husband,
and thou becamest my wife.

The Jews in general made a covenant with God (in their forefathers) and
promised to be obedient to him: Exodus 24.7. and the same covenant did they make
every one in particular at their circumcision: For every one which was
circumcised was by virtue of his circumcision a debtor to do the whole Law,
Galat. 5.3. Part of this Law was this: that they should have no other Gods but
the Lord, and that they should not worship any graven Image: Exodus 20. verse. 3,
5. This part of the covenant therefore did Jerusalem break when she worshipped
Moloch and other Idols Gods, and in breaking that she brake the whole, James
2.10. Being therefore that she did not keep the covenant and promise which she
made with God, but broke it; she is said here to lie.

And have not remembered me] i. e. And have not remembered the covenant and
promise which thou made to me.

Me] Me is put here by a Metonymie, for the covenant made with me.

Nor laid it to thine heart] i. e. Nor have seriously considered, Supple, that
thou have forsaken me, and broken the Bonds of Wedlock which were made between
thee and me, by thine Idolatry.

Have not I held my peace even of old? and thou fear me not? q.d. Have not I
winked at thy sins now for a long time, and not rebuked thee for them: and
therefore thou have not feared me, but put the fear of me far from thee?

Note here, for the connection of these with the former words, that (as often
elsewhere, so here) there is a Brachylogie or short kind of speech, and that
here is something left to be understood by the circumstance of the place: When
therefore the Lord said ( Of whom have thou been afraid or feared, that thou
have lied and have not remembered me? It is to be understood, that Jerusalem,
(willing to justify her self) Answered him, that she was not afraid of any
other than of him, neither did she fear any other but his holy name: And him
she did fear, and was afraid to break her promise and her covenant which she
had made with him. But that this answer was but dissembling and falsehood, the
Lord detecteth saying; Have not I held my peace of old, and thou fear me
not? Where he does not only say that she feared him not, in contradiction to
that that she said, that she feared him, but also shows the reason why she
did not fear him, which was this; Because he had winked at her sins of a
long time, as though he had not seen them.

And thou fear me not?] q.d. And therefore thou have not feared me.

12.
I will declare thy righteousness and thy workes] q. d. But I will not hold my
peace long but will declare thy sins with a witness.

I will declare thy righteousnesse] i. e. I will declare thy righteousness,
and show what it is by the vengeance which I will take on thee for it; i. e. I
will surely punish thee for thy sins.

The punishment which the Lord inflicted upon her for these her sins, was her
captivity in Babylon, and the miseries which she there suffered.

Thy righteousnesse] Note that he speaks Ironically when he says, thy
righteousness, for by her righteousness he means her sins, but he calls
her sins, her righteousness by an Irony, because she justified her self
concerning the fear of God, and the consequences thereof, and made her self
as if she had been righteous, in that answer of hers which was left to be
understood verse. 11.

And thy workes] i. e. And thy good works.

But note that good works are put here Ironically for evil works as
righteousness was put just before for sin.

For they shall not profit thee] i. e. For thy goodly works shall not profit
thee, but bring vengeance upon thee.

This causall particle, For, relates to those words, I will declare, which
signify to declare with a witness, or declare with a vengeance, q. d. I will
take vengeance on thee for thy works and that openly; for thy good works
shall not keep off my vengeance, but bring it the sooner on thee.

13.
When thou cryest] q. d. When I shall take thee in hand and punish thee for thy
doings, and thou cryest for help and deliverance out of the hands of the
Babylonians to whom I will give thee.

Let thy companies deliver thee] i. e. Let the companies of those many Idol
gods which thou worshippest, deliver thee out of mine hands, or the hands of
the Babylonians, into which I will give thee.

This is spoken with a Sarasme.

But the wind shall carry them all away] q.d. But they shall be but poor
Helpers, and poor deliverers, for they themselves shall come to naught, and be
as the chafe which the wind carries away.

Vanity shall take them] q. d. They shall prove but vain things.

But he that puts his trust in me] q.d. B^t he which shall be carried away
into Babylon with thee, if he puts not his trust in such Idols as you do,
but puts his trust in me (who am the living God) in the midst of his
afflictions.

Shall possess the Land] i. e. He shall return out of Babylon and possess
his own land, even the land of Judah again.

And shall inherit mine holy mountaine] i. e. And shall inherit Mount Sion, and
dwell there.

14.
And shall say] Supple, to the way laborers.

Cast ye up, Cast ye up] i. e. Cast ye up, cast ye up the earth, and make a
cause-way for the people of the Lord to pass by from Babylon to their own
Land.

Thus do they make good ways in Moorish and Fenny grounds; which otherwise
are very bad for Travelers, to wit, by casting up the earth and making a
causway: to this manner of making ways God does he therefore allude when he
says, Cast ye up, cast ye up, as if he should say, prepare ye the ways, and
make them good, etc. and as Cap. 40.3.

Take up the stumbling block out of the way of my people] q. d. Take away the
dirt and stones, and other impediments that lie in the way from Babylon to
Judaea; That the Jews my brethren and contrymen may not stumble or be
hindered in their journey from Babylon into their own Lands.

The meaning of this place is this, that those Jews which did trust in the
Lord in the land of Babylon, the land of their Captivity should return safe
out of Babylon and have no hinderance or want of any thing in their way as they
passed from Babylon to Judaea.

Of my people] These words may relate either to him that says, cast ye up,
cast y^ up, etc. and then when he says of my people, it is as if he should say
of my brethren and country men: or they may relate to the Lord, who says of
him who trusts in him, that he shall say cast ye up, cast ye up.

15.
The high and lofty one] i. e. The high and lofty God.

That inhabiteth eternity] i. e. Who alone is eternal.

He speaks of Eternity as of an house or Palace which a King or a Prince
inhabiteth as his own peculiar possession, in which no other man has any right
but himself.

Whose name is holy] i. e. Who is holy, that is, who is separate from all other
by way of excellency above all.

Whose name] i. e. Who.

The name of God is put here for God himself.

Holy] To be holy signifies to be separate, and be above all others by way of
eminency.

I dwell in the high and holy place] i. e. I dwell in heaven which is high in
regard of the earth, and which is a place separate and above sublunary things.

The holy place] Though heaven be a place in which righteousness dwells: 2
Pet. 1.13. and into which no unclean or unholy thing shall enter, Rev. 21.27.
yet I take not that to be the meaning of the word holy here; but heaven is
called here the holy place, because it is separated in a most glorious manner
from all sublunary things and is above them all. For this word holy in its
original signification signifies a separation from other things by way of
excellency, as I have often said.

With him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit] q.d. And yet for all
that I dwell in the high and holy place, I dwell also with him that is of a
contrite and humble spirit.

I dwell with him] i. e. I am present with him by my favor and tokens of my
love to him, etc. for God is said (among the Hebrews) to be with and to dwell
with him, whom he favors and shows kindness to.

That is of a contrite and humble spirit] i. e. That trembles at my words when
he is reproved, and humbles himself for his sins.

A contrite spirit is opposed to an obstinate spirit which will not yield to
any reproof; and it is so called by a Metaphor taken from such a stone as will
break in pieces at the knock of a hammer or the like.

As a contrite spirit is opposed to an obstinate spirit: so an humble spirit is
opposed to a proud spirit.

To revive the spirit of the humble] i. e. To comfort and refresh the heart of
the humble, when they are made sad and oppressed with any grief or sorrow.

16.
For I will not contend for ever] i. e. I will not always be angry, Supple,
with him which is of an humble and contrite spirit, but will in time break off
mine anger toward him.

To contend is properly spoken of those which sue and plead one against another
in a Court of justice, which because it is seldom done without anger, it is
put here by a Metaphor, for, to be angry with.

For the spirit should fail before me] i. e. For the spirit of a man would
faint in my presence, as being overwhelmed with horror and despair, Supple,
if I should be always wroth with him.

And the souls which I have made] Supple, Would fail or faint away, if I
should be angry with them for ever.

Note here that the spirit and souls which are but parts, are put by a
Synecdoche for the whole men.

By these words (which I have made) The Lord does either intimate his
compassion upon these men, as being his own creatures therefore to be pitied
by him: as Psalm. 138.8. Or else he does hereby intimate that he knows that
what he says is true. viz. That the souls and spirits of men would fail if
he should be always wroth with them, because he made them, and therefore he
knew what their condition was.

Note here, that when God smites his people he is often moved to stay his
hand, so that he does not utterly destroy them or utterly discourage them, upon
consideration of the frailty of their nature (especially if they relent at his
words and humble themselves before him) as Psalm. 103. v. 14. etc.

17.
For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth and smote him] i. e. I was
angry with Jacob (i. e. with the Jews which were the children of Jacob) and
smote him for his covetousness.

Note here, that the smiting here meant, was the judgment which he executed
upon the Jews by the Babylonians, who took them and carried them captive into
Babylon and there afflicted them.

Note Secondly, that though he mentions covetousness, yet that was not the
only sin for which he smote the Jews and delivered them over into the
Babylonians hands; but the sins which caused this were many, whereof he
mentions sometimes one, sometimes another, but seldom altogether.

Note Thirdly, that this is spoken as though the Jews were at this time
captive in Babylon, whereas they were not carried into captivity till many
years after: and this the Prophet does often, by a prophetique spirit.

I hid me] God speaks of himself here (...) as of a man, that is so angry as
that he will not be seen or spoken with.

And was wroth] i. e. And continued my wrath: Or, and was yet more wroth.

And he went on frowardly in the way of his heart] q. d. Yet (although I smote
him and was wroth with him) he repented not, but went on still with a great
deal of frowardness in his wicked way, even the way which his own heart
found out and delighted in.

And, is to be taken here for Yet.

Frowardly] i. e. Perversely and crossely toward me.

In the way of his heart] i. e. In the way which his wicked and perverse heart
found out.

18.
I have seen his wayes] But now I have seen his ways, Supple, that he has
amended them, and repented him of the wicked ways of his heart.

By ways are meant metaphorically the course of a man's life, and his actions.

And will heal him] i. e. And because I see that he has amended his ways, I
will deliver him out of his affliction and captivity which he suffers under the
Babylonians.

He said in the former verse, that he smote him, by which he meant that he
delivered him into the Babylonians hands to be afflicted by him: In allusion
therefore to that, that he said he had smote him; he says here that (he would
heal him) to wit, of those wounds which he made in him by those strokes: that
is, that he would deliver him out of that affliction, which he suffered by the
Babylonians; where note, that he compares affliction to a wound which a man
makes with a rod or a staff.

I will lead him also] i. e. I will also lead him safe from Babylon to his own
Land, the Land of Judah.

And restore comforts unto him] i. e. And will comfort him again, for the
discomforts which he has met with in his captivity.

And to his mourners] q. d. That is, to his mourners or such of his that are of
a contrite spirit and mourn for their sins. Or by his mourners may be meant
such as mourned by reason of their hard usage in their captivity.

And is put here as a note of explication, and signifies as much as that is.

19.
I create the fruit of the lips] q.d. I am he which create peace, and none else.

Note here, that by the fruit of the lips are meant in general, words which
proceed from the lips, as fruit proceeds from the Tree, by a Metaphor: then
by a Synecdoche, by words are meant words of praise, or praises and
thanks-givings. Then because the subject of praises and thanks-givings is
peace, by praise and thanksgivings is meant peace, by a Metonymie.

This the Lord says; that they might not doubt but that they shall have peace
if he says it; for if he says it, he is able to give it as being the only
giver thereof.

Peace, peace to him that is far off, and to him that is neere] i. e.
Therefore peace, Supple, shall be to him that is afar off, and to him that is
near.

Peace] i. e. By peace understand all manner of prosperity and good: for so the
Hebrews use to call peace.

Peace, peace] The word is doubled, the more to confirm what is said.

To him that is afar off, and to him that is neere] i. e. To all that are in
captivity, whether they be in captivity farther off, or nearer home.

The Jews while they were in captivity to the Babylonian, were dispersed far
and near into their dominions, so that some were in captivity very far off
from their own home, and others were captives nearer hand.

And I will heal him] i. e. For I will deliver him out of his affliction, See
verse. 18.

20.
But the wicked are like the troubled Sea etc.] i. e. But the wicked Jews
which will not repent them of their sins, they shall not enjoy peace, but
shall be tossed to and fro on the Land of their captivity, as the Sea is tossed
to and fro with winds and tempests.

A Praesent Tense is put here for a Future.

The troubled Sea] The Sea which is tossed to and fro with storms and winds.

Which cannot rest] i. e. Which cannot lie still and enjoy a calm, by reason
of winds and tempests.

Whose waters cast up mire and dirt] This is an amplification of what he said:
for a troubled sea, and a sea that cannot rest, casts up mire and dirt upon
the shore with her waves.

21.
There is no peace says my God to the wicked] q. d. Though they that are of an
humble and contrite spirit shall enjoy peace, yet to the wicked and irrepentant
Jew there shall be no peace, says my God.

There is no peace] i. e. There shall be no peace, that is, there shall be no
prosperity.

A Praesent is put here for a Future Tense as in the verse before.

Says my God] Supple, Who is able and will perform what he says.

The Prophet speaks this in his own person.

ISAIAH, CHAP. LVIII.
CRy aloud, spare not etc.] This the Lord speaks to his prophet, as if he were
the present with the Jews in the Babylonish captivity: And this chapter may
well be continued with the former: for because the Lord promised his favor and
deliverance out of captivity to those which were of a contrite and humble
spirit, Cap, 57. v. 16. etc. He foreseeing that many of the obstinate Jews
would be ready to contradict what he said, and to say that he had no respect to
those which were of a contrite spirit and humble heart: for they had fasted,
and yet he regarded them not, but suffered the Babylonians to prevail against
them, and keep them still captive, he shows that that Fast which they kept
(and as they kept it) was no sign of an humble and contrite spirit, and that
he could not be pleased with such a Fast as that was, etc.

Lift up thy voice like a Trumpet] i. e. speak unto them aloud, that they may
hear thee.

The voice or sound of a Trumpet is loud and may be heard afar off; Therefore
he bids him, lift up his voice like a Trumpet: And they had need to lift up
their voice like a Trumpet and speak aloud to sinners who are to tell them of
their sins; For sinners are deaf on that ear.

And the house of Jacob] i. e. and the Jews which are of the house or family of
Jacob, as his children, and descended from him.

Yet they seek me daily] Between this and the former verse there is something
left to be understood; as this or the like [For they are a wicked generation,
walking in the ways of their own heart, etc. So that the sentence complete, is
this, For they are a wicked Generation, walking in the ways of their own
heart, yet as though they were holy and righteous men. They seek me daily.

They seek me daily] i. e. They make as though they sought me daily by their
prayers, etc.

And delight to know my waies] i. e. And (in show and outward appearance) they
make as though they did delight to know the ways which I have commanded them
to walk in; That is, to know my statutes.

To delight is taken here for to make show as if they did delight; as to seek
was taken for to make as though they did seek, just before. As a Nation that
did righteousness, and forsook not the Ordinances of their God] i. e. As if
they were an holy Nation, which loved righteousness, and which cleaved to the
Law of their God, and would not depart from it.

They ask of me the ordinances of justice] i. e. They ask of me by my Priests
and my Prophets, what my Laws and Statutes are, and what is the meaning of
them; as though they were desirous to keep them; and as though they wanted not
will, but knowledge only to observe them.

The Ordinances of justice] i. e. My Statutes, which (as they are just indeed)
so do they also call them just, to show what love they had to them, and how
worthy they were to be known.

Note here, that a Substantive of the Genitive case, viz. Of justice, is put
for the Adjective, Just, after the Hebrew manner.

Or else, of justice, may be here Genitivus subjecti; and intimates, the
subject of those Ordinances, to wit, that they taught justice and
righteousness.

They take delight] Supple, in show, or as they would make men believe.

In approaching to God] i. e. In approaching to me, to wit, by prayer and holy
services.

Note, that the Lord speaks here of himself in the third person; and says to
God, for, to me.

Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou see not] q. d. Thou said, say
they, That thou would dwell with him that is of an humble and contrite
spirit, and comfort and deliver him; but we have humbled our selves, and
fasted every year in the day of atonement, according to thy command, Levit.
23.27. And we have fasted, and humbled our selves many other times also in
these the days of our captivity, and do fast and humble our selves often;
Wherefore then have thou not looked upon us, and delivered us from the hands of
the Babylonians?

Note that these words relate to the first verse, and are as an introduction to
those sins which the Lord there would have his Prophet show his people.

Wherefore have we afflicted our souls?] Supple, with fasting. See verse. 5.

And thou take no knowledge] This is a repetition of those words. Thou see
not.

Note, that by Gods not seeing, and not taking knowledge of their fasting, is
meant, Gods not comforting them, and his not delivering them out of captivity,
for that their fasting and humiliation, and contrition, by putting the
Antecedent for the Consequent.

Behold in the day of your fast you find pleasure] Here begin the sins and
transgressions which the Lord would have his Prophet show unto his people: q.
d. My people say, wherefore have we fasted, and thou see not? wherefore have
we afflicted our selves, and thou take no notice? Cry therefore aloud, spare
not, lif^ ^p your voice like a Trumpet, and show thy people their
transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins, saying, Behold in the day
of your fast ye find pleasure, etc.

Behold in the day of your fast ye find pleasure] i. e. Behold in the day of
your fast ye seek after, and find, and enjoy, and follow your sports, and your
pastimes, in which ye take pleasure.

By pleasures, are meant sports and pastimes, in which they take pleasure, per
Metonymiam efficientis. And by finding is meant, seeking and finding, and
enjoying or following, by a syllepsis.

These words contain a reason why God, though they fasted, yet would not see;
and though they afflicted their souls, yet would take no knowledge of it.

And exact all your labours] i. e. And ye make all your servants labor in
private, as much upon the day of your fast, as ye do upon any other day, and
use as much rigor to them that day, that they may do the work or task which
ye have set them, as ye do at any other time.

Note, that upon the tenth day of the seventh month there was to be a day of
atonement, it was to be an holy convocation to the people of Israel, and they
were to afflict their souls, and to offer an offering made by fire unto the
Lord, etc. Levit. 23.27. And it is not to be doubted, but that the Jews which
would seem religious, did observe this day yearly in the Land of their
captivity, and afflict their souls therein, though they did not offer an
offering made by fire, or perform such duties of that day as were bound to the
Temple. And of this day of Fast (though not only, yet) principally do I think
that this place is here meant.

Upon the day of Atonement, which was a day of Fasting and humiliation, no work
was to be done, Levit. 25.31. Neither was it seemly upon the days of voluntary
Fasting.

4.
Behold ye fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of
wickedness.] q.d. Behold, when ye fast, ye do on the day of your fast scould
and brawle one with another, and fast to fisty-cuffs, and strike one another
with your wicked fists.

But how can he which scouldeth and brawleth, and smites his neighbor with
his fist, on the day when he fasteth, be said to fast for strife and debate,
and to smite with the fist of wickedness? And how could they come on that day
to scould and brawle and fight one with another?

Ans. Upon the day of Atonement there was to be an Holy convocation; And on
other days of voluntary fasting they met together to prayers, and other
religious duties of the day; and when they were so met, they would contend and
quarrel one with another, and come from words to blows. And though they did
not intend to quarrel and brawle and fight one with another, when they thus
met, yet he says, ye fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of
wickedness. Because it fell out that they did strive, and brawle and quarrel,
and fight one with another when they so met. And we often speak of the event of
a thing, as of the intent, and of a thing which happens but by chance, as of
a thing which was really purposed.

See what was said for this purpose on those words, Tophet is prepared of old,
Cap. 3. verse. 33.

Again, a man which fasteth, (is (by the nature of a fast) by his fasting to
repress sin, and to repress his turbulent passions, if therefore he does
not repress sin, nor repress his turbulent passions, nor resolve nor
endeavor so to do by his his fasting, he may be said to fast for sin, and
to fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness,
according to that saying, Qui non vetat peccare cum possit, jubet, S^n. Troas
verse. 289. that is, he which forbids not sin, when he can, commands it,
and eggs it on. And according to that proverb, Mark 9.40. He that is not
against us, is for us.

With the fist of wickednesse] i. e. With your wicked fist.

A Substantive of the Genitive case is put here for an Adjective.

As you do this day] i. e. After the manner as ye are wont to do on this
day, supple, which we speak of, that is, on the day of your Fast.

To make your voice to be heard on high] i. e. If you would make the voice of
your prayers and supplications which ye make that day to be heard of God who
dwells on high, ( to wit, in heaven) and cause him to s^e and take knowledge
of your Fasting.

5.
Is it such a Fast as I have chosen] q.d. For is it such a fast that that I
delight in?

As I have chosen] To choose signifies often to approve, affect, love, or
delight in, by a Metonymie, because we approve of and affect and love and
delight in, that which we make free choice of.

A day for a man to afflict his soul in] i. e. to wit, only for a man to
afflict his soul for a day?

Note that these words A day for a man to afflict his soul in, are put by an
hypallage, For, For a man to afflict his soul for a day.

To afflict his soul] To afflict his soul is put here for to afflict and
macerate himself with hunger or want of meat. The soul being put by a
Synecdoche partis, for the whole man, yea, the soul which is one part, is put
for the body which is the other part of man, so that to afflict the soul is, to
macerate and afflict the body or the flesh with abstinence from meat.

Is it to bow down his head as a bul-rush, and to spread sackcloth and ashes
under his feet?] i. e. Is the Fast which I have chosen only for a man to bow
down his head like a Bul-rush, and to spread sackcloath and ashes under him for
a day?

To bow down his head] To bow down the head is a posture of one that is humble
and penitent, Luke 18.13. As to lift up the head is the posture of the proud,
Cap. 3.16. But this posture the Hypocrite may use, as well as he is which is
truly penitent, and humble in heart.

As a Bull-rush] A Bull-rush is tall and slender, especially at the top, and is
but weak; wherefore the top thereof does always bend downward to the earth or
the water in which it grows.

And to spread sackcloath and ashes under him?] This was the fashion of
mournings among the Jews, to put on, or to sit on Sackcloth; and to cast ashes
upon their head, or to sit in ashes.

Concerning the putting on of sackcloath, and sitting in sackcloath. See 1
King. 11.27. Psalm. 69.11. Esther 41. and 3.

Concerning the casting of ashes upon the head, and sitting in bshes, see 2 Samuel 13.19. Esth. 4.1 and 3.

Therefore did they use Sackcloath and Ashes in their mournings, because
Sackcloath and Ashes, did afflict the flesh, and was unpleasing to it: As also
to signify in an humble manner their their own vileness; and this, that they
were but dust and ashes. But the outward ceremony of Sackcloath and Ashes, the
Hypocrite could use, as well as the true convert.

Will thou call this a fast] q. d. Will thou call this a Fast? Supple, to do
only after this manner.

And an acceptable day to the Lord] i. e. And will thou call the day in which
thou do this an acceptable day to the Lord?

6.
Is not this the Fast that I have chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness?
etc.] q. d. Is not this the fast that I have chosen? Supple, the Fast whose
effect or consequent is, to loose the bands of wickedness.

As the Prophet speaks here, so speaks St. James, Jam. 1.27. Pure Religion,
and undefiled before God, and the Father is this, to visit the Fatherless and
the widow, etc. That is, Pure Religion and undefiled before God, and the
Father, is this; Whose effect and consequent is, to visit the fatherless and
widow, etc.

To loose the bands of wickedness,] i. e. To loose those wicked bands, in which
ye wickedly and injuriously hold your poor brethren.

The bands of wickedness,] i. e. The wicked bands; that is, bands wickedly
made, and in which your brethren are wickedly detained, and stand bound.

Here is a substantive of the Genitive case put again for an Adjective, as
Verse. 4.

The bands here mentioned are to be understood of such bands in which the
Debtor was bound to the Creditor upon hard and unmerciful, yea unlawful
conditions; As, v. g. when a poor brother was bound to pay use for money lent
upon such conditions, ^s they were, Nehem. 5.7. which was against the Law,
Exodus 22.25. Or when a brother had sold himself to a brother by reason of his
poverty, and he made him to serve as a bond-servant, which was against the Law,
Levit. 25. verse. 39.

To undo the heavy burdens,] This is a repetition of the former sentence: And
what he called bands there, he calls an heavy burden here.

To let the oppressed go free,] i. e. To let thy brother, which thou oppressest
with usury, and with hard service, as if he were a bondman, go free from this
thy oppression.

This is also a repetition of that which went before.

And that ye break every yoke.] Supple, Which is grievous, and put upon the
neck of your brother against the Law of God.

This also is a repetition of the former sentence, in which the same thing is
often repeated, that it may the more work upon this people.

Note here, that the Lord instanceth in the abstinence from these evils,
because these Jews, which bragged of their fasting, were most notoriously
addicted to these, even in their captivity, as well as before it; But by these
understand not only these, but all other evils also: for that is not a fast
well pleasing to the Lord, in which we abstain not from all evil whatsoever.

7.
Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry?] q. d. Is not this the Fast that I
have chosen? to wit, the Fast whose effect or consequent is, to deal thy bread
to the hungry?

As the Lord showed in the former verse, that the Fast which he loved, and
which he delighted in, required the Faster to abstain from all manner of evil;
so here he shows, that it required him to do all manner of good.

But as he there instanced only in the abstinence from those particular evils
to which these Jews were most addicted; so here he instanceth in those
particular good deeds from which they were most averse: Both which kinds speak
the unmercifulness of the Jews to their brethren. But (as I said) the
abstinence from all manner of evil is intimated in the one; and the pursuing of
all manner of good and virtuous actions in the other.

To deal thy bread to the hungry,] i. e. To feed the hungry according to their
necessities.

And that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thy house,] i. e. And that
thou show hospitality, and receive them into thy house, and there entertain
them which have no house to dwell in.

That are cast out,] i. e. That are without an house, as those are which are
cast out of house and home for rebellion.

Thou cover him,] i. e. Thou clothe him.

And that thou hide not thy self] i. e. And that thou be not unkind and
unmerciful to thine own kinsman, when he has need of thee.

This speech, That thou hide not thy self, alludeth to the fashion of those
men, who when they would not own a man, or take notice of him in his misery to
relieve him, slip out of the way, and hide themselves from him, and will not so
much as be seen by him.

From thine own flesh.] i. e. From thine own kinsman, which is a son of Abraham
and Isaac and Jacob, as well as thou; and is therefore of the same flesh and
blood as thou art of.

He says, Thine own flesh, that it may be an argument to stir them up to pity.

8.
Then shall thy light break forth as the morning,] q. d. When thou fastest
after this manner, and do the things which I spoke of, verse. 6, 7. then shall
thy prosperity arise after thine adversity, as the light of the morning arises
after the dark of the night.

But a man may ask here, how the Jews being in so poor a condition all of them
in their captivity, could do such works as the Lord here requires? for such
works require riches to do them.

Ans. It is not to be doubted but that the Jews were in a condition good enough
to show such works of mercy, as are here named, in some good measure: For many
of them were in such a condition, as that they were contented to stay in
Babylon, when they might have returned into Judea.

Again, Suppose that the Jews, while they were in captivity, were all of them
in a mean condition, and not able to do these works of charity; yet the Lord
would accept of these works as done, if there were in them but a mind ready to
do them, when they had opportunity and all things fitting for these works.

Again, when the Lord says, If thou do these things, then shall thy light
break forth as the morning: By these things may be meant, not these things in
special, but these things in general. So when Saint Paul had commanded Servants
to be obedient to them that are their Masters according to the flesh with fear
and trembling, etc. he adds, Ye Masters do the same things to them, Ephesians. 6.9.
where we cannot understand the same things of the same things in special, but
of the same things in general. The like we read, Romans 2. verse. 1.

Thy light] By light is meant prosperity, which the Hebrews often call, by a
Metaphor, light, because as light is pleasant to the senses, so is prosperity
to the heart.

Thine health shall spring forth speedily,] By health he means their
deliverance out of captivity; of which he speaks here as of a plant which
springs out of the Earth.

Note, that as our Prophet does often liken adversity and oppression to a
disease, or to a wound; so he does the delivery from adversity and oppression
to health.

Thy righteousness shall go before thee,] i. e. The Lord, which is the Rewarder
of thy righteousness, shall go before thee. See Cap. 52.12.

Righteousness is put here for the Lord, the Rewarder of their righteousness,
by a Metonymy.

The glory of the Lord shall be thy reerward.] i. e. The glorious Lord will be
thy reerward. See cap. 52.12.

The glory of the Lord is put here, per Metonymiam Adjuncti, for the glorious
Lord.

9.
Then shall thou call, and the Lord will answer thee,] i. e. Then, if thou
call upon God, he will hear thee.

Thou shall cry,] i. e. If thou cryest unto him, saying, Lord, where art thou?

He shall say, here I am:] i. e. He will answer thee, and be ready to help thee.

If thou take away from the midst of thee the yoke,] What is meant by the yoke,
see verse. 6. where the bands, burdens, and yoke, signify all one and the same
thing.

From the midst of thee,] i. e. From among you.

This is an Hebrew Idiotism.

The putting forth of the finger,] i. e. The mocking of the servants of the
Lord; for they were wont to mock them. See cap. 57.4.

Mockers do oftentimes put out their finger at him whom they mock, in way of
jeering and contempt; therefore he puts the putting forth of the finger for the
jeering and mocking which they used, by a Metonymy.

And speaking vanity:] i. e. And speaking such things as are vain and profit
not.

By speaking vanity may be meant jeering and jibing speeches: yea, there may be
meant by that, wrangling and jangling, and the worst speeches that can be, by a
(...).

10.
If thou draw out thy Soul to the hungry,] If thou bring out thy food and thy
victuals freely and cheerfully to him which is hungry.

By the Soul are here meant first pity and compassion (which are passions of
the Soul) by a Metonymy: Then there are meant the effects of that pity and
compassion, by the like Metonymy.

Or then we may be said to draw out our Souls, that is, our pity and
compassion, when we show it in ample manner by the works and effects thereof,
as by giving food to the hungry, and clothes to the naked, etc.

If thou draw] This is a Metaphor; and the Metaphor is taken from drawing of
waters, which uses to be in abundance: for waters are common and plentiful.

And satisfy the afflicted Soul,] i. e. And satisfy the man, which is
afflicted with hunger, with food convenient.

The Soul is put here, by a Synecdoche, for the whole man; and the afflicted
Soul for the man which is pinched with hunger.

Then shall thy light rise in obscurity,] i. e. Then shall light rise to thee
which art in darkness; that is, Then shall prosperity come to thee which art in
adversity.

As by light is meant prosperity, as I said verse. 8. So by darkness and
obscurity is meant adversity.

And thy darkness be as the noonday.] i. e. And thy darkness shall be turned
into exceeding great light, such as is the light of the noonday when the Sun
is at the highest.

The meaning is, That then he should enjoy exceeding great prosperity in stead
of his adversity.

11.
And the Lord shall guide thee continually,] i. e. And the Lord shall be thy
Guide from Babylon to Jerusalem, all the way through; yea, the Lord shall be
thy Guide at all times, whithersoever thou go.

I know not whether the Prophet may allude here to that place of Exodus, or no,
Exodus 33.3. where the Lord says, I will not go up in the midst of thee; where
the Lord threatened the children of Israel, when he brought them out of Egypt,
not to guide them, as he had done: q. d. I threatened thee not to guide thee
unto the Land of Canaan (as I had done) when I brought thee out of Egypt; but
now I will not leave thee, but guide thee out of Babylon to Judea, all the
way-long; yea, I will guide thee, whithersoever else thou go.

And satisfy thy Soul,] i. e. And satisfy thee, Supple, with drink.

Thy Soul,] i. e. Thee. Synecdoche partis.

In drought,] i. e. In time of drought, and in dry and barren places.

And make sat thy bones,] i. e. And feed thee abundantly, so that thou shall
wax fat through abundance of food, Supple, in the time of drought (which is a
time of famine and scarcity) and in dry and barren places.

And thou shall be like a watered garden,] i. e. And thou shall flourish like a
garden which is continually watered.

And like a spring of water, whose waters fail not.] For as a Spring is never
dry, but has waters continually flowing from it; so shall thou never be poor
and needy, but shall always abound with wealth and riches.

12.
And they which shall be of thee shall build the old waste places,] i. e. And
thy children shall build up those places in thy Land, which have been waste a
long time, and which were laid waste, not only by Nebuchadnezzar King of
Babylon, but by Tiglath, Pileser, and Salmanesar, and Sennacherib, Kings of
Assyria, etc. and shall raise them up into Cities and Towns and Villages again.

Thou shall raise up the foundations of many generations,] i. e. Thou shall
raise up the Houses and Cities which were pulled down to the ground many ages
since, so that the foundations thereof only remained; those, I say, shall thou
build up again.

The repairer of the breach,] i. e. The repairer of breaches, to wit, the
breaches of Cities and Towns which were broken down.

Breach is put here collective, for breaches.

The restorer of paths,] i. e. The restorer of breaches which are in the walls
of Cities or Towns.

This is a repetition of the former sentence. And by paths are meant the
breaches in the walls of Cities and Towns: And therefore are breaches called
paths here, because through breaches they were wont to make ways and paths to
go in and out of the City or Town, as being the nearer and readier way to and
fro, out and in.

Or to restore paths may signify to bring the paths to their wonted course:
For whereas the paths were wont to be only through the Gates of the City, but
since the breaches all the paths were through the breaches, and the paths which
led through the Gates were almost desolate and forsaken; he may say, that he
shall be the restorer of paths, because he shall bring the paths to their
wonted way again, by making up the breaches of the walls.

Or when he says, Thou shall be called the restorer of the paths, he may mean,
the restorer of paths, supple, to the desolate Cities, which have li^n waste
and without inhabitants a long time, so as that no man has gone out or in
thereat, and the paths thereof have been overgrown and destroyed for want of
travelers; which paths were restored again, by building up those ruinous and
desolate Towns and Cities; for then there was traveling to and fro, and the
paths were restored which were destroyed and overgrown for want of traveling.

But what the meaning of the Prophet is, is well known, though the phrase is
not so well known.

To dwell in.] i. e. That the ruinous Cities and Towns may be fit to dwell in.

13.
If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath,] i. e. If thou do turn away thy
foot from the Sabbath, Supple, so that thou pollutest it not; i. e. If thou
do keep my Sabbath.

From doing thy pleasure on my holy day,] q. d. that is, If thou turn away thy
foot, so that thou do not those things which are pleasing to thy corrupt
lusts on my holy day.

On my holy day,] i. e. On my Sabbath, which is an holy day, and to be kept
holy to the Lord.

And call the Sabbath a delight,] i. e. And call the Sabbath a day which thou
delightest in.

Note, that by Call is here meant, not a bare verbal Call, but a Call to which
the heart assenteth, and to which the actions of the whole man are answerable.

The holy of the Lord,] i. e. A day which the Lord has commanded to be kept
holy.

Honorable,] And a day which is to be esteemed honorable.

And thou shall honor him,] i. e. And if thou shall honor it, that is, this
day, by keeping it holy. Or, and if thou shall honor him, that is, the Lord, by
keeping this day holy to him, which he has commanded to be kept holy.

Not doing thine own ways,] i. e. Not doing thine own works, which God has
forbidden thee to do, on that day.

Ways are often put Metaphorically for Works.

Nor finding thine own pleasure,] i. e. Nor seeking thine own pleasure, or that
which is pleasing to thy own corrupt mind. See verse. 3.

Nor speaking thine own words:] i. e. Nor so much as talking of any thing which
tends to thine own profit, or pleasure, or delight, or to what the Lord has
forbidden thee on that day.

Note, that that which he calls their own here, he calls their own, in
opposition to that which God commanded and required of them by his transcendent
power over them.

Note also, that what the Prophet speaks here particularly of the Sabbath,
must be understood generally of all Laws which the Jews could keep in their
captivity.

14.
Then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord,] i. e. Then shall the Lord do
such great things for thee, as that thou shall rejoice in him, and delight thy
self in the thought of him, that thou have so good a God, and so gracious a
Benefactor as he is.

See the like phrase, Psalm. 33.21.

And I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the Earth,] i. e. And I
will bring thee home out of captivity, and cause thee not only to walk, but
also to ride; and that not after a base manner, but in Charets, to and fro in
thine own Land.

Upon the high places of the Earth,] That is, In thine own Land, the Land of
Judah.

By the high places understand the mountains, and by the Earth in general
understand the Land of Judah in particular, by a Synecdoche, for Judea was a
mountainous Country.

And feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy father,] i. e. And will feed thee
with the fruits, even the fruits which grow up in the inheritance, which I gave
to thy father Jacob.

The heritage here meant is the Land of Canaan, which God gave to Jacob, Genesis
35.12. part of which Land was the Land of Judah.

For the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.] For the Lord has spoken it, who
cannot lie, but will bring to pass whatsoever he speaks.

The mouth of the Lord is put here by a Synecdoche, for the Lord, a part for
the whole man, for the Lord speaks here of himself as of a man, by a
Prosopopoeia.

ISAIAH, CHAP. LIX.
BEhold the Lords hand is not shortened that it cannot save,] This may well
cohere with the former Chapter: For many incredulous Jews among the Babylonish
captives, considering that the Babylonians were mighty and powerful, could not
believe, for all the Lords Promises, that the Lord was able to deliver them out
of their hands. Such therefore might here say; For all the Lords Promises, the
Lord is not able to deliver us out of the hands of the Babylonians; for if he
were able to deliver us, why has he not delivered us when we have called and
cried so often to him?

This Objection the Prophet here prevents, saying, Behold the Lords hand is not
shortened that it cannot save.

The Lords hand is not shortened that it cannot save,] q. d. The Lord has
often saved his people out of the hands of their Enemies, as out of the hands
of the Egyptians, and Midianites, and Assyrians; and since that time his hand
is not shortened, nor is his power abated, that he cannot save; therefore
surely he is as able to save you now, as he was then.

Note, that the hand is often put for power and strength, for a man's strength
is seen by the strength of his hand and his arm.

Neither is his ear heavy that it cannot hear.] i. e. Neither is he deaf, or
his ear stopped, that he cannot hear.

The Prophet prevents another Objection here: For they might say, If it be so
that the Lord can save us, yet surely it is so, that he is deaf, and cannot
hear us: For certainly if he could save us, he would, if he could but hear the
cries which we make to him. This Objection, I say, the Prophet does here
prevent, saying, Neither is his ear heavy that it cannot hear.

2.
But your iniquities have separated between you and your God,] i. e. But your
iniquities have stood, and made as it were a wall of separation between you and
your God, and have kept your cries and your prayers (while ye have prayed for
deliverance out of Babylon) from coming to his ears.

Your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear,] i. e. Your sins
have stood, and do stand as a curtain (or as a wall rather) between him and
you, and have hid his presence from you, so that he cannot hear your prayers,
because your voice cannot enter through that curtain or wall, to wit, your
sins, into his presence.

His face] Take the face here first for the whole head, in which are all the
senses of man, and Hearing as well as Seeing: then take it for the whole man,
by a Synecdoche.

That he will not hear] i. e. That he cannot hear.

Note, that this Particle, will, signifies not any resolved act of the will,
but is only a sign of the tense, and is to be interpreted Potentially.

The Prophet speaks here of God as of a man, by an (...): and by what he has
said he has showed, that it is not by reason of any defect in God that he does
not deliver them, or hear their prayers; but the fault is in themselves, by
reason of their sins.

3.
For your hands are defiled with blood,] Blood may be taken here for murder;
or it may be taken only for oppression, used in Courts of Justice, as Cap.
1.15.

Because they might say, that they are not guilty of such sins as might
separate between them and their God, and hide his face from them; the Prophet
prevents this their exception, and accuses them with their particular sins.

Your lips have spoken lies,] i. e. You have born false witness against your
neighbor, and have wronged the poor with false accusations.

Your tongue has uttered perverseness.] i. e. Ye have spoken all manner of
wicked words, and have used your tongue to all manner of evil practices.

Perverseness is taken here for wicked words, and such words as a righteous
man, and a man which loved justice, would not speak; per Metonymiam Adjuncti.

In general, that is called perverseness which is contrary to the Law of God,
and which is thereby forbidden; and perverse words in general are naughty evil
words, such as God prohibiteth.

4.
None calls for justice,] i. e. Whereas justice should find friends every
where, none calls upon the Judge in her behalf.

He speaks of justice as of a person, by a Prosopopoeia.

Note, that the Prophet speaks here to the Jews, as if they were even ^hen
captives in Babylon.

Quest. But how could these men, or any of them, be accused for not calling for
justice, and not pleading for truth, in the time of their captivity; whereas,
in the time of their captivity, they had no Courts or Judges among them?

Ans. It is not to be granted that the Jews had no Courts or Judges amongst
them, during the time of their captivity; but it is rather to be presumed from
this and other places, that the Jews had power to judge of Jews, and had
authority and jurisdiction among themselves, and that by the leave of the
Babylonish Kings, under whom they lived.

Nor any pleads for truth,] He speaks of truth here, as he did of justice
before, as of a person, by a Prosopopoeia.

They trust in vanity,] i. e. They trust in this, That they are able, by their
wit, and by their tongue, to put a show of justice and righteousness upon an
unjust and unrighteous cause, which confidence of theirs shall prove but a vain
thing in the end.

This confidence of theirs, that they could put a show of justice upon an
unjust cause, he calls vanity, per Metonymiam Adjuncti; that is, a vain
thing, because it would prove vain, and as an empty thing, and a thing of
nothing in the end, and would not be able to justify them against Gods
proceedings, when he should call them to account.

Speak lies,] i. e. They speak that which they know to be false: the Judges in
their sentences which they give; and the Advocates and Counselors in the
arguments which they bring in their pleadings.

They conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity.] i. e. They devise
mischievous devices, and what they devise they put in execution.

This speech is Allegorical, alluding to a woman's conception and bringing forth.

5.
They hatch Cockatrice eggs,] i. e. They foment mischievous and villainous plots
and devices, and bring them into act.

A Cockatrice is a venomous kind of Serpent, and as she her self is, such are
her eggs, venomous. By the Cockatrice eggs therefore may be meant mischief and
villainy, or mischievous and villainous plots and devices.

This seems to be a Proverb, or proverbial kind of sentence.

And weave the spiders web,] i. e. And weave a web for the same end as the
Spider weaveth her web: For as the Spider weaveth her web to catch the smaller
flies; so do they lay their plots to take the poorer sort of people, and them
which are most destitute of friends.

This also seems to be a Proverb.

He that eats of their eggs, dies,] But whosoever of them eats of these
their Cockatrice eggs, which they use to hatch, dies by the venom of them.

The Adversative Particle, But, is here to be understood: And as for the sense
of these words, they are like to those of the Psalmist, Psalm. 7.16. His
mischief shall return upon his own head, and his violent dealing upon his own
pate. And the thing it self is true; For, for these their wicked doings, these
men, as they were delivered over into the Babylonians hands to be afflicted and
oppressed by them; so were they oppressed, afflicted and held in captivity by
them. But to the words.

Note, that they which use to deal in eggs, do often eat of those eggs which
they deal in: For as Saint Paul said, Who feeds a flock, and eats not of
the milk of the flock? 1 Cor. 9.7. So may we say, Who deals in eggs, and
eats not of the eggs wherein he deals? To this therefore, that is, to the
eating of eggs for meat, does the Prophet here allude: And by this, that he
that eats of the Cockatrice eggs dies, is meant, That they which meddle with
mischievous matters, bring mischief upon their own heads.

But you will say, That no man will eat Cockatrice eggs for food?

Ans. True; therefore this allusion to the eating of eggs for food, is
Catachrestical; yet it is an allusion to that still, to wit, to the eating of
eggs, as we eat them for food.

Note, that this Metaphor varyeth from that which is used in those words, They
hatch Cockatrice eggs, though in some particulars it agrees with it.

And that which is crushed breaks out into a Viper.] And that Cockatrice egg,
which is crushed, breaks out into a Viper, which is a most venomous creature,
and which fasteneth on his hand that crushed it, till it kills him.

This is a proverbial kind of speech too, and signifies the same with that
which went immediately before, to wit, That they which meddle with mischievous
devices, receive mischief thereby.

Note, that they which use to deal often with eggs, do sometimes crush an egg
against their will, and break it; and to this does the Prophet seem here to
allude.

But how can a Cockatrice egg, being crushed, break out into a Viper, or bring
forth a Viper; for the Cockatrice and Viper are different beasts, of different
species?

Ans. For answer to this, see Cap. 14. verse. 29.

6.
Their webs shall not become garments,] i. e. Their devices shall not profit
them, yea they shall procure them much hurt.

The web, which the Weaver weaveth of yarn, makes garments for a man to wear;
but the cob-web, or spiders web, is not fit or convenient for a garment: and
such was the web which these men wove, even the Spiders web, which cannot
profit them, verse. 5.

Neither shall they cover themselves with their works,] i. e. Neither shall
they clothe themselves with their works; that is, Neither shall their works or
their devices profit them at all.

This is a repetition of the former sentence: And in the word works he alludeth
to the works of the Spider, that is, to the Spiders webs, which cannot cover a
man; that is, which cannot make him a garment.

From those words, He that eats of their eggs dies, hitherto, the Prophet
has by the By shown, that the plots of these wicked men shall redound to their
own hurt; and this he does by conversion of those two Proverbs, They hatch
Cockatrice eggs, and weave the spiders web.

Their works are works of iniquity,] i. e. Their works are wicked works,
injurious and hurtful to others.

Here is a Substantive of the Genitive case for an Adjective.

Note, that these words, Their works are works of iniquity, relate to, and in
construction do follow immediately after, those words, They hatch Cockatrice
eggs, and weave the spiders web: And that those intervening words (He that
eats of their eggs dies, and that which is crushed breaks cut into a
Viper; their webs shall not become garments, neither shall they cover
themselves by their works,) are to be read as it were with a Parenthesis.

The act of violence is in their hands.] i. e. They commit acts of wrong and
violence.

7.
Their feet run to evil,] i. e. They haste and stay not to commit evil: i. e.
They are ready to commit evil upon all occasions.

Their feet are put for them themselves, by a Synecdoche of the part for the
whole.

And they make haste to shed innocent blood,] i. e. And they are ready, and
stick not to oppress, yea to slay those which are innocent.

Their thoughts are the thoughts of iniquity,] i. e. Their thoughts are wicked
thoughts; for all that they think of, is, how to do evil.

Wasting and destruction are in their paths,] Which way soever they go, they
waste and destroy, like a plague that sweepeth all away.

Note, that wasting and destruction are to be taken here actively.

The way of peace they have not known,] i. e. They have not walked in peaceable
or quiet ways: that is, Their deeds and actions have not been peaceable, or
such as become honest and peaceable men.

Note, that ways and paths are often put for the actions and deeds and
carriages of men, by a Metaphor.

8.
And there is no judgment in their goings,] i. e. For there is no right or
equity (which are the foundations and preservers of peace) in their actions,
and in their doings.

And is put here for For, (for this yields a reason of what went before:) And
judgment is put for right and equity; and goings for actions.

They have made them crooked paths,] i. e. They have chosen wicked and perverse
courses.

As paths and ways and goings are put oftentimes for the actions and carriages
of men; so right paths and straight ways and goings signify honest and just
and godly actions and carriages; and crooked ways and paths and goings signify
wicked, unjust and ungodly actions and carriages: For the Scriptures by a
Metaphor make the end of Gods Commandments (which is blessedness or happiness)
as a mark or place to which we should go or run: and the Commandments
themselves they compare to the way or paths which lead to that mark or place;
to wit, A way which is straight and direct, and lying as it were in a straight
or direct line. Now because they which keep not in such a path or way, must
needs go in crooked paths, (for there cannot be two straight paths or lines
from point to point,) hence they which keep the Commandments of God may be
said, by this Metaphor, to walk in the right way and straight paths; and they
which keep not Gods Commandments, to walk in crooked paths, which paths they
may be said to make to themselves, because God appointed them not.

Shall not know peace.] i. e. Cannot know what belongs to peace and quiet;
and therefore all their doings tend to the vexation, and wrong, and ruin of
others.

To know signifies here to know with approbation; and the Indicative is put
for the Potential mood.

Note here, that Saint Paul makes use of the seventh and part of the eighth
Verse of this Chapter, in the 15, 16, and 17, Verses of the third Chapter to
the Romans.

But you may ask, To what purpose St. Paul makes use of these places there?

Ans. He makes use of these places there, not alone, but with other the like
places, to show, that all men have sinned, some after this manner, and some
after that. For whereas he had said (out of the Psalms) that there is none
righteous, no not one; there is none that understands, there is none that
seeks after God; they are all gone out of the way, they are altogether become
unprofitable; there is none that does good, no not one: he adds out of other
Psalms, and this place of our Prophet, Their throat is an open sepulcher, with
their tongues they have used deceit, the poison of Asps is under their lips,
their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness, their feet are swift to shed
blood; destruction and misery are in their ways, and the way of peace they have
not known. As if he should say; The throat of some is as an open sepulcher,
others have used deceit with their tongues, others carry the poison of Asps
under their lips, the mouth of others is full of cursing and bitterness, the
feet of others are swift to shed blood; destruction and misery are in the way
of others, and the way of peace they have not known.

For note, that neither St. Paul there, nor our Prophet here, does mean, that
all these vices and sins were in all and singular men; but that some were in
some, and others in others; yet so, as that all had sinned and gone out of the
way, and that there was none righteous, no not one.

But how can Paul prove, from these, and the like particular places as these
are, That all have sinned?

Ans. Because these, and the like places, speak of the sins of such as had the
best means to make them good: For thus Paul argues; q. d. If they which had
the best means to make them good, have proved so extreme bad; it is not
credible that they were good, who had not means to be good, in the least degree
answerable to theirs. Saint Paul's Argument therefore from these and the like
places, is, Argumentum a minus credibili ad magis credibile.

9.
Therefore is judgment far from us, neither does ju^tice overtake us,] q. d.
Because we have done these things, and there is no judgment in our goings;
therefore is judgment far from us, neither does justice overtake us.

Note, that this is spoken in the person of the captive Jews, but of such of
them as were not of the wicked crew; who excuse not, but accuse themselves, and
judge themselves worthy to suffer what God has laid upon them.

Note also, that the word judgment is otherwise to be taken here, then it was
verse. 8. and that judgment and justice signify here both one and the same
thing, and that that which is called judgment and justice here, is called
judgment and salvation, verse. 11.

By judgment and justice therefore is meant salvation and deliverance out of
the hands of the Babylonians.

But how comes judgment and justice to signify salvation and deliverance?

Ans. By a Metonymy of the cause; for if the Jews had observed judgment and
justice, God, who had delivered them over into the Babylonians hands for their
injustice, would have sent them salvation and deliverance again, as a reward
for that their judgment and justice. Therefore, as works are sometimes put for
a reward of works, as cap. 40.10. and 60.11. So is judgment and justice put for
the reward of judgment and justice, which (as I said) had been in particular to
these men their deliverance and salvation out of captivity: For of this it is
said, Behold his reward is with him, and his work before him; Cap. 40.10. and
cap. 60.11.

We wait for light, but behold obscurity,] i. e. We look for prosperity, but
behold we are still kept in adversity.

For brightness, but we walk in darkness,] i. e. We look for redemption, but we
are held still in captivity and misery.

Note, that the Hebrews by light and brightness do often signify any happy and
joyful estate; and by night and darkness and obscurity, any kind of misery or
miserable estate whatsoever.

10.
We grope for the wall like the blind,] i. e. We feel for salvation, and grope
after it, as the blind man feels for, and gropeth after the wall: For as the
blind man gropeth after the wall, and cannot meet with it; so do we grope
after salvation, but cannot find it.

This is a Proverb, and it is well here used; for well might those Jews be
compared to blind men groping after the wall; for they felt after salvation,
as blind men do after the wall; for they went but blindly to work, because
they believed not the Prophets, but thought to obtain salvation in that sinful
estate in which they were in, by their hypocrital fasts, and outward
observances, either not knowing that God would not save them, so long as they
were in that estate in which they were in, or else not knowing what and how
sinful their estate and condition was. Moreover as the wall brings ease and
rest to a weary man; so would salvation have brought ease and rest to these
Jews.

And we grope as if we had no eyes,] q. d. Yea, I say, we grope as if we were
stark blind.

And is put for Yea.

We stumble at noonday as in the night,] i. e. We are exceeding blind, and
which way soever we go, we hurt our selves, as he which stumbleth at a stone in
the night, and falls, and comes to hurt.

He must needs be exceeding blind, which cannot see his way in the day, and
that time of the day which is the lightest, which is at noon, when the Sun is
at the highest, and which sees no more then if it were midnight.

These Jews were as it were in the light, yea the light of the noonday, when
the Prophets did preach unto them the Word of the Lord, and tell them what they
should do to be delivered out of captivity, (for the Word of the Lord is a
shining light;) but they were blind, in that they did not believe that Word,
nor were attentive thereunto; and came to hurt, in that they followed not the
Word of the Lord, but their own fond conceits for Redemption, whereby they
provoked the Lord to add to their afflictions, and to keep them yet faster in
captivity.

We are in desolate places as dead men,] i. e. We are in the Land of our
captivity, as dead men are in their graves or in their sepulchers; for as dead
men have no eyes, no more have we; for we want the eye of Faith to see and
behold the Promises of God, and other parts of his Word: and as dead men cannot
get out of their sepulchers, no more can we out of the Land of our captivity.

In desolate places] i. e. In the Land of our captivity.

They call the Land of their captivity, desolate places, in allusion to
sepulchers; because as sepulchers are places of darkness, so was the Land of
captivity to them a place of darkness and obscurity; that is, a place of sorrow
and of mourning.

Note, that the sepulchers of the Ancients were rooms of some space, vaulted
over-head, with gates also belonging to them; and these he calls desolate
places, because no living man did there abide or inhabit.

11.
We roar all like Bears, and mourn like Doves,] Supple, Because of the great
oppressions and miseries which we endure.

We look for judgment, but there is none; for salvation, but it is far from
us.] See Verse. 9.

12.
For our transgressions are multiplied before thee,] i. e. For our sins are
many, and that thou know very well, as being committed in thy sight.

Here is an Apo^trophe to God.

And our sin te tifie against u^,] i. e. And our sins come in as witnesses
against us, and witness that we are worthy of that which we suffer, and
unworthy of salvation, or to be delivered from o^r sufferings.

He speaks of sin as of a pe son, by a Prosopopoeia.

For our transgressi^ns are with us, and as for our iniquities we know them.]
q. d. For we cannot say that we have not transgressed and sinned; for our
transgressions are always before our eyes, and as for our sins we know them
very well.

Here is an (...), or Brachylogy.

We know them.] i. e. We know them, and confess them; for we cannot deny but
that we are guilty of them.

13.
In transgressing and lying against the Lord,] i. e. We have sinned by
transgressing and lying against the Lord.

These words, We have sinned, are here to be understood.

I take their transgressing and lying against the Lord to signify here both
one and the same thing: For their tran^gressing the Law of the Lord may be
called lying against the Lord, because the Jews promised the Lord solemnly in
Mo^nt Sinai, and elsewhere, to keep his Laws, and yet broke this their promise,
which what was it else but lying against God?

Departing from your God,] i. e. Leaving the worship of God to serve Idols.

Speaking oppression and revol^,] i. e. Advising one another, and teaching one
another how to oppress the poor, and to forsake the worship of God, and serve
Idols.

Conceiving and ut^ering from the heart words of falsehood,] i. e. Conceiving in
our hearts false reports, and false accusations, to the hurt of our neighbors;
and d^sloyal^y, to the dishonor of our God; and bringing them out of our hearts
(where they were conceived) by the mouth or tongue.

Note, that this word falsehood may relate both to God, and to their neighbor;
and as it relates to their neighbor, it may signify false reports, and ^alse
accusations: and as it relates to God, it may si^nifie disloyalty in breaking
the Co^enant and the Promise which they made to God; as c^p. 57.4.

14.
Judgment is turned away backward] i. e. And judgment is gone away, and will
not come at the Courts of Judicat^re.

By judgment understand up^^ght dealing, in pleading and making D^crees, and
giving sentence in Courts of J^dicat^re: And note, that he speaks of it, as
of a pers n, by a Prosop^poeia.

And justice standet^ a^ar o^,] i. e. And justice stands afar off, and will
not come nigh to the Courts and places of Judicature.

What he called Judgment before, he calls Justice here, and uses the like
P^osopopoeia: So that this is but a repetition of the former sentence.

For Truth is fal^en in the streets, and Equity cannot en^e^,] i. e. B^ca^se
Truth is overthrown by falsehood, and fallen in the very streets, and Equity
cannot enter into the Courts or places of Judicature, being kept out as it were
by force.

This contains a reason why Judgment turned backward, and Justice ood a^ar
of; For Judgment turned backward, and Justice stood afar off, because they saw
Truth beaten down, and Equity kept out of the Courts and places of Judicature:
For Judgment and Justice will not be, nay they cannot be, where Truth and Equi
y are not entertained.

He speaks of Truth and Equity here, as of persons, by a (...), as he did of
Judgmen^ and Justice before.

15.
Yea, Truth fails,] i. e. It is more for Tr^th to fail then to ^a^^; for if
Truth fall, she may recover strength, and rise a^ain; b^t if she fail, or
languish, her very vitals are decayed.

And he that departs from evil, makes himself a prey,] i. e. And if any man
hate evil, and cleaves to that which is good, he is therefore hated and
persecuted, and made a spoil to wicked men.

This is a sign that Equity failed as well as Truth.

And the Lord saw it,] i. e. And the Lord took notice of it, that there was no
Judgment in Courts and places of Judicature.

16.
And the Lord saw that there was no man,] i. e. And the Lord looked about to
see if there were any man, supple, that did intercede with him to take away his
displeasure from us.

And he wondered that there was no intercessor,] i. e. And he saw that there
was none that did intercede with him for us, and he wondered at it.

It was a matter of wonder, that none among all that people, which had been so
brought up, and so instructed from time to time, should intercede, and be
earnest with God to pardon so great sins as these were of the people.

He speaks of God, as of a man, by an (...).

Therefore his arm brought salvation to him,] i. e. Notwithstanding this, his
arm brought salvation to him, etc.

Therefore is put here for Yet notwithstanding, as cap. 7.14. cap. 51.21. And
the sense is, q. d. Though our wickedness is so great, and there is none to
intercede for us, yet notwithstanding the Lord will deliver us his people out
of the hands of the Babylonians, to wit, so many as are righteous, and do
repent in Jacob.

His arm brought salvation unto him, and his righteousness it sustained him,]
q. d. His arm will bring salvation to Jacob, that is, to the Jews; and his
righteousness will uphold him ( that is, Jacob, that is, the Jews) against the
Babylonians, yea, and deliver him out of their hands.

This may seem to be the natural Interpretation of these words; and so should I
have took it, had not a parallel place, to wit, cap. 63.5. (which is not so
capable of this Interpretation) put me to seek another.

When therefore I consider those words, cap. 63.5. Therefore mine own arm
brought salvation unto me, and my fury it uph^ld me; and when I consider
withal those words which follow in this place, viz. For he put on
righteousness as a brestplate, and an helmet of salvation upon his head; My
thoughts are, that there is both in these words we have in hand, and cap. 63.5.
an allusion to a King arming himself for a Battle, that he might war against
his Enemies in the behalf of his Subjects, whom they have wronged.

So that I conceive, that the words in hand must be interpreted some such way
as follows.

His arm brought salvation to him,] q. d. He has brought salvation out of his
armory, and made use of it.

He speaks of salvation here as of a piece of armor, wherewith a Soldier is
armed. If you ask, what piece of armor it is which he alludeth to; the next
Verse will tell you, where he calls it, the helmet of salvation.

Note, that the arm, which is but a part, is put here for the whole man, by a
Synecdoche.

Object. But you will say, that the Hebrew being translated word for word, is
not, His arm brought salvation to him, but, His arm has saved him.

Ans. Be it so, yet there may be the same meaning, and the same allusion in
these words, as was in the former: For the meaning of these words, His arm has
saved him, may be this, He has made himself safe, that is, He has armed
himself, supple, with salvation: For armor is a safeguard to the body which is
therewith armed.

And his righteousness it sustained him,] Rather, And his righteousness does
sustain him: q. d. And his righteousness armeth him, that is, is upon him as a
piece of armor, to preserve him.

If you ask, what piece of armor he alludes to; the next verse will tell you,
that it is a brestplate.

But note, that in these words, It sustained him, or, It sustaineth him, there
is a Metaphor borrowed from a staff which a man has in his hand, whereby he is
sustained or upheld while he leans upon it: but we must transfer this
Metaphor to the having on, or being armed with a brestplate: For as a staff,
which a man has in his hand, does preserve him and keep him from falling; so
does the brestplate, which a man has on him, or with which he is armed,
preserve him and keep him from wounds.

Such kind of mingling or confounding or transferring Metaphors our Prophet
often uses.

Note that the Pronoune, It, is here redundant by an Hebraisme.

What is meant by Righteousness here, See in the next verse following.

17.
For he put on righteousness as a brest-plate] Better, For he has put on
righteousness as a breast plate.

A breast plate is a piece of ormour: which defends the heart and the vital
parts: to a breast plate therefore does he liken righteousness, that is, the
justness of the cause of war, because there is no greater comfort to the
heart of a man, nor any thing that can give him greater assurance, or on which
he may more rely for safety and preservation in the Battle, than this that he
knows that his cause of taking up arms is just.

By righteousness therefore I understand the just cause which the Lord had in
taking up arms or making War upon his enemies the Babylonians, the justness
of whose cause you may read, Cap. 47. v. 6. etc.

An helmet of salvation upon his head] i. e. And salvation as an helmet upon
his head.

An Helmet is a piece of armor which is to guard and defend the head wherein
the brains lie, which are the Mint of the Animal spirits, which being wounded
death presently follows.

Nothing can yield more safety than salvation it self, for where salvation is,
there can be no hurt, otherwise salvation were not salvation. Therefore the
Lord says that he will appoint Jerusalem salvation for walls, Cap. 26.1. And
therefore does the Lord take salvation here for his own Helmets.

Note, that this salvation which the Lord here takes is to protect himself,
not to save his people: For salvation is here as an Helmet, and an Helmet is
for the safety only of him which wears it, and therefore the Lord is said to
put on an Helmet of salvation, to show, that he is invincible, and can receive
no hurt.

By this that the Prophet says, that the Lord has put on righteousness as a
breast plate, and salvation as an Helmet upon his head, we may learn, that God
is a just God, and therefore draws not out his sword against a man to punish
him without a cause: and that he is invincible, and therefore is not afraid to
set upon the most potent enemies; so that all men have just reason to stand in
awe of him.

St. Paul Ephesians. 6. v. 14, 17. describing the whole armor of a Christian,
seems to allude to this place.

And he put on the garments of vengeance for clothing] i. e. And he has put on
garments made of vengeance, for his clothing.

Vengeance is to be taken here for a desire of executing vengeance upon his
enemies.

And he was clad with zeal as with a cloake] i. e. And he is clad, etc.

By zeal may be meant the zeal and love which he bore to his own honor,
which honor of his had been given to Idols, even the Idols of the Babylonians,
if he had suffered the Babylonians always to oppress his own people. And the
zeal and love which he bore to his own people whom the Babylonians did make to
houle, Cap. 52.5. And the zeal and indignation, (for zeal intimates as well
indignation, as love) which he bore toward the Babylonians for his own
honor's, and his peoples sake.

Besides, their garments of ordinary wearing in times of peace, most of the
most ancient people of the world had their garments extraordinary which they
wore upon their armor in time of War, of which you may read Alex: ab
Alexand: Genial: Dier. lib. 1 Cap. 20. etc. And not to ordinary garments worn
in time of peace, but to these warlike garments does our Prophet seem to allude
when he says (And he put on garments of vengeance for clothing, and was clad
with zeal as with a cloak.

18.
According to their deeds, accordingly will he repay fury to his adversaries]
i. e. He will recompense his adversaries (who have without mercy oppressed his
people) he will recompense them, I say, with such effects of his fury as they
have deserved.

Fury] Fury is put here for miseries and calamities and other the effects of
Gods fury and wrath. Per metonymiam efficientis.

His adversaries] He means the Babylonians whom therefore God calls his
adversaries, because they did most cruelly oppress and show no mercy at all to
his people when they were in Captivity.

Recompense to his enemies] By Recompense is meant that which they have
deserved, that is, the like cruel usage, as they had used toward the Jews.
And this is a Repetition of the former sentence.

To the Islands, he will repay recompence] By Islands understand the
Inhabitants of the Islands, by a Metonymie; and by these Islands understand
Mesopotamia, and other Islands which were near to Tigris and Euphrates: For
Mesopotamia was an Island or Islands made by those two Rivers Tigris and
Euphrates. But the Hebrews call not only that Land an Island, which is quite
environed with waters: but that also that lies by the Seas or Rivers sides.
Yea they call every particular Nation an Island: so that by Islands here may be
meant all those Nations which were subject to the King of Babylon, taking
Island Per metonymiam continentis, for Islanders or Inhabitants of Islands, as
I said.

This is also a Repetition of the former sentence.

19.
So shall they fear the name of the Lord from the West] So shall all the
people of the Western parts of the world fear the Lord, when they shall see or
hear how he has recompensed the Babylonians for their cruelty to his people.

The name of the Lord is put here for the Lord himself: Per metonymiam
adjuncti.

And his glory from the rising of the Sun] i. e. And all the people which live
in the Eastern parts of the world, shall likewise fear him.

His glory] i. e. The glory of the Lord: that is, the glorious Lord.

The glory of the Lord is put for the glorious Lord: Per metonymiam adjuncti.

By these words (So shall they fear the name of the Lord from the West; and
his glory from the rising of the Sun) is meant, that they shall fear the Lord
all the world over. Two parts of the world, to wit, the West and the East being
put for the whole world by a Synecdoche.

When the enemy shall come in like a floud] q.d. Cyrus shall come with the
Medes and the Persians in upon the Babylonians like a Flood or overflowing
River, and when he shall so come, etc.

Like a Floud] He alludeth to the overflowing of the River of Euphrates whereon
Babylon stood, which overflowing, did by its Inundations mightily annoy and
endammage the Babylonians.

The spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against him] q.d. Then shall
the Lord himself in his fury bear the Standard before Cyrus, and the Medes
and Persians against the Babylonians, and fight for Cyrus, and Medes and
Persians against them.

By the spirit of the Lord is meant the Lord himself, but as he was enraged
with fury, Per metonymiam adjuncti: For note first, that the Prophet speaks
here of God as of a man by an (...): Then note, that the word spirit among
other significations which it has among the Hebrews, signifies the motions
and passions of the Soul, as love, anger, or wrath, or fury, etc. And here it
signifies anger, or wrath, or fury, as it signified love, Cap. 48.16.

If you ask how this word spirit comes to be taken for the motions or
passions of the soul? some answer Per metonymiam efficientis, because the
motions or passions of the soul arise from that soul which is a spirit; and Per
metonymiam subjecti, because they are received in the foul as in their subject;
others answer that therefore the motions and passions of the mind are called a
spirit, because the word spirit intimates that which has motion, and the
motions or passions of the soul stir the man in whom they are, and move him
to action.

Note that in the particle him a Singular number is put for a Plural, by an
Enallage.

20.
And the Redeemer shall come to Sion] And then the Redeemer (to wit, Cyrus)
shall bring redemption to Sion, that is, to Jerusalem.

Cyrus came not to Sion in person, but she came even to Sion by his favors to
her, and by the effects of his victory over the Babylonians.

In Jacob] i. e, Among the Jews which were the children of Jacob.

21.
As for me] i. e. For as for my part.

Vnd^rstand (...) for here.

This is my covenant to them] i. e. This is that which I promise to do for
them, by the Covenant which I make with them.

To them] i. e. To those which turn from transgression in Jacob.

My spirit that is upon thee] i. e. Those words which thou have uttered by
virtue of that spirit which is upon thee, O Isaiah.

The Lord makes an Apostrophe here to Isaiah.

By the Spirit is here meant first the gift of Prophecy (for such gifts of God
are by the Hebrews called the spirit of the Lord, see Cap. 61.1.) Then by the
gift of Prophecy is meant the Prophecy, or Speeches, or Words of God,
proceeding from, or uttered by virtue of that gift of Prophecy, by a Metonymy.

And my words which I have put into thy mouth,] q. d. That is to say, The words
(concerning that which I will do for them which turn from transgressions in
Jacob) which I have sent thee to speak, and to make known.

This Conjunction And is a note of explication, and signifies as much as That
is to say: For note, that these words, My words which I have put into thy
mouth, are an explication of those, My Spirit which is upon thee.

Shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed.] i. e.
Shall never be forgotten, but shall so be fulfilled, as that thou and thy
children, and thy childrens children after thee, shall always speak of them,
saying, The Lord has said thus and thus by his Servant Isaiah, and he has
made good what he said; for whatsoever he said by him, he has performed.

The meaning of this place is this; as if the Lord should say, This which I
have said shall certainly come to pass; for what I have said I will covenant to
perform.

The words which Isaiah spoke, are therefore said not to depart out of his
mouth, nor out of the mouth of his children, or childrens children; because he,
and his children, and childrens children, should always make mention of those
words, and talk of them, and of the goodness of God in fulfilling them, and
that with praise and thanksgiving, saying, The Lord said by the mouth of his
servant Isaiah, that he would send a Redeemer to Sion, and to them that turn
from transgression in Jacob, etc. And what he said by the mouth of Isaiah, he
has performed, etc. Blessed therefore be the Name of the Lord for ever.

Yet note, that these words do not signify, that the words which the Lord had
put into the mouth of Isaiah should never actually depart out of his mouth, and
out of the mouth of his seed; but that the Lord would do such things as should
deserve the perpetual remembrance of those words; and that those words should
never depart out of their mouths.

ISAIAH, CHAP. LX.
ARise, etc.] i. e. Arise out of the dust, or from the ground whereon thou have
sat mourning during the time of thy captivity. See cap. 3.26. and 52.2.

This the Prophet speaks by his Prophetique spirit to Sion, or to Jerusalem,
as though she were in captivity, and the time of her captivity were expired;
telling her, that now she should be redeemed out of captivity: and he speaks to
Sion, or Jerusalem, which was a City, as to a woman, by a Prosopopoeia.

Shine,] Receive that light which is cast upon thee, and shine by the reflection
of that light.

The meaning is, q. d. Be thou happy and glorious, through that happiness with
which thy God will bless thee.

The Prophet seems to allude here to the Moon, or to some Star, which is
enlightened by the Sun, and compares the Lord to the Sun, and Sion to the Moon
or Star enlightened by the Rays of the Sun.

It is a common thing with the Prophet to put light for prosperity and
happiness: By light therefore received, understand the prosperity and happiness
which the Lord would vouchsafe Sion by his favor: And because the Moon and the
Stars do shine by the reflection of that light which they receive from the Sun,
understand by Sions shining, the glory which Sion should have by the happiness
which the Lord would vouchsafe her.

For thy light is come,] i. e. For thy God which will give thee light, that is,
Prosperity and Redemption, is come, supple, to give thee light.

By light understand God, who is here likened to the Sun, which is called a
light (because it gives light) Genesis 1.16.

Because the Prophet does often call prosperity, light; and God was to be the
Author of Sions prosperity and redemption; he likeneth God here to the Sun
(which gives light to the Moon and to the Stars) when he says, Thy light is
come.

And the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee.] i. e. And the glorious Lord is
risen upon thee, as the Sun rises upon the Moon and the Stars, by casting his
rays upon them.

By the glory of the Lord understand the glorious Lord himself, as cap. 58.
verse. 8. which he says is risen upon thee, by a Metaphor drawn from the Sun,
in which he persists.

2.
The darkness shall cover the Earth,] By darkness is understood misery and
calamity: by the Earth is understood the Land of Babylonia, by a Synecdoche,
the whole Earth being put for a part thereof: and, by a Metonymy, the
inhabitants of that earth, to wit, the Babylonians.

And gross darkness the people,] i. e. And exceeding great misery and calamity
the people which inhabit Babylonia.

This came to pass when Cyrus conquered and subdued Babylon.

He prophecyeth misery to the Babylonians, because the Babylonians did mightily
oppress Sion, and her children the Jews in their captivity.

3.
But the Lord shall arise upon thee,] i. e. But the Lord shall arise upon thee,
by casting the beams of his favor upon thee, as the Sun arises upon the Moon
and the Stars, by casting his rays upon them.

And his glory shall be seen upon thee,] i. e. And he shall be seen upon thee,
Supple, by the light and brightness of the beams of his favor which he shall
cast upon thee.

He compares here the Lord to the Sun, and the redemption and prosperity which
he gave to Sion, to the beams and brightness which proceeds from the body of
the Sun.

Then did the Lord arise upon Sion, when Cyrus did vanquish the Babylonians,
and set the Jews free, and do such great things for them, as we read of in the
book of Ezra.

His glory,] i. e. He. See verse. 1.

And the Gentiles shall come to thy light,] i. e. And so great shall thy glory
and thy prosperity be, as that the Gentiles shall come to thee, because of the
greatness of thy glory and prosperity, to joy thee, and to be partakers with
thee of that thy prosperity, or at least to behold it, and admire it.

To thy light,] By light (as I said) is meant prosperity, etc. But he alludeth
here to the light of the Moon, or some glorious Star, to which he here
resembles Sion.

And Kings to the brightness of thy rising.] i. e. Yea, Kings shall come to
thee, by reason of thy brightness, when thou shall rise for brightness like to
the Moon, or some glorious Star, enlightened by the beams and rays of the Sun.

The brightness of thy rising is put, per Metonymiam Adjuncti, for Sion her
self rising in brightness.

4.
Lift up thine eyes round about,] i. e. Behold and look toward all the parts
of the Earth.

Here he begins to show in particular, what the light and brightness, that
is, what the prosperity and glory of Sion should be.

All they gather themselves together, they come to thee,] i. e. All they which
thou see gathering themselves together in all the parts of the Earth, are
Jews, thy children, and they gather themselves together to come to thee.

He speaks here to Sion, as if he had her in an high Watchtower, from whence
she could see all the quarters of the Earth.

Thy sons shall come from far,] i. e. Thy sons shall come to thee from far,
even from Babylon, where they were captive; and from other parts of the world,
whither they fled when the Babylonians invaded thy Land.

The Jews which were captive in Babylon returned to Jerusalem, by the favor of
Cyrus, which conquered Babylon, and set them free: The Jews which were in other
parts of the Earth, when they heard what Cyrus had done for their Countrymen,
were invited by their good success to return home, and did return and take part
with them of their happiness.

And thy daughters shall be nursed by thy side.] q. d. And thy daughters shall
be no more taken away from thee, but they shall be nursed up by thy side, or in
thy presence.

He speaks to Sion as to a most indulgent Mother.

5.
Then shall thou see, and flow together,] i. e. Then shall thou see, supple,
thy sons and thy daughters in thine own house; and shall flow together with
them with abundance of joy and riches.

Shall thou see,] Supple, Thy sons and thy daughters within thine own walls.

And flow together,] i. e. And thou shall flow together with them; or, thou and
they together with thee shall flow with abundance of joy and riches.

Flow] There is a Metaphor in this word, taken from a river which flows with
abundance of waters, to which waters he likeneth the joy and riches of Sion and
her children.

And thine heart shall fear, and be enlarged, because the abundance of the Sea
shall be converted unto thee,] i. e. And thou shall fear and rejoice, because
of the abundance of people that shall come to thee.

A question will here be asked, How the Prophet can say, that she shall fear
and rejoice; for these two are contrary passions, and cannot happen upon the
same occasion, in the same person, at the same time.

Ans. The Prophet here alludeth to the manner of men, who when they see a great
company approaching toward them, and toward their dwellings, and knowing not
what they are, are dismayed, and fear that they are some Enemies (especially if
they have been frighted before with companies of Enemies, as Sion had been with
the Babylonians,) but when they perceive, upon their near approach, by their
carriage, and by their words, that they are friends come to serve them, their
fear is turned into joy. Sion then might fear, when she saw so many coming to
her, while they are yet afar off, suspecting that they were Enemies, and that
by their multitudes they intended evil against her; but when she is assured of
the contrary, that they are friends come with Presents to her, and offering her
all kind services, her fear is turned into joy: So that Sion did not fear and
joy here upon the same occasion, at the same time; but her joy succeeded her
fear, upon a several apprehension.

And be enlarged,] i. e. And shall rejoice.

Fear and sorrow do contract the heart, but joy enlarges it; he says
therefore, Thine heart shall be enlarged, for Thine heart shall rejoice, or
thou shall rejoice; per Metonymiam Effectus.

Because of the abundance of the sea shall be converted unto thee,] i. e.
Because of the abundance of the Tyrians, and those which live by the Seaside,
and in the Islands thereof, which shall direct their way to thee, and come to
thee.

Of the sea] i. e. Of those which live near the Sea, or in the Sea, in the
Islands there: Metonymia subjecti or adjuncti.

Shall be converted unto thee,] i. e. Shall turn their way to thee, and come to
thee with their merchandise, whereas they were wont to go to other Cities.

In the word Converted, some think there is a change of mind intimated, as
well as a bodily coming; as if these people were once ill-affected to the Jews,
but should now be well disposed toward them.

The Forces of the Gentiles shall come to thee.] i. e. Whole Armies as it were
of the Gentiles shall come to thee, and bring their merchandise to thee.

By Forces understand great multitudes of men, for such does he call Forces
here, by a Metaphor from an Army, which in warlike terms is called the Forces
of such or such a Nation, or such and such a Prince.

That the Tyrians, or people of Tire, brought fish, and all manner of ware, to
sell in Jerusalem, see Nehem. 13.16. And what the Tyrians did, that we may say
all the other Nations did which dwelt about Judea; that is, That every one
brought the commodities of their Land thither, there to sell.

6.
The multitude of Camels shall cover thee,] i. e. So many Camels shall come
into thee, laden with rich commodities, as that they shall even cover the
ground of thy streets, so thick shall they stand there.

The Eastern people were wont to carry their Carriages, and such commodities as
their Countries afforded (as Gold, Silver, Spices, sweet Odors, etc.) upon the
backs of Camels; so that the Prophet means by this, which he says here of
the Camels, that great abundance of merchandise and commodities of the East
shall be brought into Jerusalem.

The Dromedaries of Midian and Ephah,] i. e. Even the Dromedaries of Midian and
Ephah.

These words seem to limit the former words; q. d. The multitude of Camels
shall cover thee; I mean the Camels of Midian and Ephah.

A Dromedary is a kind of Camel, so called from its swiftness, for it is
derived from (...), which signifies to run.

Midian] Midian is put here for the Midianites, which were the children of
Midian, the son of Abraham by Ketura, Genesis 25.1. per Metonymiam efficientis.

Ephah] Ephah is taken here for the children of Ephah, who was the son of
Midian, Genesis 25.4. by the like Metonymy as before.

The Midianites and Ephaites, or children of Ephah, dwelt beyond Arabia.

All they from Sheba shall come,] i. e. Many of them which are descended from
Sheba shall come unto thee.

This universal Particle, All, has not always an universal signification.

Sheba was the son of Raamah, the son of Cush, the son of Ham, the son of Noah,
Genes. 10. v. 7, 6, 1. He dwelt in Arabia Foelix, from whom a certain Region
thereof was called Sheba, of which she which came to see Solomon, 1 King. 10.1.
was Queen.

They shall bring Gold and Incense,] Arabia Foelix was noted for Gold and
Incense.

India mittit ebur, molles sua thura Sabaei. And they shall show forth the
praises of the Lord.] q. d. And as in times past the Queen of Sheba, when she
saw what the Lord had done for Solomon, 1 King. 10.9. So shall many of the
people of Sheba, when they see what great things the Lord has done for thee,
praise the Lord in thy behalf.

7.
All the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered together unto thee,] i. e. Many of
the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered together to be brought in unto thee, and
sold in thy Markets.

Of Kedar] By Kedar are meant the children of Kedar (which were called
Kedarens) per Metonymiam Efficientis, which Kedar was the son of Ishmael,
Genes. 25. verse. 13.

Kedar, and his children the Kedarens, inhabited part of Arabia Petraea, and
abounded with flocks and herds of Cattle.

The Rams of Nebaioth shall minister unto thee,] i. e. The children of Nebaioth
shall bring their Rams to be sold in thy streets, so that their Rams shall be
at thy service, and they shall yield burnt sacrifices to thee, for thee to
sacrifice to me.

Of Nebaioth] Nebaioth is put here for the children of Nebaioth (which were
called Nabataei and Nebathites, 1 Mac. 5.27.) per metonymiam efficientis, which
Nebaioth was the son of Ishmael, Genes. 25.13.

Nebaioth, and his children the Nabataeans or Nabathites, did inhabit part of
Arabia Petraea, and were rich in flocks and herds, as the Kedarens were.

They shall come up with acceptance upon mine Altar,] q. d. Thou shall offer
them for burnt-sacrifices upon mine Altar, where I will accept of thee and of
those thy sacrifices.

And I will glorify the house of my glory.] i. e. And I will make my Temple
glorious by those Rams which Nebaioth shall bring to thee, and thou shall offer
therein to me.

The more the sacrifices were, which were offered in the Temple, the more
glorious was the Temple accounted, and the higher esteemed of.

The house of my glory.] i. e. The house of me, that is, my house.

The glory of the Lord is put here, per metonymiam adjuncti, for the Lord
himself, who is glorious, as verse. 1.

By this house of the Lord is meant the Temple.

8.
Who are these that flee as a cloud, and as the Doves to their windows?] i. e.
Who are these which flee to thee, as fast as a cloud before the wind, or as a
flock of Pigeons to their house?

I said, verse. 4. that he spoke unto Sion, as if he had had her in an high
Watchtower, from whence she could see all the Quarters of the Earth: Now as
though they were in the same Watchtower still, and espied on a sudden a great
company hasting toward Jerusalem, he cries, Who are those that flee as a
cloud, and as Doves to their window^? He knew them to be the Jews returning
homeward: but (as men use to do in such a case) he asks Sion, whether she
knew who they were or no, that he might assure her that they were her children
the Jews hasting unto her.

By this the Prophet would show the certain return of the Jews out of the
Babylonish captivity to their own homes again.

As the Doves to their windows] By windows understand here the windows or
lover-holes of the Dove-houses, or Pigeon-houses, by which the Doves or Pigeons
go in or out of their houses, to wit, the Pigeon-houses, or Dove-houses.

9.
Surely the Isles shall wait for me, and the ships of Tarshish first, to bring
thy sons from far,] i. e. Surely the Inhabitants of the Isles and the Merchants
of Tarshish shall wait upon me, as servants upon their Master, that they may
bring thy sons to me at my command.

The Isles] By the Isles he means the Inhabitants of the Isles, that is, of
the seacoasts, by a Metonymy.

The ships of Tarshish] By the ships of Tarshish he means the Merchants of
Tarshish, who traffic by sea in ships.

What Tarshish was, see cap. 2.16.

First] i. e. Before they do any other thing, or take any voyage, either for
themselves or any other.

To bring thy sons from far,] i. e. To bring thy sons, O Zion, from those far
Countries into which they were fled, or were carried, when the Babylonians
invaded Judea.

Thy sons] He makes Zion here as a Mother, and the Jews as her sons.

Their silver and their gold with them,] i. e. And to bring their silver and
their gold with them.

This may be understood, either of the silver and gold of the Merchants, which
they should bring with them to traffic within Jerusalem, as verse. 6. or of
the silver and gold of the Jews, which either they had gained by their labor,
or carried with them when they fled for fear of the Babylonians; or which had
been given them by the benevolence of others for their Gods sake, as Ezra 1.6.

Note, that these ships of Tarshish might have been employed to bring the Jews
to Jerusalem, not only from Tarshish, but from any other part of the World
besides.

Unto the Name of the Lord thy God,] That is, To the dwelling place of the Lord
thy God.

Note here, that by the Name of the Lord God is meant the Lord God himself, by
a Metonymy: Then by the Lord is meant the dwelling place of the Lord, by
another Metonymy; as Vcalegon in the Poet is put for the house or dwelling
place of Vcalegon.

-- Jam proximus ardet
Vcalegon.
Virgil. Aenead. lib. 2. Then by the dwelling place of the Lord is meant
Jerusalem: see Psa. 76.2.

To the holy One of Israel,] i. e. To the dwelling place of God, who is the
holy One of Israel.

This is a repetition of the former sentence.

Note here the Enallage of the person, and how God speaks of himself in the
third person.

Because he has glorified thee,] i. e. Because he has honored thee, and will
honor thee in the sight of all the Nations.

10.
And the sons of strangers shall build up thy walls,] i. e. And strangers shall
build up thy walls.

The sons of strangers are put for strangers, by an Hebraism; And those he
calls strangers which were not Israelites born.

The walls of Jerusalem were beat down by the Babylonians, 2 Chronicles. 36.19. and
they were built up again after the Babylonish captivity, by the favor and
liberality of Cyrus, Darius Hystaspis, and Artaxerxes, Ezra, cap. 6, 7. and by
the hands of many Proselytes.

And their Kings shall minister unto thee] i. e. And the Kings of strangers
shall minister unto thee those things which are necessary for that work,
Supple, Of building up thy Walls.

For in my wrath I smote thee] i. e. For I smote thee because I was angry with
thee for thy sins.

Then he smote her, when he gave her over into the hands of the Babylonians.

11.
Therefore thy gates shall be opened continually] i. e. Moreover thy gates
shall stand open continually.

Therefore, for Moreover.

That men may bring unto thee the forces of the Gentiles] i. e. That the Armies
of the Gentiles may be brought to thee, as Captives in chains.

He shows here the reason or end why the gates of Jerusalem should stand open
continually night and day, to wit, that the captives which they took in war
should be brought thither: And by saying that the gates shall stand open
continually day and night, he intimates the frequent victories which the Jews
should have, and their often conquests over the Gentiles.

And that their Kings may be brought] supple, To thee as captives in linkes of
Iron.

Note, that what is here said of Sion in the first sense, is to be understood
of the Church of Christ, in the second and sublime sense, of which Sion was
here a Type, Revel. 21.15.

12.
That will not serve thee] i. e. That will not do offices of civillity and
kindness to thee, but rather injure thee and wrong thee, and give thee just
cause to make war upon them. And when thou do so make war upon them,
will not submit to pay Tribute to thee, and do other conditions which thou
shall require of them.

Note, that (...) to serve, signifies sometimes to do offices of civillity
and kindness to another, as Cap. 19. v. 23. So that he that will not do
offices of civillity and kindness to another, may be said to deny to serve
him; Yea to deny to serve a man may sometimes signify to injure and wrong a
man; by a (...).

Note further, that to pay tribute, and to perform other conditions, which a
potent Prince or People exacteth of another Prince or People, does usually fall
under the name of service: And tributaries are frequently called servants; so
that not to serve may signify also not to pay tribute, and not to submit to
such conditions as a more powerful Prince or People shall exact: See 2 Samuel
10.9. 1 Kings 4.21. 2 Kings 18.7.

Shall perish] Supple, From being a Nation or Kingdom of it self, and living
under its own Laws; for thou shall subdue it, and bring it into captivity to
thy self.

Yea, those Nations] Supple, That will not serve thee.

Shall be utterly wasted] Supple, By thy sword.

Josephus writes of the victory of the Jews over the Tyrians and those of
Ptolemais, as also of their victory over the Ammonites and Gileadites, lib. 12.
Antiq. Cap. 16. He writes also of the subversion of Pella by the Jews; lib.
13. Antiq. Cap. 23. In the book of Macchabees also we read of the victories of
the Jews by Judas Macchabaeus, 1 Macchab. Cap. 5. etc. All which tend to the
fulfilling of this Prophecy.

13.
The glory of Lebanon shall come unto thee] By the glory of Lebanon is meant
the Cedar which is the tallest and stateliest of all Trees; and it is called
the glory of Lebanon, because it brought a great deal of renoune to Lebanon
(which bore it and upon which it grew) and made it famous Per metonymiam
efficientis.

Lebanon was an high hill situate on the North side of the Land of Canaan,
which brought forth as other godly Trees, so especially the Cedar; hence the
Cedar of Lebanon went for a kind of proverb, 2 Kings 14.9. Psalm. 22.12.
Ezech. 31.3.

Shall come unto thee] i. e. Shall be brought unto thee.

For what purpose the Cedar should be brought he tells toward the end of this
verse.

Note that this is another reason why the gates of Jerusalem should stand open
continually; and hereby is intimated also, that the Syrians which possessed
mount Lebanon, should be subdued by the Jews, or at least should so far
either stand in fear of them, or respect them, as that they should furnish
them with all things for the use of the Temple which their Country could
afford. For it must be either by the good will, or, by a conquest of this
people that the Jews could have these Trees brought to Jerusalem: but Strabo
relates that the Jews did subdue this people by the sword.

To beautify the place of my sanctuary] i. e. To adorn my Temple* for the
Temple was adorned by the wood of these Trees being curiously wrought.

And I will make the place of my feet glorious] i. e. For I will make my Temple
glorious.

The place of my feet] By the place of Gods feet is meant the Arc; then by the
Arc (which stood in the Sanctum Sanctorum) is meant the Temple, Per metonymiam
contenti.

The Arc is called the place of Gods feet as appears 1 Chronicles. 28.2. And
therefore was it called the place of Gods feet, because in the two ends of the
mercy seat (which covered the Arc) there were two Cherubins of gold looking
one toward another, and spreading out their wings one toward another: and by
the spreading out of their wings, making as it were a seat to sit upon. Upon
the wings of the Cherubins so stretched out was the Lord supposed to sit in
shape of a man, and to rest his feet upon the Arc; And therefore was the Arc
called the place of his feet. See Exodus Cap. 25. v. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.

14.
The sons also of them which afflicted thee shall come bending unto thee] q.
d. So glorious also shall thou be, that not only they which were thy friends,
but they also which afflicted thee as enemies, shall be moved with thy glory:
and come and honor and reverence thee, if not for love, yet for fear, and s^e
to thee for thy favor, and for thy friendship.

This is another reason why the gates of Jerusalem should stand open
continually, to wit, because the sons of them that had afflicted Sion, should
come bending to thee.

The sons of them which afflicted thee] i. e. The children of those that
afflicted thee. Or, they themselves which afflicted thee O Sion: For the
Hebrews put the sons of such and such, for, such and such themselves.

Shall come bending unto thee] Supple, In token of honor and reverence toward
thee.

See this fulfilled in part Ezra 4. v. 1.2.

Shall bow themselves at the soles of thy feet] i. e. Shall bow themselves down
even to the ground in most humble manner, in sign of the greater respects to
thee.

And they shall call thee the City of the Lord] q. d. And when they speak unto
thee and call thee, they shall say, O thou City of the Lord: And this they
shall say to show the great esteem which they have of thee, and that they
greatly reverence thee.

Sion or Jerusalem might be called the City of the Lord, as well in regard of
the love which the Lord had to her, as of the Temple (which was situate in
Jerusalem) which was the Lords house.

The Sion of the holy one of Israel] i. e. The Sion of the Lord, who is the
holy One of Israel.

15.
Forsaken] Supple, Of me as of thine husband, and of thy children thin^
Inhabitants during the Babylonish captivity.

An^ hated] Supple, Of me as of thine husband, against whom thou have played the
whore: And of the Babylonians as of my Instruments which I called to p^nish
thee, who out of hatred to thee have laid thee waste and desolate.

So that no man went through thee] i. e. So that no man went through thy
Streets.

I will make thee an eternal excellence] i. e. I will make thee most excellent
and glorious for a long time to come.

The Hebrews when they would signify a thing in the Superlative degree: They
use an Abstract for a Concrete; so here when the Prophet would signify that
Sion should be most excellent, says, that she shall be an excellency.

An eternal excellency] i. e. Most excellent a long time.

The Hebrews are somewhat hyperbolicall in their expression of time and
duration, and that that shall be eternal and everlasting, which shall last
only a long time.

A joy of many generations] i. e. Such a one as in which many generations
successively shall rejoice.

Note, that joy is put here, per Metonymium objecti, for the thing in which we
joy; and many generations, for the men of many generations, per Metonymiam
Efficientis.

When the Lord made Jerusalem an eternal excellency, and a joy of many
generations, then did all men flock to her and tread her streets, though none
went through her before.

Thou shall also suck the milk of the Gentiles] i. e. Thou shall draw the
riches of the Gentiles to thy self, and be enriched by them.

He uses a Metaphor taken from a sucking child, milking his Nurses breasts,
and resembles Riches to the milk which he draws by sucking.

And shall suck the breasts of Kings] He persists in the Metaphor of a sucking
child.

In the 49 Chapter, verse. 27. The Prophet says, That Kings shall be their (i.
e. the Jews) nursing fathers, and that the same with this, Thou shall suck the
breast of Kings.

When he says, The breast of Kings, his Metaphor is, Catachresticall, For
children use to suck, not the breasts of men, but of women.

And thou shall know] i. e. For thou shall know, and that by experience.

And is put here for, for.

Thy Savior, and thy Redeemer] Supple, which will save thee, and redeem thee
out of the hands of the Babylonians.

The Mighty one of Israel] i. e. The mighty God, whom Israel worshipped, and
who loved Israel.

By Israel may be here meant, either Jacob himself, who was named Israel, Genesis
32.28. or the Jews, ^he children of Jacob.

The Lord adds this, viz. The mighty God of Israel, to show, that what he
has said here should surely be effected, for there be but two things required
to bring any thing to pass: A power and a will to do: God shows his power,
in that he calls himself the Mighty one; his will, in that he calls himself
the Mighty one of Israel; for by that he shows his love to the children of
Israel.

17.
For Brass I will bring Gold, etc.] q. d. whereas now thou art poor, I will
make thee exceeding rich, so as Gold shall be as plentiful with thee then, as
Brass is now, etc.

Thus rich God made Sion by the Gentiles, whom he made as Conduit-pipes to
convey these his favors to them; so as these words are an explication of
those, Thou shall suck the milk of the Gentiles, and shall suck the breast of
Kings.

I will also make thine Officers peace] i. e. I will also give thee such
Officers to bear rule in thee and govern thee, as shall be meek and peaceable
men.

This was fulfilled, when the Lord made Ezra, Zorobabel, Nehemiah, etc. Rulers
and Officers in Jerusalem.

Peace] Peace is put here for most peaceable men; as excellency was for most
excellent, Verse. 15.

And thine exactors righteousnesse] i. e. And those which shall be appointed to
leavie the Taxes and Tributes which are to be leavied in thee, shall be
righteous and just men, such as will not impose nor exact more then they ought,
and is convenient and needful.

God promises not Jerusalem that she shall be freed from Taxes; for Taxes and
Tributes must be leavied in all Kingdoms and Commonwealths, as occasion
requires for the p^blique good. But he promises her here, that they which
impose or levy the Taxes or Tributes, shall not be such as she felt during the
Babylonish captivity, who were cruel and unjust Extortioners; but righteous
Taxers, which shall impose no more then necessity requires, and shall not
exact what is imposed with rigor.

Righteousnesse] i. e. Most righteous.

Righteousness is put here for most righteous; as before peace, for most
peaceable; and Excellency, for most excellent.

Note, that the Prophet preventeth an objection here; for whereas he says (in
the person of God) in the former part of the verse, For Brass I will bring
Gold; and for Iron I will bring Silver, and for Stones Iron. Sion might say,
But what shall I be the better for this? for if I had never so much, such
officers as I have now (meaning those that ruled in Jerusalem, under the King
of Babylon, during the Babylonish captivity) and such exactors, would wring it
all from me. This objection therefore the Prophet prevents, in the person of
the Lord, saying, I will also make thy Officers peace, and thine Exactors
Righteousness.

18.
Violence shall be no more heard in thy Land] i. e. Nor shall violence be any
more heard in thy Land; for though there has been much violence used in thy
land by the Babylonians, yet now thou shall be free from the violence of all
foreign enemies.

He seems to speak of violence, as of a scolding woman, by a Prosopopeia.

Wasting and destruction within thy borders] Nor wasting and destruction within
thy borders, as they have been heard since the Babylonians first invaded these
thy borders.

Here in this verse he promises security to Sion.

But thou shall call thy walls salvation] q. d. But thy walls shall be safe,
and shall keep all thy children within thee safe; yea, they shall be as safe as
salvation, and keep thy children within thee as safe as salvation her self
can keep them. So that thou may justly call thy walls Salvation.

He speaks of Salvation here as of a person or at least as of a thing
subsisting by it self. And what is more safe then salvation, which if she
could be hurt, were not salvation, and what can keep us more safe than
Salvation; For so long as salvation encompasseth us, we must needs be safe,
otherwise salvation were not salvation.

And thy gates praise] By praise he means salvation; for this is but as it
were the former sentence repeated

But how comes praise to signify salvation?

Answ. Per metonymiam effectus (for salvation produces praise to God,) And Per
metonymiam adjuncti, (for salvation is worthy of praise it self.)

And not only salvation, but any other thing which does either produce praise,
or is worthy of praise, may be called praise.

Note, that the Prophet presents another objection here in this verse: for
whereas the Lord had said, That for brass he would bring gold, and so for Iron
he would bring silver; and for wood brass, and for stones Iron; And had
prevented an objection which Sion might have made saying; But I shall be
nothing the better for these; for such officers and such exactors as I am now
under will extort and wring all that I shall have away from me: He prevents an
other objection; For Sion might say, though I shall have peaceable officers and
righteous exactors, so that I may enjoy all that thou give me, for any thing
I need fear from Officers within me; Yet I have cause to fear the violent man
and the destroyer, I mean the foreign Soldier from without, for I have felt
them and their violence but lately for they have burnt down my gates, and
broken down my walls, etc. This objection therefore the Lord prevents and
takes away in this verse, Saying (Violence shall be no more heard in thy Land,
wasting nor destruction within thy borders; but thou shall call thy walls
salvation and thy gates praise.

19.
The Sun shall be no more thy light by day, neither for brightness shall the
Moon give light unto thee, but the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting
light] q. d. The Lord shall give unto thee continually greater light by many
degrees, than the Sun does give thee by day or the Moon by night.

For understanding of this place, know first, that the Hebrews when they make
comparison between two things, and therein prefer one thing before another,
they affirm that which they prefer and deny that before which it is
prefer^ed. So I desired mercy and not sacrifice, is put for I desired mercy
more than sacrifice: Hosea 6.6. And I am a worm and no man is put for I am a
worm rather than a man, Psalm. 22.6. According to which rule; these words (The
Sun shall be no more thy light by day, neither for brightness shall the Moon
give light unto thee; but the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light) Are
put to signify, That the Lord would give Sion more light con^inually than the
Sun could give her by day* or the Moon by night.

Note secondly, that whereas the Lord is said to be Sions everlasting light; By
light is meant prosperity; For, as I have often said, the Hebrews call
prosperity light by a Metaphor.

Note in the third place, that when the light which the Lord will here be to
Sion, is compared with the light of the Sun; light metaphorically taken is
compared with true natural light: and so the Hebrews often compare things
only so called by a Metaphor or figure, with things properly so called: as you
may see Cap. 58.8. Ecclus. 23. v. 19.

The Sun] By the Sun is meant the Sun which is placed in the Firmament of the
Heavens.

Thy light] i. e. The giver of light to thee.

Light is taken here for the giver of light: Per metonymiam efficientis.

Neither for brightnesse] i. e. Neither in respect of any brightness which the
Moon shall have. For her brightness shall be eclipsed or obscured by the
brightness of the Lord.

Shall the Moon give light unto thee] Supple, By night.

But the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light] i. e. But the Lord shall
be unto thee a giver of light, such light as shall far exceed the light of
the Sun and of the Moon, and that an everlasting light too.

Light is taken here for the giver of light; Per metonymiam efficientis, by
which figure the Sun is also called a light as a little before; so also Genesis
1.16.

The Lord is called the everlasting light, because he is a light, that is, a
Sun which never goes down: See Psalm. 84.11.

Whereas the Lord is here said to be a light, or, giver of light, By light
understand prosperity.

And thy God thy glory] This is a repetition of the Sentence going immediately
before, and what he called light there, he calls glory here; For light is a
glorious thing: God therefore is said here to be Sions glory, Per metonymiam
efficientis; Because he gave glory, that is, light, that is, prosperity to
Sion, which light, that is, which prosperity might be called glory, Per
metonymiam adjuncti, because it was glorious, and Sions glory, Per metonymiam
efficientis, because it rendered Sion glorious.

The Lord is said in this sense to give glory, Psalm. 84.11.

Note here, that St. John in his revelation Cap. 21. v. 23. alludeth to this
verse of our Prophet, but he does not only allude to it as to words which he
may turn to his purpose; but he alludes to it also as to a place principally
intended to set out the glorious state of Christ's Church; And indeed so these
words are intended in the second and sublime sense; For though in the first
sense they speak only of the prosperity which the Jews should have after
their captivity in Babylon: Yet in the second and sublime sense, they speak
the glory and Bliss which Christ's Church should receive after her delivery
from sin and ignorance and the power of the Devil; For those temporal and
bodily blessings which God bestowed upon the Jews after their captivity, were
a Type of those spiritual and eternal blessings, which God would give unto
Christ's Church after their delivery from sin and ignorance and the power of
the Devil: And these words being understood of that bliss which the Church of
Christ shall enjoy in Heaven, may be understood as they said without any
figure, for in Heaven the Sun shall be no more thy light by day, neither for
brightness shall the Moon give light unto thee, but the Lord shall be unto
thee an everlasting light, etc.

20.
Thy Sun shall no more go downe] Thy Sun shall no more go down, as the Sun
in the firmament uses to go down and set daily.

Sions Sun went down when God withdrew his favor from her, and delivered her
into the hands of the Babylonians to be afflicted and oppressed by them; But it
rose again, when he delivered them again out of the hands of the Babylonians
by Cyrus, and vouchsafed her his favor.

Neither shall thy Moon withdraw it selfe] Neither shall thy Moon set any more,
as the Moon in the firmament uses to set, when it goes under the earth.

For the Lord shall be thine everlasting light] i. e. For the Lord shall be thy
Sun and thy Moon which shall be above thine Horizon, and shine upon thee
everlastingly without intermission.

By light understand here the Sun and the Moon, which are called lights,
because they give light, as Genes. 1.16. But the Lord is called Sions Sun and
Moon only by a Metaphor, because he gave light, that is, prosperity and joy,
day and night to Sion, as the Sun imparts his light by day, and the Moon
imparts her light by night, to the Inhabitants of the Earth.

And the days of the mourning shall be ended] He speaks of that mourning which
the Babylonians caused by their oppression and hard usage of her in her
captivity.

By this we may understand what he meant by light, to wit, prosperity and joy.

21.
Thy people also shall be all righteous] i. e. Most of thy children which shall
return out of Babylon, and come and dwell in thee shall be righteous.

All is put here for the greater part, not for All without exception.

The greatest part of those which returned to Sion out of captivity, were
righteous and good men (though the most part of those which went into captivity
were wicked) because the Sword and the Famine and diseases had consumed the
greatest part of the wicked, and many of them which remained alive returned
not, but remained still in Babylon; Cap. 57. v. 20, 21. See the like Cap. 1.25.
See also Cap. 4.4.

Note here, that in these words thy people also shall be all righteous; the
Verb shall be is supplied by the Interpreter, so that the words of themselves
are these, thy people all righteous, which may be as if he should say, thy
people, to wit, all the righteous, so that the meaning of this plural may be
this, q. d. Thy people, that is to say, all the righteous shall inherit the
Land for ever, etc.

They shall inherit the Land for ever] i. e. And they shall inherit the Land of
Judah for a long time.

The Branch of my planting] q. d. Even the branch of my planting, etc.

This is governed of (...) they, to wit, Thy people by Apposition: And he
calls the people of Sion here, the branch of his planting, by Anticipation;
But the branch of his planting he calls them, because he would (though he had
not as yet) plant them in their own land, and cause them there to take root
downwards, and bear fruit upwards, as he speaks, Chap. 37.31.

The work of my hands] This also is governed of the former words by Apposition.

God calls the people of Sion, the work of his hands, because he would bring
them out of their miserable thraldom, and give them great prosperity and joy;
yea because he would plant them as a young slip or Tree in their own land, and
there cause them to flourish.

That I may be glorified] Supple, for that which I will do to them, that is,
to thy people.

A little one shall become a thousand] i. e. And so I will bless them, as that
a little Family in or among thy people shall grow into a thousand families.

And a small one, a strange Nation] i. e. And a small family shall become a
mighty Nation.

This is a repetition of the former sentence.

I the Lord will hasten it in his time] i. e. I the Lord will make have to
accomplish this which I have said, that it may be fulfilled in the due time,
that I have appointed for it.

His time] i. e. My time, or the time that I have appointed for it.

Here is an Enallage of the person, where the Lord on a sudden speaks of
himself in the third person. See the like Chap. 51.15.

ISAIAH, CHAP. LXI.
THe Spirit of the Lord is upon me] i. e. By the Spirit of the Lord, is meant
that Spirit of prophecy, which is the gift of God, q.d. The Lord God has
endued me with the gift of Prophecy, etc.

Note, that among the many significations which this word Spirit has in the
Hebrew language, it signifies any quality of the mind, whether it be
permanent, or whether it be transeunt. And if the quality be good, and given of
God (as this of Prophecy is) it is called the Spirit of the Lord. And such a
quality as it may be called a Spirit, per Metonymiam subjecti, because it is
received in the soul, which is a spirit; so it may be called a spirit per
Metonymiam efficientis, because it is given of God who is a Spirit.

This the Prophet speaks in his own person, of himself. Yet in this he was an
eminent Type of Christ, of whom in the second and sublime sense these words
also are to be understood. See Luke 4.18.

Because the Lord has anointed me to preach good tydings] i. e. because the
Lord has designed and separated me to preach good tidings, etc.

He alludeth to that ceremony of the Law, whereby they which were designed and
separated me to the office of a Prophet, were designed and separated thereunto
by the Ceremony of Anointing. See 1 Kings 19.16.

By the same Ceremony of Anointing, were they separated to the Office of a
Priest, Exodus 29.21. And by the same were they separated also to the Office of
a King. 1 Samuel 16. v. 12, 13. 2 Samuel 2.4. 1 King. 1.45. 2 Kings 9.3.

To preach good tidings to the meek[ The meek, to which Isaiah was to preach
good tidings were those of the captive Jews which were meek in heart, and
humble in Spirit; and the good tidings which he came to preach was the good
tidings of their delivery out of Babylon by Cyrus.

These good tidings did Isaiah preach to them by his Writings, though he
himself dyed before the captivity.

Note here, that as these good tidings, in their first sense, do signify the
tidings of the delivery of the Jews out of the Babylonish captivity by Cyrus:
So in the second and sublime sense, they signify the good tidings of man's
salvation, whereby he is saved from the captivity of sin and of the Devil by
Christ; of which latter that former was a type.

He has sent me to bind up the brokenhearted,] i. e. He has sent me to
comfort the sorrowful heart by my Prophecies.

This is a repetition of the former sentence; and the Prophet uses here a
Metaphor taken from a leg or an arm of a man which is broken, which while the
Chyrurgeon heals, he swadleth and binds up after he has set the bone.

He has sent me, etc.] These words show what these words mean, viz. He has
anointed me.

To proclaim liberty to the captives,] i. e. To declare to the Jews which are
captive in Babylon, that they shall be delivered out of that their captivity.

And the opening of the prison to them that are bound.] i. e. And the enlarging
of them which lie in prison bound in chains.

This is, for sense, the same with the foregoing words.

Note, that the Jews which were carried captive into Babylon, were not chained
and put up in prison, as great Malefactors were wont: therefore that which is
here spoken, is to be taken metaphorically; For because the Jews could not go
out of those Cities and places at large, which were assigned them in their
captivity, therefore does he by a metaphor call them prisoners, and the places
of their captivity prisons.

2.
To proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord,] i. e. He has sent me to
proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord: For these words are either to be
referred to them, to wit, He has sent me, or they are to be repeated here.

To proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord,] Supple, To the Jews which are in
captivity, that is, to proclaim, that the time in which the Lord will redeem is
at hand.

The acceptable year] i. e. The year or time in which the Lord is well pleased,
and in which he will dispense his favors, and show his magnificence, by giving
gifts as a King unto his people, and by delivering those which had offended out
of prison.

This speech is metaphorical; but concerning the Metaphor, see Cap. 49.8.

And the day of vengeance of our God,] i. e. And the time in which the Lord
will pour out his vengeance upon his Enemies, that is, upon the Babylonians
which have held his people in an hard captivity.

One and the same time may be an acceptable time, and yet a day of vengeance;
an acceptable time in respect of the Kings subjects, and a day of vengeance in
respect of his Enemies, whom he may put to death, having taken them captive on
that solemn day, and the more to celebrate the day, and the more to show his
love and care to his people.

To comfort all that mourn.] i. e. To comfort all that mourn, by reason of
their hard usage in Babylon, if they mourn likewise for their sins.

3.
To appoint to them that mourn in Zion,] i. e. To tell that the Lord will
appoint to them that mourn among the people of the Jews which are in Babylon.

Note, that the Prophet suspends this sentence till the next words, and there
perfects it.

That mourn] See Verse. 2.

In Zion,] i. e. Among the people of the Jews, supple, which are in Babylon.

Zion is often put, by a Prosopopoeia, as a woman, yea, as the mother of the
Jews; and it is put here, by a Metonymy, for the Jews themselves.

To give unto them beauty for ashes,] Here the Prophet does perfect the
sentence which he left imperfect and in suspense in the former words: so that
those words, and these together, are thus to be read or construed; q. d. To
tell that the Lord will appoint to them that mourn in Zion; that is, that he
will give to them beauty for ashes, etc.

Beauty] Beauty is put here, per Metonymiam Adjuncti, for beautiful garments,
such as they were wont to wear in times of joy.

For ashes,] By ashes is here meant sackcloth basked in ashes, such as they
were wont to wear in times of mourning: for in times of mourning they were wont
to put on sackcloth and sit in ashes.

Or by beauty may be meant the beauty of the face, which they were wont to
wash, and make as beautiful as they could in times of solemn joy: and by ashes
are meant the ashes which stuck upon the face, and made it ill-favo^ed in the
time of sorrow and mourning and public calamities; for at such times they
were not only wont to sit in ashes, but to sprinkle ashes upon their heads.

If you ask, how the Prophet did appoint or give to them which mourn in Zion,
beauty for ashes: I answer, He did it by prophesying to them, that God would
give them beauty in stead of ashes; as Jeremy is said to root out, and to pull
down, and to destroy, and to throw down, to build, and to plant Cities, because
he foretold and prophesied, that they should be rooted out, and pulled down,
and destroyed, and thrown down, and builded, and planted, Jer. 1.10. See Notes,
cap. 6.10.

The oil of joy for mourning,] i. e. Joy for mourning.

When he says, the oil of joy, he alludeth to the sweet oils and ointments
with which they were wont to anoint themselves in times of joy: Of which, see
Psa. 23.5. and 104.15. and Mat. 6.17.

The garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness,] i. e. Gladness for
heaviness.

By praise he means gladness, and that either because gladness is a thing in
it self praiseworthy, or because it produces praise to God, while they which
rejoice praise God for his benefits to them, and for the cause of their
rejoicing.

When he says, the garment of praise, or of gladness, he alludeth to the
garments which they were wont to use in days of public rejoicing, which were
better then those which they wore on ordinary days, as they which they wore on
days of sorrow and humiliation were worse.

Or by the garments of praise may be meant such garments which they were wont
to wear on the days of praise and public thanksgiving, when they praised God
for some great mercy received: and by such garments may be meant the joy and
gladness of heart which the people had when they wore those garments, by a
Metonymy.

For the spirit of heaviness,] The word spirit signifies here a passion; but
it is here redundant, as it is often among the Hebrews: so that the spirit of
heaviness is no more then heaviness.

That they might be called trees of righteousness,] That is, That they to whom
I preach may by my preaching become trees of righteousness, that is, such trees
as the Lord will plant in the Land of Judea, there to flourish for ever.

The meaning is, that they might by his preaching stir up themselves to take
hold of the gracious promises of the Lord, that so they might go out of
captivity, and inherit their own Land, that is, the Land of Judea for ever. For
if they did stir up themselves to take hold of the gracious promises of the
Lord by Faith, the Lord would surely deliver them out of captivity, and bring
them to their own home again.

Note here first, that he says, that they might be called, for that they might
be. See the like, cap. 7.14. and 9.6.

Note secondly, that this [that they might be called, or that they might be
trees of righteousness] is the same with that, That they might inherit their
own Land, even the Land of Judah for ever, Cap. 60.21. For he uses a Metaphor
here, and in this Metaphor he compares the Land of Judah or Judea to an
Orchard or a Vineyard; and the inheritors of that Land to a tree which takes
root in that Orchard or Vineyard: So that these words, That they might be
called the trees of righteousness, are no more then this, That they might go
out of the Land of their captivity, and inherit their own Land, even the Land
of Judah for ever.

Trees of righteousness,] i. e. Righteous and holy trees.

A substantive of the Genitive case is put here for an Adjective.

By why does he say, That they might be trees of righteousness, that is,
righteous or holy trees?

Ans. To show, that he desired that they might be trees agreeable to the soil
wherein they were to be planted; that they agreeing with the soil, and the soil
with them, they might always flourish therein. Now the soil wherein they were
to be planted was Judea; and no other trees were to be planted in that soil, to
wit, Judea, then holy and righteous trees; neither was it seemly that there
should: for Judea was the holy Land, as Jerusalem was the holy City, Matthew.
4.5. and 27.53. And it was not meet to plant any other Trees or Plants in the
holy Land then such as were holy and righteous: For men will not set Nettles,
or plant Briars and Thorns in a choice Vineyard or Orchard. Secondly, the trees
which were to be planted in Judea were to be planted by the Lord who is holy
and righteous: And would the Lord plant any other trees in his Orchard or
Vineyard, but such as he liked and approved? And he could like and approve of
none, but what were righteous, being that he himself is righteous.

But you will say, Who ever heard of holy trees, or rightrous trees? What?
trees, and yet holy or righteous? Trees are without sense, but righteousness
presupposes sense and reason too.

Answ. The Prophet speaks here of men under the metaphor of trees, and
therefore he says, righteous trees, or trees of righteousness: and he has
respect not to trees, when he mentions righteousness, but to the men,
signified by the trees: For it is usual with the Prophet, as to confound
Metaphors, so to confound that which is metaphorical and figurative with that
which is real and without a figure.

The planting of the Lord,] i. e. Plants planted of the Lord.

Planting is put here for plants, or trees planted, per Metonymiam adjuncti:
And this is a repetition of the former words.

That he might be glorified.] That is, That he might receive honor, and praise,
and glory, by this his planting of them in their own Land, and making them thus
to flourish.

4.
And they shall build the old wastes,] i. e. And they which are now captives,
and mourn in Babylon, shall build up those Cities and Towns, which the
Assyrians, and the Babylonians, and other the Enemies of the Jews, have laid
waste in Judea.

They shall raise up the former desolations] i. e. They shall build up those
places, which the Assyrians, and the Babylonians, and other the Enemies of the
Jews, pulled down, and made desolate in Judea in former time.

Desolations are put here for desolate places or Cities, per metonymiam
adjuncti.

The desolations of many generations,] i. e. The place and Cities which have
layn waste and desolate many ages. See cap. 58. verse. 12.

5.
And strangers shall stand and feed your flocks,] i. e. Strangers, which are
not Jews born, nor of the stock of Abraham, shall serve you, and be your
shepherds, etc.

Note, that this word stand signifies to be ready at hand, as the servant is
at the hand of his Master, to do his will when he calls him: for standing is
the posture of one which is in a readiness to do any thing. See Cap. 48.13.

As this word stand signifies a readiness to do any service; so, to feed the
flock, to be plow-men, to be vine-dressers, limits the service, and shows in
what they shall serve them.

Note here the Enallage of the person, how he speaks to them in the second
person, of whom he spoke in the third just before.

And the sons of the alien shall be your plow-men,] What he called strangers
before, he calls the sons of the aliens here, who, he says, shall be their
plow-men, to fallow and plow their Lands, and sow their Corn, and reap it, and
bring it in, etc.

And your Vine-dressers,] Supple, To dress your Vines, and to do all the labor
and toil which a Vineyard requires.

That which he says here, is this; That they shall not need to toil and moyl
as Countrymen use to do about their Cattle, and about their Corn, and about
their Vineyards; but they should sit still, and have all done to their hands:
So that they should feed of the flock, and eat of the field, and drink of the
Vineyard, without sweat and labor.

But how should the Jews have strangers thus to moyl and toil for them, and
they themselves fit still?

Ans. They should take some captives in war, and make them their servants;
others they should hire for their money, for they should be rich enough to do
it: so that one way or other they should have all their moyling Country-work
done for them without any trouble of their own.

6.
But ye shall be named the Priests of the Lord,] And why shall they be named or
called the Priests of the Lord? Ans. Because as the Priests of the Lord, the
sons of Aaron, were maintained by the labor of the other Tribes, and labored
not in Husbandry as the other did, (for the Lord gave them the Tithes of the
Flock, and of the Herd, and of the Corn, and the Oblations which were offered,
that they might the better wait upon their Ministry;) So should the whole
Nation of the Jews live by the labors of the strangers, and have their meat and
their bread and their wine brought in to them, without any pains at all by them
taken.

But ye,] There is an emphasis in this Pronoun Ye.

Men shall call you the Ministers of our God,] This is a repetition of the
former sentence; for he means hereby those Ministers and Servants of God,
which minister at the Altar, and serve him in holy things.

Ye shall eat the riches of the Gentiles,] i. e. For ye shall eat of the Flocks
and of the Herds of the Gentiles, about which you took no pains. See cap. 60.7.

The riches of many people of old consisted chiefly in Flocks and in Herds;
therefore are riches put here for Flocks and for Herds.

This is another reason, to show why they should be called the Priests of the
Lord, and the Ministers of their God, in the sense given: For the Prophet does
often follow that with one reason, which he ushered in with another.

And in their glory shall ye boast your selves] i. e. And ye shall enjoy, and
rejoice in their riches.

This is a repetition of the former sentence.

What he called riches just before, he calls glory here, per Metonymiam
Effecti; because riches were the Gentiles glory: i. e. They were that in which
they gloryed themselves, and that for which they were renowned by others.

Shall ye boast your selves.] i. e. Shall ye rejoice.

To boast of a thing sometimes signifies to joy or delight ones self in a
thing, because they which boast of a thing, take joy and delight in what they
boast of.

7.
For the shame ye shall have double,] Supple, Honor: q. d. Ye have been put to
shame by the Babylonians, whose bondmen ye have been; but for that your shame
ye shall receive twice as much Honor.

And for confusion they shall rejoice in their portion,] i. e. And for the
confusion which they have suffered, God will give them a great portion of
Honor, in which portion of Honor they shall rejoice.

This is a repetition of the former sentence; only he changes the second
person into the third: for this belongs to those Jews to whom he spoke before.

For confusion,] Confusion signifies the same thing as shame did.

In their portion,] i. e. In that portion of Honor which God will give them, so
great shall it be.

Therefore in their Lord they shall possess the double,] i. e. For whereas they
have been put to shame in a strange Land, to wit, in Babylon, they shall
possess twice as much Honor in their own Land, as they have suffered shame in a
strange Land.

Therefore is put here for For, or Because, as Cap. 26.14.

The double,] i. e. A portion of Honor, which shall be double to the shame
which they have suffered.

Everlasting joy shall be unto them.] i. e. And the cause of this their joy
shall proceed, as from other blessings, so partly from this, that their God
shall make them honorable. See cap. 43.4.

8.
For I the Lord love judgment,] i. e. For I the Lord love upright dealing, I
love common Justice (which gives to every one his own) and reward it,
wheresoever I find it.

I hate robbery for burnt-offerings,] i. e. But I hate robbery, though it be
committed for this end, that he that robs might buy a burnt-offering with
that which he has taken by robbery, and offer it unto me; I say, I hate
robbery, and will punish it, in whomsoever I see it.

By this God intimates, that he would not spare those Jews of the captivity
which were given to robbery and unjust dealing.

And this he speaks occasionally, and by the By; for his main scope is
contained in those words, I love judgment.

By Judgment understand, by a Synecdoche, all good; by robbery, all evil.

Note, that this is spoken in the person of the Lord, and the Lord gives a
reason here, why he will do so great things for them to whom he sent Isaiah his
Prophet, and why he will so honor them; and the reason is, because he finds
Judgment and Justice in them: q. d. For I the Lord love Judgment, and I will
reward it wheresoever I find it; and because I see it in these my people, I
will reward them for it.

Note, that though most of the Jews, which were carried away captives, were
unjust, robbers, and fraughted with all manner of wickedness; yet all were not
so, but some were upright honest men: And of those which were naught, some
turned from their naughtiness and became good: of these therefore, which either
persisted in their goodness, or turned from their wickedness, and those only,
does the Lord and his Prophet here speak.

And I will direct their work in truth,] i. e. I will direct their reward, who
follow after Judgment, in truth.

Their work] i. e. Their reward, or the reward of their work.

The work is put here for the reward of the work, per Metonymiam efficientis.

In truth,] i. e. According to truth.

Then is the reward directed according to truth, when the reward is answerable
and proportionable to the work which is to be rewarded.

Or, In truth, that is, according to my sayings, who am true in all my sayings.

And I will make an everlasting Covenant with them.] i. e. And I will renew my
Covenant with them, which for my part shall be everlasting, for I will never
break it.

When a Covenant is broken on any part, he that breaks it can no more lay claim
to it; wherefore the renewing of it is as the making of a new Covenant.

This Covenant the Lord renewed by his Prophets; and Nehemiah and others sealed
to it in the name of the whole people, Nehem. 10.

9.
And their seed shall be known among the Gentiles,] i. e. And such shall be the
prosperity of their children, as that the Gentiles shall take notice of them,
for the p^osperity and happiness which they shall enjoy above other people.

That they are the seed which the Lord has blessed,] q. d. Whereas the Lord
blessed the seed of Abraham, Genesis 26.4. all that see them shall know, that they
are the seed of Abraham whom the Lord blessed.

10.
I will greatly rejoice in the Lord,] i. e. I will greatly rejoice, because of
the goodness of the Lord toward me.

This is spoken in the person of Zion, by a Prosopopoeia; for Zion hearing
these great things which the Prophet speaks of, and believing them, breaks
out into joy and gladness, saying, I will greatly rejoice in the Lord.

In the Lord,] i. e. Because of the goodness of the Lord toward me in my
children.

In is put here for For, or Because of, and is a sign of the Object: and the
Lord is put here for the goodness of the Lord, per Metonymiam efficientis.

He has clothed me with the garments of salvation,] i. e. For he has redeemed
me out of the Babylonish captivity.

He compares the Redemption, or Salvation, by which they were saved or
delivered out of the Babylonish captivity, to a garment; therefore he calls it
the garment of Salvation.

He puts a preterperfect tense for a future.

He has covered me with the robes of righteousness,] This is a repetition of
the former sentence: for by righteousness he means salvation; of which more
in the following Verse.

As a Bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments.] i. e. As a Bridegroom decketh
himself with ornaments on the day of his marriage, on which day he is at the
finest.

11.
So the Lord God will cause righteousness and praise to spring forth,] Supple,
In me, or for me.

This is spoken still in the person of Zion, who takes that which is done to
her children the Jews, as done also to her self.

Righteousness] By righteousness he means salvation, that salvation by which
the Lord redeemed Zion and her children out of the hands of the cruel
Babylonians: and this salvation he calls righteousness, per Metonymiam
efficientis, because God gave it to the Jews which were righteous, as a reward
of their righteousness: as also because God gave it to the Jews according to
his promise; so that it was an effect of Gods righteousness, that is, of his
fidelity or faithfulness in keeping promise.

Praise] By praise he means also salvation and redemption, even the salvation
and redemption of Sion and her children, and that per Metonymiam effectus;
because that Salvation and Redemption bring forth praise to God: for they which
are saved and redeemed, will praise God for his Salvation and Redemption.

Before all Nations.] i. e. In the sight of all Nations.

ISAIAH, CHAP. LXII.
FOr Zions sake I will not hold my peace,] i. e. For the love which I bare to
Zion I will not hold my peace, but call upon God day and night to save Zion out
of the hands of the Babylonians.

The Prophet speaks this, as though the Jews were even then in captivity, and
near to be delivered, and as though he himself did see them in distress bodily:
And what he says he would do here, certainly many of the godly men and the
Prophets, which lived in the time of the captivity, did do.

For Jerusalems sake I will not rest,] This is a repetition of the former
sentence.

I will not rest,] Supple, From calling upon God to hasten the salvation of
Zion.

Until the righteousness thereof] i. e. Until the salvation thereof, that is,
of Zion.

By righteousness is meant salvation. See cap. 51.11.

Go forth as brightness,] i. e. Go forth as a light which dispelleth the
darkness.

As brightness,] i. e. As a light.

He puts brightness for light, that is, for a body which gives light, and
shines clearly, per Metonymiam adjuncti.

He compares the salvation of the Jews to a bright shining body, because as
such a body gives light, so would this salvation bring joy and prosperity with
it, which the Scripture does often resemble to light, and call by the name of
light.

And the salvation thereof as a lamp that burns.] This is a repetition of the
former sentence: For the Lamp that burns, shines.

2.
And the Gentiles shall see thy righteousness,] i. e. For the Gentiles shall
see the salvation which God shall work for thee.

And is put here for For, and righteousness for salvation, as Verse. 1.

Thy glory,] i. e. The glorious estate with which God will bless thee.

He calls the glorious estate which God would give her, her glory, per
Metonymiam adjuncti.

The Prophet uses an Apostrophe here to Zion, whom he speaks to as to a woman.

Thou shall be called by a new name,] What this new name is by which Zion
should be called, we shall read verse. 4.

Which the mouth of the Lord shall name.] i. e. Which the Lord shall give unto
thee.

The mouth of the Lord is put here, by a Synecdoche, for the Lord himself.

The name which the Lord shall give her shall consist rather in reality then in
words, for Gods word are operative, and turn to deeds.

3.
Thou shall also be a crown of glory in the hand of the Lord,] i. e. Thou shall
also be as a glorious crown in the hand of the Lord; that is, Thou shall also
be precious in the eyes of the Lord.

The Note of similitude, As, is here left to be understood: and a substantive
of the Genitive case, viz. of glory, is put for the Adjective, glorious.

A crown is a rich and precious ornament of a King; therefore he says, she
shall be as a crown of glory, or as a glorious crown, to show the happy and
glorious estate which she shall attain to, and how precious she should be.

And he says, In the hand of the Lord, to show, that the Lord should delight
in her, and have a continual eye upon her: For it is a sign that we delight in,
and take pleasure in a thing, when we love to have it in our eyes, and to look
upon it.

And a royal Diadem in the hand of our God.] i. e. And as a royal Diadem in the
hand of our God.

This is a repetition of the former sentence.

A Diadem was an Ornament or Crown which Kings used to wear upon their
heads; It was made commonly of purple silk, and beset with pearls and
jewels and precious stones.

4.
Thou shall no more be termed forsaken] i. e. Thou shall be no more forsaken.

Note, that to be termed or to be called so or so, signifies with the Hebrews
to be so and so, for by being so or so, they may be called so or so.

Sion was forsaken, when God who was her husband left her, for her whoredoms,
and had no pleasure in her.

Neither shall thy Land be termed any more desolate] By the Land of Sion is
here meant, the Land of Judah, whereof Sion or Jerusalem was the head.

The Land of Sion, or the Land of Judah was desolate, when the Babylonians
destroyed many of the Inhabitants, and caused others to fly for fear into
foreign countries, and carried away the rest captive into Babylon.

But thou shall be called Hephzibah] i. e. Thou shall be called my delight is
in her.

Hephzibah, by interpretation, signifies my delight is in her, which name
being given her by God himself, v. 2. signifies that God should take delight
in her, and rejoice over her: and note, that this name Hephzibah was given her
in opposition to that, that she was termed Forsaken; For whereas God forsook
her, because he had no delight in her; now he will delight in her again.

And thy land Beulah] Beulah signifies by interpretation married, and
therefore should the Land of Sion or the Land of Judah be called Beulah, that
is, married, because her Sons should marry her, v. 5.

Note that this name Beulah is given to the Land of Sion or the Land of Judah
in opposition to that, that she was termed desolate; for being that her Sons
should marry her Land, it is intimated, that there should be a kind of
indissoluble knot between them, as is between a man and his wife, and that her
children should always dwell with her Land as an husband dwells with his
wife.

For the Lord delights in thee] This is the reason why Sion should be called
Hephzibah.

And thy Land shall be married] i. e. And thy Land shall be married, to wit, to
thy children the Jews.

This contains the reason why Sion should be called Beulah.

So shall thy sons marry thee] i. e. So shall thy sons marry thy Land,
Supple, And when they have married it, they shall always live in it or with
it, as an husband lives with his wife: they shall not depart from it as they
have done of late by means of the Babylonians, who scattered some of them
abroad, and carried others captive into Babylon.

By Thee, that is, by Sion is meant the Land of Sion, that is, the Land of
Judah, by a Metonymie, as will appear verse. 4.

Note that these words, As a young man marries a Virgin, so shall thy sons
marry thee, relate to those words of the fifth verse, And thy Land shall be
married, as a demonstration thereof.

As the Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride] i. e. As the Bridegroom rejoices
because of the Bride, and takes joy in her.

So shall thy God rejoice over thee] i. e. So shall thy God take joy in thee,
Supple, and therefore he shall take thee to himself again, and not forsake
thee as he has done.

6.
I have set watchmen upon thy walls O Jerusalem] i. e, I have given thee
Priests and Levites.

Note that this phrase is Allegorical, alluding to watchmen watching upon the
walls of a City for the safety of that City: For the Priests and Levites are
often called by a Metaphor, watchmen; because they are set over Gods people for
the safety and welfare of their souls, as the watchmen of a City are set over
the walls of a City for the safety thereof. And therefore because the Priests
and Levites are called watchmen by a Metaphor, he alludes to those watchmen
from whom the Metaphor is taken, when he says, I have set watchmen on thy
walls O Jerusalem! whereby is meant nothing else but this, I have given to thee
spiritual watchmen O Jerusalem, and I have given them to thee for thy
spiritual safety.

The duty of the spiritual watchmen is to labor and promote the safety of
that people over which he is set, which he does partly by advertizing them of
their sins, when he sees them in danger thereof, partly by praying to God
for them.

They shall never hold their peace day nor night] i. e. They shall pray unto me
without ceasing, that I would save thee and deliver thee out of the hands of
the Babylonians.

Note that though the Proph^t did allude to the watchmen of a City when he
said, I have set watchmen upon thy walls O Jerusalem; yet in this passage, he
does not allude to them, but speaks only of the spiritual watchmen: For it is
usual with the Prophet to confound that which is Metaphorical, and that which
is not Metaphorical together.

What is spoken from the beginning of this verse hitherto, is spoken in the
person of God, who when he intends to do a thing does often set and appoint
men himself to entreat him to do it, See Genes. 20.7. Job Cap. 42.8.

Ye that make mention of the Lord keep not silence] q. d. Being it is so that
God has set you upon the walls of Jerusalem and has said that ye shall never
hold your peace day nor night, keep not sil^nce O ye Priests and Levites, but
call upon him without ceasing day and night, etc.

Thsi the Prophet speaks in his own person.

Ye that make mention of the Lord] i. e. Ye Priests and Levites, which are
the Servants of the Lord, as Psalm. 134. v. 1.

He describes the Priests and Levites by this, that they make mention of the
Lord; because they were the servants of the Lord, servants set apart in a
peculiar manner for his service, for to make mention of one, in the Hebrew
phrase, is, to be his servant of whom he makes mention, See Cap. 26.13.

7.
And give him no rest] i. e. And give the Lord no rest, by your continual
calling upon him.

Till he establish] Supple, Jerusalem in a firm state of prosperity.

A Praise] i. e. Most praiseable or praise worthy scilicet by reason of his
blessings to her.

A Substanttve abstract is put here for an Adjective of the Superlative degree
Congrete as Cap, 60. v. 15.

Or, Praise is put here by a Metonymium, for the matter or subject of praise
q.d. Such a one as may praise him her self, and as others may praise him also
for his exceeding goodness showed to her, by redeeming her out of the
Babylonish captivity and setting her in perfect peace and prosperity.

In the Earth] i. e. In sight of all the people of the Earth.

8.
The Lord has sworn by his right hand and by the arm of his strength,
saying, surely I will no more, etc] The Prophet tells the Priests and Levites
(whom he called upon in the former verses, to call upon God continually in the
behalf of Jerusale^) that the Lord had sworn to Jerusalem to be good to her;
and this he does, to make them more confident and faithful in their prayers,
that they might not doubt of the issue thereof.

The Lord swears here by his right hand, because that is an Emblem of
Fidelity, and by his Arm, because that is the Emblem of power, to signify,
that he is able to do what he swears, and will therefore fafthfully perform
it: And God when he swears, swears always by himself, because he has no
greater to swear by, Heb, 6.13.

By the arm of his strenght] i. e. By his strong arm.

I will no more give thy corn to be meaet to thine enemies] q.d. Although I
have heretofore given the meat which thou have taken pains for, to the
Assyrians and to the Babylonians and other thine enemies, yet now I will do so
no more.

The sons of the stranger shall ntt drink of thy wine for which thou hair
laboured] i. e. Strangers such as the Assyrians and the Babylonians are, shall
not take away thy wine which thou have labored for, by force, and drink
wtthout thee.

9.
But they that have gathered tt shall eat it] i. e. But they that have been at
the cost or at the pains to sow the corn and to reap it, and to gather it
into the Barn, shall eat it.

Have gathered it] By gathering the corn into the Barn understand by a
Syllepsis all other costs and pains necessary for the having of corn.

It] i. e. The corn, v. 8.

Shall ear it] Supple, In the courts of the Lords house, to wit, the Temple,
See Deuteronomy. 14. v. 23.

But note, that the Tithe only of the corn etc. was to be eaten before the
Lord in the court of his house, but their eating of the Tithe there, according
to the Lords command, was as it were an earnest, that they should peaceably
eat the whole harvest at their own places.

And praise the Lord] Supple, For his bounty and goodness in giving them corn
to eat.

They that have brought it together] i. e. They that have brought the wine
together into their cellars and storehouses out of their several Vineyards
etc.

It] That is, the wine, v. 8.

Shall drink it in the courts of my holinesse] i. e. Shall drink it in my
courts, as I have commanded, Deuteronomy. 14.23.

In the courts of my holinesse] i. e. In my courts.

Gods holiness is put here Per metonymiam adjuncti for God himself: so that
in the courts of my holiness is q.d. In the courts of me, that is in my courts.

10.
Go through, go through the gates] q.d. Make have, make have, and go ye into
your own Land, O ye Jews which have been held here in Babylon captives.

This is spoken in the person of Cyrus, or some from Cyrus to the Jews which
were in captivity, and signifies to them, that they might go out of their
captivity so soon as they would.

Prepare ye the way of the people] i. e. Prepare ye the way of the Jews by
which they are to pass from Babylon to Judea, that their way may be without
let or hinderance.

This is spoken to the way-makers or those which were set to see to it that the
ways were good, See Cap. 40. v. 3.

This sudden turning from persons to persons is done, as if the Jews were even
then hastening to depart out of Babylon to their own home: by which is
signified the certainty of their return.

Cast up, cast up the highway] See Cap. 57.14.

Gather up tho stones] Supple, Out of the way in which they must go, that they
may no way trouble or hinder them in their way.

Lift up a standard for the people] This is spoken to other persons then
before. And the sense is, q.d. call the Jews together from the several places
of their captivity, that they may go together to their own Land.

He alludeth to the manner of Soldiers, for whom when they were to meet
together, a standard was set up for them to meet at.

11.
Behold the Lord has proclaimed unt^ the end of the world] supple, saying, i.
e. Behold the Lord has sent out his proclamation into all, even into the
uttermost parts of the world, saying.

The proclamation here mentioned may relate to that proclamation which Cyrus
made 2 Chronicles. Cap. 36. v. 22.23. For what Cyrus did by motion from the Lord,
the Lord himself may be said to do.

Say ye to the daughter of Sion] i. e. Say ye to Sion.

By the daughter of Sion is meant Sion, that is, Jerusalem: As Cap. 1.8. And he
speaks to Sion as to a woman by a Prosopopoeia. And the sense of those words,
say ye to the daughter of Sion, is q.d. Let the daughter of Sion know: for
these words (say ye) are to be taken indefinitely.

This and what follows is the substance of the proclamation which the Lord
proclaimed.

Behold thy salvation commeth] i. e. Behold thy Savior comes, even he which
will save thee out of the hands of the Babylonians.

Salvation is put here for Savior, Per Metonymiam effectus.

The Savior here meant is the Lord, who saved the Jews out of the hands of
the Babylonians by Cyrus.

Behold his reward is with him] i. e. Behold he has brought with him the
reward with which he will reward those Jews which are meek and mourn, and
have not departed from him, but have put their trust in him in the midst of
their affliction, which they suffered in captivity, See Cap. 40.10.

And his work before him] i. e. And his reward is in a readiness.

This is a repetition of the former sentence.

By work is meant, the reward due to the work, pe Metonymiam efficientis.

When he says, his work or his reward is before him; It may be that the
Prophet alludeth to some such games as the Apostle alludeth to 1 Cor. 9.24.
Where they that came to be Judges of the victory, had the garland which was to
be given to the victor carried before them to the Stadium or place of exercise;
and when they were there, they had it lying before them ready to bestow upon
him, who deserved it best.

And they shall call them the holy people] i. e. And they, to wit, the Jews
which are now in captivity, shall be called the holy people.

They shall call them, is put here for, they shall be called.

The holy people] i. e. The people whom God has severed from all the people of
the earth, and preferred above them all by his blessings, See Cap. 4.3.

The redeemed of the Lord] i. e. The people whom the Lord redeemed out of the
hands of the Babylonians.

And thou shall be called, sought out] i. e. And thou O Sion, or O Jerusalem
shall be sought out.

What it is for one to be called so or so, See verse 4.

Sought out] i. e. She which was lost like a lost sheep, but now is sought
out, and found again, See Ezekiel. Cap. 34.16.

A City not forsaken, See verse. 4.

ISAIAH, CHAP. LXIII.
WHo is this that comes from Edom] The Lord appearing to Isaiah in a vision
like a man of war coming from Edom, Isaiah asks him who he is; who
receives his answer to this and other questions which he makes, in this and
the verses following.

By this vision is signified the victory which the Jews should have over the
Edomites their enemies, which victory was achieved by the Jews under Judas
Machabaeus, of which you may read 1 Match. 5.3.

The Edomites were a people which did always rejoice at the afflictions and
miseries of the Jews Psalm. 137.7. Therefore it was very material for the
Jews to be acquainted with this victory, which they should have over the
Edomites, that they might solace themselves in the thoughts thereof.

From Edom] Edom is the name of Esau Genes. 25.30. but is here put for Idumaea
the country where Esau dwelt.

With died garments from Bozrah] i. e. With garments died red from Bozrah?

Bozrah was the chief City of Idumaa.

This that is glorious in his apparrell] i. e. This that is clothed in a brave
coat armor or coat of maile or the like.

The Apparel here meant is not ordinary Apparel, but such Apparel as
Generals and Captains were wont to wear, by which they were distinguished and
known from other men.

Traveling in the greatness of his strength] i. e. Walking or stalking
according to the greatness of his strength, so that he shows what his
strength is by his gate, and by the Majesticke steps which he takes.

In, is put here for, according to.

I that speak in righteousnesse] Here the Lord gives an answer to the
question which the Prophet asked and tells him who he is, saying, I am he
that speaks in righteousness, etc.

By this character the Lord describes himself and distinguished himself from
the Idoll-gods of the heathen: Cap. 45.19. which place see.

Mighty to save] q. d. I am he which is of great power and might to save my
people from their enemies.

2.
Wherefore art thou red in thine apparel?] i. e. Wherefore is thy apparel
thus dyed with red, and how comes it so to pass?

His apparel was dyed with red through the blood of the Edomites which he had
slain, whose blood in the slaughter spouted out upon his garments, as he tells
in the next verse.

Note, that the Prophet speaks this in his own person, who upon an answer to
his first, asks a second question.

And thy garments like him that treads in the wine-fat] This is a repetition
of the former sentence; for they which tread in the wine-fat are all
besprinkled with the juice of the Grapes, which being red dies his garments
red, who is besprinkled therewith.

3.
I have trod the wine presse] This is an answer to Isaiahs second question and
the meaning of it is; q.d. I have fought with the Edomites, vanquished them and
trodden them under my feet as grapes are trodden in the wine press; and hence
it is that I am red in my apparel; and that my garments are like him that
treads in the wine press, for I am all besprinkled with their blood.

By occasion of those words in the second verse, viz. Wherefore are thy garments
like him that treads in the wine-fat? he gives his answer in these
Metaphorical words saying; I have trod the wine press alone. Where the Lord
compares his enemies and the enemies of his people to the grapes in a wine
press which are there pressed that the juice thereof may run out: and himself
to the treader, whose treadings breaks the grapes and squeezes them, and
makes the juice to flow out: and this Metaphor is the apter to signify the
subduing and vanquishing of an enemy, being that the subduing and vanquishing
of an enemy is often set forth by treading and trampling upon them, as Cap.
41.25. Psalm. 60.12.

Understand not therefore the wine press here without grape^, but the wine
press as it was full of grapes.

Al^ne] This adds to the reason why he was red in his apparel, and why his
garments were like him that treads in the winefat; for if he had trodden the
winefat with company his garments must have needs been stained with the juice
of the grapes; but much more being that he trod the wine press alone; for as
he underwent the whole labor of treading, so all the sprinkling of the grapes
flew up upon him alone.

But how can the Lord say that he trod the winefat alone, whereas (as we said)
this victory over the Edomites was achieved by the Jews under the conduct of
Judas Machabaeus.

Answ. The Lord says; that he trod the wine press alone, that is, that he
vanquished the Edomites alone, not to exclude the Jews his own people; but
only to exclude the Gentiles and the Nations that dwelt about Iudaea and
Idumaea, as will appear by the next words following. For the Lord and his
people are to be taken at one in this matter, and so they are taken Judges
5.23. And the Lord here speaks as a General, or, as a Captain of his people.

Of the people there was none with me] i. e. Of all the Nations there was not
one Nation that took part with me.

Note, that the word people is here a word of the Plural number, and so
contains many people and Nations.

This the Lord adds to encourage his people, and to bear up their spirits,
notwithstanding all Nations should be their enemies at this time as they were,
1 Macchab. Cap. 5.

For I will tread them in mine anger] i. e. For I said, though there is none of
the people with me, yet I will tread down the Edomites in mine anger etc.

Note, that ((...) I said) is here to be understood.

Note Secondly, that this relative them is put here without any formal
Antecedent; But the Antecedent may be understood from the first verse, which
teaches, that by this them are meant the Edomites the Inhabitants of Edom and
Bozrah.

Note thirdly, that by treading and trampling the Edomites, is meant subduing
and vanquishing and destroying them, as was observed a little before.

And their blood shall be sprinkled upon my garments q. d. And I will make my
garments red with the blood of their slain.

And I will stain all my raiment] Supple, With their blood, so many will I
slay and tread and trample upon.

4.
For the day of vengeance is in my heart] For (I said) I meditate and think
upon a day of vengeance to avenge my self upon the Edomites for all the
injuries which they have done to my people, the Jews.

He says the day of vengeance is in mine heart, for, I meditate and think upon
a day of vengeance.

And the year of my redeemed is come] i. e. And the time in which I will
avenge my redeemed upon the Edomites is now come.

He calls the Jews his redeemed, because he had redeemed them out of Egypt and
would redeem them as out of the captivity of Babylon, so from the vexations
which the Edomites had or should vex them with.

5.
And I looked] Supple, Among all the Nations to see whether any would help me
against the Edomites.

And there was none to helpe] i. e. And I saw none among all the Nations that
would help me.

But you will say, does the Lord need help?

Answ. The Lord needed not help in himself, but his people the Jews might
need help: and therefore what they stood in need of, he may be said to have
stood in need of; and what was done or not done to them, the Lord might take as
done or not done to himself: For the Lord in heaven cannot be an hungry or
thirsty, etc. Yet because her brethren were hungry and thirsty he says, that
He was an hungered and thirsty, etc. Matthew. 25. v. 35.40. And we read Judge.
5.23. Of one saying curse ye bitterly the Inhabitants of Meroz, because they
came not to the help, the help of the Lord against the mighty, when they came
not to the help of the people of the Lord.

And I wondered that there was none to uphold] i. e. And I wondered that there
was none to help me. He says, to uphold, for, to help by a Metaphor from a
staff which upholdeth him (and so helps him) that leans upon it, that he
falls not.

The Lord speaks here of himself as of a man by an (...), and so he might
well wonder that there was none of all the Nations that would help him, that
is, (as I said) would help his people, being he had been so beneficial to
them, and his people had not wronged them at all: but so far were they from
helping, as that they would have destroyed him, that is, his people, if they
could, 1 Machab. 5.2.

Though God can subdue any Nation himself by the blast of his mouth, yet he
will not work miracles when he can use secondary and ordinary means; therefore
if any of the Nations would have offered their help to the subduing of Edom,
God would not have rejected it.

Therefore mine own arm brought salvation unto me] See what I said in Cap. 59.
v. 16, 17.

Mine own arme] He says, his own arm in opposition to the arm of the
Nations, and to signify that he had not the least help or furtherance in this
his expedition from them.

And my Fury it upheld me] q.d. And I armed my self with fury, that is, I put
on courage.

There is nothing better to encourage a man and to make him valiant, than
anger, and fury is the height of anger.

And there is no better armor to preserve a man, then courage and valor, for
quo timoris minus est, eo minus ferme e^ periculi, says Livie lib. 22. By how
much the less fear there is, by so much the less danger there is, for the
most part.

For the farther understanding of this phrase, And my fury it upheld me, see
what I said on those words, And his righteousness it sustained him, Cap. 59.16.

6.
And I will tread down the people in mine anger] i. e. And I resolutely said,
I will tread down the people of Edom in mine anger, and all the people that
join with them.

And make them drunke] Supple, with calamities and miseries.

It is frequent with the Hebrews to liken calamities and miseries to a cup of
wine or strong drink, and to say that he is made drunk with that cup, who is
sorely afflicted with those calamities and miseries. See Cap. 51. v. 21, 22,
23. and Psalm. 75.8.

I will bring down their strength to the Earth] i. e. I will overthrow all
their strength, and all their power.

7.
I will mention the loving kindenesses of the Lord] Many make this the
beginning of a new chapter, howsoever certainly it is the beginning of a new
matter: And this part of this and the whole next chapter are a prayer composed
by the Prophet to be used by a lew in his Captivity in Babylon.

I will mention the loving kindenesses of the Lord] i. e. I will declare abroad
and speak of those many great kindenesses which the Lord has showed to me.

This is that which God looks for, for his kindnesses to his people, that they
should acknowledge them and speak of them, and so praise him for them.

And the praises of the Lord] i. e. And the praises which are due unto the Lord.

And the great goodnesses toward the house of Israel] i. e. And I will mention
the great goodness which he has showed toward the children of Israel.

8.
For he said] i. e. For the Lord said concerning the house or children of
Israel, when he was about to bring them out of the Land of Egypt.

Surely they are my people] i. e. Surely the house of Israel are my people,
whom I have chosen of all the people of the earth, to serve me. Deuteronomy. 7.6.

Here he begins to praise the Lord, and to mention the kindnesses of the
Lord, which the Lord had showed to Israel; so that the seventh verse was an
Exordium to these praises of the Lord.

Children that will not lie] i. e. Children that will keep the Covenant which
they have made with me.

See Cap. 30.9. and Cap. 59.13. concerning what it is to lie.

By this God showed what good hope he had at first of the children of Israel.
And he speaks here, as a man who knows not secret things, and things to come,
but hops the best. By an (...).

So he was their Saviour] i. e. So he took upon him to be their Savior and
Protector.

9.
In all their afflictions he was afflicted] i. e. When he saw them afflicted,
he was grieved at it, so tender was he over them.

Thy, is spoken of God (...).

And the Angel of his presence saved them] And he sent an Angel, even an Angel
of his presence to save them, and he saved them from the fury of the Egyptians.
Exodus 14.19. etc.

The Angel of his presence.] By this he means some eminent Angel, which stood
in the sight of God, or in his presence; and by consequence was a mighty Angel,
or an Angel of great might and power.

Such an Angel does he call an Angel of Gods providenc, by a Metaphor taken
from the custom of Kings, who admit not every common servant into their
presence; but their Noble and their great ones only. As 1 Kings 10.8. To which
custom our Savior also allvdeth, Matthew. 18.10. Where speaking of the Angels
of the faithful, he says, That they see the face of their father which is in
Heaven.

In his love and in his pity the redeemed them.] Lhough the love and the pity
which he had toward them, when he saw their misery in Egypt, he redeemed them
out of the hands of the Egyptians by his Angel.

And he bare them, and carried them] As a nurse bears and carries her child
in her arms, or as an Eagle bears and carries her young ones on her wings,
Exodus 19. v. 4. or, Deuteronomy. 32.11.

All the days of old.] i. e. All the days of their infancy.

10
But they rebelled] Supple, against God, and were disobedient to him.

Understand this not only of those rebellions which we read of Exodus 15.24.
and 16.2. Number. 14.11. and 21.5. etc. But of those other Rebellions also which
they showed afterward in the time of the Judges, and of the Kings.

And vexed his holy Spirit] i. e. And vexed him who is the holy one of Israel
with their sins.

He speaks of God, as of a man, and puts the spirit, which is but part, for
the whole man.

Therefore was he turned to be their enemy, and fought against them] Therefore
did God show himself their enemy and fought against them; for he sent fiery
Serpents amongst them, Number. 21.6. and did afterward when he brought them into
the land which he promised to their fathers, often raise up enemies against
them, as the Philistines, and the Ammonites, and the Moabites, and Midianites,
and Syrians, etc.

11.
Then he remembered the days of old] yet he remembered what he did in favor of
hi^ people in the days of old, that he might show them favor still.

Then, for yet.

Moses and his people] i. e. He remembered what he did for his people by Moses,
by who^ he brought them out of Egypt, and did so great favors for them in
former times.

Moses] i. e. He remembered Moses, viz. that he used him as an instrument to do
his people good.

And his people] q. d. And he remembered his people, viz. That he had done great
things for them, by the hand of Moses.

Saying, where is he that brought them out of the sea] q.d. Saying, where is he
that divided the R^d Sea, and brought his people safe through it? has he
forgotten his people, or forsaken them, for whom he did so great things?

Note here, that this is the speech of God, arguing with himself, and stirring
up himself to pity his people, and to do for them, as he had done formerly,
for his names sake. And God speaks to himself, and of himself, though he
says, where is he, etc.

With the Shepherd of his Flock] i. e. with or by the hand of Moses, who was
as the shepherd of his flock.

With is put here for by, and is a sign of the instrument; and Moses is
likened to a Shepherd: and the children of Israel (whom Moses brought out of
Egypt) to a flock of sheep. See Psalm. 77.20.

Where is he that put his holy Spirit within him?] i. e. Where is that God
which put his holy Spirit in Moses, for the good of his people?

By the holy Spirit is meant all those gifts which God gave to Moses, to enable
him to be a Conductor and Protector of his people; as, the gift of Prophecy,
and of Wisdom, and of Courage, and of Fortitude, etc. For all the qualities of
the Soul the Hebrews call by the name of the spirit; and those qualities which
the Lord gives, the Spirit of the Lord.

12.
That led them by the right hand of Moses with his glorious arm,] That is,
Which led them like sheep by the hand of Moses (Psalm. 77.20.) working many
miracles for them by his power.

With his glorious arm,] These words signify the miracles which God did for
his people under Moses; as, the dividing of the Sea, etc. which miracles he
wrought by his glorious arm; that is, by his power, which made him glorious: in
which work God was the principal Cause, and Moses his Instrument.

Dividing the waters before them,] i. e. Dividing the waters of the red Sea
before them, that they might pass through the same to the Land which he had
given them. See Exodus 14.21.

To make himself an everlasting Name?] i. e. By which he got himself
everlasting honor and glory.

13.
That led them through the deep as an horse in the wilderness,] i. e. That led
them through the red Sea (by dividing the waters thereof, and drying it by an
Eastwind, Exodus 14.21.) as easily and as firmly, as an horse (goes or runs
up and down) in the hard and dry wilderness.

That they should not stumble,] i. e. So that they did not so much as stumble.

To stumble signifies, by a Metaphor, to come to harm, as cap. 8.15. But it
may be here properly taken; for he that goes in muddy places (such as is the
bottom of the Sea) cannot ordinarily make haste, but he will stumble in pulling
out one foot after another out of the mud: But though the channel of the Sea
was deep, and the Sea were but newly divided, for the people of Israel to pass
through it; yet did God so provide for his people, that the mud caused them not
to stumble.

14.
As a beast goes down into the valley,] i. e. As a beast, which is heavy
laden, goes down a steep hill into the valley; for he goes easily and warily,
and with a great deal of care and circumspection, that he fall not.

The Spirit of the Lord caused him to rest,] i. e. So did the Lord lead his
people to their rest; for he led them easily and warily, with a great deal of
care and circumspection, that they should not be over-travelled, and fall down
by the way through weariness, ( Deuteronomy. 8.4.) and that they should not come to
any other hurt.

Note, that this is spoken in the person of a Jew, for whom the Prophet
composed this prayer, where the Jew attesteth what the Lord said before, and
bears witness to it, as to the truth; and encourages himself from thence, to
ask of the Lord the like favors for himself and his brethren, in their
captivity in Babylon, as he the Lord vouchsafed that his people in the days of
old.

The Spirit of the Lord] i. e. The Lord.

By the Spirit of the Lord is here meant the goodness of the Lord; for he
speaks of God here as of a man, by an (...): And all the qualities and passions
of a man's Soul the Hebrews call the spirit: By the spirit therefore of the Lord
is here meant (as I said) the goodness of the Lord; and the spirit or goodness
of the Lord is put, per Metonymiam adjuncti, for the Lord himself.

Caused him to rest,] i. e. Led his people to their rest, that is, to the Land
of Canaan which is called their rest, (Psalm. 95.11. and Deuteronomy. 12.9.) because it
was the end and period of all their travels.

The Lord is said to cause his people to rest, because he did lead them through
the red Sea, and through the wilderness, to the place of their rest, that is,
to the Land of Canaan: And so does Jeremy also use this phrase, Jerem. 31.2.

Him] That is, Israel his people, as appears by the following sentence.

So did thou lead thy people,] i. e. As a beast goes down into the valley,
so (I say) did thou lead thy people to their rest.

The Prophet makes his Apostrophe here to God, in the person of the people of
the Jews, and repeateth what he said in the words before.

To make thy self a glorious Name.] i. e. So that thou did purchase to thy
self great glory and renown, by bringing thy people in the Land of Canaan as
thou did.

15.
Look down from Heaven,] q. d. Look down therefore from Heaven, upon us thy
people which are now in captivity, as thou did look upon our Fathers in the
days of old.

Look down from Heaven,] Supple, With the eyes of mercy.

Behold,] Supple, Us thy people which are in captivity.

From the habitation of thy holiness,] i. e. From thy holy habitation.

A substantive of the Genitive case is put here for an Adjective.

Heaven is called Gods habitation or dwelling place, because God does there
manifest himself in greater glory, then in any part of the world besides.

And of thy glory,] i. e. And from the habitation of thy glory, that is, from
thy glorious habitation.

He says, of glory, for glorious; as he said, of holiness, for holy: Or else
both holiness and glory may be put here, per Metonymiam adjuncti, for God
himself; q. d. From the habitation of thee, that is, from thine habitation who
art holy and glorious.

Where is thy zeal,] i. e. Where is that love which thou have heretofore showed
to us thy people in the days of our forefathers.

Zeal is oftentimes put for love, but ardent love.

And thy strength,] i. e. And where is thy strength which thou have heretofore
showed in delivery of us thy people out of the hands of our Enemies?

And the sounding of thy bowels, and thy mercies toward me?] q. d. And where
are those sighs and those groans toward me, which thy pity and compassion was
wont to move toward the sons of Israel?

This is also spoken in the person of a Jew.

The sounding of the bowels I take to be sighs and groans proceeding from the
bowel^, that is, proceeding from pity and compassion.

For the bowels being deemed the seat and subject of pity and compassion, are
often taken by a Metonymy, for pity and compassion it self.

Ingemuit miserans graviter, says the Poet, Virgil. lib. 10. Aenead. verse.
823. He out of pity sighed or groaned grievously.

Are they restrained?] i. e. Are thy zeal, and thy strength, and the sounding
of thy bowels, and of thy mercies, restrained and kept in, that they should not
show themselves toward me?

16.
Doubtless thou art our Father,] q. d. Surely thou live, and art still our
Father, and therefore wilt take notice of us as of thy children, and of the
miserable condition in which we are.

Though Abraham be ignorant of us,] i. e. Though Abraham, who was our Father
according to the flesh, is now dead, and therefore neither knows us, nor our
condition.

And Israel acknowledge us not,] i. e. And though Israel (who was also our
Father according to the flesh) is now dead, and therefore acknowledges us not,
though we were his sons.

Why was Abraham ignorant of them? and why did not Israel acknowledge them at
this time?

Ans. Because Abraham and Israel were both dead at this time, and so all their
thoughts perished, Psalm. 146.4.

Thou O Lord art our Father,] i. e. Thou O Lord (I say) live, and art our
Father.

Our Redeemer,] The people of the Jews calls the Lord their Redeemer, because
he had redeemed them, at all times, out of the hands of their Enemies.

Thy Name is from everlasting.] i. e. Thou art from everlasting, and so being
from everlasting, shall be to everlasting; for that which has no beginning,
shall have no ending.

By this he preferred God as a Father, before Abraham, and before Jacob; For
though Abraham and Jacob were both their Fathers, yet they were mortal, and
both dead, and so had no longer any knowledge and care of them, as a Father had
of his children: But God is everlasting, and dies not, and so can always both
take notice, and have a care of them which are his.

Thy Name] i. e. Thou. See Cap. 30. verse. 27.

He puts the Lord in mind, that he is their Father and Redeemer, thereby to
move him more vehemently to compassion.

17.
O Lord, why have thou made us to err from thy ways?] i. e. O Lord, why have
thou suffered us so long to be oppressed by the Babylonians, and by that means
have made us to err from thy Commandments?

Note, that if the rod of the wicked lies long upon the righteous, it makes
them to put forth their hands to iniquity, Psa. 125.3. Hence it is that he
says here, O Lord, why have thou made us to err from thy ways? for, Why have
thou so long oppressed us, or suffered us to be oppressed? per Metonymiam
Effectus.

From thy ways] i. e. From thy Commandments, in which thou have appointed us to
walk.

And hardened our heart from thy Fear?] q. d. And why have thou hardened our
heart, so as that we fear thee not?

God is said to harden their hearts so, as he was said to make them err from
his ways; that is, by prolonging their misery and captivity in Babylon.

Return] i. e. Return unto us in mercy, and deliver us out of our captivity and
misery, now after the time that thou have been angry with us.

Anger oftentimes makes one man to depart from another, who returns again
when his anger is over, and his wrath appeased: In allusion therefore to such a
one does he say here, Return, speaking of God as of a man, by an (...).

For thy servants sake,] i. e. For our sake who are thy servants, lest if thou
return not unto us, we be utterly consumed.

The tribes of thine inheritance.] i. e. The Tribes to whom thou gave the
Land of Canaan (which is thine inheritance) to dwell in.

These words are governed of the former, by Apposition: and those which he
called the Lords servants there, he calls the Tribes of the Lords inheritance
here; for the people of the Lord were divided into Tribes, Exodus 28.21.

Though the people of Israel were sometimes called the Lords inheritance,
because the Lord chose them for himself, to be his own, as a man's inheritance
is his own; yet here the Land of Canaan, which God gave them to dwell in (and
not the people themselves) is called Gods inheritance, as will appear by the
next Verse: And the Land of Canaan might be called Gods inheritance, because
God reserved to himself a peculiar right in that Land, Levit. 25.23.

18.
The people of thy Holiness have possessed it but a little while,] i. e. Thy
people, or thy holy people the Jews, have possessed the Land of Canaan, which
is thine inheritance, but a little while: Supple, Therefore bring us back
again, O Lord, out of our captivity in Babylon, into thine inheritance, that we
may possess it yet longer, according to thy promise.

He says, that they had possessed the Land of Canaan, the Lords inheritance,
but a little while, though they had possessed it^ eight or nine hundred years,
because the Lord promised that they should inherit it for ever, Exodus 32.13.
And what is eight or nine hundred years, to that which is for ever?

The people of thine Holiness] Of thine Holiness may be put here, for Of thee,
(Gods Holiness being put for God himself,) per Metonymiam Adjuncti: q. d. Thy
people. Or the substantive of the Genitive case may be put here for an
Adjective (as the Hebrews often put it) and so the people of thine Holiness may
be put for thine holy people.

And the Jews, the children of Israel, might be called Gods holy people,
because God took them to himself, and separated them from all the people in the
Earth, to be his servants: for Holiness is nothing else but a separation from
others, by way of eminency.

It] i. e. Thine inheritance, mentioned Verse. 17.

Our adversaries have broken down thy Sanctuary.] i. e. The Babylonians, which
are our adversaries, and which hold us in hard captivity, have broken down thy
holy Temple: Supple, Therefore destroy thou them for so doing, that we may be
freed out of their hands.

The Temple was called the Sanctuary, be-of the sanctity and holiness thereof.

How the Babylonians trod down the Temple, see 2 Chronicles. 36.19.

19.
We are thine,] i. e. We are thy servants, and thy peculiar people; Supple,
Therefore let not the Babylonians tyrannize over us.

Thou never barest rule over them,] i. e. Thou wast never the King, and the
God, and the Lord of our adversaries, in that special manner as thou wast ours,
as that thou should regard them before us.

They were not called by thy Name.] i. e. They were not ever thy peculiar
servants (as we were) so that thou should have any great respect or care of
them.

Supple, Why therefore do thou suffer them to tyrannize over us, and oppress
us? And why do thou suffer us to be oppressed by them? And why do thou do
for them more then thou did for us?

Note, that to be called by ones name, is to be his servant, or wife; or his in
some relation or other (as the circumstance of the place requires) by whose
name he is called. See Cap. 4.1. etc.

ISAIAH, CHAP. LXIV.
O That thou would rent the Heavens,] Supple, To make a way through them.

He speaks of God, as if he were a man, by an (...): for if a man were in
Heaven, and would come down from thence, he must have the Heavens opened, and
divided some way or other, that he might have passage through them, before he
could come down; he cannot pass through them shut, or undivided, being solid
bodies.

Would rent] This word rent imports anger and indignation in the renter, as
though he could not tarry till the Heavens were orderly opened, but would rend
them in haste, and make a way through them by violence.

Note, that this is to be continued with the former Chapter.

That thou would come down,] Supple, Upon the Earth.

That the mountains might flow down at thy presence.] q. d. O that thou would
come down in flaming fire, that the mountains might melt, and run down like
melted wax, at thy presence, with the heat thereof.

Here is an Ellipsis of those words, O that thou would come down with flaming
fire.

Note, that the Scripture, when it describes God coming to take vengeance,
describes him for the most part coming with fire, as Psalm. 50.3. and 97.3.
Deuteronomy. 32.22. 2 Samuel 22.9. Joel 2.3. 2 Thessalonians. 1.8, etc. And so does our Prophet
tacitly here describe him, when he calls upon him to come and take vengeance
on the Babylonians: for he tacitly calls upon him to come with fire, when he
would have him so to come, as that the mountains might flow down at his
presence, as appears Psalm. 97.5. Judge. 5.5.

Note secondly, that the mountains being earth, are not of a nature fit to be
melted, no not with the greatest fire; The Prophet therefore, when he speaks
of the melting or flowing down of the mountains, uses a (...), or Metaphor,
with an Hyperbole.

2.
As when the melting fire burns,] q. d. O that thou would come down with
fire, which would burn as hot, as when the fire burns, etc.

Note, these words, O that thou would come with fire which would burn as hot,
are here to be understood.

Note also, that by the melting fire he names a vehement and strong fire, for
such a fire is required to the melting of metals.

The fire causes the waters to boil,] Here also the same words are to be
understood, which were to be understood in the former Verse: q. d. O that thou
would come down with fire, which would burn as hot as when the fire causes
the waters to boil.

Note, that by the fire which causes the waters to boil, he means a strange
and vehement fire; as he did by the melting fire: for it must be a strong fire
and a vehement, which makes a great furnace of water to boil.

To make thy name known to thine adversaries] Here he shows the ends why he
would have the Lord come down from Heaven, and come with fire, to wit, that he
might take vengeance of his adversaries.

To make thy name known to thine adversaries] i. e. To make thine Adversaries
know thy power; Supple, by feeling of it. That is, q.d. To punish thine
Adversaries, and take vengeance on them.

Thy Name] i. e. The Name of God is put here for God himself, as Cap. 63. v.
16. And God, for the power of God.

To thine Adversaries] By these he means the Babylonians, whom he calls the
adversaries of God, because they destroyed his Sanctuary, Cap. 63.18. And
because they kept the Jews, the people of God, in an hard bondage.

That the Nations may tremble at thy presence] i. e. That other Nations also
may tremble when they see how heavily thou layest thy judgments upon the
Babylonians.

Yet by the Babylonians, I mean not those only which lived in Babylon, and the
Precincts thereof; but all those Nations which were subject to the King of
Babylon, which were many; which Nations only may be here meant, when he says,
that the Nations may tremble at thy presence: And therefore might they tremble,
because the hand of God would be as well upon them, as upon those which dwelt
in Babylon and the Precincts thereof, which are called Babylonia.

3.
When thou did terrible things, which we looked not for] What these terrible
things were, and when they were done; is not so easy to determine; but they
seem to have been done upon the Egyptians, when God delivered his people out of
their hands, though they be not recorded in holy Writ. For many things were
received among the Hebrews for truth, which were not therein recorded, as will
appear by the Prophecy of Enoch, which Jude mentions Jude 14. which is no
where recorded in the Old Testament.

Which we looked yet for] i. e. Which thou did for us, when we little dreamed
of them, and which therefore were the more welcome to us.

But how can the Prophet say here, which we look^d not for, when they were done
many hundred years before his days?

Answ. Indeed these things were done long before the Prophets days; for they
were done in the days of his forefathers: yet because all the Jews were of
one race, and one people, the children speak often of their fathers as of
themselves, and say, that they did that, or saw that which their fathers only
did and saw.

Thou came down] Supple, from Heaven in flaming fire.

The mountains flowed at thy presence] See verse. 1.

After these words, understand these or the like; Being therefore, O Lord, thou
have come down heretofore from Heaven in flaming fire, so that the mountains
flowed at thy presence, when we looked not for it, Thou can come down again
when we entreat thee.

4.
For since the beginning of the world men have not heard] i. e. For no man
since the beginning of the world has ever heard, or shall hear, etc.

These words relate to that passage of the third verse, viz. [which we looked
not for] and show, that he might well say, which w^ looked not for; for since
the beginning of the world no man ever heard, or saw, what God had prepared,
and was ready to do for them who wait for him.

Men have not heard] Men have not heard, nor shall hear.

These words contain not only a praeterperfect Tense, but the praesent and
future also, by a Syllepsis.

Nor perceived by the eare] These are the same with the former words; except
you will say, that by hearing is meant, hearing from the reports of others;
perceiving by the ear, is meant hearing immediately themselves.

Neither has the eye seen] i. e. Neither has the eye of any one seen, or
shall see; Supple, before it comes to pass.

Besides thee] q. d. But only thou, O Lord, who know what thou will do,
and what thou have prepared, before it be done.

What he has prepared for him that waits for him] i. e. What thou, O God,
have prepared, and art ready in thy good time to do for them that wait for
thee.

Note here the Enallage of the person, for he speaks of God in the Third
person, to whom he spoke just before, and speaks immediately after in the
second.

For him] i. e. For them.

A singular for a plural number collective.

That waits for him] i. e. Which depend upon thee, or trust in thee, and will
not depart from thee, but wait upon thee, till tho^ have mercy upon them.

5.
Thou meetest him that rejoices and works righteousnesse] i. e. Thou
preventest him with thy blessings, who rejoices to work righteousness.

Thou meetest him, etc.] This is that which he says, Cap. 65.24 Before they
call, I will answer, and while they are yet speaking I will hear. But the
words are metaphorical, taken from a man meeting his friend before he comes to
him. An example whereof we have Luke 15.20.

This shows, that no man knows what God has prepared for his, until it
comes to pass: For God meets those which are his, and preventeth them with
his blessings, before they think of it.

That rejoices and works righteousnesse] i. e. Which rejoices to work
Righteousness.

Here is (...), two words to express one thing.

Those that remember thee in thy waies] i. e. Even those which remember the
Covenant which they have made with thee, by walking in those ways which thou
have appointed for them to walk in. That is, by walking in thy commandments.

These are a repetition or amplification of these words, That rejoices, and
works righteousness.

That remember thee] i. e. That remember thy Covenant, or the Covenant which
they have made with thee.

A metonymie in the word thee.

B^hold, thou art wroth] q.d. But behold, thou art wroth with us, and show
no kindness unto us, though thou meetest us, which rejoice to work
righteousness, and remember thee in thy ways.

God showed his wrath toward them, by giving them over into the hands of the
Babylonians, and suffering them to remain so long in captivity, as they did.

In those is continuance] i. e. To those, supple, which rejoice to work
righteousness, and which remember thee in thy ways; There is continuance.
Supple, of thy love, and of their happy estate.

In, for To.

And we shall be saved] q. d. And we, supple, which are now in the hands of our
enemies, shall be saved out of their hands; Supple, if we were such as they
are; That is, if we did rejoice and work righteousness, and remember thee, O
Lord, in thy ways, as they do.

This sentence is very concise, and so are many more in this chapter.

But we are all as an unclean thing] i. e. But we are not such as they are, but
we are all impure, and defiled, by reason of our iniquities.

As an unclean thing] He alludeth to those things which the Ceremonial law of
Moses made unclean; such was the cloth and the timber and the stones, etc. in
which the Leprosy was found, which things were either to be burned or cast
away. Levit. 13. v. 55, 56, 57. and 14. v. 46, 47.

And all our righteousnesses] i. e. And all our works, or all our actions and
doings.

Though all their works were sins, yet he calls them their Righteousnesses,
by a (...), because most of the Jews accounted them themselves as well done,
and called them themselves Righteousnesses. See the like manner of Phrase, Cap.
47.12.

Are as filthy rags] i. e. As rags which are pulled off from mattrie soars; or
rags which are defiled with the menstruous blood of a woman, (which the Law
made unclean) Or, as some other rags which were fitter to be cast away or
burned, then to be kept or used.

And we all do fade as a leafe] Wherefore we do all fade away in the land of
our captivity, as a leaf which the wind has blown from the Tree whereon it
grew, and flourished, fades away and withers.

And is put here for wherefore.

And our iniquities have like a wind taken us away] i. e. For our iniquities
have taken us away from our dwellings and habitations, where we lived in
prosperity and peace, (as a wind takes the leaf away from the Tree whereon
it flourished) and have brought us into Babylon.

And for For.

Their Iniquity is said to take them away, because God suffered the Babylonians
to take them away, because of their iniquities.

7.
And there is none that calls upon thy Name] i. e. And yet there is none that
calls upon thee, or prays unto thee in his miserable es^ate.

Note the And is put here for yet, and that this universal particle none, is
not to be universally taken here, for none absolutely, but for few; q. d. There
are but few that call upon thee.

Thy Name] That is, thee. See Cap. 63.16.

That stirs up himself to take hold on thee] q. d. There be but few that
endeavor to stop thy judgments by begging pardon at thy hands.

This phrase is Allegorical, and alludeth to a man who is stricken down, and
yet he that struck him down still smites him, and strikes him; yet he that is
stricken down lies still along, and suffers him that struck him down to
strike him still, and raises not up himself to lay hold on his arm, that he
may strike him no more. See Cap. 27.5.

For thou have hid thy face from us] i. e. Though thou art angry with us. See
Cap. 8.17. and Cap. 54.8.

For is put here for though.

But now, O Lord] Supple, We call upon thee; we beseech thee therefore to hear
us.

Thou art our Father] Supple, Therefore as a father pittieth his children, so
do thou pity us, and have mercy upon us.

We are the clay] i. e. We are the vessels which thou have made.

Clay is put here per metonymiam materiae, for vessels made of Clay.

And thou our Potter] i. e. And thou art the Potter which made us thy vessels.

We are all the work of thine hands] This is a repetition of the former
Sentence.

We are the Clay, and thou our Potter, we are all the work of thine hands]
Supple, therefore forsake us not, forsake not the works of thine own hands,
Psalm. 138.8.

Be not wroth] Supple, with us.

Neither remember iniquity for ever] i. e. Neither remember our iniquity;
Supple, to punish us for it for ever.

We are all thy people] Save us therefore, we beseech thee; Save thy people,
and lift them up for ever. Psalm. 28.9.

Thy holy Cities are a Wildernesse] i. e. Thy Cities, even the Cities of Judah
(which is the land of thine inheritance) are made as a wilderness, by the
Babylonians, who have cast them down, and left none to build them up again, and
inhabit them.

He calls the Cities of Judah the holy Cities, because they were the Cities
standing upon Gods own Inheritance; for the land of Judah was Gods inheritance,
Cap. 63.17. Or, because they were Cities appertaining to Gods people the Jews,
which were an holy people, Deuteronomy. 7.6. Or, because there were Synagogues
therein, erected for Gods service, Psalm. 74.8.

Sion is a wildernesse] By Sion is meant the City of David, which was built
upon the hill Sion, which was also called the upper City of Jerusalem.

Jerusalem a Desolation] i. e. Jerusalem is utterly desolate.

He puts desolation for utterly desolate; an Abstract for a Concrete. And by
Jerusalem he means that part of Jerusalem which lay under the hill of Sion,
in the valley, and which was called the lower City.

Note that he makes particular mention of Sion and Jerusalem here, because
they were the chiefest and most holy of all the Cities: and note that is not an
unusual figure in Rhetorique, (...). i. for a man to make special mention of
one particular, amongst the rest, even then when he makes mention of all in
general, as Strabo notes, lib. 8.

11.
Our holy and our beautiful house, where our fathers praised thee, is burnt up
with fire] q. d. Thy beautiful Temple, which was the place to which we and our
fathers resorted to worship thee, is burnt up with fire.

All our pleasant things are laid wast] By pleasant things, may be meant the
Kings Palaces, and the Palaces of the Nobles, with all other the stately houses
of their great men, and the Orchards, Gardens, and places of delight thereunto
appertaining.

Or by their pleasant things, may be meant, Those rare pieces of workmanship
which were about the Temple. Or else, thereby may be meant, their Synagogues,
wherein their fathers delighted to meet, for Gods service.

12.
Will thou refrain thy self for these things] q. d. And they which did these
things were the Babylonians, will thou therefore refrain thy self from taking
vengeance of the Babylonians, for doing these things?

Will thou hold thy peace?] q. d. Will thou hold thy peace at the Babylonians
which did these things, and will thou not rebuke them?

And afflict us very sore?] q. d. And will thou afflict us very sore, who have
not done any such things as these are, but suffered all this at the hands of
the Babylonians.

He lays open the sins and outrages of the Babylonians, that he might provoke
God to punish them, because by their punishment the Jews were like to speed the
better, as the event showed: For when God punished the Babylonians by Cyrus,
the Jews obtained their freedom again.

ISAIAH, CHAP. LXV.
I Am sought of them that asked not for me,] This has good connection with the
former Chapter: and this Verse contains the gracious Answer of God to that
prayer which was there made to him in person of a Jew which was in captivity:
For here he tells him, that he has them that shall do all his pleasure, in
punishing the Babylonians, and in redeeming his people the Jews, which was the
chief subject of that prayer.

I am sought of them that asked not for me,] i. e. They have light upon my will
and pleasure (to do it) that never enquired after it, as if they had enquired
after it.

Note first, that God is put here, by a Metonymy, for the will and pleasure of
God: As when we say, Abraham obeyed God, for Abraham obeyed the will of God,
etc.

Note secondly, that he says, I am sought for I am found out, or my will is
found out; or, they have light upon will and pleasure, as if they had sought
for it, per Metonymiam Antecedentis: For seeking goes before finding out: So
is this word seeking also taken for to get, Eccles. 3.6. by the same figure.

Now if ye ask, who they were which sought, that is, which found out, and light
upon the will and pleasure of God, as if they had sought it; I say, that it was
Cyrus, and the Medes and Persians under him: For thus does God say of Cyrus, He
shall perform all my pleasure, Cap. 44.28.

If you ask, what this will and pleasure of God was; The answer is, That it
was, that Cyrus should tread down the Babylonians, Isai. 41.25. And that he
should redeem the Jews out of captivity, Cap. 45.4. And that he should build up
the Temple, Cap. 44.28.

If you ask, whether Cyrus knew that this was the determinate will of God or
no, when he light upon it; I answer, At first it is probable he did not; but
before he had performed all the Lords pleasure, he did; as appears, 2 Chronicles.
36.23. Ezra 1.1, 2, etc. And Josephus, in the eleventh Book of his Antiquities,
cap. 1. reports, that Cyrus read what was written of him in Isaiah, Cap. 45.
whereby Cyrus was stirred up to perform the Lords will, in subduing Babylon,
redeeming the Jews, and building the Temple, etc.

That asked not after me,] i. e. That enquired not what my will was.

Cyrus, and the Medes and Persians under him, which did perform the pleasure of
God, did not ask what the pleasure and will of God was, that they should
perform it; for they did not so much as know God at the first, Isai. 45.4. And
afterward, when the Priests of the Lord acquainted Cyrus with the will and
pleasure of the Lord concerning him, they did it without his asking; for he did
not so much as dream of any such thing.

I am found of them that sought me not,] This is an illustration of the former
sentence, as also a repetition thereof; with which kind of repetition our
Prophet is much delighted.

I said, Behold me, behold me, to a Nation that was not called by my Name.] q.
d. I said, to a Nation that I owned not, and took not for a peculiar people, as
I did the Jews, Behold me: Supple, For I will bless thee, and make thy way
prosperous: Behold me; Supple, For I will bless thee, and make thy way
prosperous.

The Nation or Nations here spoken of (for Nation may be put for Nations,
collective) were they which served Cyrus in his expedition against Babylon,
whom God blessed, and to whom he made great promises in Cyrus, cap. 45.2, 3, 4,
etc.

That was not cal^ed by my Name,] i. e. That is not mine; that is, not mine by
peculiar choice, as the Jews were.

Concerning this phrase, see Cap. 63. verse. 19.

Note, that Cyrus and the Persians lighting upon the Will of God here, and
doing it, were a type of the Gentiles embracing the Gospel (which is the Will
of God concerning man) and walking according to it: And therefore the Apostle,
in the second and sublime sense, makes use of this Verse, to show, that the
believing of the Gentiles was foretold of old, Romans 10.20.

2.
I have spread out my hand all the day long to a rebellious people,] i. e. I
have spread out my hand all the day long to my people the Jews, which are a
stubborn and a rebellious people, etc.

In the first Verse, the Lord showed that he had heard the prayer which was
made to him (in the two former Chapters) and that the Medes and Persians should
perform his pleasure, concerning the overthrow of the Babylonians, and the
redemption of the Jews, according to that prayer. But lest any one should think
that he intended to redeem the wicked and irrepentant Jews, he shows here,
that he had no such intent; but because the greatest part of the Jews were
wicked and irrepentant, he would take vengeance of them to the full, and
destroy them; yet he would redeem the better part, to wit, those which were
sorry for their sins, and were mindful of his service.

I have spread out my hands -- to a rebellious people,] i. e. I have invited a
people to come unto me, and have spread out my hands, as being ready to receive
them in mine arms, but they would not come unto me.

Or thus; I have preached to my people the Jews, and called upon them to repent
and turn from their evil ways, but they would not hear.

Because the spreading out of the hands was a gesture which was wont to be used
by those which preached to the people, either to raise attention, as Acts 26.1.
or to move affection: The spreading out of the hands may be put here for
preaching.

All the day long] q. d. Without ceasing.

To a rebellious people,] This people were that part of the Jews which would
not accept of Gods invitation, nor give ear when he preached to them by his
Prophets, but would run on still in their transgressions.

Note here, that these rebellious Jews, which would not accept of Gods
invitation, nor hear him when he preached unto them by his Prophets, were a
type of those obstinate and unbelieving Jews, which would not believe the
Gospel, when the Gospel was preached unto them, Romans 10.21.

That walks in a way that is not good,] i. e. Which do that which is evil.

After their own thoughts.] i. e. That walks after their own lusts.

3.
A people that provokes me to anger] Supple, By their sins.

To my face,] The Lord speaks here of himself, as of a man, to show their
impudency in sinning, and the greatness of their provocation: For men are more
provoked with that contumely which is done to their face, then with that which
is done behind their back: And they are more impudent in sin, which commit sin
before the face of one that looks on, then which commit it in private, where
they are not seen.

That sacrifices in Gardens,] Idolaters were wont to sacrifice in Gardens, and
in Groves; and it seems the Jews, many of them, did so sacrifice, while they
were captives in Babylon, contrary to Gods command, Deuteronomy. 12.13, 14.

And burns incense upon Altars of brick.] This was contrary to the words of
God, Exodus 30. v. 1. Howsoever, they sinned by burning Incense out of the
Temple.

4.
Which remain among the graves,] They did remain among the graves, that they
might consult with evil spirits which haunt those places: Or that they might
use some kind of Necromancy or other, which was forbidden, Deuteronomy. 18.11.

And lodge in the monuments,] This is a repetition of the foregoing sentence:
For sepulchers are called monuments, because of the monuments which are there
erected to the memory of the dead.

Which eat Swines flesh,] Contrary to the Law, Levit. 11.7. Deuteronomy. 14.8.

And broth of abominable things is in their vessels.] i. e. And which have in
their vessels broth made of the flesh of unclean beasts, such as were forbidden
to be eaten, Levit. 11. and Deuter. 14. and therefore were abominable for a man
to eat.

5.
Which say,] Supple, To other men, notwithstanding their own wickedness,
Hypocrites as they are.

Stand by thy self,] i. e. Keep off.

Come not near to me,] Supple, To pollute me with thy company.

These are a smoke in my nose,] i. e. These are a vexation to me, as smoke is
to the eyes or the nose of a man.

A fire that burns all the day,] i. e. Such as kindle my wrath by their
wickedness continually, or such as vex me all the day long.

He likeneth these men to fire, either because they did kindle Gods wrath
against themselves, as fire kindles the wood: Or else, because as fire raises
a smoke, which vexes the eyes and nose of a man; so did they commit sins
daily, by which they did vex the Holy One of Israel.

6.
It is written before me,] i. e. That which these men have done, and do do,
shall not be forgotten, but I will keep it in continual remembrance.

He alludeth to the Books of Records which Kings use to have, and to read in,
as E^th. 6.1.

This Particle, It, is a Relative without any formal Antecedent, which is a
thing frequent with the Hebrews: Or it relates to all the sins before
mentioned, without observing the number.

I will not keep silence,] Supple, But will rebuke them in my fierce anger.

Gods rebuke goes not with his actual afflicting and punishing: and therefore
though rebuke with men signifies but words, yet with God it signifies deeds
also.

But will recompense,] Supple, Their iniquities, as it follows in the next
verse; that is, I will pay them as much punishment as their sins deserve.

Even recompense into their bosom,] By the bosom is meant the lap; And he
alludeth to an householder paying his laborer his wages in corn, which corn the
laborer takes of him in the lap of his garment, and so carries it to his own
home: For in those days men went in loose garments, as well as women, though
different in fashion.

7.
Your iniquities,] i. e. Their iniquities.

These words relate to the word recompense in the former Verse.

Note here the confusion of the persons, how he confounds the second person
with the third, and says, Your for their iniquities. The like we read cap.
1.29.

And the iniquities of your fathers together] i. e. And the iniquities of their
fathers together.

A question will here presently arise, How it can stand with the Justice of
God, to punish the iniquities of the fathers upon their children?

Answ. God is said to punish the iniquities of the fathers upon their children,
not because he lays more upon their children, then their children deserve by
their own proper sins: but because, being they are wicked children, of wicked
Parents, he does not deal so mercifully with them, as if they were the children
of pious Parents: For though the sins of children be equal, yet God does often
punish the children of pious Parents with a great deal more mercy then he does
the children of wicked Parents, even for their Parents sake: And thus to punish
the iniquities of the fathers upon their children, may very well stand with the
Justice of God.

Which have burnt incense upon the mountains,] He speaks of those which lived
in the days of Amaziah, 2 Chronicles. 25.14. and in the days of Manasseh: For note,
that he speaks to the Jews, as if they were even then in captivity.

And blasphemed me upon the hills,] Supple, By the sacrifices and worship which
they have given to other gods.

The blasphemy here spoken of, is a blasphemy of deeds, not of words: For by
sacrificing to, and worshipping other gods, they gave Divinity, which is due
only to the God of Israel, to Gods of their own invention; by which they said
in effect, That not the holy One of Israel, but they whom they worshipped, and
to whom they did sacrifice, were the true Gods. Yet at the doing of such
sacrifices, the Lord was blasphemed in word too: For the Idolaters, which lived
about Judea, were wont to ascribe their wealth and their victories to their
Idols, and to mock the holy One of Israel; whose custom these men imitated.

Therefore will I measure their former work into their bosom,] i. e. Yea, I
will repay the wages due to the works of their Fathers into the bosom of them
their children.

The work is put here for the wages due to the work, per Metonymiam
efficientis: And therefore is to be taken for Yea.

He alludeth to an householder paying his laborer in corn for his wages, which
corn he measures to him, etc. See Notes, verse. 6.

Their former works] He means the punishment due to the sins of the fathers;
which sins, because they were before the sins of the children, are therefore
called former works.

Into their bosom.] i. e. Into the bosom of those which are their children.

See concerning this phrase, verse. 6.

8.
Thus says the Lord,] i. e. Yet for all this, Thus says the Lord.

Note, that the Particle Yet is here to be understood.

As the new wine is found in the cluster,] That is, As some good grapes are
found in a cluster of naughty grapes.

By new wine are meant good grapes, which have in them, and will yield good new
wine, per Metonymiam Continentis or Efficientis: And by the cluster is meant a
cluster of naughty grapes, in which most of the grapes are naught, and which
the Lord of the Vineyard is ready to fling away.

And one says,] i. e. And one which sees the new wine, that is, the good
grapes in the cluster, which the Master of the Vineyard is ready to fling away,
says,

Destroy it not,] q. d. Fling it not away.

For a blessing is in it:] i. e. For there is new wine in it; that is, there
are some grapes in it which will yield good wine.

What he called new wine before, he calls a blessing now; for whatsoever is
conducible to the life of man, the Hebrews call a blessing. See Deuteronomy. 28.2.
Joel 2.14.

So will I do] Between these and the former words, understand these or the like
words; And thereupon the Lord of the Vineyard picketh off from the naughty
cluster the good grapes, which will yield good wine, and reserveth them.

So will I do] i. e. So will I gather those which are good out of this
rebellious people.

For my servants sake,] See Cap. 63.17.

That I may not destroy them all.] i. e. That I may not destroy all the people
of the Jews, but save a remnant of them.

9.
And I will bring forth a seed out of Jacob,] i. e. For I will bring out of
those Jews which are captives in Babylon a remnant, and that remnant will I
place again in their own Land.

And is put here for For.

By a seed he means a little remnant, or small number of the Jews, which God
would save, though he destroyed the rest: And those few he calls a seed,
because a seed is but a little thing in respect of the whole plant: and also
because he would so bless them, as that they should multiply and increase, and
become a great Nation, as great store of fruit and great trees spring out of a
little seed.

By Jacob are meant the Jews, the children of Jacob, per Metonymiam Efficientis.

And out of Judah,] i. e. Out of the Jews, which were the children of Judah.

By Judah are meant the Jews, which were the children of Judah, who was the son
of Jacob, Genesis 49.1, 8.

An inheritor of my mountains,] i. e. A seed, or a remnant, which shall inherit
the mountains of Judea.

Judea was a mountainous Country, therefore he puts the mountains for the
whole Land of Judah by a Synecdoche: and God calls that Land his Land,
because he kept a peculiar right in it. See Cap. 63.17.

And mine Elect] i. e. For those which I make choice of to inherit my
mountains, which are such as fear me, and have sought me.

And for For, as before.

Shall inherit it,] i. e. Shall inherit my mountains, or my Land.

Note here the Enallage of the numbers, how he changes the plural into a
singular number.

And my servants] i. e. And they which worship me and serve me.

Shall dwell there.] Supple, In peace and in rest, though now they are captives
in Babylon, and there oppressed.

These did God bring out of Babylon, and seat in this Land, by Cyrus, Ezra 1.

10.
And Sharon shall be a field of flocks,] i. e. And Sharon (though it be now
desolate and without cattle) shall abound so with sheep for their sakes, as
that it shall be as one great fold of sheep; it shall be so full of sheep, as
sheepfolds use to be.

Concerning Sharon, see cap. 35.2. And the valley of Achor a place for herds to
lie down in] The valley of Achor was a fruitful valley near Jericho, where
Achan was stoned to death, Josh. 7.25, 26. This valley the Lord says shall
become a fruitful walk, for cattle to walk, and quietly to lie down in, though
at the time he speaks it was desolate, through the desolation that the
Babylonians had made.

For my people that have sought me.] i. e. For the good of my people, which
have sought me in their affliction.

This he adds, lest that that fertility which he speaks of may be thought to be
intended for the good of the Babylonians, and others under them, which
inhabited the Land of Judah, during the time that the Jews were captives in
Babylon, and not for the Jews.

11.
But ye are they which forsake the Lord] The Lord makes this Apostrophe to the
wicked part of the Jews which were in captivity, and he speaks of himself in
the third person.

That forget my holy mountain,] i. e. That forget my Temple where I was wont to
be worshipped, and mourn not for the destruction thereof.

By the holy mountain is meant Mount Sion, and by that the Temple of God which
was built thereon, per Metonymiam Subjecti or Continentis.

Therefore are they said to forget the holy mountain, or Temple of God, because
they did not remember that that was the only place where they ought to
sacrifice, Deuteronomy. 12.14, 15. and that that was the holy place where they ought
to keep their solemn and religious Feasts to the Lord, Deuteronomy. 16.13, 14, 15, 16.
and because they were not moved, nor did mourn for the destruction thereof. See
cap. 66.10.

That prepare a table for that troop,] i. e. That make a Feast in honor of the
Stars.

He pointed as it were with his fingers toward the Stars, when he said, that
troop: and he calls the Stars a troop, because they were many; and says, that
troop, in contempt of them, to think, that they should be esteemed as gods.

Note, that Feasts were wont to accompany all solemn sacrifices; and it may be
that such Feasts are here meant: But Idolaters had other Feasts also, in honor
of their Idols, which did not relate to any sacrifice, as may appear Judge.
9.27. And of these kind of Feasts may this place be understood.

And that furnish the drink-offering] i. e. And that provide a plentiful
drink offering.

To that number.] i. e. In honor of the Stars, which he calls a number,
because they were many in number.

12.
Therefore will I number you to the sword,] q. d. Because ye are they that
furnish the drink offering to that number, therefore will I give you all over
to the sword by tale, or by number, to be slain by it, so as that not one of
you shall escape.

He speaks here of the sword as of a person, by a Prosopopoeia: Or takes the
sword by a Metonymy, for the Soldier that uses the sword.

Observe the Paranomasia here from the former Verse, or the playing (as I may
so speak) in the word number.

And ye shall all bow down to the slaughter,] q.d. And as ye did bow down to
that troop, and that number, that is, to the Stars; so shall ye bow down to the
slaughter, either voluntarily to beg your lives at her hands, or against your
wills, when ye shall not only bow down, but fall down flat at her feet dead,
in your blood.

He speaks of slaughter here as of a person, by a Prosopopoeia: Or else by the
slaughter he means the slayer, by a Metonymy.

Because when I called, ye did not answer; when I spoke, ye did not hear:] He
gives another reason here, why he would number them to the sword, and make
them to bow down to the slaughter; and this their sin he threateneth with
another judgment, verse. 13.

When I called,] Supple, To you by my Proph^ts.

He alludeth to a master calling his servant, when he would have him to do any
thing for him.

Ye did not answer,] He alludeth to servants, which if they are dutiful, are at
hand, and ready to answer when their masters call.

But did evil before mine eyes,] i. e. But for all my calling and my speaking,
did evil before my face.

And did choose that wherein I delighted not.] i. e. And did choose that, from
which I was so far from taking delight in, as that I abhorred it, as being sin.

Here is a (...) or a (...) in these words, wherein I delighted not.

13.
My servants,] i. e. They which harkened to my voice, and sought me.

Shall eat,] i. e. Shall have plenty of food, and that in their own Land.

Shall rejoice,] Supple, Because of the prosperity which I will give them in
their own Land.

But ye shall be ashamed.] Supple, Because of the vile condition which ye shall
be in, in the Land of your captivity.

15.
And ye shall leave your name for a curse unto my chosen,] q. d. And so
miserable shall ye be, as that my Elect, when they take an Oath, and in their
Oath, shall wish evil unto themselves, if they do not as they say: they shall
wish that evil unto themselves, as shall befall you, saying, v. g. If I do not
as I say, let that misery befall me, which befell those captive Jews, which
would not harken unto the voice of the Lord in Babylon.

My chosen,] i. e. Mine Elect, verse. 9.

For the Lord God shall slay thee,] i. e. For the Lord God shall slay you.

A singular is put here for a plural number.

The slaughter here spoken of was executed upon these men by the Medes and
Persians under Cyrus, who slew them among the Babylonians which were slain.

And call his servants by another name,] q. d. And when he has slain you, he
shall call them which have harkened to his voice by another name.

This other name which the Lord would give unto his servants, was Amen, that
is, truth, that is, stability: That whereas they were now called tossed with
tempest, as cap. 54.11. and removing to and fro, as cap. 49.21. they should be
no more so called: But from henceforth they should be called Truth, that is,
stability, because of the stability which they should enjoy in their own Land.

That Amen, that is, truth or stability, is the name which the Lord would here
give unto his servants, appears by the following Verse.

Note, that when the Lord gave these his servants this name, he gave them also
the thing signified by the name, as he gave it to Jerusalem, when he called her
Hepzibah; and as he gave it to her Land, when he called it Beulah, cap. 62.4.
Yea rather the Lord gave these his servants that thing which might be the
foundation of this name: For then is the Lord said to call a man so and so,
when he gives them those gifts for which he might be so or so called. See cap.
9.6.

The meaning of this place then is this; That when these men were slain, he
would bring those which had harkened to his voice to a far better condition and
estate then they enjoyed at the present: And whereas they were tossed to and
fro in the Land of their captivity, he would bring them to their own Land
again, and there establish them in rest and quiet.

16.
That he that blesses himself in the Earth, shall bless himself in the God of
Truth,] i. e. So that he that blesses himself in the Earth, shall bless
himself by the God of Truth, saying, Bless me I pray thee, O God of Truth; O
God of Truth, have mercy upon me.

That blesses himself] i. e. That shall desire or pray for a blessing upon
himself.

To bless a man, is to pray God for a blessing upon him, and to wish well to
him: To bless God, is to praise God, and to give him thanks for his goodness.

In the Earth,] i. e. In the Land of Judah.

Here is a Synecdoche integri, where the whole Earth is put for a part, to wit,
Judea.

In the God of Truth,] That which is here rendered Truth, is in the Original
Amen: which word is not an Adverb, but a Noun, and signifies Truth, that is,
stability.

Note here therefore, that this word Truth signifies stability in this place;
and therefore it signifies stability, because it is equivalent to the Hebrew
word Amen, which signifies not only truth, but stability also: So does the
Apostle take (...), which signifies truth, for stability, Ephesians. 4.15. as Beza
well notes upon that place.

God is called here the God of truth, that is, of stability, because he showed
himself to be the God of these his servants, which he called truth or
stability, by giving them stability in their own Land, when as they had been
tossed with tempest, and removing to and fro in the Land of their captivity.

Shall swear by the God of truth,] i. e. Shall make mention of the God of truth
when he swears, saying, If I speak false, the God of truth deal so and so
with me.

Because the former troubles are forgotten,] i. e. Because my servants shall
forget their former troubles (whereby they were tossed and carried to and fro)
as though they had never been, and shall enjoy a constant stability in their
own Land.

The Lord gives the reason here, why he would call his servants, truth; and
why he himself should be called the God of truth.

Are forgotten,] i. e. Shall be forgotten.

He puts a present for a future tense; or else these words are to be understood
as relating to the time in which men should bless themselves in the God of
truth, at which time all the trouble of these servants of the Lord should be
forgotten, as being now past.

And because they are hid from mine eyes.] Those troubles which the servants of
the Lord endured, are said to be hid from the Lords eyes, because they were
quite taken away, and brought to an end.

17.
For behold I create new Heavens, and a new Earth,] He confirms here what he
said in the former Verse, to wit, That the former troubles should be forgotten
and hid from his eyes.

When he says, that he would create new Heavens, and a new Earth, the meaning
is, That he would make a new face and state of things, far more happy, and more
glorious and desirable, then what his servants did now enjoy: He would bring
them out of such a depth of misery to such an height of happiness, as that they
should think themselves to be in a new world.

I create new Heavens,] The Lord says that he would create new Heavens,
because he would make the Heavens brighter then they were at this time: For
whereas they were now black and cloudy and lowering, he would make them bright
and clear, and full of light; so that they should appear as new Heavens.

This is an expression which the Holy Ghost often uses, when he would signify
joy and gladness, and an happy estate, which should be given to those which had
been in misery. And the ground of it seems to be, either this, That he makes
the Heavens to sympathize with men; and as to look black and dark when men are
in misery, as cap. 5.30. so to shine out when they are in prosperity, as cap.
30.26. Or this, That to the man which is of joyful heart all things seem
pleasant, whereas to him that is sorrowful all things seem sad; because we
receive and look upon things, not as they are in themselves, but as we are
affected, and as we are in our selves: When therefore God gives a joyful
heart, or that which may create joy, he may be said to create new Heavens.

And a new Earth,] This is also an expression which the Holy Ghost often uses,
when he would signify joy and gladness, and an happy estate; the ground
whereof seems to be the very same with the ground of the former expression:
To which we may add, That at this time the Land of Judah lay waste and
desolate, which should be tilled and manured, and look as though it were not
the same Land, when the Lord should bring his people again out of Babylon into
that their own Land.

Note here, that the Holy Ghost seems to use such high expressions for such
mean things, because such mean things were types of greater things, yea such
things as these expressions signify, (...).

And the former shall not be remembered, or come into mind.] i. e. And so
glorious shall the new Heavens and the new Earth be over the old, as that the
old shall not be remembered or thought of; that is, So far shall the new face
and state of things be above the old, as that the old shall be quite forgotten.

18.
But be ye glad and rejoice, etc.] The Lord makes an Apostrophe here to his
servants which harkened unto his voice, whereas he spoke from the eleventh
verse hitherto, to them which forsook his Law.

But be ye glad,] Note, that this Adversative Particle But relates to those
Judgments which the Lord threatened to those which forsook his Law, in the
twelfth Verse and forward: q. d. I said to them which forsake my Law, that I
would number them to the sword, etc. But notwithstanding be ye glad.

For ever,] Ever among the Hebrews is often put to signify only a long time.

Which I create,] i. e. In that great thing which I will do.

The Hebrews use this word create, of every great and notable work of God.

I create Jerusalem a rejoicing,] i. e. I will make Jerusalem exceeding joyful.

He puts a rejoicing for exceeding joyful, an Abstract for a Concrete; and this
he does often: And when he puts an Abstract thus for a Concrete, he would
signify an excess of what he speaks of.

He speaks also of Jerusalem here as of a woman, by a Prosopopoeia.

Her people a joy,] i. e. And the people which dwell in her exceeding glad.

Here is an Abstract again put for a Concrete.

19.
I will rejoice in Jerusalem,] i. e. I will rejoice and take delight in
Jerusalem to do her good. See Deuteronomy. 28.63.

And the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her.] q. d. And though
there has been heard the voice of weeping and mourning, and lamenting in
Jerusalem, caused by the Babylonians; yet there shall be no more such a voice
heard in her.

20.
There shall be no more thence an Infant of days,] i. e. There shall be no more
carried out of Jerusalem to the grave, an Infant dying in his Infancy.

The Lord does here begin to tell what blessings he would bestow upon his
servants, after their return out of their captivity into their own Land again;
The first whereof is long life, a blessing desired of all, and a blessing like
to that, Exodus 23.26. The number of thy days will I fulfill.

Nor an old man that has not fulfilled his days,] i. e. Nor shall a man,
though he be come to the verge of old age, be carried out of Jerusalem to the
grave, until he has come to the extremity of old age: that is, neither shall a
man dye in Jerusalem, though he be old, before he be exceeding old.

An old man] Note, that the old man here is opposed to an Infant, and so
signifies not a very old man, but one that may be called an old man in respect
of an In^ant; or one that is on the verge only of old age.

That has not filled his days,] He calls those a man's days, which are
requisite to the making up of a good old age, and which a man might reach to by
the course of Nature, if no casualty did cut him off, which ordinarily are an
hundred years, as the next words show.

For the child shall dye an hundred years old,] i. e. For the child shall
live an hundred years, before he dies.

But the sinner being an hundred years old, shall be accursed,] He prevents an
Objection here: For whereas God promises here the blessing of long life only
unto his servants, and would have it taken as a peculiar blessing to them, so
that the sinners should have no part in it; It might be objected, That this is
not such a peculiar and special blessing of the righteous, or of his servants,
as he would make it to be; for the sinners also fulfill their days, and live an
hundred years. The Lord therefore prevents this Objection, saying, that though
the sinner lives till he be an hundred years old, yet he shall be accursed;
and therefore accursed, because in his life time the plagues of God shall fall
upon him, and in his death he shall be taken away with an unusual destruction.
See Job 21. v. 7, 8, etc. to verse. 20.

Note therefore, that it is not only a long life which the Lord here promises
to his servants, but a blessed long life, a life which shall be accompanied
with length of joy and happiness.

And they shall build houses,] i. e. And my people shall build houses.

And inhabit them,] i. e. And shall live to inhabit them.

And eat the fruit thereof.] i. e. And shall live to eat the fruit thereof.

22.
For as the days of a tree are the days of my people,] i. e. For my people
shall live as long as the tree which they shall plant; so that they which plant
the tree, shall live to eat all the fruit thereof.

Are the days of my people,] i. e. The days of my people shall be.

A present is put here for a future tense.

Mine Elect] See Verse. 9.

Mine Elect shall long enjoy the work of their hands.] i. e. Mine Elect shall
live long, that they may long inhabit the houses which they shall build.

23.
They shall not labor in vain,] i. e. They shall not build houses which they
shall not enjoy, nor plant Vineyards which they shall not eat, (for this would
be labor in vain, which was a curse which God threatened to the wicked, Levit.
26.16. and Deuteronomy. 28.30.)

Nor bring forth for trouble,] i. e. Neither shall they bring forth children,
whose untimely death shall bring them sorrow and trouble of mind.

This is a short repetition of what he said in the three foregoing verses.

They are the seed of the blessed of the Lord,] i. e. They are the true
children of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob, whom the Lord blessed in
themselves; and in their seed, as well as in themselves.

And their offspring with them.] q. d. And so are their children as well as
they: wherefore they also shall live to build and to plant, and to enjoy what
they builded and planted.

24.
And it shall come to pass before they call I will answer.] i. e. And if any
evil befall them, I will take it away before they complain.

This is another blessing which the Lord promises his people, after their
return out of captivity.

25.
The Wolf and the Lamb shall feed together,] See cap. 11.6.

The Lion shall eat straw like the Bullock,] See cap. 11.7.

And dust shall be the Serpents meat,] i. e. And the Serpent shall live upon
the dust only, so that he shall be contented with that, and shall not fasten
upon man to do him any harm, nor yet upon any beast.

That Serpents live upon the dust, see Genesis 3.14.

They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain.] See cap. 11.9.

This Verse contains another blessing, which the Lord promises his people
after their captivity, which is this, That they shall live peaceably and
quietly in their Land, without any fear of violence: there shall be no robbers,
no man-slayers there.

ISAIAH, CHAP. LXVI.
THus says the Lord, The Heaven is my throne, and the Earth is my footstool;
where is the house that ye build for me?] This may be very well continued with
the former Chapter; For whereas the Lord found fault with the wicked and
hypocritical part of the Jews, which were in captivity, for that they forsook
him, and forgot his holy mountain, etc. Cap. 65.11. and threatened them
grievously in the former Chapter; They were ready to clear themselves, and to
plead not guilty, and to show that they were faithful servants of the Lord; and
to say, That whereas they did frequent the Temple, and did offer their due
sacrifices while the Temple stood, and they were suffered to live in the Land
of Judah: So, if ever they should come into that Land again, they would build
up the Temple which the Babylonians had destroyed, and would offer sacrifices
to the Lord, as they were wont to do: The Lord therefore, in the beginning of
this Capter, takes away these vain arguments of theirs, and shows, that to
build him a Temple was not such an acceptable piece of service as they deemed,
nor would he take pleasure in their sacrifices, being they were such men as
they were, that is, Idolatrous and wicked men.

The Heaven is my throne,] The Heaven is my Chair of state, whereon I sit.

And the Earth is my footstool,] i. e. And the Earth is my stool on which I
rest my feet.

When he says, The Heaven is my throne, and the Earth is my footstool; he
alludeth to the manner of earthly Kings, who as they had glorious thrones to
sit on; so had they their footstools (though not so glorious) to rest their
feet upon: And the Lord is here compared to a man of an immense greatness; for
he must needs be of an immense greatness, who is so big as to sit upon the
Heavens as his seat, and to rest his feet upon the Earth as his footstool; for
so his upper parts must be higher by much, then the highest Heavens.

Where is the house that ye build unto me?] i. e. Where then shall that house
be, which ye say you will build for me? for Heaven and Earth are not able to
contain an house big enough to contain me.

Here is a present tense twice put for a future.

This people (which said, that if they did ever return into their own Land, the
Land of Judah, they would build the Lord an House or Temple, because the
Babylonians had burned down the first first Temple which Solomon built) being
inured to Idols and Idolatry, conceived that the Lord would be contained in his
House or Temple, as their Idols were in their Houses or Temples: Therefore the
Lord says thus unto them; The Heaven is my throne, the Earth is my footstool;
where therefore is the House that ye build unto me? etc.

And where is the place of my rest?] i. e. And where shall be the place of the
Temple, which ye said ye would build unto me?

This is a repetition of the former sentence: And as there, so here, a present
is put for a future tense.

By Gods rest is meant the Temple of God, which may be so called in allusion to
that, that it is called Gods rest, Psalm. 132.8. and it is there called Gods
rest, in opposition to the Tabernacle of the Lord which moved up and down,
whereas the Temple stood firm and fixed in one place.

In allusion, I say, to that place of the Psalms, Psalm. 132.8. may the Temple
be called Gods rest: and because the Temple is so called in the Psalms, this
people might call the Temple, which they said they would build, Gods Rest: and
the Lord, in imitation of them, might by a (...), say, as he does here, And
where is the place of my Rest?

2.
For all these things has mine hand made,] i. e. Moreover all these things,
supple, which ye see, have I made.

For is put here for Moreover: and the hand, which is but a part, is put here,
by a Synecdoche, for the whole man; for God speaks here of himself, as of a
man, by a Prosopopoeia.

And all those things have been,] i. e. And all these things have continued
from the Creation, Supple, by the supportment of my hand.

If the Lord made all things, and sustained them ever since; then cannot man
make a Temple to the Lord of any thing which was not his own before; then can
he not make him a Temple worthy of his honor; then does not the Lord need any
Temple of man's building: And so their work wo^ld not be so acceptable to the
Lord as they imagined: nay, the Lord would not regard a Temple of their
building, being they were wicked men, and delighted in their abominations.

But to this man will I look, even to him that is of a poor and contrite
spirit,] Between this and the former Verse understand these or the like words,
I will not therefore have any regard to you, though ye do build me a Temple: q.
d. I will not therefore have any regard to you, though ye do build me a Temple;
but to him only will I look, even to him that is of a poor and a contrite
spirit.

To this man will I look,] Supple, With a pleasing and delightful countenance.

That is of a poor and contrite spirit,] See cap. 57.15. But what he calls poor
here, he calls humble there; for the humble man is always poor in his own
conceit.

And trembles at my Word.] i. e. And trembles at those words of threatening
wherewith I threaten the transgressors of my Law, and so is afraid to
transgress my Law.

3.
He that kills an Ox is as if he slew a man,] q. d. They say, that when they
come into their own Land, that Land of Judah again, and have built me a Temple
there, that they will serve me with their sacrifices again, as they were wont:
But whosoever he be among them that kills an Ox in sacrifice to me, shall be
to me as abominable as if he slew a man, which to do is plain murder, which I
will not suffer to go unrevenged.

Note here the Enallage of the person, for he speaks of them here in the third
person, to whom he spoke in the second, Verse. 1.

He that sacrifices a Lamb, as if a he cut off a dogs neck,] A dog was
accounted so unclean and base a creature among the Hebrews, as that the price
of a dog was not to be brought into the House of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 23.18.
Abominable therefore must he needs be, that would cut off a dogs neck, thereby
to sacrifice to the Lord.

He that offered an Oblation, as if he offered Swines blood,] By the Oblation
here mentioned is meant a meat offering, which was of meal either raw or
dressed; of which Levit. 2.

To offer Swines blood for an Oblation, was unlawful, and so abominable, two
ways; first, as it was blood; secondly, as it was Swines blood: for no blood
was to be offered as an Oblation; for Oblations were to be only of meal, wine,
and oil, Levit. 2. And the blood of every beast which a man killed was to be
poured on the ground, Levit. 17.13. And as for Swine, they were neither
permitted in Gods public service, or man's private use, Levit. 11.7.

He that burns Incense as if he blessed an Idol,] i. e. He that burns
Incense to me, shall be as abominable, as if he blessed an Idol.

That burns Incense,] He alludeth to that burning of Incense, or
Frankincense, which is mentioned Levit. 2.2.

As if he blessed an Idol,] i. e. As if he did burn Incense, and sing praises
to an Idol.

Note, that Idolaters, at the time that they burned Incense to their Idols, did
sing hymns and songs in praise of their Idols, which is called blessing their
Idols; and is that to which the Prophet here alludeth.

Yea, they have chosen their own ways,] i. e. Because they have forsaken those
ways which I commanded them, and have chosen them ways of their own, which they
think best of, to walk in, such ways as are mentioned Cap. 65.3, 4, 5.

Note, that Yea is put here for Because; for this contains a reason why any
of them, if he killed an Ox, should be as abominable as if he should slay a man.

And their Soul delights in their abominations.] i. e. And they delight in
their abominable sins, such as those are which are mentioned Cap. 65.3, 4, 5.

4.
I also will choose their delusions, and bring their fears upon them,] q. d.
But because they have chosen their own ways, I will choose also, but I will
choose their delusions: And because their Soul delights in their abominations,
I will cross their delight, and bring their fears upon them.

For understanding of these words, know this, that the Babylonians did promise
those captive Jews, which would comply with them in their wicked Religion, and
their abominations, more favor then they would show to others: whereupon the
ungodly party of the Jews, fearing that they should never be delivered out of
captivity, and that the Babylonians would oppress them every day more and more,
because the Lord sent his Prophets to the Jews to tell them that he would
deliver them out of Babylon; as Pharaoh did the more afflict the Israelites in
Egypt, because Moses came with a message from God concerning their deliverance;
They did comply with the Babylonians in their Religion, and their abominations:
And because the Babylonians did sacrifice in Gardens, and burn Incense upon
Altars of brick, they also would sacrifice in Gardens, and burn Incense upon
Altars of brick, Cap. 65.3. And because the Babylonians did prepare a Table,
and furnish a drink offering to the Host of Heaven; they also would prepare a
Table to that troop, and furnish a drink offering to that number, Cap. 65.11.
And because the Babylonians did use Sorceries and Necromancy, they also would
do the like, Cap. 65.4. And because the Babylonians did eat all unclean meats,
they also would eat them, Cap. 65.4. thinking by this means to gain the favor
of the Babylonians, and to prevent the miseries which they feared. Because the
Babylonians promised them, that they would deal better with them, if they would
comply with them in these things, then they would with other Jews, which would
not comply with them: Therefore the Lord threateneth them with this, That by
doing this wickedness they should gain nothing, but should be deluded by the
Babylonians: For notwithstanding this their complying with the Babylonians in
these their abominations, and the Babylonians promise, the Babylonians should
afflict them, and should deal as bad with them as with others.

I will choose their delusions,] i. e. I will choose this, That they shall be
deluded by the Babylonians.

How they should be deluded by the Babylonians, I said immediately before.

Note, that this word Delusions is to be taken here, not in an active, but in a
passive sense or signification: And they are called their delusions, not
because they did delude others thereby, but because they were thereby deluded
themselves.

And will bring their fears upon them,] q. d. And whereas they are afraid that
they shall never be delivered out of Babylon, and that their misery will be day
by day greater in the Land of their captivity, (and therefore they strive to
prevent these their fears by complying with the Babylonians in their
abominations, they shall not prevent them, but for all their abominations) I
will bring their fears upon them.

I will bring their fears upon them,] i. e. I will bring those things upon them
which they are afraid of; and then their delight shall come to an end.

Note, that the word Fears is to be taken here objective, for the things
feared: And where such things befall a man, he can have no pleasure or delight
in any thing.

Because when I called, etc.] He adds another reason here why he would choose
their delusions, and bring their fears upon them.

When I called none did answer,] See cap. 65.12.

5.
Hear the Word of the Lord ye that tremble at his Word,] q. d. But as for you
which tremble at the Word of the Lord, hear the word of comfort which the Lord
speaks unto you.

Ye that tremble at his Word,] See Notes, verse. 2.

Your Brethren that hated you.] By these their Brethren he means those
ungodly Jews to whom and of whom he spoke in the four first Verses, whom he
calls their Brethren, because they were all brethren according to the flesh,
and were all descended from the same Fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who
for all this did hate these their brethren which feared the Lord.

That cast you out, etc.] Viz. Of their company, as though ye were impure, and
would defile them, if you drew nigh to them, and did converse with them. See
Cap. 65.5.

For my Names sake,] i. e. For my sake: that is, because ye cleave to my
Commandments, and live according to them.

Said] Supple, In derision and mockery of you.

Let the Lord be glorified,] Though the ungodly party of the Jews did not
believe that the Lord could deliver those which were in captivity in Babylon
out of their captivity, yet most of the godly party did, and out of the fullness
of their heart did often say, that the Lord would be glorified in their
deliverance, according to what the Lord said by his Prophet, cap. 44.23. and
cap. 60.21. The ungodly party therefore (which hated the godly party, as for
other things, so for this, that they believed that the Lord would deliver them
out of the hands of the Babylonians) because they themselves could not think
it, were wont to mock the godly party with this saying, Let the Lord be
glorified, Supple, In your deliverance, as though they believed, and looked for
that which God could not do.

But he shall appear to your joy,] i. e. But he shall show himself in your
deliverance, to your joy.

And they shall be ashamed.] To wit, That they mocked you with this saying, Let
God be glorified, when they shall see that God has delivered you to his glory.

6.
A voice of noise from the City, a voice from the Temple,] q. d. I hear a voice
of a noise of rejoicing, from the City of Jerusalem, and a voice of singing,
and thanksgiving from the Temple.

The Prophet speaks this as if he had heard on a sudden a noise of rejoicing
made by the Jews from Jerusalem, and a noise of praise and thanksgiving made by
the Levites from the Temple, for their redemption out of the Babylonish
captivity. By which he signifies that the godly Jews should be certainly
redeemed and brought to their own Land again, and that they should build again
the waste places of Jerusalem, and that they should raise up the Temple which
the Babylonians had destroyed, and rejoice in all this.

A voice of the Lord that renders recompense to his Enemies,] q. d. I hear the
voice of the Lord, who recompenceth his Enemies according to their deserts.

In those Psalms of praise and thanksgiving which were wont to be sung in the
Temple, many passages were made and sung in the person of God triumphing over
his Enemies, and threatening them with due vengeance, as Psalm. 68.22, 23. and
132.18. and 81.14, etc. and 89.23, etc. And to such passages as these may the
Prophet allude, when he says, A voice of the Lord that rendereth recompense to
his Enemies.

Yet that which follows in the three next Verses may be the voice and song of
rejoicing which the Prophet heard, which song is sung in the person of the
Lord, or at least part thereof, as appears verse. 9. And those words, That
rendereth recompense to his Enemies, may be added here, not to denote any
passage in the song, but as an Epithet of the Lord, an Epithet opportunely
added, because the wicked part of the Jews thought that God was not able to
punish the Babylonians.

But if the song here sung was not sung in the person of God, yet the subject
thereof was the acts of the Lord, whatsoever the song was: And those words, Of
the Lord, may as well signify the subject matter, as the Author of the voice
or song, which utters the voice, or sings the song.

That rendereth recompense to his Enemies] This is meant especially of the
Babylonians, whom the Lord accounted his Enemies, because they did use his
people the Jews with all cruelty, when they were in captivity, and upon whom he
poured out vengeance when he delivered his people by Cyrus.

Before she traveled she brought forth,] i. e. The Jews which were in
captivity, were delivered out of captivity, and brought back to Sion sooner
then any one could expect.

This is the meaning of the words, which are proverbial, and where Sion is
compared to a teeming woman, yea to a woman bringing forth before her pains
came upon her; and the Jews which were in captivity, and brought home again, to
the children brought forth by such a woman.

Note, that by she is meant Sion or Jerusalem, of which he speaks as of a
woman, by a Prosopopoeia; But the Relative, She, is put without an Antecedent,
which is a thing ordinary with the Hebrews.

Before her pain came, she was delivered of a man-child.] This is a repetition
of the former words.

Of a man-child.] The birth of a man-child makes the joy the greater, Joh.
16. verse. 21.

But whom does he mean by this man-child?

Ans. He means the whole people of the Jews; for he speaks often of a people,
as of one individual man, as Cap. 17.4. Or a man-child may be taken
collective, for men-children: q. d. Before her pain she was delivered of many
men-children.

8.
Who has heard such a thing?] q. d. Who ever heard or saw such a thing?

Who has seen such things?] i. e. Supple, as this, That a woman should bring
forth before she traveled, and that she should be delivered before she was in
pain, as Sion was; that is, That a City should be so suddenly redeemed out of
so great captivity, and so suddenly filled with people, which was so utterly
desolate before, as Jerusalem was when she was redeemed by Cyrus?

Shall the Earth be made to bring forth in one day?] i. e. Shall a Land be made
to bring forth in one day people enough to inhabit it?

The whole Earth is put, by a Synecdoche, for one Land and Country.

Or shall a Nation be born at once?] Or shall a whole Nation be suddenly born
at one birth?

For as soon as Sion traveled she brought forth her children,] i. e. Yet Sion
did all on the sudden bring forth all these her children, which are more then
enough to inhabit her, cap. 49.20.

By this Metaphor of Sion traveling and bringing forth, the Prophet means,
that Jerusalem was replenished in a moment with inhabitants, which was desolate
before, multitudes of people returning on a sudden out of Babylon into her, as
if a whole Nation had been born in her in one day.

For is put here for Yet.

A question may here be asked, How he can say, As soon as Sion traveled, she
brought forth, when as he said, verse. 7. Before she traveled she brought forth?

Ans. These two phrases are both proverbial. To bring forth before she
traveled, and To bring forth as soon as she traveled; and both these may
signify one and the same thing, viz. To bring forth of a sudden: And this is
all which is intended by this place, to wit, to show the suddenness of Sions
bringing forth her children: And therefore he may say, As soon as Sion
traveled, and Before Sion traveled she brought forth, without any
contradiction or contrariety. So Cap. 65.24. The Lord says, Before they call,
I will answer; and while they are yet speaking, I will hear: By which phrases
is only meant, that the Lord would be forward to help them when they stood in
need of him. So we read Matt. 10.10. that our Savior, when he sends forth his
Disciples, bids them carry no staves; yet Mark 6.8. our Savior tells them that
they should take nothing for their journey save a staff only; in which words
there is no contradiction, if we look to the sense: for by both phrases our
Savior intends, that his Disciples should have nothing but what was
necessary for the present: and that Matthew signified, when he said, no staves,
for every poor man has a staff: And Mark, when he said, nothing, save a staff
only; for he that has only a staff, has nothing superfluous.

9.
Shall I bring to the birth, and not cause to bring forth?] q. d. Shall I cause
Sion to conceive, and shall I perfect her fruit within her, and bring it to the
birth; and shall I not cause her to bring it forth? that is, Shall I give Sion
hopes of having her children return to her out of captivity, and shall I not
bring it to pass?

Shall I cause to bring forth, and shut the womb?] q. d. Shall I cause all
mothers to bring forth, and be fruitful, and shall I shut the womb of my
beloved Sion, so that she shall not bring forth? No, I will not, but I will
open her womb, and make her more fruitful then any mother in the world besides;
for I will make her very populous. Or thus: q. d. Shall I say that I will cause
Sion to bring forth, and yet shut her womb? I will not do it.

To cause to bring forth, in this last interpretation, is taken for To say that
he would cause to bring forth: and To shut her womb, for To suffer her womb to
be shut.

10.
Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad with her all ye which love her,]
Supple, Because of the happiness and prosperity which she shall enjoy.

He speaks to the captive Jews, which sought the Lord, and served him, who
therefore loved Jerusalem, because the Lord had chosen it for the place of his
worship: And hereby he prophecyeth both of theirs, and of Jerusalems prosperity.

All ye that mourn for her,] Supple, Now in the time of her affliction and
desolation, because she lies waste and desolate, without Altar and without
Temple to serve God in.

11.
That ye may suck and be satisfied with the breast of her consolation,] i. e.
For though ye be now afflicted, ye shall be partakers of her comfort.

This phrase is Metaphorical, and alludeth to children, which when they cry and
weep, the mother, to quiet them and comfort them, lays them to the breast to
suck.

Note, that the Particle that signifies here (as often elsewhere) either the
connection and consequence, or else the cause of rejoicing.

That ye may milk out] i. e. For ye shall milk out of her breasts abundance of
glory.

And be delighted with the abundance of her glory,] i. e. Ye shall eat, and be
delighted with the abundance of her glory, that is, of her prosperity and
happiness.

By glory he means prosperity and happiness, per Metonymiam Effecti, or
Adjuncti, because prosperity and happiness make him glorious who has them: And
he compares this glory, that is, this prosperity and happiness here to the
milk of the breast.

12.
I will extend peace to her like a river,] i. e. I will give her, that is,
Jerusalem, abundance of prosperity and happiness.

The word peace signifies in the Hebrew language all manner of prosperity and
happiness.

And the word extend notes abundance and continuance of what is extended: and
when he says, He will extend peace as a river, he signifies exce^ding plenty
of peace, from the exceeding plenty of waters which flow in the river.

And the glory of the Gentiles] i. e. And the riches of the Gentiles.

God gave Jerusalem the riches of the Gentiles, partly by the victories which
he gave the Jews over the Gentiles, as the Edomites, Moabites, Philistines, etc.
By which they had great preys and spoils: And partly by the Nations bringing
into Jerusalem the riches of their several Countries by way of merchandise,
cap. 60.6, 7, 8.

Like a flowing stream,] i. e. Like a full stream, that is, q. d. in abundance.

Then shall ye suck,] Supple, Comfort and consolation and wealth from her. See
verse. 11.

Ye shall be born upon her sides,] i. e. Ye shall be carried by her, as
children are carried in the arms of their Nurse, and so shall be always with
her, whereas ye are now snatched from her, and carried into captivity. See cap.
60.4.

Note, that they which carry children in their arms, carry them not at their
arms end, but so carry them, as that they rest them upon their sides, which is
that which the Prophet alludeth to, when he says, Ye shall be born upon her
sides.

And dandled upon her knees,] The meaning of this and the foregoing phrases is,
That they shall live in Jerusalem, and in as much joy and delight, as the child
does, which is always either carried in the arms, or danced upon the knees of a
tender Mother, or tender Nurse.

14
When ye see this] He means that which is mentioned in verse. 12, 13.

Your heart shall rejoice,] i. e. Ye shall heartily rejoice.

The heart being but a part, is put here for the whole man, by a Synecdoche.

And your bones shall flourish like an herb] i. e. And your bones which were
heretofore dried away with sorrow and grief, shall flourish again by reason of
joy and mirth, as herbs do in the spring, which withered in the winter season.

As sorrow and grief do dry up the bones and consume the marrow thereof: So joy
and mirth do moisten them, and make them abound with marrow and fatness, Prove.
17.22.

And the hand of the Lord shall be known toward his servants.] i. e. For the
power of the Lord shall be known by what he will do to his servants; that is,
He will do such things for his servants, as that all men shall take notice of
his power for it.

The hand is put here by a metonymie for power which is shown by the hand. Or
by the hand may be meant bounty and liberality; for the bountiful and liberal
man gives freely, and what he gives he gives with the hand; And then the
sense is this, q. d. For the bounty and liberality of the Lord shall be known
toward his Servants, by those great gifts and blessings which he will bestow
upon them.

And his indignation,] i. e. But his indignation and wrath. And, for But.

Toward his Enemies. By the enemies of the Lord, are here meant, the wicked
Jews which transgressed against him, as well as the Babylonians; for both were
his enemies.

15
The Lord will come with fire.] This shows how terrible his coming should be
against his enemies; for fire is terrible. See Heb. 12. v. 18.21.

And with his Chariots like a whirlwind.] By Chariots, he means such Chariots
as were wont to be used in War. And hereby he speaks of God as of a great
King, marching with terror and great strength against his Enemies.

He compares these Chariots here to a whirlwind, to signify their
swiftness, and the speed which they should make: see more of this Cap. 5.28.

To render his anger.] Supple. To or upon his enemies.

Anger is put here for punishment proceeding from anger: Per metonymiam
efficientis.

With fury.] In fury there is little mercy shown: this therefore shows the
grievousness of the punishment which he will inflict.

And his rebuke with flames of fire.] This is in a manner a repetition of the
former sentence; for the Lords rebuke is operative, and therefore whom he
rebukes he does also punish. And as for fire, it is merciless and terrible,
the most merciless and terrible of all the Elements.

Will the Lord plead with all flesh.] i. e. will the Lord fight with all flesh.

He uses a Law-word here for a military word; pleading for fighting, because
in pleading also there is a contest between two Adversaries.

With all flesh.] That is, with all his enemies, whether they be Babylonians,
or the wicked part of the Jews also.

In these words there is a double Synecdoche: There is Synecdoche membri, and
Synecdoche generis. Synecdoche membri, in that the flesh is put for the whole
man: And Synecdoche generis, in that men in general, are put for those men
only which were Gods enemies in particular.

And the slain of the Lord shall be many.] i. e. And many shall they be which
the Lord shall slay.

17
They that sanctify themselves, and purify themselves.] Then these wicked
Jews that use superstitious Ceremonies and washings thereby to cleanse
themselves, when they deem themselves unclean and impure.

In the Gardens.] In Gardens they were wont to set up their Idols, and use
their Idolatry and superstitious rites. See Cap. 1.29. and 65.3. There also (it
is likely) they had their Lavers and waters to wash in.

Behind one Tree in the midst.] i. e. Behind or under one Tree planted in the
midst thereof.

By one Tree is here meant some one special Tree, which they seem to have made
choice of, and set apart for their Idolatry and superstitious rites, about the
amidst of their Gardens.

Eating Swines flesh.] This was unlawful for a Jew to do. Levit. 11.17.

And the abomination.] i. e. And other abominable meats (which were unlawful
for the Jew to eat) such as are mentioned Levit. 11.

Abomination is put here Per metonymiam adjuncti; for abominable meat, and
abominable meat in the singular, for abominable meats in the plural number.

And the mouse.] The mouse was pronounced unclean to be eaten, Levit. 11.29.

Note that the Mouse in the singular number is put here collective, for mice in
the plural number.

Note also, that the Mouse was part of the abomination spoken of in the
foregoing words: But it is here particularly mentioned, because (it may be)
they took most delight in eating of the mouse.

Shall be consumed together.] i. e. Shall be all of them destroyed (with the
Babylonians) and that by Cyrus in his expedition against Babylon.

18
For I know their works and their thoughts.] He prevents an objection here; for
whereas the Lord said, they shall be all consumed together, it might be said,
that the Lord may not know all those that did these things; for many did these
things very privately, and therefore many might escape.

To this the Lord answers saying, that he knew not all their works, and all the
doings of their hands only; but their thoughts also, and therefore none should
escape, but all should be consumed that do these things.

And their thoughts.] Yea their thoughts.

And, is put here for Yea.

It shall come that I will gather all Nations.] These words relate to, and
follow those words, v. 14. And the Hand of the Lord shall be known toward his
servants; for as they, so these speak of that happy and glorious condition
which the godly Jews should enjoy after their return out of Babylon into their
own Land.

It shall come, that I will gather all Nations and tongues, and they shall come
and see my glory.] i. e. It shall come to pass, that I will gather many of all
Nations, and of all Languages together: and they shall come and see those
glorious things which I will do for Jerusalem, and for my people the Jews
which serve me.

The meaning is, q. d. And it shall come to pass, that the glory which I will
give my Servants, when they come into their own Land shall be so great, as that
all Nations shall be taken with the fame thereof, and many of them shall come
to see that their glory which I will give them.

Note, that many of these Nations did not only come to see the glory of the
Jews, but did also desire a League of amity with them, and many of them also
did upon sight of what the Lord had done for them, become Proselytes as
appears, v. 2.3.

I will gather all Nations.] i. e. I will gather many of all Nations.

This he says, to signify, that very many of all Nations and Countries should
come to Jerusalem, to see the glory which God gave her. i. e. the Jews, being
moved with the fame thereof.

All Nations.] i. e. Many of all Nations.

A Synecdoche Generis, Or, an Hyperbole.

God says here, that he would gather all Nations to come and see His Glory,
because he would bestow such glory upon Jerusalem, and his Servants the Jews,
as that all Nations should hear of it, and many of all Nations should come,
and that in great multitudes to Jerusalem, to see that glory.

And all tongues.] i. e. Men of all Tongues and Languages.

My glory.] i. e. That glory which I will give to Jerusalem, verse. 12. and my
Servants the Jews, verse. 10.

This glory he calls His, because he was the Author of it.

91
And I will set a sign among them.] i. e. And I will set up an Ensign among the
men of Israel, that is, I will gather the men of Israel together which are
scattered abroad, and they also shall come and see my glory.

By them are meant the men of Israel, or of the ten Tribes which were scattered
abroad, whom he calls their Brethren, v. 20. and at whom he seems to point,
when he says, I will set a s^gn among them. And he alludeth here to a Captain
or General, who when he would call his Soldiers together to march any where,
sets up a Standard or an Ensign for them to repair to.

Note here, that though the greatest part of the ten Tribes of Israel were
destroyed, or carried away captive into Assyria, and their Commonwealth was
brought to naught by Salmaneser, 2 Kings 18.11. yet God left a few in the Land
of Israel, as it were gleaning Grapes, and the shaking of the Olive Tree,
Isaiah 17.6. And besides those that were left in the Land of Israel, and those
that were carried away Captive into Assyria: there were others which fled in
their extremity to other Countries to save themselves, as to Tarshish, Pull,
Lud, etc. of which many returned to Jerusalem, and lived among their Brethren
the Jews, when they heard what great things the Lord had done for the people
the Jews, and what glory he had bestowed upon Jerusalem.

Among them.] i. e. By them he means the men of Israel, or of the ten Tribes,
whom he seems to point at, when he says among them.

He makes particular mention of the men of Israel, that is, of the ten Tribes,
because he had said, ^e would have no more mercy upon the house of Israel, but
would utterly take them away, Hos. 1.6.

And I will send those that escape of them to the Nations.) i. e. And I will
send many of the men of Israel which live among the Jewt, and have escaped
those dangers into which they fell, etc.

These God sent to the Nations, not by any express or open command, but by his
secret providence, directing them that way, when they had a mind to traffic,
or the like.

And God might make these an Instrument of reducing the scattered of Israel
rather then any other, because of the near relation which was between them and
the dispersed of Israel.

To Tarshish,] Tarshish I take to be the same with Tartessus a City in Spain;
and by a Metonymy, the inhabitants of that City.

Pull,] Some take Pull to signify Africa in general; others, that part of Africa
which is near to Fez: and here they take it for the Inhabitants of one or other
of these places.

Lud,] By Lud is meant the posterity of Lud, which were called Lydians, of whom
Genesis 10.22.

That draw the Bow,] i. e. That are skilful Archers, and have strength and
knowledge how to draw the Bow well.

To Tubal,] By Tubal are meant the children of Tubal, which was the son of
Japhet, Genesis 10.2.

To Javan] By Javan are meant the children of Javan, which was the son of
Japhet, Genesis 10.2.

The Isles afar off,] q. d. That is, To the habitants of the Regions and
Countries which are afar off.

The Hebrews call all Regions and Countries Islands, especially if they abut
upon the Sea, or any great river.

That have not heard my fame,] i. e. That have not heard the report of those
things, which I have done for my servants the Jews.

Neither have seen my glory,] i. e. Neither have seen those glorious things
which I have done for my servants the Jews.

Glory is put here, per Metonymiam effecti or adjuncti, for great acts or
things worthy of glory, and bringing glory to the author or doer of them.

And they shall declare my glory amongst the Gentiles.] i. e. And they shall
declare to the Gentiles, among whom their Brethren of Israel live, the glorious
works that I have done for my servants the Jews, and the glory which I have
bestowed upon Jerusalem.

20.
And they shall bring all your brethren for an offering to the Lord,] i. e. And
the Gentiles, when they hear of my glory, shall come themselves, and shall
bring all your brethren, the men of Israel, which live among them, with them,
as an offering to the Lord.

That which is here meant, is, that many of these Nations should become
proselytes, and that many of the children of Israel, or ten Tribes, should turn
to the Lord, and dwell among the Jews.

He speaks to the Jews, and he calls the men of Israel, their brethren (a
lovely name) because they were all descended from the same father, Jacob.

Note, that the Lord uses an Enallage of the person here, and speaks here of
himself in the third person.

For an offering to the Lord,] When he calls them an offering to the Lord, he
speaks metaphorically; for (to speak properly) they were no offering; but
therefore does he call them an offering, because as an offering is brought in
honor of the Lord, so would the Nations bring them to the Lord, in honor of the
Lord, because they were once his people, and he would now accept of them.

Out of all Nations,] When Salmaneser invaded the Land of Israel, many of the
men of that Land fled to all Nations abroad, to save their lives, where they
lived and begat children, which are they which are here said to be brought as
an offering to the Lord.

Upon Horses, and in Charets, and in Litters, and upon Mules, and upon swift
beasts,] By these is signified the accommodation with which the Nations should
accommodate the men of Israel in their way to Judea.

Upon swift beasts,] As Dromedaries.

To my holy mountain, Jerusalem,] q. d. To my holy mountain, that is, To
Jerusalem.

Note here again the Enallage of the person, how God speaks of himself in the
first person, when he spoke in the third just before.

Gods holy mountain was mount Sion, upon which the Temple which was destroyed
by the Babylonians was built, and on which the Temple which was to be built
after the Babylonish captivity was to be built: And therefore was it called the
holy mountain, because it was hallowed, or set apart for that use.

This mountain was within Jerusalem, and therefore was part of Jerusalem, and
is here put, by a Synecdoche, for all Jerusalem: But he seems to make mention
of the holy mountain, and to say, that they should bring them to the holy
mountain, because he likened them to an offering; and offerings used to be
brought to the holy mountain, that is, to the Temple which stood on that
mountain.

Note, that these men were brought, not to the Land of Israel, though they were
men of Israel, but to Jerusalem, because the men of Israel never made a
Commonwealth of themselves, after the days of Salmaneser, but all which
returned into the Land of Canaan were incorporated into the Commonwealth of
Judah: And hence is this Allegory of their being brought as an offering to the
holy mountain Jerusalem.

As the children of Israel bring an offering,] i. e. With as much joy and
gladness, and with as much respect to the Lord, as the children of Israel bring
an offering, etc.

By the children of Israel may be meant here, not the children of the ten
Tribes only, but the children of Judah also, yea, rather these, then they.

An offering,] He alludeth to the meat offering, of which Lev. 2.

In a clean vessel,] i. e. In a dish or platter, which is not polluted with any
legal uncleanness.

In the similitude here used the Horses and Charets and Litters and Mules and
swift beasts, on which the men of Israel were brought, answers to the clean
vessel (here mentioned) in which the children of Israel brought their offering.

Into the House of the Lord,] i. e. Into the Temple which is the House of God.

21.
And I will also take of them for Priests, and for Levites, says the Lord,]
q.d. And I will not only cause them, to wit, your brethren, to be brought as
an offering to me the Lord to Jerusalem; but I will also take of them for
Priests and Levites, says the Lord. Or thus; q. d. And I will not only take
of you, O ye Jews; but I will also take of them, to wit, your brethren (which
shall be brought as an offering to me) for Priests and for Levites, says the
Lord.

Note, that as the word Priests, so is the word Levites here a word denoting
(not the tribe, but) the office of the Levites, who were by their office to
minister in the things appertaining to the Temple or Tabernacle under the
Priests, Numb. 3. And of these their brethren, or men of Israel, the Lord
says, he would take Priests and Levites, to signify, that the glory which he
the Lord would give to Jerusalem, and to the Jews, should be so great, as that
the men of Israel, who had rejected the Lord, should be moved thereby to return
to the Lord, and serve him so, as that the Lord should delight in them again,
though he had rejected them, for rejecting him.

It may be asked, what they were whom the Lord would take out of these men of
Israel (which were to be brought as an offering to him) for Priests and Levites?

Ans. He would take for Priests such as were of the lineage of Aaron, and for
Levites those other that were of the Tribe of Levi.

But what new love and kindness was this, for God to take these for Priests and
Levites at this time, when God had appointed these and only these to be, the
one Priests, the other Levites for ever, before he brought them first into the
Land of Canaan? For, to take of the men here mentioned for Priests and Levites,
intimates, that they were not Priests and Levites before, whom he would take
now.

Ans. True it is, That God chose Aaron and his sons for Priests, and the rest
of the Tribe of Levi to minister to him under them, in the Tabernacle and
Temple, before he brought the Israelites into the Land of Canaan: But as for
those Priests and Levites which dwelt among the ten Tribes, they were exceeding
wicked, as the ten Tribes were; And therefore when the Lord would have no mercy
upon the house of Israel, but utterly take them away, Hos. 1.6. and said unto
them, Ye are not my people, and I will not be your God, Hos. 1.9. As he
rejected the whole people from being his people; so he rejected those of the
Tribe of Levi, which dwelt among them, from being Priests and Levites to him:
Yea, he expressly said to the sons of Aaron which dwelt among them, Because ye
have rejected knowledge, I will also reject you, that ye shall be no Priests to
me, Hos. 4.6. And what he said to them, we must understand of the Levites also,
that they should not minister any more to him. Now if God, when he had thus
rejected all the sons of Aaron which dwelt among the ten Tribes from being
Priests, and the rest of the sons of Levi from being Levites unto him, did
afterward accept of some of them for Priests and Levites to himself, it was a
new love, and a new kindness in the Lord toward them.

22.
For as the new Heavens and the new Earth which I will make, shall remain
before me, says the Lord; so shall your seed and your name remain.] By the new
Heavens he means the Heavens which he would renew, in respect of their
qualities, (of which see cap. 65.17.) which though they were dark and cloudy
now, he would make clear and resplendent in his due time: And by the new Earth
he means the Earth which he would renew in respect of her qualities, (of
which see also cap. 65.17.) For he would make it fruitful and verdent, whereas
it was barren and squalid at this time. And by these are figuratively meant,
the new, glorious, and flourishing state of things, which he would make for his
people the Jews in their own Land after their captivity.

For as the new Heavens] i. e. Moreover as the new Heavens, etc.

For for Moreover.

Shall remain,] i. e. Shall be and remain; the Heavens clear and resplendent,
and the Earth fruitful and verdent; the Heavens in a glorious, the Earth in a
flourishing estate.

So shall your seed and your name remain.] i. e. So your seed and your
posterity shall be and remain in a glorious and flourishing condition.

By your seed he means their children, per Metonymiam Materiae: And by your
name he means the same, to wit, their posterity; For a seed or posterity bear
the name of their Parents or Ancestors. See cap. 14.22.

23.
And it shall come to pass, that from one new Moon to another, and from one
Sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to worship before me.] i. e. And it
shall come to pass, that men of all Nations and Countries ( Gentiles and
Israelites as well as Jews) being moved with that glory which I will give you,
shall come and worship me in my holy Temple at Jerusalem, not only every new
Moon, or from one new Moon to another, but every Sabbath, from one Sabbath to
another; that is, not only one month, but every week.

Note, that the first day of every Month, or the day of every new Moon, on
which the Moon changed, was an holy day, and to be kept holy, Numb. 10.10. So
was the seventh day in every week, which was called the Sabbath day, Exodus
20.10, 11.

Shall all flesh] i. e. Men of all kindred and Nations.

Flesh is put here, per Synecdochen partis, for men: and all signifies here,
not all of all kinds, but some of all kinds; not singula generum, but genera
singulorum.

24.
And they shall go forth and look upon the carcasses of the men that have
transgressed against me,] i. e. And men shall go forth into the fields, and
shall see the dead bodies of those that have transgressed against me, whom I
have slain, lie there unburyed, as not being worthy of a burial.

Note, that this word They is to be taken indefinitely here; and that this
Verse relates not to that which went immediately before, but to the
seventeenth Verse, as we shall say hereafter.

Of the men that have transgressed against me,] What these men were, and what
their transgression, see Verse. 17.

In these words, They shall go forth and look upon etc. is included a frequent
act, and an act repeated many days, as we may gather from those words, For
their worm shall not dye, which signify that their dead bodies should lie
unburied a long time, to wit, Till the Worms had quite devoured them, which
should be long first.

For their worm shall not dye,] q. d. For the Worms which shall breed in their
carcasses (for Worms do naturally breed out of the corruption of dead bodies)
shall not dye till they have quite devoured their carcasses, and that shall not
be under a long time.

Worm is put here for Worms, Worms that breed naturally out of the corruption
of dead bodies; which he calls their Worms, because they shall breed out of the
corruption or putrefaction of their dead bodies or carcasses. Such Worms use
not to dye until they have eaten up all the flesh of the dead bodies, whereby
they were sustained.

Shall not dye,] i. e. Shall not quickly dye, but it shall be a long time
before it dies.

Note, that though he says absolutely, It shall not dye, yet the meaning is
not, that it shall not dye at all; but it shall not dye in a long time: For the
Hebrews (in an Hyperbolical kind of speech) say, that that shall not be, which
shall not be a long time.

Neither shall their fire be quenched,] I take this to be a repetition of the
former sentence: and that he calls either the worm which breeds in a dead
body, fire; because both the worm and the fire are of a consuming and devouring
nature: Or else that preternatural heat which is the cause of putrefaction, or
whatsoever else is the cause thereof.

Neither shall their fire be quenched,] Supple, For a long time.

Note, that our Savior, speaking of Hell, makes mention of these words,
saying, Where the worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched, Mark 9.44.
alluding no doubt to this place of our Prophet, viz. Their worm shall not dye,
neither shall their fire be quenched.

But why does our Savior do this? Why does he quote this place, when he speaks
of the everlasting punishment of Hell, when our Prophet speaks thereby of the
temporal punishment of those which transgressed against God?

Answ. The temporal punishments of those which transgressed against God during
the time of the Law, were Types of the eternal punishments which the damned
should endure in Hell: and while the Scripture speaks of the Type, it does
often fit many passages to the Antitype, yea, and that in greater propriety of
words then to the Type; one of which is this present passage, which though it
fits the Type, that is, the temporal punishment of those that transgressed
against God; yet it fits the Antitype in a greater propriety of words; for the
punishment of Hell is truly and absolutely everlasting, and the Worm that is
there never dies, and the fire that is there is never quenched; when as the
worm of the Type after a time dies, and the fire thereof is after a time
quenched.

And they shall be an abhorring to all flesh.] i. e. And all men, which shall
come near to them to look upon them, shall abhor and loath them, so abominable
shall their sight be, and so loathsome the stink that proceeds out of their
carcasses.

Abhorring is put here, by a Metonymy, for Abhorrend.

Note, that this last verse has its immediate connection with, and relation to
the seventeenth verse, and that that it is so far dis-joyned from it,
proceeds from the earnestness of the Prophets spirit, by which he was in a
manner compelled to interpose many things, before he made an end of what he had
to speak in the seventeenth Verse. The like we read Ephesians. 2.1-5. and Ephesians.
3.1-13. where the Apostle begins matters, but compleats them not, till he has
first spoken of many other things.

FINIS.
Reader, thou art desired to read the places here noted, according to these
Emendations.
PAge, 2, colume, 1, line, 43, read, The vision of Isaiah the Son of Amos,
which he saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem: p: 3: c: 1, l: 9 r. does not: p:
3, c, 2, l, 43, r. the G^d: p, 5, c, 1, l, 32, r. the Kings: p, 8, c, 1, l, 49,
r. of blowing Trumpets: p, 9, c, 2, l, 51, r. in his cause: p, 11, c, 2, l, 7,
r. an Adulteress: p, 11, c, 2, l, 24, r. lodged in it: p, 11 c, 2, l, 53, r.
thy righteousness: p, 12, c, 1, l, 31, r. these Judges: p, 14, c, 1, l. 1, r.
but how: p, 19, c, 1, l, 42, r. (...) p, 21, c, 1, l, 23, r. Boetis: p, 22, c,
1, l, 35, r. causal: p, 31, c, 2, l, 40, r. wore: p, 31, c, 2, l, 44, r. wore:
p, 32, c, 2, l, 54, r. in the third: p, 35, c, 1, l, 14, r. fortieth: p, 35, c,
1, l. 24, r. of the Jews: p, 42, c, 1, l, 1, r. to resolve: p, 42, c, 2, l,
34, r. Synecdochen Integri: p, 44, c, 2, l, 20, r. let the counsel: p, 45, c,
1, l, 34, r. sweet: p, 46, c, 1, l, 20, r. their root: p, 49, c, 2, l, 9, r.
above it: p, 50, c, 2, l, 2, r. other of his attributes: p, 60, c, 1, l, 16, r.
v. g. p, 100, c, 2, l, 48, r. promising him a lease; p, 102, c, 2, l, 42, r
depends: p, 108, c, 2, l, 29, r. Metaphorical: p, 109, c, 1, l, 14, r. that
which is: p, 110, c, 2, l, 49, r. those: p, 112, c, 1, l, 9, r. and to find, or
to get, or take away what he found: p, 112, c, 1, l, 12, put out, And to find
for to take away that which he has found: p, 112, c, 2, l, 28, r. no wood: p,
113, c, 2, l, 2, r. in which light: p, 113, c, 2 l, 2 r. trees: p, 115 c, 2 l,
19 r. the: p, 115 c, 2 l, 37 r. changed: p, 116 c, 2 l, 23 r. Kings: p, 116 c,
2 l, 27 r. Aiash: 117 c, 2, l, 31 r. v. 29. p, 121 c, 1 l, 26 r. he instanceth:
p, 128 c, 2 l, 36 r. to help them: p, 130 c, 1 l, 6 r. to march: p, 134 c, 2,
l, 1 r. therefore when it is said: p, 137 c, 2, l, 8 r. and they shall take
them captives: p, 139 c, 1 l, 28 r speak: p, 139 c, 2 l, 43 r. graphically: p,
143 c, 2 l, 22 r. is brought down to the grave: p, 143 c, 1 l, 44 r.
signifies: p, 144 c, 1 l, 39 r. pull: p, 144 c, 1 l, 41 r. build others again:
p, 144 c, 1 l, 45 r. Alexandria: p, 145 c, 2 l, 57 r. them: p, 148 c, 1 l, 21
r. and hill and part: p, 151 c, 2 l, 14 r. is not that all: p, 151 c, 2 l, 33
r. went: p, 153 c, 1, 33 l, r. and when he had overcome them he put two parts:
p, 154 c, 2 l, 49 r. execute judgment: p, 157 c, 1 l, 11 r. that is, thou
shall subdue: p, 158 c, 1 l, 11 r. who seem: p, 158 c, 2 l, 15 r. wind: p, 159
c, 1 l, 9 r. for thy: p, 159 c, 1 l 43 r. for every: p, 159 c, 2 l, 30 r. and
is: p, 161 c, 1 l, 33 r. had with the ten Tribes against Assyria, about the
time mentioned, 2 Kings 18.9. p, 161 c, 2 l, 1 r. for: p, 164 c, 1 l, 10 r. in
it: p, 165 c, 2 l, 24 r. of: p, 167 c, 1 l. 29 r. of Assyria: p, 167 c, 2 l, 22
r. that I may come: p, 172 c, 1 l, 50 r. on those words: p, 173 c, 1 l, 27 r.
their work: p, 173 c, 1 l, 49 r. and the Princes of Noph, and their Kings: p,
173 c, 2 l, 4 r. those: p, 174 c, 1 l, 49 r. his: p, 175 c, 2 l, 18 r. land: p,
2 c, 2 l, 19 r. for: p, 30, c, 2 l, 21 r. Cap. 33.14. p, 4 c, 1 l, 29 r.
desolation: p, 7 c, 1 l, 53 r. have: p, 7 c, 2 l, 28 r. unto: p, 7 c, 2 l, 29
r. unto: p, 9 c, 2 l, 2 r. spoak: p, 12 c, 1 l, 7 r. thy slain: p, 15 c 1 l, 12
r. which Cedar pillars, and Cedar wood: p, 15 c, 1 l, 42 r. held: p, 15 c, 2 l,
19 r. Counselors: p, 16 c, 2 l, 5: viz. p, 18 c, 1 l, 42 r. shall dye here,
and never be removed: p, 19 c, 2 l, 37 r. his: p, 21 c, 2, l, 50 r. such: p, 26
c, 1 l, 3 r. as the honorable: p, 27 c, 1 l, 18 r. Sion: p, 28 c, 2 l, 4 r.
Cyrus: p; 32 c, 1 l, 44 r. aggravate: p, 36 c, 1 l, 36 r. be not taken: p, 40.
c, 2. l, 13. r. short: p, 48 c, 1, l, 55 r. destroy: p, 48 c, 1 l, 36 r.
Nation: p, 54 c, 2 l, 11 r. the Altars: p, 54 c, 2 l, 17 r. which are beaten,
p, 59 c, 2 l, 54 r. spuings: p, 72 c, 1 l. 15 r. a dream which a man: p, 72 c,
2 l, 24 r. now that they are said to be drunken: p, 72 c, 2 l, 26 r. that with
which: p, 73 c, 1 l, 29 r. so that they: p, 74 c, 1 l, 32 r. one for sense with
this: p, 82 c, 1 l, 1 r. will carry their riches: p, 83 c, 1 l, 52 r. they did
love: p, 83 c, 2, l, 49 r. send: p, 84 c, 2 l, 18 r. sinners: p, 90 c, 1 l, 50
put out not. p, 91 c, 2 l, 24 r. a bridle: p, 93 c. 2 l, 25 r. Collective: p,
97 c, 1 l, 29.. is meant, p, 97 c, 2 l, 28 r. and redeem: p, 99 c, 1 l, 38 r.
and to mask all his villainy and iniquity: p, 105 c, 2 l, 36 r. engines: p, 106
c, 1 l, 23 r. on Bashan: p, 106 c, 2 l, 41 r. seems: p, 107 c, 1 l, 9 as the
burnings of lime: p, 110 c, 1 l, 10 r. word: p, 110 c, 1 l, 37 r. environeth:
p, 111 c, 1 l, 44 r. and a Praeterperfect: p, 4 c, 1 l. 44 r. farther heard: p,
7 c, 1 l, 21 r. an: p, 29 c, 1 l, 26 Saba: p, 36 c; 1 l, 35 r. as he did from
the rest of h^s people: p, 38 c, 1 l, 15 r. shall he call: p, 38 c, 2 l, 34 r.
rehearse in order whatsoever: p, 40 c, 2 l, 1 r. it: p, 45 c; 1 l; 30 r.
misery: p; 46 c; 2 l; 3 r. derived: p; 47 c; 1 l; 37 r. they which were: p; 47
c; 1 l; 45 r. for he was: p; 53 c, 2 l; 41 r. not only those: p; 61 c; 2 l; 26
r. third: p; 70 c, 1 l; 33 r. manner: p; 72 c; 2 l; 33 r. notion: p; 75 c; 1 l;
26 r. which while he does he does: p; 75 c; 2 l; 27 put out indeed: p; 82 c; 1
l; 24 r. lift up: p; 82 c; 2 l; 2 r. Context: p; 84 c; 1 l; 29 r. thy: p; 88 c;
2 l; 33 r. I make: p; 95 c; 2 l; 34 r. whom: p; 98 c; 2 l; 28 r. or: p; 100 c;
1 l; 27 r. Cap. 51. p; 100 c; 1 l; 35 r. Cap. 51. p; 103 c; 2 l, 47 put out or:
107 c; 2 l; 32 r. as Romans 1.16. p; 108 c; 2 l; 45 r. (...): p; 112 c; 1 l; 37
r. therewith: p; 115 c; 1 l; 13 r. and who: p; 117 c; 1 l; 35 r. Philip 2. v.
1, 8, etc. p, 117 c, 1 l; 42 r. an: p; 120 c. 2 l; 4 r. Genesis 41.51. p; 112 c; 1
l; 26 r. Genesis 49. p; 124 c; 1 l; 10 r. the waster: p; 124 c, 1 l; 18 r. to make
no arms: p; 137 c, 1 l; 10 r. and liken Idolaters to Whores and Adulteresses,
and the Idol to an Whoremonger and Adulterer; because as Whores and
Adulteresses love those men: p; 140 c; 1 l; 24 r. Son of Hinn^n: p, 146 c; 2 l;
32 r. and fall to fifty-cuffs: p; 147 c; 1 l; 5 r. Cap. 30. p; 148 c. 2 l, 9 r.
he instanceth only in: p. 160 c. 2 l. 36 r. he: p. 161 c. 2 l. 25 r. and that;
that those words; p, 164 c, 2 l, 10 r. Arabia deserta; p, 167 c, 2 l, 32 r. and
say that, that; p, 168 c, 2 l, 44 r. wasting nor destruction; p, 168 c, 2 l, 45
r. nor wasting, nor destruction; p, 175 c, 1 l, 22 r. praevents; p, 170 c, 1 l,
44 put out as thy said; p, 170 c, 2 l, 51 r. this place; p, 171 c 2 l, 7 r. a
strong Nation; p 173 c, 2 l, 43 r. but why; p, 175, c, 2 l, 13 r. in their
Land; p, 178 c, 2 l, 3 r. to thy Children the Jews, and to the Lord too; p,
178 c, 2 l, 29 r. take thee to himself again and marry thee; p, 178 c, 2 l, 41
r. on the walls; p, 179 c, 1 l, 50 r. Concrete; p, 184 c, 1 l, 36 r. Gods
presence; p, 189 c, 1 l, 2 r. a strong; p, 189 c, 1 l, 56 r. not; p 192 c, 1 l,
53 r. upon my will; p, 193 c, 1 l, 17 r. that is, that is not mine; p, 194 c, 1
l. 55 r. without his; p, 208 c, 1 l, 37 r. V. 28. p, 211 c, 1 l, 50 r. once a
month; p, 212 c, 2 l, 18 r. abhorred.


