A WORK For none but ANGELS and MEN.

THAT IS, To be able to look into, and to know our selves.

OR A BOOK Showing what the SOUL Is, Subsisting and having its operations
without the Body; its more then a perfection or reflection of the the Sense, or
Temperature of Humors: How she exercises her powersof vegetative or quickening
power of the Senses.

Of the Imaginations or Common sense, the Fantasy, Sensative Memory,
Passions, Motion of Life, the Local Motion, and Intellectual Powers of the soul.

Of the Wit, Understanding, Reason, Opinion, Judgment, Power of Will, and the
Relations betwixt Wit and Will.

Of the Intellectual Memory, that the soul is Immortal, and cannot dye,
cannot be destroyed, her cause cease not, violence nor time cannot destroy
her; and all Objections Answered to the contrary.

O thou my Soul, which turn'st thy curious eye

To view the beams of thine own form Divine:

Know that thou can know nothing perfectly,

Whilst thou art clouded with this flesh of mine.

Such knowledge is too wonderful for me, it is high, I cannot attain unto it,
Psalm. 139. 6.

LONDON: Printed by M. S. for Tho: Jenner, at the South-Entrance of the Royal
EXCHANGE. 1653.

Of the Soul of Man, and the Immortality thereof.
THe lights of Heaven (which are the worlds fair eyes)
Look down into the world, the world to see:
And as they run or wander in the skies,
Surveigh all things that on this Center be.
And yet the lights which in my Tower do shine,
Mine Eyes, which all objects both nigh and far,
Look not into this little world of mine,
Nor see my face, wherein they fixed are.
Since Nature fails us in no needful thing,
Why want I means mine in ward self to see?
Which sight the knowledge of my self might bring,
Which to true wisdom is the first degree.
That Power which gave me eyes the world to view,
To view my self infused an inward light,
Whereby my Soul as by a mirror true,
Of her own form may take a perfect sight.
But as the sharpest eye discerns naught,
Except the Sunbeams in the air do shine:
So the best Sense with her reflecting thought,
Seeks not her self without some light Divine.
O Light which make the Light, which makes the Day,
Which set'st the Eye without, and Mind within,
Lighten my spirit with one clear heavenly ray,
Which now to view it self does first begin.
For her true form how can my Spark discern?
Which dim by Nature, Art did never clear;
When the great Wits, of whom all skill we learn,
Are ignorant both what she is, and where?
One thinks the Soul is Air, another Fire,
Another Blood diffused about the heart;
Another s^^th, the Elements conspire,
And to her Essence each does give a part.
Musi^ians think our Souls are Harmonies;
Physicians hold that they Complexions be;
Epicures make them swarms of Atomies,
Which do by chance into our Bodies flee.
Some think one general Soul fills every brain,
As the bright Sun sheds light in every Star:
And others think the name of Soul is vain,
And that we only well-mixt bodies are.
In judgment of her substance thus they vary;
And thus they vary in judgment of her seat:
For some her Chair up to the brain do carry,
Some thrust it down into the stomachs heat.
Some place it in the Root of life, the Heart,
Some in the Liver, fountain of the Veins;
Some say, she is all in all, and all in part:
Some say, she is not contained, but all contains.
Thus these great Clerks their little wisdom show,
While with their Doctrines they at Hazard play,
Tossing their light opinions to and fro,
To mock the Lewd, as learned in this as they.
For no crazed brain could ever yet propound,
Touching the Soul so vain and fond a thought,
But some among these Masters have been found,
Which in their Schools the self-same thing have taut.
God only Wise, to punish pride of Wit,
Among men's Wits has this confusion wrought,
As the proud Tower whose points the Clouds did hit,
By Tongues Confusion was to ruin brought.
UNDERSTANDING.


I once was AEgle ey'ed full of all light.
Am owl eyd now as dim as derke^s night
As through a glass or Cloud I all things view.
Shall on day see them in there proper hue
But (thou) which did Man's Soul of nothing make,
And when to nothing it was fallen again,
To make it new, the Form of Man did take,
And God with God becam'st a Man with Men.
Thou, that have fashioned twice this Soul of ours,
So that she is by double title thine,
Thou only know her nature and her powers,
Her subcile form thou only can define.
To judge her self she must her self transcend,
As greater Circles comprehend the less,
But she wants power her own power to extend,
As fettred men cannot their strength express.
But thou bright morning Star, thou rising Sun,
Which in these later times have brought to light
Those Mysteries, that since the world begun,
Lay hid in darkness, and in eternal night.
Thou (like the Sun) do with indifferent ray,
Into the Palace and the Cottage shine,
And show the Soul, both to the Clerk and Lay,
By the clear Lamp of thy Oracle Divine.
This Lamp through all the Regions of mv brain,
Where my Soul sits,does spread her beams of grace,
As now, me thinks, I do distinguish plain,
Each subtle line of her immortal face.
The Soul a Substance and a Spirit is,
Which God himself does in the Body make, What the Soul is.

Which makes the man, for every man from this,
The Nature of a Man, and name does take.
And though the Spirit be to the Body knit,
As an apt mean her powers to exercise,
Which are Life, Motion, Sense, and Will and Wit,
Yet she survives, although the Body dies.
She is a substance, and a real thing, That the soul is a thing subsisting by
it selse without the body.

Which has it self an actual working might,
Which neither from the Senses power does spring,
Nor from the Bodies humors tempered right.
She is a Vine, which does no propping need,
To make her spread her self, or spring upright;
She is a Star whose beams do not proceed
From any Sun, but from a Native light.
For when she sorts things present with things past, That the soul has a
proper Operation without the body.

And thereby things to come does often foresee;
When she does doubt at first, and choose at last,
These acts her own without the Body be.
When of the dew which The Eye and Ear does take
From flowers abroad, and bring into the brain,
She does within both wax and honey make;
This work is hers, this is her proper pain.
When she from sundry Acts one skill does draw,
Gathering from diverse Fights one act of War,
From many Cases like, one Rule of Law;
These her Collections, not the Senses are.
When in the effects she does the Causes know,
And seeing the stream, thinks where the spring does rise,
And seeing the branch, conceiv'th the root below;
These things she viewes without the Bodies eyes.
When she without a Pegasus does fly,
Swifter then lightnings fire to East to West,
About the Center and about the sky,
She travels then, although the Body rest.
When all her works she forms first within,
Proportions them, and sees their perfect end,
Ere she in act does any part begin:
What instruments does then the Body lend?
When without hands she thus does Castles build,
Sees without eyes, and without feet does run,
When she digests the World, yet is not filled,
By her own power these miracles are done.
When she defines, argues, divides, compounds,
Considers virtue, vice, and general things,
And marrying diverse principles and grounds,
Out of their match a true Conclusion brings.
These Actions in her Closet all alone,
(Retired within her self) she does fulfill;
Use of her Bodies Organs she has none,
When she does use the powers of Wit and Will.
Yet in the Bodies prison so she lies,
As through the Bodies windows she must look,
Her diverse powers of Sense to exercise,
By gathering Notes out of the Worlds great Book.
Nor can her self discourse, or judge of ought,
But what the sense Collects, and home does bring;
And yet the power of her discoursing thought,
From these Collections, is a diverse thing.
For though our eyes can naught but Colors see,
Yet Colors give them not their power of sight:
So, though these fruits of Sense her objects be,
Yet she discernes them by her proper light.
The workman on his stuff his skill does show,
And yet the stuff gives not the man his skill;
States their affairs do by their servants know,
But order them by their own royal will.
So thongh this cunning Mistress and this Queen,
Does as her instruments the Senses use,
To know all things that are felt, heard, or seen,
Yet she her self does only judge and choose.
Right so the Soul, which is a Lady free,
And does the justice of her State maintain,
Because the Senses ready servants be,
Attending nigh about her Court, the brain.
By them the forms of outward things she learnes,
(For they return into the fantasy)
Whatever each of them abroad discernes,
And there enrol it for the mind to see.
But when she fits to judge the good and ill,
And to discern betwixt the false and true,
She is not guided by the Senses skill,
But does each thing in her own Mirror view.
Then she the Senses checks, which often do err,
And even against their false reports decrees:
And often she does condemn what they prefer,
For with a power above the Sense, she sees:
Therefore no Sense the precious joys conceives,
Which in her private Contemplations be;
For then the ravished spirit the Senses leaves,
Has her own powers, and proper actions free.
Her harmonies are sweet, and full of skill,
When on the bodies instrument she plays:
But the proportions of the wit and will,
Those sweet accords, are even the Angels lays.
Doubtless in man there is a nature found,
Beside the Senses, and above them far;
"Though most men being in sensual pleasures drowned,
"It seems their souls but in the Senses are.
If we had naught but Sense, then only they
Should have found minds, which have their Senses sound;
But wisdom grows, when Senses do decay,
And folly most in quickest Sense is found.
If we had naught but Sense, each living wight,
Which we call brute, would be more sharp then we;
As having Senses apprehensive might,
In a more clear, and excellent degree.
But they do want that quick discoursing power,
Which does in us the erring Sense correct;
Therefore the Be did suck the painted flower,
And birds of Grapes the cunning shadow peckt.
Sense outside knows, the Soul through all things seet,
Sense Circumstance, she does the substance view;
Sense sees the bark, but she the life of Trees;
Sense hears the sounds, but she the Concords true.
But why do I the Soul and Sense divide?
When Sense is but a power, which she extends,
Which being in diverse parts diversified,
The diverse forms of objects apprehends?
This power spreads outward, but the root does grow
In the inward Soul, which only does perceive;
For the eyes and ears no more their objects know,
Then glasses know what faces they receive.
For if we chance to fix our thoughts elsewhere,
Although our eyes be open, we do not see,
And if one power did not both see and hear,
Our fights and sounds would always double be.
Then is the Soul a nature, which contains,
The power of Sense, within a greater power;
Which does employ, and use the Senses pains, That the soul is more then the
temperatures of the humors of the Body.

But sits and rules within her private bower.
If she does then the subtle Sense excel,
How gross are they that drown her in the blood?
Or in the bodies humors tempred well,
As if in them such high perfection stood?
As if most skill in that Mositian were,
Which had the best, and best ruined instrument;
As if the Pensil neat, and Colors clear,
Had power to make the Painter excellent.
Why does not Beauty then refine the wit?
And good Complexion rectify the will?
Why does not Health bring wisdom still with it?
Why does not Sickness make men brutish still?
Who can in Memory, or Wit, or Will,
Or air, or fire, or earth, or water find;
What Alchymist can d^aw with all his skill,
The Quintessence of these out of the mind?
If The Elements which have nor life, nor sense,
Can breed in us so great a power as this,
Why give they not themselves like excellence,
Or other things wherein their mixture is?
If she were but the Bodies quality,
Then would she be, with it sick, maimed, and blind;
But we perceive, where these privations be,
A healthy perfect, and sharp-sighted mind.
If she were but the bodies accident,
And her sole being did in it subsist,
As white in snow, she might her self absent,
And in the bodies substance not be mist.
But it on her, not she on it depends;
For ^ne the body does sustain and cherish,
Such secret powers of life to it she lends,
That when they fail, then does the body perish.
Since then the Soul works by her self alone,
Springs not from sense, nor humors well agreeing,
Her nature is peculiar, and her own,
She is a substance, and a perfect being.
But though this substance be the root of Sense,
Sense knows her not, which does but bodies know, That the soul is a Spirit.

She is a spirit, and heavenly influence,
Which from the fountain of Gods spirit does flow.
She is a spirit, yet not like air or wind,
Nor like the spirits about the heart or brain,
Nor like those spirits which Alchymists do find,
When they in every thing seek gold in vain.
For she all natures under heaven does pass,
Being like those spirits, which Gods bright face do see,
Or like himself, whose image once she was,
Though now (alas) she scarce his shadow be.
Yet of the forms she holds the first degree,
That are to gross material bodies knit;
Yet she her self is bodilesse and free,
And though confined, is almost infinite.
Were she a body, how could she remain That it cannot be a Body.

Within this Body, which is less then she?
Or how could she the worlds great shape contain,
And in our narrow breasts contained be?
All Bodies are confined within some place;
But she all place within her self confines;
All Bodies have their measure and their space,
But who can draw the Souls dimensive lines?
No Body can at once two forms admit,
Except the one the other do deface;
But in the Soul ten thousand forms do sit,
And none intrudes into her neighbors place.
All Bodies are with other Bodies filled;
But she receives both heaven and earth together,
Nor are their forms by rash encounter spild,
For there they stand, and neither toncheth either.
MEMORY.


A com^on June all com^ers to reteyne.
A Sieve where good run^e out and bad remain.
A Burrow with a thousand vermin hydes.
A Den where nothing that is good abides
Nor can her wide Embracements filled be;
For they'that most, and greatest things embrace,
Enlarge thereby their minds Capacity,
As streams enlarged, enlarge the Channels space.
All things received do such proportion take,
As those things have wherein they are received:
So little glasses little faces make,
And narrow webs on narrow frames be weaved;
Then what vast Body must we make the mind?
Wherein are men, beasts, trees, towns, seas, and lands,
And yet each thing a proper place does find,
And each thing in the true proportion stands?
Doubtless this could not be, but that she turns
Bodies to spirits by sublimation strange;
As fire converts to fire the things it burns,
As we our meats into our nature change.
From their gross matter she abstracts the forms,
And draws a kind of Quintessence from things,
Which to her proper nature she trans forms,
To bear them light on her celestial wings.
This does she when, from things particular,
She does abstract the universal kinds,
Which bodilesse, and immateriall are,
And can be lodged but only in our minds.
And thus from diverse accidents and acts,
Which do within her observation fall,
She goddestes, and powers divine abstracts,
As nature, fortune, and the virtues all.
Again, how can she several Bodies know,
If in her self a Bodies form she bear?
How can a Mirror sundry faces show,
If from all shapes and forms it be not clear?
Nor could we by our eyes all colors learn,
Except our eyes were of all colors void;
Nor sundry tastes can any tongue discern,
Which is with gross, and bitter humors cloyd.
Nor may a man of passions judge aright,
Except his mind be from all passions free;
Nor can a Judge his office well acquit,
If he possessed of either party be.
If lastly this quick power a Body were,
Were it as swift as is the wind, or fire,
(Whose Atomies do the one down sidewayes bear,
And make the other in Pyramids aspire.
Her nimble Body yet in time must move,
And not in instants through all places slide;
But she is nigh, and far, beneath, above,
In point of time, which thought can not divide.
She Is sent as soon to China, as to Spain,
And thence returns, as soon as she is sent;
She measures with one time, and with one pain,
An ell of Silk, and heavens wide-spreading Tent.
As then the Soul a substance has alone,
Besides the Body, in which she is confined:
So has she not a Body of her own,
But is a spirit, and immateriall mind.
Since Body and Soul have such diversities, That the soul is created
immediately by God, Zech. 12.1.

Well might we muse, how first their match began;
But that we learn, that he that spread the skies,
And fixed the earth, first formed the Soul in man.
It Is true Prometheus first made man of earth,
And shed in him a beam of heavenly fire;
Now in their mothers wombs before their birth,
Does in all sons of men their Souls inspire.
And as Minerva is in Fables said,
From Jove without a mother to proceed,
So our true Jove without a mothers aid,
Does daily millions of Minerva's breed.
Then neither from eternity before, Erroneous opinions of the creation of
Souls.

Nor from the time, when times first point begun,
Made he all Souls, which now he keeps in store,
Some in the Moon, and others in the Sun.
Nor in a secret Cloister does he keep
These virgin spirits, until their marriage-day,
Nor locks them up in Chambers where they sleep,
Till they awake, within these beds of Clay.
Nor did he first a certain number make,
Infusing part in beasts, and part in men,
And as unwilling farther pains to take,
Would make no more, then those he framed then.
So that the widow Soul, her Body dying,
Unto the next born Body married was,
And so by often changing and supplying,
Men's souls to beasts, and beasts to men did pass.
These thoughts are fond: for since the Bodies borne
Be more in number far, then those that die,
Thousands must be abortive, and forlorn,
Ere others deaths to them their souls supply.)
But as Gods handmaid nature does create
Bodies, in time distinct, and order due:
So God gives souls the like successive date,
Which himself makes, in bodies formed new.
Which himself makes, of no material thing,
For unto Angels he no power has given,
Either to form the shape, or stuff to bring,
From air, or fire, or substance of the Heaven.
Nor he in this does Natures service use,
For though from Bodies she can Bodies bring, That the soul is not traduced
from the parents.

Yet could she never Souls from Souls traduce,
As fire from fire, or light from light does spring.
But many subtle wits have justified,
That Souls from Souls spiritually may spring,
Which (if the nature of the Soul be tried)
Will even in nature prove as gross a thing.
For all things made, are either made of naught,
Or made of stuff that ready made does stand; Reasons drawn from nature.

Of naught no creature ever formed ought,
For that is proper to The Almighty's hand.
If then the Soul another Soul do make,
Because her power is kept within a bound,
She must some former stufle or matter take,
But in the Soul there is no matter found.
Then if her heavenly Form do not agree
With any matter, which the world contains,
Then she of nothing must created be,
And to create, to God alone pertaines.
Again, if Souls do other Souls beget,
It Is by themselves, or by the Bodies power,
If by themselves, what does their working let,
But they might Souls engender every hour?
If by the Body, how can wit and will
Join with the Body only in this act?
Since when they do their other works fulfill,
They from the Body do themselves abstract?
Again, if Souls of Souls begotten were,
Into each other they should change and move;
And change and motion still corruption bear;
How shall we then the Soul immortal prove?
If lastly Souls did generation use.
Then should they spread incorruptible seed;
What then becomes of that which they do loose
When th'acts of generation do not speed?
And though the Soul could cast spiritual seed;
Yet would she not, because she never dies;
For mortal things desire their like to breed,
That so they may their kind immortalize.
Therefore the Angels, sons of God are named,
And marry not, nor are in marriage given,
Their spirits and ours are of one substance framed,
And have one Father even the Lord of Heaven.
Who would at first, that in each other thing,
The earth, and water living Souls should breed;
But that Man's Soul, whom he would make their king,
Should from himself immediately proceed.
And when he took the woman from man's side,
Doubtless himself in spir'd her Soul alone;
For it is not said, he did man's Soul divide,
But took flesh of his flesh, bone of his bone.
Lastly, God, being made Man for Man's own sake,
And being like Man in all, except in sin,
His Body from the Virgins womb did take,
But all agree, God from'd his Soul within,
Then is the Soul from God; so Pagans say,
Which saw by natures light, her heavenly kind,
Naming her kin to God, and Gods bright ray,
A Citizen of heaven, to earth consigned.
And then the Soul, being first from nothing brought,
When Gods grace fails her, does to nothing fall,
And this declining Pronesse unto naught,
Is even that sin that we are born withal,
Yet not alone the first good qualities,
Which in the first Soul were, deprived are,
But in their place the contrary do rise,
And real spots of sin her beauty mar.
Nor is it strange, that Adams ill desert,
Should be transferred unto his guilty race,
When Christ his grace and justice does impart
To men unjust, and such as have no grace.
Lastly, the Soul were better so to be
Borne slave to sin, then not to be at all,
Since (if she do believe) one sets her free,
That makes her mount the higher from her fall.
Yet this the curious wits will not content,
They yet will know (since God foresaw this ill)
Why his high providence did not prevent
The declination of the first man's will.
If by his word he had the current stayed,
Of Adams will, which was by nature free,
It had been one, as if his word had said,
I will henceforth that man no man shall be.
For what is man without a moving mind,
Which has a judging wit, and choosing will?
Now, if Gods power should her election bind,
Her motions then would cease, and stand all still.
And why did God in man this Soul infuse,
But that he should his maker know and love?
Now if love be compelled, and cannot choose,
How can it grateful, or thank-worthy prove?
Love must free-hearted be, and voluntary,
And not enchaunted, or by fate constrained;
Not like that love which did Ulysses carry
To Circes Isle, with mighty charms enchained,
Besides, were we unchangeable in will,
And of a wit that nothing does misdeem,
Equal to God, whose wisdom shines still,
And never erres, we might our selves esteem.
So that if man would be unvariable,
He must be God, or like a Rock, or Tree;
For even the perfect Angels were not stable,
But had a fall, more desperate then we.
Then let us praise that Power, which makes us be
Men as we are, and rest contented so;
And knowing man's fall was curiosity
Admire Gods counsels, which we cannot know.
And let us know that God the marker is,
Of all the Souls, in all the men that be,
Yet their Corruption is no fault of his,
But the first Man's, that broke Gods first decree.
This substance and this spirit ofGods own making,
Is in the Body placed, and planted here, Why the soul is united to the body

That both of God, and of the world partaking,
Of all that is, man might the image bear.
God first made Angels bodilesse pure minds,
Then other things, which mindlesse Bodies be;
Last he made man th'Horizon 'twixtboth kinds,
In whom we do the worlds abridgement see.
Besides, this world below did need one wight,
Which might thereof distinguish every part,
Make use thertof, and take therein delight,
And order things with industry, and Art.
Which also God might in his works admire,
And here beneath, yield him both prayer and praise,
As there, above, the holy Angels Quire
Does spread his glory, with spiritual lays.



When Hearing, Seeing, Tasting, Smelling's past:
Feeling (as long as life remains) does last.
Maid reach my Lute, I am not well indeed:
O pitty-mee, my Bird has made me bleed.
Lastly, the brute unreasonable wights,
Did want a visible King on them to reign;
And God himself thus to the world unites,
That so the world might endless bliss obtain.
But how shall we this union well express? In what manner the Soul is united
to the Body.

Naught ties the Soul, her subtilty is such;
She moves the Body, which she does possess,
Yet no part touches but by virtues touch.
Then dwells she not therein as in a tent,
Nor as a Pilot in his ship does sit;
Nor as a Spider in her web is pent,
Nor as the wax retains the print in it.
Nor as a vessel water does contain,
Nor as one liquor in another shed;
Nor as the heat does in the fire remain,
Nor as a voice throughout the air is spread.
But as a fair, and cheerful morning light,
Does here and there her silver beams impart,
And in an instant does her self unite
To the transparent Air, in all and part.
Still resting whole, when blows the Air divide;
Abiding pure, when The Air is most corrupted,
Throughout the Air her beams dispersing wide,
And, when the air is tossed, not interrupted.
So does the piercing Soul the Body fill,
Being all in all, and all in part diffused
Indivisible, uncorrnptible still,
Not forced, encountered, troubled, or confused.
And as the Sun above, the light does bring,
Though we behold it in the air below:
So from the eternal light the Soul does spring,
Though in the Body she her powers do show.
But as the worlds Sun does effects beget,
Diverse, in diverse places every day, How the soul does exercise her powers in
the Body.

Here Autumnes temperature, there Summers heat,
Here flowery Springtide, and there Winter-gray.
Here even, there morn, here noon, there day, there night,
Melts wax, dries clay, makes flours, some quick, some dead,
Makes the More black, and th'Ethiopian white
Th'American tawny, and The East Indian red;
So in onr little world this Soul of ours,
Being only one, and to one Body tied,
Does use on diverse objects diverse powers,
And so are her effects diversified.
Her quickening power in every living part,
Does as a Nurse, or as a Mother serve, The vegetative or quickening power.

And does employ her oeconomick Art,
And busy care, her household to preserve.
Here she attracts, and there she does retain,
There she decocts, and does the food prepare,
There she distributes it to every vain,
There she expels what she may fitly spare.
This power to Martha may compared be,
Which busy was, the household things to do;
Or to a Dryas living in a Tree,
For even to Trees this power is proper too.
And though the Soul may not this power extend
Out of the Body, but still use it there,
She has a power, which she abroad does send,
Which viewes and searches all things every where.
This power is Sense, which from abroad does bring
The color, taste, and touch, and sent, and found, The power of Sense.

The quantity, and shape of every thing,
Within the earths Center, or heavens Circle found.
This power in parts made fit, fit objects takes,
Yet not the things, but forms of things receives;
As when a Seal in Wax impression makes,
The print therein, but not it self, it leaves.
And though things sensible be numberless,
But only five the Senses Organs be;
And in those five All things their forms express,
Which we can Touch, Taste, Feel, or Hear, or See.
These are the windows through the which she viewes
The light of knowledge which is life's load-starre;
"And yet while she these spectacles does use,
Often worldly things seen greater then they are.
First the two Eyes, which have the Seeing power,
Stand as one Watchman, Spy, or Sentinel, Sight.

Being placed alost within the Heads high Tower;
And though both see, yet both but one thing tell.
These Mirrors take into their little space
The forms of Moon and Sun, and every Star,
Of every body, and of every place,
Which with the worlds wide Arms embraced are
Yet their best object, and their noblest use,
Hereafter in another world will be,
When God in them shall heavenly light insuse,
That face to face they may their Maker see.
Here are they guides, which do the body lead,
Which else would stumble in eternal night;
Here in this world they do much knowledge read,
And are the Casements which admit most light.
They are her farthest reaching instrument,
Yet they no beams unto their objects send,
But all the rays are from their objects sent,
And in the Eyes with pointed Angels end.
^ Where Fantasy, near handmaid to the mind,
Sits, and beholds, and does discern them all, The Fantasy.

Compounds in one, things diverse in their kind,
Compares the black and white, the great and small.
Besides those single forms, she does esteem,
And in her balance does their values try,
Where some things good, and some things ill do seem,
And neutrall some in her fantastic eye.
This busy power is working day and night;
For when the outward Senses rest do take,
A thousand Dreams fantastical and light,
With fluttering wings do keep her still awake.
Yet always all may not before her be,
Successively she this, and that intends; The sensative Memory.

Therefore such forms as she does cease to see,
To Memories large volume she commends.
This Lidger Book lies in the brain behind,
Like Janus eye, which in his pole was set;
The Lay-mans Tables, Storehouse of the mind,
Which does remember much, and much forget.
Here Senses Apprehension end does take,
As when a stone is into water cast,
One Circle does another Circle make,
Till the last Circle touch the bank at last.
But though the apprehensive power do pawse,
The Motive virtue then begins to move, The passions of Sense.

Which in the heart below does passions cause,
Joy, grief, and fear, and hope, and hate, and love.
These passions have a free commanding might,
And diverse Actions in our life do breed;
For all acts done without true reasons light,
Do from the passion of the Sense proceed.
But since the Brain does lodge these powers of Sense,
How makes it in the heart those passions spring?
The mutual love, the kind intelligence
'Twixt heart and brain, this sympathy does bring.
From the kind heat, which in the heart does reign,
The spirits of life do their beginning take;
These spirits of life ascending to the brain,
When they come there, the Spirits of Sense do make,
These spirits of Sense in Fantasies high Court,
Judge of the forms of Objects ill or well;
And so they send a good or ill report,
Down to the heart, where all Affections dwell.
If the report be good, it causes love,
And longing hope, and well assured joy:
If it be ill, then does it hatred move,
And trembling fear, and vexing griess, annoy.
Yet were these natural affections good;
(For they which want them blocks or devils be)
If reason in her first perfection stood,
That she might Natures passions rectify.
Besides, another Motive power does rise
Out of the heart: from whose pure blood do spring
The vital Spirits, which borne in Arteries, The motion of life.

Continual motion to all parts do bring.
This makes the pulses beat, and lungs respire,
This holds the sinews like a bridles Raines, The local motion.

And makes the body to advance, retire,
To turn, or stop, as she them slacks, or straincs.
Thus the Soul tunes the Bodies instrument;
These harmonies she makes with life and sense,
The Organs fit are by the Body lent,
But the actions flow from the Souls influence
But now I have a Will, yet want a Wit, The intellectual powers of the Soul.

To express the working of the Wit and Will,
Which though their root be to the body knit,
Use not the body when they use their skill.
These powers the nature of the Soul declare,
For to man's Soul these only proper be;
For on the earth no other wights there are,
Which have these heavenly powers, but only we.
The wit, the pupil of the Souls clear eye, The Wit, or understanding.

And in man's world the only shining Star;
Looks in the mirror of the Fantasy,
Where all the gatherings of the Senses are.
From thence this power the shapes of things abstracts,
And them within her passive part receives;
Which are enlightened by that part which acts,
And so the forms of single things perceives.
But after by discoursing to and fro,
Anticipating, and comparing things;
She does all universal natures know,
And all effects into their causes brings.
When she rates things, and moves from ground to ground Reason

The name of Reason she obtains by this:
But when by Reasons she the truth has found, Understanding.

And stands sixth, she Understanding is.
When her assent she lightly does enclins
To either part, she is opinion light: Opinion.

But when she does by principles define
A Certain truth, she has true Judgments sight. Judgment.

And as from Senses Reasons work does spring,
So many Reasons understanding gain,
And many understandings knowledge oring,
And by much knowledge, wisdom we obtain.
So many stairs we must ascend upright,
Ere we attain to wisdoms high degree;
So coth this earth eclipse our reasons light,
Which else (in instants) would like Angels see.
Yet has the Soul a dowry natural,
And sparks of light some common things to see;
Not being a blank, where naught is writ at all,
But what the writer will may written be.
For nature in men's heart her laws does pen,
Prescribing truth to wit, and good to will;
Which do accuse, or else excuse all men,
For every thought, or practice, good, or ill.
And yet these sparks grow almost infinite,
Making the world, and all therein their food;
As fire so spreads as no place holds it,
Being nourisht still, with new supplies of wood.
And though these sparks were almost quenched with sin,
Yet they whom that just one has justified, Note,

Have them encreasd, with heavenly light within,
And like the widows oil still multiplide.
And as this wit should goodness truly know, The Power or Will.

We have a wit which that true good should choose:
Though will do often (when wit false forms does show)
Take ill for good, and good for ill refuse.
Will puts in practice what the wit devises; The relations betwixt Wit and
Will.

Will ever acts, and wit contemplates still,
And as from wit the power of wisdom rises,
All other virtues daughters are of will.
Will is the Prince, and wit the Counselor,
Which does for common good in Council fit,
And when wit is resolved, will lends her power,
To execute what is advisd by wit.
WILL.


Free to all ill. till freed to none but ill,
Now this I will anon the same I ^ill
Appetite ere while, ere while Reason may,
Nere good but when Gods Sperit bears ^^^ay
Wit is the minds chief Judge, which does Comptroul
Of fancies Court the judgments false and vain;
Will holds the Royal Scepter in the Soul,
And on the passions of the heart does reign.
Will is as Free as any Emperor;
Naught can restrain her gentle liberty,
No Tyrant, nor no Torment has the power,
To make us will, when we unwilling be.
To these high powers a Storehouse does pertain, The Intellectual Memory

Where they all Arts and general Reasons lay,
Which in the Soul, even after death remain,
And no Lethoean flood can wash away.
This is the Soul, and those her Virtues be,
Which though they have their sundry proper ends,
And one exceeds another in degree,
Yet each on other mutually depends.
Our Wit is given, Almighty God to know,
Our Will is given to love him being known;
But God could not be known to us below,
But by his works, which through the sense are shown.
And as the Wit does reap the fruits of Sense,
So does the quickening power the Senses feed;
Thus while they do their sundry gifts dispense,
The best the service of the least does need.
Even so the King his Magistrates do serve;
Yet Commons feed both Magistrate and King;
The Commons peace the Magistrates preserve,
By borrowed power, which from the Pr. does spring.
The quickening power would be, and so would rest,
The Sense would not be only, but be well;
But Wits ambition longs to be best,
For it desires in endless bliss to dwell.
And these three powers three sorts of men do make;
For some like plants their veins do only fill;
And some like beasts, their senses pleasure take;
And some like Angels do contemplate still.
Therefore the Fables turned some men to Flowers,
And others did with brutish forms invest,
And did of others make celestial powers,
Like Angels, which still travel, yet still rest.
Yet these three powers are not three Souls, but one;
As one and two are both contained in three,
Three being one number by it self alone;
A shadow of the blessed Trinity.
O what is man (greater maker of mankind) An Acclamation.

That thou to him so great respect do bear?
That thou adornst him with so bright a mind,
Make him a King, and even an Angels peer?
O what a lively life, what heavenly power,
What spreading virtue, what a sparkling fire,
How great, how plentiful, how rich a dowre,
Do thou within this dying flesh inspire!
Thou leave thy print in other works of thine,
But thy whole image thou in man have writ;
There cannot be a creature more divine,
Except (like thee) it should be infinite.
But it exceeds man's thought, to think how high
God has raisd man, since God a man became;
The Angels do admire this mystery,
And are astonished when they view the same.
Nor has he given these blessings for a day, That the soul is immortal and
cannot dye.

Nor made them on the bodies life depend;
The Soul, though made in time, survives for aye,
And though it has beginning, sees no end.
Her only end, is never ending bliss;
Which is, the eternal face of God to see;
Who last of ends, and first of causes is,
And to do this, she must eternal be.
How senseless then and dead a Soul has he,
Which thinks his Soul does with his body dye?
Or thinks not so, but so would have it be,
That he might sin with more security?
For though these light and vicious persons say,
Our Soul is but a smoke, or airy blast,
Which during life does in our nostrils play,
And when we die, does turn to wind at last.
Although they say, come, let us eat and drink,
Our life is but a spark, which quickly dies;
Though thus they say, they know not what to think
But in their minds ten thousand doubts arise.
Therefore no heretics desire to spread
Their light opinions, like these Epicures;
For so their staggering thoughts are comforted,
And other men's assent their doubt assures.
Yet though these men against their conscience strive,
There are some sparkles in their flinty breasts,
Which cannot be extinct, but still revive,
That though they would, they cannot quite be beasts.
But who so makes a mirror of his mind,
And does with patience view himself therein,
His Souls eternity shall clearly find,
Though the other beauties be defaced with sin.
First in man's mind we find an appetite 1 Reason. Drawn from the desire of
Knowledge.

To learn and know the truth of every thing,
Which is connaturall, and borne with it,
And from the Essence of the Soul does spring.
With this desire she has a native might
To find out every truth, if she had time
Th'innumerable effects to sort aright,
And by degrees from cause to cause to clime.
But since our life so fast away does slide,
As does a hungry Eagle through the wind,
Or as a Ship transported with the tide,
Which in their passage leave no print behind.
Of which swift little time so much we spend,
While some few things we through the sense do strain.
That our short race of life is at an end,
Ere we the principles of skill attain.
Or God (which to vain ends has nothing done)
In vain this appetite and power has given,
Or else our knowledge which is here begun,
Hereafter must be perfected in heaven.
God never gave a power to one whole kind,
But most part of that kind did use the same;
Most eyes have perfect sight, though some be blind;
Most legs can nimbly run, though some be lame.
But in this life no Soul the truth can know
So perfectly, as it has power to do;
If then perfection be not found below,
An higher place must make her mount thereto.
Again, how can she but immortal be?
When with the motions of both will and wit, 2 Reason. Drawn from the Motion
of the Soul.

She still aspireth to eternity,
And never rests, till she attain to it?
Water in Conduit pipes can rise no higher
Then the wel-head from whence it first does spring,
Then since to eternal God she does aspire,
She cannot be but an eternal thing.
"All moving things to other things do move
"Of the same kind, which shows their nature such;
So earth falls down, and fire does mount above,
Till both their proper Elements do touch.
And as the moisture which the thirsty earth, The Soul compared to a River.

Sucks from the sea, to fill her empty veins,
From out her womb at last does take a birth,
And runs a Nymph along the grassie plains.
Long does she stay, as loath to leave the land,
From whose soft side she first did issue make;
She tastes all places, turns to every hand,
Her flowery banks unwilling to forsake.
Yet nature so her streams does lead and carry,
As that her course does make no final stay,
Till she her self unto the Ocean marry,
Within whose watery bosom first she lay.
Even so the Soul, which in this earthly mould
The Spirit of God does secretly infuse;
Because at first she does the earth benold,
And only this material world she viewes.
At first our mother earth she holds dear,
And does embrace the world and worldly things;
She flies close by the ground, and hovers here,
And mounts not up, with her celestial wings.
Yet under heaven she cannot light on ought,
That with her heavenly nature does agree;
She cannot rest, she cannot fix her thought,
She cannot in this world contented be.
For who did ever yet in honor, wealth,
Or pleasure of the Sense contentment find?
Who ^ver^ea^^d to wish, when he had health,
Or having wisdom, was not vexed in mind?
Then as a Be which ammong weeds does fall
Which seem sweet flowers, with luster fresh and gay,
She lights on that, and this, and tastes all,
But pleased with none, does rise, and sore away.
So when the Soul finds here no true content,
And like Noah's Dove can no sure sooting take,
She does return from whence she first was sent,
And flies to him that first her wings did make.
Wit seeking truth from cause to cause ascends,
And never rests, till it the first attain;
Will, seeking good, finds many middle ends,
But never stays, till it the last do gain.
Now God the Truth and first of Causes is,
God is the last good end, which lasts still,
Being Alpha and Omega named for this,
Alpha to Wit, Omega to the will.
Since then her heavenly kind she does bewray,
In that to God she does directly move,
And on no mortail thing can make her stay,
She cannot be from hence, but from above.
And yet this first true cause, and last good end,
She cannot hear so well, and truly see;
For this perfection she must yet attend,
Till to her maker she espoused be.
As a Kings daughter being in person sought
Of diverse Princes, which do neighbor near,
On none of them can fix a constant thought,
Though she to all do lend a gentle ear.
Yet can she love a Foreign Emperor,
Whom of great worth and power she hears to be,
If she be wooed but by Ambassador,
Or but his Letters, or his picture see.
For well she knows, that when she shall be brought
Into the Kingdom, where her Spouse does reign.
Her eyes shall see, what she conceived in thought,
Himself, his state, his glory, and his train.
So while the Virgin Soul on earth does stay,
She wooed and tempted is ten thousand ways.
By these great powers, which on the earth bear sway,
The wisdom of the world, wealth, pleasure, praise.
With these sometime she does her time beguile,
These do by fits her fantasy possess;
But she distaits them all within a while,
And in the sweetest finds a tediousness.
But if upon the worlds Almighty King,
She once do fix her humble loving thought,
Which by his picture drawn in every thing,
And sacred messages her love has sought.
Of him she thinks she cannot think too much,
This honey tasted still, is ever sweet,
The pleasure of her ravished thought is such,
At almost here, she with her bliss does meet.
But when in Heaven she shall his Essence see,
This is her sovereign good, and perfect bliss,
Her longings, wishings, hopes, all finished be,
Her joys are full, her motions rest in this.
There is she Crowned with Garlands of Content,
There does she Manna eat, and Nectar drink;
That presence does such high delights present,
As never tongue could speak, nor heart could think,
For this the better Souls do often despise 4 Reason. From contempt of death in
the better fort of (...)

The Bodies death and do it often desire:
For when on ground the burdened balance lies,
The empty part is listed up the higher.
FANCY.


Apelike I all things imitate.
New proiects fashions I invent.
Dreame-like I them vary-straite.
All Shapes to head and heart present.
But if the Bodies death the Soul should kill,
Then death must needs Against her nature be;
And were it so, all Souls would fly it still,
For Nature hates and shuns her contrary.
For all things else, which Nature makes to be,
Their being to preserve are chiefly taught;
For though some things desire a change to see,
Yet never thing did long to turn to naught.
If then by death the Soul were quenched quite,
She could not thus against her nature run;
Since every senseless thing by Natures light,
Does preservation seek, destruction shun.
Nor could the worlds best spirits so much err,
If death took all, that they should all agree,
Before this life their honor to prefer;
For what is praise to things that nothing be?
Again, if by the Bodies prop she stand,
If on the Bodies life, her life depend,
As Meleagers on the fatal brand,
The Bodies good she only would intend.
We should not find her half so brave and bold,
To lead it to the wars, and to the Seas;
To make it suffer watchings, hunger, cold,
When it might feed with plenty, rest with ease,
Doubtless all Souls have a surviving thought,
Therefore of death we think with quiet mind,
But if we think of being turned to naught,
A trembling horror in our Souls we find,
And as the better spirit, when she does bear 4 Reason. From the fear of death
in the wicked souls.

A scorn of death, does show she cannot dye:
So when the wicked Soul deaths face does fear,
Even then she proves her own Eternity.
For when deaths from appears, she fears not
An utter quenching, or extinguishment;
She would be glad to meet with such a lot,
That so she might all future ill prevent.
But she does doubt what after may befall;
For natures law accuses her within,
And says, it is true that is affirmed by all,
That after death there is a pain for sin,
Then she which has been hoodwinckt from her birth
Does first her self within Deaths mirror see;
And when her Body does return to earth,
She first takes care, how she alone shall be.
Whoever sees these irreligious men,
With burden of a sickness weak and faint;
But hears them talking of Religion then,
And vowing of their Souls to every Saint?
When was there ever cursed Atheist brought
Unto the Gibbet, but he did adore,
That blessed power, which he had set at naught,
Scorned and blasphemed, all his life before?
These light vain persons still are drunk and mad,
With surfetings, and pleasures of their youth;
But at their deaths they are fresh, sober, sad,
Then they discern, and then they speak the truth.
If then all Souls both good and bad do teach,
With general voice that Souls can never dye;
It Is not man's flattering gloss, but Natures speech,
Which like Gods Oracle, can never lie.
Hence springs that universal strong desire, 5 Reason. From the general
desire of imortality.

Which all men have of Immortality;
Not some few spirits unto this thought aspire,
But all men's minds in this united be.
Then this desire of Nature is not vain,
"She covets not impossibilities;
"Fond thoughts may fall into some idle brain,
"But one Assent of all, is ever wise.
From hence that general care and study springs,
That lanching and progression of the mind,
Which all men have so much of future things,
As they no joy do in the present find.
From this desire, that maine desire proceeds,
Which all men have, surviving fame to gain,
By Tombs, by Books, by memorable Deeds,
For she that this desires, does still remain.
Hence lastly springs Care of Posterities,
For things their kind would everlasting make;
Hence is it, that old men do plant young Trees,
The fruit whereof another age shall take.
If we these Rules unto our selves apply,
And view them by reflection of the mind;
All these true notes of immortality,
In our Hearts Tables we shall written find.
And though some impious wits do questions move, 6 Reason. From the very doubt
and dispuration of immortality.

And doubt if Souls immortal be or no;
That doubt their immortality does prove,
Because they seem immortal things to know.
For he which Reasons on both parts does bring,
Does some things mortal, some immortal call;
Now if himself were but a mortal thing,
He could not judge immortal things at all.
For when we judge, our minds we mirrours make;
And as those glasses which material be,
Forms of material things do only take;
For thoughts or minds in them we cannot see.
So when we God and Angles do conceive,
And think of truth, which is eternal to;
Then do our minds immortal forms receive,
Which if they mortal were, they could not do.
And as if Beasts conceived what Reason were,
And that conception should distinctly show,
They should the name of reasonable bear;
For without Reason none could Reason know.
So when the Soul mounts with so high a wing,
As of eternal things she doubts can move;
She proofs of her eternity does bring,
Even when she strives the contrary to prove.
For even the thought of Immortality,
Being an act done without the Bodies aid,
Shows that her self alone could move, and be,
Although the body in the grave were laid.
And if her self she can so lively move,
And never need a foreign help to take,
Then must her motion everlasting prove,
Because her self she never can forsake.
But though corruption cannot touch the mind, That the soul cannot be destroyed.

By any cause that from it self may spring;
Some outward cause fate has perhaps designed,
Which to the Soul may utter quenching bring.
Perhaps her cause may cease, and she may die;
God is her cause, his word her maker was,
Which shall stand fixed for all eternity, Her cause cease not.

When heaven and earth shall like a shadow pass,
Perhaps some thing repugnant to her kind, She has no contrary.

By strong Antipathy the Soul may kill;
But what can be contrary to the mind,
Which holds all contraries in concord still?
She lodges heat, and cold, and moist, and dry,
And life, and death, and peace, and war together;
Ten thousand fighting things in her do lie,
Yet neither troubles or disturbeth either.
Perhaps for want of food the Soul may pine; She cannot dye for want of food.

But that were strange, since all things bad and good,
Since all Gods creatures mortal and divine,
Since God himself is her eternal food.
Bodies are fed with things of mortal kind,
And so are subject to mortality;
But truth, which is eternal, feeds the mind;
The tree of life which will not let her dye.
Yet violence perhaps the Soul destroys; Violence cannot destroy her.

As lightning or the Sunbeams dim the sight;
Or as a thunderclap or Cannons noise,
The power of hearing does astonish quite.
But high perfection to the Soul it brings,
T'encounter things most excellent and high;
For when she viewes the best and greatest things,
They do not hurt, but rather clear her eye.
But lastly, Time perhaps at last has power Time cannot destroy her.

To spend her lively powers, and quench her light;
But old God Saturn which does all devour,
Does cherish her, and still augment her might.
Heaven waxes old, and all the Spheres above
Shall one day faint, and their swift motion stay,
And Time it self in time shall cease to move;
Only the Soul survives, and lives for aye.
"Our Bodies every footstep that they make,
"March toward death, until at last they dye;
Whether we work, or play, or sleep, or wake,
"Our life does pass, and with times wings does fly.
But to the Soul Time does perfection give,
And adds fresh luster to her beauty still;
And makes her in eternal youth to live,
Like her which Nectar to the God, does full.
The more she lives, the more she feeds on truth,
The more she feeds, her strength does more increase;
And what is strength, but an effect of youth?
Which if time nurse, how can it ever cease?
But now these Epicures begin to smile, Objections against the immortality of
the Soul.

And say, my doctrine is more safe then true,
And that I fondly do my self beguile,
While these received opinions I ensue.
For what, say they, does not the Soul wax old? 1 Objection.

How comes it then, that aged men do dote?
And that their brains grow sottish, dull, and cold,
Which were in youth the only spirits of note?
What? are not Souls within themselves corrupted?
How can there Idiots then by Nature be?
How is it that some wits are interrupted,
That now they dazzled are, now clearly see?
These Questions make a subtle Argument, Answer.

To such as think both Sense and Reason one;
To whom nor agent from the instrument,
Nor power of working, from the work is known,
For if that region of the tender brain,
Wherein the inward sense of fantasy should sit,
And the outward senses gatherings should retain,
By nature, or by chance, become unfit.
Either at first incapable it is,
And so few things or none at all receives,
Or marred by accident, which haps amiss,
And so amiss it every thing perceives.
Then as a cunning Prince that uses Spies,
If they return no news, does nothing know;
But if they make advertizement of Lies;
The Princes Counsel all awry do go.
Even so the Soul to such a Body knit,
Whose inward senses undisposed be,
And to receive the forms of things unfit,
Where nothing is brought in, can nothing see.
But if a Frenzy do possess the brain,
It so disturbs and blots the forms of things,
As fantasy proves altogether vain,
And to the wit no true relation brings.
Then does the wit admitting all for true,
Build fond conclusions on those idle grounds;
Then does it fly the good, and ill pursue,
Believing all that this false Spy propounds.
But purge the humors, and the rage appease,
Which this distemper in the fancy wrought,
Then will the wit, which never had disease,
Discourse, and judge discreetly as it ought.
Then these defects in Senses Organs be,
Not in the Soul, or in her working might;
She cannot loose her perfect power to see,
Though mists, and clouds, do choke her window light,
The Soul in all has one Intelligence;
Though too much moisture in an Infants brain,
And too much dryness in an old man's sense,
Cannot the prints of outward things retain,
Then does the Soul want work, and idle sit,
And this we childishness, and dotage call;
Yet has she then a quick and active wit,
If she had stuff and tools to work withal.
As a good Harper stricken far in years,
Into whose cunning hands the Gout does fall;
All his old Crotchets in his brain he bears,
But on his Harp plays ill, or not at all.
Then dotage is no weakness of the mind,
But of the Sense: for if the mind did wast,
In all old men we should this wasting find,
When they some certain term of years had past.
But most of them even to their dying hour,
Retain a mind more lively, quick, and strong,
And better use their understanding power,
Then when their brains were warm, and limbs were young.
Yet say these men, if all her Organs dye,
Then has the Soul no power her powers to use; 2 Objection.

So in a sort her powers extinct do lie,
When unto act she cannot them reduce.
And if her powers be dead, then what is she?
For since from every thing some powers do spring,
And from those powers some acts proceeding be,
Then kill both power, and act, and kill the thing.
Doubtless the bodies death, when once it dies,
The instruments of sense and life does kill; Answer.

So that she cannot use those faculties,
Although their root restin her substance still.
But (as the body living) wit and will
Can judge and choose, without the bodies aid;
Though on such objects they are working still,
As through the bodies Organs are conveyed.
So when the body serves her turn no more,
And all her Senses are extinct and gone,
She can discourse of what she learned before,
In heavenly contemplations all alone.
And (though the Instruments by which we live,
And view the world, the bodies death to kill)
Yet with the body they shall all revive,
And all their wonted offices fulfill.
But how till then shall she her self employ? 3 Objection.

Her spies are dead, which brought home news before,
What she has got and keeps, she may enjoy,
But she has means to understand no more.
Then what do those poor Souls which nothing get?
Or what do those which get and cannot keep?
Like Buckets bottomless, which all out let;
Those Souls for want of exercise must sleep.
See how man's Soul against it self does strive, Answer.

Why should we not have other means to know?
As children while within the womb they live
Feed by the navil; here they feed not so.
These children, if they had some use of sense,
And should by chance their mothers talking hear,
That in short time they shall come forth from thence,
Would fear their birth, more then our death we fear.
They would cry out, if we this place shall leave,
Then shall we break our tender navil strings;
How shall we then our nourishment receive,
Since our sweet food no other conduit brings?
And if a man should to these babes reply,
That into this fair world they shall be brought,
Where they shall see the earth, the sea, the sky;
The glorious Sun, and all that God has wrought.
That there ten thousand dainties they shall meet,
Which by their mouths they shall with pleasure take,
Which shall be cordial too, as well as sweet,
And of their little limbs tall bodies make.
This would they think a fable, even as we
Do think the story of the golden age;
Or as some sensual spirits amongst us be,
Which hold the world to come, a feigned stage.
Yet shall these infants after find all true,
Though then thereof they nothing could conceive,
As Soon as they are borne the world they view,
And with their mouths the Nurses milk receive.
So when the Soul is borne (for death is naught,
But the Souls birth, and so we should it call)
Ten thousand things she sees beyond her thought,
And in an unknown manner knows them all.
Then does she see by Spectacles no more,
She hears not by report of double spies;
Her self in instants does all things explore,
For each thing present, and before her lies.
But still this Crew with Questions me pursues: 4 Objection.

If Souls deceasd (say they) still living be,
Why do they not return, to bring us news
Of that strange world, where they such wonders see?
The Soul has here on earth no more to do, Answer.

Then we have business in our mothers womb:
What child does covet to return thereto?
Although all children first from thence do come?
And doubtless such a Soul as up does mount,
And does appear before her Makers face,
Holds this vile world in such a base account,
As she looks down, and scorns this wretched place.
But such as are detruded down to Hell,
Either for shame they still themselves retire;
Or tied in chains, they in close Prison dwell,
And cannot come, although they much desire.
Well well say these vain spirits, though vain it is 5 Objection.

To think our Souls to heaven or hell do go,
Politic men have thought it not amiss,
To spread this lie, to make men virtuous so.
Do you then think this moral virtue good? Answer.

I think you do, even for your private gain;
For Commonwealths by virtue ever stood,
And common good the private does contain.
Oh how can that be false, which every tongue The general consent of all

Of every mortal man, affirms for true?
Which truth has in all ages been so strong,
As lodestone like all hearts it ever drew.
For not the Christian, or the Jew alone,
The Persian, or the Turk, acknowledge this,
This mystery to the wild Indian known,
And to the Cannibal and Tartar is.
None that acknowledge God, or providence,
Their Souls eternity did ever doubt,
For all Religion takes her root from hence,
Which no poor naked Nation lives without.
If death do quench us quite, we have great Wrong,
Since for our service all things else were wrought,
That Dawes, and Trees, and Rocks, should last so long,
When we must in an instant pass to naught.
But blessed be that great power, that has us blessed,
With longer life then heaven or earth can have;
Which has enfusd into one mortal breast
Immortal powers, not subject to the grave.
For though the Soul do seem her grave to bear,
And in this world is almost buried quick,
We have no cause the bodies death to fear,
For when the shel is broke, ou^ comes a Chick.
For as the Souls Essential powers are three, Three kinds of life answerable
to the three powers of the Soul.

The quickening power, the power of Sense and Reason,
Three kinds of life to her designed be,
Which perfect these three powers in their due season.
The first life in the mothers womb is spent,
Where she her nursing power does only use;
Where when she finds defects of nourishment,
Sh'expels her body, and this world she viewes.
This we call Birth, but if the Child could speak,
He Death would call it, and of nature plain,
Tha she would thrust him out naked and weak,
And in h^s passage pinch him with such pain,
Yet out he comes, and in this world is placed,
Where all his Senses in perfection be,
Where he finds flowers to smell, and truits to taste,
And sounds to hear, and sundry forms to see.
When he has past some time upon this stage,
His Reason then a little seems to wake;
Which though she spring when sense does fade with age,
Yet can she here, no perfect practice make.
Then does the aspiring Soul the body leave,
Which we call death, but were it known to all,
What life our Souls do by this death receive,
Men would it Birth, or Gaole-delivery call.
In this third life Reason will be so bright,
As that her spark will like the Sunbeams shine,
And shall of God enjoy the real sight,
Being still increast by influence Divine.
O ignorant poor man, wha^ d^st thou bear, An Acclamation.

Locked up within the Casket of thy breast?
What Jewels, and what riches have thou there?
What heavenly treasure in so weak a chest?
Look in thy Soul, and thou shall beauties find,
Like those which drowned Narcissus in the flood,
Honor and Pleasure, both are in thy mind,
And all that in the world is counted good.


There are a Crew of fellows of suppose,
That angle for their victuals with their nose
As quick as Beagles in the smelling sense
To smell a feast in Pauses 2 miles from thence.
Think of her worth, and think that God did mean
This worthy mind should worthy things embrace;
Blot not her beauties with thy thoughts unclean,
Nor her dishonor with thy passions base.
Kill not her quickening power with surfettings,
Mar not her sense with Sensuality,
Cast not her serious wit on idle things,
Make not her free will slave to vanity.
And when thou think of her eternity,
Think not that death against her nature is,
Think it a birth: and when thou go to dye,
Sing like a Swan, as if thou went to bliss.
And if thou like a Child did fear before,
Being in the dark, where thou did nothing see;
Now I have brought thee Torch-light, fear no more,
Now when thou die, thou can not hoodwinkt be,
Take heed of overweening, and compare
Thy Peacocks feet with thy gay Peacocks train,
Study the best, and highest things that are,
But of thy self an humble thought retain.
Cast down thy self, and only strive to raise
The glory of thy Makers sacred name;
Use all thy powers, that blessed power to praise,
Which gives thee power to be, and use the same.
FINIS.

