THE VIRTUES OF COFFEE.

Set forth in the WORKS of The Lord Bacon his Natural Hist. Mr. Parkinson his
Herbal, Sir George Sandys his Travails, James Howel Esquire his Epistles.

Collected and Published for the Satisfaction of the Drinkers thereof.

Arbusta juvant Humilesque Muricae. Virg. Licensed and Entered according to
Order.

LONDON, Printed by W. G. 1663.

To the READER.
GENTLEMEN,

HAving often Drunk Coffa (as many other have done) for Company more then of
any Knowledge I had of the Virtue of it; nor could I gain it by Discourse with
those who sold of it, nor others which drank thereof daily; it made me search
for satisfaction out of the works of eminent Authors of our own Nation who
have made mention of it in their printed works many years before it was in use
here in England, and having found so much as gave me much satisfaction of the
excellent virtues of it, I think it not amiss to let others reap the same
benefit.

N. D.

The VIRTUES of COFFA.
Of the Turks Berry Drink, called Caova or Coffa.
ALpinus in his Book of Egyptian Plants, M. Parkinsons Herball. page 1622.
gives us the Description of this Tree, which, as he says, he saw in the
Garden of a certain Captain of the Janissaries, which was brought out of Arabia
Foelix, and there planted as a rarity, never seen growing in those places
before. The Tree (says Alpinus) is somewhat like unto the Euonymus
Pricketimber Tree, whose Leaves were thicker, harder, and greener, and always
abiding green on the Tree: The first is called Buna and is somewhat bigger then
a Hazel Nut, and longer, round also, and pointed at the one end, furrowed also
on both sides, yet on one side more conspicuous then the other, that it might
be parted into two, in each side whereof, lies a long small white Kernel, flat
on that side they join together, covered with a yellowish skin, of an acide
taste, and somewhat bitter withal, and contained in a thin shell of a darkish Ash
color; with these Berries generally in Arabia and Egypt, and in other places
of the Turks Dominions, they make a Decoction or Drink which is instead of wine
to them, and generally sold in all their Tap-houses, called by the name of
Caova or Coffa; this Drink has many good Physical properties therein, for it
strengthens a weak Stomach, helps digestion, and the tumors and
obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, being drunk Fasting for some time
together; the Egyptian and Arabian women use it familiarly while their Courses
hold, to cause them to pass away with the more ease, as also to cause those to
flow that are stayed, there bodies being prepared and purged aforehand.

Of the Turks Berry Drink called Coffa.
They have in Turkey, a Drink called Coffa, made Lord Bacon's Natural Hist. page
155.
of a Berry of the same name, as Black as Soot, and of a strong sent, but not
Aromatical, which they take beaten into Powder in water, as hot as they can
drink it, and they take it, and sit at it in their Coffa-houses, which are like
our Taverns. This Drink comfort the Brain, and Heart, and helps Digestion;
certainly this Berry Coffa, the Root and leaf Betell, the leaf Tobaco, and the
Tear of Poppy, (opium) of which the Turks are great Takers (supposing it
expels all fear) do all Condense the Spirits, and make them strong and
Alacre: But it seems they are taken after several manners, for Coffa and
Opium are taken down, Tobacco but in smoke, and Betel is but champed in the
Mouth, with a little Lime. It is like there are more if they were well found
out and well corrected.

Of the Drink of the Turks.
Their usual Drink is pure water, yet have they Sir George Sands Traval's pa.
66. printed 1621.
sundry Sherbets (so call they the confections which they infuse into it) some
made of Sugar and Lemons, some of Violets, and the like (whereof some are mixed
with Amber) which the richer sort dissolve thereinto. The Honey of Sio is
excellent for that purpose, and they make another of the juice of Raisins, of
little cost, and most usually drunk of: Wine is prohibited them by their
Alcoran, they plant none, they buy none, and death has been the penalty unto
such as presumed to bring any in; they prefer our Beer above all other Drinks,
and considering that wine is forbidden, that water is with the Rawest
(especially in this Clime) the dearness of Sherbets, and plenty of Barley (being
here sold for not above nine pence a Bushel) no doubt but it would prove
infinitely profitable to such as should bring in the use thereof amongst them:
although they be destitute of Taverns, yet have they their Coffa-houses, which
do something resemble them; there sit they chatting most of the day, and sip of
a Drink called Coffa (of the Berry that it is made of) in little China Dishes,
as hot as they can suffer it, black it is as soot, tasting not much unlike it
(why not that black Broth which was used amongst the Lacedaemonians) which
helps, as they say, Digestion, and procures Alacrity. Many of the Coffa-men
keeping beautiful Boys, who serve as Stales to procure them Customers.

Of the Drink of the Turks.
Amongst the Turks at this day, the want of wine Sir Hen. Blunt's Voyage to the
Levant. p. 191.
has caused them to devise other Drinks to their meat; for the better sort
Usaph, which is water sod with Raisins, sometimes with Honey, but above the rest
they esteem Sherbets made with Sugar, the juice of Lemmons, Peeches, Apricocks,
Violets, or other Flowers, Fruits, and Plums, as each Country affords; these
they dry together into a consistence reasonable hard, and portable for t^eir
use in war, or else where, mingling about a spoonful with a quart of water,
they have another Drink not good at Meat called Coffa, made of a Berry as big
as a small Bean dried in a Furnace and beaten to Powder, of a Soot color, in
taste a little bitterish; that they sees and drink as hot as may be endured; it
is good all hours of the day, but especially Morning and Evening, when to that
purpose they entertain themselves two or three hours in Coffa-houses, which in
all Turkey abound more then Inns and Alehouses with us, it is thought to be the
old Black Broth, used so much by the Lacedaemonians, and it dries ill humors
in the Stomach, comfort the Brain, never causes Drunkenness, or any other
Surfeit, and is a harmless entertainment of good fellowship, for there upon
Scaffolds half a yard high and covered with Mats, they sit crosse-legg'd after
the Turkish manner, many times two or three hundred together, talking, and
likely with some poor Music passing up and down.

-- But as for the two remarkable Simples which you most Part of Sir H. Blunt's
Letter to Mr. Justice Rumsey printed at the beginning of his Organon salutis
1659.
employ, that is, Tobacco and Coffa, a man may guess at their rare Efficacy,
who observes how universally they take with mankind, and yet have not the
advantage of any pleasing taste wherewith to tempt and debauch our Palate, as
Wine and other pernicious things have; for at the first Tobacco is most horrid,
and Coffa insipid, yet do they both so generally prevail, that Bread it self is
not of so universal use. The Tartars and Arabs two great Nations, have little
or no use of bread, yet they, the Turks, Persians, and most of the Eastern
World, have hourly use of Tobacco and Coffa, but especially of Coffa, for
besides the innumerable store of Coffa-houses, there is not a private fire
without it all day long, they all acknowledge how it freeth them from Crudities
caused by ill Diet, or moist Lodging, insomuch as they using Coffa Morning and
Evening, have no Consumptions, which ever come of Moisture; no Let hargies in
aged People, or Rickets in Children, and but few Qualms in Women with Child:
But especially they hold it of singular prevention against the Stone and Gout.
When a Turk is sick he fasts and takes Coffa, and if that will not do, he makes
his Will, and thinks of no other Physic. --

-- Touching Coffa, I concur with them in opinion who Part of a letter James
Howell Esquire. printed in the same Book.
hold it to be that black Froth which was used of old in Lacedemon, whereof the
Poets sing, surely it must needs be salutiferous, because so many sagacious,
and the wittest sort of Nations use it so much, as they who have conversed with
Shashes and Turbants do well know: But besides the exsiccant quality it has to
dry up the Crudities of the Stomach, as also to comfort the Brain, to fortify
the sight with its steem, and prevent Dropsies, Gouts, and the Scurvy, together
with the Spleen, and Hypocondriacal winds (all which it does without any
violence or distemper ^t all) I say, besides all these qualities, its found
already that this Coffa Drink has caused a great sobriety amongst the Nations;
for whereas formerly Apprentices and Clerks with others used to take their
Mornings Draught in Ale, Beer, or Wine (which by the Dizzinesse they cause in
the Brain, make many unfit for business) They use now to play the goodfellows
in this Wakeful and civil Drink Therefore that worthy Gentleman Sr. James
Muddiford who introduced the practice hereof first to London deserves much
respect of the whole nation.

FINIS.

