A DECLARATION OF An happy TREATY for PEACE, BETWEEN The Kings Majesty, AND
The High Court of PARLIAMENT.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

LONDON, Febr. 11. Printed for T. Wright. 1643.

A DECLARATION OF An happy Treaty for peace, between THE KJNGS MAJESTY, AND
The high Court of PARLIAMENT.
THE bleeding misery of our poor distressed brethren in Ireland, under the
cruel rebellion of the Papists at this time, whereby that Kingdom is in danger
to be lost, requires rather aid to rescue them from that thraldom: then to
involve England into the like misery, and indeed who can be ignorant not only
how just cause Scotland has to suspect the Papists here as well as we, but
with us labor to root them out also, and what their intents are against
England we may easily judge, not only by their cruelties in Ireland and
foreign Kingdoms, but by woeful too late experience in many places about this
Kingdom, who do mischief amongst us, not by their own persons only, but by
traducing others ^o coagitate in their cruel and desperate designs against the
Land, Religion, King, Parliament, and even humanity, against whose practices
there is so many wholesome Laws.

Neither have they only made us miserable, but an evil counsel that have
labored to breed and work in the Kings Majesty a dislike and disaffection
toward the Parliament and their proceedings, under which mistake this Kingdom
has too long bleedingly groaned, by reason of a civil and unhappy war:
Insomuch that although both the honorable Houses of Parliament have by all
means sought the peaceable return of his Majesty, yet they have bin still
prevented by such who have prevailed in their Counsel against them, which has
caused so long a hinderance of that happy accommodation which might otherwise
have bin obtained.

For this purpose they have often petitioned to his Majesty, and in most humble
manner desired his peaceable return to his Parliament, but were still opposed
by reason of the evil Counsel about him.

The Parliament having received now at last such an Answer as has given them
some hopes of accommodation; are no little glad thereof, which they have
entertained with such joyful acceptance as they can express, and have therefore
cheerfully treated concerning the same, desiring no greater happiness then the
perfecting thereof, not doubting but that it will make way for the removing of
all our grievances and supplying of all our wants, neither have they neglected
the perfecting of their sitting for a convenient and happy Treaty, who being
all equal, willing and re^^y in the accomplishment thereof, have in a short
space of time drawn up their resolutions, and returned them to his Majesty: God
prosper the work, and give a blessing to it.

The Parliament being tender of the losing of the lives of any of his Majesty's
good subjects by war and bloodshed, do in their wise judgments hold it better
to draw up the period of all differences, and perfect a reconciliation with his
Majesty by a peaceable treaty, then by the sword, or^ingring Declarations and
Messages, that so (if it be possible) a sudden and happy accommodation may be
accomplished, in which work they are, most earnest and careful.

Now seeing there is so much hopes of an accommodation, it concerns the whole
Kingdom, and every man in his particular state, degree and calling, to be
careful not to hinder, but to help forward this great work, lest by negligence
they become guilty of innocent blood.

1 We ought to remember in the first place to give God thanks for these hopes,
and this happy opportunity, for it is not man alone that does it, all the
wisdom of man is but vain, God directs and appoints what in his great wisdom
he will have come to pass, and he looks for the praises of his works,
therefore let us not forget to praise God for the hope which he has now given
us of this great work; let us be often thinking and talking of it, saying,
Blessed be the name of the Lord.

2 We must take heed of sin, least thereby the work be hindered: God grant that
the pride of this land, the profaning of the name of God by bloody and fearful
oaths, cozening, lying, Sabbath-breaking, etc. do not hinder the accommodation;
the destroying Angel ceased not until Phineas smote the adulterer and the
adulteress; Gods wrath was not appeased till Achans theft was punished; sin
brought the troubles that often fell upon Jerusalem, and Jonahs sin troubled
the whole ship, which found no rest til he returned. Thus does it concern us
all to leave our sins, and turn to God by repentance, else may we still sail in
violent winds and troubled waters.

3 It concerns us also to take heed of trusting the Papists, they must be
narrowly watched; for they are ^tter enemies to accommodation, they cannot
endure unity between the King and Parliament, they love to increase civil
war in Protestant Kingdoms; for by continuance of war, 1. They gain
advantage for the bringing in of foreign power to subdue the Protestants. 2.
They can better show themselves to one another. 3. They gain better
opportunity of working their treasons and conspiracies at home. 4. They gather
more to an head, etc. all which being considered, we have great reason to take
heed of trusting them or permitting them in any way to give opportunity of
doing hurt to Protestants, or Religion.

4 Let us by no means cross or thwart the Parliaments designs, or be in any
respect an hinderance to the same; we have chosen them to be the representative
Body of the Kingdom, to sit there for us; and they have been found faithful;
they are there gathered together by the providence of God, let us take heed of
crossing Gods way, least instead of procuring a blessing, we bring a curse upon
us.

5 We must not be negligent to help them with money; yea with our lives and all
that we have (according to the Protestation) else we are not helpers but
troublers of the Commonwealth, and indeed who of conscience can deny to help
them in so great a work in which we are all so much interested.

6 We must not be negligent in Prayer to almighty God to perfect it to his
glory, the Kings honor, the flourishing of the Gospel, and the good of the
whole Land, have we not cause to pray? Surely there can no Kingdom in the
world have more reason to implore Almighty God by humble supplication then we;
whether we look upon the miseries we are in by war, or the blessings we may
enjoy by peace. 1. The miseries we are in by war, in our own persons by
continual danger to be slain and murdered, in our friends, to have our wives
and daughters barbarously defloured, our childrens brains dashed in pieces
against the stones, and famine the handmaid of war to devour both us and
them; And in our estates to be plundered and pillaged, and robbed of all that we
have: especially having Armies of Papists raised against us. 2. The blessings
that we may enjoy by peace are many, reparation of decayed trading, freedom
from continual fears and dangers, comfort in our callings, each man according
to his degree, safety of our estate, comfort of our Church, propagation of the
Gospel, the honor of the King, and the comfortable enjoyment of such blessings
as God has bestowed upon us.

Now may we see how much a prudent Accommodation is better then by hasty peace
on the Papists, and Malignants terms to betray our Religion and liberties,
King, Parliament and Laws, for by the one we are happy, and have to do with a
royal King and Sovereign himself, by the other Papists and evil Counsel might
prove our ruin.

This is that way of peace which may make poor England more happy then ever:
yea then all Nations (when our royal King shall sit in his Princely throane
with an Olive branch of peace, to the joy of all his Protestant subjects, who
desire rather to see him in his Parliament then at so great a distance from
them, when the Parliament shall stand right in the eyes of his Majesty, when
Religion is settled, reformrtion of all things amiss wrought, and every one
quietly fitting under his own Vine, by a peaceable and happy settlement under
his gracious Majesty, which God of his good mercy and goodness grant.

FINIS.

