A DECLARATION Of the daily grievances of the Catholics RECVSANTS of ENGLAND.
With Protestations to the same for their Loyalty and truth to their King and
Country.

Whereunto is annexed by them a Prayer for the King.

And also a Prayer for the Honorable House of Parliament, for their quiet
proceedings, good succession, and happy ending.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN THOMAS, 1641.

The DECLARATION.
WHereas we the poor distressed Catholics Recusants of England, have by
reason of the penal Laws in former time made and enacted against us, whereby
we have to our great hindrances many times bin constrained to part with our
good Chattills and money, and sometimes imprisonment also to the great
hinderance of our estate and calling. Yet nothing more grievous unto us, then
the remembrance of that most detestable plot of the Powder Treason, only
wrought by some decayed fur^ous discontented and evil minded persons,
professors of the same Religion, but quite contrary to all godly or humane
Laws, neglecting, transgressing and most inhumanely forgetting all goodness,
duty, and obligation to God their King and Coun^ry, which detestable or rather
most d^mnable plot still singing in the ears of the people and daily
augmenting and increasing the memory of the same, by many strange Discoveries
of unknown Plots, wherein we that truth has little share, only divised and
set forth by some evil willers to Catholic Religion, to make us hateful to
the world, knowing the vulger sort apt to believe (through the evil minds of
some bad Catholics or rather detestable Traitors) actors of the Plot,
whatsoever is or can be invented, or set forth against us in any other newly
divised Plots, now daily spread about the City and Country, in many pamphlets
which we hope and perfectly know to be false other ways we should have more
hanging, drawing, and quartering then now we have, but heartily wish it to all
offenders in such like hands that shall deserve it and desiring that we being
innocent and clear from all Conspiracies or Plots of Treason, or any such
things hurtful to our King and Country, may not be always made reproachable
and contemptable to the world.

Let not the faults of some detestable persons be still inflicted and laid to
our charge, do not for a few desperate or ill conditioned Traitors condemn
the whole Church to be so, but let a more gracious conceit spring from your
hearts, and truly concur us, as you would your selves be censured by the
highest and most dreadful Judge, for we ought not to judge of others more
then certainly we can prove for truth, least that judgment light upon our
selves. If any of us deserve to suffer, let us suffer, but let us not scourge
the innocent, least we suffer stripes, forgive, as you would be forgiven, and
esteem of us, as you would be esteemed, true Subjects, as we have always
been and ever will be, in witness whereof we have here set down some little
Protestations for our Royalty and truth to our King and Country.

The Protestations.
WE the Catholic Recusants of England, do truly confess, and acknowledge
King Charles, to be our true and Lawful King, and chief Governor under God.

And that next unto God, we ought, and are bound in all duty, to Love honor,
and obey him in all things, not contrary, to Catholic Religion.

Wherein we here protest, as befitting good Catholics, and Loyal Subjects,
to be true to our King Charles, not giving, or yielding any Obedience, or
Allegiance to strangers, but will with all our Powers, Lives, and Fortunes,
defend, and maintain his Right* and the Right of our Country, against all
Foreign Kings, or Princes whatsoever, though of our own Religion.

We do protest likewise, not to have hand or heart in any conspiracy, or plot
of Treason, or any such thing that may any ways condescend to the hurt, or
prejudice of our King or Country.

Jn like manner we protest, never to entertain into our houses any Ammunition,
as Gunnes, Powder, or Halberts, Pikes, or Swords, or any other Jnstruments of
War thereby to defend our selves, or to raise any forces against our Royal
King Charles, or Native Country.

Also we deo protest, and yield our selves, as true loyal Subjects to our
King, as in all respective duty we are bound, Loving friends to our Country,
and most humble Submittees, to the Honorable assembly of Parliament, Hoping
they will as prudent, Fathers, and merciful Judges, one day give a Iuditious
ear to all our agrievances, (and in their good consideration of our loyalty)
grant a gracious censure to the same, and so make us free from this imputation,
and scandal now laid upon us by the vulgar, for which we shall be ever bound
to pray for happy success in this world, and their everlasting joys in the
world to come, in the mean time we have thought good to add to rhis little
Prote^tation, a Prayer for his Majesty, and another for the Honorable assembly
of Parliament.

A Prayer for the King
WE besehch the O Almighty God, to bless thy Servant Charles out King, and
preserve him from all conspiracies, dangers or hurts of his Enemies, who
through thy mercy, has taken upon him the Government of this Kingdom, or
King^omes, and mercifully grant that he may to thy Honor, and glory, reign in
peace and quietness, and that he may also receive the increase of all virtues,
wherewith being decently adorned, he may both be able to avoyde the
monstrousness of vices, as also to come to thee right gracious, who art the
way, the truth, and the life, through our Lord Jesus Christ, thy Son, who
lives and reigns God with the and the Holy Ghost, world without end, Amen.

A Prayer for the Honorable House of Parliament.
O Almighty and everlasting God who of thy great Providence for the general
good of this Kingdom have called and gathered together from all parts thereof
this most Honorable Assembly of Parliament, mercifully grant unto them true
knowledge of thy holy will therein, and a right firm understanding of what
they take in hand, that they may settle all things according to thy blessed
will and pleasure, to the good of the King, and the Commonwealth. Grant them O
Lord a quiet proceeding a good success, and a most happy ending in all their
actions, that what they do may be to thy Honor and glory, to the good of the
Kingdom, and to the everlasting happiness of their own souls health,
inspire them O Lord with thy heavenly grace with Ghostly wisdom and true
understanding, that they may happily consumate all things, that we may live
together in true peace and unity, to the Everlasting praise of thy most holy
name, and our eternal good and theirs, through our Lord Jesus Christ, thy
Son, who lives and reigns, God with thee in the unity of the holy Ghost,
world without end, Amen.

Laus Deo. in Eternum.
FINIS.

