A DECLARATION BY Several Congregationall Societies in, and about the City of
LONDON.

In way of Vindication of themselves.

TOUCHING

1. Liberty. 2. Magistracy. 3. Propriety. 4. Polygamie.
WHEREIN Their Judgment, concerning the particulars mentioned are tendered to
consideration, to prevent mis-understandings.

1 COR. 9. 3. My answer to them that examine me is this. PSALM. 35. 11. False
witnesses did rise up: they laid to my charge things that I knew not. Printed
by Matth^ Simmons in the year, 1647.

A DECLARATION BY THE Several Congregationall Societies in, and about the City
of LONDON.
IT is no new thing for the people of God, to be through malice misrepresented
by some, and through weakness mis-apprehended by others, as touching the
principles of their profession, and opinions about matters of Religion. And it
cannot be denied, but that the erroneous opinions and irregular practices of
some particular persons making profession of the same way, and passing under
the same denomination with the servants of God themselves, have from time to
time ministered occasion to the ignorant and weak to mis-conceive, and
opportunity and advantage to the malicious to mishape the state and temper of
the judgments and ways of the generality of people fearing God, and walking
before him in truth with all their hearts.

And in as much as we find it in these our days to be the policy of
adversaries, to cloth us in the skins of Savage beasts, that is, to father
such opinions, and fasten such imputations upon us to engage the world against
us, and to provoke all men to fall upon us, as, in which if there were matter
of truth answerable to pretense, would indeed render us unworthy the society of
men. And for as much also as there are some sad examples in the Land, of the
vanity and wickedness of somemen, who, having professed the same way of
worshipping God, and been called by the same name with our selves, have so far
fallen from the grace of God and the principles of their profession, as not
only to do things inconvenient and unworthy the name of Christians, yea of
men, but also to justify themselves therein as well-doers, to the great
reproach of the Gospel, the breaking of our hearts, and the offense of the
world before whom they have laid the stumbling block of their iniquity; 'wee
cannot but judge, that, both in relation to the Gospel it self, (the honor
of which is in great part involved in the innocence and honor of those people
that hold it out unto the world, and accordingly suffers in their reproaches)
as likewise in relation to men of the world, strangers to God, who harden
themselves against the way of God and his servants upon the forementioned
occasion (the undeceiving and enlightening of whom lies upon us as a duty to be
endeavored:) yea and in relation to our own innocence and integrity, the
which we are bound to vindicate on this behalf:) a necessity lies upon us to
do some act, by which the truth and reallity of our judgments and principles
touching these things, wherein we so undeservedly suffer in the thoughts of
men, may be brought out into an open light, to be beheld and known of all men;
which then (we doubt not) will be found to be nothing less, then what many
have fancied them to be.

We are very sensible that some men have even filled the world with the noise
of their outcries against us, as if we were the advocates of all licentious
liberty, disorder and confusion; but, how unjustly, will one day appear to
their shame.

What liberty is pleaded for.
It is true, we have asserted that as belonging unto men, which in some respect
and consideration may be called, a liberty. But what liberty? Not a liberty to
harm any man in word or deed: nor a liberty for any man to be corrupt, vain,
loose or inordiate in judgment, or conversation: for such a liberty as this
can do no man good. And God that knows our hearts knows that we desire not
any liberty for any, but in order to the good of all.

But this is the liberty for which we have appeared, viz. That while men
behave themselves peaceably and justly as touching civil conversation, making
no encroachments upon the civil power, nor any breaches upon the names and
reputations, the estates or bodies of men; they might not suffer in their
names, bodies, or estates from the hands of the Civil Magistrate, or any other
men whatsoever, merely for such things as appertain to the worship of their
God.

It is true, there are offenses and miscarriages of men in matters of Religion,
and things purely relating to Gods Kingdom, which we do not at all exempt
from correction, provided it be by a power and means suitable to the nature of
such offenses, which are spiritual and not about things of this world; but we
conceive withal that it does not appertain to the Civil Magistrate, so to
engage his Magistratieall power against them, as to inflict a worldly or
corporal punishment on men because of them. Joh. 18. 36
For the Kingdom of God being not of this world (as the great Law giver
himself does avouch) doubtless it is as improper for such a power which is
but secular, and whose utmost bounds and adequate object are (as we conceive)
the Civil affairs of men, to intermedle or umpire authoritatively in the
affairs of Gods Kingdom, either by giving Laws, or punishing offenses
therein, as it is for a King of one Kingdom by way of authority, to order
affairs in another Kings Dominions. And as the Kingdom of God is Spiritual,
and the affairs and concernments thereof spiritual, (and not such as are
meats and drinks and other like accommodations for the body Romans 14. 17.
) so those instruments and that power, viz. the word of God and Divine
Censures, by which the things thereof are ordered, are spiritual also. 2 Cor.
10. 4^


And as these instruments and means are spiritual in their natures, so are
they mighty in their power, being able through God, (who has appointed them)
to pull down strong holds, to cast down imaginations, and every high thing
that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and to bring into captivity
every thought to the obedience of Christ, and to revenge all disobedience, etc.
Cor. 10. 4, 5, 6.


But the Civil power being in its nature only such as it is in denomination,
viz. secular: that is, the nature and constitution of it being worldly; 1 Pet.
2. 13.
the direct and proper operations and effects of it are not like to be
spiritual. For That which is borne of the Spirit is Spirit, and that which is
borne of the flesh is flesh. Joh.3. 0.
That is, it is but flesh; of a nature and condition answering its cause
producing it: And therefore the innate and intrinsicall property of the powers
and authorities of this world being terrene, and calculated for the affairs
thereof; we conceive they are not to act, but within their own proper Sphere:
or if they shall attempt to do otherwise, miscarriage and disappointment in
the undertaking is the best that can rationally be expected.

Besides, if God has made those instruments and means which are spiritual,
able and sufficient to cure those distempers in men which are of a spiritual
nature, and offensive only against a spiritual power and state; why should
we think that he should institute any other kind of means, such as is the
secular power, for the same end? for when once God has found one kind of
means fit for his hand to accomplish his end by, he is not wont to constitute
another for the same purpose. Upon which Principle of truh the Apostle builds a
great assertion, accompanied with an asseveration; for (says he) if there had
been a Law given, which could have given life, verily Righteousness should
have been by the Law Gal.3.21.
. If the Law had been given by God for that end, that men might be justified by
it, he would then never have instituted another way and means, such as is that
which is by faith, for the same purpose. And therefore we conceive, that we may
with the same raeson and truth assert; that if God has instituted and made a
spiritual power, and spiritual Engines and Instruments, effectual for all
spiritual purposes, (the affirmative whereof is before proved,) then he has
not superadded another power, and means, and that of an inseriour nature, such
as is that which is but secular, for the same end.

How ever God being at liberty, does in his providence sometimes make use of
other means, such as are afflictions, etc. together with his spiritual
institutions for the production of spiritual effects: yet confident we are,
that he has confined men to instituted rules only, for the promotion of
spiritual things appertaining to spiritual and instituted worship.

But as the Apostles, when they preached the Doctrine of justification by faith
alone, excluding the works of the Law, as having no part nor fellowship in
that matter; were cried out upon as destroyers of the Law, though in other
respects, and such as were proper to the Law, they were the great assertors of
it: even so while we do but go about by way of debate and argument, to keep
and preserve the Civil power within its due and proper bounds, distinct, and
unconfounded with that power which is quite of another nature; we are exclaimed
against by some (who have the boldness to affirm, or the weakness to
believe) as if we were enemies to all Magistracy and Government, and as if we
intended to throw down those hedges that are set about men's estates, and to
lay both the one and the other common: Though the truth is, we have been, and
resolve to be as faithful assertors, and zealous maintainers, to our power,
both of Magistracy, and just Government, and of the Liberty of men's persons,
and propriety of their estates, (to speak without vanity) as any other men
whosoever.

Magistra^^ necessary
And therefore we declare in the first place, That man beingfallen from that
uprightness and perfection, in which at first he was created, and being now so
far from being commanded by principles of love, goodness, meekness; mercy,
sobriety, and equity, as that he is filled with lustful inclinations, and
dispositions to Fornication, Adultery, drunkenness, extortion, fraud,
reviling, theft, murder; witchcraft, perjurie, and to defile himself with
mankind, together with many other lamentable distempers, unto the truth whereof
both the word of God, and daily experience will abundantly witness? We cannot
but apprehend an absolute necessity, both of Governors, and Government, to
bridle and restrain men from falling ^oule one upon another, and from doing
things destructive, not only to the honor, and rights, but even to the safety
and beings of others. Eor whilst those noisome 1 Timothy 1. 9, 10.
lusts do rage, and reign in men; what other thing can be Imagined sufficient
to guard the persons, the honor and estates of men from suffering violence,
but the sword of the Magistrate? And therefore, look what necessity there is
for men to enjoy themselves in safety, and honor, the same necessity there is
of Laws and Governors.

And as Magistracy and government in general is the Ordinance of God, which he
in love to the world has appointed for the good of men. Romans 13. 1, 2. 4.


2. And as we do not disapprove any form of Civil government which has a
direct tendancie and subordination to its proper end; so we do freely
acknowledge, that a Kingly government, bounded by just and wholesome Laws, is
both allowed by God, Pet. 2. 3, 14.
and a good accommodation unto men.

3. And however it be a thing very desirable to have such to be Sam. 23. 3.
governors, as fear the Lord, in as much as together with their moral
principles, they are under the solemn engagement of Christianity to execute
Judgment and Justice, and faithfully to discharge their trust; and will be
more ready to protect godly men (who generally are the hatred of world) and to
propagate the Gospel in their territories, then other men will be: ye^
whatever the Magistrate is, in point of Religion, he is to be reverenced and
obeyed in all those commands of his, which do not entrench upon, or rise up in
opposition to the commands of God, or fall cross to the common interest of
men, the maintenace whereof is his, and in his charge.

And in as much as variety of actions, and unanimity in endeavors, are
necessary in the management of public affairs, And since every man is not a
like qualified for the same action, nor has that discretion and propension of
his own accord to fall into that place which is most proper for him; and since
also there is so much darkness remaining in the minds of men, as to make them
subject to call evil, good, and good, evil* and so much pride in their
hearts, as to make their own wills a Law not unto themselves only, but unto
others also; it cannot but be very prejudicial to humane society, and the
promotion of the good of Commonwealths, Cities, Armies, or families, to admit
of a parity, or all to be equal in power. Because there being (in this case) a
Liberty for every man to follow the dictates of his own understanding, and to
act as he pleases in reference to the Public, what can be expected but
disorders, confusions, jealousies, factions, yea Civil wars themselves? For
as men's apprehesinons of the common interest, but especially their opinions of
the conduciblenesse of means thereunto, are (almost infinitely) various, and
contradictious to each other: so is it natural for them to indulge their own
opinions, and violently to pursue, even unto blood, their own means, which
seem only to themselves to be such; and that in opposition to those means,
which in the eye of wiser men, and in themselves, are such, indeed. And
therefore we cannot but conclude, that the ranging of men into several and
subordinate ranks and degrees, is a thing necessary for the common good of men,
as being the only means to remove obstructions, and to preserve order, and
agreement in all agitations tending thereunto.

Of Propriety.
Touching propriety we further declare, that however the wants and necessities
of men, are a call from God to those that have where withal in their hands to
minister to them and relieve them in their need; and that where the love of God
dwells richly in the soul it cloth enlarge the heart of men in compassion, and
their hands in bounty toward their brethren in distress, who are as their
own flesh, yet certainly, for any man to urge such a community amongst men in
the good things of ^his life as necessary, which dissolves men's propriety in
them; is not only a cutting off from men one of those gracious opportunities
which God has put into their hands of expressing the good work of God upon
their hearts, and of displaying the power and glory of his grace, but it is
also, a rendering the Scriptures (the honor and authority whereof, is more
dear and precious to us then our lives.) in many places, to be but so many
words written in vain. For men by refreshing the bowels of the hungry,
clothing the naked, harboring the stranger, etc. do not only declare, that
the love of God dwells in them; 1 John 3. 17.
that is, a benevolent disposition toward men in misery, answering that
tender, compa^ionate and bountiful disposition that is in God toward
miserable men, but they do God hereby an especial service in relieving such,
the care, and maintenance of whom, he has peculiarly taken upon himself. In
which respects among^t others, that saying of our Savior is verified, It is a
more blessed thing to give than to receive, m. Act 20. 35
But if all things were common unto all, there would be no place left for any
such difference as is between giving and receiving, or if there were, both the
one and the other would turn to the same account. But what ever account other
men make of such opportunities by which they may at once both bless the world,
and bless themselves, comfort men and please God, express the grace of God to
others, and endear it to themselves^ certainly, they are, and ought to be
precious in our eyes: and therefore that opinion which would adnull them,
cannot but be cast out of our judgments and thoughts as an unclean thing.

And when that Commandment (for so it is interpretatively) went forth unto
Christian men, to provide for their own, especially those of their own
households; for that end amongst others; that the Church might not be burdened
with them. 1 Timothy 5 8, 16.
Undoubtedly, either there was a difference between the Churches stock and
that which particular persons did possess, or else the Apostle must needs
speak very impertinently, the later of which to assert, were to blaspheme that
Spirit by which he wrote.

When Solemon says, The diligent hand makes rich, Prove. 10 24.
and drowsinesse shall cloathe a man with rags; Prove. 23. 21.
questionless his Proverb was more than Paradox, if both the diligent and
slothful were to inherit an equal portion.

In a word, if this conceit of community should stand, the difference between
poor and rich, borrowing and lending, buying and selling, communicating and
receiving, would all fall; upon the foundation of which notwithstanding, God
has built many injunctions of duty unto men.

And as for that instance and example of those Primitive Chri^tians, amongst
whom it is said, that all things were common, Acts 2. 34.
and that not any man said, that the things which he possessed were his own,
Acts 4. ^5.
it is (as we conceive) to be understood thus, The sense of that blessedness
which was come upon them by the belief of the joyful message of salvation,
preached to them, was so great, vigorous and strong, and did so dilate and
enlarge their hearts in good will both toward God and Man, that the good
things of this world which they possessed were very little esteemed by them:
and therefore they parted with them as freely to their brethren that had need,
as men use to part with those things which are not their own* their particular
propriety and intere^^ in them, was not so considered and insisted on, as any
wise to bind their hands from dispersing or scattering abroad, the (...) of
that love and great content under which they then were. And if more of this
temper of heart, and bounty of hand were in the world, than now is to be found
amongst us, it were not a thing t^ be declared against, but to be rejoiced at
by Christians. But though these Christians acted so, as if they had had no
inter^^^, or propriety in their Estates, yet certainly a propriety they had,
nor was this propriety dissolved me^rly by their becoming Christians, as
appears plainly by what was spoken by the Apostle Peter to Ananias, who was in
pretense one of those bountiful Benefactours before mentioned.

For the Apostle in reproving him for his di^^^mulation, in pretending to
dedicate to common use the whole price of his possession, being sold, when as
he reserved part thereof unto himself: says thus unto him, Whilst it
remained, was it not thine own? And after it was sold, was it not in thine own
power? By which double interrogation the Apostle does emphatically t Acts 5. 4.
grant and affirm a particular and distinct right which he, and so
consequently those other Benefactors had to their possessions, both before they
had sold them and after, unless they had passed the same away by a voluntary
act of donation or free gift.

If therefore God has built up a wall of separation between the estates of men
and men, the affirmative whereof sufficiently appears by many acts of his
will, then far be it from us who profess our selves to be his servants, that
we should endeavor to throw it down.

And in as much as those Apostolical Churches themselves recorded in the
Scriptures, in which the glory and power of the Gospel ruled, were not
altogether free from such persons as turned the grace of God into wantonness,
Jude 2.
and that abused their liberty in the Gospel to the gratifying of the flesh,
Gal 5. 13.
we cannot promise the world that they shall never find any such amongst us.
For whilst there are temptations without and corruptions within that expose men
to the danger of falling and that all men that profess strictness in Religion
are not so vigilent and wise as to stand upon their guard, it cannot be but
that offenses will come. Mat. 18. 7.


And though some who are willing to pick a quarrel with Religious men, if
elevated above the sphere of their own activity, and are glad when they meet
with any thing in their lives and ways as will comport with, and smile upon
that evil opinion they have of them: Yet we could wish, that all who pretend
to wisdom, ingenuity and honesty, would not be so injurious to God and
Religion, as to charge personal and particular errors and practices, such as
savor of the flesh, and tend to obscure and darken the beauty of holiness,
either upon the Generallity of the servants of God, or upon the grounds and
principles of their profession, but that they would put such a difference
herein, as becomes men of sobriety and truth, to do.

Of Polygamie.
And therefore, if any scurrilous persons shall of purpose to blemish Religion,
and to make themselves glad with lies, give it out as if we intended to enlarge
and extend wedlock by Law established in this Land (in which provision is made
that no man shall have above one wife at one time) beyond its due limits or
that we gave any quarter in our judgments to such an opinion, as favors
plurality of wives: or if any who have been looked upon as professors of
religion have so fearfully ^alne as to break through bounds not only of
Religion, but also of morality, and to defile themselves with those that are
not their wives, and to cover their shame shall go about to plead the lawfulnes
of polygamy; we earnestly desire, that all men may do both us and that way of
Religion which we profess in the world that right, as not in the least to
charge either the one or the other therewith, as if we were any patrons
thereof. For we do with great zeal and detestation of soul declare and
protest against the folly and filthiness of such persons, and of any such
opinion as is that now last mentioned, as being contrary to the Scriptures of
truth.

For though God, having the residue of the Spirit, could in the day of creation
as easily have made more women then that one which he did create for one man
(as the Prophet Malachy observes,) Mal. 2. 15.
yet his pleasure was to make but one, to the end there might be a godly seed,
or a seed of God, that is, a seed propagated according to Gods institution and
appointment.

And therefore our Savior referring to the first institution of marriage for
correction of some corruptions and abuses of men about marriage, says, Have
ye not read, that he which made them at the beginning, made them male and
female? for this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave to
his wife, and they twain (not they three or they four, but they twain) shall
be one flesh. Mat. 19. 3. 5.
Answerably the Apostles advice is, for the avoiding of fornication, that every
man should have his own wife, (not wives) and every woman her own husband,
(not husbands.) 1 Cor. 7. 2.


And when the Apostle gives those cautions concerning such who were to be
chosen into the office of a Bishop or Deacon, viz. that they should be men that
had but one wife, as well as men that were not given to wine, nor strikers, nor
greedy of filthy lucre; 1 Timothy 3. 2, 3. Tit. 1. 6.
undoubtedly, he accounted the one as well as the other a blot and matter of
dishonor, otherwise he would never have put it in the number of those things
whereof he made matter of exception in the election of such Officers.

And when our Lord Jesus Christ (who is Truth it self) utred c Matthew. 16. ^.
this grave saying, Whosoever shall put away his wife, except it be for
fornication, and shall marry another, commits adultery, he had not said true
but upon this supposition, that a man commits whoredom with what ever woman he
shall marry over and besides that one wife unto which he has first joined
himself, the bands of that Conjunction not being dissolved. For otherwise his
putting away a former wife injuriously could no wise disable him from marrying
a later. For can a man's doing one unlawful act make him incapable of doing
another act that is lawful? And therefore as all other words of the lips of
Jesus Christ, which continually dropped wisdom and grace, are dear and
precious to us, so these also have taken hold of our hearts so, as to cause us
to abominate the very opinion, and how much more the practice of Polygamy, as
rising up in opposition against them!

Thus having shaken off those Vipers of calumny and reproach, which some
unworthily have labored to fasten upon us; and having cleared our own
innocence both before Angles and men, as touching those things whereof either
in whole or in part we have been either accused or suspected by malevolent men:
our hope is, that all men (except those that have joined themselves in a
confederacy with Hell, and have struck hands with the Devil, as being
resolved with him to accuse the brethren) into whose hands this ingenuous and
solemn Declaration of our selves shall come, will both perceive and believe,
that we are no friends or favorers either of those unrighteous ways against
which we have now declared more particularly, or of any other thing that is
contrary to wholesome Doctrine. 1 Timothy 1. 10.


For so far are we from patronizing or tolerating any thing of this nature,
that our earnest desire is, that the Magistrate into whose hand the sword of
justice is put, may draw it out impartially against all those whether
pretenders, or not pretenders to any strictness in Religion, that do in word
or deed disturb the Civil peace of the Land, in doing or speaking things
destructive to the honor, safety or interests of men, in body, name or goods.

And our unfeigned desire likewise is, that we with all other men, and all
other men with us, may by pureness, by knowledge, by long-suffering, by
kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by love unfeigned, by the word of truth, by the
power of God, by the armor of righteousness, on the right hand and on the
left 2 Cor. 6. 6. 7.
oppose and contend against all unrighteousness of men, and what ever in them,
either in opinion or conversation rises up against the honor of the Cospell,
and the well-being of men. That so the civil and external peace of men may by
the sword of the Magistrate be secured on the one hand, and their spiritual
and internal peace effected, maintained and defended by the sword of the
Spirit on the other hand, from suffering by the hands of those fleshly lusts,
crooked and perverse imaginations which war against the soul 1 Pet. 2 11.


The high and honorable advancement of which peace of men in both kinds, shall
through the help of the most High, be the subject matter of our studies,
labors and prayers, during our pilgrimage on earth, that God in all things may
be glorified through Jesus Christ; to whom be praise in all the Churches of
the Saints. Amen.

FINIS.

