A DECLARATION, By the Nobility and Gentry of this County of YORK; City of
YORK, and County of the same City.
WE the Nobility and Gentry, of this County of York; City of York, and County
of the same City: do Entirely agree and fully Consent to the Humble Petition
here Incerted of (...) Lords Spiritual and Temporal: Bearing Date the
Seventeenth of November, 1688. And presented to His Sacred Majesty the said
day; by His Grace the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord Archbishop of York
Elect; And diverse other Peers of this Kingdom, and we do not only approve the
said Petition, but can by no means think our selves safe either in our Religion
or properties until the same be granted and that a Parliament shall meet
accordingly.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, The Humble Petition of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal; whose Names are Subscribed.
May it please your Majesty.
WE your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects, in a deep Sense of the Miseries of a
War now breaking forth: in the Bowels of your Kingdoms and of the danger to
which your Majesty's Sacred Person is thereby like to be exposed, and also of
the distractions of your People, by reason of their present Grievances; do
think our selves bound in Conscience of the duty we owe to God, and our holy
Religion to your Majesty and our Country most humbly to offer to your Majesty
that in our opinion the only visible way to preserve your Majesty and this
your Kingdom would be the Calling of a Parliament regular and Free in all its
Circumstances.

We therefore do most earnestly beseech your Majesty that you will be
graciously pleased withal speed to call such a Parliament wherein we shall be
most ready to promote such Counsels and resolutions of Peace and Settlement in
Church and State as may Conduce to your Majesty's Honor and safety and to the
quieting of the minds of your people.

We do likewise humbly beseech your Majesty in the mean time to use such means
for preventing the Effusion of Christian Blood; as to your Majesty shall seem
most meet.

And your Petitioners shall ever Pray. etc. W. Canterbury. D. Grafton. D.
Ormond. E. Dorsett. E. Clare. E. Clarendon. E. Burlington. E. Anglisy. E.
Rochester. Newport, Vic. Tho. Tho. Exon. Tho. W. Asaph. Fran. Peterbrugh.
Roffon. Ely. Osulfton. Shandois. Padgett
The Earl of Danby. Lord Viscount, Dunblane. Lord Viscount, Lumley. Lord
Haughton. Lord Willoughby. Lord Fairfax. S. Worthley, Esquire John Darcy, Esquire Henry
Fairfax, Esquire Sr. Francis Bointon, Bar. Sr. William Strickland, Bar. Sr. Thomas
Gower, Bar. Sr. Henry Goodrick, Knight. and Bar. Sr. Christopher Wandesford, Bar.
Sr. Edmond Jennings, Knight. Sr. Henry Bellasyse Knight. Sr. John Hewley Knight. Sr.
Stephen Thompson Knight. Sr. Matthew Pearson, Knight. William Bointon, Knight. Christopher
Vain, Esquire Thomas York, Esquire John Jennings Esquire John Beilby, Esquire Henry Thompson,
Esquire Thomas Lascelles, Esquire William Pennyman, Esquire Thomas Dodson. Gent. William
Robinson Esquire Metcalfe Weddell Esquire Thomas Wetherley Esquire (...) William Bethell
Esquire Jord, Tanckard Esquire Tobias Wickham, Esquire Christopher Tanckard Esquire Francis
Tanckard, Esquire Cycill Arthington Esquire Nicholas Thompson, Esquire Edward Thompson Esquire
Richard Thompson, Esquire Thomas Fawkes, Esquire Richard Win, Esquire John Batt, Esquire
William Hardcastle, Esquire John Baynes, Esquire Thomas Raynes, Esquire Roger Shackleton,
Esquire William Thomlinson, Esquire Arthur Ingram, Esquire Matthew Lister, Esquire George
Boynton, Esquire Matthew Wilkinson, Esquire Tho. Savill Esquire George Tockett, Esquire Charles
Tankerd Esquire William Lowther Esquire John Knight Esquire Will. Lowther. Juu. Esquire Jasper
Blythman. Esquire Henry Gill. Esquire John Dale Esquire Marmaduke Butler. (...) Esquire J.
Gilson, Esquire Robert Midford. Arth: Robinson, Gent. Jo. Knight Esquire R. Byerley Esquire
Ingleby Daniel Esquire William Vavasour Esquire Tobias Jenkins Esquire Walter Strickland.
Esquire Charles Lister Esquire John Dodsworth, Esquire William Thompson, Esquire Francis
Thompson, Esquire Rich. Thompson, Sen. Esquire Rich. Thompson, Jun. Esquire Captain
Thompson. Stephen Thompson Esquire John Peirson. William Jennings, Gent. Thomas
Kirk, Gent. George Beale. Henry Long. Thomas Fairfax, Gent. Thomas Pulline. Esquire
John Sampson. Esquire Richard West, Gent. Henry Hitch, Esquire Roger Win, James
Mountegue, Esquire
ROBERT WALLER Lord Major of the City or YORK. George Prickett. Recorder,
Aldermen,
William Ramsden. Philip Herbert. John Wood. Edward Thompson John Thompson.
Lenard Wilberfoss John Foster. Samuel Dawson. George Stockton. Joshua Earnshaw.
Sheriffs,
Thomas Fothergill Chrstopher Hutton.
Com. Council,
Fra. Duckit Joseph Scot. Matthew Coats Peter Dawson. John Lund. John Moor.
George Pickring. Robert Hillary. Ed. Wilkinson. John Thompson. Ambrose Girdler.
George. Fothergill. Jno. Priestley. John Welborne. Thomas Bradley. William
Suttell. Fran. Thomlinson. Joseph Hillary. John Banes. James Waller. George
Dealtary. Robert Gathorne. Mark Gill. John Day. Robert Rodes. Matthew Wales.
Robert Calvort. Natha Wilson. Thomas Mangie. William Holte. William Walker.
Matthew Big. Sam. Blackbeard John Billingham. Robert Wilsom. John Hurst.
Phillip Eshe. Walter Baynes. Thomas Mace. Richard Bettson. Francis Hewet. John
Benthma Christo. Percebay.




