A TRUE ACCOUNT Of the Seige, and taking of the Famous City of Gran in Hungary,
in a Letter from a Gentleman there, to his Correspondent in London.
OCTOBER 2d. Honored Sir;
I hope, mine of September the 20th. came safe to your hand, and what was
contained was very acceptable. I have now greater news to impart of the happy
Progress of the Christian Armies, of the taking of Gran, but before I begin, I
think it convenient, to give you a short Description of this Famous Town Gran,
anciently called Arigimum, is very strongly seated upon the Danub, and defended
with Extraordinary Walls, and deep Ditches, having a most impregnable Castle,
upon a little Hill called St. Thomas's, a pretty way out of the Town, so they
that beseige Gran, are forced to take this strong Castle, or else they will be
continually plagued by the Enemies Cannon upon their Backs. Our Army having
defeated the Turks at Barkan, and so having made the way open, resolved upon
the Seige of this Town, which has been in the hands of the Turks, ever since
the time of Achmet the 8th. and upon the 14th. of the last they called a
General Council of War, where it was resolved first to fall upon St. Thomas
Fore, which we next day, began with great bravery, the Turks making several
furious Salleys, and perpetually playing upon us, but we beat them back with
great slaughter, our Cannons answering them in the same Language, which was
conveniently planted on another hill, elevated much by Art. This hot service
continued several days, but at last our Cannon making a great breach and, many
of the Turks being killed, and seeing no hope of relief, they came to a parley,
and the day after it was surrendered, they having Good Military Honorable
Conditions, and as soon as the Poles saw the Castle was surrendered, several of
them went to the King, and the Duke of Lorrain, to beg the most difficult
places in the attaque of the Town; which honorable request, the KING with
tears of joy Granted them; then we surrendered the Town, making the greatest
effect upon the lower Town, and after many furious assaults, at last carried
it; when they of the higher town, saw that the Castle was taken, and that the
lower town was lost and that all hopes of succor was gone, their Garrison
being reduced to a small number, they hung out the white Flag, and submitted
to such Conditions as pleased our Commanders, which however were honorable
enough. Thus with no great loss of the Christian side, but of many hundreds of
the Turks, is this great town (once the Bull-work of Christiandom) now again
in the hands of the Christians, and our Army, is now upon the march, to beseige
Buda, the Metropolis of all Hungary, of which I hope we shall give account e're
long, in the interim.

I Rest your assured Friend N. D.

Entered according to order.

LONDON Printed by E. Mallet, 1683.


