A DECLARATION OF The proceedings of the ARMY.

BEING Several Papers delivered to the Commissioners of the Parliament and
City, from the General and his Council of War, at Alisbury July 23. 1647.

ALSO, A Petition and engagement, drawn up in the name of the Citizens
Commanders, Officers and Soldiers of the Trained Bands, and Auxiliaries; and
Apprentizes of the Cities of London and Westminster: Sea Commanders, Officers,
Seamen, and Watermen: with diverse others, etc.

Whereunto is annexed a PROCLAMATION from his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX
Against the entertainment of Cavaleers in the Army.

By the appointment of the General, and his Council of War.

Signed JOHN RUSHWORTH.

OXFORD, Printed by ^. and H. and published for the satisfaction of the
Kingdom, 1647.

A PAPER FROM THE ARMY, DELIVERED JN TO THE Commissioners of the Parliament and
City, at Alisbury. July 23. 1647.
My Lords and Gentlemen.
WE received this enclosed paper the last night, from the hand of a very well
^ffect^d Citizen, It was delivered him by an Officer of the City Militia, who
being invited to meet some Citizens at Skinners Hall upon Wednesday last, with
diverse others to sign the same, and offering to dispute against the matter of
it, and to show how dangerous and illegal it was, was silenced, and told that
that it was not to be disputed, but to be signed and joined in: there being
diverse Citizens and others at the same place for that purpose, which when he
understood he took this printed copy away with him.

By the contents of which when you read it, you will easily perceive what it
tends to, and how desperate and dangerous it is to the hazard of the whole
Kingdom, and to frustrate all those endeavors of the Parliament, the Army and
Kingdom for a happy settlement: And likewise to precipitate all into a new and
bloody war. We cannot therefore but acquaint you that we look at this as a
business set on foot, by the malice of some desperate minded men, this being
their last engine for the putting all into confusion, when they could not
accomplish their wicked ends by other means. To this have all secret listings
tended, and we with that that needless and superfluous listing of Auxiliaries,
and co^^^^ance at the continuance of the Reformadoes about the Cities of London
and Westminster, have not had the same aim, and by this we hope it will
appear that our jealousies and fears of some such desperate designs to be
hatched in and about the City (considering the temper of men there) have not
been groundless, nor our desires to draw near the City of London with the Army
to disappoint and break all such plots, and to free the Parliament from the
violence of them, have not been without just cause: And we desire all
indifferent men to judge, whether our withdrawing from the City in obedience to
the Parliaments command, was for their and the Kingdoms security or not?

We wonder that diverse men did calumniate that our marching so near the City,
and put so bad representations upon it, (...) that it tended to force the
Parliament, or (...) plunder the City, seeing our doing so was to break that
black d^^gre which now begins to show it self in its colour^. Whereas indeed
our consciences witness with (...), that our aim were clear and honest,
tending to restore the Parliament into its just liberty which was much abated
in the eyes of all the Kingdom, and no doubt by the authors and contrivers of
this new Covenant and (...) whereof have been so far from assisting to put
the Reformadoes, and other dangerous persons out of the lines* that now they
have called them to join in the conspiracy.

We entreat you to give the (...) representation of these things, which that
you may do, we have sent you the papers together with such information as may
give them an opportunity to discover the bottom of this business. We were
marching from London when we received this information in obedience to the
Parliament, and to give the City more content and to stop the mouth of
slanderers.

But if such designs so distructive to the Parliament, and the work in hand
be suffered to go on, or that the Parliament be interrupted in the freedom of
their debates and proceedings as we hear within this few days, they were by
those that are invited in this confederacy, We beg it of the Parliament, as
they tender their own safety, the peace of the Kingdom, and preventing of a
second war, as they would not have the Kingdom loose the fruit and benefit
of all that blood and treasure that has been spent in this cause that they do
not suffer their freedom and liberty to be endangered by such designs as
these, they having an Army, which by the blessing of God in spite of all that
their and the Kingdoms enemies can do, will stand and fall with them, and be
found faithful and obedient to them in all things, and as ready to relieve
Ireland when the peace and right of this Kingdom are settled.

We write not this to desire the Parliament to invite us to march up to them,
we care not how great a distance we are from London, if it be the Parliaments
pleasure, and consists with their security, and the breaking of those
combinations which are hatched in the bowels of that City.

We are hastening our proposals which are for the general settlement, and which
we are confident will satisfy all that love truth and peace. But we see
plainly, we need more to intend security, then have cause to expect to bring
things to a happy issue by treaty, whilst such designs are on foot. We pray
you therefore that the Parliament would speedily and thoroughly inquire into,
and break these designs, wherein as in all things else we shall be ready to
serve them, as they shall judge it needful, and when they shall command us.

A PAPER DELIVERED TO THE COMMISSIONERS OF THE CITY.
BY a Printed Paper come to our hands this day, (a Copy whereof you receive
herewith) we still f^nd* and clearly perceive that some evil Spirits within
the City of London malliciously disaffected to the Peace of the Kingdom; do
secretly and wickedly endeavor to bring about that mischief upon the
Kingdom, which we have so much feared; and by all our addre^^^s unto you
sought to prevent; which indeed are of that dangerous consequence, as we can
expect no other issue from, then the unavoidable engaging of the Kingdom in a
second War; if not timely and effectually prevented by your wisdom and
diligence: we must further observe unto you, that whatsoever Design is
intended in the foresaid Paper, it is contrary to the Authority of Parliament
and direct opposite to the proceedings of the Army, which the two Houses have
owned as theirs, and approved of their Fidellity, by committing the Forces of
the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, and Islands of Garnsey, and
Jersey under the Generals care* and command* and therefore cannot be effected
but by force of Arms against the Parliament and their Armies, which in
probabillity may involve the whole Kingdom in blood, but must necessarily
begin within your own bowels, and draw the seat and misery of war upon you
and your City.

Also we desire you would consider whether we have not just cause to suspect,
that an evil party lurkes within the City ready to distemper it, and the whole
kingdom upon every occasion, and whether it be probable such persons desire a
happy close between the King and his Parliament (at least such as will be for
the Kingdoms good) which take upon them the boldness to make new offers to his
Majesty, with solemn engagements to make good the same during the time that the
Parliament, has given us leave to make tender of and treat with their
Commissioners about those things which tend to a general ^ettlement, and
therefore we cannot but desire that you would take a speedy course timeously to
suppress this great evil, and to prevent all of this nature for the fu^ure, by
making some of those examples, who have been active to carry on this business,
we have not had time to inquire into particulars, but shall give you only one
instance of a meeting at Skinners Hall concerning this business, where some
persons have been very active, the names of some of whom we have given to your
Commissioners, and also the names of other citizens who will testify their
carriage there.

Lastly, We cannot but desire your concurrence in our desire to the parliament
to put the Militia into the hands of those that had it before, without which we
can have no assurance that your City will be free from designs of this nature,
nor can we expect to see a happy close.

Alsbury July 23. By the appointment of His Excellency Sir THOMAS FAJRFAX, and
his Counsel of war. John Rushworth.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD MAJOR, THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL THE ALDERmen and
Common-Counsell of the City of London, in the Common or Guild Hall of the Gity
of London assembled.
The Humble Petition of the Citizens, Commanders, Officers and Soldiers of the
Trained Bands and Auxiliaries, the Young Men Apprentices of the Cities of
London and Westminster, Sea-Commanders, Sea-Officers, Seamen, and VVater-men,
together with diverse other Commanders, Officers and Soldiers within the line of
Communication, and parishes mentioned in the weekly bills of Mortallity.

Shows,
THat your Petitioners (taking into serious consideration, how Religion, his
Majesty's honor and safety, the Privileges of Parliament, and Liberties of
the Subject are at present greatly endangered, and like to be distroyed. And
also weighing with our selves what means might likely prove effectual to
procure a firm and lasting peace, without a further effusion of Christian
blood; have therefore entered, into a solemn Engagement, which is hereto
annexed, and do humbly and earnestly desire, that this whole City may join
together by all lawful means as one man in hearty endeavors for his
Majesty's present coming up ^o his two Houses of Parliament, with honor,
safety and freedom, (and that without the nearer approach of the Army) and to
confirm such things as he has granted in his Message of the 12. of may, last,
in answer to the propositions of both Kingdoms, that by that personal Treaty
with his two Houses of Parliament, and the Commissioners of the Kingdom of
Scotland* such things as yet are in difference may be speedily settled and a
firm and lasting peace established. All which we desire may be presented to
both Houses of Parliament, by this honorable Assembly.

A SOLEMN ENGAGEMENT OF THE CJTJZENS COMmanders, Officers and Soldiers of the
Trained Bands and Auxiliaries, the Young Men and Apprentices of the Cities of
London and Westminster, Sea-commanders, Seamen and Watermen. Together with
diverse other Commanders, Officers and Soldiers within the Lines of
Communication, and Parishes mentioned in the weekly Bill of mortallity.
WHereas we have entered into a solemn League and Covenant for Reformation* and
defense of Religion; the honor and happiness of the King, and the peace and
safety of the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland, all which we
do eminently perceive not only to be endangered but ready to be destroyed: We
do therefore in pursuance of our said Covenant, Oath of Allegiance, Oath of
every freeman of the Cities of London and Westminster, and Protestatic as
solemnly engage our selves, and vow unto almighty God, that we will to the
utmost of our power, cordially endeavor that his Majesty may Speedily come to
his two houses of Parli^ment* with honor safety and freedom (and that without
the nearer approach of the Army) there to confirm such things as he has
granted in his message of the 12. of May last. In answer to the Propositions of
both Kingdoms, and by a personal Treaty with his two houses of Parliament,
and the Commissioners of the Kingdom of Scotland, such things as are yet in
difference may be speedily settled, and a firm and lasting peace established:
for the effecting hereof, We do protest and re-obleige our selves as in the
presence of God the searcher of all hearts, with our lives and fortunes, to
endeavor what in us lies to preserve and defend his Majesty's royal person
and authority, the previledges of Parliament, and liberties of the Subject in
their full and constant freedom, the Cities of London and Westminster, Lines
of Communication, and parishes mentioned in the Weekly bills of Mortality, and
all other that shall adhere with us to the said Covenant, Oath of Allegiance,
Oath of every free man of London and Westminster, and Protestation, nor shall
we by any means admit, suffer or endure any kind of neutrality in this common
cause of God, the King and Kingdom, as we do expect the blessing of Almighty
God, whose help we crave, and wholly devolve our selves upon in this our
undertaking.

A PRCOLAMATION, From his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAJRFAX, concerning the putting
Cavaliers out of the Army.
I do hereby require the chief officer present with every Troup, and Company,
to make strict enquiry what Cavaliers have been listed and entertained in their
Troops and Companies, since the Muster preceding the last muster; and that all
such chief Officers shall presently upon such enquiry as before, put them
forth of Troops and Companies from such Muster as before: and that before they
receive any pay upon this last Muster, they shall expunge the names of all such
Cavaliers out of their Muster-rolls, as they shall have put out of their Troops
and Companies: and if it shall hereafter appear that any chief Officer
present with their Troops or Companies, shall neglect to put forth, or Cashiere
such Cavaliers in manner as before; or receive any for the time to come; upon
proof made thereof, he shall be liable to a Council of War, and be
proceeded against accordingly.

Given under my hand, July 23. 1647. FAJRFAX.


