A DECLARATION, Of the Besieged Soldiers in the City of Colchester, and their
resolution concerning the surrendering of the said City.

Also the planting two demi-Canon against it, and the battering down part of
Saint Mary's Church.

And how a Party of the Lord Cepel's Shavers issued forth of Buttolphs-gate,
and set upon our Pioneers, and took some prisoners, and hewed one of our men
to pieces with their Sythes.

Moreover the taking of diverse horse from underneath the Walls, and the killing
of one of their Commanders.

Together with a true Relation of the proceedings betwixt the Scots and Major
General Lambert, and the last news from Portsmouth.

LONDON Printed, An. Dom. 1648.

The last news from Colchester, Yarmouth, Scarborough; and other parts.
WE Are credibly informed from Colchester, that there has been little or no
action, these three or four days; the 29. of July a trumpeter came forth, who
reports that the Town is much straightened for want of provisions, yet says
the Soldiers are very cheerful since they heard the Prince of Wales was at
Yarmouth, and drink his health in a cup of cold water, and a very good shift
too, hoping ere long to have better drink.

The Council of War agreed to shoot in papers with arrows, to undeceive the
Soldiery. The Lord General has sent several summons to the Town, in one of
which he offered, that all private Soldiers and persons of that rank laying
down arms, and engaging not to bear arms any more against the Parliament,
should have liberty and passes to go to their several homes, and there quietly
to abide. The Officers and Gentlemen of quality, should have liberty, and
passes to go beyond the Seas with Equipage be fitting their qualities,
engaging not to returns into this Kingdom without leave from the Parliament.
And all persons to have quarters, and be free from plunder, or violence of the
Soldier; this being rejected; and scornfully retorted by the Lords Norwich,
Capell, and Sir Charles Lucas: The General yet offered to make good the same
conditions to so many as should truly accept thereof, except those three
persons themselves, which has accordingly been performed with advantage to
all such as have come off.

He has lately summoned them again to surrender the Town, and the Officers to
render themselves to the mercy, and the rest only to future obedience of the
Parliament. This also has been rejected with scorn; nevertherlesser
understanding that the Lords, Goring, Capell, and Sir Charles Lucas, and some
Officers of their Council, have concealed these overtures both from the
Soldiers and Townsmen, and from many of the Officers, and that they have given
out, as it they had good conditions off^red to themselves* if they would render
up the Soldiers, and perceiving that the Townsmen and Soldiers have been
deluded by them, and their chief Agents, with daily expectation of relief,
while there is none at all toward them: The General is willing to make good
the same conditions to so many as shall timely accept thereof, except the
Lords, Goring, Capell, and Sir Charles Lucas, with the Lord Loughborough,
Colonel Far, Colonel Lawrence, and Captain Lynn; and except all such
soldiers as have been in the Army since the siege, and are gone into the
Town.

Our forces also gave an Alarm to them in Colchester, the great Gunnes played
round the Leaguer, and the foot with Volleys, in the mean time Colonel
Rainsborough was acting his design in cutting off a sluice, to divert the
water, and fiering the middle Mill, the first took good effect, but the second
little, the fire not burning above half a quarter of an hour, and then
extinguished, the foot went up to the neck in water to storm the Fort where the
Mill was, effected it speedily, with the loss of three men, and ten wounded,
besides one drowned going over the River. The enemy drew down two or three
small parties of Horse, who faced but durst not engage, the Soldiers had not
time to bring away the prisoners in the Fort, and therefore put them all to the
sword. They within took the Alarm hot supposing a storm, but when they found
it otherwise, they fired but little, beating their Kettles in scorn, and
afterward their D^ums in defiance of them.

Diverse of the Besiegers being busied in making of a line through Maudlin
street, some of the Lord Capells Regiment of shavers sallied out of Buttolphs
Gate upon them, with Pistolls and Sythes, and our workmen being gotten within
Musket shot of the foresaid gate; they immediately surprised three of them,
one of which they hewed most fearfully with one of their Sythes; the rest
hasting to our guard, were sudda nly rescued, and there began a short dispute
between them, but our forces fired so fast upon them, that they forced them to
retreat, and killed a Gentleman in Scarlet, who we suppose to be some
eminent Commander.

The Suffolk side are a closing up their line, and about bout Tuesday will have
finished it; finished it; which when they have performed, his Excellency may
spare a considerable number of horse and foot, if there should be a good
occasion.

The two demi-Cannon which were lately sent down were mounted against St.
Mary's Church, and after a few shots, brought down a great part of the Steeple,
and the Ordnance mounted therein, which falling upon the Leads, brought down
most of it with them, in which the Ordnance is buried. A party of ours
endeavored to fetch in some of their horse, which grazed near the Town
walls, but immediately there issued forth a party of theirs, betwixt whom there
began some dispute, wherein was little or no hurt done, but our men retreating
the besiegers had opportunity to remove their horse, at a farther distance,
where they remain with more security.

The Soldiers of this Garrison are very resolute and gallant-spirited, and not
to be frighted with every blast of wind, as their actions have made manifest
to the world, there is not so great want of provision as is reported, for they
have plenty of bread and water, with which the Soldiery are very well
contented; and so long as that lasts declare they will never desist the
service or leave the Town.

The Soldiers in Portsmouth are much discontented, but the Seamen more; being
much wrought upon by the Royal party, who have instructions from others
abroad; the Sea men must appear, and act the design, for which purpose about
300 came ashore, and in the midst of the Town declare for King Charles: this
puts the Governor and the other of South-Sea-Castle to a stand, the Alarm is
given to the Soldiery, the Seamen stand still till 300. were bodyed, upon
whose advance the Sea men retreat, the Soldiers pursue, but not with
violence, or offering to fire; they get the Seamen out of the Gates which
being shut, all was pacified: the Plot took not with the discontented
Soldiery, as pre-supposed, but the Sea men threaten a revenge.

From Scarborough we are certified; that discontents and jealousies of many
there, have been very great, occasioned by some hint of the Governors
Treachery, which was suspected many ways, 1. By turning out Capt. Lawson, a
faithful honest man, that long served in that Garrison. 2. By countenancing
all disaffected persons therein, and discountenancing the rest. 3. By procuring
a ship for carrying away his malignant Kinsman, and other Cavaliers with him,
and giving great entertainment to the Kings Party, with whom he was very
frequent. 4. By expressing some ill placed words, which tended to a deep
construction of his royal affections. The jealousies are now confirmed by the
Governot, Col. B^in^ons declaring, which is for the King and Prince Charles,
his discontents, rather then hopes of a reward, prompts him to a desperate
adventure, having had no pay, either for himself; or Soldiers for many
months together; and though his Declaration be rash, yet he admits of none of
the Royal party to enter; and if an overture of Indemnity, with a
considerable sum for himself and Soldiers were made, the difference might be
composed in all probability.

From the North it is by post, affirmed that Lieutenant General Cromwells
horse, consisting of 30. od Troops joined with Major General Lambert the 27
which no sooner came near the Major Generals further quarters, but fell upon
action with a small party, with which they resolved to try the Scots Scouts,
who forced them to retreat within 2 miles of Appleby, where their main guard
was, the Scots advance not, nor has the Major General given ground this 10.
days and upwards, no Action between them, only the Scouts sometimes dispute
it. The Major General increases daily, his number consists of nine thousand,
and with the foot of the Lieutenant General with other forces (joined with him
in Nottingham, Leicester, and Derby shire; which will complete-5000) his Army
will be very numerous, and more offensive then defensive. The Letters seized
this day in two ships bound for Scotland, and brought to the Committee at Derby
house, will discover much Roguery, when reported to morrow to the house; the
arms are seized on, and the ships secured till further*order. Lieutenant
General Cromwell is to be for certain to morrow night at Nottingham, from
whence he speedily advances after he has joined with other forces of those
parts. The great additionall Army of Scots Marching into England, appear to
be no otherwise then a Regiment of 600. poor Scots that are come to take
possession of Berwick, who say all is their own on this side Trent.

FINIS.

