The Dutch-Miller, and New Invented Wind-Miller, Or,
An exact description of a rare Artist newly come into England, who undertake^
to Grind all sorts of Women; whether old, decriped, wrinckled, blear-eyed, long
nosed, blind, lame, dcold^^alous, angry, poor, or all others whatsoever: he will
engage they shall come out his Mill, young, active, plea^^nt, handsome, wise,
modest, loving, kind and rich, without any defect, or deformity, and just
suitable to their Husbands humors, and dispositions, as he has often
experienced in other Countries where he has m^de practice of his Art. The rich
for money, and the poor for nothing. Tune of, Cook La^rel, etc. Then bring your
Wives unto my Mill,
And young for old you shall have still.

depiction of men bringing their wives to the windmill for grinding.

I Am a brave Miller but newly come over,
Of such a rare Artist you never heard before,
For with my new Mill such rare feats I have done,
I Will grind your old women, and make them all young.
Then stay a while gallants, and make not such have,
Till you of my Office have taken a taste;
It Is worth your attention, if that you will be,
Made free from all troubles, and live happily.
There Is many a married man I dare to say,
Could wish that I sooner had come this way:
For never a Doctor in the whole land,
Can do such rare cures as you shall understand.
For he that is married unto a cross scold,
Or to an old Granny of ninety years old:
They needs must commend me or else do me wrong,
If I grind them bath till they are patient and young.
The Old, the decriped, the blind, and the lame,
I Will make them all active and fit for the game:
Nay, she that is so old, that she is bedridden with age,
I Will make her young again, I will engage.
He that has a mind to a Widow that is old,
And fain would be married to finger her gold,
Bring her to my Mill, and i will grind her so small,
That she may be young again, handsome and all.
The man that is troubled with a jealous wise,
That Is cross and untoward, and weary of's life:
If once in my Hopper I have her to grind,
Be sure she will come out in a far better mind.
And she that is deformed and has a long nose,
Though crooked like Mother Shipton she goes,
I Will grind her until she be handsome and right,
And fit for a Gallant to play with all night.
View here but my picture, and mark well my Mill,
And see how my customers flocketh in still:
You may be assured I please them to the life,
Eaeh man is so ready to bring in his wife.
Here is an old woman I have on my back,
I bear her up stairs, you may see, a pick pack;
When once I have ground her, I Will pass you my word,
That she shall be young (...) and a bit for a Lord.
The second part, to the same Tune.
There Is honest Jack Doe-little to ease his sorrow,
Takes pains to put his wife in a wheel-barow,
But yet he labors all for his own ends,
Because when she is ground she will make him amends.
The Water-man has got three in his boat,
And each one has promised to give him a groat,
For they are resolved no money to spare,
So they may but once again be Market-ware.
There is an old Woman that sits by my Stone,
She is at her Prayers and making her moan,
Let any one heave her but up to my Mill,
I Will make her as young as the best of them still.
There Is Will he is hugging his wife by the middle,
And he is resolved to find out the Riddle,
So she may be young again, for his own part,
He cares not if she be ground until she fart.
A Coach full of Ladies you here may behold,
That now are deformed and grown very old,
If I have but wind, I will miss of my aim,
If they may not live to be fit for the game.
You see there is Monsieur has got his new wife,
She past from the Mill, and is now come to life;
Before she was crooked, and peevish and blind,
But now she is beautiful, pleasant and kind.
So Taffie likewise does bow to the ground,
To see that a young for an old he has found,
Kind Complements he now to heo does afford,
Who formerly never gave him a good word.
By this you may see what an Artist I am,
To make an old scold be as meek as a Lamb:
You that have bad wives and do hear of my Mill,
If you will not come you may stay away still.
And he that is poor, and has got a bad wife,
Let him take my counsel to rid him of strife,
Bring her to my Hopper, i will shake her about,
And she shall be rich euough when she comes out.
All this i will perform at a very small rate,
The Rich shall pay little, the poor not a groat:
Then say such a Miller is now come ashore,
That can do such feats as was never done before.
The come along Customers, pray come away,
Make have, for I have but a while for to stay:
When once I am gone, it is too late to repent,
Then lay out yonr Money before it is all spent.
Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, J. Wright, and J. Clarke.


