depiction of bucolic scene with two people in a field, a house, and a horse

Licensed.

decorative border for license E. C.
GAD
depiction of Gad ASAP
depiction of Asaph

The DEATH and BURIAL OF Mistress MONEY.

With her Will she made at her Departure: And what happened afterward to the
Usurer that Buried Her.

depiction of the burial of Mistress Money

London Printed by E. Cotes, and are to be sold by Charles Tyus at the Three
Bibles on London Bridge. 1664.

ARGVMENTVM hujus Libri.
THesauro invento qui limina mortis juibat,
liquit ovans laquem, quo periturus erat,
At qui quod terra abdiderat, non repperit aurum
quem laqueum invenit, nexuit; and periit.
AN Usurer did hide his gold
which two young Lovers find,
And having took the gold away,
Did leave a Rope behind.
The Usurer finding of the Rope,
and missing of his Wealth,
Did take the Rope that he had found,
and therewith hanged himself.
THE DEATH AND BURIAL OF MISTRESS MONEY.
WHen the earth for her wantonness in Summer did penance in a white sheet of
Snow; and when the short days, and long Evenings gave assured tokens that it
was the depth of Winter: The covetous wretch, old Avarez, to save fire and
candle, went to Bed, where having meditated a while on his Trunk of Golden
earth, which stood in his Chamber, and now finding himself dispased to sleep,
he made this short Prayer. Whether I do sleep or rest,
Pluto still defend my Chest.


And no sooner had spoke these words but he fell fast asleep before he could
say Amen. But yet though his senses were bound up with the silken chains of
sleep, yet his mind (ever watchful over his gold) and jealous of the losing
it, drew him into a fearful dream, Which was that thieves had assaulted his
house (he living alone with an old Maid called Kerdona) and that they were
ready to break open that Chest wherein all his trrasure lay. The fear of this
Dream had so surprised his fancy, that thinking he heard the lock crack;
and that his angels were taking their flight, be leapt out of his bed; and his
clothes happening to lie upon his Trunk, thinking it to be one of the Thieves,
catching fast hold thereon; and so holding the Trunk and cloathe fast in his
arms, calls out aloud for help. Kerdona his Maid hearing this noise, and
having said by her Smock when she went to bed, because it should not wear
out, come running unto him stark naked: Where you may think what a strange
sight it was to see the maid persuade her master that there wa^ (...) ^^^se of
fear? No, says old Avarez, ^hy I have one of the Thieves under me, come help
me to hold him fact. Alas says the Maid, it is your own clo^ths. I will not
believe that says he, till I see more. With that the Maid lights a candle,
and coming toward her master, I hope sir says she you will now see the truth
of all: with that her master looking upon her, and seeing her stark naked, he
falls backward into a swound, crying O Cupid, I never knew the power of thy
bugle how till now, it is pity (says he) thou should live a Maid longer,
and therewithal embracing his Maid Kerdona, he fitted his own Arrow to her
Bow-string, and that night got a bastard on her, called senne in the hundred.

How Kerdona did rise from her Master old Avarez: and how he went the next day
to Bury his Gold.
KERDONA having all this night lain with an old Man, and being weary with his
tedious sumbling, at last lightly slipped ont of the Bed, as good a Maid as she
came in. And so stealing down, she intended to send for her sweetheart, who
should finish that task of pleasure which the other had so flightly begun, and
accordingly she sent a messenger for him. Now in the mean time Old Avarez
calling to mind the terror and fear of his former Dream, presently resolves
upon a new course, which was, to avoyde the like perplexity, he meant to bury
his Money, being the safest way, (as he thought) that posibly could be
invented, For says he, then I may sleep securely on my Pillow, nor can any
Dreams affright me with the fear of loosing my beloved Gold. Being thus
resolved, up he gets, and having put on his old furred Gown, away he goes
into the fields, with a spade in one hand, and a great bag of Gold in the
other hand, meaning to bury his money privately without any Ceremonies,
himself being both Priest and Sexton: so having made a deep hole under the
root of a tree, he lays therein his bag of money; and as he was going to
say Earth to Earth, a Spirit sitting upon the bag in the likeness of a
Reden, spoke thus unto him in the behalf of Mistress Money. I hope Master
Avarez you will not commit so soul a deed as to bury Mistress Money alive,
for know that all the world lives by her, and she being buried, the whole
world would be all amort. She is the life of the living, the comfort of the
rich, the hope of the poor, and therefore she dying and being buried, all
worldly hope and comfort dies with her. However, I hope if you will needs bury
her, yet suffer her to make her Will. Avarez willingly agreed hereunto, and did
the spirit tell him what she desired. Why says the Spirit, this is her Will.

Mistress Money, being sick in body as you may perceive by her pale look,
but healthful in mind, bequeaths her body to be buried under this Tree, and
her soul to the infernal Vault below.

Also she gives and bequeaths unto her Friends in manner and form as follows.

To young Mistress Tireby, who for my sake first lost her maiden head, and
afterward turned a common whore, I give five pound to fetch her best gown out
of pawn.

To young master Rastley a Gamester, who has often quarrelled in my behalf, I
give forty shillings to swear and drink sack withal.

To master All sup the Broker I give six pence for a halter.

To master Fatling an Innkeeper, I give twenty shillings to paint his sign
withal.

To the incurable Hospital of Knaves and Fools I give three pence per annum
for Whips and Coxcombs.

To the Scholars I give nothing.

Item, to those Drunkards that have spent all their money overnight, I give
six pence for a mornings draught.

Item, to Master Nonsense a young heir, I give four pence to buy Greenes
Groatsworth of wit.

Item, to Maids that have no portions, I give five shillings to buy a chain
to lead Apes in hell withal.

Item, to him that has a scoulding wife, I give twelve pence to go to the
alehouse; and if she follow him thither, I give him six pence to buy holly
wands to swaddle her withal.

Item, to maids that are in Love, I give pence apeece, to buy the next new
ballet of Love, that so they may sing it over their Milking pails.

Item, to a grave chamber maid that very gracelesly has lost her mayden-head, I
give six pence to carry her water to the Doctor.

Item, to Tobacconists, I give six pence for a brush to scour their smoaky
throats.

Item, To the poor of the Town of Nonesuch, I give three pounds sacking
threescore shillings.

Item, to them that keep the Road way of preferment, otherwise called
highwaymen or thieves, I give five shillings for a false Beard and Pistol.

Item, to Country Booksellers, I give three pence to buy this new book withal.

And so him that writ it, I give what he can get, and so he will thank you
for nothing.

THese are all the poo^e legacies which Mistress Money intends to trouble you
withal at this time, hoping you will be a just Executor in performing her last
Will and Testament. Old Avarez having heard what the spirit said, consents to
all that was demanded of him; Avarez ties the strings of the leather bag so
close together, that he strangled Mistress Money by letting no air come unto
her, and afterward buries her, and the paper which she had made, both in one
grave: and so having laid Earth upon his golden Earth, thinking now it safe
enough, he goes merrily home, while his brain seemed to ring a peals of bells
in this manner.

Avarez has done well,
Then ring out every bell:
For I have laid my Gold,
Within the earths fair mold.
Ding, dong, ding, dong.
How Kerdona and her Sweetheart having stood by all this while unseene, found
Avarez gold.
NO sooner was the old Avarez gone home, rejoicing that his money was now past
thieves handling, when Kerdona and her sweetheart came forth from behind a
bush, where they had lain in amorous dalliance, and had beheld what had past
between Avarez and the spirit; and had seen how injuriously he stiffed, and
then buried Mistress Money. But Kerdona a long time through duty to her Master,
persuaded him to let the body rest: How? says her lover, I will not be guilty
of her death for a Hundred pounds, and therefore let us make haste to dig her
up again, for perhaps the warmth of my pocket may recover her. So they both
went to the Grave which Avarez had made under the Tree, and scratching away ^he
Earth with both their hands, they found Mistress Money stark dead, in which
manner she has ever since continued, for your tradsemen complain that money
is dead, and your Countrymen find fault that money is dead too. So that ever
since Avarez buried his money, there has been a dead time of money both in
Country and City. But let that pass: Kerdona and her lover having taken up the
Usurers gold, and having found the Will which was buried with it, her lover
swear he will perform all that was contained therein, seeing that it was
Mistress Moneys charity to bestow it upon such members of the Commonwealth: as
Whores, and Knaves, and the like. Nay then says Kerdona, since you have gained
this by my Fortunate Love, which brought you to these fields, let us send for a
License, and let this burial be turned into our Bridal, I am contented said
the Lover, but first (says he) that Avarez when be digges up this earth
again may say that we are conscionable thieves, I mean to leave him this
halter and this paper, which contained these Verses. He must sure be a covetous
knave,
That hid his money in a grave,
For such as he makes money dead,
But let him know his money's fled;
Which when he misses I do hope
He Will hang himself in this same rope.


So having cast in the Earth upon the halter and paper, they both went
homeward, meaning to be married the next day.

How Kerdona, and her Sweetheart were married, and how Avarez would have
hanged himself, but that he was prevented.
THe Sun was no sooner risen fr^^ his Rosy b^d, but the two Lovers made have
to rise after him, and away they went to Church, where the Parson quickly ^^^e
them man and wife; and thinking to st^^l home again together, they h^pned to
come to that (...), from whence the day before they espied Avarez burying his
Gold. And so being invited by the natural del^ght of the place, and the flames
of love beginning to blaze forth at their lip^; they both consented to lie down
a while, and quench that rising flame with the honey dew of ^isses. But they had
not lain here long, when they might perceive Avarez coming toward the tree,
where he had buried his gold, and looking round about, finding the co^st
clear, and that no body saw him, he began to scrape with ^oth hands li^e a do^
that would fain hide a marry bo^e, (...) ^ing that he could not see his b^g of
Gold, at l^st he (...) the and of (...) ro^^, which being plucked out of (...)
E^r^h ^id end in a fair halter, and brought forth with it the former paper of
verses; the old man not knowing what to think, open she paper, and there
reading the two last lines, Which when he misses, I do hope,
He Will hang himself in this same rope.


He begins thus to reason with himself: Hang my self, says he, yes I will
hang my self, for now I perceive that my gold is stolen from hence, and that
the arrant thief in ^^orne has left me this halter to end my days withal;
well, I will hang my self I need no Jury to pronounce me guilty, for I confess
my self guilty of much folly in biding my gold, and thinking to save it: Was it
not safe enough in my Trunk? (foele that I was) but I must have new devises of
my own to bury it without bell, book, or candle; but I see we old men dote,
and thinking to be over-wise, prove extremely ridiculous. Having thus said,
cursed himself often, and fearing his ^^ver ^a^^e for the loss of his golden
coin, he get^ at last upon a high hedge, and having fastened one end of the
halter to a bough of the same tree (under which he had buried his gold) he
puts the noose over his neck, and then begins to confess in t^i^ manner. ^ear
me you wood and trees, while I conf^sse that I have worthily deserved of is
kind of death, for know all, that it is such as I am, that makes money so dead
in the world as it is: while we ccvetous wretches hide and bury our Gold; for
me I hope the world will forgive me, but for my sake I wish, that those that
hereafter bury their Gold, may first loose it as I have done, and then hang
themselves as I mean to do; and herevishal being ready to cast himself off
the hedge, the two Lovers (who all this while had heard his confession) came in
and safed him from the gallows, and comforting him for the loss of his Gold,
which they had gotten, at last with many persuasions brought him home, where
for very grief not long after he hung himself in his own Gartere. And thus
have you seen that marriage and hanging goes by destiny, for the finding of
this Gold made Kerdona and her sweetheart marry and the loosing of this gold
made the Usurer hang himself, which was a fit end for an Usurer, and so I end
with Finis, Funis.

The Moral Meaning of this BOOK.
AVAREZ fearful dream shows, that the Poor man sleeps more quietly than the
Rich man. Kerdena is as much as to say gain, from lucrum; so that Avarez
getting his Maid Kerdona with child, does show, that Usury does beget upon
gain, ten in the hundred. Avarez burying his gold, and yet loosing it, does
show that we should rather lay up our Treasure in Heaven than in Earth.
Kerdona's marrying with a young gallant and making him find Avarez gold, does
show, that which is gotten miserably does at last come to some prodigal hand,
and so is spent wickedly. And this is the moral meaning that this short story
does afford.

Funeral Verses upon the Death and Burial of Mistress Money, with the number
of Mourners that will be sorry for her Departure.
COme hither you worldlings all,
lament for your dear honey:
For here you may see the funeral,
and burial of Mistress Money.
We need not stretch invention,
with praises to adorn her,
For though she be dead and buried,
she will have many a mourner.
The swaggering gallant will mourns
in sable weeds hereafter,
For now he cannot roar any more,
since Moneys sad departure.
The Tapster too will mourn,
for his scores are now released:
He must stay, for who can pay,
when Money is deceased?
The young Heir too will mourn,
when Money cannot be procured:
With morgage of land, and setting his hand
for Mistress Money is buried.
Your wanton Lasses will mourn,
that themselves for Money hired:
For they in Term they nothing can erne
since Money is thus expired.
The Soldier too will mourn,
that in the wars has served:
For he must stay now for his pay,
which he before deserved.
The Country man will mourn
when he does hear it told,
That Money is dead and buried,
for how shall his corn be sold?
The Scholar too will mourn,
for his Verses can never flourish,
Nor can he write with any delight,
till money his Muses do cheerish.
Blind Cupid a Mourner will be,
for he is now assured,
That he shall never such matches see
as money has often procured.
Your Gentlewomen will mourn,
and their hearts will now he fainting,
For they may stay full many a day
if their portion be but wanting.
The Country Mayds will mourn,
for they at home must tarry;
Nor can they repair to Market or Fair,
if they no money do carry.
The Fiddlers they will mourn,
and with their trade be wearied,
They Will scrape no more at your chamber door
since Money is dead and buried.
The Sheepherds they will mourn,
for though their flocks are increased,
Yet their wool on the plain, will yield no gain,
since money is now deceased.
Your Chapmen too will mourn,
for now they are assured
They cannot have ware to sell at the fair
since Money is dead and buried.
The Tobacco-men will mourn,
and be full heavy hearted,
For with their smoke themselves they may choke
since Money is thus departed.
The Ostler he will mourn,
for since Moneys funeral,
Though your horse he dress, yet nevertheless
his gettings will be very small
The Country Innes will mourn,
for they have little trading:
Since Money is dead and buried,
their custom will be fading.
Your Watermen will mourn,
for Gentlemen hereafter,
Since Money is dead and buried,
will go with a Skuller by water.
And all good fellows will mourn,
for how should they be merry:
They have reason to curse the Usurer,
that did Mistress Money bury.
Thus Money was so beloved,
that no man ever did scorn her
And now being dead and buried,
the whole world will be her mourner.
FINIS.

