A DECLARATION OF THE PRINCIPAL POINTS OF CHRISTIAN Doctrine, GATHERED OVT OF
diverse Catechismes, AND SET FORTH BY THE English Priests dwelling in Tournay
College.

christogram IHS

AT PARIS, By SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY, Printer to the King. M.DC.XLVII.

EMINENTISSIMO PRINCIPI IVLIO CARDINALI MAZARINO.
NON diu quaerendus fuit huic libello Patronus, Eminentissime Cardinalis, cum
nec sub alterius nomine eum prodire in lucem oporteret, quam illius cuius
liberalitati ortum suum acceptum refert, nec nobis fas esset nostros
qualescunque labores alteri cuirentem, res ipsa per se postulare visa est, vt
illi potissimum nuncuparetur, qui tam sublimem in Ecclesia principatum
obtinens, acerrimus esset eiusdem fidei propugnator. Patere igitur
Eminentissime Cardinalis, vt nominis vestri patrocinio gaudeat, eumque pro
solita benignitate in qualecunque obsequij nostri argumentum accipe, vna cum
assiduis votis precibusque ardentissimis quas pro Eminentia vestra offerre
indies non desinunt

Eminentiae vestrae Humillimi and obsequentissimi serui Sacerdotes Angli
Collegij Tornacensis.

A TABLE OF THE LESSONS.
Lesson I. OF God. page 1. Lesson II. Of the mystery of the blessed Trinity. 15
Lesson III. Of the creation of the world. 23 Lesson IV. Of Man. 28 Lesson V. Of
man's duty toward God. 37 Lesson VI. Of Original Justice. 44 Lesson VII. Of
Original sin. 53 Lesson VIII. Of the Redemption of Man. 62 Lesson IX. Of the
Incarnation of Jesus Christ. 65 Lesson X. Of the Church. 79 Lesson XI. Of a
Christian. 97 Lesson XII. Of Faith. 110 Lesson XIII. Of the Creed. 117 Lesson
XIV. Of Hope. 167 Lesson XV. Of the Pater noster. 170 Lesson XVI. Of Charity.
190 Lesson XVII. Of the Decalogue, or ten Commandments. 199 Lesson XVIII. Of
the Commandments of the Church. 296 Lesson XIX. Of the three Evangelical
counsels. 308 Lesson XX. Of the Four Moral or Cardinal Virtues. 320 Lesson
XXI. Of the State of Grace. 332 Lesson XXII. Of Sin. 347 Lesson XXIII. Of the
seven Sacraments. 368 Lesson XXIV. Of Baptism. 378 Lesson XXV. Of
Confirmation. 385 Lesson XXV. Of the holy Euchariste. 398 Lesson XXVII. Of
Penance. 414 Lesson XXVIII. Of Extreme Unction. 491 Lesson XXIX. Of Order. 497
Lesson XXX. Of Matrimony. 512 Lesson XXXI. Of God his actual ass^stant grace.
520 Lesson XXXII. Of Prayer. 532 Lesson XXXIII. Of Mental Prayer. 539 Lesson
XXXIV. Of praying to Saints. 545 Lesson XXXV. Of the Aue Maria. 558 Lesson
XXXVI. Of the Sacrifice of Mass. 571
A DECLARATION OF THE PRINCIPAL Points of Christian Doctrine.
LESSON I. Of God.
1. WHere were all these men that we see in the world, and what did they do,
before they were conceived in their Mothers wombs?
They were no where, and they were nothing, and therefore they could do
nothing.

2. Who made them to be?
Their fathers and mothers, who likewise were made to be by other fathers and
mothers, until Adam and Eve, who were the first man and woman that ever were.

3. And who made Adam and Eve to be?
God almighty, who made all things, and after all the rest made Adam of earth,
and Eve of a ribbe of Adam his side.

4. How do you know that Adam did not make himself?
Because that which is made, must be made by something, for as I said before,
nothing can do nothing: but Adam before he was made, was nothing, and therefore
he could not make himself. And the same reason does show that the first of
every thinde of all creatures in the world, and the world it self, did not
make themselves, but were all made by a thing, which was something before; that
is by God allmighty.

5. Who made God allmighty to be?
God was from all eternity, and has no beginning, and therefore cannot be
made: for nothing can be made to be, unless it once were not in being it
self, that so it might be made, as was man and all things else but God,
before he created them.

6. How do you know that God was ever?
Because our faith does assure us thereof, and so likewise does reason. For, if
once God had not bee^, there had then been nothing at all: which supposed, it
evidently would follow, that there could never have bee^ any thing, seeing that
something cannot be made by nothing. Wherefore since that there are so many
things, it follows, that that thing which made the first of every kind, was
it self from all eternity.

7. Wherefore does it follow, that he who made the first of every kind, must
needs be God?
Because, seeing that nothing has power to make it self, it follows that
every creature must needs have a maker of an other more powerful kind then it
self, until it comes at last to some thing, which is more powerful then all
kinds of things that are made; and that is God. Besides, nature it self does
teach us that the maker of all things is God; for in all our dangers and
misfortunes we do naturally call upon him who made us: and so all sorts of
people are agreed that he is God. Moreover the beauty of this created world,
does teach us as much: for as when we see a fair house well built, we judge
that it was made by some excellent architect, so when we see the beauty of this
world, the order of creatures, the variety of times and seasons, we gather from
thence the greatness and wisdom of him who made it; and that he can be no
other but God.

8. How do you know that God is allmighty?
Because seeing that whatsoever can be made, and is not, cannot make it self,
but must be made by God, it follows that God can make all things that can be
made; which is as much as to say, that he can absolutely make all things, for
that which cannot be made, is nothing. Again, seeing that nothing can be done,
but what is done by something, and whatsoever is something, is made by God to
be something, it follows that God does give power to do all things that are
done, or can be done, and consequently that he him self can do whatsoever can
be done; for clear it is, that who gives power to do any thing, has in
himself power to do the same, since that nothing can give, what it has not
it self. And so you see that God is allmighty: for that thing is allmighty,
which can make all things, and do all things. And for this reason also we
must grant, that God has in himself the perfections of all things.

9. As God is the maker of all things, is it not he also who conserueth all
things in being, when they are made?
Yes: for as nothing can make it self, no more can any thing conserve it
self; because conservation of a thing, is a continual giueing of that being
to a thing, which it received at its first making; and so no less power is
required to keep a thing in being, then is necessary to give its first being
to it.

And because it belongs to him, who makes a thing of nothing, to give limits
both to the being, and to the power of the thing he makes, which is done by
prescribing its end, and by laying down in particular all the chain of
actions that ever it shall do; it follows that no creature shall do any
action at all, but only that which God having first particularly foreseen, does
ordain or permit it to do; and consequently, that his eternal decrees, do
concur to the doing of every action: on whom also the being of all actions
does depend, both in their continuation, and in their beginning. And so it is
clear that God is the Author of all our actions, by giving them existence, as
well as of our being: as the Architect, who by ouerseeing the building, has
influence into euery-particular of a house, does build the house more truly,
then the workmen, by whose means those things are executed, which he or
daineth about it. So that God in fine is both the maker of all things, the
keeper of all things in being, and also the chief doer of all things.

10. As God is the chief doer, and maker of all things, so do you not also
believe, that he sees, and knows all things whatsoever?
Yes undoubtedly, for we account him but very simple, who knows not what he
does himself. God therefore not only giving us the power, but even also doing
all our actions with us much more then our selves, he must needs know far
better then our selves, what we do. And so you see, that God knows all and
every thing that is done, great and little, to the number of the thoughts of
men and Angels, to the division of dust and sands; yea he knows whatsoever
can be done or made; yea though it nether be done or made, nor ever to be done
or made. And because he does not only know, but also sets on work the
causes of all things, clear it is, that all things are done by his
disposition and government; and consequently that he is the gouernout of all
things in the world.

11. If God then be the chief Author and principal cause of all our actions,
does it not follow from-thence, that he is also the cause and Author of our
sins?
No: for sin is but a want and defect of our doing, or rather a misdoing, or
missing to do: wherefore, as in a scriuener the writeing proceeds chiefly
from the scriuener, but the ill writeing by blotting or blurring proceeds
from the fault of the pens ill slit, bad fashion, or foulness: so in like
manner, all man's actions proceed chiefly from God; but sin, which is the ill
doing them, proceeds merely from some defect in man himself, and not from
God at all. For as cold cannot proceed from heat, nor dryness from water, so
the missing to do, and want of goodness, cannot spring from the author of
doing and fountain of goodness.

12. But what now finally is this God, who both makes and knows all things,
and was himself from all eternity?
This is a question we can not answer fully, until we come to enjoy him in
heaven, where we shall see him clearly. Here upon earth we know him but
imperfectly, for he is not like unto any thing, which can be seen by the eye of
man, or framed by humane fantasy.

13. What then must we conceive him to be?
We must conceive him to be a spiritual substance, having his being from
himself, most single, incomprehensible, omnipotent, immutable, remaineing
always in the same state without any alteration at all, omniscient,
infinitely wise, and infinitely good, eternal without all beginning or end,
who depends of nothing, has need of nothing, and by whom all things were
created, and on whom all things both in heaven and earth depend.

14. Where is God his chief and proper mansion place?
Although we conceive God to be chiefly n heaven, because he does there
chiefly manifest the greatness of his glory unto the blessed; yet you must
know, that he is every where, not only by his power, but also by his presence,
and essence.

14. What do you mean by Gods being every where, by power, by presence, and by
essence?
God is every where by power; as is the king in his kingdom; where by his
laws and officers, he is morally present in his whole kingdom, and obeyed by
his subjects: and so God conserueth every thing and does all that is done in
several parts of the world, sin only excepted, as we said before. He is
every where by presence, as is the king in his chamber, by his personal being
there: and so he sees all that which is in the world, as the eye sees that
which is before it. And finally he is also every where by essence, as is the
king in his throne, where with his body he fills up the whole place. God is
also said to be particularly present with the just by grace, with the blessed
by glory, and with the very damned in hell by justice.

16. Must we believe that there is but one God?
Yes; as there is but one sun in the world, one king in a kingdom, one soul
in a body, so is there but one God in heaven, who governs the whole world.
And the reason of it is, because, he who is absolutely sovereign, cannot have
any thing distinct from himself as a companion equal to himself; for
absolute souerainty does signify a superiority above all: now God, who has all
perfections, must consequently have souerainty; for otherwise he would want
that perfection which is the chief of all. And the notio^ of Godhead does
prove that it cannot be otherwise: for if there be two Gods, either both of them
have all being, that is, do possess being in its full latitude and perfection,
or one has it so, and the other not; if both have all being in its full
latitude and perfection, then there cannot be any kind of being in the one,
which is not in the other, whereby they may differ in their beings; and if they
do not differ in their beings, they must needs have one and the self same
being, and so they cannot be two things, but one and the self same thing; for
things are multiplied by different beings. If one has all being and the other
not, this second cannot be God, who is being it self, and so must needs
possess all being in its full latitude and perfection.

LESSON II. Of the mystery of the blessed Trinity.
1. WAs God then solitary, and all alone before the creation of the world?
No: he was from all eternity the most sacred company of the blessed Trinity:
for as he is the cause of all fruitfulness in creatures, so is he first of all
most fruitful within himself, in regard of his fecundity both in his
understanding, and in his-will; and therefore although there were no more
things but himself, and he himself was but one thing, yet this one thing was
allwayse existent with three divine personalities. And this is that which we
call the mystery of the blessed Trinity and unity of God.

2. How can this be?
It is a thing which we cannot comprehend for as God himself is
incomprehensible to us, so is all that which is in God, and particularly this
mystery of the most blessed Trinity.

3. Is there no example to help us to conceive this mystery?
Yes; it may in some sort be exemplified in a fountain, which produces a
river, and the river and it together a lake: for the lake, the river, and the
fountain, are distinguished from one another, and yet the water by which they
are all constituted, is one and the same, in every one of them.

4. What then means the mystery of the unity and Trinity of God?
It means that in God there is only one divinity, or, as we say, essence and
divine nature; which nevertheless is in three divine persons, who are called
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, and so there is but one God, and every Person is
truly that one God.

5. Wherefore are the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, three distinct
persons?
Because they have three distinct notions; for though the being of the Godhead
be most single and indivisible, and consequently the self same in all three;
yet the manner of this being is not the same, but each one has his special
manner of being, which cannot be common to the rest. For the Father is the
fountain from-whence the other two persons do proceed, and he has no source
himself to proceed from, and therefore he produces, but is not produced. The
Son proceeds from the father, and only from him. The holy Ghost proceeds
both from the Father and the Son. And hence it arises that the three persons
are distinguished (though not divided) one from another: and therefore though
we cannot say, that the Godhead of the Son proceeds from the Godhead of the
Father, or the Godhead of the holy Ghost, from the Godhead of the Father and
the son; yet we are bound to believe, that the person of the son proceeds
from the person of the Father, and the person of the holy Ghost from the
persons of the Father and the son.

6. How does the son proceed from the father?
He is not made, nor created, but begotten of his fathers own substance by his
understanding. For the father knowing himself by an infinite knowledge,
produces by his understanding a most perfect word, or expression of himself;
which is his son coeternall and equal in all things to himself, and must
needs possess the same nature with him, because he is produced of his own
substance.

7. Why is he called his son?
Because his production is a true generation. For as the end of generation in
creatures is to make a thing like in nature to that from which it proceeds, so
does the word of the divine understanding produced through the force of the
fathers intellectual nature, by the manner of its production naturally
express the thing which is understood, which is God the father himself.

8. Has God the father but one son begotten of his own substance?
No; nether can he have any more then one: for it is otherwise in God, then in
men; because no man can give all that he himself is, to any son, and
therefore he may have many children; but God allmigthy does give his own
substance so perfectly to his son by generation, as that he gives him all
that is in himself, and can be communicated; in so much that there remains
nothing to be given by way of generation to any other.

9. How does the holy Ghost proceed from the father and the son?
He does proceed from them both, as from one only source, and not as made, or
created, nor as begotten, but produced through the will by an ineffable way,
which divines rearme Spiration.

10. What is Spiration?
It is a breathing or impulse of the will, by which it expresses its
affection: for the father loving his son infinitely, as being his only
begotten, and the son his father, as the fountain from whom he proceeds,
they produce a mutual bond of love, whereby the father and son are ineffably
linked together: and this is the holy Ghost, the third person of the blessed
Trinity; eternal God, and equal to both the other two persons.

11. Why are these three persons one only God?
Because they have one self same essence, one self same power, one self same
wisdom, one self same goodness, one self same understanding, and one self
same will.

12. Did then all these three divine persons create the world?
Yes, for all three having from all eternity the same power, the same will, and
the same understanding, whatsoever is done out of God by one, is done by all.

LESSON III. Of the creation of the world.
1. OF what did God make the world?
Of nothing.

2. With what did he make it?
With his word alone.

3. Had not he then need of some instruments to make it with all?
No, for his power is so great and so infinite, as that he can, not only make
what he will, but also in what manner he will.

4. Was there an infinite power required to create the world?
Yes, for the harder a thing is to be done, the more force is required to the
doing of it; and the more remote a thing as from the end to which it is to be
moved, the more force is required to move it thither: and therefore seeing that
to create, is to make a thing of nothing, and that betwixt nothing and
something there is an infinite distance, it follows that creation requires
an infinite force or power in him who creates.

5. Why did he make the world?
That his greatness and goodness might be seen and adored.

6. By whom would he have it adored?
By men and Angels, who only are able to consider the admirable works of
heaven and earth, and by knowing them to love and praise his goodness, who
made them for their use and benefit.

7. What moved God to create men and Angels? did he want them? or did he get
any thing by them?
He did not want them, for seeing he is all goodness, he could want no good
thing; and for evil, it is not to be desired: nether could he get any thing by
them, for he who has all, gets nothing. So that he was moved merely through
his own goodness: for being all goodness himself, he needed no other cause
why to do good, then that himself by nature is goodness: for as it is the
nature of heat to make hot, and of cold to cool, so is it the nature of
goodness to do good.

8. What is an Angel?
An Angel is a spiritual creature subsisting completely by himself without a
body.

9. What became of the Angels whom God created?
Some of them remained in that holy estate, wherein they were created, and so
were by God his grace established therein, and became happy and blessed for
ever. Others kept it not, but wilfully lost it by sin, and so became Devils,
and are condemned to everlasting torment in hell.

10. How many Angels were there created?
The multitude of them is so great, as that they exceed all kinds of creatures
in the world, both men, beasts, birds, fisshes, plants, and all other
speciesses of things which we see upon the earth. And they are distinguished
into three ranks, which are called Hierarchies: and every Hierarchy
consists of three orders, whereof the highest are called Seraphins, and the
lowest, Angels; and amongst the highest Lucifer is held by many to have been
the chief of all; who fell through pride, and so although he was the
perfectest creature that ever God made, he is now become through his own fault
the most miserable and damned creature of all others. The next to him (as some
conceive) was S Michael, who is in nature the perfectest creature of all that
enjoy God; all though both in grace and glory, the Blessed Virgin does far
surpass both him and all the rest.

11. How many men were created at the beginning?
Only one, that is Adam, and out of him Eve the woman was made; from whom
afterward all mankind did proceed.

LESSON IV. Of Man.
1. WHat is man?
Man is a reasonable creature made of body, and soul.

2. Of what was his body made?
Of the slime of the earth.

3. Of what was his soul made?
It was made of nothing.

4. What is a soul?
It is a spiritual substance ordained to inform a body, immediately created by
God, endued with understanding, and freewill, whereby man is truly made to gods
own image, and by which also he resembles the Angels, and differs from all
other mortal creatures.

5. For what end did he create man?
That he might know God, and knowing love him, and loving praise him; for these
are the things in which man ought to employ his whole life. And his last end
is, to enjoy him in heaven.

6. Why has God made man's body (who is so noble a creature) of so base a
substance, as is earth and dust?
Thereby to abate his pride, and so keep him humble by the consideration of
his extraction.

7. Wherefore did he make his soul so noble a substance?
To the end that he might be capable of enjoying God himself: and also that
knowing his own worth and dignity, to be so far exceeding all other mortal
creatures, his actions should likewise be answerable, and surpass the actions
of all other inferior creatures.

8. What goods has God bestowed upon men?
Two sorts of goods; some internal, and belonging to the constitution of
himself, as the three powers of his soul, whereby he is endued with reason;
and the five senses of his body, with all the parts belonging to it: others
external, as the heavens and earth, and all the things contained in them,
which were made for the entertainment, and service of man.

9. Which prevails most in man sense or reason?
For the first seven years, sense has the whole government of man, but after
seven years, reason by little and little begins to get strength, and
grows on, to the age of thirty, the Philosophers not admitting a time of
wisdom, and constant judgment, until we come to the standing part of man's
life; which is when we leave growing. Yet she can never quite conquer sense, by
reason that it is deeply rooted, and accustomed to sway us, by having had at
first a long possession over reason.

10. Which ought to sway most with us, sense or reason?
Certainly reason, for if man be a reasonable creature (as we have defined him
to be) then reason must be the nature of man, and so to do against reason, were
to do against nature, and consequently to sin. Again, sense only considers
the present, and so it is apt to precipitate us into future inconveniences,
whereas reason, which forecasteth what is to come, keeps us out of such
dangers. Moreover reason has one conduct and government through all, and
settleth us in a stable way tending to one incommutable good: whereas sense
sets our hearts upon uncertain goods, and such as may be taken from us, and
so it puts us in casuality to be ever grieved; for who loses what he is in
love with, must needs be grieved according to the measure of his love.

11. What becomes of man's body and soul after his death?
The body returns again to earth, of which it was made, as the graves do well
testify: the soul retains its being for all eternity, either in hell or heaven.

12. Does every soul presently after that it is separated from the body, go
immediately either to heaven, or to hell?
No, for some go first to purgatory, before they go to heaven: but those who go
to hell, go all immediately thither, as soon as they are separated from their
bodies.

13. Which be those that go immediately to heaven?
The souls of those that dye in the state of grace, and have in this life
paid all debt due for their sins: for these souls whilst they were in their
bodies, did love God above all things, as being good in himself; and
therefore they could not choose but also desire to know and see him, whom they
loved so much. And this same desire (because it is of an immutable good)
remains also after death; yea it is then much increased; because the soul
having no more any distraction by its senses, it is wholly set upon that object,
and therefore it would be miserable, if it did not obtain it. But God who is
all goodness can not be so cruel as to let one be miserable for loving him,
and therefore he does immediately let himself be seen unto him; which is to be
in heaven or perfectly blessed. And so you see how those who dye in that happy
state, go immediately to heaven.

14. Which be those, that go first to purgatory, before they go to heaven?
The souls of them who dye in the state of grace, and have not fully satisfied
for their sins in this life: for those souls at their death, are in such a
state, that though they firmly love God as their greatest and final good, and
so are content to forgo all things rather then offend him mortally; yet their
love is not pure, because they love worldly things withal by an inordinate
affection, being loath to leave them, though thereby they know they should see
God the sooner. Now souls departing with such affections, are not fit to see
God, until they be purified from all such dross; and so they remain in
pain, not being able to attain that bliss, which they chiefly desire, until
by suffering they pay what is due to God his justice, or until by the
churches help, God of his mercy rectifieth them.

15. And which be those unhappy souls that go to hell?
The souls of them, who dye without repentance in there woeful state of
mortal sin; whereby whilst they lived they did fasten their souls upon some
other object, more then upon God, from which after their death they cannot
turn themselves to God, for want of gods grace, and so they can not see or
enjoy God; for how should they enjoy that, which they do not love? And to be
utterly deprived of hope to see God (who can only comfort the soul, when by
death transitory comforts are lost) is to be in the everlasting torment of hell.

16. Does our future life then depend of this present life?
Yes, all depends of performing our duty toward God in this life, whereby
those who fail in it, deserve eternal punishment in the next, as contrary
wise those who perform it, deserve eternal reward.

LESSON V. Of Man's Duty toward God.
1. What is the duty which we owe to Almighty God?
We are bound to fear, to serve, to honor, and to love him above all things.

2. Wherefore are we bound to fear Almighty God above all things?
Because he is omnipotent, and so can dispose of us, as he will himself; and
because he is omniscient, and so does see the bottom of our hearts, and
sinful condition; and chiefly because he is our Lord, on whom our salvation
depends; for we are all inuolued in one heap of perdition, out of which he
chooses none, but whom he pleases; and therefore we ought allwaise to stand
in fear of offending him, as not knowing whether we be vessels of his wrath,
or mercy. Besides, we are guilty of sin, and consequently of eternal
damnation, if he has not pardoned us; and therefore, he being our judge, all
ought to stand in fear of him, whom they have offended.

3. Wherefore are we obliged to serve God above all things?
We are obliged to serve him, first, in regard that both for our being, and
co^seruation, we wholly depend on him. Secondly in regard that the wages, and
recompenses, which he reserueth for his servants, exceed all rewards in the
world by an infinite proportion.

4. Why are we to reverence and honor him above all things?
Because his majesty, and excellency, does infinitely surpass all things in
the world, and therefore he is worthy of all honor and respect.

5. Wherefore are we bound to love God above all things?
Because God of his own mere goodness, did first vouchsafe to make us of
nothing to be what we are; wherefore if we are bound to love our parents, who
are only God his instruments in making of us, how much more ought we to love
God? Besides that our parents are not the thousanth part of the causes, which
God has laid from the beginning of the world, for the making of every man in
particular; and so though our parents be our immediate causes, yet there is not
one thousanth part of our making belonging to them, in comparison of what
belongs to God, to whom we owe our selves totally, and of all sides, and from
the very beginning. Secondly because he has redeemed us, and suffered death
for our sakes, knowing every one for whom he suffered; and of so great a
number excluding none, though never so great a sinner; and with such excess of
love, as that there was not any, for who^ alone he would not have suffered
(though there had been no other to suffer for) as freely, as we see he did make
the sun shine on Adam, when he was alone, no less then upon the millions
that now be. Thirdly because he has also conferred on us by grace, the great
dignity of being his adopted sonns, and heirs to the kingdom of his eternal
bliss. Besides all other continual and innumerable both temporal and
spiritual benefits, which we receive from him. And lastly, because God is
goodness it self, the only true and proper object of love.

6. Which be the best signs, to know whether we truly love God or no?
The first and best sign is, if we delight to keep his commandments. The
second, if we delight to think and often speak of him, or to converse and
speak with him by prayer, or to have him to speak frequently with us, by our
reading pious books. The third is, if we desire to see him, when by sickness he
gives us warning of his calling us to him by death. The fourth is, if we
delight to practice virtue, which is most pleasing to him. And the last, if we
find in our hearts true repentance, and sorrow, for our sins committed
against him; for so we ought to do toward all, whom we truly love.

7. Considering all these many strong and conuincing motives, which we have
both to love, fear, and serve almighty God; and that by so doing, we are
assured of eternal felicity, as also of eternal torments in hell for the
contrary; whence does it proceed, that so great a number transgress, and so
few perform their duty?
The reason is, for that the Diuill, and our corrupt sensuality, do so dazzle
us with the pleasures, wealth, and honors of this world, as that we do not
truly apprehend either our duty toward God, or the felicity of heaven, or
the woeful misery of the damned in hell; but (being led away like little
children by the present objects of bables, which delight our appetites) we
little reflect upon eternal things, which are not obuious to our corporal
senses.

8. Why then is Man so severely punished for not performing his duty toward
God, if sensuality has such power to withdraw him from it?
Very deservedly. First, because through the merits of Christ Jesus, we have
sufficient grace whereby to overcome this sensuality, if we will make use of
it. Secondly, because almighty God bestowed upon Man so many helps and
graces, at first when he did create him, as that he would not have been subject
to this sensuality, if he had not, by his own fault, lost part of that, which
God bestowed upon him, and weakened the rest.

LESSON VI. Of original Justice.
1. DId God then, at the creating of man, bestow on him any helps more then we
have at our birth?
Yes, he gave both Adam and Eve, the grace of original justice, at the first
moment of their creation, with all the goods that flow from it; whereby as they
themselves were perfectly submitted in obedience to almighty God, so likewise
were all things perfectly subjected to them, as well those which were
internal, and within themselves, as all other external creatures: in so much,
that they could not rejoice, nor be contristated, nor have any other thought,
unless they themselves would have it. And all creatures did obey them so, that
man was a greater king, then any Prince now in the world: for the greatest
kings now are oftentimes disobeyed; but man in the state of his first
innocence, was so absolute, that no creature could rebel against him, nor
would any man have been disloyal to another.

2. How did the grace of innocence work these great effects in man?
By making him know God, and love him above all things; for you must know,
that the first thing represented to his understanding, was Allmighty God
finishing the creation of all things in him; and that his will embracing the
strong motives of so powerful an object, did at the same instant love God most
fervently above all things; which act proceeding from the grace of God, and
being the first act, that ever took possession of his heart newly molded, and
rightly set for this purpose, it could not choose but carry with it toward its
beloved object the whole powers of his soul, which then was free from all
contrary dispositions, and so it could not choose but subject them all unto
it; and consequently he must needs remain totally subjected to God, as long as
he remained in this state; and he could not but remain in this state, unless
he lost it through his own fault, by destroying that constant inclination of
loving God above all things, which was now settled in his soul by this happy
grace.

3. But how could this grace, which was in his soul only, work such good
effects in his body?
The reason of it is, because his corporal co^stitution being fitted to follow
the inclination of the soul, this grace of innocence actuated, and increased
that fitnes, which of it self it found in the body: and so as long as man
remained in that state, the body could not choose but do that, which it was
fitted to, that is, follow the inclination of the soul; whereby all its actions
were necessatily to expect the souls operation: and so it could not choose but
be prevented by reason; since that the soul it self which was to move the
body, could do nothing but by reason. And thus you see, how Adam his body,
being continually by this grace prevented with reason, could not incline to
any thing, before reason gave it leave and order, and so this grace made his
very corporal desires subject to reason.

4. What would have become of man at last?
He would have lived in Paradise, without ever being sick, as long as it had
pleased God; and at last he should have been translated into haven without
dying.

5. How could this be? For seeing that men must eat to grow, and to keep
themselves alive; they could not avoid, but meats should have their effect, and
so breed diseases.
If we look into the cause of sickness, we shall see, that it proceeds from
some excess, or defect, which in that state would not have been, when man had
wit and will, to provide against both. Besides, God almighty had fitted the
place of habitation to the man, that there should be no ill air, or other
occasion of harm unto him. Whence (because wisdom kept him from mischance,
and the place from infection) he could not dye but of age; against which, God
had provided the tree of life to preserve him; and so in conclusion he would
have lived for ever.

6. Was this grace ardained only for Adam?
No; all his posterity would have been endued with the same, derived from him
to all, by their very birth right; as now we are all, by our very conception,
infected with original finne derived from him: and so all would have lived in
this world most happily, and at last have been translated to heaven.

7. How could the grace of innocence, which is unmediately in our soul, come
to us by birth from our parents, who make only our body; and have nothing to
do with our soul, but leave that to be made by God alone?
You may easily conceive this, if you know how children come to be like to
their fathers. You must consider then, that Adam his body (being designed by
God for a soul endowed with original Justice) was fitted for the operations
of such a soul; and consequently, it was imbued with all such special
dispositions, as were requisite to make it pliable, and subject to reason. Now
Adam procreating his sonns body with the same good dispositions, which his
own body had; and almighty God (who had promised by covenant the grace of
innocence to all his posterity, in case that he himself did continue in his
due obedience) finding those good dispositions in the child's body, as an
infallible token of his fathers actual perseverance in his first grace, he
could not fail to endow, according to his promise, the soul of Adams son
with the same grace of original justice, which his father had. And so, seeing
that these good dispositions in the child's body (which were antecedent to the
creation of the soul, and proceeded from the like dispositions in its parents)
would have been as a seal of God his covenant with mankind; it follows that
they would have drawn by a necessary consequence, in virtue of the said
covenant, original justice, even in to the child his soul. And so you see,
how this first grace was to come to us from our parents by our generation. And
it was most conformable to reason, that it should come that way: for, as on the
one side it was natural, that Adam should have made his sons body like his
own, and consequently disposed in a special manner to be subject to reason;
so it was most reasonable, that Allmighty God should fit the soul to the
sons body; which would not have been, unless he had given him a soul apt
to love God above all things; seeing that the actual subjection of the body
to reason, does proceed from such a disposition in the soul. And so you see
how the grace to love God above all things (which is commonly called justice
or sanctity) was given to Adam, so as to descend from him unto his heyrs, and
therefore was called original justice, and would have come unto us, who were
to be borne to it, as if it were by nature.

LESSON VII. Of original Sin.
1. How did Adam and Eve make use of this great grace?
Very ill, for many are of opinion, that they lost it in less then one day.

2. How did this misfortune befall them?
Because they did not persevere in their first love of God above all things,
but fell from it by disobedience.

3. What induced our first parents to commit this sin?
Eve was induced principally by pride and vanity; for the Angel (who was
become a Devil by pride) did infect Eve with the same sin, that thereby he
might make her and Adam companions of his misery, persuading her, that if she
did rebel against God by eating the fruit, which he had forbidden them; they
should become greater then they were. And although this was the chief motive,
yet two other motives did also concur: for, by the same act she yielded to
three sinful suggestions, all which are expressly set down in scripture. The
first was of gluttony, She saw that it was good to eat, and pleasant to
behold. The second was a curiosity of knowing, You shall know good and evil.
The third was pride, You shall be like Gods. And although Adam was not seduced
by the Devil, as Eve was, yet he fell into the sin of disobedience, by
yielding to the persuasions of his wife, being loath to displease her. And so
that which induced Adam to sin, was a disordinate affection toward Eve,
choosing to offend God, rather then to contristate her.

4. What effect did this sin produce?
It caused the quite contrary to that, which Eve pretended. For it did cast
both her, and Adam, lower then they were, and made all other creatures rebel
against them; and rendered them slaves to their own passions; it rendered their
bodies obnoxious to death, and misery; their understanding to ignorance, and
errors; and their will to malice, and the Devil. And no wonder; for, if the
love of God was the cause of those good effects in them, the contrary must
needs breed contrary effects.

5. What comfort then did there remain for them?
None at all, but God his merciful goodness: for they had no means left in
themselves, to defend themselves from so many enemies, or to deliver
themselves from the misery they were in: they could not deserve so much as
that God should take pity of them: for having lost entirely his grace, they
had of themselves no power any more to do the least good work, as it ought
to be done, not so much, as to pray to God to assist them.

6. This disaster was it to go no farther, then to Adam, and Eve?
Yes, to their children, and to all their posterity. For as all the fruits of
an ill root, are ill; and clear water cannot proceed from a fountain, which
is infected; no more could there be borne of our first parents, infected with
sin, any other but sinners. For Adam his first sin did not infect him,
only as a particular person, but also as the general root of all mankind.

7. Are we all then borne in sin?
Yes; for as those who were borne of Adam and Eve, were borne sinners by the
infection of their Parents, so were their children likewise for the same reason
borne in sin, and the children of their children; and so it must needs be for
all their posterity to the worlds end. And the reason of this is, because
Adam, falling from the love of God, to love himself more then God (which love
was contrary to reason) this change in his soul could not choose but work a
great change in his very body, and destroy its former good dispositions,
that were fitted to the grace of innocence, by moulding in it others of a
contrary bias. For we see by experience, that our souls operations have
strong effects in our bodies; we see that when we hear good news, the joy in
our souls makes our very bodies light and iocond: and when we grieve, the
grief of our souls redoundeth to our bodies, and makes them dull and heavy.
Now then, Adam being changed, not only in his soul, but also in his very
body; he could not make his sons body with a better disposition, then his
own body had; which was not now disposed to be subject to reason, but the
quite contrary: for the soul by loving an other thing better then God,
carried the body along with it, and put it into possession of command against
reason; and so it remained in rebellion with its proper motion independent of
reason: which bad disposition, being derived also to the child's body, and
being there as a mark of that transgression, which we did all of us incur by
Adam, it re^dreth the same body, through a necessary consequence (by reason
of Gods covenant with Adam) incapable of any other soul, but such as is
guilty of that loss, which was inflicted by God upon Adam, and upon all his
posterity, in case that he did break his commandment. From whence it
follows, that no other soul could be due to such a body, as Adam made to
his son, but such as was deprived of original justice. And this is that,
which Christians call original sin, to wit the missing of grace, or
original justice, in the child, as proceeding from the guilt, which we
contracted through the fault of our first father, in whom we all sinned. So
that the want, or privation, is particular to every one, the cause or actual
sin only in Adam.

8. But seeing that Adam after his fall did penance, and began to love God
anew, did he not recover again the former good dispositions, as well in his
body, as in his soul, both for himself, and his posterity?
No: for this second love, being prevented with dispositions in man contrary
to it self, it could not (according to the ordinary course of God his
providence) produce that effect, which the first love did, that found no such
contratie dispositions, but all things fitted to it self. Nether can it on
the sudden extirpate those contrary dispositio^s, but with a great deal of
pain and labor, and never wholly; because these affections, and ill
dispositions of sensuality, go before reason, and are in some sort independent
of it; infecting the motions of sense, before reason can espy it. And so
allmighty God has most justly ordained, that these ill inclinations, caused by
this inordinate love, should alwayse remain in mankind, as due punishment for
his first sin. And this is that which is called concupiscence; which is an
inclination, that draws our hearts to love our selves more then God, contrary
to the former good disposition, that was in man, by the grace of innocence.
And no wonder, if since the soul cannot be without love, and having lost the
love of God, it runs after sense, and loves those things which sense
proposes, seeing that sense is the gate, that opens the way for objects to
enter into our soul.

LESSON VIII. Of the Redemption of man.
1. DId God allmighty abandon man, in this his most miserable state?
No: for Adam had no sooner sinned, but God, moved by compassion out of his
mere goodness, promised to relieve him by the means of Jesus Christ, who
being to descend from Adam and Eve (by the blessed Virgin) was to redeem
mankind, and to bruize the head of the serpent, that is of the devil, by whom
Eve was seduced.

2. Did God fulfill this promise presently?
No: he expected four thousand years, or there about.

3. In what state was the world all that time?
In the state that the sin of our first father had put it into.

4. Were all men then in the state of sin, and damnation?
Yes: in so much, that those who were saved, were only some few, in whom God
conserved his grace, and a lively faith of his promise: so that, of the whole
world, in Noes time, hardly eight persons were found just in the sight of God;
and presently again, not five men, in five cities.

5. Were the Jews of the number of those few?
Not all; but only those, who had a lively faith of Jesus Christ, as chiefly
the Patriarchs, and Prophets; and some others.

6. Was all the rest of mankind damned?
Yes: except some particulars, whom God did favor extraordinarily amongst the
Gentiles, as Melchisedec, Job, and some others. All the rest were under the
power of the Devil, who abused them so far, as to make them adore stones,
and beasts, for Gods.

7. Why did God expect four thousand years before he redeemed mankind?
To the end, that men might know the grieuousnesse of sin, which was
committed against him, (seeing that it was the cause of the ruin of so many
souls) and acknowledge the greatness of his mercy, and divine grace, when we
look upon the misery from whence he has delivered us by Jesus Christ: and
therefore we ought to have a perpetual joy, and acknowledgment toward God,
for that we are borne since the redemption of the world.

8. How did God almighty redeem the world?
By the Incarnation, and Passion of our blessed Savior Jesus Christ.

LESSON IX. Of the Incarnation of Jesus Christ.
1. WHat is meant by the Incarnation?
It is a wonderful mystery, whereby one of the three Persons of the blessed
Trinity, was united to our nature, after that it was become mortal, and
subject to misery by sin.

2. Which was that Person?
The second; that is the son.

3. Why the son, rather then any other Person of the blessed Trinity?
Because he came to make us sons to God; and therefore it was fitting, that,
amongst three Persons, the son should be chosen, to be our pattern and
example, and as it were our eldest brother. Besides, wisdom is appropiated to
the son; wherefore (he coming also to be our master and teacher) it was fit
that the wisdom of God (that is the son and second Person) should be chosen
for that effect.

4. Had the other Persons of the blessed Trinity no hand in this mystery?
Yes; for the second Person was incarnated by their will, and by their
operation; although he only was invested with our flesh, and with our nature,
remaining man as we are.

5. Why was it necessary that our redeemer should be both God and man?
It was necessary that he should be God, that his obedience, and sufferings,
might be of infinite value, as proceeding from such a person: it was necessary
he should be man, because the Godhead could not suffer; besides it was
convenient that the same nature, which had offended, should suffer for the
offense; and that the same nature should overcome the Devil, which had been
overcome by him; and also that he who came to teach us how to live virtuously,
should have the same nature and be composed of flesh and blood as we are, that
so we might have a visible pattern, and one whom we might imitate.

6. Was he in all things like to other men?
Yes, excepting only sin, concupiscence, and ignorance. And so the Apostle
says, that he was made to the likeness of the flesh of sin; whereby he
does not only except sin it self, but also concupiscence and ignorance; for
the flesh of sin, is not sin it self, but it signifies those perverse
dispositions in humane nature, which do incline men to sin, which are
comprehended under concupiscence, and ignorance. Yet the Apostle says he was
made to the likeness of the flesh of sin, in regard that he was subject to
mortality, and to painful afflictions, which are the direful effects caused
in man at first by sin.

7. Had he a father and mother, like other men?
No: for he was borne miraculously of the blessed Virgin, without having a
father here upon earth, as in heaven he had no mother. For his body being
framed, by the power of the holy Ghost, in the entrails of the blessed Virgin,
almighty God breathed into this body, (as he did into Adams) the breath of
life in the womb of his mother.

8. How long did he live?
Thirty three years, and three months, or there about.

9. How did he pass that time here?
He lived as other men do, unless that his life was more heaped up with woes.
When he was eight days old, he was circumcised, and his tender body
painefully wounded. After this he is thought to have been kept in Bethleem,
until the three kings came out of the East to adore him; upon which king
Herod growing jealous, he fled into Egypt; and Herod executed his tyranny
upon all the children, from two years old and under in Bethlee^, and in all
the confines of Bethleem. In Egypt we must imagine he was provided, as poor
people are wont to be in strange countries; yet he remained there for some
years, until the death of Herod. After which, being returned, he lived in
Nazareth for fear of Herod his son; whence every year he went to
Jerusalem at the solemn feasts, and there was lost by his Parents, at twelve
years of age; and, after three days seeking, found in the midst of the
Doctors, astonnishing them with his wise and learned answers. As for the rest
of his life, he lived until he was thirty years old, as a private man,
leading an ordinary course of life in the town of Nazareth, and other places,
without appearing to be more the^ an ordinary man, and getting his living by
working with his own hands, as a carpenter, under S. Joseph our ladies
husband; who for this reason was esteemed his father; and although he was not
so, yet being married to his mother, he had paternall jurisdiction over him,
and so he lived obedient both to him, and to his mother.

10. Why did he live so privately?
To give us an example of humility, and to show how those that are to be
teachers in Gods church, ought to prepare themselves by an humble and retired
life.

11. What did he do after he was thirty years old?
When S. John (the trumpet of God, that came from the desert) by summoning
mankind to penance, had sou^ded the march for him toward his eternal
fathers work, for which he was sent, he was baptized by S. John, and receiving
the visible testimony of the holy Ghost, he made his trial in the desert by a
fast of forty days, and forty nights, and by the tentation of the Devil;
all which he did for our instruction. And then he began to exercise his charge,
in gathering of disciples, and in preaching of the verity of the gospel by
actions and words, in proving it by scriptures, in co^firming it by miracles,
through great contradictio^s and dangers; and at last by effusion of his own
blood, which he shed to maintain this truth against them, who did contradict
it.

12. What effect had his preaching?
It had no great effect (as it seems;) for, all those, whom he had made his
disciples, (at least the chief of them) did abandon him at the time of his
Passion; and so all that which he had done with so much labor, was in a manner
lost in one moment.

13. How came it to pass that his word was of so small force in his own
disciples?
Because they had not as yet received the fulness of grace.

14. How came it to pass that he had so few disciples, since that he preached
the Gospel both by words, and miracles, to thousands of people?
Because the holy Ghost was not yet given; for the word of the preacher (though
excellent and divine) works no effect at all, unless the holy Ghost do enter
at the same time into the hearts of them, who hear it, to make them receive
it, and keep it.

15. Was then Christ his preaching fruitless?
No; for first it has taught us by experience, that the word of the preacher,
is not sufficient; but that we must, besides hearing the preacher, address our
selves to God, and demand of him his holy spirit, and his grace. Secondly, the
holy Ghost did afterward revive in the hearts of Christ his disciples, all
that which he had told them during his life.

16. In what manner did Jesus Christ dye?
As his life from the beginning to the end, was full of poverty, subjection,
contradiction, and affliction; so was his death as full of all indignity, and
torment, as humane wit could invent, and humane nature (keeping the shape of
man) endure; yea it was so full of torments, as to induce the^, surpassed the
strength of humane nature: yet it was such, and in that manner, as he himself
made choice of, and as he himself had foretold by the Prophets, without
omitting any of the circumstances, which they pointed out very particularly,
as the cross, the nails, whips, the two thieves, and others.

17. He dyed then freely and willingly?
Yes; in so much, that although the Jews had often attempted to take him, yet
they could never do it, until he himself permitted it, by delivering
himself into their hands, that he might dye at the very hour, which his
father had ordained.

18. Why was it necessary for him to dye?
That he might accomplish the last work necessary for the redemption of
mankind: for such was his fathers will, as that, all which he had done and
suffered during his life, had not been sufficient, if he had not also shed his
precious blood for us upon the cross, in order to his fathers sentence, who
ordained for the satisfying of his divine justice, that his only son should
destroy our spiritual death, by his own corporal death: and although the
least action he did, was of it self sufficient, so that (all his actions being
of infinite value) no more had been necessary, if his father had not ordained
it otherwise for our greater good; yet his love was so great toward man, that
he himself did rejoice, that his father had ordained him to suffer death it
self for our redemption.

19. Was it sufficient that he dyed?
No; for as he dyed to destroy our death, so it was necessary, that he should
rise again from death to life, to communicate his own divine life to us; and
also to confirm us in hope, by considering, that as our head is risen, so
shall we rise, who are his members.

20. Who did raise him again from death to life?
The scripture tells us, that his father did raise him again to life, and
also that he did raise himself.

21. Why is his father said to have raised him again from death to life?
Because, as he is his father, he is the fountain, and source of all his
glorious and divine life, from whence all life is derived. And the father is
said to do it, because it belongs to the father to give life to his son.

22. How did the son raise himself from death?
By the power of his divinity, which remained always hypostatically united to
the flesh he had taken, without being separated at any time, either from his
body, or soul; by virtue of which union, eternal life was due both to his
body and soul; because the word, to whom they were united, is immortal: in
so much, that our Savior could not have dyed at all, if God had not granted it
to him through a particular dispensation, for man's salvation.

23. How did he communicate life to men, through the virtue of his Resurrection?
By giving them the holy Ghost (his own divine spirit) not long after that he
had raised himself from death; and much more afterward, upon the day of
Pentecost, when his Resurrection being fully accomplished, by being seated at
the right hand of his father, he sent the holy Ghost down to them in a visible
form.

LESSON X. Of the Church.
1. WHy was the holy Ghost sent into the world?
To render the disciples of Jesus Christ perfect, and to begin in them his
mystical body.

2. What perfection did he give them?
The perfection of charity, which before was but weak, and imperfect in them:
for the holy Ghost took away this weakness from them, and made them strong,
and vigorous, in the love of Jesus Christ, to serve him with entire fidelity;
so that the stratagems of men, and devils, could not afterward divert them
from serving him.

3. How did the holy Ghost form the mystical body of Jesus Christ?
By uniting his disciples hearts with God, and amongst themselves, by charity,
with which he did replenish them; for the life of this body, is the holy
Ghost, by the fire of his charity.

4. How is this body called?
It is called the Church, whereof all the faithful are members, and Christ is
the head; in so much, that there is made of Jesus Christ, and of all the
faithful, but one body, and one Church.

5. How can persons so far separated from one an other, be truly united into
one and the self same body.
This is done by the holy Ghost, who is every where; for he is the link and
soul of this body, uniting all these members more firmly together, then man
his soul does unite the members of the body it informs.

6. Why did he make this Church?
That he might thereby plant the doctrine, which he had taught, and which was
altogether necessary for the salvation of mankind, so firmly, that it might
continue for ever. And for this end, the holy Ghost (according to the outward
apparition, in which he was sent) filled the hearts of his Apostles, who were
to be the first teachers of it, with fiery zeal; and their tongues, with the
praises of almighty God; that they (being vehemently co^ceited themselves of
the truth, and of the great good the knowledge thereof brought unto the world)
might be most earnestly desirous to breed the like conceit in others; and that
so it might descend, in virtue of the first plantation, to the end of the world.

7. Who were the Apostles? and of what condition?
They were those, who, being called by Christ, left all to follow him, and to
serve him in the publication of the gospel. And as for their condition, they
were poor ignorant men, of a contemptible rank, most of them being fishermen:
and the greater their weakness was, so much the more did it set forth the
power of the holy Ghost; for in one day they became so learned, and so
powerful to persuade, as that they were able to confound, and convert the most
learned Philosophers in the world.

8. Of what parts does the Church consist?
It consists of two parts in general, which are necessary to all well
ordered Communities; that is, of those who are governed and taught, and of
those who govern and teach.

9. Who are those, that Christ appointed to govern and teach?
They are chiefly Bishops, and next under Bishops, other inferior Priests, who
are commonly called Curats.

10. Are Bishops then necessary in the Church?
Yes; for if we look into the institution of Bishops, we shall find, that
they were instituted immediately by Christ, to rule; and consequently, commanded
to be continued, and to be obeyed in his Church: for he who instituteth an
authority to rule, by the very institution of it, commands obedience to it,
and that it be perpetuated, and used to that end, for which it was instituted.

11. For what end are Bishops necessary in the Church?
For many ends, whereof we shall speak in the Sacrament of Order; and chiefly
to take care of the common, and to govern the Church: for government is a
thing in it self absolutely necessary unto all Communities; in so much, that
though we may see some community governed by superiors without laws, and
prosper for a while; yet we shall never find, that there was any seen
governed by laws without superiors; and if there were any such, the laws
would be but occasions of quarrels, and dissensions. Wherefore, as every man
by his understanding directs himself, so is the Bishop the understanding,
that directs the whole: for Bishops are the heads, and Princes, from whom all
inferior Priests, and directors in particular Churches, are to take their
rules, and judgment in all spiritual affairs.

12. How do we know, that Christ instituted the government of the Church
himself, and did not leave it to the Church to do it?
Because we know, that he came into the world, to erect and establish a Church,
which in it self should have ordinary power to conserve and propagate it
self; as we see all States and Communities do. Now, he who has
understanding, knows that this cannot be done, but by ordering of governors:
so that the institution of the very Church it self (which is a thing that no
man can deny to come from Christ) does necessarily implie the institution of
the government of it.

13. But how do we know, that those governors instituted by Christ, were
Bishops, and not Priests, or Lay Elders?
We know this, first, because we are told expresselie in scripture, that
Bishops were appointed by the holy Ghost, to govern the Church of God.
Secondly, we know it by the same rule, whereby we know all things that we
believe in the Church: for, since you see that Bishops (that is, men
consecrated by a special ordination) are governors in the Church over all the
Christian world, if one should ask you, who made them such? I am sure, you
would say, they were made such by others who are dead, that were themselves
such; and those again by others; and so upwards to the Apostles themselves,
who were made such immediately by Christ: which is as strong a motive, as any
we have to receive the Blessed Trinity, Incarnation, Sacraments, and all other
mysteries of our faith. And therefore, he, who denies necessity of government
by Bishops in Christ his Church, is as absolute an heretic, as he, who
denies any thing that Christ has taught; and he who impugneth it, impugneth
Christ, and seeks to destroy his Church.

14. Are all Bishops equal?
No; for as S. Peter was chief amongst the Apostles, so is the Bishop of Rome
(who succeeded to S. Peter) chief amongst all Bishops; and it belongs to
him, as supreme Prince of the Church, to pronounce the definitive sentence in
all matters of Church controversies: for as it is not fitting, that there
should be more then one king in a kingdom, one master in a house, and one
pilot in a ship, so is there but one head over the whole Church.

15. If Christ be the head of all the Church, what need is there of any other
head, especially since you say, there cannot be two heads?
Christ alone is the supreme and absolute head, and the Bishop of Rome is only
his Vicare, and ministerial head. And this was necessary, because Christ
being now ascended into heaven, he does not converse with his Church any more
in a visible manner, but governs it spiritually, and inuisibly: wherefore,
seeing that the members of his Church here upon earth, are corporal, and
visible; it was necessary, that they should have also a visible head, to
govern them, and instruct them, according to the exigencie of their capacity
in this world.

16. What then is the Church?
It is the society or company of those, who are baptized, and serve God by
professing the true faith, and by being united amongst themselves, and with
their visible head the Bishop of Rome.

17. Which be the marks to know the true Church, from all false ones?
They are principally four, Sa^ctity, Universality, Succession, and Unity;
that is, to be holy, to be universal, to be Apostolical, to be one.

18. Is the true Church then allwaies holy?
Yes certainly, both in doctrine, and practice; for holiness is the thing,
which Christ came chiefly to settle in his Church.

19. What is it to be holy?
It is to teach and practice those virtues, which lead us to heaven, which is
the life that Christ Jesus came to give us. And this can be no where, but in
the true Church; faith being the first principal virtue, that puts us in
the way to heaven: and from it springs good living, and execution
correspondent, and also miracles wrought in token of holiness (which are the
works of God, whereby his Church does shine throughout the world) not only to
the confirmation of those faithful, who are weak, but also to the conversion
of Infidells. And this mark of holiness, and miracles, agrees to none but to
the Roman Church: for although there may be more, and greater wickedness
amongst Catholics, by reason of the multitude of the professors of the
Catholic religion; nay of it self the wickedness must needs be greater, for
those, who have not so good things to offend against, cannot be so wicked; and
as the Philosopher says, Corruption optimi pessima, a good thing when it is
corrupted, becomes stark naught: yet is there also great and extraordinary
holiness. Whereas amongst other sects, there is never any man heard of, who
whilst he lived, had the reputation and credit amongst wise men to be a Saint,
or of extraordinary holiness, and devotion. Congregations of men and women
absteining from pleasures, and separating themselves from the world, none are
found, unless such as were begun in Catholic times. Extraordinary acts of
penance, or heroicke virtues, are not to be looked for. And as for miracles,
they do not pretend unto them in their churches. In fine, very little more,
then nature affords, is to be seen amongst them, saving some bare words of
God and Christ.

20. Must the Church also be universal?
Yes certainly, for Christ commanded his Apostles to preach through the whole
world, and there can be no doubt, but that they did what they were bidden. And
this also is a mark belonging only to the Roman Church, for she alone is found
in every part of the Christian world, all Heretics being every kind in some
countries, but none in all.

21. What is meant by the churches being Apostolical?
To be Apostolical, is to receive their belief from the Apostles, by a
continuated succession. And this also none has done but the Roman Church;
nether does any Protestant lay claim unto it: for ask any Protestant,
whether they received their doctrine from the Apostles or no? they will answer,
yes: by whose hands? they will answer, by the scripture. But a Catholic
says, by succession from his forefathers, and they by succession from theirs,
and so upwards to the Apostles themselves without interruption. Now the
question of being Apostolical, is not only, whether they believe the same
thing, that the Apostles did believe; but withal, whether those, who now are,
did receive their belief from the Apostles, by a true continuated succession,
or no.

22. How is the true Church also one?
It is such, first, because it has one principle, in which, all that are of
it, do agree; wherein if others should agree, they could not be of any other
Religion, but Catholic: and this is Tradition, to which none lays claim but
the Roman Church. Neither have other Churches any one such principle, as to
make all that agree in it, to be of the same Religion with themselves; for the
scripture (which is their only supreme rule) is of itself subject to the
several misinterpretations of every private spirit. Secondly, it is one,
because all that are in it, profess one and the same faith, and use the same
Sacraments. Thirdly, it is one in government, because the members of it are all
united under one head the Bishop of Rome; for as S. Peter had amongst the
Apostles, so have his Successors amongst Bishops, the princely and definitive
sentence. And this is a mark to be found no where, but in the Roman Church,
although it be a thing very necessary for the ending of controversies, which
cannot be ended, where equality is on both sides; a thing that may easily fall
out, if there be not one supreme head over all, as we see by daily experience.

23. What things are necessary to make a member of the Church?
Three, that is, Baptism, true faith, with the profession thereof, and vnio^.
And therefore Pagans are not of it, because they want baptism: nor Heretics,
because they profess not the true faith: nor Schismatics, because although
they be baptized, and profess the true faith, yet they do not keep that
union, which is necessary to knitt the members of Christ his mystical body
together.

24. Are all Catholics of the Church?
Yes; except only excommunicated persons.

25. Are ill living Catholics of the Church?
Yes; but they are as dead members of a living body, for they want the love of
God and his grace, which is the life of this mystical body. But at the end of
the world, these also shall be cast out of the Church, and be separated from
the blessed in heaven, where the Church shall remain only triumphant for all
eternity.

26. Are all Christians of the Church?
No; for all schismatikes, heretics, and excommunicated persons are
Christians, though imperfect ones, and yet they are not of the Church.

LESSON XI. Of a Christian.
1. WHo is he properly, whom we call Christian?
He, who having been baptized, professes to believe in Jesus Christ.

2. From whom does the name of Christian distinguish us?
From Jews, Turks, and all Infidells.

3. Who is a Catholic Christian?
That Christian who, belieueth, and professes the true faith of Jesus Christ,
and co^municateth in Sacraments and public service of God, with that Christian
Church, which is dispersed through the world, and is united in one visible head
the Bishop of Rome.

4. From whom does this word Catholic distinguish us?
From Heretics, and Schismatikes.

5. Who is an Heretic?
That Christian, who refuses to believe any point, taught as a matter of faith
by the Roman Catholic Church, when it is sufficiently proposed to him as such.

6. Who is a Schismatike?
That Christian, who in Sacraments, and public service of God, refuses to
communicate with the Roman Catholic Church, or with the head of the Roman
Catholic Church, or with any member of the Roman Catholic Church.

7. Why do you call it the Roman Catholic Church?
We do not call it Roman, as if there were any other Catholic Churches,
besides the Roman Catholic: nether do we call it so, as if the particular
Church of Rome, were the whole Catholic Church, (for as it is a particular
Diocese, it is only one part of the Catholic Church:) but we call it so,
because all the Catholics of the world, are united in the Bishop of that
particular Church, as in their general Pastor. And so the word Roman, is not
limited to the particular territory of Rome, but it does signify a property
belonging to the whole Church; to wit, that relation, which the whole Church,
and every member of it acknowledges toward the Bishop of Rome, as to their
head, appointed by Christ to govern his whole flock. And therefore the word
Roman, taken in this sense, is of no less extent, then the Church it self, so
that he, who is not a Roman Catholic, is no Catholic at all.

8. Is it sufficient to make one a Catholic in point of faith, that he b^eue
the same things, that the Catholic Church belieueth?
No; unless the Catholic Church be also the ground of his belief: for
whosoever does believe any point, upon no other ground, but only because it
seems to his private judgment to be contained in scripture, or to be in it
self true; yea though he should believe in this manner every thing, that the
Church belieueth, yet he would not be a Catholic, and so may be damned for
want of faith. And the reason of it is, because, seeing that faith is to
believe a thing, because God reuealeth it, and that there is no infallible way
(without a miracle) whereby God his revelation comes to us, but only by the
Churches proposition, it follows, that we cannot believe any thing certainly
upon the motive of God his revelation, unless our belief be likewise grounded
upon the Churches proposition. Wherefore the faith of a Catholic, must consist
in submitting his understanding, and adhering to the Church, and in believing
every thing, because she proposes it: for all other perswasio^s of our own
discourse, are resolved at last into our particular judgments, or else into the
judgments of other particular men; and so cannot breed in us Catholic and
divine faith, but only opinion, or human belief.

9. What sign is there whereby to know, whether ones belief is grounded upon
the Catholic Churches proposition, or no?
The best sign is, when you do without difficulty assent to any thing, as
soon as you know that it is proposed by the Catholic Church; for if you have
the least doubt of any thing, which you know to be proposed by the Church, it
is an infallible sign, that your belief in all the rest, relyeth upon some
other grounds, which sway more with you, then the authority of the Church; or
else that you have no firm belief at all, but only an opinion or conjecture
grounded upon your own discourse.

10. Who is a good Christian?
He, who having been baptized, belieueth the true faith of Christ, and lives
accordingly.

11. How shall we learn to do this?
By the Christian doctrine, that is, by that doctrine which Christ Jesus came
to teach, and preach unto the world.

12. Where is this doctrine contained?
It is contained in God his holy word, which is delivered to us at large,
partly by scripture, and partly by tradition of the holy Catholic Church.

13. How many be the chief and principal heads of the Christian doctrine?
They may be reduced to six, to wit the Creed, the Pater noster, the ten
Commandments, the seven Sacraments, Prayer, and the Sacrifice of Mass.

14. Wherefore are these six the principal heads of Christian doctrine?
Because, whereas there are principally four things necessary to salvation,
that is, faith, which gives us light to believe well; hope, which gives us
confidence to demand well; charity, which gives us strength to do well; and
God his actual assista^t grace, which is the most necessary of all, for
without it, we cannot get the other three, nor make the least progress in the
way of salvation. Now the Creed, teaches us, what belongs to faith; the Pater
noster, what belongs to hope; the ten Commandments, what belongs to charity;
and the three last parts, the Sacraments, Prayer, and Sacrifice of Mass, are
the means, whereby to obtain God his actual assistant grace.

15. Why do you account the Pater noster, a distinct part from the rest, seeing
that it is included in prayer, which you number as making one principal part
by it self?
The reason of it is, because the Pater noster, is not only actually a prayer
it self; but it is also a general instruction, whereby we are taught how to
pray, and what to demand. Now as it is actually a prayer it self, it belongs
to Prayer, which we have reckoned for the fifth part of the Christian doctrine:
but as it is an instruction, it makes a part by it self; because, to
instruct, is a quality, which is not essential to actual praying; and so it
belongs properly to hope, which is the foundation of all actual prayer, and
is practiced by knowing what, and how we are to demand.

16. Why do you number but four things necessary to salvation, since that no
man can be saved without inherent justice, or sanctifying grace, which is a
distinct thing from God his actual assistant grace; and therefore in all,
there are five things necessary?
The reason of it is, because sanctifying grace, is either charity it self,
or at least it is a thing, which cannot be separated from charity: and
therefore, whosoever has charity, may be assured that he has sanctifying
grace; and the means to obtain one, does serve for both.

17. What is the visible sign, or badge of a Christian?
The sign of the holy cross, accompanied with these words, In the name of the
father, the son, and the holy ghost.

18. Wherefore is this the badge of a Christian?
Because, by making this holy sign with these words, we profess the three
chiefest mysteries of our Christian faith; which are, the mystery of the Unity
and Trinity of God, the mystery of the Incarnation, and the mystery of our
blessed Savior his sacred Passion.

19. Why is the mystery of the Unity and Trinity of God, said to be contained
in the sign of the cross?
Because, by saying in the name, and not names, we declare the Unity of one
sole essence, power, and divinity in one only God: and by naming the father,
son, and holy ghost, we plainly manifest the three distinct persons of the
most blessed Trinity.

20. Why are the other two mysteries, of the Incarnation, and Passion of our
blessed Savior, said to be included in the sign of the cross?
Because, by putting our hand from the head under the breast, we profess the
son of God to have descended from heaven, to become incarnated in the womb
of the most blessed Virgin: and by putting our hand from the left shoulder to
the right, we declare how he redeemed us by dying upon the cross, in form
whereof we make this holy sign.

21. Wherefore has it been the custom of all true Christians, at the
beginning of their chief actions, to make so frequently the sign of the holy
cross, pronouncing the former words?
For diverse good reasons; and first, thereby to consecrate their actions unto
the honor of the most blessed Trinity. Secondly, to crave in all their
actions God his divine assistance, through the merits of the sacred death, and
Passion of our Savior Jesus Christ. Thirdly, to make a brief profession of
the Christian faith, the chief mysteries whereof, we see are so lively
expressed under this sign. Fourthly, to declare thereby, that they fight under
this sign, as under Christ his standard; and so; like faithful soldiers, to
distinguish themselves from Paga^s, Turks, Jews, and all other his enemies.
Fifthly, to arm ourselves by it, against the Devil, and all his temptations;
for that he does fear and fly this sign, as the malefactor does fear the
Ministers, and sharp instruments of justice. Lastly, by the help of this holy
sign, men do most frequently escape many both corporal and spiritual
dangers, as innumerable most authentike histories, and good Authors declare.

Now we make this sign so frequently, because faith is the foundation, and
groundworke of Christianity; and therefore we ought to make a frequent
profession of it.

LESSON XII. Of Faith.
1. WHy is faith the first foundation, and groundworke of Christianity?
Because, by natural knowledge, we cannot come to know the means, which are
prescribed for our salvation; and therefore we have need of a supernatural
help, which is faith: and so the Apostle tells us, that without faith, it is
impossible to please God.

2. What then is faith?
Faith is a gift of God, and a light, whereby we do firmly and without
doubting, believe all that, which is proposed to us by the Catholic church, to
be believed, not because we see it, but because it is revealed by God, who
cannot speak untruths. So that, to an act of faith necessary for salvation,
two things are required, first, in regard of God, that it be an object
revealed by him, and proposed to us by the Church as such: secondly, in regard
of man, that he give a firm assent to it.

3. Is there no more required to an act of faith?
No more is required to an inward act of faith; yet to practice this virtue
perfectly, we are some times obliged to declare our belief by an outward act,
when occasion requires it: for man being composed of body and soul, he ought
to acknowledge God his veracitie, by both these parts; by his soul, in
believing; and by his body, in professing with his mouth what he belieueth. And
therefore it is never lawful to dissemble our faith, by professing one thing,
and believing an other; for whosoever denies Jesus Christ before men, will be
denied by him before his father.

4. Why is faith called a gift of God?
Because divine belief surpasses the forces of our nature, so that we cannot
any way deserve it; in so much, that the holy Ghost does inspire it into us,
through his own mere bounty. And it is the first Theological gift of God, by
which we are disposed by little and little to obtain the rest.

5. Why is it called a light?
Because it enlightens our understanding, by making us believe the holy
mysteries of our Christian faith, delivered to us by the Church.

6. Why do you say, delivered to us by the Church?
Because (as I have observed before) we cannot have Catholic faith, but by the
instruction of the church, which proposes to us those truths, which God did
reveal to his Apostles and disciples, to the end that they should communicate
them to others, who were to succeed to themselves in the church, and they
again to others, and so till the end of the world.

7. Who are those that succeeded to the Apostles, and Disciples.
They are the Bishops, and Pastors of the Catholic Church, whom the Apostles,
and Disciples left behind them to teach us that doctrine, which they themselves
had taught, and preached before to the whole world. And therefore we are bound
to believe what the Bishops, and Pastors of the Catholic Church teach;
because we are sure, that the Catholic Church delivers to us; that same
doctrine, which the Apostles delivered to her.

8. How are we sure of this?
First, because our Savior himself does assure us so; for he tells us, that
the gates of hell, shall not prevail against his Church; so that the Church is
the supreme and certain guide, to which Christ directs us, for the knowledge
of the true faith, and true religion. Secondly, because (abstracting from
supernatural means) reason it self does convince as much; for the Church
being universal, that is, a Congregation of Christians dispersed through the
whole world, it follows, that she cannot propose a falsehood; seeing that the
Christians dispersed in so many countries, as are necessary to make
universality, cannot meet together, and agree to frame a lie: and therefore if
they consent together, that such a thing was delivered unto them, for the
doctrine of Christ, it cannot choose but be so. And this is that, which Divines
call Tradition, which descends from father to son in all nations, where the
Catholic faith is professed; and when it is contradicted or called in to
doubt, the question is decided by a general Council, which is a congregation
of Catholic Bishops and Doctors gathered together out of all parts where the
Church is dispersed. And to this, (I mean to universal tradition) no heresy
lays claim: and yet Religion is so grounded upon it, that even all Heretics
must acknowledge this same authority, for the receiving of scripture. So that
we see how the universality of the Church, is, even in grounds of nature, and
abstracting from all supernatural advantages, as great a warrant as can be,
that what the Church teaches, is that same, which the Apostles and Disciples
of Christ, dispersed through the whole world, had taught before. Lastly, we are
sure, that what the Church says is true, not only because she is universal,
but also because she is invested with all the other motives, that are apt to
beget belief, as santity; unity, antiquity etc. and so she is credible of
herself, in whatsoever she affirms.

LESSON XIII. Of the Creed.
1. What is the doctrine, which the Apostles, and Christ his Disciples taught?
It is chiefly that, which is comprised in the Creed.

2. Say the Creed.
1. I believe in God, the father Allmighty, creator of heaven and earth. 2. And
in Jesus Christ, his only son, our Lord. 3. Who was conceived by the holy
Ghost, borne of the Virgin Marie. 4. Suffered under Po^tius Pilate, was
crucified, dead, and buried. 5. Descended into Hell: the third day rose again
from the dead. 6. Ascended into heaven; sits at the right hand of God the
father Allmighty. 7. From thence he shall come to judge the quick, and the
dead. 8. I believe in the holy Ghost. 9. The holy Catholic Church: the
communion of sanctes. 10. Remission of sins. 11. Resurrection of the flesh.
12. Life everlasting. Amen.
3. What is the Creed, and who made it?
It is a brief rule of our christian faith, made by the 12. Apostles, as a
symbol, or mark, whereby to distinguish and know the true disciples of Jesus
Christ, from all others, of what profession soever.

ARTICLE I.
4. What does the first Article signify: I believe in God the father Allmighty
creator of heaven and earth?
It teaches us, that God the father, is the source, and first producer of all
things, having produced within himself the other two persons, and out of him
self all created things. And this God is omnipotent, because he can do all
that he will, and has made of nothing both heaven and earth, with whatsoever
is in them, as well Angels, as men, and the whole universal world, and is
able to create more and more worlds without end.

5. The son, and the holy Ghost, are not they also omnipotent?
Yes; and they created the world with the father: but creation, and
omnipotency, are particularly attributed to the father; for they belong to him
in a particular manner, because he is the first offspring of all production
within himself, from whence is derived all creation and being out of him
self; whereas the other two persons have their production, and being, from
him, as from their source: and because production of things, is done by power,
therefore power also properly belongs to him, who is the first origin of all
things produced. So wisdom is attributed to the son, because he is
produced by the understanding, which is the seat of wisdom: and goodness to
the holy Ghost, because he proceeds by love, which has goodness for its
object.

6. Why do we profess God his omnipotency in the first article?
To the end, that we may be prepared to believe all that which follows,
although it surpass humane force: and also to let us know, how he created the
world, which did require an infinite power in the creator; for otherwise he
could not have done it.

7. Why do we say, I believe in God, and not, I believe God, or, I believe a
God?
There is a great difference betwixt believing a God, believing God, and
believing in God. The first does import only, I believe there is a God; and the
second, I believe all that which God reuealeth; but the third does import, not
only an act of faith, but an act of faith, and love together: and so the
Apostles used expressly this kind of speech, I believe in God, to teach us,
that faith is unprofitable without love.

ARTICLE. II.
8. DEclare the second Article; and in Jesus Christ his only son our Lord.
I believe also in Jesus Christ, who is the son of God the Father, not by
adoption, or grace, but by nature; and the only begotten of his own
substance, in so much, that he cannot beget any other son after him: whom he
has also established, as he is man (that which he was from all eternity as
God) Lord and king of all creatures, and particularly of true Christians.

9. Why is he called Jesus?
Because this name was given him by his Fathers appointment, who commanded
Joseph to call him so. And it signifies as much as Savior: which holy name
was given him with great reason, because he cave to save and redeem the world,
from the death of sin, and thraldom of the Devil: and it cost him his own
blood, and his own proper life to do it. And so it is impossible to explicate
the force, and virtue of this name, which is so efficacious, as that it chaseth
away devil, cures diseases, and works all sorts of miracles, being
pronounced with a lively faith: and it is honored in heaven, reverenced on
earth, and feared in hell, above all names.

10. Why is he called Christ?
He is called Christ, which signifies anointed, because Priests, Kings, and
Prophets, used to be anointed with oil, which represents grace; to signify,
that their functions did represent the function of God, whose Lieutenents they
are in these charges; for it belongs properly to God, to govern spiritually,
to govern temporally, and to foretell things to come. Now Christ Jesus is not
only a Priest, a King, and a Prophet, but the sovereign Priest of Priests, King
of Kings, and Prophet of Prophets; not anointed by men with a terrestiall
ointment, but by God, with the plentitude of his graces. So that the difference
betwixt these two names, is, that Christ is a title belonging to his dignity;
Jesus is a title belonging to his merit, which he purchased with the price of
his blood, and his life.

11. Why is he called our Lord?
First, because he is God; and secondly also as man, because he is our
Redeemer; for he, who redeemeth a slave (as all we were) is most properly
master, and Lord of him, whom he redeemeth, and the redeemed is most truly his
servant.

ARTICLE III.
12. DEclare the Third Article; Who was conceived of the holy Ghost, borne of
the virgin Marie.
I believe that Jesus Christ took upon him (for the redemption of the world)
our nature, from the immaculate body of the blessed Virgin Marie; not by any
operation, or power of man, but by the divine virtue of the holy Ghost, who
framed his body of the most pure blood of a virgin, uniting a soul to it,
created expressly by God, at the same instant; in which instant also, the
second person of the blessed Trinity did unite this body, and this soul, to
himself; and so he was borne on earth, most pure and most holy. And his Virgin
Mother conceived him, and was delivered of him, remaining still a virgin: yea
she was more pure, then before; for both her body, and soul, received a
greater purity, and sanctity, by the operation of the holy Ghost, and by her
conjunction to the sacred flesh of Jesus Christ.

13. Why is the Conception of our Savior attributed to the holy Ghost?
To make us understand, that the great benefit and dignity bestowed upon
mankind, by the Incarnation of the son of God, was a free gift, proceeding
purely from the love of God, and not from any merit of man; and so although
this operation was common to all the three persons of the blessed Trinity (as
all outward actions are,) yet it is peculiarly attributed to the holy Ghost,
because he proceeds by love, and is called a gift.

14. Why is not the holy Ghost called the Father of Jesus Christ, since that he
formed his body?
Because he did not form it to the likeness of his own nature, nor made it
of his own substance, which is required to make one a Father; (as a stone
caruer, who makes a statue, is not the father of the statue, though he be the
maker and former of it) but he made it only of the pure blood of the Virgin.
And so Christ had in this second generation, only a Mother, and no Father.

15. Wherein do consist the wonders of this mystery?
First, that his body was formed by the special operation of the holy Ghost.
Secondly, that in the first instant, that it was formed, it received a
reasonable soul, replenished with perfect knowledge of all things, and with
all graces, as also with the full beatificall vision and fruition of allmighty
God. Thirdly, that this body, and this soul, was in the same instant united to
the second person of the bless^ Trinity; so that the child conceived in the
womb of the Virgin, was both perfect God, and perfect man. Fourthly, that his
mother was both a virgin, and a mother. And lastly, that she was mother both of
God, and of man; which is the miracle of miracles, that the same person should
be God and man, begotten from all eternity and borne in time, omnipotent and
infirm. And yet it is most true; for the nature of God, and the nature of man,
were both in the second person of the Trinity, without confusion or mingling
one with another; and also without making a diversity of persons: which may be
some way exemplifyed in two grafts set in the same stock, which keep still
their different natures, since that they produce different fruits; and yet make
not diverse trees, since that they are both in the same stock.

16. God then becoming man, was not turned into man, nor man into God, nor both
into a third thing?
No; for God cannot be changed, and so none of these three mutations could be
made: but man (as we have declared) was joined to God, and so God became man.
For seeing that what has not the nature of man, is not man, and much less
what has not the nature of God, is God, we must acknowledge in Christ two
distinct natures, the one of God, the other of man, or else he should not be
both God and man.

17. Was man joined equally to God, so that the thing made, was equally God and
man?
If we consider the two natures in themselves, he had both of them truly and in
all perfection: but if we compare the natures together, which are united in the
same person, certainly the maine thing must needs be God, and man but a small
portion of it. As we see, if a little other metal be cast into a great deal
of gold, the coin is principally gold, and is commonly called so: so, since
that God is infinitely greater then man, the result of both remains
principally God.

18. How was he borne?
He was borne nine months after his conception, as other children use to be,
to show that he was truly man. He was borne without grief to his Mother, to
show that the blessed Virgin was opposite to Eve, to whom it was said, In
dolor paries; thou shalst bring forth with grief. He was borne in a stable,
and in as great poverty, as the poorest child in the world, thereby to humble
himself the more, by how much the greater he was in himself. He was swaddled
in cloures, laid upon straw, began to feel hunger, and cold, and such like
extremities, as we see it fares with all children.

ARTICLE IV.
19. DEclare the fourth Article, Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified,
dead, and buried.
I believe that Jesus Christ (to redeem the world with his precious blood)
after that he had ended the time, which his Father ordained for his dwelling
upon earth, suffered under Pontius Pilate Governor of Jury; being scourged,
crowned with thorns, and nailed upon the Cross, on the which, after three
hours, he dyed, and his body (which remained always united to his divinity,
as was his soul) being taken down from the cross, was buried in a new
sepulcher.

20. Why did the Apostles presently after that they had declared our Saviors
birth, pass to his death, without making mention of his life?
For two reasons; first, to let us know, that the end of his coming into this
world, was to dye for us. Secondly, because he, who knows the miraculous
birth of our Savior, and the charity, wherewith he suffered death for us,
(that is, the beginning and ending of his life) cannot choose but know, that
his whole life was full of miracles, and goodness. And therefore S. Paul
professes to know nothing but Jesus Christ crucified; for, by knowing this, he
knows all the rest, and must needs be replenished both with hope in his
merits, and with love to wards his person.

21. Hew did Christ suffer?
He did not suffer in his Divinity; for his two natures, divine and humane, did
each of them always retain that, which is proper to each nature; wherefore
seeing that his Divinity cannot be subject to grief, it was impossible that he
should suffer any thing as God, but only as man; and as man, he suffered both
in his body, and in his soul.

22. What did he suffer in his body?
He suffered the greatest torments, that ever man endured, in all his five
senses, and in every part of his body, from the very bottom of his feet, to
the top of his head.

23. What did he suffer in his soul?
He suffered the greatest grief, that could be; being not only tormented by
his enemies, but also abandoned by his friends, and betrayed by one of his
Apostles: and he suffered chiefly by the sins of man, which was the most
cruel grief to his goodness, that could be. Besides, whereas all those who
suffer for God, receive a celestial comfort, which does strengthen them in
their pains, our blessed Savior (that he might suffer the more) did deprive
him self of comfort, and abandon his nature wholly to grief and pain.

24. How could he suffer, seeing he was blessed from the first instant of his
conception?
His beatitude did not hinder him from suffering, because he restrained his
whole bliss to the superior part of his soul, without letting it pass to
the inferior part, or to his body.

25. Where did he suffer?
At Jerusalem, the place appointed by God for sacrifices; for it was
expedient, that the true sacrifice should be accomplished at the same place,
where all the figurative sacrifices of the old law had been performed.

26. Why did he suffer the death of the Cross?
Because it was the most unworthy death of all others, and most ignominious,
inflicted only upon rogues, and notorious malefactors.

27. How did he die?
By the separation of his soul from his body; but neither part was separated
from his Divinity: as when a bow is broken, the two parts of the bow are
separated from one another, but the bowstring remains still fastened to both.

ARTICLE V.
28. DEclare the fifth Article; Descended into hell; the third day rose again
from the dead.
I believe that Jesus Christ, as soon as he was dead, went with his soul into
hell that is, into Limbo, to triumph over the devil, and to deliver the souls
of all the faithful, who dyed in the state of grace, since the beginning of
the world; who were kept in Limbo, as in a prison, from whence they could not
come forth, until Christ had paid the price of their redemption, and came
himself to deliver them. I believe also, that the third day (which was the
Sunday) Jesus Christ rose again from death, most triumphant and glorious.

29. What is understood by this word Hell?
Hell hah principally four significations: first it is used for the place,
where the damned are to be eternally: secondly, for the place, where the
children are, that dye with original sin: thirdly, for the place of
Purgatory; and fourthly for the place, where the souls of holy men were kept,
before the coming of Christ. And the word Hell, in the Creed, is principally to
be understood in this sense; which place, by his presence, was made a Paradise,
to verify what he had promised the good thief, this day thou shall be with me
in Paradise.

30. Why is Christ his resurrection called by S. Augustine the faith of
Christians, rather then his death?
Because it is no hard matter to believe that Jesus Christ dyed, for death is
naturally due to every man; but it is very hard to believe that he did rise
again from death, because no man can raise himself from death to life. And
therefore his Resurrection is a clear argument of his Divinity. In so much,
that the Jews damanding of Jesus Christ some miracle, for proof of his
doctrine, he gave them no other mark of it, but only that he would rise again
from death: so that his Resurrection is the miracle of miracles, and the proper
miracle of Christianisme.

ARTICLE VI.
31. DEclare the sixth Article; Ascended into heaven, sits at the right hand
of God the Father allmighty.
I believe, that Jesus Christ (after that he had remained forty days with the
holy Apostles, to instruct them, and to prove with many apparitions his true
Resurrection) mounted up in their sight to heaven, and there sits at the
right hand of his Father, as Lord and governor of all creatures, his body and
soul being replenished with the glory of his Divinity.

32. How did Christ ascend into heaven?
He ascended into heaven, not as God, but as man; for a God, he was never
absent from heaven; yet he ascended by the force of his Divinity, which of its
own nature gave him that power. He did also ascend by the force of the glory,
wherewith his soul, and his body, were replenished; and which was due to him
naturally, by reason of his hypostaticall union. And therefore, although he was
compassed round with all the Angels, yet he had not the assistance of any to
ascend, but did ascend through his own proper force. And for this reason we
say not commonly, that he was carried but that he ascended into heaven: whereas
the Church speaking of our Lady, says, that she was carried; because she did
not ascend by any force of her own, naturally due to her, but by the force,
which she received from allmighty God.

33. Why is Christ said to sit in heaven?
We must not imagine, that Christ does sit in heaven, as men use ordinarily to
do; for this kind of position, is a token of weariness, but in heaven there
is no weariness, and therefore no body sits there, but all shall stand up
right (as it is generally conceived) which is the natural position of man: yet
our Savior is said to sit, because by this manner of speech is expressed the
perfect repose, which he enjoys, and shall enjoy for all eternity in heaven.

34. Why is he said to sit at the right hand of his Father?
He is not said to sit so, as that we should imagine the Father to be at the
left hand of his Son, or in the middle betwixt the Son and the Holy Ghost:
for seeing that these three persons are one only Divine essence, which is
essentially in all places; it is impossible, that one person should be in one
place, and another in another place; but every one is every where. Wherefore he
is said to sit at the right hand of his Father, thereby to signify, that as
man, he excells all creatures whatsoever in glory, majesty, and power; and also
to signify, that he is equal to his Father in Majesty and glory; which
equality, though it be principally to be understood, as he is God, (for as man
he is without comparison inferior to his Father;) yet the same honor from us
is to be given to Christ man, which is due to him as God, by reason of the
union his humanity has with his divine person: for seeing that adoration is
directed to the person, who is adored, if one should adore him as man with one
kind of worship, and as God with another, he would divide Christ, and suppose
him to be two persons.

ARTICLE VII.
35. DEclare the seventh Article; From thence he shall come, to judge the
quick, and the dead.
I believe, that this our blessed Redeemer Jesus Christ, in the end of the
world, after the reign of Antichrist, shall come from heaven, with most great
power, and glory, to judge all men, both living and dead; giving to every one,
the reward, or punishment, which he has deserved; saying to the just, come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you, from the beginning
of the world; and to the wicked, Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting
fire, which is prepared for the Devil, and his Angels.

36. Shall Christ judge us as man, or as God?
He shall iugde us, both as man, and as God; for it is reasonable, that he
should judge as man, to reward those, who deserved it, through the merits of
his own humanity; and likewise to give sentence against those, who have
neglected to make use of his sacred death, for their own salvation. He shall
judge us also as God, and not only he, but also all the blessed Trinity,
although it be particularly attributed to the second person, because it is an
act of wisdom; the acts whereof are attributed to the son, because they
depend of the understanding.

37. When shall he judge those, that are dead?
There are two judgments, the one particular, which is, when every man dies;
the other general, which will be, when all men shall take their bodies again;
for then, the body and the soul being united, they shall receive jointly the
judgment, which they did jointly deserve; and they shall receive it with shame
or glory, before the whole world; and all together, to the end, that as soon
as the sentence is given, the earth opening it selse, may swallow up all the
wicked at once, and the heavens receive all the blessed.

ARTICLE VIII.
38. DEclare the eight Article; I believe in the holy Ghost.
I believe in the holy Ghost, who is the third person of the blessed Trinity,
and proceeds from the Father and the Son, and is in all and every thing,
equal to the Father, and to the Son: that is, he is God, eternal, infinite,
omnipote^t, creator, and lord of all things, as much as the Father, and the
Son.

39. Why is the holy Ghost represented ordinaryly in the form of a dove, and
sometimes also in the form of fiery tongues, and of a cloud?
The reason of it is, because he has appeared under these forms, to make us,
by these visible things, apprehe^d the effects, which he works in us; as by
a dove, innocence; by fire, charity; by a cloud, a plenitude of glory,
wherewith we shall be environed in heaven.

40. Were these creatures united to the holy Ghost, as the nature of man is
united to the son of God?
No; for they were mere figures, made by the hands of Angels, or by God, to
represent unto us, the effects of the holy Ghost; which being represented,
these signs remained no more, but did vanish presently away.

ARTICLE IX.
41. DEclare the ninth Article; The holy Catholic Church; Communion of Saints.
I believe also, that there is a Church, that is to say, a society of
reasonable creatures, united to God by supernatural gifts. Which church has
two principal members, whereof one is called the church triumphant, which
contains all the blessed in heaven; the other is called the church militant,
which consists of mortal men, who fight perpetually with the flesh, the
world, and the devil: which church is a visible congregation of all faithful
Christians, that are baptized, and united here upon earth into one common body.
I believe also, that each member of this congregation, does partake of the
assistance of all the rest, and likewise of the assistance of the church
triumphant.

42. Why is this Church called holy, and catholic?
It is holy, because it has the head (which is Christ) holy; and also for that
it has many holy members; besides, the faith, law, and Sacraments, are all
holy; and lastly, because the holy Ghost does never forsake it, but does
always inform it with sanctity, and glorify it with miracles. And it is
called Catholic, that is, universal, both for time and place. It is also
called such, because all the faithful, in what part soever of the world they
be, must be united to it, to be saved.

43. Why did the Apostles set down in the Creed these two conditions of
holiness, and universality?
Because they are two infallible marks of the true Church: to which, unity is
also added, as a third mark; seeing that the Apostles call it the Church in
the singular number, and not Churches.

44. What signifies the Communion of Saints?
It signifies, that all the holy members of the church, are so united to one
another, by the same faith, and by brotherly union, that, as in a man's body,
all the members are partakers of the good, or evil of each member thereof, so
do they partake of the goods, and sufferings of one another, according to the
charity, which every one has himself, and according as it shall please the
holy Ghost, to distribute them, who does divide the spiritual goods of the
church, as well as his graces, as he pleases himself. Besides, all the goods
of the church are common; the sacraments are instituted for all; every one does
receive profit by the sacrifice; preaching does instruct whosoever will hear;
every man in the church may assist his companion by prayer; the living do
assist the dead in purgatory by alms and good deeds; and the blessed in
heaven do assist the living upon earth, by their continual intercession for
them to allmighty God.

ARTICLE X.
45. DEclare the tenth Article; Forgiveness of sins.
I believe, that to the holy Catholic church only, and to no other society,
there is given by God, power for true forgiveness of sins, by means of the
holy sacraments; whereby men, from being children of the devil; and guilty of
eternal damnation, do become the children of God, and heirs of Paradise.

46. How does the Church forgive sins?
By the means of Priests, who, as God his Ministers, have power to forgive
sin, by virtue of the sacraments, and particularly of Baptism, and of
Penance: by Baptism, only once; but by Penance, as often as man sins, and
truly repents for it. And this benefit is so much the greater, because it is
particular to the law of grace; for no man, either in the law of nature, or in
the law of Moses, ever had power to remit sin.

ARTICLE XI.
47. DEclare the eleventh Article; Resurrection of the flesh.
I believe, that in the end of the world, all men shall rise, taking again the
self same bodies, which they had, when they were living, and this by the power
of God, to whom nothing is impossible: but the elect shall have their bodies
glorious and beautiful, and shall be lifted up with their bodies into the
air, to meet Christ at the day of judgment; whereas the cursed shall remain
on earth, hideous, and woeful to behold.

48. Why did not the Apostles say, the resurrection of man, but the
resurrection of the flesh?
To show to us, that, whereas man does consist of two parts, soul and body,
the body is only that, which perishes by death, the soul being immortal, and
consequently incapable of resurrection; for nothing is revived, but that which
is first dead.

49. Shall we rise in the same bodies, that we had whilst we lived?
Yes, to the end that the same body, which contributed in this world to our
good, or evil life, may likewise receive an eternal recompense, or
punishment. And in effect, if we, did not receive the same body, which dyed, it
would not be a resurrection, but a new production; for since that to be
resuscitated, signifies to take life again, that which is resuscitated, must
be the same which dyed before.

50. How shall this be done?
We are sure that it shall be done, and S. Paul is so certain of it, that he
tells us, that if the dead shall not rise, Christ has not risen. We are sure
also, that it shall not be done by our own forces, for Philosophers teach us,
that, that which is once corrupted, cannot be naturally reproduced; but it
shall be done by the hand of allmighty God, who can make again, when he
pleases, that same thing, which he has once made.

51. Shall all bodies rise with the same defects they had, whilst they lived,
as being dwarfes, giants, lame, monsters, and the like?
No; for these defects, and deformities, proceed only from the excess or
defect of nature, whose work they properly were. But the work of their
resurrection, being properly the work only of God, it must needs be perfect,
and without all defeat: and therefore it is generally believed that all the
blessed shall rise in that perfect stature, which nature should have given
them, at the three and thirtith year of their age; at which age our blessed
Savior did rise himself.

ARTICLE XII.
52. DEclare the twelfth Article; Life everlasting.
I believe, that there is reserved for good Christians, life everlasting, by
enjoying the sight of God, full of felicity, and free from all kind of evil:
as contrariwise for infidelles, and bad Christians, there is a life full of
eternal punishment, overwhelmed with misery; and void of all good.

53. In what does the happiness of this eternal life consist?
In knowing and loving God: for knowledge and love, are the pleasures of the
soul or mind, which must needs be greater, then the pleasures of the body,
since that the body has pleasure by the mi^de; for take away the mi^de, or
reflection upon the object, and it has none: Now the content of love increases
to the proportion of knowledge, and amongst knowledges, the most universal
gives the greatest pleasure. What pleasure then must it be, to see God in
himself, who is beyond all causes, and in whom all things are contained? We
shall discern in him the essences, and reasons of every particular thing, from
the creation of the heavens, and millions of Angels, to the parting of two
dusts in the high way; so that no variety can be sought, which is not found in
him. Neither can we desire any change, for no body desires a change or
variety, until he has a satiety of what he enjoys, that is, until he has
perfectly known it, and found it less then his desires; for till then, he
has rest, content, and quiet, in the object he enjoys. Now God is far
beyond the capacity of our desires; so that for all eternity we shall find in
him, more then we can desire, and consequently for all eternity have
unspeakable content, and rest in him. Besides, every ones memory shall
contribute to this contentment, by remembering the dangers they have escaped of
loosing so great a good, and by calling to mind their own good actions,
wrought by them through God his grace in this world; especially those great
ones, martyrdom, teaching, and virginity, which special contents, caused by
the memory of those virtuous heroike actions, are called by some Divines,
Aureolae.

54. In what shall the pain of the damned consist?
It will consist likewise chiefly in the soul; for as pleasure comes to the
body from the soul, so does grief; and therefore, as the pleasure of the
soul, is greater then the pleasure of the body, so must the grief of the
soul, by being deprived of this pleasure, needs be a pain surpassing without
comparison all corporal pains.

55. Must this next life needs be eternal?
Yes; for those who see God, cannot choose but love him above all things; and
God (as we said before) does never fail to bliss them, that love him;
wherefore, since that nether the blessed can leave to love, nor God will leave
to bliss those that love him, their happiness can have no end. And as for the
damned, they can never begin to love, because they want God his grace, without
which we cannot love God above all things; and therefore they must needs
remain for all eternity in the same miserable state, into which they have cast
them selves, through their own fault.

56. Shall the glory of the Saints be equal in heaven?
No; some shall have greater glory then others, according as they have served
God more or less in this world. Yet all shall be equally content; in the same
manner, as we see in a feast, a Giant eats more then a dwarf, and a man more
then an infant, and yet all are equally satisfied, because every one is fed
fully to his capacity.

57. Shall not this happy life of the blessed, bring some perfection to their
bodies, as well as to their souls?
Yes; for first in regard of health, they shall have their bodies incapable of
any harm; so that nothing shall be able to hurt them; which perfection is
called impassibility. For strength, they shall have a power, to the which
nothing can resist; which is called Penetrability. For agility, they shall have
a power to go in any never so short a time, as far as they list without
limitation, though it be from one end of the world to the other in one moment,
and this without pain or labor. And lastly for beauty, they shall have power
to shine brighter then the sun, and to show them selves in what glory they
please: so that finally they shall have whatsoever they can desire, by
possessing God, who is all things to them.

58. What signifies, Amen?
Amen, is used to express an agreement, and consent, to that which has been
said, which signifies as much, as if one should say, it is so, so it is in
truth.

59. Does the Creed contain all that Christians are obliged to believe?
It does not contain all in express words, but only in substance, and this,
supposing that it be understood, as the Apostles, and their Successors, did
understand it. But Heretics having oftentimes corrupted it, by their errors,
the church has been forced to add many explications to it, contained in
several Creeds, a in that, which is read in the Mass, and others.

60. What be the things, which are not contained expressly in the Creed?
They be many, which Christians learn by little and little, according to the
diligence they use in seeking to be instructed, as the holy Eucharist, and the
other sacraments, which the church thought not good to discover, but only to
those, who had been first well instructed in the belief of the Creed.

61. Are we obliged equally to believe all those things?
No; for the things, which we believe, are of two kinds: some we are bound to
believe explicitly; others it is sufficient to believe implicitly, by the
faith of the Roman Catholic church; which is done by saying within our selves,
that we believe all that which the church belieueth, though we do not know
distinctly, what it is. Again, amongst those things, which we are bound to
believe explicitly, some are absolutely necessary for salvation, others are so
necessary, as that, although we may in (...) case be saved without the
knowledge of them, yet we are obliged to seek to be instructed in them, so
that we shall sin, if we know them not through our own negligence. That
which is absolutely necessary for all Christians to believe, is, the mystery
of the blessed Trinity; the Incarnation of the Son of God; and that he has
redeemed mankind by his sacred death; that God will reward the good, and
punish the wicked; and all other things, which we have notice of, with
assurance that the Church proposes them. So that generally speaking, no
Christian, after that he is come to the use of reason, can be excused by
ignorance from believing these points explicitly: for the case of invincible
ignorance, can scarcely happen in these points, if ever one reflect that he is
a Christian. That, in which we are obliged to seek to be instructed, is all
that, which is contained in the former Articles of the Creed, and likewise the
Sacrament of Baptism, the Sacrifice of the Mass, the holy Eucharist, and the
Sacrament of Penna^ce, and such other things, as are ordinarily taught the
people by the Pastors of the Church: yet so, that we shall be excused before
God, as long as our ignorance of them proceeds not through our own fault.

62. Is faith alone sufficient for our salvation?
No; Hope also is required.

LESSON XIV. Of Hope.
1. WHat is hope?
Hope is a virtue, that gives us an humble and firm confidence in God, that
he will make us happy for ever in the next world, by seeing and possessing him
there fully, whom here we know only obscurely by faith; and also that he will
give us all things requisite and necessary in this world for that end, both
corporal, and spiritual.

2. What reason has man to have such confidence in God?
He has very good reason, considering the infinite goodness of God, and his
love toward man, whom he has created out of nothing, and also redeemed with
his own blood, only to make him capable on this happiness: besides the
promises, which he has made of eternal bliss, to those, who love him; and
his fidelity in performing what he has promised: and lastly, the infinite
desire, which in the holy scripture he has often expressed himself to have,
to save all sinners, and to see them truly converted.

3. The greatest sinner in the world then may have hope?
Yes; he is bound to have it, for otherwise he would do a great wrong to
allmighty God, if he should think that his mercy, and goodness, were not
infinite, and consequently greater then all the sins of the world.

4. Cannot a man have to much hope or confidence in God?
No; as long as he uses his diligence to do what is required on his part, for
the obtaining of that, which he hops for, and relieth more upon God his
grace, then upon himself. But to rely upon God without using his diligence to
do that, which is required on his part, would not be hope, but presumption: for
God gives not bliss unto any, but to those, who use the means prescribed by
him, to obtain it.

5. Where are we taught, what we are to hope for, and how to ask it?
We are taught this, in our Lord his prayer, called the Pater noster; which is
an abridgement of all, what we are to hope for, and to ask of allmighty God.
And it is usually divided into seven petitions, or demands.

LESSON XV. Of the Pater noster.
1. SAy the Pater noster.
Our Father, which art in heaven. 1. Hallowed be thy name. 3. Thy kingdom
come. 3. Thy will be done, in earth as it is in heaven. 4. Give us this day our
daily bread. 5. And forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our debtors. 6.
And lead us not into temptation. 7. But deliver us from evil. Amen.
2. What is contained in the Pater noster?
All that which we can demand, and hope for from God: for in the first four
petitions, we demand all necessary good; in the three following, that he
deliver us from all evil. And again, as concerning what is good, we first
demand the glory of God. Secondly our own final and greatest good in heaven.
Thirdly our greatest good on earth, which is a virtuous life. Fourthly the
means to get, and keep the said good, which is Gods actual grace. And
touching that which is evil, we demand, that he deliver us from all evils,
both past, present, and to come; and so absolutely from all evils whatsoever.

3. Declare those first words which go before the first petition; Our father
which art in heaven.
This is a little preface, which teaches us three things; first that it is
the prayer of the children of God, and therefore that we are to pronounce it
with a sincere confidence and affection, such as true children do bear toward
their father. Secondly that we ought to say it with a general intention, and
charity, toward all our brothren united in one body of the Church; for we do
not say, my father, but our father. Thirdly that we ought to address our
selves to him, as to our heavenly father, and so to seek nothing but heavenly
things, or what conduces thereunto.

4. To whom is this prayer addressed?
It is addressed particularly to the first person of the blessed Trinity;
because it was composed by Jesus Christ, who is the second person himself, the
only son of his father, and our mediator toward his father: yet this does
not hinder, but that it is addressed also to all the three persons of the
blessed Trinity; because all three are but one God.

5. Why is God, and particularly the first person of the blessed Trinity,
called our father?
Because he has created us, and does nourish, and conserve us: but chiefly,
because he does love and embrace us, with a fatherly love; whereby we are truly
his adopted children: for no body would give his own son, to ransom others,
if he did not esteem those others also, as if they were his own children.

6. Why is he said to be in heaven?
Although he be every where, yet he is said particularly to be in heaven,
because he is seen there perfectly by the blessed, and so our hope is at last
accomplished there. In the same manner, as we may say, that a man's soul is
seated in his head, though it be also in his whole body; because all his five
senses are found there; for by his head; he sees, he hears, he smells, he
tastes, and also touches.

7. Declare the first petition; Hallowed be thy name.
In the first petition we demand, that God be known of all the world, and that
so his holy name be honored, and glorified by all, as it becomes him, who is
infinitely holy in himself, and who is our Creator, our last end, and our
sovereign good.

8. Why do we say, hallowed be thy name, and not, hallowed be thou?
Because every thing is known by its name; and by this petition, we demand,
that God be known to the whole world, and all idolatry and false religion
destroyed. And so it is worthyly placed in the first place, both because all
the evils in the world proceed from not knowing God; and also because no body
can pray to him, unless they first know him; and therefore this knowledge is
the first thing, to be demanded for those who want it; and lastly to teach us,
that the first thing, which a Christian ought to seek, is the glory of God:
for although our own interest cannot be separated from the glory of God,
because it is impossible to seek God his glory, without saving ourselves, or
save ourselves without glorifying God; yet these two ends ought to be one
subordinate to the other, and the glory of God to be preferred before our own
proper interest. And for this reason also we say, in the two following
petitions, thy kingdom come, and, thy will be done, to show that we ought to
seek our own good, chiefly with relation to his glory.

9. Declare the second; Thy kingdom come.
We demand in the second that the kingdom, which he has promised us, come
speedily; that is to say, that the batails being ended, which we have with the
world, the flesh, and the devil, we may arrive to everlasting felicity, where
we shall enjoy God without impediment; and he shall reign in, and over us, for
all eternity.

10. Why is our final happiness in heaven called the kingdom of God? or how
can any thing be to come, that belongs to God?
Because, when those places, which the elect are chose to, shall all be filled
up, then all motions, and alterations shall cease; and allmighty God shall
reign by a constant emanation, or conservation of the same unvariable being
for ever and ever in all things; which kind of reign, is most proper, and
suitable to God his immutability. And we do wish, that it may come: because this
kingdom is now as it were a making; as that king, who is going upon a
conquest, either of rebels, or of other enemies, is making himself a kingdom.

11. Declare the third; Thy will be done, in earth as it is in heaven.
We demand in the third, that we may perfectly obey his holy commandments, as
the angels do allwayse obey him in heaven; because it is the means to obtain
the former petition: for the ladder to mount up to heaven, is the obedience of
his commandments, and it is the height of all happiness upon earth.

12. Why do we say, thy will be done in earth, and not rather, do thou thy will
in earth?
Because the observing of Gods commandments, and living virtuously, depends
jointly both on ourselves by our free will, and also on God, by giving us his
grace; and so we nether say, do thy will in earth, that is, in us, nor, let us
do thy will, but thy will be done in earth; to show, that nether God alone does
do his will in us, nor man alone in himself, but that both do concur to it;
God, by preventing us by his grace; and man, by consenting with his free will.
And we do wish, that it may be done in earth, as in heaven, that is, with all
perfection, and by a full subietion without resistance.

13. Declare the fourth; Give us this day our daily bread.
We demand in the fourth, our daily bread, and chiefly our spiritual bread,
that is, the grace of God, and his holy inspirations, which we have need of
every day and moment: and secondarily our corporal sustenance and apparel.

14. Does he permit us then, to ask for temporal things?
Yes; but it is by way of condescending to our infirmity; and therefore, our
prayer for them, ought allwayse to be co^ditionall, that is, if God does see
them to be profitable for us; because we ourselves do often mistake in our
desire of temporal things, and seldom know what is good, or bad for us.

15 Is he content, that we should ask in this manner, all sorts of temporal
commodities?
No; for his condescendance does not permit us, to ask any thing, but only our
daily bread; that is to say, that we should not ask superfluous things, but
such things as are necessary, as that is, which we have need of every day: nor
this nether, but after that we have first demanded our spiritual bread; which
is chiefly understood by this petition.

16. Why do we call this bread, which we ask for, our bread?
Because this spiritual nourriture does appertain to those only, who are
children of the Church, and not to those, who are out of it. Secondly, because
Christians have a certain kind of right to it, through the merits of Christ
Jesus, if they ask it duly. And lastly, because it is necessary for us, for
our spiritual, or temporal nourrishment.

17. Why do we call it our daily bread?
First we call it so, because we stand daily in need of it. Secondly we call it
so, to note thereby the difference betwixt the nourriture, which God gives to
his militant Church, and that which he gives to his triumpha^t Church; for
this is eternal, and consequently cannot be lost, when once it is given; the
other is subject to be lost every moment, and therefore is designed by the
short course of one day.

18. Why do we adioyne that other word, this day?
By joining this word, our Savior does give us two documents; the first, that
it was his will, that we should say this prayer every day, seeing we pray but
for one day, that so we may depend continually on him. The other is, that we
should not be sollicitous, or troubled with anxiety for future things,
especially as far as they belong to God allmighty; but enjoy the present,
with thanksgiving, and repose a confidence in his goodness for the future.

19. Declare the fifth; and forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our debtors?
We demand in the fifth, that God deliver us from evil past, that is, from
sin already committed, and which we do daily commit; by remitting the debt of
the fault; and the pain which for it we have incurred. And we add, as we
forgive our debtors, that is, as we pardon the offenses of our enemies: for
that it is not a reasonable thing, that God forgive us our sins, if we will
not pardon the injuries done unto us, which are offenses of so small importance.

20. Why do we call our sins against God, our debts?
Because, whosoever offends God, does owe to him a reparation of his offense.
Where, it is to be noted, that we owe diverse things to God: some, by reason of
his perfection and goodness, as love, service, and the like: others, by reason
of our imperfection and malice, to wit, reparation for our sins. Now we do
not ask of God, that he remit us the first kind of debt, because they are of
their own nature irremissable; for it is impossible to be a creature, and not
to owe love, and service to his creator: besides, those debts are aduantagious
for us. But we demand to be discharged of those debts, which our own malice
has caused.

21. Why do we call them our debts?
We call them so, in a quite contrary sense to the former petition, where we
asked our daily bread; for we call that bread, ours, because God does give it
us, and nothing is a man's own more truly, then that which is given him. But
sin is called ours, not that it is given by God at all, but because we commit
it through our own proper wills, and malice, contrary to gods inspirations.

22. Must we pardon our enemies, to be able to say this prayer?
Yes; and not only this prayer, but any other: in so much, that whosoever
hates his neighbor, and does perceive it, cannot pray to God at all, without
great presumption, unless he do first lay aside all hatred, by pardoning his
enemy in his heart; or at least demand of God, his grace to do it: since that
our Savior himself does tell us, that that sacrifice is fruitless, which is
offered up by him, who is in enmity with his neighbor.

23. Why will not God forgive him, who wishes harm to those, by whom he has
been offended?
Because it is against reason that God should forgive him, who is not in love
and charity; and whosoever wishes harm to his neighbor, loves him not, and
so he is void of charity.

24. Must we then forgive our enemies, although they do not repent that they
have offended us?
Yes; although they should not only not repent, but continue to offend us: for
it is otherwise with men, then with God; for revenge belongs to God, because
his justice does oblige him to punish where the offender repents not, and so
God does never forgive, unless man repent: but as for man, God commands him to
leave revenge to himself alone, and therefore man is obliged to pardon,
whether his enemy repent or no.

25. What is it to pardon?
To pardon, is to depose all manner of rancour against one, and not to wish him
any harm, merely because it is a harm: wherefore he is not excluded from
this prayer, who wishes due punishment to an offender, as long as he wishes
it, either for the offender his own amendment, or for the example of others,
and good of the common wealth. Neither is he excluded from this prayer, who
wishes, by a legal way, a reasonable satisfaction, from the offender; which,
by reason of the offense, may be due out of justice to the offended, either for
the conservation of his honor, or of his life, or same, or wealth.

26. Declare the sixth; And lead us not into temptation.
We demand in the sixth, that God will not permit us to be tempted, without the
assistance of his efficacious grace, to make us overcome: for he only is lead,
or gone into temptation, whom temptation compasses round about, so that he
finds no way out; and not he, who is (as it were) but touched with it on one
side.

27. Declare the seventh; but deliver us from evil.
We demand in the seventh, that God will deliver us from all evil to come,
both spiritual, and corporal, as far as it may be prejudicial to our
eternal happiness. And therefore our Savior has taught us, to pray for our
deliverance from all evil in general, without specifying in particular the
evil, either of poverty, sickness, or the like; because it often happens,
that we conceive that to be inconvenient for us, which God notwithstanding well
knows to be much conducing to our bliss. And thus we see, what it is we are
to ask, and hope for from God.

28. What signifies Amen?
It is a holy epilogue, or succinct repetition of all this prayer, whereby we
demand in one word, all that, which went before; and it signifies in this
place as much as, so be it, or, God grant it to be so. It is an hebrew word,
which was often in our Saviors most sacred mouth, and so it is most proper to
conclude the prayers, which we present to God.

29. Who gave this instruction of prayer to the Church?
Jesus Christ himself, at the instance of his disciples, who desired him to
teach them how to pray.

30. Is it sufficient for salvation, to have faith and hope?
No; we must have also charity; because these three virtues, faith hope, and
charity, do compound the state of a christian; and charity is the chiefest, and
most perfect of all.

LESSON XVI. Of Charity.
1. WHat is Charity?
Charity is a virtue, whereby we love God above all things for his own sake
only, and our neighbor as ourselves, also for God his sake.

2. What is it to love God above all things?
It is, to love him more then any creature, and more then ourselves, so as to
be ready to deprive ourselves of all things, and of our life also, rather then
to offend him.

3. What is it to love God for his own sake only?
It is, to love him, principally for no other reason, but because he is
infinitely good, excellent, and worthy to be beloved.

4. What is it to love our neighbor as our selves?
It is, to desire to him, for Gods sake, (that is, because God will have us to
do so) the same goods, which we desire to our selves; and to treat him in the
same manner, as we would have him to treat us: for he, being of the same
nature with us, and made by God for the same end, it were unreasonable, and
contrary to God his determination, not to desire the same goods to him, which
we desire to our selves; since that God has fitted him for them, as well, as
us.

5. May one love himself also?
Yes; and we are bound to do it in some manner; but in some manner we may not:
for there are two manners of loving ones self; one naught, the other good.

6. Which is the naughty manner?
It is, when we do not refer to God, the affection which we bear to our
selves, but rest wholly in our selves, by seeking inordinately our own
contentment.

7. Which is the good manner?
It is, when we desire any thing for ourselves, because God will have us desire
it, intending thereby to fulfill in ourselves, Gods holy will concerning
ourselves.

8. The love, which we bear to ourselves in this manner, does it proceed from
the love, which we bear to God?
Yes; for by loving God truly, we love all that, which he loves, and we do
will all that, which he wills, as well in ourselves, as in our neighbor: for
God, having made us to a determinate end, in so making us, he has directed us
to some actions, and functions; and so we owe to God our endeauours conformable
to such actions, and also the conservation of our selves, whereby we may be
able to do them.

9. What are the goods, which God will have us desire for our selves?
Those, which make us capable to attain that end, for which he has created
us, that is, to love him, and to serve him eternally.

10. Which are these goods?
They are God his holy grace, whereby we are sanctified, and all that, both
corporal, and spiritual, which helps us to get the same, and to conserve
in according to the rules of the Gospel.

11. Must we desire these same goods, to all men?
Yes; but still with conforming ourselves to the eternal decrees, which God
made, concerning the giving of them, to each man in particular.

12. Is it thus then, that we do satisfy the precept of Charity, which we owe
to our neighbor?
Yes; supposing that this affection be truly settled in our heart, and that we
do testify the same by effects, when occasion is given.

13. Who is our neighbor?
All men in the world; but not all in the same manner, nor in the same degree.

14. How are all men in the world our neighbors?
Because all men are issued out from one and the same father and mother Adam
and Eve; all are composed of one and the same nature; and all are capable of
the same everlasting bliss: which makes that they are all, not only
neighbors, but also brethren, and for this reason obliged to love one an other
sincerely.

15. Why are not all men neighbors in the same manner?
Because some are neighbors, only in respect of their humane and corporal
birth; others are also neighbors, in respect of their divine and spiritual
birth, by Baptism; whereby all Christians do become children of Jesus Christ,
their common father.

16. Thy are not all men neighbors in the same degree?
Because some have a greater alliance with us, then others, as well in respect
of our humane, and natural birth; as our parents, who begot us, and our
kindred, who come from the same race, and family, are nearer to us, then other
men in general: as also in respect of our divine and supernatural birth, by
Baptism; for Prelates, and Pastors, (who are in the Church as second fathers
to us) and our Godfathers and Godmothers, (who are our spiritual kindred) are
more near unto us, then other Christians, who are our spiritual brethren,
only because they are borne of the same common father Jesus Christ. And
likewise amongst our Christian brethren, we owe more to them, who are more
holy, and more virtuous, then to others; because they are as our elder
brethren, and as the first begotten in the family of Jesus Christ.

17. Who are more near unto us, those who are our neighbors by corporal
birth, or those who are our neighbors by spiritual birth?
Those who are our neighbors by spiritual birth; yea they are nearer to us,
then our own kindred, if they be not Christians; for our kindred appertain
unto us, only by reason we are borne of the blood of the same man: but
Christians are borne of the blood of the same God, who is Jesus Christ.

18. How then must we exercise Chrity?
We must exercise it, according to the aforesaid degrees, by preferring
always our kindred before other men, and Christians before Pagans, and
Catholics before Heretics and Schismatikes.

19. Must we love Catholics, only because they are our brethren borne of the
same blood of Jesus Christ?
This is one reason, why we must love them; but besides this, we must love them
also, because they are our fellow members, and compose, together with us, truly
and really one and the self same mystical body, whereof Jesus, Christ is the
head.

20. Must we not then love Catholics, also as members of Jesus Christ.
Yes; and not only so, but in some sort as Jesus Christ himself; for we find
Jesus Christ himself in them in some sort. First because they make but one
body, and one self same mystical person with him: and secondly, because his
own divine spirit, the Holy Ghost, is the common soul of this body, and so by
being derived from Jesus Christ, as from the head, unto all the other members,
it makes us all to partake of Jesus Christ. And therefore he says in the
Gospel, that all that one shall do to the least of the faithful, he will
hold it as done to himself.

21. Is it then a great sin to offend against the Charity we owe to our
neighbor?
Yes; because it is an offense done, not only to our brethren, and to the
mystical members of our own body, but also to Christ himself.

LESSON XVII. Of the Decalogue, or ten Commandments?
1. WHat is the best sign to know, whether we love God, and our neighbor, as
we ought?
That is best known, by keeping his Commandments: for who has my
Commandments, and observes them, he it is that loves me, says our Blessed
Savior himself; whereas he who says, that he loves God, and does not do
what he commands, is an Hypocrite, and a deceiuer, as his Disciple assures
us.

2. Tell me the reason of this?
Because love makes the hearts of those, that love one an other, conformable;
in so much, that they have the same affections, and the same will: he then who
loves God truly, wills all that, which God wills, and does not go against
his commands.

3. How many be the Commandments of God?
They be ten; to wit these. I am the Lord thy God, who have brought thee out of
the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. 1. Thou shall not have any
other God but me before my face. Thou shall not make to thy self an Idol, nor
an ingrauened image, nor any figure, to adore them. 2. Thou shall not take the
name of God in vain. 3. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day. 4.
Honor thy Father and mother, that thy life may be long in the land, which the
Lord thy God shall give thee. 5. Thou shall not kill. 6. Thou shall not commit
adultery. 7. Thou shall not steal. 8. Thou shall not bear false witness. 9.
Thou shall not desire thy neighbors wife. 10. Thou shall not covet thy
neighbors goods.


4. What do these ten Commandments contain?
All that, which we must do, or forbear to do, to love God, and our
neighbor. The first table, in which were written the three first
Commandments, contains that, which we owe to God. The second table, in which
were written the other seven, contains that, which we owe to our neighbor.
Now charity does consist in giving to God, and our neighbor, their due; for
to do this for God his sake, is to love him: so that the keeping of the
Commandments is an assured mark of Charity.

5. But what do you say to those Sectaries, who teach it to be impossible, for
us to keep Gods holy commandments?
First, they contradict our Blessed Savior, who most plainly says, that his
yoke is sweet, and his burden light; and S. John, who tells us, that Gods
Commandments are not heavy. Secondly, they make hime most cruel, by obliging
us under the pain of eternal damnation, to do that, which is impossible for
us to perform. And finally, they deny a most manifest experience, even in
many thousands of Gods blessed Saints, who assisted by the grace of God, have
observed his Commandments, without committing any mortal sin, after their
first conversion.

6. What is meant by those first words, I am the Lord thy God, who have brought
thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage?
By these words, which serve but as a Preface to the Commandments, we are
given to understand, that God can give us a law, which we are bound to observe,
he being our Sovereign Master and Lord, who having first made us of nothing,
did also redeem us from the thraldom of the Devil; and finally, by
innumerable benefits, has obliged us in gratitude, to love him above all, and
to observe his holy law.

7. What do we owe to God?
We owe to God all that which a servant owes to his master; which are three
things. The first is fidelity, which consists in not giving away to any
other, that which belongs to his master, and also in forbearing to keep
intelligence with his enemies; and this is contained in the first Commandment.
The second is reverence, which consists in forbearing to speak injuriously
of him; and in speaking worthily of him, when occasion is offered; and this is
contained in the second. The third is actual service, and this is contained in
the third Commandment.

COMMANDMENT I.
8 EXplicate the first Commandment: Thou shall not have any other Gods before
me?
We are commanded by it, to acknowledge one only God, and not to give the
honor, and adoration (either inward or outward) which we owe to him, to any
creature, or to the image of any creature.

9. Must we not then honor the Saints, and the images of God, and his Saints?
Yes; but we must not honor them as Gods, as some Pagans did, who gave divine
honor to images, as to Gods, and so made Idols of them.

10. What is the divine honor which we render to God?
It is a worship, which Divines call Latria, because it is the sovereign
worship of all, and it consists in this, that it is an act, whereby we
testify, that God is our absolute and sovereign Lord, from whose goodness,
and power, we have both our being, and conservation. Now this honor cannot be
given without Idolatry, to any, but to him: yet it does not hinder, but that
we may give an inferirour kind of honor to Saints, to Relics, to Images,
and to the Cross; which may appear evidently by this example. If a king
should forbid us, to give to any body, the honor, which is due to his own
person, no man willimagine, that he does forbid us, to render to his
Magistrates united to his person in several offices under him, some other
kind of honor, inferior to that, which is due to himself: but every body
will perceive, that he forbids us only to acknowledge his Magistrates, for our
Sovereign Lord, and king. And the same is in our case: for the Catholic Church
will not have us, to acknowledge the Saints for our sovereign Lords, or to
honor them upon that consideration, but teaches expressly the contrary, that
such honor is due only to God: yet it declares, that we may honor them, as
persons united by love to our Sovereign Master, and cherished by him.

11. Is the worship, which we render to Saints, only a civil worship?
No; it is a holy, and religious worship; and it is called holy, because it is
rendered to Saints, in regard that they are holy, and blessed in heaven; and it
is called religious, because it is commanded by the Christian religion; and
also because it is used for a religious end; and finally because it is an act
of that virtue, which Divines properly call Religion: for Saints are honored
with relation to God, by whom they are glorified with eternal bliss. And well
may this honor be called religious, when S. Augustine auoweth, that the
honor, which we render to our Parents, may be called such.

12. How must we worship the relics of Saints?
We must worship them also with a religious worship, as representing to us the
virtues, and good works, which were done by the Saints themselves, in doing
whereof these relics were instruments; for the body is the instrument,
whereby our soul does perform all our outward actions. Wherefore we do
reverence in relics the sanctity, zeal, and purety of those, to whom they
did belong.

13. May we also give reverence and worship to Images?
Yes, but we must not worship them as Gods, as the Pagans did; for that is
forbidden in this commandment. Neither must we worship the images, that is the
wood, the stone, the metal, the painting, etc. for themselves, but for their
sakes, who are represented by the images; for the Persons themselves are
honored, worshipped, and prayed to in their images. Wherefore S. Ambrose
speaking of honoring images, says, that he who crowns the image of the
Emperor, does honor him, whose image he has crowned. And so Jacob did adore
Joseph, in honoring the top of his rod or scepter; for he made no account of
the rod itself, but only in consideration of him, who held it. No more does
the Church bear any reverence to iamges, but merely in consideration of them,
whom they represent; and to deny them reverence in this respect, is a mere
barbarousnesse, and want of common sense.

14. What kind of worship is due to Images?
Certainly, since that we worship the Saints in their Images, by calling to
mind their holiness, and that they are united in bliss to God, the worship
done to the image, must needs be religious: for iamges being used for a
religious end, they are belonging to God, and holy, and consequently to be used
with respect for that reason; since that no man can deny, but that nature
teaches us, that all holy things ought to be used so. And therefore it is a
shortness of discourse in men, to deny that unto pictures, which of they
grant unto other things.

15. Must we also worship the Cross?
Yes, and in a more particular manner, then other representative images and
things; because it was the instrument of our redemption, and it calls to our
memory the death, and passion of our Savior. In fine, in all these points, we
do follow the custom of our fathers, and the practice of the ancient Church,
and therefore all those, who disallow them, are condemned by the Church.

16. What then are we commanded to do, by the first Commandment?
We are commanded to worship God, by acknowledging him in our hearts, to be our
Supreme Lord, and Master, and to apprehend him, as an incomprehensible essence,
not like to any thing fancyed by man.

17. What are we forbidden to do, by this Commandment?
We are forbidden, to give this worship, which is due to God, to any creature;
or to apprehend him like any thing fancyed by us.

18. What sins are reduced to this Commandment?
All those, which are committed against Faith, Hope, and Charity; for God is
worshipped in our hearts, by these three virtues, and so in the first place, the
true religion is established, and all false ones rejected by this Commandment.

19. Who are those, that offend against Faith?
First, he offends against faith, who does not believe (at least implicitly)
by act, or habitude, firmly, without doubting of their truth, all that, which
the Catholic Church teaches as matter of faith. Now, he belieueth implicitly
by act, who says actually within himself, I believe whatsoever the Church
teaches as necessary to be believed: and he belieueth implicitly by habitude,
who having once made firmly the former act, does not afterward recall it; for
by virtue of that act, he is presumed still to be ready by Gods grace, to make
the like act, whenever he shall be obliged to it, upon any occasion.

He also offends against faith, who (although he believe implicitly all that
the Church tells us) yet is ignorant of that, which he is bound to know
explicitetly, as that there is but one God, that this God is just, good, and
perfect; and in fine, all the principal points, which are contained in the
Creed.

Those likewise offend against faith, who believe in general, and also in
particular, what they ought, but yet do dissemble their religion, and forbear
to profess it (when they are obliged) either through fear, or for other
respects.

Those also, who give ear to Heretics, or read heretical books with danger
to be perverted, or assist at the public prayers of Heretics.

All Magicians, Coniurers, and Witches, who give themselves to the Devil, or
believe in their hearts, that devils deserve any honor from them, offend
against faith.

All those likewise, who use the means of Coniurers to inuoke the Devil, for
what end soever, although it be to undo again the mischievous enchantments,
which they had made before: yea though they do not inuoke the Devil, yet if
they desire to be assisted by their superstitious and magical inventions,
offend mortally.

All those offend against faith, who use certain superstitions, or put any
confidence in them, as some do in herbs gathered upon the day of our Saviors
Ascension, or on S. John Baptists day; others in a certain number of candles,
or the like. In fine, whenever any thing has not a virtue for that end, for
which it is used either by its own natural qualities, or by some
supernatural force conferred upon it through God his promise (as Sacraments
and such other remedies have, which the Church prescribes,) it is to be
esteemed superstitious, and to make use of such remedies, either to cure
diseases, or to find things that are lost, is a mortal sin.

20. Who are those, that offend against worshipping God by hope?
All those, who despair of their salvation.

All those, who presume so much in Gods mercy, that they aba^don themselves to
all sorts of sins, thinking that God will pardon them, though they do what
wickedness soever.

Those, who, through want of courage in misery, do detest, and hate their
own lives, and being, which God has given them.

Those, who being oppressed with calamities, do think that God has abandoned
them.

Those, who hope so much in God, that being sick, or in other miseries, they
neglect humane means, to relieve themselves, thinking that God will cure them
without their own industry.

21. Who be those, that offend against worshipping God by charity.
All those, who have a distaste against God, because they do not receive, what
they desire.

Those, who love creatures more then him, who is the creator of them.

Those, who are ashamed publicly to profess devotion, and love toward God.

Those, who mock, or disesteeme such persons, as do their duty toward God,
calling them scrupulous persons, Bigots, or the like.

Those, who despise the blessed, who are united with God, and mock at their
relics, at the Cross, at holy places, miracles, and other holy things; it
being evident, that those do not give to God, what charity obliges them
unto, who do not love, and reverence that, which has a particular relation to
God, as holy things have.

Lastly, the sin of pride is particularly reduced to this commandment, for
by pride we assume that to our selves, which is due to God.

Now to conclud this first commandment, you must note that this precept of
charity, is the sum of all the commandments, for all are comprehended in
this, by which we are commanded to love God with all our heart, with all our
strength, and with all our soul; in fine, to love him without measure or
limits.

22. How is it possible to accomplish this commandment, which has no measure
nor limits?
It is true that this commandment cannot be perfectly accomplished, until we
possess allmighty God himself, and enjoy him entirely in heaven; yet the want
of this perfection in this world, does not render us guilty of breaking this
commandment, as long as we do aspire unto it by making a continual progress
in it, which is at last to be accomplished in heaven. And to this purpose S.
Augustine says, that the whole life of a good Christian is nothing else, but a
holy desire; that is to say, a continual motion of our heart, which carries it
on (according to S. Paul's admonition) not to look back, but to advance still
further and further; as Pilgrims do, whereof some go faster, others slower in
the same way, yet all go on toward their iournies end.

23. What degree then of the love of God is that, which is necessary in this
life for salvation?
Two things are absolutely necessary for salvation, touching the observance
of this precept, for those who are come to the use of reason. The first is,
that the love of God be the most absolute, the most affectionate, the most
general, and predominant over all our other lover, and that it reign over all
our passions: so that we must love God not only more then our own lives; but
also we must love him generally and without exception, more then all that,
which we desire, or can desire. For we must be truly and sincerely so disposed
in the bottom of our hearts, as to loose all things that are most dear unto
us, and to suffer the greatest indignities that can be, rather then to loose
him; and consequently rather then to commit the least mortal sin. This
degree of the love of God is absolutely necessary to salvation for all men in
the world; and this degree is sufficient, supposing it be accompanied with a
second condition, which is, that having once this love rooted in us, we
endeavor still to increase it more and more, by our prayers, by our good
works, and by a devout rule of our whole life: for let us have made never so
great advancement in charity, we are still bound to go on, and not to make a
stand; because we have not yet attained to the perfect accomplishment of this
precept of loving God with all our soul; nether shall we attain unto it,
until we come to heaven; and therefore not to go on, is to go back.

Now seeing that the love of God must be predominant over all our affections,
and reign over all our passions, the securest rule to know, whether we have
truly this love of God or no, is to look into the course of our life, our
actions, and designs. For as we see amongst worldly men, that ordinarily in
every one, some one passion is predominant over all the others, which makes,
that we esteem some auaricious, others ambitious, others vain glorious,
others addicted to pleasures, others reuengefull; accordingly as the love of
riches, or of greatness, or of glory, or pleasure, or revenge do reign in
them; whereof we do judge by their actions, designs, occupations, and by the
whole conduct of their life, which is for the most part tainted by that
principal affection that reigns in them. In the like manner, no man has
reason to think that he loves God above all things, which is necessary to
salvation, if examining his life, actions, employments, desires, and
pretensions, he does not find, that the principal part of them do tend
toward God, seeing that the love which we owe to him, is not a love of words
and thoughts, but of effects and actions. And therefore we must not deceive
ourselves, taking the acts of our understanding, for acts of love and
affection; for there is no man, that has the use of reason, whose
understanding does not tell him, taht we ought to love God more then ourselves;
yea, there is no true man, who has not an inclination to love God, more then
himself: but the love of God does not consist in that act of the
understanding, nor in this inclination, but it consists in putting this
inclination in practice.

COMMANDMENT II.
24. WHat are we taught by the second Commandment. Thou shall not take the
name of the Lord thy God in vain?
It forbids all false, and unnecessary oaths, and all disrespect which is
done to God, by word of mouth; for the respect we owe to the Majesty of God,
does oblige us, not to use his name in any thing whatsoever it be, without
some necessity.

25. When is it lawful, and no sin, to swear?
It is lawful to swear, when our oath is accompanied with truth, justice, and
judgment; without any one of which conditions, the oath will be sinful, and
naught.

26. Why were oaths invented?
They were invented for a remedy of humane imbecillitie, to supply the want
of belief, which we should give to one an other, when we affirm a truth; and
so if Adam had not sinned, oaths had not been needful.

27. What is it to swear with truth, justice, and judgment?
He swears with truth, who affirms nothing but what he thinks himself to
know certainly to be true. He swears with justice, who does not swear all
truths, but only such, as his oath shall hurt no body; and in case he promise
a thing by oath, that the thing promised be lawful, and possible. He swears
with judgment, who observes these three conditions; first, if he does not
swear any thing, but only that, which would not be believed without an oath;
secondly, if he swears nothing, but that which is necessary to be known for
is necessary to be known for some important reason; thirdly, if when he
swears, he performs it by decent words, and in due time and place, and
without passion or cholere.

28. How many kinds of oaths be there?
First in regard of God, whom we call to witness, they are twofold; for we may
either call him simply for witness of a thing, or else we may call him as
revenger of untruths, in case we say a false thing. Secondly they are twofold
in respect of the things we swear; the one is purelly affirmative, the other
has also a promise joined with the affirmation: the first may concern things
past, present, or to come; the second does concern only things to come; which
also is twofold, for we may promised by oath either to man, or to God. And as
we are bound to affirm nothing but truth, so are we bound to make our promised
true by observing it, in case it be lawful, unless by some accident, it
become morally impossible; or unless he, unto whom the promise is made,
dispenses with it; as if to man, the man himself; if to God, the Church.

29. What things are we commanded to do by this Commandment?
As in the former we are commanded to honor God with our hearts, so are we in
this commanded to honor him with our tongues.

30. What sins are reduced to this Commandment?
All blasphemy; and so those offend against this Commandment, who blaspheme
either in thought, or word, by attributing to God that, which does not become
his divine perfection; as those do, who say, he is cruel, unjust, partial,
that he damneth men actually to eternal punishment without their demerits, etc.

Those, who deny him to have that perfection, which belongs to him; as those
do, who murmr against him, and say, he is not good, etc.

Those, who affirm of him that, which he has in some sense, but they do it,
as if it were threatening, or otherwise irreuerently; as those do, who have in
their mouths so often these words, God his blood, God his wounds, or the like.

Those, who swear by the Devil, or by false Gods; for none ought to be sworn
by, as if the were God, but he who is the first truth, and by whom all things
are true.

Those, who swear by S. Peter, or other Saints, by heaven, by the earth, or by
any other creature, as they represent unto us the truth, and majesty of their
Creator.

Those, who speak ill of Saints, and of holy things, who laugh at scripture,
and use it profanely in a sporting way, or diffamatorie libells, etc. For the
name of God, which we are forbidden to take in vain, does not signify that
material word only, but also all that which has a particular relation, and
union with God. Adn therefore those also offend against this Commandment, who
in a place consecrated to God, as in a Church, or in a Church yard, do commit
any action unworthy the purity of the place.

COMMANDMENT III.
31. DEclare the third Commandment. Remember to keep holy the Sabbath day?
The two former commandments do contain our duty in heart, and word; here we
are commanded, to sanctify the day of God almighty his repose, by actual
service; which day, before the resurrection, was the seventh day, but now it
is the eighteth: for as God, after he had created the first world (as I may
term it) in six days, did repose the seventh; so our Savior, after that
with great labor he had made up the second world, which is the Church, reposed
the eighteth day (which is the day of his resurrection) for all eternity.

32. Wherefore did God command the Jews to observe the Sabbath day?
In memory of that great benefit, which man received by the worlds creation,
which he finished upon this day.

33. Wherefore is it that Christians observe the Sunday, and not Saturday, the
former Sabbath, which was commanded by God himself?
You must note, that there is this defference betwixt this commandment, and
the other nine, that all the others do follow in every particular out of the
law of nature, and therefore they are perpetual, and cannot be changed;
whereas this commandment, for as much, as concerns the determination of the
time, is ceremonial, and therefore it may be changed in this point; for
although the law of nature does teach us, that we ought to give some particular
time to God his service, yet it does not determine the time, but leaves the
determination to the positive laws of God, or his Church. Wherefore as our
Savior had formerly changed diverse of the ceremonies in the ancient law, by
taking away the figure, to give us the truth itself, as Baptism in place of
Circumcision, the blessed Sacrament in place of the Paschall Lamb; so also his
Apostles (inspired by the holy Ghost) appointed unto Christians instead of the
former Sabbath, the observation of Sunday, or our Lords day of repose: which is
worthily called our Lords day, for that our blessed Redeemer Jesus Christ did
not only rise gloriously from death this day, but also (according to the common
opinion) he was borne this day, and he sent the holy Ghost upon this day to his
dearest spouse the Church. We do also keep still on this day a memory of the
Creation of the world, which was begun on this day, if we take it as the
first day of the week.

34. What is required of us, for the fulfilling of this precept, of sanctifying
the Sabbath day?
It is required, that we abstain from all servile works forbidden by the
Church; and that we give to God, upon this day, that solemn and public
worship, which the Church prescribes. Besides, to observe this commandment
with perfection, we are to employ the whole day (excepting only that time which
is required for our sustinance, and necessities) in divine service, as in
prayer, hearing sermons, reading good books, and the like: and therefore
those, who spend this day in idle sports, or unnecessary voyages, and the like,
do not comply fully with the end of this commandment, nor with the Churches
desire concerning it; and therefore are reprehensible. Wherefore all people
should be exhorted, to spend at least some part of the day in hearing of
sermons, or other pious exercises; for by little and little Christians become
like Pagans, without apprehension of the next world at all, unless they be
often stirred up by sermons and such pious exercises. And therefore to neglect
them totally, cannot choose but be a great abuse, and the cause that many go
headlong to hell.

35. What is understood by servile works?
All corporal works, whereby men use to gain their living by laboring for
other men, which are commonly called meckanicke works: and so works, which
are common to Masters, and servants, as dancing, and singing, and the like, are
not esteemed servile. But the best rule to know which are such, and which are
not, is the practice of the Church: for the law of nature does not forbid
servile works, on days dedicated to God his service, but only so far forth,
as the said works may be a hindrance, either to the inward or outward worship,
which men profess peculiarly toward God on those days: and therefore, as it
belongs to the Church, to determine the days of public, and solemn
worship; so it belongs to her also, to determine what temporal works are to
be permitted, and what to be forbidden, as prejudicial to the public
solemnity of divine worship intended by her on those days. And so we see that
she does forbid certain works, which are not altogether mechanicke, as buying
and selling in markets, keeping open shoppes, or selling in them, etc. and she
does also allow some servile works, which are daily necessary for the
subsistence, and entertainment of men, as most household businesses are.

36. Is it never lawful upon our Lord his day, to do such servile works, as
the Church forbids?
Yes; when the not doing them may be a cause of any notable harm, as the
taking in of harvest, when there is danger, that it may be spoiled with ill
weather; as also the shooing of an horse, that is in a journey upon the high
way, etc. For although in these cases a temporal gain be gotten by those, who
do these works, yet that particular gain is not the principal end of
permitting these works, but the good of the common wealth.

37. Who be those that transgress against this Commandment?
First, all those laborers, and tradesmen, who work on festival days.

Secondly, those who consent to such working, or do not hinder it, when they
may by authority do it.

To this Commandment also may be reduced those things, which are committed
against the precept of the Church for hearing of Mass. As first, those, who
neglect to hear Mass on Sundays, and Holy days, offend mortally.

Secondly, those who though they be present at Mass, yet are not attentive at
it, but stand talking or gazing up and down.

Thirdly, those who go to Mass for some ill end.

Fourthly, those who take no care to see, that their children, andd servants
satisfy this precept.

38. May not one also be excused in some case from hearing Mass on festival
days?
Yes, when he cannot go to Church, without danger of some notable hurt to
himself, or to his neighbor: or if he have some lawful impediment; as for
example, if a man have undertaken a voyage for a business of great importance,
either for himself, or his neighbor, and should be hindered by hearing Mass,
from performing his voyage in due time.

COMMANDMENT IV.
39. DEclare the fourth. Honor thy Father and Mother, that thy life may be
long in the land, which our Lord thy God shall give thee.
In regard that above all others, our parents are most near to us, and that we
are most obliged to them, both for our being, and life; therefore the first
precept of the second table commands us, to obey, and reverence them, both
inwardly and outwardly, and also to help them in their necessities; for honor
includes both love, obedience, and service.

40. What means the later clause; That thou may live long in the land,
which thy Lord thy God shall give thee.
As it does promise long life to dutiful and obedient children, so also it is
a most fearful threat (amongst other punishments) to those, who are
undutiful to their parents, from whom they had received their life and being
that they shall not live long.

41. What obedience do Children owe to their parents?
They owe them obedience, in all just things, but not in such things, as are
contrary to the will of God; for he is to us more then our father, and so must
be preferred.

42. What assistance are Children bound to give them?
They are bound to assist them, not only by their industry, but also with
their goods and means, if they have any of their own: for it is reason, that
those, that have given us our being, should receive from us all that, which may
contribute to the conservation of their being. And the obligation is so great,
that if one should see his father, and his son in imminent danger, and were
not able to help both, he is bound to help his father, rather then his own
son. This obligation also is such, that Religious persons may go out of
their Religion, to assist their parents in extreme necessity, when by other
means they cannot be relieved.

43. Does this Commandment oblige only children to their parents?
No; for love is mutual of its own nature, and so by obliging children to
love their parents, God obliges also parents to love their children. But it
was not necessary to command it expressly, because the love of parents toward
their children, is so natural, that it needed not to be expressed: it
suffices that nature has imprinted it in the hearts of all parents.

44. Whom are we to understand by our Fathers and Mothers?
First and principally our corporal fathers, and mothers: secondly our
spiritual fathers, who are the Prelates of the Church, as also our ghostly
fathers: thy r dl our te^porall Magistrates: fourthly husbands, in respect of
their wives: fifthly our uncles and aunts: sixthly tutours, in respect of
pupills: seventhly masters, in respect of servants: eighthly, those who teach
in respect of scholars: and lastly old, and aged persons, in respect of younger
people. So that we owe to all these, a more particular respect, then to others,
according to their several degrees. As they likewise, do owe a particular
love, to their inferiors, of each kind respectively.

45. How do children transgress against this precept?
First, all those do transgress, who do not love and respect their carnal
parents.

Secondly, those who do not obey them.

Thirdly, those who do not assist them in their necessities.

Fourthly, those who do despise them, or are ashamed to acknowledge them, by
reason of their poverty.

Fifthly, those who treat them rudely, and give them just occasion of choler.

Sixthly, those who mock at them, and murmr against them, and treat them
with injurious words.

Seventhly, those who do any unreasonable action of importance contrary to
their desire.

Eighthly, those that do accuse their parents in public courts, except it be
for treason.

Ninthly, those who by excessive expenses, and disorder, hinder them from
making restitution of goods ill gotten.

Tenthly, those children, who are not careful to see, that their fathers and
mothers confess at the hour of death, sin mortally, in case that there be
no body else to look unto it, and that through their negligence their parents
dye without confession.

Eleuenthly, those who after their parents death, do not execute their last
will, and testament.

Twelfthly, those children who permit themselves, to be induced to marry,
against their fathers will, offend against this commandment. And it is to be
noted, that the obligation, which we have to our parents, is so great, that
they, who transgress against them, do very often offend mortally.

46. How do parents transgress against this Commandment?
First, by using their children with two much severity, as those do who beat
them, and use them ill upon no occasion; or upon just occasion, but beyond
measure.

Secondly, those who marry them to persons, that they cannot love.

Thirdly, those who make them become religious against their will, do offend
mortally.

Fourthly, those who use them with too much indulgence, and do not correct
them, when they do ill.

Fifthly, those who have more care to see them rich, then that they be brought
up in the fear of God.

Sixthly, those that hinder them from entering into Religion, when they seem
to be called to it by allmighty God.

Seventhly, those who give them any ill example, or put them upon any evil
action.

Eighthly, those who disinherit them without any lawful cause.

Ninthly, those who give their goods to any others, though it be to the Church,
in case that thereby they deprive their children of that portion, which is
reasonably due unto them, and which is necessary to maintain them in a
competent manner, do transgress notably against this precept.

Tenthly, those who send their children to beg, that is, make beggars of
them, when they are able to maintain them.

Eleuenthly, those who do not provide for their bastards, if they be able, at
least ways so far, as that they may not live in misery.

47 How do men trangresse against other persons, who are mutually obliged by
this Commandment?
First, those persons transgress against their spiritual fathers, and
temporal Magistrates, who do not obey the ordinances of the Church, and of the
Common wealth.

Secondly, those who do murmr against their superiors, either civil, or
ecclesiastical; and do censure their ordinances, and manner of government;
which murmuring is for the most part an occasion of great harm: for such
discourses do easily beget in the hearts of the hearers, a contempt of their
persons and authority, which afterward does likewise infect the people; and
causes contempt, disobedience, and disorder in the Common wealth.

Thirdly, those, who do speak ordinarily against the vocation, behavior, and
lives of Churchmen, and do not bear a due respect unto them. And on the
contrary side the Churchmen, who have care of souls, offend greiuously, if
they do not administer the Sacraments, and preach the word of God, to those who
are under their care, and give them spiritual instruction, counsel, and
comfort. As also, if they do not give alms to the poor, as far as they are
able, especially to such as are under their care.

Wives offend against this commandment, who do neglect, or disdain their
husbands; or do give them an occasion of choler, and do not seek to content
them in all reasonable things. As contrariwise, husbands do abuse their
authority, which God has given them over their wives, if they deprive them of
honest liberty; if they do not allow them commodities necessary for their
entertainment; if they treat them outragiously in words or deeds; if without
their consent they live continually absent from them, upon any disgust, or
without a just cause.

Pupills are bound to follow the counsel, and advise of their tutors. And
tutors offend if they take not care to instruct their pupills; if they permit
their goods to be dissipated through their negligence; if they marry them
disaduantageously, either through favor, of for other respects.

Servants offend by neglecting their service; by murmuring against their
Masters; by speaking to their disadvantage; by giving them an occasion of
choler; by disposing of their goods without their consent, etc. Masters offend
by too much rigor toward their servants; in exacting from them more then they
are able to perform; in not procuring their good, as much as they can
conveniently; in reteining their wages from them, that so they may be
constrained to live with them; as also in hindering them from marrying, or
dissuading them from any other course, that may be notably disaduantageous to
them, to the end that they may thereby still have them for their servants.

COMMANDMENT V.
48. DEclare the fifth Commandment. Thou shall not kill?
This forbids us to do harm to any man, in his life, either corporal,
spiritual, or civil: and consequently it commands us to protect, and
preserve him, in all three, so far forth, as we are able.

49. Is it never lawful to kill a man?
It is never lawful to kill him spiritually: but it may be lawful to kill one
corporally, in these cases. First, if it be done by authority of Magistrates,
in way of justice. Secondly, if it be done by soldiers, in a just war, by
order of their Captain. Thirdly, if it be done by any particular man, in a
just defense of his own, or his neighbors life, when (in case he or his
neighbor be set on) he cannot otherwise defend himself, or his neighbor,
from being slain: and that these things be done without any rancour of mind,
or spirit of revenge.

50. Who are those, that transgress against this Commandment, for as much as
it concerns corporal life?
First, all those, who kill voluntarily any man, excepting in one of the three
former cases.

Secondly, those who do lame, wound, hurt, or beat any man.

Thirdly, those who desire, counsel, or (when they may conveniently) do not
hinder any of the foresaid excesses. And it is to be noted, that the more
co^siderable the person is, so much the sin is greater; as also if it be done
in a place consecrated to God: for it is a greater sin to kill ones father,
brother, kinsman, churchman, magistrate, or one by whose industry and labor a
whole family lives, then to kill one, that has none of these qualities: as
also it is a greater sin, to persuade many, then to persuade one only, to
commit any of the foresaid excesses.

Fourthly, those judges who condemn one that is innocent, or also one that is
guilty, without using all the forms that are requisite for his process.

Fifthly, those judges, who do not favor the cause of an innocent person, as
also those, who persecute him, are guilty of his oppression.

Sixthly, those magistrates, who do not punish duells, murders, and all such
like excesses.

Seventhly, those that praise, and approve of such like excesses, either before
or after they are committed.

Eighthly, all Physicians, Chirurgiens, or Apothecaries, who kill or hurt one
notably, although it be not done on purpose, but by gross and culpable
ignorance; for ignorance is esteemed malice in him, who is obliged to know.

Ninthly, those who procure to destroy the fruit in the womb of a woman, or if
the woman herself should do it by dancing, or any other excess, or by some
gross negligence, though she think not of it; for negligence also is esteemed
malice, where one ought to be diligent.

Tenthly, those who see a poor man dying for hunger, and do not relieve him.

Lastly, those who kill themselves, or, without a just cause, expose themselves
to imminent danger of death; or, being weary of living, desire death; yea, if
one should expose himself to martyrdom, because he is weary of his life, he
would commit a grievous sin.

51. Who be those, that transgress against this Commandment, for as much as
concerns spiritual life?
First, all those, who infect others with Heresy, or keep those that are
infected, from returning to the true Church.

Secondly, all those, who either by word, or by ill example, do incite others
to sin, or divert them from doing good.

Thirdly, those who do not correct their neighbor, when they think probably
their admonition would do him good.

Fourthly, Physicians, friends, and servants, who assisting sick persons, do
not advertise them in time, that they are in danger of death, and to think of
their conscience.

Fifthly, all those, who commit, or resolve to commit any mortal sin.

52. Who be those that transgress against this Commandment, for as much as
concerns our civil life?
First, all those, who either by words, or libells, do diffame their neighbor,
whether it be by imposing a false crime upon him, or by discovering a true vice
of his, which was not known publicly before.

Secondly, those, who incite others to commit such diffamation against their
neighbor, or give ear to them, or do not divert their discourse when they may.

Thirdly, those who brag of their own vices, whereby they deprive themselves
of that reputation, with which they ought to live in the world. And it is to be
noted, that he who has diffamed another man, whether it be in a thing true, or
false, is bound to restitution, that is, to repair his honor.

Fourthly, those who do laugh at other men, do discourse and talk of their
defects, do censure their actions, do break bitter jests upon them, and in
fine do speak freely in prejudice of persons, either present or absent. And
whereas many make no scruple of doing these things, under pretense that they
discourse only for recreation, and passetime, or that they say nothing, that
seems to be of importance, they do deceive themselves exceedingly: for
ordinarily these kind of discourses, do cause a confusion, and distaste in
him, who finds himself laughed at, despised, or ill spoken of; whereupon
proceed oftentimes enmities, and auersions from one another, and a breach of
mutual correspondence, and fraternall charity.

Fifthly, all those offend against this precept, who do not carry to each other
a due respect. Where it is to be noted that many, yea sometimes man and wife,
make little scruple, when they have vpbraided one another with all sort of
contumelies, and vented their whole choler, but esteem them as words spoken in
the air, because no other harm follows out of them; not considering that
God is more offended with the malice of the heart, from whence such injuries
proceed, then with the effects, that follow out of them: and therefore they
deceive themselves, if they think it not a grievous offense; since that our
Savior himself says, that he who calls his brother fool, is guilty of
hell fire.

Sixthly, whosoever having had some falling out with his neighbor, does
disdain him, or put of to be reconciled unto him, or auoideth his company,
merely out of rancour of mind, offends against this commandment; nether
will it excuse him to say, that he wishes no more harm to him, then to
himself; for God does not only forbid us to do, or wish harm, to our
neighbor, but also he commands us to do him good, and express kindness
to him upon occasions, both in deeds and in words.

Lastly, those offend grievously against this commandment, who cause factions,
and seditions amongst parties; as also those, who nourish such disunion of
minds, by siding with either party, and do not seek rather to unite them
together by peace and quietness: and the offense is the greater, when by
siding with either party, they meddle in that, which does not belong unto them,
as when Laymen meddle in Ecclesiastical affairs, or matters of Religion; for
although differences in these kinds, may oftentimes in Ecclesiastical
persons, proceed from zeal in both parties, yet in Laymen it can never be
excused from faction, except it be where the Church has publicly censured one
party.

COMMANDMENT VI.
53. DEclare the sixth Commandment. Thou shall not commit adultery?
We are forbidden by this commandment, all sorts of actions, words, and
thoughts, contrary to chastity, and chiefly to violate the bond of Marriage.

54. How many kinds of carnal sins be there?
There be seven, Adultery, Simple fornication, Incest, Defloration, Rape,
Sacrilege, and sin against nature. Adultery is a carnal act betwixt man and
woman, where one or both parties are married to a third person. Fornication is,
when nether party is married, nor has vowed chastity, nor are virgins, nor
allied to one another. Incest is, when there is kindred, or affinity betwixt
the two parties. Defloration is, when one, or both parties, are virgins. Rape
is, when one of the parties, of what condition soever the person be, is forced
to the act. Sacrilege is, when one, or both parties, are consecrated to God:
or when by any other persons a carnal action is committed in a holy place.
Sin against nature, has also diverse kinds, which are not necessary to be
explicated.

55. Why is Adultery named, i^ the prohibition of this Commandment, rather
then any of the other kinds?
Because, besides the impurity of the act, and the injustice against our
neighbor, it contains also a wrong done against the commonwealth, in regard
that lawful heirs are deprived of their due, by bastards: and therefore a
married woman, that knows for certain, that she has bastards, who are
accounted as her lawful children, is bound by sparing, and other means, to
endeavor to recompense the loss, that her husbands lawful children, or next
heirs, shall receive by her bastards.

56. Who do transgress against this Commandment?
All those, who either by thoughts, words, looks, or actions, incite
themselves, or others, to any of the former kinds of sins, or to any kind
of carnal delight: and although it proceed to no other deformity, but only to
the delight it self, and in thought only, yet it is a mortal sin, of it be
with full deliberation, and consent, though it endure but a moment.

All those parents, husbands, and tutors, who permit their children, wives, or
pupills, to be drawn to such sins.

The same persons also, though they should not consent to those indignities,
yet if they give so much liberty to their daughters, wives, or pupills, as that
they may be debauched, they are guilty of their sins.

The same persons are also guilty, if through toe much rigor, by denying to
their children, wives, or pupills, that which is necessary to entertain them
according to their condition, they should give them occasion to yield to such
persons, as seek to corrupt them.

Those, who by their ill example, do give occasion to others to do the like.

Those, who by charms, and witchcrafts, seduce other persons, or cause them to
be seduced.

Those, who use extraordinary means, only to provoke lust, offend grievously,
although they be married people; and not only they, but also Physicians, and
Apothecaries, who furnish them with receipts, and druggs for that end.

Those, who by stealth, or otherwise, carry away a man's daughter, or pupil,
against their parents or tutors consent, if she be not past the years of
tutelage, commit a rape, although it be done with design of marriage, and that
she herselse consent to it.

They also, who run away with a widow, with intention to marry her against
her will, commit a rape: as also do those, who run away with a man's wife. And
it is to be noted, that those, who seduce young maids, under pretense of
marrying them, whether they confirm their promise by oath, or no; or whether
they intend to perform, or no; yet if the maid, and her parents require it,
they are bound in conscience to marry her, and sin mortally if they do not;
except they be of a condition altogether unequal, or that the maid do break
first with the man, by being disloyal to him, or that there should be danger
of some notable infamy, or scandal by the marriage; in which cases he is
bound to recompense the maid, by giving her a portion to marry her.

Lastly (this commandment being made specially for the benefit and right use
of marriage) all those married people do offend grievously against it, who
expose themselves to danger of sin, by abstaining from the duty of marriage,
only for fear of having children; especially seeing that multiplicity of
children, is the greatest benediction, that married people can have, marriage
being instituted only for that end.

COMMANDMENT VII.
57. DEclare the seventh Commandment. Thou shall not steal?
It forbids us to offend our neighbor, in his temporal goods, and chiefly
by theft.

58. What is theft?
Theft in general, is a taking or detaining, that which belongs to another, by
fraud, or by force, to make himself master of it, against his consent, to whom
it belongs.

59. How many kinds of theft be there?
The several kinds of theft do proceed, either from the nature of the goods,
which are taken, or from the places whence they are taken, or from the several
manner of taking or usurping them. For to take a sacred thing, is sacrilege;
as also to take that, which is not sacred, if it be committed to a sacred place
to be kept there, as in a safegarde, or if it be taken from a sacred person, is
sacrilege. In like manner, to take a thing secretly, is properly called theft;
but to take it openly, or by violence, is rapine. And the sin is so much the
greater, or less, as the prejudice, which is done, is greater or less: and so
it is a mortal sin, when the thing that is taken, is of a considerable value
in it self, or when it is considerable in respect of the person, from whom it
is taken; as a penny is a considerable loss to a beggar, 12 pence to an
ordinary man.

60. What is commanded by this precept?
As theft is forbidden, so restitution is commanded: in so much, that he, who
has stolen, cannot be absolved, without purpose or promise to restore again:
and not only he, who has stolen a thing, but also he, who has found a thing
by chance, or had a thing belonging to another man, given him, or came by it
any other way, is bound to restore it, if he know, or can come to know, whom it
belongs unto.

61. To whom is one bound to restore?
To him, or to his heirs, to whom the thing belongs, in case he, or they be
known; if not, then he must give it to the Church, or to the poor. And he
must restore the thing it self, if he has it; if not, the value of it,
supposing he got it unjustly; but if he got it justly, and has it no more, he
must restore the profit, that he has made by it.

62. Who transgress against this Commandment?
All those, who steal, or rob; as also those, who consent to theft, either by
entertaining thieues, or concealing the thefts, or any way favor such actions;
all which persons are bound to restitution, in case that it be not performed by
the man himself, who committed the theft.

All servants, who put more upon their masters account, then they have laid
out; whose sin is the greater, by reason of the confidence, that their
masters put in them,

All servants, who by their negligence, do permit their masters goods to be
lost.

All those, who buy stolen goods; or retain other men's goods, which they have
found.

All those, who through malice, set their neighbor his house on fire, poison
his cattle, or do any other notable harm to his goods.

All those gamesters, who gain by false play; as also if they gain any
notable sum, from persons under age to enjoy or dispose of their goods,
although it be without deceit.

All those, who coin false money.

All those, who sell merchandise, for much more then it is worth; as also
those, who sell one kind of merchandise for another, or that which is bad for
good, or a less quantity for a greater.

All those, who do not give alms to the poor, according to their ability;
wherein many rich men, who do heap up money, offend grievously without scruple.

All those, who feign themselves to be poor, and receive alms, when they
have no need, take that which belo^gs to others.

All workmen, who receive wages for that, which they have not done, ot for
that, which they have done ill, for want of due care; or who pay themselves by
a secret way, under pretense that their labor deserves more then they
bargain for.

All those, who do not pay servants, and workmen, their due wages, and
recompense.

Tailours, and others, who retain part of the stuff, of which they make
clothes, or other things, in case that they be reasonably paid for their
pains and work.

Those, who by any fraud, deceive their creditours of that, which is due to
them.

All usurers, and notaries, that make contracts of usury.

Those, who pay not the decimes to the Church, or refuse to pay just tribute to
their Princes.

All Churchmen, that do not perform the duties, and offices, to which they are
obliged by their benefices: as also those, who by simonie, or trust, possess
unjustly Ecclesiastical livings.

Those officers, who tax particular persons, parishes, or communities, with a
greater rate then others are taxed; whereby they are also bound to restitution.

Judges, who wittingly adiudge a cause wrongfully; who are also bound to
restitution: as also those Judges, and Advocates are, who prolong processes on
purpose to gain by them; or take from either party any present of great
value, that is, any such present, as may be esteemed a bribe.

All Physicians, who prolong their patients diseases, purposely to gain by
them.

All those, who by an unjust way, do hinder an other man's preferment.

All women, who without their husbands consent, do make any notable expense,
though it be in giving alms: and those, who receive such gifts from married
women, without their husbands consent, are bound to restitution.

Children, who steal any thing from their parents: and they are also obliged
to restitution (although their parents should afterward be dead) for so much
of the theft, as exceeds their own portion.

All such, as do by persuasions induce ones daughter to marry against her
fathers will, any person, that is of a condition far unequal to her, sin
mortally.

All those, both fathers and mothers, who live at a greater rat^, then they can
well bear, or spend their means in gaming, whereby they impouerish their
families, and bring their children into misery, offend mortally.

All those, who spend their whole means in sporting, keeping company, gaming,
feasting, drinking, etc. offend grievously, by robbing from the poor, although
they spend of their own: and certainly such people deceive themselves, if
living so, they think that they are in state of salvation: for those are such,
as the Apostle speaks of, who live according to the flesh, and make a God of
their bellye. And it is to be noted, that such persons as make profession to
play continually at cards and dice, are in a state incapable of absolution, by
reason that such a continual custom is an immediate danger of offending God
some way or other.

All those, who being indebted, do live at a higher rate in superfluous
expe^ses, then their means can bear, are guilty of injustice, and commit a
mortal sin, if thereby they become unable to pay their debts: or do make new
debts, more then they are able to discharge whilst they live: or if they do
thereby impouerish themselves so much, as that they are not able to provide for
the marriage of their daughters.

All those, who to the loss of their creditors, do defer, and put of to pay
their debtes, when they are able; as also those who defer to make restitution.

COMMANDMENT VIII.
63. DEclare the eighth Commandment. Thou shall not bear false witness
against thy neighbor?
It forbids us to speak any false thing, to the disadvantage of our
neighbor, either in public, or in private.

64. How many sorts of lies be there?
They are divided into three kinds: the first is called malicious, that is, to
tell a lie expressly, thereby to do harm, or prejudice to his neighbor. The
second is called officious, which is, only to content himself, or others,
without doing harm to his neighbor. The third is a lie told in merriment, in
laughing, or jesting. These two last kinds of lies, though they be sins, yet
they are not mortal, but only venial; but the first is allwaies mortal,
unless it be excused by the smallness of the wrong, that is done to his
neighbor.

65. Who transgress against this Commandment?
All those, who bear false witness, or accuse another man falsely, in any
tribunal; as also those, who consent to such wickedness, or do not hinder it,
when they can: for he, who accuses one falsely, is worse then the Devil, who
at the day of judgment, will not accuse any man of that, which he has not
committed.

All Judges, who give false judgment, or judge or matters, which do not belong
unto them.

All Advocates, and Atturnies, that maintain a cause manifestly unjust; or
that defend a just cause, by untruths.

All, that make false contracts; as likewise the witnesses, that assist at such
contracts; and they are bound to restitution of the loss.

All, who upon any occasion whatsoever, though it be not in any court, or
tribunal, do impose falsely upon his neighbor any fault, vice, action, or
word, as done, or spoken by him.

All those, who exaggerate another man's fault more then it is, or reveal a
fault, that is secret.

All those, who do not praise their neighbor, and defend their honor, when
they are bound to do it; for this commandment, does not only oblige us not to
speak ill, but also binds us to speak well of them, when by our not
speaking, we should be thought to assent to some notable diffamation against
them; or when by speaking, we may probably hinder such a diffamation, without
any great prejudice to ourselves, or others.

All those, who flatter men for their own private interest, attributing those
qualities to them, which they have not.

Whosoever being required in justice, does not reveal to the Judge, the crime
he is examined about, except he be kinsman, or Lawier to the person, that is
accused; or the crime be secret, and not known to any but to himself; or that
he, who knows it, did receive it as a secret, from the criminal himself; or
that he has just reason to fear, that by deposing the truth, he shall
undergo any notable harm; all which cases excuse a man, from deposing the
truth. But otherwise he is bound to do it, in so much, that he would sin, who
should hide himself, or feign himself to be enemy to the criminal, thereby
to exempt himself from bearing witness, when he is called upon, against one,
who is lawfully accused. And you must note also, that the former exceptions do
not excuse a man from deposing the truth, in case of treason.

He who can prevent any great harm by bearing witness, does sin in not
doing it.

He also offends against this commandment, who being convinced in justice,
by sufficient proofs, does not confess his crime: as also he, who accuses
himself or that, which he never did do.

Lastly some, who are accustomed to lie, do oftentimes confirm their lies with
oaths, as saying that the merchandise (for example) which they are about to
sell, did cost them so much, or that they have refused for it so much; which
sort of men must note, that although the matter be of small consequence, yet if
they join an oath to it, it is a great offense, and not easily freed from
mortal sin. Nether let them think, that equivocations, mental
reseruations, or such other suttleties, and devises, will excuse them before
God Almighty.

COMMANDMENT IX.
66. DEclare the ninth Commandment. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife?
This commandment forbids the desire of an other man's wife, (and the same
is to be understood in respect of women, of another woman's husband) although it
were with intention to marry her. And Allmighty God did forbid this, chiefly in
regard of the Jews, who had in certain cases permission to repudiate their
wives; least that some of them, who had a desire to marry another man's wife,
should upon that permission, procure her to be separated from her husband.
Wherefore we are forbidden by this commandment, to wish in our hearts that
another ma^s wife, were not his wife, though it were to the end, that we might
marry her.

67. Wherein does this commandment differ from the sixth?
In the sixth commandment, all those things are forbidden, that are directly
against chastity: but in this commandment, is forbidden a thing, which is
directly against Charity, by desiring that our neighbor were deprived of his
own, to the end, that we might enjoy it.

68. What are we commanded by this precept?
Every one is commanded to be content with those lawful pleasures in this
world, which are conformable to the state he lives in: for whereas God, out of
his secret providence, does impart to some in this world, a more pleasant, and
delightful life, then to others, as well in body, as in mind, and also in
spirit, and in spiritual things; every one ought to thank God for his own,
and to rest satisfied with it.

69. Who transgress against this commandment?
First, all those men, who do envy other men for their wives, and all those
women, who do envy other women for their husbands.

Secondly, all those, who do envy other men for any qualities, virtues,
offices, charges, or dignities, whereof they cannot, or ought not to be
deprived, during their lives, do offend indirectly against this commandment;
and especially, if their envy does concern Ecclesiastical Prelacies, and
Pastorships; for Bishops, and Pastors, are spiritually espoused to their
Churches.

Thirdly, all those, who desire any of the former things inordinately,
although it be without envy to their neighbor.

70. What is it to desire a thing inordinately?
It is to desire a thing, contrary to the rule of reason, and the law of Jesus
Christ; as those do, who desire worldly honors, beyond their deserts; and also
those, who desire temporal things, merely for their own interest, and to
satisfy their greedy appetite, without thinking of making use of them, for Gods
honor, and glory.

COMMANDMENT X.
71. DEclare the tenth Commandment. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors goods.
It forbids us, to desire with an auaritious appetite, the goods of our
neighbor, in any manner whatsoever to his loss, although we should desire,
that we could possess the^ legally, and lawfully; for as we should be loath,
that another man should have any design upon our goods, or envy us for them,
or desire that they could deprive us lawfully of that, which we do lawfully
possess; no more ought we to have design upon the goods of other men, or
envy them for them, or desire that we could deprive them lawfully to their
own loss, of that which they do lawfully possess.

72. How is this Commandment different from the seventh?
The seventh forbids only injustice, that we should not desire our
neighbors goods, without a just title: but this forbids all
uncharitableness proceeding from avarice, that we may not so much as wish we
had a just title, thereby to accommodate our selves, by our neighbors
incommoditie.

73. Why is this a different commandment from the former, since that both do
concern a desiring of that, which belongs to our neighbor?
The reason is, because in this, is forbidden only the desire of our neighbors
goods, now his wife does belong unto him more nearly, then his goods, by a
special union, whereby the husband and his wife, are but one flesh; and
therefore there is a special deformity, in coveting our neighbors wife, and
in desiring her to be separated from her husband; and especially now in the law
of grace, where the mystery of the Church united to Christ, is signified by
the union of marriage betwixt man and wife, which union cannot be dissolved
now, but by the death of one party.

Howsoever, I know that some do join these two commandments into one, and
divide the first into two, but that division is contrary to S. Augustines
opinion, which is for the present, the more common, and generally received in
the Church, and agrees with that division of the commandments, which we have
here set down.

74. Who transgress against this Commandment?
All those, who envy another for his riches, honors, preferments, praises, or
any other, external goods.

All those, who envy a man for his knowledge, learning, beauty, or any other
internal gift of nature, or grace.

All those, who do deliberately desire any of these things, merely out of
appetite, without any further end tending to God his honor, do likewise offend
against this commandment; which forbids us all inordinate appetite of
profitable things; as the former commandment forbids us all inordinate
appetite of delightful or pleasing things.

75. Is then this inward appetite, or desire, always a sin?
Yes; when it is accompanied with deliberation: for there are three inward acts
in man, by which, as by degrees, we descend to sin, that is, suggestion,
delectation, and consent. The first, which is a proposition of some evil
object made unto us by the Devil, or the flesh, or the world, is never any
sin in it self, though the motions of our fancy be never so violent, if our
will do not accompany them, unless they did proceed through our own fault, or
negligence, as when one did foresee the danger of having such motions, and did
not avoid the occasions, or neglected to prevent them, when he might have done
it. The second, which is an act, whereby our senses, and fancy, are fixed with
pleasure, and content, upon the proposed object, is sometimes a sin, as when
our reason does admonish us, of the complaisance we take in the object, or of
the danger we put ourselves into, of giving a perfect consent to it, and yet we
neglect to reject it; which admonition of reason, is called deliberation, which
is sometimes perfect, sometimes imperfect, and without which, the delight it
self, that follows the first motions or suggestio^s, is no sin. The third,
which is an act of the will embracing, after perfect discourse, the proposed
object, or the pleasure it causes, is always a sin. And so this third, as
also the second act, so far forth, as it is done with deliberation, and the
first likewise, when it happens through our own fault or negligence, are the
things expressly forbidden by these two commandments.

76. Is it not a sin also, to desire inwardly to do any thing, that is
forbidden in the other commandments, although we should not do the act itself?
Yes, and the transgression is against that commandment, in which the thing
desired is forbidden: and the same is to be said of purposing not to do what is
commanded. And so those do deceive themselves to their own perdition, who
having had a resolution to commit a mortal sin, as to steal, to commit
fornication, to swear, to kill, not to hear Mass on a Sunday, or the like,
do neglect to confess these thoughts, because afterward they did not put
these purposes in execution, or because no outward act did follow.

77. When, and by whom, were these ten commandments given to man?
First by God himself in the old Law, and afterward, for as much as concerns
the moral part, they were confirmed by Jesus Christ in the new, who abolished
only the ceremonial part of the old Law: and therefore the ten commandments
remain entire, for as much as concerns the moral part: for our Savior
says of himself, that he came not to take away the Law, but to fulfill it.
And before both these laws, God Allmighty had likewise imprinted the substance
of them, in the heart of man, by the light of reason, when he first created him.

78. Has no body power to make commandments but only God immediately
himself?
Yes, for as Almighty God has communicated to creatures, and especially to
man, and Angels, his divine perfections, according to their capacity,
distributing some to one, and some to others; so also, amongst the rest of his
excellencies, he has communicated to some the power of making commandments,
and governing others.

LESSON XVIII. Of the commandments or Precepts, of the Church.
1. TO whom has God communicated this power?
To all our superiors, both temporal, and spiritual.

2. Are we obliged then to obey them, and to keep their commandments?
Yes, no less then we are bound to keep the commandments of God, because
this power of making commandments, is derived to men from God himself,
particularly the power of the Pastors of the Church, of whom our Savior
himself speaking tells us, that those who hear them, hear him; and those
who despise them, despise him.

3. Has the Church put this her power of making commandments in execution?
4. Yes, she has done it, and does doc it daily, upon several occasions, as
she sees it to be necessary for the good of the faithful.

4. How many kinds of precepts, be there?
They are commonly divided into two kinds: the first are called affirmative,
which are, all those, that command us the doing of some thing, as the precept
of attention, and devotion at Mass, and such like: the second are called
negative, which do not command a thing to be done, but forbid us the doing of
some thing; as to read, or keep heretical books, and the like.

5. Which be the commandments of the Church?
Amongst diverse others, which concern several particular states of persons,
there be five, which are commanded to all in general.

First, to be present at Mass upon Sundays, and other commanded feasts, and
also to abstain from servile work on the said feasts.

Secondly, to fast the Lent, the four Ember weeks, and commanded eues of
feasts; and to abstain from flesh upon Fridayes, and Saturdayes.

Thirdly, to confess at the least once a year; and to receive the blessed
Sacrament at Easter, in our proper parish Church.

Fourthly, to pay out tithes, which shall be due.

Fifthly, not to solemnize marriage within the prohibited times.

6. Are the precepts of the Church, different from the former commandments of
God?
They are not different in effect, they being all contained under that one,
wherein Allmighty God does expressly command us to obey, and honor our
father, and mother; by which he does sufficiently oblige us, to obey the
Church, we being her children, and she our parent, and chief mother. Besides,
that they serve as declarations of Gods commandments, and as peculiar rules
for their more exact, and punctual observation. And so they are not to be
accounted as burdens to the faithful, but as convenient means, to make them
keep exactly God his ten Commandments.

7. How does the first precept of the Church serve for this end?
By showing us the manner, how we ought to fulfill God his third commandment:
for the light of nature does only teach us, that we ought to give some time
particularly to God his service; but how much time, or what time rather then
another, and in what manner, does depend upon the positive institution of the
Church: and so (as I noted above) the Apostles have changed the Sabbath, into
our Lords day, which is the day following. Now the Church has determined the
manner, by appointing us to hear Mass: and concerning the time, she has also
ordained feuerall festival days, besides our Lords day; and she has made
choice of those days, on which Allmighty God did work the principal
mysteries of our faith, or did confer, by means of his servants some
singular benefits to his Church.

8. How does the second precept serve for this end?
It helps us to observe the sixth Commandment, by mortifying our flesh, and
diminishing our sensuality.

9. Why does the Church make choice of those times, rather then others to fast
on?
The reason of it is, first as for Lent, because it was instituted by the
Apostles, to imitate our Savior, in his fast of 40 days. Ember days were
also instituted by the Apostles (at least the three first) to consecrate the
seasons of the year to God. The eues of feasts are ordained by the Church, to
make us more fit to serve God the next day following: Fridayes and Satturdayes
are observed by abstinence, in memory of our Saviors passion, who dyed on
Friday, and lay buried all Satturday.

10. Is it a mortal sin, not to observe the fasting days ordained by the
Church?
Yes, except they be excused by some necessary impediment, which, for the most
part, may be reduced to four heads, poverty, sickness, imbecility of body,
and extraordinary labor of the body. By the first, beggars are excused, and
all that have not means to get daily one entire meal: by the second, those
sick are excused (by license obtained from their Curate) whom the Physician
shall judge unable to fast: by the third, all persons under twenty one
complete, or above threescore and three years of age begun, are likewise
excused, as also women great with child, and nources: by the fourth, are
excused laboring men, and tradesmen, who are forced to gain their living by
the sweat of their bodies. Yet it is to be noted, that all these persons are
not excused from abstaining from flesh, though they be permitted to eat two
meals a day.

11. Are all fasts to be observed in the same manner?
No, for in Lent it is forbidden not only to eat flesh, but also to eat eggs,
and in some places white meats; which notwithstanding are permitted on other
fasting days: but the rule to be observed in this point, is the custom of the
country. That which is to be observed in all fasting days, is, that we eat
but one entire meal a day, and that at night we rest satisfied with a small
collation, or drinking.

12. What does the third precept of the Church serve for?
It helps us to observe all the ten commandments in general; for whereas it
consists of two parts, to confess, and to communicate, by confession we are
purged from our sins, and so have less occasion to fall again, for nothing
does draw to sin more then sin it self: by the holy communion we receive
strength to perform all that, which we are obliged to do in serving God.

13. Who are obliged to confession?
All those, that are come to the use of reason, which is ordinarily conceived
to be at eight years of age: and it is to be noted, that the Church does not
by this precept of confessing once a year, take of the obligation that every
man may have of confessing oftener.

14. What occasions be they, that oblige a man to confession, oftener then once
a year?
First, it must be supposed, that none are obliged, but such as are in mortal
sin: amongst whom, first those are obliged, who by sickness, or by reason of
some other accident, are in imminent danger of death; as those are reputed to
be, who are to undertake any long voyage at sea, or who are in the wars, and
do undergo any actual service with danger of being killed, as also women that
are ready to labor with child, and the like. Secondly, those, who are to
receive the blessed Sacrament, are also bound to go first to confession, in
case they be in mortal sin. Thirdly, those, who having committed any mortal
sin, do suspect that by deferring their confession, they shall not remember
it, are bound to confess it speedily.

15. Who are obliged to communion?
All those, who are of age sufficient to discern the greatness of this
mystery, which is conceived to be ordinarily when one is 12 years old. And it
is to be noted, that by Easter, is understood the eight days following, and
the eight days precedent to Easter day: and also, that those who communicate,
are bound to be fasting, that is, not to have eaten, or drunk any thing after
midnight, except it be in case of extreme sickness judged such by Physicians.

16. Ought one to communicate as often as he goes to confession?
In the first above named cases, he is bound to communicate, when he
confesses, if he has opportuny: but ordinarily speaking, every man would do
well to confess oftener, then he communicates, especially those, who for want
of actual devotion, or through spiritual slothfulness, communicate very
seldom: and if they fall often into mortal sin, they ought to prepare
themselves by doing worthy fruits of repentance (whereof I shall speak in the
Sacrament of Penance) for some time, before they communicate: for by virtue of
the Sacrament of Penance of ten reiterated, being joined with the worthy
fruits of repentance, they will afterward communicate more worthily.
Wherefore I should advise those, who communicate but once a year, to confess
at least every three months once; and those who communicate every quarter, to
go to confession at least once a month; as others, who go to communion more
frequently, would do well to confess more frequently, it having been the
practice of many holy Saints, to confess daily, though they did sometimes
abstain from communion.

LESSON XIX. Of the three Evangelical Counsels.
1. IS there no more required for the practice of charity, but only to observe
the commandments of God, and his Church, and other superiors?
Whosoever does this, has (as we have said) an assured mark of charity, and
therefore it cannot be doubted, but that he has charity, in some measure. Yet
every one, that observes the commandments, has not charity in the same
measure: for he, who observes them so, as not to break them in any matter of
weight, which makes a mortal sin, remains in charity; but for the
perfection of charity, there is required a more exact performance of them, and
especially of that great precept contained in the first commandment, of
directing all our actions, and thoughts, to God his honor, and glory; the
mark whereof is, when we do avoid even venial sins, so far forth as the
condition of humane frailty will permit us: for although these smaller
offenses, do not deprive us of the grace of God, yet they are ungrateful, and
displeasing to him, because they do entrench in some sort upon his
commandments, by hindering us from performing them readily and with alacrity,
and by bringing us into danger of breaking them grievously. Now as we see that
one who, loves his friend entirely, will not only do what he commands, but
he will do it also with alacrity, and use the best: means he can for that end;
so shall we do the like toward God, if we love him fervently.

2. How shall we know, which be the means to attain to this perfection?
We may know this, by looking upon the life of our blessed Savior, and by
seeing what things those were, which he exhorted those to, who were nearest
about him; for certainly seeing that out Savior came to teach us, not only
perfection itself, but also the means to attain unto it, and this by making
himself our pattern, that is, by leaving unto us an example in his own life,
for us to imitate; there can be no doubt, but that those things, which he
himself embraced for our instruction, and which he inured his most familiar
friends unto, are the most efficacious means, to attain to the height of
Christian perfection.

3. Where shall we find these things?
We shall find them at large, in the four Euangelifts, who writ the life of
our blessed Savior; and for that reason, they are called the Evangelical
counsels; and the practice of them, is called particularly the imitation of
Christ.

4. How many be the Evangelical counsels?
There be very many set down in the Gospel, whereof there are three which
are the principal, called voluntary poverty, perpetual chastity, and entire
obedience, of which the religious orders do make their essential vows: and by
them they are mainely assisted to extirpate those three pernicious roots, from
which most sins do proceed, to wit luxury, avarice, and pride.

5. What is meant by the counsel of Poverty?
We understand by it, a voluntary renouncing all worldly wealth: a thing which
our Savior did teach, both by word, and example; and after him, the holy
Apostles followed it, and the first Christians did practice it at Jerusalem,
in the primitive Church.

6. Wherein does consist the counsel of perpetual chastity?
It consists in a resolution to abstain perpetually, not only from all sorts
of carnal sin, but even from lawful marriage it self; which also our
Savior Christ did both teach, and practice.

7. Wherein consists the counsel of entire obedience?
It consists in renouncing our own proper will, and judgment, which in holy
scripture is called the denying of our selves, by submitting our selves, to the
will of a superior, for the honor and love of God: which counsel our Savior
not only taught by word, but also by perfect example, submitting himself for
so many years to his mother the blessed Virgin, and to S. Joseph his supposed
father on earth.

8. What fruit, and profit, is there gotten, by observing these holy counsels?
They mainely help to take away the impediments of Christian perfection, which
consists in charity; the impediments whereof are chiefly three, to wit, the
love of temporal goods, which is taken away by poverty; the love of carnal
pleasures, which is taken away by chastity; and finally the love of worldly
honor, and power, which is taken away by obedience. Moreover, whereas a man
has but three sorts of goods, a soul, a body, and his exterior wealth, by
giving his exterior goods to God by poverty, his body by chastity, and his
soul by obedience, he makes a perfect sacrifice to God, of all he has; and
thereby, disposes himself to the perfection of charity, in the best manner
that in this life is possible.

9. Were these three Evangelical counsels given to all Christians in general?
Yes, for although the embracing of them by vow, and in that manner, as we
have declared them here, belongs properly to Religious men, whereby they are
afterward tied to them, no less then if they were precepts, and so are
obliged to perform them more strictly then others are: yet all Christians are
called to that perfection, which is attained by these three Evangelical
counsels, and consequently ought to practice actually these three virtues,
poverty, chastity, and obedience, in some measure proportionable to the state,
and condition in which they live; as poverty, by giving actually part of their
goods to the poor, and by enduring with patience, and alacrity, the want of
such commodities, which they themselves have need of: chastity, by moderating
the use of lawful marriage: obedience, by submitting themselves to the
direction of some prudent and devout person, and by yielding in indifferent
things, to the will, and judgment of others, with whom they co^uerse,
mortifying thereby their own will, and proper inclinations. For since these
are means to attain to perfection of Christianity, Christ, who bids all
Christians without exception, to be perfect as his Father is in heaven, does
also propose to all, the practice of these his holy counsels, which are the
means, that all, who will attain unto perfection, have need to practice in
some degree or other: so that there is no Christian, whom these holy counsels
do not concern. And whereas their condition of life, will not permit laymen,
to practice actually these counsels, in that latitude, as Religious men do;
yet if they will attain to that height of perfection, which Christ calls
every Christian unto, they ought, in affection of mind, to embrace them in
their full latitude, by withdrawing their hearts from those things, which
their state of life does oblige them to possess and make use of. And by doing
this, although by reason of their vocation they be hindered, and disenabled from
the actual execution of the said counsels, and consequently are not in so
perfect a state of life, yet they may attain to as great perfection of
sanctity, as the most holy Religious men, who do actually forsake all, and
possess nothing. I say not this, as if the state of Religion, were not to be
honored, and esteemed above the state of ordinary Christians, since that by
observing strictly the three Evangelical counsels, whereunto Religious men
have tied themselves by vow, the perfection of charity is not only more easily
attained, but also for the most part more perfectly practiced, then it is by
laymen: but what I say, is to the end, that those who live in the world, may
know the dignity of that state, whereunto they are called, when they are
baptized, and consequently that they do not neglect to aspire to that height of
perfection, whereof all Christians are capable, notwithstanding their secular
vocations, and conditions wherein they live. And it is to be noted, that even
laymen themselves, may sometimes be obliged to practice actually these
Evangelical counsels, no less then if they were precepts: for as we are
bound under pain of mortal sin, to undergo austere mortifications, when we
find them absolutely necessary, to withdraw us from mortal sin; so if a man
find, that the possessing of riches, honors, pleasures, and other worldly
things, do absolutely hinder his salvation, he is bound by his solemn promise
made to God in baptism, to forsake, and renounce them all.

LESSON XX. Of the four Moral, or Cardinal Virtues.
1. WHat is left in man's nature, after his fall, whereby to concur with God
his grace, and by the assistance of it, to observe the commandments, and to
practice charity with perfection?
They are principally two things, free will, and the light of reason, or first
principles of the four Moral Virtues, commonly called Cardinal.

2. What is virtue?
It is a quality in the soul, which makes a man good; for as science makes
a good scholar, and art a good artificer, so virtue makes a good man, and
causes him to do that, which is good, with readiness and facility?

3. How many virtues be there?
They are all reduced to seven, to wit, the three Theological Virtues, faith,
hope, and charity, of which we have spoken already; and the four Moral
Virtues, of which we are now to treat, to wit, Prudence, Justice, Fortitude,
and Temperance: so that he who has these seven qualities, is a perfect good
man.

4. Why are the three first called Theological?
Because their principal object is only God himself, for the object of faith,
is Gods veracity, or infallibility in speaking truth: the object of hope, is
Gods infinite inclination to do good to all: the object, of charity, is Gods
infinite perfection, whereby he is worthy of all love.

5. Wherefore are the other Virtues called Moral?
Because they concern the manners, or behavior belonging properly to the
actions of man, only as he is man, from the Latin word Mores, which signifies
manners.

6. Why are they called Cardinal?
Because they are the hinges, on which all other Moral Virtues depend.

7. How do these four Virtues help us to practice charity?
By inclining us to give to God, to our neighbor, and our selves, that which
is each ones due; for all virtue is reduced to these three heads. And to begin
with our selves; since that we are created to a determinate end, and so
directed to some determinate actions; these actions depend of two principles;
the first, not to prefer a lesser good before a greater; the second, not to
choose a greater harm before a lesser. Now the first is done by Temperance, by
which we abstain from a lesser good, to get a greater.

8. What then is Temperance?
Temperance is a virtue, which rules the appetite and brideleth our sensual
delights, and makes a man content to moderate himself in them, in that
manner, as reason requires, that is, according to the former principle. And it
is divided into diverse sorts, and kinds, according to several matters, in
which it is employed; for tempera^ce toward women, is called chastity; in
drink, and meat, sobriety; in action, modesty, etc.

9. By what virtue do we abstain from choosing a greater harm, before a
lesser?
By Fortitude; for we cannot abstain to choose a greater harm, before a
lesser, when one is necessary, but by undergoing the less harm, that we may
avoid the greater?

10. What then is Fortitude?
Fortitude is a virtue, that moderateth the irascible power, according to
reason, and so it helps us to overcome those difficulties, which require
courage in choosing one harm, to avoid another, according to the former
principle. And it has diverse kinds, for Fortitude in an action full of
difficulty, is called courage; in suffering, patience; in length, perseverance;
in war, valor, etc.

11. What is the virtue, by which we give to our neighbors that which is their
due?
It is Justice; for whereas our neighbors are either our equals, our betters,
or our inferiors: to our inferiors we owe love, and to be ready to do them
any good we can, as others our betters have done, and daily do for us: to our
equals, the same in substance, although in another degree: and to our
superiors, and betters, duty and obedience; all which is done by Justice?

12. What then is Justice?
Justice is a virtue, whereby the will of man is so ordered, as to give to
every one his due, and so it is the foundation of peace, and quietness amongst
men. And the several kinds of it are these; Justice toward our country and
parents, is called piety; toward laws, and superiors, obedience; toward our
equals, and inferiors, in honor, courtesy; in words, affability, etc.

13. What is the virtue, by which we give to God, what is due?
It is also Justice; and because God is essentially our superior, we have an
essential tie to him, and a greater obligation to obey him, then any other,
and so it is called Religion, or Devotion, from the Latin words Religare,
which signifies to tie and bind fast, and Deuouere, which signifies a
solemn bequeathing of onesselfe, to an other. And so we see, how these three
virtues make a man's affections right, in order to perform humane actions.

14. What then is Prudence necessary for?
It is necessary for all the three former virtues, for although a man have his
affections right, yet if he has not skill to carry things well, his action
will oftentimes not correspond to his affection, and so in the whole, be
naught: now this skill in humane actions, is had by Prudence.

15. What is Prudence?
It is a virtue apt to direct man's understanding, in showing the due of every
action, as also the right means how to do it, according to the proportion of
man's knowledge; and therefore it is fitly compared to the other three virtues,
as salt is to meat, or as the su^ne to the world. And so you see, how the
whole man is ordered by these four Moral Virtues, his understanding by
Prudence, his will by Justice, his irascible power by Fortitude, and his
concupiscible power by Temperance.

16. But since many men have little knowledge, and so want that skill, which is
called Prudence, ought such men to have a scruple of the actions which they do?
Truly, though it is certain, that not any action done without skill, can be
completely good; yet they need not make scruple of what is passed, because they
did their endeavor: but before the action be done, they ought to ask some
body that knows; but if they cannot ask, or, when they have asked, find no
body that can tell, they may do what they think best themselves; and whether
they miss or no, never make scruple of it, as long as they are sure, that no
ill affection was guide in their choice, but that it proceeded out of the love
of God, and a good conscience.

17. But what if the actions of those four Moral Virtues, are done with
skill, but without charity, are they then naught?
No; for although they be not absolutely good, yet they are not naught, because
they have in themselves a kind of good: for as in a fair picture, garden, or
house, or any such thing made by art, there is left in them from the Artist an
impressio^ of reason, that makes them delightsome, and conformable to our
nature; so also is there an impression of reason called decorum, or honestas,
in moral actions, which gives content both to the doer, and spectatour, and
enticeth moral men to do such actions, as being conformable to man's nature.
But to make them absolutely good, and meritorious, they must be done for the
love of God; for unless we love God, no action will avail us any thing,
toward our last end, so that charity is all in all. And thus you see, how
these four Moral Virtues, do help us to observe the commandments, and how
by observing the commandments, we live a virtuous and Christian life.

18. What is a christian life?
It is the practice of the three Theological Virtues chiefly, and consequently
of the four Cardinal Virtues, that is of all virtues, through the spirit of
charity, which gives life to all the rest.

19. Why do you say, chiefly the three Theological Virtues?
Because, those three virtues do co^pound, or constitute peculiarly the state
of a Christian; for the four Moral Virtues, are common to all men, and may be
found now and then in Gentills themselves, as well as in Christians, as
depending on the principles of nature; but the other three are supernatural,
and proper only to Christians.

20. Why do yon say that charity gives life to all the rest?
Because to live, is to have power in it self to move, or stir it self; now
charity is that, which moves us to walk toward God, and gives us power, by
all other virtues, to tend toward him, love being that, which moves all
reasonable creatures to action. Besides, the love of God, is the immediate step
to heaven, which is our everlasting life; and so whatsoever takes away from us
the love of God, brings death to our souls in lieu of life; and therefore no
action can have life, where the love of God is wanting.

LESSON XXI. Of the state of Grace.
1. Why do those three virtues faith, hope, and charity, constitute the state
of a Christian?
Because by them a man is made capable to perform all the functions, and acts,
which, we said do belong properly to a Christian.

2. Are we then in this state, though we be sleeping, or not doing those acts?
Yes, if we have the virtues, by which they are done; for this state does not
consist properly in the acts themselves, but in the habit, whereby we are
enabled to produce such acts.

3. Why so?
Because a state, does signify a permanencie, whereas our acts, as soon as
they are done, remain no longer as act, but the habitudes, or virtues remain
still within us.

4. Are all these three virtues necessary to constitute this state?
Yes, for as the understanding, memory, and will, do constitute the natural
being of our soul; so do these three virtues constitute her supernatural
being; for by faith, our understanding is perfected; by hope, our memory; and
our will by charity: yet it does consist chiefly in charity, both because (as
has been said) charity is the mistress, and life of the other two, and also
because charity is never found without the other two, whereas the other two are
sometimes without charity.

5. How is this state called?
It is called the state of grace, for the same virtue has diverse names; as it
moves us to action, and to produce acts of love, it is called charity; as it
is the consummation of our spiritual life, and constituteth the state of a
Christian, it is called grace, inherent justice, habitual grace, sanctity, all
with signify the same thing; and if they be not charity it self, at leastwise
they cannot be separated from it, not it from them.

6. Why is it called a state?
First, because it exempteth a man out of the slavery of sin, and puts him
into that condition of spiritual freedom, which is proper to the children of
God. Secondly, because it is the chiefest end of God his providence toward his
elect in this life, and so those, who have it, are said to be in the state of
grace, because they are arrived to that happy condition, which God intended to
work in them by all his former motions, and divine inspirations. Thirdly it is
called a state, because, by it we have a permanent title in us to God his
continual assistant grace, as children have a peculiar title to be continually
assisted, and aided by their parents. Yet you must note, that it is called a
state, only improperly, and in a large sense, because immobility is a condition
requisite to a state, properly speaking; whereas these virtues are not in us so
firmly, but that we loose them again.

7. Why is it called grace?
Because, when it is first given to us, it is bestowed upon us merely through
Gods mercy, without being due to us, by any precedent deserts of our own. And
also, because it is the beauty, and orname^t of our soul, whereby we become
graceful in the sight of God.

8. Why is it called inherent justice?
Because it is a quality, inherent, or permanent in our souls, whereby we are
truly justified, and cleansed from sin, and acknowledged, and owned by God,
as his adoptiue children.

9. Why is it called habitual grace?
Because, as a habit of any virtue, does beget in us, a facility to produce
acts of the same nature, so does this divine quality enable us to produce acts
of grace, that is, supernatural acts grateful in the sight of God, and
meritorious of eternal bliss.

10. Why is it called sanctity?
Because, by it we are sanctified formally: and also, because by it the holy
Ghost himself, does truly inhabit in us.

11. How does the holy Ghost inhabit in us by sanctifying grace?
First, by diffusing into our hearts the sanctifying grace it self; and
secondly, by communicating to our souls his divine and supernatural gifts,
which do flow from this sanctifying grace, as from the fountain of all
righteousness, and good in us.

12. Which be the gifts of the holy Ghost?
They are chiefly seven, to wit, wisdom, understanding, counsel, fortitude,
knowledge, piety, and the fear of God.

13. What fruit do we receive by these gifts?
They serve us as so many helps, to make us practice all other virtues with
perfection; for by understanding, we are elevated to penetrate with a more
lively apprehension the mysteries of our faith; by knowledge, we are
instructed, how these mysteries do tend to Gods honor, and lead us to our
own final end; by wisdom, we are enabled to discern the motions of God his
holy inspirations; by counsel, how to direct, and order our lives by them,
against the deceits of the devil, the world, and the flesh; so that by these
four gifts, our understanding is fully perfected in the way of grace. Piety
does perfect our will, and moves it to perform readily our duty toward God:
fear does bridle our co^cupiscible appetite, and holds us from being led
away by worldly pleasures: fortitude does strengthen our irascible power, to
put in execution whatsoever does tend to Gods glory, notwithstanding any
apparent dangers, that may present themselves.

The same seven gifts may likewise be declared in this manner: that first, by
the gift of fear, we are brought to repentance; repentance opening our eyes
draws us to love, and begets piety; piety brings the gift of knowledge;
for he who loves one, desires to know his will, thereby to please him;
fortitude follows knowledge; for he who wants strength, and courage, cannot
execute what he knows; and least the devil should deceive us more by craft,
then force, by filling our souls with scruples, the holy Ghost does give us
the gift of counsel, to discern true good, from apparent; next after this
(which is the highest gift of the active life) the holy Ghost does raise us up
to contemplation, by the gift of understanding; whereby we penetrate the
obscure, and sublime mysteries of faith, in a more perfect manner then
ordinary; and lastly, by the gift of understanding, we arrive to the gift of
wisdom, by apprehending God lively, as our last and supreme end, to whose
honor and glory all things are to be directed; so that we seem to enjoy him
in some manner here on earth.

14. A man then, by sanctifying grace; becomes learned and wise?
Yes, but it is not in the learning, and wisdom of the world, but in the
wisdom of God, which is the true wisdom, so that the silliest woman in the
world, if she has but this divine grace, and a will to keep it, is truly more
wise, and more learned, then the greatest scholar, or the greatest politician,
who has not this grace, for the wisdom of the world, before God is esteemed
mere folly.

15. Are there no other gifts of the holy Ghost, but only these seven?
Yes; all other spiritual aduancements, are his gifts, but these seven are
chiefly named such, because they enable us, to make the true use of all
virtues, and are given us, when he himself dwells in our hearts by charity.

16. Are not all these graces, as also charity it self, given to us by the
first, and second person of the blessed Trinity, as well as by the holy Ghost?
Yes; but they are attributed peculiarly to the holy Ghost, because, as he is
produced by an act of love, so is God his fervent love toward us the cause of
all his graces bestowed on us: and also, because the chief of them is charity,
which is love it self.

17. Does sanctifying grace bring all other gifts with it, as well as these
seven?
Yes; all that are necessary, or convenient for us; for by it, we are made the
adoptiue children of God, whereby every one partaketh of all those graces,
which are requisite for his own vocation, or condition of life: so that
sanctifying grace is our whole happiness in this life, and the seed of our
future happiness in the next world; for every one shall receive glory in
heaven, according to the measure of the grace he has gotten in this life.

18. Is there any means then to increase the grace, which is already in our
souls?
Yes; it is increased by every action done by one, in the state of grace, with
the true spirit of charity; and chiefly, by the practice of the eight virtues,
which commonly are called for that reason, the eight beatitudes.

19. Which be these eight beatitudes?
They are these.

1. Blessed are the poor in spirit, because theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
2. Blessed are the mild; because of they shall possess the land. 3. Blessed
are they chat mourn; because they shall be comforted. 4. Blessed are they that
hunger, and thirst after justice; because they shall be filled. 5. Blessed are
the merciful; because they shall find mercy. 6. Blessed are the clean in
heart; because they shall see God. 7. Blessed are the peacemakers; because they
shall be called the sons of God. 8. Blessed are they, that suffer persecution
for justice; because theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
20. Can a man then do any thing, whereby he may deserve sanctifying grace?
No, it is impossible (as I said before) for a man to deserve it absolutely
speaking, that is, to deserve to have it; but when once he has it, he may
deserve the increase of it; for it does so beautify, and strengthen the soul,
as that there is not any one least action, which proccedeth from us, through
the spirit of grace, which does not become meritorious in the sight of God, and
deserve an increase of the same grace, by which it was produced, and also of
the glory, which shall correspond to it in heaven.

21. Can a man know certainly whether he has this sanctifying grace, or no?
All sinners may be sure, that they have it not; but no man can be sure that he
has it; for no man knows, whether he be worthy of hatred, or love: yet some
men may have a probable conjecture, that they are in the state of grace; that
is, such a moral assurance, as may beget a firm hope, though it does not
absolutely take away all doubt; and this all men are bound to have.

22. By what rules may this kind of moral assurance be gathered?
By the same, by which we gather, whether we love God sincerely or no; for
charity is either grace it self, or at least it is always joined with it: but
we may guess chiefly by the fruits it produces; for as when we see any
creature to move, and stir it self, we judge it is alive; but if we see it
not stir, we hold it for dead; so when we see any man do many good works,
and otherwise observe no impiety, or iniquity in him, we have iustreason to
hope, that he is in the state of grace, and that he moves by the life of
charity.

23. From whence proceeds the incertitude of this knowledge?
It proceeds from two heads, first, from the hidden corruption, which lies
in our hearts, and infecteth those actions, which we least suspect: secondly,
from the hidden influences of those motions from God, whereby out actions are
purified, and without which, they are of no value, which are not perceptible to
any, but to God himself.

24. Can a man loose sanctifying grace when once he has it?
Y s; for otherwise all those who are baptized, would, be saved: but alas, it
is easily lost, unless it be kept with great care and watchfullnesse.

LESSON XXII. Of Sin.
1. How is grace lost?
It cannot be lost by any thing, but only by such actual sin, as depriueth
our soul of the love of God.

2. If so, how is it possible to loose grace? for love cannot be lost, but by
hatred, since one contrary is not expelled but by another; and me thinks, no
body can hate God.
If you remember, we said, that he, who loves one, is bound by love to do
good for him, whom he loves, if he can, by performing all that toward him,
which is due unto him; whence it follows, that he who will not do these
things, to which he is bound by love, loses his love: now a man may neglect
to do these things, by loving some other thing, the love whereof hinders
him, from performing what he owes to God: so that you see not only hatred of
God, but also love of such things, as hinder us to do, what we ought to do
in love to God (that is, all which he commands, and is practiced by the three
Theological, and four Cardinal virtues) takes away our love toward him.

3. What then is actual sin?
It is a voluntary thinking, speaking, or doing something contrary to the law
of God: or a voluntary omitting to think, speak, or do something commanded
by the law of God.

4. Is there no other sin, but actual sin?
Yes, there is also original sin, which is that, wherewith we are all borne,
and which comes to us, by inheritance from our first parents Adam and Eve. But
we are freed from this sin, by baptism, when we first receive grace, and it
never returns more.

5. How many sorts be there of actual sin?
Two general ones, mortal, and venial.

6. How can any sin be venial, since that all sin is the neglect of our
duty toward God, and he who neglects his duty, forbeareth to love, and so
loses charity; which loss, as you say, is the death of our soul?
You must know, that though we cannot loose charity, but by neglecting our
duty; yet all neglect of duty loses not charity: for love or charity, is of
its own nature mutual, and therefore we cannot loose it, but that we must
loose also our friend his love toward us; so that we do not loose charity, by
any other neglect, but such as breaks the mutual bo^d of love: if then not
every thing, as the taking of a pin, is a sufficient cause for our neighbor,
to fall out with us, we loose not out love toward him, for taking a pin from
him; but we loose it by those acts only, which are a sufficient cause for
ordinary wise men, to break of conversation, and friendship with us; and not
by what is less then that. And the same may be said of the duty, which we owe
to ourselves, or to Allmighty God; for whereas man owes certain duties to
himself, the neglect of them, may come to be such, as if another man should do
it unto you, you would have just cause to fall out with him; and so, though you
do not fall out with yourselfe, for the like occasion, yet it is not for want
of cause. Again, it may be also so little a neglect, as that it would be
unreasonable for you, to fall out with him; now, this second neglect of your
duty toward your self, is only a venial sin; whereas the former is
mortal. And the same is to be said of misrespect toward God; for if it were
such, as done to one, to whom we owe all that we are, should according to the
rule and decrees of his justice, give him an occasion to break of friendship
with us, it is a mortal sin; if not, a venial.

7. Why are these two kinds of sins so called, one mortal, the other
venial?
Because, by the one we break friendship with God, and so we are deprived of
his grace, and become guilty of eternal damnation, and spiritually dead; for
charity, or the love of God, is our spiritual life; and for this reason, it is
called mortal: by the other, we make no breach of friendship, nor loose God
his grace, or charity by them; and so, because they are such of their own
nature, as that their pardon may be easily obtained, by the works of grace,
which still remains in us, they are called venial.

8. What then is mortal sin?
It is a wilful, and witting transgression, in a matter of weight, against a
known commandment of God, of the Church, or of some lawful Superior. Where
any of these three conditions are wanting, it is at most but a venial sin;
as first, if it be not against a known commandment; secondly, if it be not in
a matter of weight; thirdly, if it be not done with perfect consent, and
deliberation.

9. How many sorts of venial sins be there?
There are three; for some are such, because the kind, or object of them, is
of its own nature, of small consideration, and generally slightly respected by
men: others are such, because they are slight, by reason of the smallness of
the matter; though the deformity of the object, be of a kind in its own
nature considerable: others again are such, because they are performed by
oversight, or without deliberation for if one should kill a man by chance, his
sin might be but venial, or none at all; and yet if afterward, when he did
reflect upon it, he should be pleased with the harm he had done, this
complaisance would be a mortal crime, though the act it self were only
venial, or no sin at all.

10. How many ways is a venial sin made mortal?
Four ways: first, when one commits a venial sin, with such affection,
that he is resolved to commit it, though it were mortal. Secondly, when the
end of doing it, is a mortal sin; as when one tells a slight lie, thereby
to induce one to fornication; the telling of a lie, with this circumstance, is
a mortal sin, though he should not afterward commit fornication. Thirdly,
when one perceives, that by committing a venial sin, he shall give an
occasion to a mortal one, by scandal, or any other way. Fourthly, whenever
one commits that, which in it self is only a venial sin, and yet he
thinks in his conscience, that it is a mortal one.

11. Why is a venial fault called a sin?
Because, although it be not a crime, as mortal sin is, yet it is an offense
against God; and although indeed it does not deprive us of grace, yet it
weakeneth the soul, and puts it in danger to fall into other sins; which
at length will make it fall mortally, and loose God his grace, if it corrects
not it self in time, by due repentance. As a small sickness, by increase,
cause that last; a mortal indisposition, if it be neglected.

12. How many degrees be there of venial sin?
Three, the first by thinking, speaking, or doing something upon a sudden,
but yet without marking fully that he offends God; the second, when he fully
marketh, that he offends venially, and yet continues; the third, when he
both marketh that he offends, and also has some good motion to give over,
but rejects it. The first argues frailty; the second, a neglect of Gods
Majesty, and so is dangerous; the third resists his holy inspirations, and so
is more dangerous, and disposes to mortal sin, from which it differs in
nothing, but only in weightinesse of matter.

13. Which be the sins, which cry to heaven for vengeance? and wherefore do
we say so of them?
They are four, to wit, wilful murder; carnal sin against nature;
oppression of the poor, and chiefly of orpha^s, and widows; and to defraud
servants, and workmen of their wages. They are so called, because their
injustice and vnlawfullnesse, is so manifest, that it cannot be covered, or
hidden by any ignorance.

14. Which be the sins against the holy Ghost? and why are they so called?
They be six, to wit, despair of salvation; presumption of God his mercy, that
is, that he will save us, without our own endeavor, and without good works
done by his grace; to impugn a known truth; to envy another man's grace;
obstinacy in sin; and final impenitence. They are said to be against the
holy Ghost, because they argue in those, who commit them, a present or former
malice deeply rooted in them; for malice is opposite to goodness, attributed to
the holy Ghost. In the same manner, the sin of ignorance, is said to be
against the son of God, to whom wisdom is attributed; and the sin of
frailty, against the Father, to whom power is peculiarly attributed.

15. What is to be understood by saying, that these sins are not pardoned in
this world, nor in the other?
It is as much as to say, that they are hard to be pardoned, because seldom,
and hardly those who fall into them, come unto true repentance. For as when we
say a disease is incurable, we do not intend to affirm, that it cannot by any
means possibly be cured; but only, that it is seldom, and not so ordinarily
to be cured, as other diseases: so we say of these sins, that they are not
pardoned in this, or the next world, because they are seldom pardoned; except
only the last, which is final impenitence, for that is never pardoned at all.

16. What are the most efficacious motives, to keep us from sinning?
Those, which the holy Ghost himself has prescribed in these few words.
Remember the last things, and thou shall never sin.

17. What be these last things?
They are four, Death, Judgment, Heaven, and Hell.

18. Why are these called the last things?
Death is called so, because it is the last thing, that happens to us in this
world. Judgment also is our last sentence, without appeal. Heaven is our last
and final happiness, which the blessed shall enjoy eternally in a most
perfect possession of God. And Hell is the last and greatest misery, without
any release, or change for eternity.

19. What is the root of all sin?
Selfeloue; and from thence springs those other roots noted by S. John,
which are, concupiscence of the flesh; concupiscence of the eyes, by which is
meant the understanding; and pride of life, which may be called concupiscence
of the will: for whereas man does consist of body, and soul; and the soul of
two principal powers, understanding, and will; under these three
concupiscences, is comprehended the whole sinful state of man. And these
again are divided into seven branches, called commonly the seven capital
sins.

20. Which be the seven capital sins, and why are they called so?
They be, Pride, Covetousness, Lechery, Anger, Gluttony, Envy, and Sloth.
They are called capital, because they are heads of many others, which proceed
from them, as branches from their root, and as rivers from their source, and
fountain. For Pride, does incline us to break the first, and fourth
commandment; Avarice the seventh; Lechery, the sixth; Envy, the ninth, and
tenth; Gluttony, the first and sixth; Anger, the second, and fifth; Sloth, the
third: and upon occasions any one of these vices, may cause us to break every
one of the commandments.

Besides, these seven vices are also called the seven deadly sins; because,
whereas all the vicious affections of man, are reduced to these seven heads,
if it chance, that the object of any one of them, be more predominant over our
affection, then the love of God, it puts us into a state of habitual
mortal sin, and depriueth us of God his grace. And although peradventure
such a man may notwithstanding, by reason of his natural inclination, or of
some other more powerful, worldly interest, forbear to commit those gross,
and palpable sins, which such vicious affections do vsualy draw men into; yet
this will not excuse him. As for example, a covetous man, who for fear of the
temporal laws, or for fear of loosing his reputation, or for other worldly
respects, does not commit usury, nor rob, or steal from his neighbor, will
not be saved, if his heart be so set upon riches, as to be wholly occupied in
seeking, and laying up worldly wealth; but this man is of the number of those,
whom S. Paul declares to be excluded from the kingdom of heaven, because,
although he do not steal, nor coozen his neighbor, yet he is truly covetous.
And the same is to be said of those, who set their thoughts, and endeauours
wholly upon honors, vanities, pleasures, feasting, gaming, contentions,
factions, and the like, placing wholly their delight in them: for though the
particular actions of these men, considered singly by themselves, may seem
venial, yet the whole number becomes damnable; because it does argue, that
their affections are placed in those objects, as in their last end, and so they
transgress the first precept. For how can we judge of our affections, but by
our actions? And if these object take up our whole employment, is it not
evident, that they are predominant over our affections; and that it is not God,
but they, that reign in us, as the last and principal end we aim at?
Wherefore, reflecting upon our selves, if we find that our life, actions and
designs, are bent in the bottom of our heart, only upon worldly things, and
that the service of God, and the salvation of our soul, is least in our
thoughts, and the most neglected of all our occupations, certainly we do
grossly deceive ourselves, if, this notwithstanding, we imagine, that we do
love God above all things, or that the love of him is the most cordial love
of all our loves, (as, if we will be saved, it must be, according to that which
has been said Less. 17. Number. 23.) because our understanding does tell us, it
must be so. For this appretiation of love, by which we are bound to prefer
God above all things, does not consist in discourse, but in affection; and the
rule, or mark of our affection, is not our understanding, but (as I said
before) our actions; for the very damned themselves, do know by their
understanding, as well as we, that God is the last end, they ought to adhere
unto.

Now, you will easily understand by this, why Christian people are commonly
instructed to know, which are the seven deadly sins: to wit, that thereby
they may discern the several roots, from whence all their particular
sinful actions proceed, and so when they examine their conscience, see what
passion it was that induced them to sin, that they may by searching
diligently, from what source their sins proceed, cut them of in the root it
self, and by abating those affections, and passions, which are most
predominant in them, avoid the danger of damnation, and eschew those rocks,
against which all the wicked do suffer shipwreck.

21. What means is there to cut of these routes of sin?
By practicing the seven contrary virtues.

22. Which be they?
They are, humility, liberality, chastity, fraternall charity, sobriety,
patience, and diligence.

23. What is the effect of a sinful act?
It has chiefly two effects; the first is called by Divines, Macula, which (if
the act be a mortal sin) makes the sinner abominable, and hateful in the
sight of God; and so depriueth him of God his grace. The second is called,
Reatus poenae, whereby he is guilty of eternal punishment, if the sin be
mortal. And although, when the sin is remitted, the former effect be
perfectly taken away, yet this second effect is not always wholly abolished,
but only lessened, by cha^ging the eternal punishment into temporal; by which
we are to satisfy God his justice, either in this world, by doing worthy fruits
of penance, or in the next, by suffering the most grievous pains of
Purgatory; unless it be remitted us through indulgences granted by the Church.
But nether indulgences, nor other works, will avail us any thing, unless the
sin it self be remitted, and God his grace recovered.

24. May we then recover God his grace, though our sins be never so great?
Yes, for the mercy of God is infinite, and never forsakes us, as long as we
live in this world; but if we dye without grace, it is not recouerable in the
next.

LESSON XXIII. OF the seven Sacraments.
1. WHat be the means, which God has left, to abolish sin, and to recover
grace, when we have lost it?
They are the holy Sacraments of the new law, instituted by Jesus Christ.

2. What is a Sacrament of the new law?
It is an outward, and sensible sign, which has virtue, and efficacy to
sanctify men, and does give them a right to certain special helps of grace,
proper to each Sacrament: which sign represents in some sort, the special
effect of that grace, when rewith allmighty God inuisibly imbueth our souls,
when we receive the Sacrament.

3. What is the difference betwixt Sacraments, and sacramentalls?
Sacraments differ from sacramentalls, because they are the maine instruments
of grace, and cannot be instituted by any, but by Christ himself; whereas
sacramentalls are instituted by the Church, and are only made by certain
blessings, as holy water, and the like, which though they be blessed, yet they
do not produce infallibly the effect, for which they are blessed.

4. What is the difference betwixt the Sacraments in the old law, and the
Sacraments in the now law?
The Council of Florence teaches us, that the Sacraments of the old law, were
only figures of grace to be given by Christ's passion, but they did not cause
grace; whereas the Sacraments of the new law, according to the doctrine of the
same Council, do both contain grace, and also cause it in those, who receive
them worthily. Wherefore you are to understand, that as God Allmighty brought
the Jews to love him, by temporal promises, and rewards, that he might
afterward give them celestial ones; so their Sacraments made them capable
only of temporal blessings, as Circumcision made the Jew to be one, who had
part in the land of promise: their purifications made him to be one, who might
offer Sacrifice, and be heard for obtaining of children, peace, long life, etc.
And therefore they were said to cleanse the body, not the soul; to be empty,
and poor elements. Whereas the new law does bring us to love, and serve God,
by the immediate promise of supernatural rewards; and so the Sacraments of
Christians (if they be worthily received) do give the things themselves, which
these corporal promises did signify, that is, celestial goods; as Baptism,
makes a man, to be one, whose share is in heaven; etc.

5. How many Sacraments be there?
There are seven, Baptism, Confirmation, holy Euchariste, Penance, Extreme
unction, Order, and Matrimony.

6. But what say you to these, who tell us, that t it is no where put down in
scripture expressly, that the number of Sacraments instituted by Christ, is
seven, neither more nor less?
I answer, that it is not also set down in scripture, that there be only two
Sacraments, Baptism, and Euchariste, and no more; or that these very two, be
Sacraments; and yet no man doubts of them. Wherefore, as we gather out of
scripture, that these two be Sacraments, because they have all things
essential to a Sacrament, that is, that they confer grace by an outward
sensible sign; so do we, by the same rule, sinde in scripture, that there are
seven Sacraments, neither more nor fewer. Besides we are assured of the same by
tradition, which is the maine ground of Christian Religion Moreover, do not the
Protestants admit, that there are twelve principal articles of our belief, to
which all the rest are reduced; and yet where do they find this number
expressly in scripture?

7. Were none of these seven Sacraments instituted by man, but all by Christ
himself?
No; not any one of them; for as God alone is the sole fountain of all
justice, grace, and purity, so he has thought good, not to communicate to any,
but to reserve unto his only son, the power to ordain Sacraments, which are
the principal instruments, that produce grace, and purify us from sin.

8. Why did he institute them in the number of seven?
Because our spiritual life, is proportioned to our corporal: now in, our
corporal life, these things are required. First, to be borne, that is to
begin to live. Secondly, to get strength, and greatness, to be able to
overcome such co^trarieties, as would destroy life. Thirdly, to be nourrished,
whereby life is conserved, whilst we perform the actions, for which it was
given us. Fourthly, we have need of physic, in case we be sick. And fifthly
of comfortable diet, to recover strength after sickness. Sixthly, of
preservation, in case of danger to be infected. And lastly, of procreation, to
give life unto others, to succeed in place of those, who dye, that ma^kinde may
not wholly perish. So also in our spiritual life, we are borne by Baptism; and
so are made members of Christ his family: we are strengthened, and get growth
by Confirmation: we are nourished by the holy Eucharist: we are cured of
sickness by Penance: we are freed from the la^guishing, which remains after
sickness, by Extreme unction: we are preserved from infection, by Matrimony,
which belongs properly to married persons, because their state of life, is
exposed to most eminent dangers of the world, and the flesh. By Matrimony also
the Church is still supplied with a new carnal progeny, into which the true
worship of God, may be introduced, and perpetuated. And lastly, by Order, we
are provided of spiritual fathers, who are to multiply spiritually new issue,
by propagating the faith, and making new Christians. To who^ also, as being our
fathers, it belongs to bring us up, govern, and direct us in our spiritual
life. And so we see, how all these seven Sacraments are necessary; the five
first, for every man in particular; the sixth, which is Order, for the whole
body of the Church; and the last, which is Matrimony, for one whole particular
state in the Church, that is for every one, that lives in that state; and
indirectly, or remotely, also for the whole Church.

9. Are all Sacraments of like necessity?
No; for Baptism is absolutely the most necessary; because it is necessary for
all, either in effect, or desire. Next to Baptism, is Penance; for it is also
absolutely necessary, for all such, as after Baptism sin mortally, at least
in desire, if they cannot get it in effect. Order is necessary for the whole
Church: and Matrimony likewise.

10. Are all Sacraments of like excellency?
No; for the Sacrament of the holy Eucharist, is more excellent then the rest
without companion, because it contains Christ himself, and therefore it is
called the holy Sacrament.

11. Into how many kinds are Sacraments divided?
The general division of them, is into two sorts; for some do confer unto
us the first grace, that is do put us absolutely in the state of grace, when we
are out of it; others confer unto us a second grace (for they suppose us to
be in the state of grace) and so do only augme^t the grace, which we have
already. Now Baptism, and Penance, were instituted by Christ, to confer
unto us the first grace; and the other, only to augment grace.

12. Which of the Sacraments is the first in order?
Baptism, for by it we begin to live the life of grace.

LESSON XXIV. of Baptism.
1. What is Baptism?
Baptism is a Sacrament, which Jesus Christ did institute, principally to
cleanse our souls from original sin, with which we are all borne. Wherefore
by the help of this holy Sacrament, we become newborn again into the happy
life of grace, and from accursed children of our first parent Adam, we become
the sons of Jesus Christ, and heirs of eternal bliss.

2. What is the outward sensible sign in this Sacrament?
It is the washing by water, and pronouncing the sacramental words, to wit, I
baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.

3. Where do yon find a promise of grace to this outward sign?
In the last of saint Mark; He who shall believe, and be baptized, shall be
saved. And in the third of S. John; Unless one be borne again of water, and
the holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven.

4. Why are we baptized in water?
To signify unto us, that is the water does cleanse our bodies, so does
Baptism, by the virtue of the blood of Jesus Christ, cleanse our souls, and
wash them from all their sins, both actual, and original.

5. Why are we baptized in the name of the blessed Trinity?
Because the blessed Trinity is the principal object of our faith, whereof
man does make his first profession in this Sacrament, to be thereby received
into the body of the Church.

6. May a man dying without the Sacrament of Baptism, be saved?
Yes, in two cases; first, by suffering Martyrdom for the honor of God,
whereby he is baptized in is own blood; and this is therefore called the
Baptism of blood. Secondly, in case he dye truly contrite for his sins, with
a desire of the Sacrament of Baptism, but is prevented by death, without his
own fault: and this is called Baptismus Flaminis, or baptism of the spirit;
because he receives the grace, and happy effect of the Sacrament of Baptism,
although by accident he be deprived of the outward action of the Sacrament.

7. To what end are Godfathers, and Godmothers appointed in the Sacrament?
They are appointed as spiritual Parents to the Child, for its future
instruction, if need shall require; and also to witness its inrolement into
the happy list of Gods adopted children. Now, out of this obligation of taking
care, that these, who are baptized, be instructed, which Godfathers and
Godmothers do tie themselves unto, it will appear, how this wholesome, and
ancient constitution of the Church, is extremely abused by those Catholics,
who undertake to be Godfathers, and Godmothers to the children of Heretics,
without being first assured, that either they themselves, or others shall be
permitted to instruct them, in the true Catholic Religion; or if having such
assurance, they should after wards neglect to perform the same. As on the
contrary side, it is also a most intolerable abuse, for any Catholic, to
permit an Heretic to be Godfather, or Godmother to his child, since that
heresy does render a man incapable of that office; as also those are incapable
of it, who are excommunicated, or interdicted, or if they be not baptized, or
are ignorant of the rudiments, or first principles of Christian Religion, as
children, fools, mad men, and the like.

8. Cannot the Child's own Parents supply the Godfathers and Godmothers place?
No; the Church does exprssely forbid it, as declaring by this ceremony, the
great difference betwixt the spiritual life of me^, and the corporal life,
which the parents give: whose love and care, is oftentimes more sensual, and
carnal toward their children, then spiritual; in seeking the wordly interest
of their bodies, more then their eternal and spiritual profit.

9. Does the Godfather and Godmother contract by Baptism, a spiritual
affinity, to the party baptized?
Yes; and not only to him, but also to his father, and mother. So likewise he
that baptizeth, is allied to the child, and to his father and mother.

10. How must we come prepared to receive this Sacrament?
The preparation due to infants, resideth in the Church, which supplying their
want of age, does offer them up to Jesus Christ. But those, who are come to the
use of reason, require more; for they must be instructed in the chief
mysteries of the Catholic faith; they must believe them all actually; they
must detest all sin; they must love God actually; they must have a resolution
to live well; they must in fine voluntarily offer themselves to be children of
God by Baptism.

11. What Sacrament folleweth next after Baptism?
Confirmation; for ordinarily according to nature, we must first grow, and get
strength, before we can feed of solid meat, such as is the holy Eucharist,
which the holy Fathers call the meat of the perfect.

LESSON XXV. Of Confirmation.
1. WHat is Confirmation?
It is a Sacrament instituted by Christ, to confer unto our souls, the holy
Ghost, and an increase of our baptismall grace, with a manly strength, to
resist, and encounter courageously with all our ghostly enemies, and to
profess constantly the faith of Jesus Christ.

2. Who are our enemies?
The Devil, the world, and the flesh. The Devil, that is, all the power of
hell. The world, that is, all the contagious infection, which proceeds from
the mutual conversation of men. The flesh, that is, the natural inchnation to
evil, which we all feel within our selves.

3. Who is the holy Ghost, which is conferred by this Sacrament?
He is the third person of the blessed Trinity, with his graces, and gifts.

4. How do we receive him by this Sacrament, seeing that we received grace
before by Baptism?
We receive him here more particularly; because, by this Sacrament, his graces,
and gifts are more radicated in our souls, whereby we become strong, and
vigorous in virtue, by receiving the perfection of Charity: for the ghostly
life, which we receive by Baptism, is but weak, and feeble, in respect of
that improuement, which we receive by Confirmation. And so this Sacrament is
called by the holy Fathers, the accomplishment, and perfection of Baptism.

5. What is the outward sensible sign in this Sacrament?
It is the annoynting with holy Chrisme, by the hands of the Bishop; which is
called in the scripture, the imposition of hands.

6. Where do we find a promise of grace in scripture to this outward sign?
We find it in the 16. Chap. of S. John, where Christ told his Apostles, that
when he went away himself, he would send the holy Ghost unto them. And the
performance of this Sacrament, appears in the act, when the holy Ghost
descended upon the Apostles, and when those, that were baptized, received the
holy Ghost anew, by the imposition of the Apostles hands: which is a sign,
that Christ instituted this ceremony; for it is certain, that the Apostles
could not by such a ceremony have given the holy Ghost, if he had not ordained
it for that end.

7. What is Chrisme?
It is a holy ointment, composed of oil, and baulme: by oil, is represented
the strengch, which we receive by this Sacrament, as soldiers of Jesus Christ:
by baulme, is represented the effusion of all virtues by the holy Ghost into
our soul, which send forth a sweet odor before God and Angels, as baulme
does before men, whereupon S. Paul says, that we are before God the sweet
odor of Jesus Christ. So that, by this Sacrament, we become perfect members of
the militant Church, and receive weapons, and courage to enter confidently into
the battle, which we are to undergo in this world, to receive at last an
eternal crown with Jesus Christ. Which also is signified by the little blow,
which the Bishop gives, when he confirms; by which sign he teaches us, to
begin to suffer with patience, all the encounters, that the enemies of our
soul, and salvation, shall make against us.

8. Why are we anointed in our forehead, when we receive this Sacrament?
To let us know, that the holy Ghost is given unto us by this Sacrament, to
imbolden us, and to expel from us shame, and fear of professing the faith of
Christ, which shame and fear, principally have their seat in the forehead, or
countenance of man.

9. With what preparation ought we to receive this Sacrament?
First we must be baptized, before we receive it. Secondly we must be in the
state of grace; for the preparation required to all Sacraments, that were
instituted to confer only an increase of grace, is, to have the first grace:
and so those, that are in mortal sin, must first receive the Sacrament of
Penance, or at least have an act of Contrition, before they can be confirmed.
And the reason of it is evident; for, as it is impossible, that a dead body
should grow corporally, so it is impossible, that a dead soul should grow
spiritually, unless it be first revived.

10. Are we obliged to receive the Sacrament of Confirmation?
Yes; we are obliged under pain of sin to seek it, and to receive it, if we
can conveniently; for this much at least is gathered out of the holy Fathers,
who say, that without it, we are not perfect Christians, this Sacrament having
been instituted by Christ to confer unto us the plenitude of the holy Ghost,
and the full perfection of Baptism. Besides, the seven Sacraments having been
instituted by Christ, as certain principal knots of Christian life, his very
instituting this a Sacrament, obliges us to make use of it: for institution in
a thing of such weight, is equivalent to a command, and so he, who neglects
to receive it, when opportunity of having it is given, sins. For it would be
a strange kind of spiritual sloth, not to seek, and much more to neglect
that means, when opportunity is offered to receive it, which Christ has
purposely established in his Church, to strengthen, and arm us against our
spiritual enemies; we being on all sides so straightly beset, and infested with
them, during this life; but especially when before persecutours, and Tyrants,
we are obliged to make profession of our faith.

11. Wherefore is it, that this Sacrament, as also Baptism, and holy Order,
cannot be reiterated, or taken again the second time?
It is, because (besides the particular grace proper to each several
Sacrament) these Sacraments have also a second effect, which they cause in our
souls, called by Divines, a Character, that is, a spiritual sign imprinted
in our souls, whereby we are known to belong to Christ Jesus, as persons
deputed to some certain functions in his family.

12. Why do these three Sacraments confer a Character?
Because by these, we are put into several states, or vocations, according to
the several functions, whereunto we are deputed by receiving them.

13. What is a state?
It is an immutable, or perpetual condition of life; whereby a man is
sole^nely deputed, and obliged to some certain acts, and works worthy his
vocation: which is truly to be seen in those, who receive the three mentioned
Sacraments. For by Baptism, we become servants of Jesus Christ, whereby we are
obliged to profess him to be our Master, and to serve him with all duty, and
obedience, as servants do their Masters; and so we receive a character, which
is, as it were, Christ his liuerie, whereby we are known to belong to his
family. By Confirmation, we are made soldiers, to fight in the cause of
Christ, and to follow him, as soldiers do their General; and so we are known
for such, as if it were, by wearing his colors, which is expressed by a
distinct character from the former. By Order, those who are ordained, are
instituted officers to govern, and undergo several charges in Christ his
family; who likewise are all distinguished by several spiritual marks, or
characters, which do always remain in the soul, and cannot be blotted out.

14. Why do not the other four Sacraments confer also characters?
Because, by them a man is not designed for any peculiar function in order to
Christ his family, nor put into any permanent state, but they are given only
for some particular necessity of our own, and are certain means, whereby to
attain unto that perfection, which we are obliged unto by the dates, or
professions, whereunto we do engage ourselves, by the other three Sacraments.
As Penance, for reconciliation; Eucharist, for nouriture; Extreme Unction, to
take away the relickes of sin, thereby to strengthen us against the last
assaults of the Devil; and Matrimony, to enable the married to bear the
burden of wedlock.

15. Why is it sacrilege to reiterate those Sacraments, that confer
characters?
The reason of it is, because by these Sacraments, man makes a gift of
himself, and his service to God, according to the several conditions of the
states, whereunto he is addicted by each Sacrament; whereby he is no more at
his own disposing in that respect: which (as I said before) he does in
Baptism, as a servant, to a Master of a family; In Confirmation, as a
soldier, to his General in an army; In Order, as a married man, to propagate
his Church. Now, no man can give any thing, but that, which is his own, and
therefore he, who has once given himself to God any of these ways, cannot
give himself again to him the same way, that is in respect of the same
service, for which he gave himself before. And so it is a sacrilege to
reiterate these Sacraments; for that were to release a gift, by supposing
himself still free, of which he cannot be released by men, but only by God:
for what is once given, cannot be given again, but belongs to him, to whom
it is given, and not to the giver.

16. Wherefore are Godfathers also appointed in this Sacrament?
To the end, that the confirmed may have instructions, how to weild his
spiritual arms; and also, to let him know, that although he has received the
grace of the holy Ghost, yet he must not be too confident in his own forces,
but that he must humble himself, and harken unto the advice, and instruction
of others, who have more experience then himself, in Christian discipline.

17. Which Sacrament is the next in order after Confirmation?
The holy Eucharist; for nature teaches us, that life cannot be long preserved
in us, without nouriture, through the want whereof, we do by little and little
loose our strength, and at length perish.

LESSON XXVI. Of the holy Eucharist.
1. What is the holy Eucharist?
It is a Sacrament instituted by Jesus Christ, under the outward forms of
bread, and wine, wherein (as under a veil) are contained his true body, and
blood, put there by the words of consecration, that so they may become a sacred
food to nourish us spiritually, and to sanctify both the souls, and bodies of
them, who shall worthily receive them.

2. What is the sensible sign in this Sacrament?
It is the body, and blood of Christ, as they are presented to us, under the
visible forms either of bread, or wine.

3. Where do we find a promise of grace to this Sacrament?
In the sixth of S. John, where our Savior says, that, he who shall eat of
this bread, shall live for ever, and, the bread which I shall give you, is my
flesh for the life of the world. Which places are commonly understood by the
Fathers, to be meant of the blessed Sacrament. And it was first put in
execution by our Savior himself, who gave it to his Apostles, at his last
supper.

4. Are we obliged to receive this Sacrament?
Yes; first, by reason of the institution of it, which (as we said of the
Sacrament of Confirmation) does oblige them, for whom it was instituted, to
receive it; and it was instituted for all, after a certain age. And secondly,
because we are in danger of spiritual death, if we do not receive this
spiritual nourishment often; for every one, that he may live spiritually, has
need to be nourished spiritually: and therefore the Church does command us at
least to receive it once a year.

5. Why was it instituted under the form of bread, and wine?
Because, these foodes are most common, and so most fit for that Sacrament,
which was instituted for all mankind. And also, because bread, and wine, do
signify the substance of all eating, or drinking; they being as it were the
groundworke of all the rest; and so they are most fit to express, that this
Sacrament works the like spiritual effects in the soul, which meat, and
drink work materially in tho body.

6. Does there remain after consecration bread in the host, and wine in the
chalice?
No: for all the substance both of bread, and wine, are taken away, to give
place to the substance of Christ his body, and blood; which only remain there
united to the accidents of bread, and wine.

7. Does the Priest, by communicating under both forms, receive no more, then
he, who receives the Sacrament under the form of bread alone, or of wine
alone?
No: for he who co^municateth under the form of bread alone, or of wine alone,
receives both the body, and blood of Christ; because he receives his living
body, which from the instant of his most glorious resurrection, can never more
be separated from his blood.

8. How possibly can the true and natural body of Christ, be contained within
so small a compass, as is a little piece of bread?
He who told us, that he was able to make a camel pass through a needles eye,
has power also to do this: and as he there tells us, though with men these
things are impossible, yet all things are possible with him, whom we believe
in our Creed, to be allmighty.

9. Is Christ's body, and blood, under every part of the host, as well as
under the whole?
Yes; for as it is defined in the council of Trent, the least part of every
host, and the least part of the consecrated wine does contain all the flesh,
and blood, the body, and the soul, the humanity, and divinity of Jesus
Christ. And the reason of this is, because Christ his body is brought into the
visible element, in lieu of the substance of bread, and therefore it must be in
every part of the element, where it was bread before: wherefore, seeing that
when bread is cut into ten, twenty, or into as many pieces as you will, every
piece is bread; it does follow also, that the consecrated element, being cut
into as many pieces, every piece must be Christ his body; for otherwise,
Christ his body would not be in every part, where bread was: for a leg only,
or an arm, is not Christ his body, no more then one wheel of a clock, is a
clock. From whence it follows, that Christ his body is not divided, when the
visible element is broken, or cut in pieces: for, that which is whole in every
part of the element, cannot be divided, but still remains, when the eleme^t
is divided into parts, whole in each part.

10. Is not Christ his body then by being really in the Sacrament made subject
to receive corporal impressions, as to be burned, annoyed, etc.
No; for as his being whole in every part, (which is done by being deprived of
local extension) makes his body, that it cannot be divided; so it does also
make it, that it cannot receive any corporal action, or impression for there
can be no corporal impression, where there is no local extension. And so,
though men may be irreuerent to the Sacrament, by burning it, or by giving it
to a dog, yet Christ his body is not burned, or torn in pieces; nether is it
annoyed, or disgraced, though it be cast into indecent places, no more then God
is harmed, or disgraced, who by his Godhead is in the same places.

11. Does the communion, or receiving of the holy Eucharist by Laics, belong
to the act of sacrificing?
No; for the act of sacrificing, consists in the Priest his giving, or offering
up the host to God; but the communion is a gift from God to man: for after
that the Eucharist has been offered up by the Priest, to the honor of God, he
does give it to men, to sanctify them, and so God does render to men the same
gift, which men did present unto him.

12. What then is the Communion?
It is not the act of sacrificing, but it is a partaking of the altar, or
Christian sacrifice, after that the host is sacrificed; whereby we receive, or
eat some part of the sacrificed host, as a meat made holy, by having been
offered up to God in sacrifice, in acknowledgement, that we do approve of, and
profess that religion, whereunto the sacrifice belongs.

13. Is it necessary then to receive in both kinds, since both are used in the
Sacrifice?
No; for the Church assures us of the contrary; and this reason may be
alleged, because, to make us partakers of the sacrifice, it if sufficient, if
we receive any part of the host, which is sacrificed; especially in this
sacrifice, where one part does contain as much, as both. Yet the Priest, who
sacrifices, is bound to receive both kinds, because his receiving, is a
consummation of the offering; and so he is bound to consummate in both kinds,
what he offers in both kinds: for, all that, which is offered, must be
consummated, that the sacrifice may be fully accomplished: and because the
consummation of the sacrifice, belongs to the act of sacrificing, from thence
it follows, that the Priest only, to whom alone the act of sacrificing, or
offering, is reserved, and not the Laity, can receive the Sacrament in this
nature, that is, as offering it up to God, in consummation of the sacrifice.

14. What state, and disposition, is required for our worthily receiving this
blessed Sacrament?
It is necessarily required, to be in the state of grace, and to come to the
Sacrament with a reverent, and devout heart; and that we may reap a more full
benefit by communicating, we ought also to avoid actual distractions, whilst
we communicate. Moreover, Sales, the holy Bishop of Geneua, is of opinion, that
it is further requisite for frequent communion, that one should have no
affection to any venial sin, and withal, that he have a great desire, or
spiritual hunger of that sacred food. Now, by affection to venial sins, is
understood a tacit resolution to persist in them, that is, such an adhesion,
or love to them, as makes a man not only to commit them often, but also not to
care, or endeavor to avoid them, being so insensible of their malice, as to
make little or no account of it.

15. Why must we be in the state of grace to receive the holy Eucharist?
Because, the holy Eucharist is of the number of those Sacraments, which were
instituted, not to confer the first grace, but to increase grace already
co^ferred. And the reason of this is, because, to be in the state of grace, is
to be in charity with God, and our neighbor, which is a thing necessary for
communion, considering the nature of this Sacrament: for Christ inuiteth us in
this Sacrament to a banquet; but none use to be invited to banquets, but such
as are his friends, who makes the banquet, and also friends to one an other,
for fear of turning mirth, and love, for which banquets were instituted, into
sorrow, and contention. And for this reason, the ancient Christians, when the
Pax is given in Mass, were wont to kiss one an other, in token of peace, and
charity, and to communicate together. And therefore not without reason, this
Sacrament is called the Sacrament of charity; whereof bread, and wine are also
emblems, signifying that our wills ought to be one and the same, firmly united
by love, as thousands of corns, or grapes are fast together in one loaf, or
one cup of wine.

16. Why is so perfect a disposition required for frequent communion, as that
one should not deliberately adhere to any sin, so much as venial?
Because, this Sacrament is a pledge of Gods great love toward us, and the
means which he has chosen to make a perfect friendship with us; and so every
one ought to be more fervent in love, by how much he makes himself more
familiar to this sacred table: and consequently it is requisite, that he should
be free, not only from mortal sin, but also from affection to venial ones;
or if he find himself entangled in such affections, he should at leastwise
come with a spirit, and design to free himself of them.

17. Ought all men to be exhorted to frequent communion?
Yes certainly; for the oftener one communicates, the more grace he
receives, supposing that he comes with that disposition, and reverence, which
behooves those to have, that come frequently to so great a Sacrament. Wherein
this rule in general ought to be observed, that if one finds by experience,
(taking the judgment and advise of his Ghostly father along with him) that
whilst he uses frequent communicating, he makes progress in virtue, in
bridling of his passions, and in diminishing of his affections, even to venial
sins, whereof we spoke before, without diminution of reverence due to the
Sacrament; or if forbearing to communicate so frequently, he finds himself
to decrease in virtue, and in respect toward the Sacrament; then he is to be
exhorted to continue still his custom of communicating frequently. But if he,
who communicates frequently, finds himself still with the same
imperfections, without making any progress in virtue; or that his reverence,
and respect toward the Sacrament, is any way thereby diminished; then he is to
be advised, for a time to forbear to communicate so frequently, and to
endeavor by works of mortification, and other spiritual exercises, to render
himself more worthy of so frequent access to that holy table, until his
Ghostly father shall judge it convenient for him to frequent the Sacrament, as
formerly.

18. What communion ought to be esteemed frequent?
In those persons, who are not subject to the distractions of the world, but
have leisure to dispose of themselves, as they please, and to attend to
spiritual employments, it may be accounted frequent communion, to communicate
constantly once a week: but in others, whose vocation, and condition, does tie
them to worldly employments, and continual distractions, I should esteem it
frequent communion, though they should communicate but once in fifteen days,
or three weeks, unless their continual distractions be supplied by
extraordinary virtue.

19. What Sacrament follows the holy Eucharist?
Penance, for when we are sick, we must first be cured of the disease it
self, before we can use remedies to take away the relickes of it.

LESSON XXVII. Of Penance.
1. WHat is the Sacrament of Penance?
It is a Sacrament instituted by Christ, for the remission of sins committed
after Baptism, whereby they that are baptized, are restored again unto grace,
when by mortal sin they have lost the same.

2. Where find we the institution of this Sacrament?
In the 20. chapter of S. John: As my father sent me so do I send you: receive
ye the holy Ghost; whose sins ye shall pardon, they shall be pardoned them,
and whose sins ye shall retain, they shall be retained.

3. What is the outward and sensible sign in this Sacrament?
It is the confession of the sinner, and the words of absolution pronounced by
the Priest: for, to the end that a crime may be remitted, reason requires,
that one should confess it, and make the quality of the crime manifest to him,
who is to remit it; and also that he who has authority to remit it, should
pronounce the sentence of absolution, after that he has judged concerning the
nature of the crime.

4. Where is grace promised to this Sacrament?
It is promised in these words: whose sins ye shall pardon, they shall be
pardoned them: for, sins cannot be pardoned but by grace. And we find the
practice of this Sacrament in the Acts, where the people casting themselves at
the feet of the Apostles, declared the sins, which they had committed.

5. Who have power to administer this Sacrament?
None but Priests, who have received it from God, and the Church.

6. What conditions are required in the Priests that administer this Sacrament?
They be many, but for as much, as ought to satisfy the Laity, we may reduce
them all to one: that is, to have approbation and commission from the Bishop of
the place, to exercise that function. For although besides authority or
jurisdiction, there is also required doctrine, and intention, yet he ought to
be held sufficient in doctrine, who has been approved by his Bishop for such:
and likewise he is to be presumed to have a real intention to do, what the
Church intends to do by this Sacrament, who has demanded approbation to do
that, which the Church does.

7. If a man be ashamed to confess his sins to one priest, may he make
choice of an other?
Yes; if he do declare unto him truly the state of his conscience; that is, not
only the sins he is guilty of, but also whether he be accustomed to do them,
without amendment. Howsoever, it were better always to keep one ghostly
father; for otherwise he is in danger to get little profit by his confessions,
and so may put his salvation in hazard; which depends mainely on the fruits
of this Sacrament.

8. What must we do to receive this Sacrament?
First after a due examen of conscience, we must confess to a Priest approved
by the Bishop, all our sins, that are mortal, committed since our last
confession, or which we have omitted or forgotten to declare in former
confessions; or if we have not mortal ones, we must confess some venial
ones, with hearty sorrow, and firm purpose to endeavor to commit them no
more; and with the like purpose to do the penance, which shall be enjoined us
for satisfaction of our sins; and so with all humility receive absolution. So
that besides the absolution, and imposing of penance, which are required on
the Priests part, three things are required on the penitents part, to wit,
Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction, and the Sacrament does consist of all
these five parts.

CONTRITION.
9. Why is Contrition necessary for this Sacrament?
Because this Sacrament was instituted to recover God his grace, and love
toward us, which we had lost by offending him: now we see, that when we have
offended one, the ready way to gain his love again, is to repent, and
acknowledge our fault, this being the most natural means to soder friendship
up again, when once it is broken. And so we see that by nature, every noble
heart perceiving his enemy subject unto him, takes compassion of him, and
seeing him now, no more the same he was, thinks meet to change likewise his
course toward him.

10. What is Contrition?
It is a sincere repentance, proceeding from the motion of the holy Ghost,
touching our hearts; which makes us to detest our sins, and to convert our
selves to God. For whereas by sin a man is auerted from God, by loving some
unlawful object, so by contrition his heart is auerted from the unlawful
object formerly embraced, and converted again to God, by loving him anew.

11. How many sorts of Contrition be there?
It is divided into two general sorts, the one is perfect, which is
absolutely called Contrition, the other is imperfect, which is usually called
Attrition. Which difference arises from the several degrees of converting our
selves to God; for sometimes our conversion may be so perfect, as to make us
not only forbear our former sinful actions, and complaisance in unlawful
objects, but also to detest them more then hell it self; whereby through the
powerful working of God his grace in our hearts, our affection toward God
becomes greater, then the love of our selves, and is more firmly rooted in
us, then the love of any unlawful object: so that if it please God to preserve
us in this disposition, we do easily afterward overcome any temptation, be it
never so great. Sometimes again our conversion may be so weak, as that
although it be able to make us forbear, and detest sin for the present,
because it is greater then our present adhesion to any unlawful object, yet it
settleth not in us the love of God so strongly, as our former sinful
affections had settled the love of our selves, and so it is not so firmly
rooted in us, as our present sensual inclinations are; and therefore we are
afterward easily overcome again by new temptations. And this is ordinarily
the condition of penitent Christians in the beginning, who do often rise by God
his grace, and yet fall again by their own weakness, until by penance
(that is by works of mortification, which are the worthy fruits of
repentance) and by often receiving the Sacraments, their inclination to love
God above all things becomes greater, and more firmly rooted in them, then
their sinful inclination to self love. Now the detestation of sin arising
from the former perfect conversion, is called Contrition; the other, Attritio^:
which is a metaphore taken from any hard thing bruzed by a harder, for if you
only grate it against the harder, you may bring it into what fashion you list,
but it will still remain hard at the middle; but if you do not only grate it,
but beat it in a mortar, you will turn it all into dust.

12. What is the motive of perfect Contrition?
It can be no other but the pure love of God for his own sake only, proceeding
from the consideration of his goodness, and of the obligation we have by
reason of it, to serve him, and not to offend him. And when I say, it can be no
other but the pure love of God, I do not intend to affirm, that it cannot be
accompanied with other pious affections, as the fear of hell, the apprehension
of God his judgments, the desire of heaven, and the like; which are not only
consistent with the pure love of God, but also good dispositions to procure it,
and conserve it; for such is the condition of humane infirmity, as that the
inferior stepps by which we ariue to perfection, are oftentimes necessary to
maintain us in it. But that which I intend to say, is, that the pure love of
God for his own sake only, without regard to our own proper interest, must be
the principal motive, and immediate ground of contrition, because no other
motive but God himself, as he is our last end, can convert us wholly to God,
and make us detest sin more then hell it self.

Now this perfect contrition, and pure love of God has, diverse degrees, for
sometimes it proceeds purely and simply out of the consideration of God in
himself, without relation to his creatures; who by reason of his own infinite
perfections, and infinite goodness, deserves to be beloved above all things,
all love being due to him merely for that goodness, which is in himself; and
this is the highest motive of divine love. Sometimes this pure love proceeds
from the consideration of God his goodness toward his creatures, expressed in
his benefits bestowed on them, and particularly in the benefits of creation,
redemption, and everlasting salvation proposed to all, who do not through their
own faults deprive themselves of it. Now the consideration of God his infinite
love expressed toward us by these benefits, does move us in gratitude to love
him again: which reciprocal love of ours, when it comes to that height of
gratitude, as to love him again not for our own interest, but for his own
sake only; and so, to avoid sin, and to do good, merely because it is
grateful to him, that is, because he would have us to do so; it is also a
sufficient motive for true contrition, though not so perfect as the former.

Again, this perfect contrition has diverse degrees, not only by reason of the
motives on which it is grounded, but also by reason of the effects it produces
in us; for although this love of God above all things, when it produces true
contrition, be always stronger and more intense in us, then the love of
ourselves, or then the love of our own interest, even in the joys of heaven,
if they could be separated from God; and consequently does make us to detest
sin, more then hell it self (without which it would not be an act of true
contrition;) yet it is not always so perfect, as not to leave in us some
little affection to worldly things, and some relickes of our former
inclinations, acquired by evil habites. Sometimes again it is so perfect, as
that it transporteth our affection from all created things whatsoever, and
settleth it wholly upon God, so that we do not love any thing but with relation
to him, whereby we cannot think of any unlawful object, but hate it, (such as
we may suppose to have been in S. Paul, and S. Marie Magdalene at the first
instant of their conversion;) and so it extirpateth by the very root, our
evil inclinations formerly acquired by perverse habits. And this is that
eminent degree of contrition, which does not only cleanse us from the guilt of
sin, but also freeth us from the pains due to our sin in Purgatory.

13. What is the motive of Attrition, or imperfect Contrition?
Sometimes it may be the pure love of God only, proceeding from the
consideration of his goodness, but not working so strongly in us, as that
perfect love, which we have said to be the ground of Contrition, because it is
not yet so strong in us, as our inclination to self love. For although we may
be disposed by this love, to prefer the glory of God before any interest of
our own in unlawful objects, yet if we reflect upon the pains of hell, we
shall find, that we are more easily carried to detest and fear them, then
sin; which is a sign, that the love of God above all things, is not yet so
strong in us, as our inclination to love our selves. Howsoever, this degree of
the love of God above all things, is sufficient for attrition, because it is
greater in us then the actual love of any unlawful object, and so it is of
sufficient force, to make us forbear to offend God by mortal sin.

Sometimes also the principal ground of our attrition may be the fear of
hell, the joys of heaven, the enormity of sin, reflecting upon them with the
eye of our own interest; for these motives also are sufficient to withdraw us
from sin, whereby we know we shall be deprived of heaven, and incur the
everlasting pains of hell. Howsoever, although (as I say) these may be the
principal grounds of attrition, because they may be so strong as to make us to
detest sin for our own interest, and although they be of their own nature
good and laudable, because they do for the most part prepare the way to love;
yet unless they do bring with them, some degree of the love of God, which is a
beginning of loving him, they would not be sufficient for true attrition. And
the reason of it is, because if they be not oyned with some kind of beginning
to love God, though imperfectly, they do not actually convert us to God at all,
but only to ourselves. And so they cannot dispose us sufficiently to receive
justifying grace; because contraries are expelled by contrary motions; and
therefore whereas sin is a motion auerting us from God, and converting us to
creatures, justification must proceed from a contrary motion, which must auert
us from creatures, by converting us again to God. And so we see that the
Council of Trent, speaking of Attrition, does join with the fear of hell,
(whereby we are moved to forbear to sin,) the hope of pardon, by which we
are converted to God; for this hope brings always with it a beginning of the
love of God. For there is this difference betwixt hope of pardon from man, and
hope of pardon from God, that we may have some ground to expect pardon from
man, whom we have offended, without any reason that may move us to love him; in
regard, that although he does not love us, yet we may be confident he will
pardon us not for any good he wishes to us, but for his own interest, either
because we are useful to him, or out of vain glory, or for fear of harm
that may happen unto himself, if he does not pardon us, or the like, which are
not motives fit to make us love him again. But when we hope for pardon from
God, our confidence does rest merely upon his goodness; for God does never
pardon us, but by loving us, and nothing but his own mercy and goodness can
move him to pardon us: he gains nothing by us, and has no need of us;
neither are our deserts any at all, and to rely upon them, were not hope, but
damnable presumption: so that the hope of our pardon from God, is raised by the
consideration of his goodness only, which always brings love with it. For
how can any man ground a confidence merely upon God, as the Author of all
goodness, the proper object of love, without loving him in whom he
apprehends that goodness? And this is conformable also to the doctrine of
the Council of Trent, concerning the disposition, which is required
precedently to justification by the Sacrament of Baptism, delivered Sess. 6.
c. 6. Those who are sinners, when they understand themselves to be such, by
converting themselves from the fear of divine justice, wherewith they are
profitably stricken, to the consideration of God his mercy, they are erected
into hope, confiding that God will be propitious unto them for Christ his sake,
and they begin to love him as the fountain of all justice: and therefore are
moved against sin by a certain hatred and detestation, that is, by that
penance which ought to be done before Baptism. So that true attrition does
always include the love of God. And of this fear of hell, joined with the
hope of pardon, the same Council teaches us, that it is a gift of God, and a
motion of the holy Ghost; for no man can love God, as he ought to do, but he
whom God first loves, and moves by his holy grace.

Now some are of opinion, that it is not sufficient, that this love be the love
of God merely for our own interest, but that it ought to be the love of God
above all things for his own sake only, though it be as yet but a weak and
imperfect love in that kind. And they are moved thereunto for these reasons;
first, because the love of God for our own interest, does not properly convert
us to God, but to our selves only; for the end of our love is only that which
moves us. Secondly, because the end of true attrition is, to breed in us the
perfect love of God, and so it must be joined at least with some beginning of
it, which may by little and little increase, and bring us to perfection,
according to the measure of God his grace working in us afterward. Lastly,
because the love which God requires of us, and which is properly due to him,
and without which we cannot observe God his comma^dements, is that love,
whereby we do prefer him before all created things, and do embrace him as
our last end; and therefore, when we have lost God his grace, we cannot recover
it again, unless we begin with observing this precept, which is the ground of
all; for this is the first thing that God exacteth at our hands, and that
gives us strength to do all the rest: but if we love God for our own
interest only, we make our own happiness, which (as it is limited within
ourselves) is a created and finite thing, to be our last end; and so we look
upon God only as a means to attain to this end. For these reasons this
opinion is very probable, and therefore the securest way is to attend to those
considerations, which chiefly move us to love God above all things, and so to
stir ourselves up to hate sin upon the same motive.

This doctrine may seem hard to some, who think that we cannot love God above
all things, unless the habit or motion from whence this act proceeds, be
stronger, and more intense in us, then our inclination to love ourselves: but
they are mistaken, for we may have this act, though the motion from whence it
proceeds, be not so strong, as those evil habits in us, which incline us to
vice and sin. For when we recollect ourselves, and consider the infinite
goodness of God, our reason does presently dictate unto us, that we ought to
prefer him before all things for his own sake only; and our will (if it be
not prevented with some contrary object) does by God his grace easily follow
the dictamen of reason, and affect him, as such, which is, to love him above
all things; and there is no Idiot so simple, who being instructed, is not
capable of this love, as well as he is of the fear of hell: and yet if
afterward we should be tempted with our own interest in some unlawful
object, we are easily overcome; which is a sign, that, although we did truly
love God above all things, yet the source, that is, the habit or motion from
whence that love proceeded, was not so strong, nor so firmly rooted in us, as
our evil habits are, which incline us to sin. I do not say, that all such
acts of love are sufficient even for attrition; for Granada that learned man of
the Order of S. Dominicke, and others affirm very well, that how great this
attrition or sorrow of mind for sin (which increases according to the
measure of our love) ought to be, that it may attain to the degree of perfect
attrition, it is not granted to any mortal man to know; but the knowledge
thereof belongs only to that Lord, from whom nothing can be hidden. Besides,
such acts of love are many times inefficacious, whereas it is certain, that
true attrition ought to be an efficacious and absolute repentance.

14. Is Attrition being joined with the Sacrament of Penance, sufficient to
cleanse one from the guilt of sin, and to restore him to the state of grace?
Yes, supposing it be perfect attrition. But least some should mistake in this
sacramental attrition, they are to know, that these conditions are required to
make it such. First, it must be a supernatural act of God his grace,
proceeding from some supernatural motive, grounded upon faith. Secondly, it
must expel from us voluntatem peccandi, that is, it must be such a voluntary
free detestation of sin, and sorrow to have committed it, as does bring with
it a firm purpose of endeavoring to avoid sin, above all evils that can
befall us in this world. Thirdly, it must include an humble and resigned
resolution, to undergo such deserved penna^ce for our sins, as it shall
please God to inflict upon us in this world, or in the next; as also a purpose
to do worthy fruits of repentance in this life, and to perform that
sacramental satisfaction, which the Priest shall impose upon us in confession.
Fourthly, it must include a firm resolution, in cases of wrong done to our
neighbor, to make him restitution. Fifthly, it must be joined with the hope of
pardon, and confidence in God his mercy, that he will be propitious unto us for
Christ his sake, through the merits of his sacred passion. Lastly, it must be
accompanied with the love of God, either for our own interest, or (according
to the more secure opinion) for his own sake: that is, we must begin to love
him purely for himself above all things; whereby we are also moved to
repentance and sorrow, for having offended him, who is our last end, and whose
blessed will, as the Author of all goodness, we ought to prefer before all
the world. If any of these conditions be wanting, it will not be perfect
attrition, but imperfect, and such as being joined with the Sacrament of
Penance, will not suffice for justification.

And because none but God himself does know whether we have these
supernatural acts of sorrow, and the love of God, or no; and how great and
intense this sorrow of mind ought to be, that it may attain the degree of
perfect attrition; therefore it is a most commendable thing, that sometimes we
should make general confessions, as some do yearly; that thereby laying
before our eyes the number of our offenses and grievous sins, and by help of
spiritual exercises, we may be moved to a more strong repentance, and supply
the defect, if there had been any for want of perfect attrition in our former
confessions. Howsoever when we have done our endeavor, and find a sorrow for
the past, and a firm purpose of amendment for the future, with a desire to
love God above all things, we ought not to be scrupulous in searching the
motive and measure of this sorrow, but we must remit the rest to the merciful
goodness of God, and go with confidence and humility to the Priest to receive
absolution, though our sins be never so great; hoping that by virtue of the
Sacrament of Penance, allmighty God will strengthen our hearts with his divine
love, and supply the defects and weakensse of contrition in us, by accepting
our desire thereof.

And here also is to be observed, as well touching contrition, as attrition,
that some think they have no love toward God, not sorrow for their sins,
unless their affections be accompanied with sensible passion: but they are
exceedingly deceived, for this love and grief is purely spiritual, it is not
seated in the senses, but in the will of man, and it is so much the greater,
when disagreeing with our sensible motions, and persisting only within the
sphere of reason, it ouercometh the contradiction of sense. And therefore the
love and grief, which we feel for worldly things, is oftentimes accompanied
with a certain tenderness of heart, and is more sensible to us, then the
sorrow for our sins, or the love of God; and yet the love of God, and the
sorrow for our sins is more intense in the reasonable part of man, which is
his judgment and his will. For the motives of love and grief in contrition,
are not corporal things, not objects fit to move our sense, but they are
spiritual things, and objects that strike only upon our reason, as the
goodness of God, the guilt of sin in our soul, and the like, which are not
things present to our sense at all; and so it is no wonder, if for the most
part they make no impression in our senses, but only in our reason: and
consequently the true balance to weigh our contrition, is not our senses, but
it is our reason, built upon the foundation of faith, which may be strongly
moved, though our sense has no feeling of it at all.

15. What is required for the second part of contrition, which is purpose of
future amendment?
To make this purpose as you ought to do, you must first consider the occasions
which draw you into sin, and study with your self, and take your Ghostly
fathers advise, how without greater to avoid such occasions; and you must know,
that the occasions are as well in omission, as commission: besides you must
prudently use such pious exercises, as may withdraw you from temptation; for no
man can be thought to have an efficacious purpose to avoid his sins, who
thinks it not worth his care; how to amend them: and therefore those who
return still with the same sins, out of neglect to do these things, are
incapable of absolution, unless they resolve to amend the said neglect.

16. But what if after all this they do still return with the same sins?
It will not easily fall out so; for God is always ready to assist us, when we
our selves do our endeavor, and therefore the occasions being fewer, and the
temptations less, there must needs be amendment. Howsoever it is to be
feared, that they do flatter themselves, who think they had a firm purpose,
if no amendment follow it. Where you must note, that he who falls into the
same sins, ought not to be thought to have no amendment of his life, as long
as he falls not so often, nor upon so slight temptations, as before; and if
after his fall, he finds a greater remorse of conscience, then formerly, and
a more earnest and speedy desire to be reconciled again to God, and withal a
serious and evident amendment in his life; for then he may hope, that his
relapses proceed rather out of frailty, then from want of sorrow and purpose of
amendment in his former confessions.

17. But what would you advise such persons to do, who fall still into the same
sins, without any amendment at all?
I would advise them, to go still to confession, and to follow the counsel of
their Ghostly father; yet before they go to confession, they ought to
endeavor to stir themselves up to a more perfect contrition, by using some
pious meditatio^s; and by reading often such devout books, as are apt to move
in the heart of man a true sorrow for his sins, and an efficacious purpose to
avoid them; and by doing worthy acts of repentance, that is, austere acts of
penance, with fervent devotion, thereby to abate their affection to sin,
which is the cause that rendereth their purposes inefficacious, and so to
continue, until it shall please God by his grace, to strengthen their
resolutions, and to amend their life: for ensuing amendment is the surest rule
that either the Ghostly father or the penitent himself can have to discern,
whether his repentance be true and sincere, or no. From whence you may gather
the miserable condition of such persons, who go to confession but once a
year, and presently without any remorse of conscience, fall again into the
same sins, and continue so without thinking ever of mending their lives,
until the year be come about again: for it is to be feared, that all such
persons for want of a firm purpose to amend, do turn the precept of the
Church, into an annual sacrilege, to their greater damnation.

CONFESSION.
18. Why is Confession necessary?
Because it is commanded by Christ to be used. And the conueniences of it are
great; first, it is the most natural easement of sin, for we see by
experience, that when one has committed any foul fact secretly, it loadeth
his heart until he has broken his mind to some one or other. Secondly, it is
the readiest way to amendment, for no man can advise himself against his own
perverse inclinations, so well as an other: and that an other may do it, it is
necessary he should know the particular quality, and condition of the several
faults the penitent commits. Thirdly, there can be no repentance without
humiliation of ones self, for there is nothing more detestable in the sight of
God, then pride, which does always accompany sin: now there can be no more
efficacious means invented to humble a man, then confession, by reason of the
confusion that man has to open his secret sins to an other man, and to lie
prostrate at the feet of one, peradventure as infirm as himself, expecting
judgment and absotion from him.

19. What is Confession?
It is a voluntary, accusation, made by a penitent of the sins he has
committed himself, to a Priest capable to absolve him, accompanied with grief
for having committed them, and with a firm purpose not to commit them any
more; for confession is nothing worth unless it be joined with contrition. By
the word, voluntary, we are taught that a confession made by constraint, such
as criminalls make before judges by force of torment, is of no value; for God
above all things seeks the will of man. By the word, Accusation, we are
taught, that we must say determinately, that we have done such and such a
thing, and not as some use to say, if I have offended God in such or such a
kind of sin, I accuse my self of it: for he is not esteemed to accuse
himself of a fault, who confesses it with an if, when he is certain he has
committed it. By this word also we are taught, that it is supperfluous to tell
any thing so in general as some do; as, that you love not God and your
neighbor, as you should do, and such like; which spends time to no profit,
for your Ghostly father knows that of you, as well as your self: so that he
who does not tell some thing in particular, in case he can do it, is not
esteemed to accuse himself sufficiently. By those vords, The sins he has
committed himself, we are taught, that the penitent ought to confess his
sins with such discretion, as that in accusing himself, he accuse no body
else: for example, if one has committed fornication, or any other sin in
company with an other, he must tell the condition of the person, when it is
necessary to declare the nature of the sin, but he must not name him, or her;
but contrary wise he must be wary not to say any thing, whereby the person may
be known.

By these words also we are taught, that we must not accuse our selves of
sins which we have not committed; so that those who through simplicity,
accuse themselves of all, that is contained in the form of examen of
conscience set down in their manual, do make an unprofitable confession, and
offend in doing so.

20. What be the conditions of Confession?
They be chiefly three: first that it be humble, with a true and submissiue
acknowledgement of our fault, accompanied with shame fastness. Secondly, that
it be sincere, that is, not done for any sinister end, as out of custom to do
what other men do, or for fear of some disgrace or punishment if they do it
not; but it must be done with intention meelrey to appease the wrath of God.
Thirdly, that it be entire, that is, that we do not voluntarily, or through
negligence, conceal any mortal sin, not any circumstance, that does change
the nature of the sin; and that we declare the number of every kind of
mortal sin, and not confess half to one, half to an other.

21. Which be the circumstances, that do change the nature of the sin?
They be reduced to six: Person, Place, End, Quantity, Time, and Scandal: the
circumstance of the person is to be declared in case of carnal sin,
according to that which has been set down in the sixth commandment: as also
in other sins, when there is a particular prohibition, or when one is obliged
by his profession not to commit them; as if one strike a Churchman, he is bound
to declare that circumstance, because there is a particular prohibition; but if
he coozen a Churchman in buying or selling, he is not bound to declare the
circumstance of his person. In like manner, if a Churchman commit murder, he is
bound to declare himself to be a Churchman, be cause it is an action contrary
to his profession. The circumstance of place is to be declared, when it is a
sacred place, in four cases, that is in the case of theft, declared in the
seventh commandment, of actual carnal sin, of murder, and of drunkenness,
when they are committed in the place it self. But he who commits these
sins only in thought or desire, although it be in the church, is not bound to
declare the circumstance of the place, unless his desire was to accomplish his
sin in the Church; for in case of such a desire, although he were out of the
Church when he had it, he is bound to declare the circumstance of the place
intended. The circumstance of the end, or motive, is to be declared, when any
action is done for some end, that is a mortal I sin in it self; as if a man
steal a sword, to kill with it, he commits adubble mortal sin. Quantity,
though it change not the nature of his sin, is yet to be declared in theft,
as how much he has stolen; or in any other harm done to his neighbor, how
great it was. Time also, which belongs properly to sins of desire, though
it change not the nature of the sin, yet men ought to declare, how long they
have continued in the same unlawful desire without interruption. Scandal is,
when one has committed an unlawful action, with intention to draw others to
sin, or without this intention has given an occasion, whereby others might
be in danger to be drawn to sin; and this is to be declared.

22. What must one do in case, that after due examination of his conscience,
he does not know the number of his sins?
In that case, it suffices if he guess, as well as he can, at the number more
or less, and declare it in that manner to his Ghostly father: but if he cannot
give any probable guess at the number, he must then confess how long time he
had abandoned himself to such a sin. And concerning the number, it is to be
noted, that in all internal sins, as often as the internal desire is
interrupted, and renewed again, so many several sins are committed: and the
same is to be understood of sins partly external and partly internal, as
for example, if one out of a desire to kill a man, should continue a whole day
seeking occasions to perform his mischievous intent, all that inward and
outward action is but one sin, unless he had interrupted his intention of
seeking to kill, and afterward renewed it again; for then he commits so
many several sins, as he has several times renewed his intention.

23. What must one do in case, that he be doubtful, whether he has committed
the sin or no: as also being certain that he has committed it, yet he is
doubtful, whether it be mortal or venial only?
In the first case, he is bound to confess the sin as doubtful; that is,
declaring it as a thing, he is not certain of. In the second case, he is also
bound to confess the sin, and to leave it to his Ghostly father to judge,
whether it be mortal or no.

24. What if one after the examination of his conscience should forget some
mortal sin?
If his forgetfulness does not proceed from negligence, which in this case is
esteemed a kind of malice, his confession ought to be judged entire, and his
absolution valide: yet if afterward he remembers the sin, he had
forgotten, if it be mortal, he is bound to confess it in his next confession.

25. In what cases is a man bound to reiterate his confession?
In all these: first, if at the time of his confession, he had not contrition,
that is, sorrow for his sins, and a purpose not to commit them any more.
Secondly, if his confession was not absolute but conditional, when he is
absolutely certain to have committed the sin he confesses. Thirdly, if it
was not entire, but that he did omit some sins, or some circumstances of
weight, or did not tell the number, either through shame, or malice, or for
want of sufficient examining himself; now that examination is sufficient,
wherein one does his endeavor by using moral diligence. Fourthly, if he had
not an intention to perform the penance his Ghostly father imposed upon him.
Fifthly, if he addressed himself to a Priest that was not approved to hear
confessions. In all these cases, the Sacrament is inualide, and therefore he
must confess all anew.

26. Must we confess also our venial sins?
It is not necessary, although it be very profitable.

27. Is it profitable to confess all our venial sins, that occur to our
memory?
No; for, unless it be in those who are come to great perfection in virtue, it
serves for no end, but only to hinder their Ghostly father and themselves,
from discerning in particular those faults, which require chiefly to be
amended: and therefore it were better to confess some only; which may be
reduced to four heads. First, those, for which they find some special
remorse of conscience. Secondly, those, that they think are the greatest
hindra^ce toward their progress in virtue. Thirdly, those, that are most
repugnant to the state of life and vocation they live in. Fourthly, those,
which they are most ashamed to confess.

28. What is the preparation for Confession?
It is a diligent examination of your conscience, by calling to mind, as far
as you are able with moral diligence (such as you would use in any worldly
matter of importance) the sins you have committed. Now to do this, there is
required more or less time, according as one goes oftener or seldomer to
confession, and is more or less subject to commit sin.

29. In what does the examen of conscience consist?
In three points chiefly: first, to note the sins you have committed,
together with the circumstances above noted, and also the number. Secondly, to
observe the motives, causes, and occasions of them. Thirdly, to think of the
means, how to avoid them hereafter, by leaving the occasions and causes of
them.

SATISFACTION.
30. What is sacramental satisfaction?
It is a performing of the penance imposed by the Priest, in token that the
Penitent submits himself to God his justice, and that he is willing and
intends to repair his offenses by worthy fruits of repentance; whereby he is
released either in part, or in whole from the pain due to sin, after that
the guilt is pardoned, and also purged from those dreggs and vicious
inclinations, which are acquired by actual sin. So that you may observe
three properties in sacramental satisfaction. 1. that it is satisfactorie. 2.
that it is medicinal. 3. that it is significatiue.

31. Why is it satisfactorie?
Because the Sacrament of Penance was instituted for the entire abolishment of
sin committed after Baptism; now one effect of sin is a debt of temporal
pain remaining to be suffered, after that the guilt itself is taken away by
contrition and absolution; for he who has broken justice, owes the making of
it up again, though his crime be pardoned. And so the performing of the
penance imposed by the Priest, being a part of this Sacrament, has (though it
be never so small) a sacramental virtue to redeem, and take away some part of
the said pain.

32. Why is it medicinal?
Because the same reason, that shows it to be satisfactory, does also prove
it to be medecinall: for all sinful actions have this evil in them, that they
leave man in a worse disposition, then he was before he sinned, by begetting in
him a certain inclination and motion, toward the same sins; which being
not always taken away by contrition and absolution, it remains to be
overcome by doing worthy fruits of repentance; and consequently the performing
of that penance, which is a part of the Sacrament, has a special virtue for
this effect.

33. Why is it significatiue?
Because it does testify our submission to endure willingly all the pains God
shall inflict upon us here, or in the next world, for the satisfaction of his
divine justice, and also our intention to do worthy fruits of repentance in
this life, and an acknowledgeme^t of our obligation to perform them; for which
end it has a sacramental virtue to obtain the assistance of God his grace.
And so you must not wonder, if in some cases the Priest imposes so small a
penance, in respect of the grievous offenses of the Penitent, as it happens
in those, who confess great sins at the hour of death; for the least
outward act is significatiue, and sufficient to testify our present intention.

34. What do you gather from its being satisfactorie?
I gather from thence, that the satisfaction ought to correspond to the
grieuousnesse of the Penitents offenses; and that it ought to be a penal
satisfaction, that is, such as does chastise the body, and manifest in the
Penitent zeal of God his justice, and a spirit of godly revenge upon himself,
for the sins he has committed.

35. What do you gather by its being medecinall?
I gather from thence, that the penance, which the Priest imposes, ought to
be proportioned to the diseased humor of the Penitent, and such as may
withdraw him from sin; and that it ought accordingly to be augmented, or
lessened, as he finds his Penitent to amend himself more or less.

36. What do you gather by its being significatiue?
Since that its signification does consist in testifying the sincerity of our
inward repentance, and an acknowledgement of our obligation to do worthy fruits
of repentance in this life; I gather first, that when we have performed the
penance imposed by the Priest, we ought not therefore to desist, but we must
still go on, in bewailing our sins all our life time; for as S. Augustine
says, Poenitere est poenam tenere, to repent, is to persevere in pain, to the
end (says he) that one may punish by revenging in himself, that which he
has committed by sinning; he therefore does persevere in pain, who always
punishes, that which it grieueth him to have committed. Secondly I gather, in
case that the Priest should either through necessity (as it happens when a
Penitent is in danger of death) or else through ignorance, or by too much
indulgence, impose, so small a penance, as would have no proportion with the
grieuousnesse of the sins, whereof the Penitent is guilty, that then the
Penitent by doing that small penance, must not think himself released of the
debt he owes for his sins, nor acquitted of the obligation he has to do
worthy fruits of repentance, but he must do them voluntarily, or by the advice
of his Ghostly father, which will be more meritorious.

37. Are we then obliged to do worthy fruits of repentance?
Yes; for as by the Sacrament of Baptism, we do solemnly renounce the world,
and promise to abstain from sin, so we do by the Sacrament of penance
(which is a second Baptism, and called by the Fathers a laborious Baptism)
not only renew our former promise made in Baptism, but also we do add a new
purpose (signified by the penance imposed by the Priest, and accepted by the
Penitent) of repairing by worthy fruits of repentance, the harm which we have
suffered by sin. And therefore the Council of Trent teaches, that in the
penance for sins committed after Baptism, is contained, not only a
cessation from sin, a detestation of sin, and a contrite and humble heart,
which things are required in Baptism; but also satisfaction by fasting,
alms, prayer, and other pious exercises of a spiritual life.

38. From whence arises the obligation of worthy fruits of repentance?
It arises from two heads; first from the precept, for they are expressly
commanded by God. Secondly, from the nature of the thing it self; for the
light of reason does teach us, that we are bound both to satisfy God his
justice, and also to repair our own losses when we are able; the one being a
kind of restitution to be made to God, and the other a kind of restitution
due to ourselves. Wherefore to know how far this precept of doing worthy
fruits of repentance binds, we must consider these two principal ends, for
which they were commanded.

And as for the first end, which is to satisfy God his justice for the
temporal pain remaining after that the guilt of sin is remitted, you must
note, that the Minister of God cannot know how much repentance and contrition
the Penitent has; nether can the Penitent nor the Minister know the value of
the said contrition, nor how much more he ought to do for due satisfaction; and
therefore in the primitive Church, they used to impose austere pennances for
every mortal sin, which they were to perform for a long time together, yea
for some sins they were to do penance all their life time, that so God his
justice might be more fully satisfied: but in after ages, the Church has
mitigated that former austerity, releasing the Penitential Canons by frequent
Indulgences, which she grants from time to time for the general good of the
Church; which Indulgences upon such occasions do likewise remit the pain due
to sin, being granted by authority of the keys of the kingdom of heaven.

Wherefore it is certain that we are not for the present obliged to the
Penitential Canons, but it suffices, if the Priest impose such pennances as
have some proportion in chastising the sinner, with as much pain and
affliction, as he took unlawful delight and content in his unbridled
passions, by sinful actions; which also may be prudently moderated upon just
occasions, by remitting the Penitent for the rest, to the general fasts and
mortifications observed in the Church, and to such voluntary afflictions, as
he himself shall make choice of.

In which kind it is to be noted, that every one is bound to use voluntarily
such pennances, as he finds necessary to keep the spirit of compunctio^ from
decaying in his heart, and to preserve him from danger of falling into a
contempt of God his wrath, and of reparation due to his justice. And therefore
although it be true, that we are not bound now to the actual practice of the
Penitential Canons, yet we are obliged to be so prepared and disposed in
mind, as to be ready to undergo them, in case they were absolutely necessary
to satisfy the divine justice, or that they were enjoined us by the Church.

From whence it follows, that although those sinners, who have not leisure to
do worthy fruits of repentance, because they are surprised by death presently
after their conversion, shall be purged by the pains of Purgatory, and so be
saved; as also those shall be, who have had leisure to do worthy fruits of
repentance, but have performed them slackely and negligently: yet those who
never had an intention to do worthy fruits of repentance in this life, or, if
they had such an intention, did afterward, when they had leisure, totally
neglect to do them, will not find a Purgatory in the next world, but eternal
punishment in hell, for their contempt of God his precept, in not performing
that, which his justice exacteth from us in this life.

The second end for which the worthy fruits of repentance were commanded by
God, is medicinal: and satisfaction as it has relation to this end, is
defined thus; Est causas peccatorum exscindere, and earum suggestionibus aditum
non indulgere; Satisfaction of penance, is to cut away the occasions of sin,
and to give no entrance to their suggestions. Where you must observe, that
there is this difference in satisfaction, as it has relation to these two
ends, that in respect of the former end of satisfying for the temporal pain,
it may be released by indulgences of the Church; and one member of the Church
may also satisfy for another: but the works of satisfaction, as it is a
medicine, cannot be dispensed with by any authority of the Church, nor can one
man perform them for another, but every man is bound to perform them
himself, otherwise they will be of no value for that end. And therefore the
Council of Trent does seriously admonish all Priests, that they should not
wink at the sins of their Penitents, by enioyning small pennances for great
sins, least that thereby they themselves become partakers of other men's
sins.

Now you must know, that the immediate occasions of sin, which we are bound
to cut of, are of three sorts: some are external, and outward to us, and
consequently such, as we may readily separate our selves from; as for example,
the hanting of such or such persons, the freque^ting of such places, the doing
of such actions, the undertaking of such employme^ts, and the like, whereby we
are usually drawn into any mortal sin of what sort soever, as of envy,
detraction, conte^tion, sedition, faction, drunkenness, lechery, or any other;
all which occasions are readily cut of by avoiding the said persons, places,
actions, employments, etc. Other occasions are within ourselves, which,
although we do carry them about us, yet are such, as we may in time totally
free ourselves from; and these are the relics of actual sin, that is, the
perverse habits, and stiff inclinations to sin, which the custom of sinning
leaves in us, which habits we are bound to endeavor to root out by the
worthy fruits of repentance, that so we may restore ourselves to the former
state we were in, before we sinned. The third sort of occasions are also within
ourselves, and such as will bear us company to our graves, because we can
never totally separate ourselves from them; and these are the inclinatio^s co
several sins, proceeding from the natural disposition of our bodies, joined
to the general concupiscence, wherewith all mankind is infected by original
sin. And although we are not able to separate ourselves totally from these
perverse inclinations of nature, yet we may abate them so, as to take away all
immediate danger of being drawn by them into mortal sin: and this we are
bound to do, especially having found by experience, in sinning actually after
Baptism, our own weakness, and having discovered in particular, those
inclinations, by which the Devil, and our concupiscence do draw us into sin.
And because this cannot be done, but by doing worthy fruits of repentance,
therefore we are obliged to do them, that thereby we may cut of all as well
inward as outward immediate occasions of sin. In so much, that it is to be
feared of those, who neglect to do this, that either they never had that
contrition, which is necessary for the Sacrament of penance; or if they had
it, that it is decayed in them; for true repentance shows it self in
effects, and as the Apostle says, it works steadfast penance to salvation.

Nether must any man, who has used the austerity of penance for some time,
think himself afterward secure, as if he had no need any longer to do worthy
fruits of repentance: for this is the sin of pride, the most odious sin of
any in the sight of God, for the cure whereof he does oftentimes permit such
persons, to fall into some palpable gross sin. Wherefore the fruits of
repentance, so far forth as they are medecinall, are always necessary, and
must never be laid aside in this world; for, that original concupiscence,
which drew us into the first relapse after Baptism, and can never be rooted
out in this life, ought to render us wary all our life time, and to teach us
after a wound to take more heed, and to work our salvation with fear and
trembling. For (to use the words of the Council of Trent) since that we know,
that we are not as yet regenerated into glory, but only into the hope of glory,
we ought to stand in fear of that strife, which yet remains in us, with the
flesh, the world, and the Devil.

39. What are the worthy fruits of repentance?
You must observe, that penance is done two ways; the one inward, consisting
in the contrition of the heart; the other outward, consisting in the affliction
of the flesh: when we do condemn and reprove our sin, then we have
repentance; when we do by ensuing satisfaction punish, and correct our sin,
then we begin to do the worthy fruits of repentance; and when our pain in
punishing, and our diligence in correcting sin, is no less, then our
pleasure was in doing the sin, and our care in pursuing it, then we do
accomplish the worthy fruits of repentance. As for example, if one has stolen
other men's goods, besides the ceasing from sin, and the restitution of the
same goods, let him begin to give his own: if he has used fornication a long
time, let him chastise his flesh as long time: if he has done injury to any
man in word or deed, let him not only make amends with humble and good words,
but let him labor to reconcile his enemies with kindness and benefits. In
fine, as a sinner before his conversion, was wholly occupied, and busied in the
works of sin, so after his conversion he ought to be as fervent and
diligent, in doing of good works, to the honor of God, and his souls
salvation; according to that of S. Paul, As you have given the parts and
members of your body and soul to serve uncleanness, heaping iniquity upon
iniquity; so give and apply the same parts and members of your body and soul,
to serve rightiousnesse for your justification. That is to say, take as much
pains to purge, and wash away the dreggs and filthiness of your sins,
gathered by your naughty living, as ye took pleasure before to defile, and
infect your souls by the same.

40. What works of penance are the most proper, to redeem the pain due to
sin, and to purge us from the filthiness it leaves in us?
Although all good works in general do help to both these ends; yet you must
note, that those works are most proper to satisfy for the pain, which are in
themselves painful, and do chastise the flesh; whereas those are most proper
to cure the diseased humors left by sinful habits, which are joined with the
practice of their contrary virtues. Howsoever there be three principal works
of satisfaction, specially commended in the Ghospel for both these ends, which
are fasting, prayer, and almesdeeds. Fasting is a medicine to heal perfectly
those sins, which we have done by concupiscence and desire of the flesh,
against ourselves, and our own bodies. Humble and devout prayer, and
especially daily meditation, of our Savior his Passion, is a medecin to heal
perfectly the pride of life, the contempt of godliness, and presumption of
mind, which are sins immediately against God. The giving of alms is a
medecin to heal perfectly those sins, which are committed by covetousness,
deceit, oppression and unjust dealing against our neighbor. Now the Scripture
joins for the most part these three together; because one without the other
two is of little value; for fasting without lifting up our mind to God by
prayer, and without mercy to a man's neighbor is little regarded by God; and
his prayer, who will not bridle the desires of his flesh, or shuts up his
mercy from his neighbor that needs it, is not heard by God; no more are
alms meritorious, if they want the fellowship of prayer, or be joined with
surfeiting on the pleasures of the world: but when all three are joined
together, they are of great force, to appease the wrath of God, and to purge
our souls from all filthiness.

And here it is to be noted, that under fasting are contained all bodily pains
and labors, as watching, lying upon the ground, using of hairecloth,
disciplines, and the like, which ought not to be used, but with discretion, and
by advise of Ghostly fathers, that they may correct, but not destroy the body.
Under prayer are contained the prayers of others, as of Priests, poor
Scholars, poor men, and such as by our liberality are procured to pray for
us. Under alms are contained all the works of mercy as well corporal, as
spiritual, all which are of great value, it being undoubtedly the most
efficacious means to obtain mercy at God his hands, to exercise first the
same ourselves unto our neighbor.

41. Which works are those that are called the works of Mercy?
They are of two kinds, seven corporal, and seven spiritual. The corporal
are. 1. To feed the hungry. 2. To give drink to the thirsty. 3. To clothe the
naked. 4. To harbor the Pilgrim. 5. To visit the sick. 6. To help the
imprisoned, and to redeem captives. 7. To bury the dead.

The spiritual are these. 1. To give counsel to those who want it. 2. To
instruct the ignorant. 3. To correct the sinner. 4. To comfort the afflicted.
5. To pardon offenses. 6. To suffer patie^tly injuries. 7. To pray for the
living and the dead, and for those who persecute us.

And this may suffice for this mportant part of the Sacrament of Penance,
which is of such weight, as that the neglect of it, is the chief cause, why so
few are saved; whereby that sentence of our Savior is verified, multi sunt
vocati, pauci vero electi: and which caused S. Ambrose to say, that it is
easier to find one, that has kept his first innocence of Baptism, then one
that has done convenient penance. And therefore we ought continually to
stir ourselves up to do worthy fruits of repentance, by considering, that the
sufferings and pains of this life, are not equal to that fault, which is
remitted, nor to that pain, which we have deserved, nor yet to that glory,
which is reserved for us.

Now you must know, that besides this satisfaction due to God his justice, and
the reparation, which we owe to ourselves for the recovery of our former
strength and vigor in grace; there is another due to our neighbor, in case
that our sin be an act of injustice toward him: which reparation is done by
restitution, and making him an amends for the harm done to him; and the
Penitent is obliged to perform this, whether the Priest imposes it or no. And
you must note, as well concerning sacramental satisfaction, as also the
restitution to our neighbor, that it is sufficient for the validity of the
Sacrament, that you have truly and really an intention, when you go to
confession, to perform these things; and therefore if afterward you do not
perform them, though you commit a new sin, and so are bound to confess it,
when you go next time to confession, yet your precedent confession was valide,
and needs not to be repeated.

42. What Sacrament is next in order to Penance?
Extreme Unction; for by it we recover our former strength after our fall, and
take away those languishings which the mortal disease of sin does leave
behind it.

LESSON XXVIII. Of Extreme Unction.
1. WHat is Extreme Unction?
It is a Sacrament instituted by our blessed Savior for the sick, to blot out
the relickes of their sins remaini^g through negligence, after the former
Sacraments; that thereby their souls may be strengthened against the last
temptations, and fierce assaults of the devil, and of death; or else thac they
may recover their bodily health, if it be expedient to their salvation.

2. What are these relickes of sin?
They are a kind of weakness or languishing left in the souls of them, who
have neglected after they have offended God, to cure themselves perfectly by
penance, and to re-establish themselves firmly in the state of grace.

3. What is the outward and sensible sign of this Sacrament?
It is the anointing the sick person with oil.

4. Where do you find in scripture grace promised to this visible ceremony?
In the Epistle of S. James, in these words: Is any one sick amongst ye? let
him call in the Priests of the church, and let them pray over him, anointing
him with oil, in the name of our Lord, and the prayer of faith shall save him
who is sick, and our Lord will comfort him, and if he be in sins, they shall
be pardoned him.

5. Who are the ministers of this Sacrament?
None but such as are Priests.

6. Are we obliged to receive this Sacrament?
Yes, for the reason above alleged; in so much, that if any man lying sick in
extreme danger of death, has sufficient opportunity to procure the
administration of this Sacrament, he is bound to procure it.

7. What preparation is necessary for this Sacrament?
He who receives it, is bound to be in the state of grace: for he who is
sick, cannot be a conualescent, unless he be first cured of his disease, and
freed from danger of death. Besides, he is bound to have a desire to receive
the Sacrament, to the end for which it was instituted, in case he be in his
senses when it is given him.

8. At what time is this Sacrament to be received?
Many commit great folly and error herein, driving it of until their very
agony and loss of senses, whereby for want of more ample disposition (with
which in their better judgment they might receive it) they loose a great part
of the grace, which this Sacrament might happily confer unto them: the true
time therefore to receive this Sacrament, is, when the physicians shall judge
the party to be in apparent danger of approaching death; that heavenly remedies
being applied, when humane helps are justly doubted will fail, health may
thereby be restored, if God so please, or the sick person be furnished with
grace to resist the last assaults of the devil: and therefore as this
Sacrament ought not to be demanded, when there is no danger to dye, so ought it
not to be deferred so long, until no hope remains to live.

9. Of what age ought they to be, to whom this Sacrament is administered?
They ought to be arrived to perfect discretion, and judged capable of malice
and sin, for otherwise it would want matter to work its proper effect.
Wherefore such as may be judged capable of the use of the Sacrament of
penance, may also undoubtedly be admitted unto this.

10. Wherefore is this Sacrament applied unto our eyes, ears, nose, lips,
hands and feet?
Because they are the organs of our corporal senses, whence sin does usually
take its beginning, as being the windows, and proper doors, whereby sin
makes entrance into the heart of man, to wound his soul.

11. What Sacrament follows Extreme Unction?
Order: for according to nature, parts are precedent to the whole which
results out of them; wherefore we were first to declare the Sacraments which
concern every particular member of the Church, and afterward that which
concerns the whole body, and the procreation of new issue, which is Order.

LESSON XXIX. Of Order.
1. What is Order?
It is a Sacrament instituted by JESUS CHRIST, whereby power is given to men to
undergo Ecclesiastical functions, and grace to perform them worthily.

2. What is the visible sign of this Sacrament? and where do you find grace
annected to it?
The visible sign is the imposition of hands, to which S. Paul declares grace
to be annected 1. Tim. 4. Do not neglect the grace which is in thee, which has
been given thee through prophecy, with imposition of the hands of the
presbitery.

3. What does Order correspond unto in our corporal life?
It correspondeth to marriage, and must consequently be to breed spiritual
children, who being generated by Baptism, must afterward be bred up,
instructed, and governed: and this is proportionably divided into three
actions, which in the mystical language are called purgare, illuminare, vnire.
The first, is to withdraw the parties from the love of natural objects, to
that which is supernatural: the second, is to instruct them and let them know
what is necessary to supernatural life, and to enable them to live
accordingly: the third, is to induce them to do what is necessary, according to
their knowledge and ability. The first, is done partly, and chiefly in the
beginning, by ceremonies, and majesty of holy rites, at which sensible men
standing in admiration, begin to think there is some greater mystery included,
and so desire to learn and understand it: the second, is done chiefly by the
holy Sacraments, and by catechizing, by which the people understand what is to
be believed, hoped, and put in practice, and are enabled to perform it: the
third, is done by government and preaching, by which men are set forward, and
kept in order, to do what they have understood, ought to be done. Now according
to these three functions, the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy is constituted, of
Bishops, Priests, and Ministers; and it is called Hierarchy, that is, holy
principality.

4. Which of these functions belongs properly to the Bishop.
The third, which is to govern and preach, for government is of greatest
difficulty, and most necessary, seeing that it attends to make us do, what we
know. Now both the difficulty and necessity of doing is far greater, then of
knowing; for the obligation is greater after knowledge, and the difficulty of
doing no less: so that to make us do, is the proper effect of the holy Ghost;
and the field where nature and grace use their stratagemes, and fight their
pitched battle. Government therefore, by which we are set on to do what we
know, belongs chiefly and properly to Bishops, from whom all inferior
Priests, as well as the people, are to take their rule and directions. And
Christ to the end that their government might be more authorized, has reserved
to the^, and to their character, the Sacrament of Confirmation, whereby we
become perfect Christians, by receiving the manlike strength, and growth of
charity; and also the Sacrament of Order, by which authority is given to others
to be gouerners. Besides in regard of their government, Christ has given to
them jurisdiction in a more eminent degree; then to other Priests; that is, an
authority to excommunicate all public and notorious sinners, who being called
to judgment, refuse to come, or if they come, refuse to obey the sentence of
their judge. Which excommunication is not inflicted to destroy them, but as a
medecin to correct them, that thereby they may be ashamed of their fault, and
seeing themselves deprived of the participation of Christ his merits given by
the Sacraments, and of the merits of the Church, they may be moved to amend
their lives, and to return to live amongst Christian people, like Christian
men. And as the Bishop has power to excommunicate such persons, so also has
he power to absolve them again from excommunication, when they are penitent,
and obedient. So that these functions belong properly to Bishops, to govern in
chief; to chastise the wicked and disobedient, by excommunicating them; to
preach and exhort; to administer the Sacrament of Confirmation; and to
administer the Sacrament of Order.

5. Which function belongs, properly to Priests?
The second, that is to instruct, and administer the Sacraments: to them also
it belongs to assist the Bishop, and to govern under him, and to preach by
commission from him. And Christ by reserving to them the function of
sacrificing and the administration of diverse Sacraments, has dignified also
their persons, because it is necessary for their office, that they be respected
by the people. So that the functions of Priests are chiefly these, to assist
the Bishop in governing, and preaching by commission from him, to offer up to
God the holy sacrifice of Mass, and to administer all Sacraments, excepting
Confirmation and Order. And from hence we may gather what respect is due to
Priests; for certainly, if we owe respect to those who bear temporal offices
in the common wealth, we owe a far greater respect to them, whose persons
Christ himself has dignified with the greatest and highests functions that
are exercised upon earth, having made them his ministers, not of riches and
temporal commodities, but by whose hands his heavenly graces, and everlasting
treasures of his mercy are conveyed to the people.

6. What function belongs to Ministers?
The chief is to assist the Bishop and Priests in the administration of
Sacraments, and in the sacrifice, and other Church services, that so they may
be performed with due majesty, by decent ceremonies and holy rites, and
discipline be observed in the Church.

7. How many degrees of Ministers be there?
They are in all six: whereof the two first, that is, Deacons, and Subdeacons,
are called Greater, because they serve immediately about the holy Eucharist,
and about the Priests person in the Sacrifice of Mass: and so the Deacons who
are next to the Priests, have also annexed to their office to assist the Priest
in his function, and consequently by commission from him, or from the Bishop,
to administer some Sacraments, and also to catechize. These two degrees of
Ministers are also called Holy, because for their greater purity they are
obliged to observe perpetual chastity, and to say the canonical office. The
other four degrees, are called Lesser, because they are employed in functions
and rites, which are more remote, and not immediately about the holy Eucharist,
or the Priests person at the altar.

8. How many several Orders be there in all?
They are commonly reckoned to be seven, to wit, the Order of Potter, Lector,
Exorcist, Acolite, Subdeacon, Deacon, and Priest.

9. Why are not Bishops reckoned amongst the rest?
If you reckon Episcopacy, and add it to the rest, then indeed they are in all
eight Orders: but commonly it is not named with the rest, for two reasons:
first, because it is an emine^t degree which surpasses them all; as being the
source from whence all the rest are derived; for they all proceed from it, and
end in it; and so as in a kingdom, the king is not reckoned in the number of
the officers that govern under him because his power is transcende^t, and
runs through all the magistrates of the kingdom; no more is the Bishop
reckoned ordinarily in the number of the other Orders, for he is in his church
as the king in his kingdom, the prince and head of all Ecclesiastical
hierarchy or holy principality. The second reason is, because if we take
priesthood in its full latitude, Episcopacy is also included in it; for the
name and office of priesthood, does signify two things, the first is ordinary
authority or jurisdiction, to govern men in order to salvation, and to God his
service; the second is power to offer Sacrifice to God; which two functio^s are
expressed by two words or names appropriated commonly to Priests, to wit
Presbyter, and Sacerdos; for Presbyter and Presbyteriu^, which is a Greek word,
do import a superiority and power of governing, as Senior and Senatus do in
Latin: Sacerdos and Sacerdotium have relation to sacrifice, and they come from
Sacer or Sacrare, which is to make holy, and so they import power to offer up
sacrifice, which is a holy and sacred function. Now then from-hence it
follows that the order of priesthood is twofold; the one being only of
inferior Priests, who are those whom we commonly call Priests, to whom it
belongs to Sacrifice, but not to govern in chief; the other of superior
and chief Priests, who are only Bishops; to whom it belongs not only to
Sacrifice, but also to govern in chief. Wherefore seeing that priesthood,
does signify these two functions, and that the first which is to govern in
chief, by ordinary authority conferred upon men by Christ himself, is the
more principal, absolutely speaking, (though in some respect the other may be
preferred) as being that by which the second is directed and ordered, and
belongs only to Episcopacy, it follows, that Episcopacy is included under
the name of priesthood.

10. Is the Sacrament of Order necessary?
We have said above, that it is absolutely necessary for the whole Church:
besides it is necessary for every one in particular, that undertakes the
administration of Sacraments; and also regularly speaking, those who undergo
the office of spiritual government, and preaching, ought to receive orders
first; unless it be in such cases, in which the Church, or the Pope do upon
some occasions grant jurisdiction to some persons without Orders, by commission
and authority of the Sea Apostolic. And here you must note, that the giving of
Orders and Jurisdiction, is that thing, which is commonly called Mission, which
is a power to preach that doctrine, which is taught by the Catholic Church, as
also to administer the Sacraments in the same manner, and in the same sense, as
that Church intends and practices. So that whosoever teaches any thing
contrary to the doctrine of the true church (fromwhence all spiritual power is
derived,) does put himself upon a function, which he has no authority to do,
for want of Mission. From whence it follows that Luther, Calvin, and all
founders of heretical sects, as also all their adherents and successors do
want Mission, and do not enter in by the gate, but do break in by stealth, in
presuming to advance their own inventions, instead of preaching that doctrine,
which preachers are warranted to by Mission.

11. What Sacrament is next after Order?
Matrimony, which is the seventh, and last. It is put after all the rest,
because it does not belong either to every one in the Church in particular, or
directly and immediately to the whole Church in general, as Order does; but it
was instituted directly and immediately for one only particular state of
persons: although indirectly and remotely it belongs to the preservation of
the whole, in regard that the Church cannot subsist without procreation of
mankind; for grace presupposes nature, as the ground to work upon.

LESSON XXX. Of Matrimony.
1. WHat is Matrimony?
It is a Sacrament instituted by JESUS CHRIST, to establish a firm and
faithful fellowship, betwixt man and woman in holy wedlock, for the
procreation of children; who afterward by their regeneration in Baptism,
becoming the children of God, may serve him, and continue the succession of his
holy Catholic Church.

2. What is the sensible outward sign of this Sacrament?
It is the mutual consent of the man and woman, declared to each other by
words, or by some other outward expression.

3. Where do we find in Scripture, that grace is promised to the contract of
Marriage?
We find it in the Apostle Ephesians. 5. where speaking of Marriage, he says, This
Sacrament is a great one; which words are, according to what the Church and the
Fathers teach us, to be understood of a Sacrament properly speaking: now there
is no Sacrament in the new law, which does not confer grace. Again the
words following, but I say in Christ, and the Church, do signify that
marriage does represent the union of Christ with his Church, which union does
consist in grace and charity; which shows that there is grace and mutual
charity, conferred upon the married people toward each other, whereby
Matrimony is truly a representation of Christ his union with his Church.

4. Is this Sacrament necessary?
Marriage may be considered either as it is a Sacrament, or else as it is a
contract ordained to an office of nature, and as such, it is not necessary to
any in particular, but it is absolutely necessary to the whole world in
general, and co^seque^tly to the whole Church, which is the principallest
community in the world, and so it was commanded by God from the beginning of
the world, and it must continue as long, as the world shall continue. But if we
consider it as a Sacrament, it is necessary for every one in particular, that
embraces the state of wedlock in the Church; in so much, that it would be a
great sin for any Christians to contract a marriage, without observing those
conditions, which are necessary to make it a Sacrament; or which are required
to make the administration of it lawful: and therefore diligence must be used
beforehand, to see that there be no impediment that may render the Sacrament
either inualide, or the reception of it unlawful.

5. What impediments do render the Sacrament of Marriage unlawful?
They are many, as for example, the prohibition of the Church, that is of the
Bishop, or of any other in his place, who may upon just occasions forbid for a
certain space of time, such or such persons to marry together. As also if
either person has made a simple vow of chastity, or a vow to enter into
Religion, or to be a Priest or not to marry.

6. What impediments be they which make the Sacrament inualide, and the
contract of Marriage of no force.
They are fourteen, concluded in these verses. Error, conditio, votum,
cognatio, crimen,
Cultus disparitas, vis, ordo, ligamen, honestas;
Si sis affinis, si forte coire nequibis,
Si Parochi, and duplicis desit praesentia testis,
Raptaue sit mulier, nec parti reddita tutae.
Where you must note, concerning Consanguinity, that the marriage is inualide,
if the parties be allied to one another within four degrees of kindred
inclusiue: and the same is also of Affinity.

7. What is the end of Matrimony?
The immediate end is corporal generation of children; the remote end is their
spiritual regeneration by Baptism; and proportionably, their nurriture and
education conformable to these two generations.

8. Are then all Fathers and Mothers bound to instruct carefully their children?
Yes, and to teach them exactly not only by words, but also by example all
that, which co^cernes faith and Christian behavior, that they may serve God,
every one according to his condition: for a father ought to be in his family,
as the Bishop is in his Church, according to S. Chrysostom and S. Augustine.

9. How comes it to pass, notwithstanding that the Apostle does prefer a
single life before Marriage, that marriage should have this excellency above a
single life, as to be a Sacrament?
Because it is an Image of the sacred union betwixt Jesus Christ and his
Church; for as Jesus Christ is one with his Church, so that they cannot be
separated; so is the husband inseparably one with his wife: and as Jesus Christ
has loved his Church, and her children so much as to dye for them; so ought a
husband to love his wife, and the children, which God has given him, most
perfectly and cordially. Besides the state of marriage has many burdens, and
therefore men have need of a special grace to sustain them, which is
conferred to them by this Sacrament.

10. Which be the fruits, and good effects, that spring from the grace of this
Sacrament?
First, by the grace of this Sacrament, the married people are much enabled, to
preserve true love and mutual loyalty to each other. Secondly, it conferreth
to them grace, to give good and virtuous education to their children. Thirdly,
it gives strength, to support with Christian courage the great and many
tribulations, which the Apostle assures us, that the state of marriage is
subject unto.

11. What is the reason, that we find so few of these happy effects to proceed
from the grace of this Sacrament; but see very often the quite contrary in
their place?
The reason is, because so few dispose themselves with due preparation to
receive this Sacrament; some aiming only at their own temporal wealth, or
sensual pleasure; others employing their whole industry in mere profane
thoughts, as in providing sumptuous, great cheer, costly apparel, and jouiall
mirth, scarce admitting one serious cogitation, for the spiritual disposition
of their souls unto this holy Sacrament. Others finally by their sinful life,
and brutall sensuality, do loose the grace of God, and by this means they also
frustrate both the grace, and the former many good fruits of this Sacrament;
and are most justly punished with the quite contrary most unhappy effects, of
impatience, brawling, hatred, and jealosy.

LESSON XXXI. Of God his Actual grace.
1. Were the Sacraments instituted for no other end, but only to produce in us
habitual or sanctifying grace?
Yes, they were instituted also to be principal instruments for the obtaining
of God his assistant actual grace; that is, every Sacrament does obtain from
God that actual grace for us, which shall be necessary, when we are to
perform those things, for which each Sacrament was instituted.

2. How is this done?
This is done through the virtue of sanctifying grace received by the
Sacrament; for Sacraments have this property, that they do confer unto us
together with habitual grace, a special title, whereby God is ready to give
us more abundantly his actual assistant grace, when any occasion requires it;
which title is nothing else (in the opinion of many) but the habitual grace it
self as conferred by the Sacraments. From-whence we may gather, how careful
we ought to be to preserve this habitual grace; for by loosing it, we loose
not only the habitual grace it self, but together with it, we loose also the
special title, which we had by the Sacrament, to God his assistant actual
grace, and so we are deprived of the same special title for ever, unless
through God his infinite mercy, we do recover again by true repentance our
former habitual grace. And this is to be understood in respect of our selves
only, for where the particular helps obtained by the Sacrament, do concern
the good of others (as they do in the Sacrament of Order) then though the
Minister be never so wicked, yet his functions will be valide, and he himself
oftentimes be assisted with special helps, or discharge his office, though
peradventure not for his own profit, yet for the benefit of those he governs.

3. Why do you say that the Sacraments do give us a title to that actual
grace, for which each Sacrament was instituted?
Because each Sacrament was instituted for a peculiar end, and so every one of
them does not confer unto us a special title to any grace, but only to that
for which it was instituted; for by the grace of Baptism we obtain those
helps from God, which are necessary to overcome the temptations that occur
through the common condition of humane frailty, in a more plentiful measure
then ordinary. By the grace of Confirmation we obtain those helps, which are
necessary to overcome extraordinary temptations, as persecution of Tyrants, and
the like. By the grace of the holy Eucharist we obtain those helps, which are
necessary to make us love God fervently, and to do heroicke works of charity.
By the grace of Penance we obtain God his assistance to produce worthy
fruits of repentance. By the grace of Extreme Unction we obtain helps from
God, to overcome those extraordinary temptations, which by occasion of our
former sinful life may befall us at the hour of death. By the grace of Order
we obtain those helps, which are necessary for performing worthily
Ecclesiastical functions. And lastly by the grace of Matrimony, those helps
are obtained, which are peculiarly necessary for that state of life, which is
exposed more then any other to dangers, by having a perpetual conversation
with the world.

4. Seeing that we receive by the Sacraments, so many helps from Allmighty
God, how comes it to pass, that those who receive the Sacraments, are
notwithstanding still in danger to fall, and to loose their first sanctifying
grace, by yielding to temptations?
The reason of it is, because although we receive from God, by means of the
Sacraments, sufficient grace to overcome temptations in all occasions, yet we
are become so corrupt through the sin of our first parents, as that we do
oftentimes neglect to consider, and regard with diligence and gratitude of
mind, the inspirations, and wholesome motions of the holy Ghost, and to embrace
that grace, which is offered unto us through Christ, and which moves us to do
good things. And therefore we ought always to pray to God, that he will
finish what he has begun, by increasing his grace toward us, and by rendering
it efficacious in us: for this is that great mercy of God, on which we do all
depend.

5. What is this actual and efficacious helping grace of God?
It is an internal motion from God, communicated to us, through the merits of
Jesus Christ, whereby we are enlightened and stre^gthened so, as to perform,
what God requires at our hands.

6. Are we able of our selves to merit this happy grace?
No, we are not able of our selves to do any thing at all, whereby we may
obtain or inuit God to grant us that first grace, which moves our hearts,
and puts us in the way of salvation; but it is purely given us by Gods mere
goodness and mercy, by which he preuents, and attracts all such, as approach
unto him.

7. Is this first grace sufficient alone for us?
No, for although by it we are put into the way to obtained God his happy
favor, and to enter into his service; yet we are not able to advance one step,
unless he do assist us again with new succor, and new grace, for each godly
action, which we shall do: but with his grace nothing is impossible unto us.

8. Can we do any thing, whereby to merit this second advancement in the way of
salvation?
By the help of God his first preventing grace, we may do some thing, whereby
God may be moved through his goodness to grant us a second grace, and so
again other favors and graces after it: but we cannot do any thing whereby
this second grace shall be due unto us. For although by works done by us in
the state of grace, we do merit de condigno, as Divines term it, an increase
of sanctifying grace, and a reward in heaven, yet by them we cannot merit de
condigno the gift of perseverance, or that efficacious actual assistance of
God, without which we never do the least godly work. Howsoever, if we use our
endeauours to show our selves such, as unto whom the grace of God, whereby we
were inspired and moved at first, was not given in vain; and if we be not
deficient, but being guilty of our own weakness, do still persevere to call
upon God; there is no doubt but that he who gave us the beginning, will perfect
it, and work in us both to will, and to perform: for he is naturally good,
and wills all men to be saved, and has provided for them all things, by
which they may be saved; except by their own malice they will be evil. For
all such as do sin, and are damned, are certainly the authors of sin, and
damnation to themselves; God is nether the author of sin, nor cause of
damnation: although he be the author of all good, and of salvation; for (as I
said before) we cannot do the least godly work without his grace.

9. Do we then depend continually in this life on the pure mercy of God, for
the doing of godly works?
Yes; for let us come to what we shall still have need of a new continual
assistance from God, to mantaine us in it, and to make us to continue to do
godly works; which assistance we can never deserve, so as to make it our due.
Howsoever although this actual grace whereby we are enabled to do any godly
thing, proceeds from the bounty of God alone, and though we be at first
inspired and moved to will without our own endeavor; yet to will actually,
that is, to resist temptations, to persist in goodness, and to go forward in
virtue, is the joint work both of the grace of God, and of our own free will
and endeavor; and therefore as on the one side, we ought not so to extol free
will, as to diminish the necessity and efficacity of God his grace; no more
ought we to preach the grace of God so, as thereby to take awy free will.

10. Whence proceeds this our great necessity of God his holy grace?
It proceeds from man's corrupt nature during this mortal life, which by the
holy Scripture is called Concupiscence; for Adam and Eve by their first sin,
infected the whole man, both body, understanding, and will, by yielding to
those three sinful suggestions of gluttony, curiosity, and pride; whereby
concupiscence seized entirely upon them, and descends to us from them, and
stirs us up continually, to rebellion against the law of God, by sinful
motions and temptations, which can never be overcome by us, without Gods
helping grace afforded us by the merits of Jesus Christ: and all the virtue and
exercise of a Christian in this world, does consist in fighting against this
concupiscence, and in diminishing it by little and little.

11. Is there no other means but the Sacraments to obtain from God, his
helping and preventing grace, which is so necessary for us?
Yes, there is also prayer, which is a general means to obtain all kinds of
actual grace.

LESSON XXXII. Of Prayer.
1. What is Prayer?
Prayer is any elevation of our mind to God, but most usually that act is
called such, whereby we do testify to God our desire, demanding him to grant
it in effect.

2. What be the effects and fruits of Prayer?
They be very many, and very great ones: first it obteineth us remission of
sin, and God accepts it for satisfaction of the pain remaining due to
sins after that the guilt is remitted. Secondly, it increases our hope and
confidence in God, for it is certain, that he who has frequent access to any
person, becomes more familiar and confident with him. Thirdly, it enflameth
charity, for it is impossible to converse often with God, who is all fire of
love, without receiving some heat from his sacred flames. Fourthly, it
increases humility and fear, for how can one be continually asking, and
humbling himself like a beggar, but that he must needs perceive his own
poverty, and stand in fear of offending him, of whom he has continual need.
Fifthly, it produces a contempt of the world, and a delight in spiritual and
celestial things. Sixthly, to omit many others, it makes one honored and
respected by the Angels themselves, who cannot choose but bear reverence to
him, whom they see familiar with God himself.

3. What be the conditions required in prayer, that it may produce these happy
effects?
The be seven. The first is discretion, that we demand nothing but such
things, as are either necessary, or conducing to eternal salvation; for it is
certain, that he who demands things that are unprofitable, or hurtful to
his soul, deserves not to be heard, but to be chastised. The second is faith,
that we do firmly believe that God, to whom we address our prayers, is good,
and able to grant what we demand. The third is hope, by which we do confide in
God his goodness, that he will grant what we demand. The fourth, is charity,
that is, that we be in the state of grace, or at least that we have a hearty
desire of repentance and amendment. The fifth is humility, for it it most
reasonable, that he who is a beggar, should humble himself before him, from
whom he desires relief, and that he should rely merely upon his goodness,
and not upon his own merit. The sixth is devotion, for it is not enough to
ask with his lips, but he must ask from his heart, with care and solicitude,
and with an ardent desire to obtain what he asks. The seventh is
perseverance, for God will not have us to ask once only, but oftentimes, that
so trial may be made of our constancy.

4. Must not our prayer also be continual?
Yes; for as our want of divine assistance is continual, so must we pray
continually to God for it, and our Savior does command us to do so.

5. Must we then be always upon our knees?
No; for there are many sorts of prayers: the first by words; the second by
thoughts only; the third by actions; the fourth by sufferings: and it is
sufficient that a man be always praying one of these four ways.

6. How must we pray by words?
By so putting our selves in the presence of God, that if he please to assist
us, we may lift up our hearts and thoughts to him.

7. How must we pray by actions?
By doing good works to a good end, and by leading a good life through the
light of faith in Gods service. For if our good works have force to merit for
us eternal glory in heaven, they may well be thought to have force enought to
obtain any thing, that is necessary for us in this life.

8. How must we pray by suffering?
By bearing with patience the evils, misfortunes, and afflictions, which it
shall please God to send us; this being an excellent way to draw upon us his
blessings and graces: for as actions are more powerful toward God, then
words, so are sufferings much more powerful then actions.

9. Show how we ought always to pray?
By doing one of these four things, with a sincere desire to serve God
thereby, and to obtain his grace for that end; for this desire is the thing,
wherein prayer does principally consist.

10. Is there no other way to pray to God, but one of these four?
Yes; we may pray also by hearing sermons, reading good books, and the like.
And when all the former ways fail us, we may yet pray by presenting our
selves simply before God, and only showing him our misery, as beggars use to
do, who lie along in the streets without speaking a word, exposing only their
misery and poverty to the view of the people, that so they may be moved by
compassion to assist them.

LESSON XXXIII. Of Mental Prayer.
1. WHich of all the former sorts of prayer is most useful and necessary for
us?
We have said already, that the most perfect kind of prayer, is to pray by
suffering, and the next to that is praying by action; for both these do include
praying by thought. But because we can scarcely pray either of these ways, as
we ought to do, unless we be first well prepared, and disposed to perform
them with devotion, which preparation or disposition is chiefly got by that
kind of praying by thought, which is commonly called mental prayer, or
meditation, it follows that mental prayer or meditation is ordinarily the
most necessary, to those who are able to meditate.

2. How are we prepared by mental prayer to pray by action and suffering?
You must know, that a virtuous life is a continual prayer, which life does
consist in doing good with charity, and in suffering evil with patience: now
mental prayer is the consideration of things necessary to those ends, and not
a dry consideration, but a moving of our will out of it, that thereby we may
exercise our affections toward God allmighty; which exercise of our affections
is the only thing that gives life to our actions and sufferings: for how do
you think we come to practice a virtuous life, but by our affections? So that
meditation is the direct right way that leads us to do and suffer virtuously.
And we may easily perceive how necessary meditation is for us, if we consider
the extreme ignorance into which we are cast by sin, and how our soul is
evermore carried backward from doing virtuous actions, unless by due
consideration it be forced against the stream; so that we must needs live
blindely, and do very little good, without the use of mental prayer, or
something equivalent to it, as the hearing of sermons, reading good books and
the like.

3. How many parts be there of mental prayer.
They are three, the first is to know, and to be sure of the truth, you are to
consider; and this rather belongs to him, who prescribes the meditation in
our present purpose; for it belongs to him to give a strong and plain
consideration, that he who comes to prayer, need not much ado to be convinced
of the truth. The next part is the making of a resolution according to the
knowledge proposed, by exhorting himself out of the weightinesse of the
consideration, to rectify his will and inclinations: and this is properly that
which is called Meditation; for Meditari signifies to often think of, or to
conne, or exercise somethi^g. The third part is the turning our heart to God,
for whose sake we are to do all things, and from whom we are to expect the
increase of our labors. For as all the husbandmans labor, is to little
purpose, unless God sends rain, hear, and fair weather at due seasons: so
likewise unless God direct our life, it is to little purpose whatsoever our
endeauours go about.

4. What preparation is necessary for Meditation?
That which is most substantial, is, that your thoughts be not preoccupated by
any other care, which may draw your mind to distractions; and therefore it
ought to be the first thing you do after you are risen. Secondly, shortly to
remember, that all other businesses of the world or studies whatsoever, be
bables, and things not concerning you in respect of this, and that it is the
maine help to do you good in this life, and the next. For the rest, I remit
you to seek it in treatises of purpose made of this subject, amongst others I
recommend unto you one, made by Antonius Molina a Carthusian: whose printed
meditations also are very good for beginners, to practice themselves in.

5. In what is vocal prayer better then mental prayer, and mental prayer,
better then it?
Vocal prayer has two excellences above mental: the first is, that
ordinarily the prayer is made by some, who have more skill then we have, and
therefore is more perfect for the most part, then one of our mental prayers.
Secondly, it keeps from distractions much; because our eyes, and (when we say
them without books) our memories hold our understanding to the matter, better
then when we have no such determination. But likewise on the other side, it
has two disaduantages: one, that it does not so well fill our souls, being
nether so much labored, as what we make our selves; nor so naturally
proportioned to us, as what we do our selves. Secondly the affections conceived
by vocal prayer do not move us to action so strongly, as those which proceed
from meditation. But that which gives weight both to the one, and other sort
of praying, is attention; so that two Aue Mary's said with thinking of what you
say, is better, then two pair of beads tumbled over with your mind upon an
other business.

LESSON XXXIV. Of praying to Saints.
1. MAy we not pray also to God, by the mediation of others, to grant us his
divine assistance?
Yes, and especially by the Saints and Angels, for the prayers of the blessed
in heaven are afficacious with allmighty God, and by praying to them we get
them to pray for us.

2. Is it lawful then to pray to Saints?
Yes, but we must not do it in the same manner as we use to pray to God; for we
pray to God, as to our sovereign Lord, that he will have mercy upon us, and
give us his grace: but the Saints can nether forgive us our sins, nor
confer grace upon us, and to dema^d it of them, were to wrong our creator,
and to attribute that homage to a creature, which is due to God alone: but our
prayer to them is, that they will pray to God for us, as being most nearly
united to his divine Majesty by charity, and eternal bliss. Which kind of
prayer has always been practiced in the Church; for if we may desire men here
upon earth to pray for us, much more may we desire the Saints in heaven to do
it; who being confirmed in charity, cannot be less willing to assist us; and
being more perfectly united to God, cannot choose but have as much power to
obtain from him, what they demand in our behalf; nether can they be ignorant
of our miseries, or of their own favor with allmighty God.

3. May we pray to Saints in the same manner as to our blessed Savior?
No, for first our blessed Savior is God, as well as man; secondly he only is
the immediate intercessour betwixt God and us, who has power and authority of
himself to intercede for us; whereas the Saints do intercede only by the force
of his intercession; Thirdly, he is the only universal mediator betwixt God
and us, for he only redeemed us, and so he only has power to obtain what he
pleases for all the world, by virtue of his own infinite dignity, and proper
merit; whereas the Saints can obtain nothing but only through his merits.
Fourthly, he is the only person, upon whose consideration all graces are
granted. Yet all these prerogatives do not hinder; but that we may pray to the
Saints in an inferior way, and that they also may pray for us, without doing
any wrong to our blessed Saviors sovereign mediation. Which is evident by the
like example in Princes here upon earth; for a king may love one of his
Fauorits so much, as that he may resolve not to grant any grace but through his
consideration; yet this does not hinder, but that one may employ other persons
toward this Favorite, to obtain of the king, the graces, which they desire;
and also that one may demand a thing from the king himself under the favor
and protection of his Favorite. In the same manner although allmighty God does
not grant any grace, but by the merits of Jesus Christ; yet this does not
hinder, but that the Saints may demand the same for us through themerits of
Jesus Christ, since we do the like daily for one another, and also that we may
desire them to intercede for us to Jesus Christ himself.

4. How can the Saints hear our prayers?
You must not think that they hear with ears, that is, that they have this
sensible passion, which we call hearing. But by hearing in this question is
understood knowing, and there can be no doubt, but that the Saints may know all
things, that concern them, since that they know God, in whom all things are
contained, and who is the doer of all things that are done. Besides the
Scripture assures us, that Angels know what men do here upon earth; and the
same Scripture tells us also, that the Saints in heaven are like Angels.

5. What obligation have we to pray to Angels and Saints?
To answer your question, you must know, that Angels and Saints are in perfect
bliss and happiness, whether we pray to them or no; from whence you will
perceive that all service and honor done to Saints by us, redoundeth rather to
our own profit then to theirs. And therefore although honor in it self be
due unto them, yet they are then best honored, when we ourselves do profit by
it, and grow better by honoring them; for this is even to them an increase of
an accidental kind of glory. From-whence it follows, that the keeping of
holy days, building churches, and setting up altars to God in memory of
Saints, is to be moderated according to the vtility, which redoundeth to the
Church by it: and in proportion, the prayers, or what sort of devotions soever
are used in private to their honors, are to be governed by the same principle.
Now the vtility redounding to the Church is, first that whereas humane nature
is easily weary of being carried above it self by prayer, and other spiritual
exercises, the weariness of devotion is in part helped by this holy variety.
Secondly, the memory of God his goodness and benefits toward mankind, is
made familiar unto us by making often commemoration of his Saints, upon who^ he
bestowed his graces most plentifully, and who were many times the instruments
he used to confer many singular benefits upon his whole Church. Again,
whereas men's humors and states of life be so diverse, it happens out, that
every man may have examples in their own kind to be affected unto; and many
times this makes a greater profit by such an affinity to their own condition,
then by a great deake of preaching or good counsel. And so you may see what
obligation there is to honor Saints, and to pray unto them; towit, when the
Church for the common good of her children presses it, then that is to be
done, whatsoever she commands, and it is a sin to omit it. But in other
occasions, and at other times, every particular man as far as he finds need
or help by this variety in his private devotion, so far he does very well to
follow it, especially if he finds that it stirs up a failing devotion in
him; for the end of this, as of all all other pious exercices, must be God
himself, and the better performing of our duty toward him.

6. What think you of the use of pictures, and hanging of lamps before them,
in honor of the blessed Virgin and other Saints?
First as for pictures, if we believe nature and experience, the use of them in
general is very profitable, and in some sort necessary in the Church of God,
for the instruction and spiritual profit of the faithful. First, for memories
sake, for as often as we see pictures, so often do we remember the thing
painted: and whether we have need of often remembering heaven, and heavenly
things, let even our cold and evil life bear testimony. Secondly, when a man
says his prayers before a picture of our Savior, or of any Saint, by
addressing himself unto it, he makes thereby a great apprehension of the
Saint, as if he himself were present, unto whom he prays, and by co^seque^ce
prays with a greater respect and attention. Thirdly, it serves for an
address of the prayer, and especially if he use any corporal gestures
withal: for as the ancient Christians were used to turn themselves to the
East, and the Jews toward the Temple, when they would adore God, the East and
Temple serving for a determination of their action: so much more when I bow, or
do any other reverence, or pray before a picture, it is a determination of my
prayer or respect unto God, or unto that Saint, whose picture it is. Lastly, it
is a help to him that prays, for pictures bear with them an expression
oftentimes, which would cost many words, and works of our memory. As he who
looks on a crucifixe, if he desire to represent to himself, and fix in his
heart the wounds and passion of our blessed Savior, he may find a great
facility and quickenesse to do it, by having the picture before his eyes.

As for hanging lamps before pictures of Saints, it is to represent their
glory in heaven, or the burning charity with which they were endued here on
earth, and so these and such like expressions are apt to breed a greater
apprehension in men, which is a means to make them pray the better, and
consequently obtain more at God his hands, and therefore are allowed, and
recommended in the Catholic Church.

7. How are we to pray to Saints?
By honoring them here upon earth, and by observing their feasts according to
the order of the Church, and also by reading their lives, and by saying such
prayers to them, as are approved by our Pastors; and chiefly of all, by
imitating the virtues, which they did particularly excel in.

8. Are we to pray to all the Saints alike?
No, for we ought to have a particular devotion to our blessed Lady above all
the rest, because she is the Mother of God, and most near unto him of any
creature. And amongst the other blessed, we ought chiefly to pray to our
Angel Gardien, seeing that it has ever been the constant faith of Christians,
that every one has an Angel for his governor; for our Savior has told us,
that the Angels of the little ones see the face of his heavenly Father. And
next we are to pray to such particular Saints, as we our selves make choice of
to be our Patrons.

9. What prayer is ordinarily used to our blessed Lady?
The Aue Maria.

LESSION XXXV. Of the Aue Maria.
1. SAy the Aue Maria?
Hail Marie full of grace, our Lord is with thee, blessed art thou amongst all
women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb Jesus. Holy Marie Mother of God,
pray for us sinners, now, and in the hour of our death. Amen.

2. Who made this prayer?
The holy Catholic Church, borrowing the words wherewith the Angel and Saint
Elizabeth did salute the blessed Virgin. The first words. Hail full of grace
our Lord is with thee, blessed art thou amongst all women, were spoken by the
Angel. Blessed is the fruit of thy womb, were spoken by Saint Elizabeth. The
Church has added the other words, which make the second part of the prayer; or
rather the holy Ghost has made the whole prayer, by whom all three, the
Angel, Saint Elizabeth, and the Church have been inspired.

3. Declare the first sentence of this prayer. Hail Marie full of grace our
Lord is with thee.
The first word used by the Angel, is a salutation which imports all
happiness, which one can desire; for in Latin it is Aue, which comes from
aueo, which signifies to desire or wish for, and there is understood some
nowne, as salutem, pacem, gaudium, etc. but none is expressed in particular,
because he who uses this word, wishes to him, whom he saluteth, all kind of
happiness, that he himself will join to the word, and can imagine or desire.
Which expression was most proper from the Angel to the blessed Virgin, since
that the cause of his coming to her, was to bring her the news, from whence
all happiness was to come, both to her self, and to the whole world. The
second word Marie, does signify her person, and her dignity. Her Person,
because it was her own proper name, given unto her by the inspiration of tho
holy Ghost, as we may piously believe: her dignity, because it signifies in
Hebrew Mistress or Lady; and who can be more truly Mistress and Lady of all
things, then she, who is Mother to the Creator of all things. It signifies
also the sea star, and she is truly a star, that conducts all those, who
take her for their guide through the sea of the world into a secure haven. By
the next word the Angel does show, that she was replenished with grace: and
worthily is her soul declared full of graces, because she had the privilege
(as it is piously believed and taught by the Church) never to be infected with
original sin, and most certainly never to commit any the least venial
actual sin. Full of Grace, because her life was a true mirror of chastity,
humility, meekness, obedience, patience, faith, hope, charity, and in fine
of all virtues. By those other words, our Lord is with thee, the Angel does
advertise the blessed virgin of the mystery, which was immediately
accomplished in her, that our Lord, the word of God, the second person of the
Blessed Trinity, was to descend into her, to rake flesh of her body, and to
remain in her, not only by charity and grace? but also personally.

4. Declare the second sentence of this prayer. Blessed art thou amongst all
women.
The Angel does by these words, denounce from heaven a benediction to the
blessed Virgin, seeing that she was to be the instrument, to banish out of the
world that general malediction, which an other woman had brought upon the
world. Blessed; because it is a benediction not to be sterile, and a
benediction proper only to her, to bring forth him, who is the Father of all
the world. Blessed above all; because none but she has the benediction of
marriage, and the perfection of virginity, none but she ever was or shall be
both a Virgin and a Mother; Blessed in fine, because she is chosen out of the
whole Progeny of Adam, to be the Mother of God, who is author of all
benedictions.

5. Declare the third sentence. Blessed is the fruit of thy womb.
Saint Elizabeth by these words inspired by the holy Ghost, with zeal toward
our Savior, after that she and the Angel had praised the blessed Virgin, does
turn to her son, to show that the merits of the Mother did proceed from the
son, who is the fountain of all blessings. The Virgin in blessed above all
women, through the benediction conferred upon her by the fruit of her womb;
and the fruit of her womb is blessed above all things, by his own proper
benediction, which he conferreth, and which is spread over the whole world by
creation, and Redemption; and so he is not said, blessed amongst men, as our
Lady is said, blessed amongst women, because he is absolutely and essentially
blessed without relation or comparison. The word Jesus which signifies
Savior, is added by the Church, to show that our redemption is the fruit of
his benediction.

6. Declare the last sentence.
The last sentence is our prayer to our Lady, whereby we desire her to assist
us by her powerful intercession. Now, that is every moment; and with great
reason, seeing that we have continually need of her assistance, being
continually a assaulted by three powerful enemies, the world, the flesh, end
the Devil: and she has both will and power to assist us; will, because she is
full of charity; power, because she is the Mother of him, by whose grace we
are to overcome our enemies. We desire her also to assist us at the hour of
our death, because seeing we are to be judged according to the state we dye in,
we have then most need of her assistance, to obtain by her intercession the
grace of God, to strengthen us, and to keep us in that last moment in such a
state, as that we may come to a happy eternity, victorious over all our
enemies.

7. Wherefore does our Mother the Church usually appoint her children, after
the Pater noster, to adjoyne the Aue Maria?
It is with great reason, that after we have humbly proposed out suite unto the
Father of our blessed Redeemer, we should next address our selves unto his
Mother (whose power undoubtedly does exceed the power of all other creatures in
heaven and in earth,) to desire her to pray to her son, that he would be our
Mediator toward his Father, and to make us obtain, what we desire.

8. Is it a good and laudable devotion, to make so many repetitions of the
self same words, as some use to do of the Aue Maria?
Truly if some Saints did with so great comfort and devotion spend frequently
whole nights in repetition of these only six words vt nouerim te, vt nouerim
me. And Saint Francis the like in these, Quis es tu, and quis sum ego? And if
the Seraphins in praise of their creator, repeat without count or term of
time, that Holy, Holy, Holy, etc. why may not we in like manner find
profitable employment for one half hour at least, in repetition of that
Angelical salutation, whereby we make so often a grateful commemoration of
the most blessed Incarnation, of the son of God, the only means designed by
God for our eternal redemption?

9. But are we to place any hope of merit in those determinate numbers of Aue
Mary's, to be said on our Beads?
No; for these determinate numbers serve only to awake in us some pious
thought, as thirty three in remembrance of the thirty three years, wherein
our blessed Savior wrought our Redemption upon earth, craving thereby the
application of his blessed merits unto our souls: and sixty three in
remembrance of the years, which our blessed Lady did live, craving her
intercession for grace to imitate the virtues she practiced in that time: and
so by all the rest, which are accommodated unto some holy mysteries, both for
our instruction, and to help for devotion; especially for the unlearned and
simple people who are not fit for contemplation, and cannot read or understand
the Psalms; for by the repetition of those two prayers, which are plain to
every ordinary understanding, those people are provided of a means, whereby to
spend their time in prayer with no less profit, then those, who say the holy
Psalms, or give themselves to contemplation.

10. What is the best way to use in saying of the Beads?
As for the use of the Beads, it is hard give a general rule that may be
suitable to all; wherefore I would advise every one to take the counsel of his
spiritual Director, and to read the treatises, that have been written of this
subject, where every one may mark, what is most conformable to his private
devotion. Only this in general 1 should advertise them, that in saying the Aue
Marie; at those words, Marie and Jesus to remember some passage or benefit of
our Redeemer toward mankind, for which we bless not only him, but also his
holy Mother; for seeing she brought forth him, who bestowed such benefits upon
us, it is reason, she should partake of the blessings, which we heap upon her
son for them. And likewise in the latter pare, where we desire her to pray
for us, we may determine some good we have need of: which additions are to be
spoken only with our heart, for by doing so, every Aue Marie will be made a
iaculatory commemoration of some mystery, and our heart will be lifted up, and
go together with our mouth, which is the true use of vocal prayer. Which will
be done more easily, if we allot a certain number of Aue Mary's, and not many,
to every point or mystery of our Saviors life, for so we shall be less
subject to distractions.

11. Is there no manner of praying vocally but by the Pater noster, and the Aue
Marie?
Yes; there are many other ways set down in the Primer, or Manual, and
particularly all those, that are practiced in the office of the Church, and the
Sacrifice of the Mass; and to these we ought to bear a particular respect and
devotion, as being the most excellent of all others, because they are the words
of the universal Church, inspired by the holy Ghost, and pronounced by the
mouth of his Ministers.

LESSON XXXVI. Of the Sacrifice of Mass.
1. IS the Sacrifice of Mass self a means also to obtains God his helping
grace?
Yes; and in some sort the most efficacious, and most general of all. For by
it we appease the wrath of God wonderfully, and so draw his blessings upon us
continually: because in it does consist the principal function of Religion, by
which we perform our chiefo duty toward God.

2. What is the Sacrifice of Mass?
It is the Christian sacrifice, ordained by Jesus Christ, to be offered up to
his Father to the worlds end, in remembrance of that bloody sacrifice upon the
cross, where he by his own sacred death offered up himself a holocoust to
God for the redemption of mankind.

3. Is the Sacrifice of Mass also it self a means whereby to pray?
Yes; but it is such in a more eminent degree then all the rest, for God is
more honored by it then by all our other actions, and therefore, as Saint
Denis says of Allmighty God, that he is not goodness, nor wisdom, nor
power, nor beauty, as we use to call him, because our conceptio^s are short of
that, which these perfections are in him: so the honor which is given to God
by other actions, is so short of the honor, which is given to him by the
Sacrifice of Mass, as that this sacrifice ought not to be reckoned as one of
our other actions, whereby we pray, but it is to be placed in a rank by it
self above all the rest.

4. What is a Sacrifice?
It is an outward action, whereby we offer up to allmighty God some creature,
by destroying or killing it, protesting thereby both a supreme worthiness in
him, as being Author of life and death, to whom we should sacrifice even our
own lives, if it were profitable and necessary for his honor; and also a
readiness in us to do so, when he shall require it of us. And the thing which
is thus offered up, is called the host of the sacrifice.

5. A sacrifice then is a kind of worship due to God alone?
Yes; and it is the greatest worship that we can exhibit to God, both in
respect of that perfection, which we acknowledge in him, which is the very
Godhead it self; for God signifies as much, as the Author of being to all
things, which is the very thing, we acknowledge of him properly by the
sacrifice; as also in respect of that, which we profess to be due to him,
which is our own lives, if he please to exact them of us, which is the
greatest thing that we can give in this world: and therefore sacrificing was
always held the chiefest function in all religions.

6. What is the host in the Sacrifice of Mass?
It is Christ Jesus himself, whose body and blood are truly offered up to his
Father, under the form of bread, and wine.

7. How is this done?
It is done by the words instituted by Jesus Christ, and pronounced by the
Priest in his name, in which words a divine virtue is present, to produce the
effect, they signify.

8. Why did Christ institute this Sacrifice?
To continue in the world the Sacrifice, which he did offer for us upon the
cross, to the end that he might render a perpetual honor to his Father, in
sacrificing himself daily to him; and also that he might communicate to men,
the fruit of that Sacrifice, by putting into their hands the victime it self,
which he offered to his Father.

9. Is Christ then truly killed daily in the Sacrifice of Mass?
No; he is only killed mystically, and not truly; yet he is truly sacrificed,
because his true body and his true blood are really offered up to God, and not
mystically only.

10. How is he truly sacrificed, if he be not truly killed?
Because his own body and his own blood, being made by virtue of the
consecration, a true memorial of his bloody death upon the cross, they are by
that outward action, truly and really put into such a state, as is fit to
express that acknowledgement of Gods supreme power, which sacrifices were
instituted to signify. And therefore by the words of consecration, Christ is
truly and really sacrificed.

11. Why did he institute this Sacrifice under the forms of bread and wine?
To signify the separation of his body and blood, which was caused by his
bitter Passion.

12. Who is he that offers up Christ to his Father in the Sacrifice of Mass?
Christ himself, and also tho Priest; but Christ principally, and the Priest
only secondarily or instrumentally, for the Priest is only Christ his Minister.

13. What virtue has the Sacrifice of Mass?
It has virtue to appease the wrath of God, and to move him, to forgive us our
sins; which is as much as to say, that it is propitiatory sacrifice: it has
also virtue to obtain for us from God, his divine grace, and other spiritual
benefits of what kind soever they be.

14. What is the Mass?
It is the Sacrifice, with all the array and ceremonies appointed by the
Church, for the edifying and decent celebrating of the same.

15. With what affection should we come to Mass?
With that affection, for which sacrifices were instituted, that is, with a
devout acknowledgement of our duties toward God; with an earnest desire to
appease the wrath of God, which we have deserved by our sins; and also with
thanksgiving to our blessed Savior, that he has vouchsafed to leave unto his
Church, his own body and blood, as a pledge of his love, to be offered up to
his Father by us in testimony of the foresayed acknowledgement, and as a
means to appease his deserved wrath.

16. What is the best way to hear Mass?
If one have capacity and commodity, he should attend to all such passages, as
the Priest speaks out plain; for the rest, he should have his private
devotions, which be so much the better, if they be accommodated to the course
of the Mass, but if not, no great matter, as long as his devotion does recall
it self by a particular attention, at the chief mysteries of Mass; which are
the consecration, published to the people by the elevation; and the
consummation, which is done when the Priest receives the body and blood of
Jesus Christ.

17. Must we have the same disposition for hearing of Mass, which is required
to receive worthily the Sacrament?
The same disposition is not absolutely necessary; for no man who finds
himself in the state of mortal sin, can receive the Sacrament, unless he
go first to confession; which is not necessary for hearing of Mass: yet it
were to be wished that all did so, because those who hear Mass with devotion,
although they do not receive the Sacrament really, yet they receive it
spiritually. Howsoever since that one principal effect of the Sacrifice, is to
dispose us to grace by appeasing the wrath of God, and by obtaining such
helps, as may work justifying grace in us in due time, with true repentance
for our sins, as the Council of Trent does teach us; and since that this
effect is wrought ex opere operato (as Divines term it) in those, who hear
Mass with devotion, certainly if one be in mortal sin, and reflect upon
it, and should not at least endeavor to stir up an act of contrition, but
persist in his sinful resolution, besides the irreuerence he commits, he
would deprive himself of that great fruit of the Sacrifice. For there is not
any doubt, but that an actual affection to mortal sin, and a resolution to
continue in it, is a direct impediment to that opus operatum, or principal
effect, for which the Sacrifice was instituted: yea some also add, that the
want of actual sorrow for our sins, is likewise an impediment, whereby the
hearing of Mass, is deprived of its proper effect; being moved thereunto by
the words of the Council of Trentsess. 22. where the said Counsel putting
down the conditions, that are required in those who hear Mass, to render the
sacrifice propitiatory, says, that this sacrifice is truly propitiatory, and
that we do obtain mercy by it, if we come to God contrite and penitent, with a
true heart and right faith, with fear and reverence.

So that it cannot be denied, but that whosoever does hear Mass with a
positive resolution to persist in sin, does besides the irreuerence committed
against the highest mystery in Christian Religion, render himself unworthy of
those special benefits, which are obtained by this Sacrifice. Which appears
plainly by the practice of the primitive Church, and also by the present
practice ordained by the Council of Trent, which commands Bishops, that they
should not permit in their Diocesses any public and notorious sinner to be
present at Mass. Yea the same Council, to express more fully the great
reverence that is required at this holy mystery, commands all Bishops, that
they should not suffer any Priest either Secular or Regular to say Mass,
unless those who be present, do first by a decent composition of their body,
show, that they are present not only in body, but also in mind, and with a
devout affection of heart. Howsoever those that are in the state of mortal
sin, ought not to be deterred from assisting at Mass, as long as they come
with a penitent and sincere heart; yea although they should find themselves so
entangled in the snares of sin, as that they have not strength, and courage
enough to resolve fully to quit it; yet if they are sorrowful, that they want
this grace, and come with a desire to obtain it from God, it is not to be
doubted, but that they may, not only assist at Mass without scruple, but also
hope by the virtue of that holy Sacrifice, to appease the wrath of God, and so
to impetrate from his merciful hand true repentance.

18. How should we order our denotions during the time of Mass?
I said before, that the best way is, to accommodate ones devotions to the
course of the Mass; but because all are not capable to do this, therefore
there are many pious books set forth of this subject. Every one may gather out
of them, by the a duise of his spiritual Directour, that which is most suitable
to his own condition. In the mean while he may observe this short one, taken
out of the works of the late holy Bishop of Geneua. 1. As soon as you come to
the Chapel, whilst the Priest is preparing the chalice and the missall, place
your self in the sight of God, by a lively apprehension of his presence. 2.
From the Confiteor until the Gospel, stir up in your self affections of
contrition. 3. From the Gospel until the Preface, make a firm protestation
of your belief by acts of faith. 4. After Sanctus, consider with your self
the great benefit of our Redemption by the death and Passion of our Savior. 5.
At the Elevation, adore with all humility our blessed Savior, and offer him
up to God his Father, in acknowledgement that he is the Author of all things,
and fountain of all graces. 6. After the Elevation, produce acts of
thanksgiving to our Savior, for instituting this immaculate Sacrifice. 7.
When the Priest says the Pater noster, do you also say it with him softly and
devoutly to your self. 8. At the Communion, communicate spiritually with the
Priest 9. After Communion, contemplate our Savior as if he were sitting in
your heart, and call before him, one after another, all the senses of your
body, and powers of your soul, to receive his benediction and commands, and
to promise fidelity unto him And thus having had occasion to speak of this
blessed Bishop, I will conclude, with recommending to you the Introduction to a
devout life, a most pious and profitable book composed by the said Bishop.

FINIS.
Approbatio Doctorum.
NOs infrascripti in sacra Theologiae Facultate Parisiensi Doctores, tractatum
hunc seu Catechismum Anglicano scriptum idiomate, cui titulus, A Declaration of
the principal points of Christian Doctrine collected out of several
Catechismes, by the English Priests dwelling in Tournay College at Paris,
perlegimus and examinauimus, in quo fidei Catholicae and moribus Christianis
consona sunt omnia, ideoque praelo dignum censuimus. Datum Parisijs 25. Iunij
1646.

H. HOLDEN. IAC. DVLAEVS.


Errors in the print.
Page 2. l. 21. tne. correct. the. p. 123. l. 6. cave. cor. came. p. 133. l.
21. to wards. cor. to wards. p. 251. l. 2. of. cor. or. p. 264. l. 22. of. cor.
if. p. 327. l. 12. due of. cor. due end. of p. 333. l. 3. act. cor. acts. p.
334. l. 10. with. cor. which. p. 335. l. 18. we loose. cor. we may loose. p.
375. l. 10. eminent, cor. imminent. p. 380. l. 12. in is. cor. in his. p. 381.
l. 3. the. cor. this. p. 383. l. 6. wordly. cor. worldly p. 406. l. 15. it if.
cor. it is. p. 424. l. 15. ariue. cor. arrive p. 430. l. vlt. oyned. cor.
joined. p. 454 l. vlt. meelrey. cor. merely. p. 458. l. 15. and 19. guess.
cor. guess. p. 488. l. vlt. mportant. cor. important. p. 497. l. vlt. What
does. cor. What does. p. 522. l. vlt. ot. cor. to. p. 536. l. 20. words. cor.
thought. p. 562. l. 19. Father. cor. Creator. p. 563. l. 17. in. cor. is. p.
569. l. 12. to. cor. they. Ibid. l. 19, partake. cor. partake.


