Faeroe, and Foeroa Referata: THAT IS A DESCRIPTION OF THE Jslands and
Jnhabitants OF FOEROE: BEING Seventeen Islands subject to the King of Denmark,
lying under 62 degrees. 10 min. of North Latitude.

Wherein several Secrets of Nature are brought to Light, and some Antiquities
hitherto kept in darkness discovered.

Written in Danish by Lucas Jacobson Debes, M. A. and Provost of the Churches
there.

Englished By J. S. Doctor of Physic.

Illustrated with Maps*

Printed by F. L. for William l^es, at the Flower-de-Luce in Little-Brittain,
over against St. Bartholomews Gate. 1676.

TO Thomas Henshaw, Esquire; late His Majesty's Extraordinary Envoy to the King of
DENMARK.
SIR,
THere is so much variety in the Works of Nature attending the difference of
Air and soil; that man the scope of whose Creation is to be an Admirer
thereof, and to praise God therefore, cannot sufficiently effect what he was
created for, but by traveling, or at least, reading the Relations of those,
whose affairs either gave them occasion, or permitted them to transport
themselves on the places where those wonders are daily seen. These
considerations, Sir, and your own incitements imboldned me, having read in
Danish this Description of Feroe, wherein many strange effects of Nature and
odd customs are described, to undertake its translation into English, That the
Curious Inhabitants of this Island might not be ignorant of a Country not far
distant from them; which having now finished, many reasons make me presume to
Dedicate it to your Favor; for though in the manner aforesaid, it can be but
of little use unto you, that have with a dilligent eye not only surveyed the
most and best parts of Europe, but also perused most of these Relations that
are extant of the whole world; yet the many obliegements you have been pleased
to put upon me, and my thankfulness for them, seem to vindicate as a duty in my
judgment, what a more severe one will perhaps think an effect of my boldness,
and a trouble to you* Besides the Authors person and Ingenuity being known unto
you, it cannot but conciliate some authority to this Treatise; since you were
beyond Sea, several times pleased to invite him, and discourse about the
Contents of his Book. Be pleased then, Sir, to accept of this small (...) of my
Gratitude, indulge some expressions that perhaps retain something of their
innate plainness, and continue to favor, Sir,

Your most Humble and most Obliged Servant, John Sterpin.

To the READER.
Courteous Reader,
APerson to whom my disobedience would have been as much a want of duty as of
thankfulness and respect, inviting me to translate this Description of Feroe, I
did nevertheless undertake it with some Reluctance, both as distrusting to my
Abilities, and knowing certainly that the Northern plainness, if not inelegancy
of its expressions would hardly, keeping to the sense, afford a Polished Style
in English, which being the only Praise an Interpreter can aspire unto; I had
little encouragement to spend my time in a thing wherein I thought my labor
would at best meet but with an ordinary acceptance; Yet the matter being
something extraordinary, and few having cared to attain to the perfection of
the Language, wherein it was written; whose will or convenience might be to
undertake such a Translation; being persuaded that judicious men would have a
more then ordinary Indulgence for a Stranger, that endeavors to communicate
unto them, the Description of a Country, though not far distant, hitherto
little known unto them, I prepared this Treatise for the Press; wherein thou
art the best Judge of my success. Accept of it, as of a thing, I thought might
conduce to the improvement of Natural History. And though in Philosophical
Discourses, some Hypotheses, yet received in those parts of the World, be
absolnte in ours; take thereof as much as will be to thy satisfaction, and for
information and matter of Fact believe, no truer Relation can be had, the
Author being both Godly and Judicious. I have in most places for thy
conveniences reduced the measures of those places to those of England,
reckoning a Danish or German League for four English Miles and a Danish Yard
for two Foot or very near, for the rest I beseech thee to take in good part
this Information of Feroe. And when it pleases thee for a diversion to steal
some hours from thy more serious occasions employ them in its perusal. The
wondrous effects of Nature and odd customs of that Country will convince thee,
that God is as admirable in the variety of his works, as in any of his other
attributes.

Farewell.
THE AUTHORS Preface to the READER.
Courteous Reader,
THe Wisdom of God does principally consist in showing the Excellency of his
workmanship in poor, despicable, and contemptible things. For an Artist is more
to be esteemed, that can perfectly make the Image of a Fly, then be that
carveth out an Elephant; gross work requiring less skill then subtle. So the
Creator has showed more wisdom in the production of a Fly, then of an
Elephant. Whence follows, That if one would undertake to consider the Makers
Art in the forming of a Fly, and write a Treatise thereof; one might, perhaps,
make, as the Proverb says, of a Fly an Elephant; for Nature is most
Artificious and admirable in her least productions, showing most mystery
therein, Wherefore the wisest of men, King Solomon, that discoursed of Trees
from the Cedar of Libanon to the Isop growing by the way side; that spoke of
Beasts and Birds, Reptils and Fishes; has of none almost left us any doctrine,
but of the little contemptible Gnats; the example of good house keeping
consisting in the diligence and forecast, that is to be seen in these poor
little creatures; for having neither Prince Leader, nor Lord, they provide
their Bread in Summer, and gather their food in barvest. If any could intrude
into their habitation, be would be astonished to see how orderly their domicill
is divided and fortified. Who can sufficiently dive into the nature of the Be?
which has given many matter enough to write of. The ancient could not too much
admire the prosit thereof, which they expressed by this question and Enigme:
what is lesser then a Mouse, bigher then a House, and more profitable than a
Country man's Ox? a Be. Who can sufficiently admire that Master piece of
Nature, the Spider? that not only can so well according to the rules of
Geometry, spin and tie its Web to a Post, or the branch of a Tree; but also can
fasten it in the air, where there is no Basis. Thus it has pleased God to show
his power in infirmity, and depose the Treasure of his wisdom and omnipotence
in the least and meanesi beings.

Having undertaken to write of Ultima Thule, which is a poor little Land, in
comparison of other Countries and Provinces: I found God had not omitted to
distribute there some signs of his Almighty power, in several things that all
may wonder at, which has caused me to communicate them to others in this
Treatise, and thereby gratify the curious Reader. Many seek far abroad the
wonderful works of God, either by reading or traveling in foreign and remote
parts; whereas we have them as admirable amongst us, if they were right
considered; but as we care not for what we daily see, we think it therefore not
worthy to be Communicated to others, who would nevertheless esteem it rare and
wonderful. Whence it is come, that none of those that have been before me in
Feroe, has taken the pains* to leave any thing in writing of the Quality and
Constitution of that Country. But being come thither a Stranger, and remarking
many effects of nature not usual in my own Country, I would not live Idle,
without the examination; and considering thereof, endeavoring to do my
Countrymen, that are not informed of this Lands Nature, some small service, by
the Notification of what I have discovered* I pray therefore, and desire the
Courteous Reader to take in good part this my Labor, which I have destined to
the Common good; and if he find any thing imperfect, expound it in the best
meaning, every one having his faults. Thus live well, and let me be included in
thy favor.

From my Pathmos in Thors-haven, the 12. of March, 1670.
THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. Of the Land of Feroe in it self, and the Circumstances thereof. Page
1.
CHAP. II. Of the Lands Fertility. p. 111
CHAP. III. Of the Waters Fertility. p. 163
CHAP. IV. Of the Inhabitation of Feroe and of the Facts of the Inhabitants, p.
190
CHAP. V. Of the Qualities of the Inhabitants. p. 25
CHAP. VI. Of the P^litie. p. 277
CHAP. VII. Of Religion, and first of Teachers. p. 325 Of the Hearers. p. 336
Of the School. p. 341
CHAP. VIII. Of Specters and Illusions of Satan in Feroe. p. 349

The MAPP of the LAND of FEROE containing XVII Inhabited ISLANDS.


CHAP. I.
Of the Land of Feroe in it self, and the Circumstances thereof.
THe Islands of Feroe in themselves, are only some high rocks, arising out of
the wild Sea, and covered with a portion of thin Earth. For Feroe does consist
of many Islands that are high Hills, of hard stone, strangely divided from each
other, by deep and rapid streams of water. And that the said Hills or Mountains
might be useful to mankind, and the Lords holy Name, in this latter age of the
world, be praised by true Christians, in the midst of the storming Sea; it has
pleased the Divine Providence to cover the valley between the Mountains, and
the sides of the Hills, almost every where, with two foot thick of Earth;
somewhere thicker or thinner, according to the nature of the place; whence does
grow, not only abundance of Grass for Cattle, but also Corn for the maintenance
of man. Wherefore if the land, as other even Countries, could be cultivated and
inhabited; many thousands of men, proportionably to the greatness and number of
the Islands, might there live and subsist. But the people dwell only by the
Seaside; where it is lowest and most convenient for them to get to Sea with
their Boats, and ply their Fishing; there being almost every where high
promontories, whence no body can come down, nor get up; though there be some
dangerous and terrible places, whence they also launch out their Boats to Sea,
to go a Fishing; where they must have strong Ropes in the Boat, that those on
Land may sometimes help the people out, if they are in any danger; some also,
who are the most, live in creeks, inletts, and havens, that are many,
convenient, and good for Seamen to lay in their Ships in time of danger. And
where they live they have enclosed a small piece of ground, which they Till to
get Grass and Corn; calling such Closes, Boe; The other part without the
enclosure, consisting in Valleys and Hills, and sometimes in hills only, is a
thousand times larger, and is called Hawe, where their Sheep feed both Winter
and Summer, and their Kine only in Summer; This part is never Tilled, neither
can it be so, because the Inhabitants live along the Sea side for their Fishing
sake, and other convenience, having nevertheless the full profit thereof, for
they keep there as many Sheep as ever the place can feed.

A part of the islands of Feroe is Inhabited, and a part furnished with Cattle;
they are in their greatness Havens, Creeks, Inletts, and other circumstances as
follows. Fugloe or Fowle-Island, which is the most North East, is pretty high
and something flat on the top, with high Clifts almost round about, three
English miles long, and two broad, where it is broadest; having a little Creek
on the East side, called Hatterviig; though it be unfit for Ships to Anchor in.
Suinoe lies two miles southward of Fugloe, consisting in two long and high
Hills on the North and South side; The South Mountain is about a Leage in
length: the North but about half a League, there is a valley in the midst; on
the East side whereof the people do inhabit; and by this reason, the Island
being seen something far off at Sea, seems to be divided in two Islands. The
said valley is about a mile long from East to West, and therefore the
Inhabitants have Boats lying on the East and on the West sides, that they,
according to the Wind, may ply their Fishing on either side such Valleys (as
also other places, where the passage over land from one water to another is but
short) are called in the Language of Feroe, Eide, whereof there are many, to
the great benefit of the Country.

Videcoe or Vidoe, lies three miles west of Fugloe, and has a mile from
Suinoe, being crooked, and having also a Valley where the people dwell, it is
in length about six miles, and where it is broadest about three miles; The
south end of it stretches it self down between Suinoe and Bondoe, being full
of high Hills, at the North of the Valley there is a high promontory, at the
East there is a little Creek, though not very good sor Ships to Anchor in.

Bordoe a strange Island, being in its Figure like a Crab, having many points
like claws; it lies South West and West of Videroe and Suinoe, being separated
from them by a small Sinus in some places half a mile broad, there being a
place near Qnandesund only of Musket shot distant, on the North East and East
side, it embraces Videroe as with two arms, and thereby makes a safe harbor
every where between both Lands, against all manner of weather and current,
having three entrances, one at North between Mulen and Videroe; another at
South between Suinoe, and the most easterly east point of Bordoe, and the third
at east between Suinoe. But since toward the South East, or South outlet, as
also about the North East, or East, three points of Land streatch out
themselves, the one from Videroe, the other from Bordoe, and the third from
Suinoe; and the ground under water being uneven, it makes an indifferent
Whirle-pool, that turns the Boats that pass over it round about; but Ships are
in no danger of it. Toward the South East, Bordoe stretches it self out into
three branches or points, so that they seem at Sea as several Islands, and
constitute too long Inletts, whereof that which is most Eastward is called
Arnefiord, the other Baardevijgs, from Baardevijg's Inlet, there runs a little
valley, half a mile long to the North west side, where there is a safe harbor
called Klack. From hence the Land stretches it self again to the North along
Videroe a matter of six miles or less; all these branches and arms are for the
most part streightning on both sides, into long and sharp points, on the North
West Bordoe embraces again with two arms or branches, another little Island
called Kunoe.

Kunoe is a long and narrow Island about six miles in length, and a good mile
in breadth, growing sharp on both sides, consisting in a long sharp hill
separated from Bordoe by a narrow straight, in some places half a mile broad,
and in some others less; stretching it self most to the South and North, from
Mule on Bordoe, till the Harbor of Klack, which it shuts up with its southerly
end, and renders it safe against all Currents of the Sea.

Kalsoe lies Westward o^ Kunoe, separated from it by an inlet called
Calseefiord which is two miles broad, and this Inlet is open from South to
North, so that all Ships may safely run through it, especially when the Stream
is with them; Kalsoe is a little longer then Kunoe, and a little broader,
stretching it self to the South and North, without Haven or Creek; on the West
side, it is a very steep promontory, on the East side the hill is edged and
runs sloping to the Sea side, all colored withgreen.

Osteroe lies West of Kalsoe and Bordoe, stretching it self most Northward
toward East, it is almost twenty miles long, but inequally broad, for some
places are two miles broad, others four or six miles broad, according as the
points stretch themselves far out; the Land consisting in many long branches or
arms; on the East side toward Kalsoe, Bordoe, and the main Sea, it has six
long branches or arms, that constitute five Inlets or Creeks, namely, Funding
fiord, And^fiord, an indifferent Harbor, Englefiord a good Harbor, Joteviig
and Lammehauf viig, afterward the Land stretches it self to the South East, in
a long point called Ostness, from which neck three miles Northward, begins
again another inlet far in the Land, two miles long, called Skaalefiord, at the
beginning of the Inlet there is a good harbor called Kings haven, because
formerly when his Majesty's Ships did Cruise here under the Land, after Pirates,
they took Harbor there; on the West side from South to North, the Land is
almost even without any Inlet or Creek, and the inlet between C^lsoe, and
Osteroe is in some places but a mile and half broad, and safe for Ships to sail
through; the North end of Osteroe is very notable for Senmen, for it stretches
out it self with a little round point to the North west, with a round hill upon
it.

Nolsoe lies two miles Southward of Osteroe or Ostres, extending it self most
N. W. to N. and S. E to S. it is 4 miles long, and a mile and half broad, where
broadest, having on its west side Stromoe, at the distance of two miles and
half* There is almost on the midst of the Island a high Hill sloaping by little
and little to the South side, where the Island is even on the top, and not very
high; North of the Hill there is a little plain, and West of it toward Stromoe
a little Harbor called Nolsoeviig, an indifferent good Summer Harbor.

Stromoe is the largest Island in Feroe, and 24 miles long, and where it is
broadest eight miles in breadth, it lies West of Osteroe and Nelsoe,
stretching it self North west to North, and South West to South, being full of
many high Hills, amongst which Skelingsfels over goes all the rest in height,
standing like a high house above the others; it is very notable for Seamen that
are bound for Thorshaven, for when they get sight of it, and sail there unto,
they fall before the Northern entrance of Thorshaven. That Island has also
several Creeks and Harbors on the East side, from the South end, is first of
all Thors-haven, where the general Commerce is established, it is a little, but
a good harbor; whereunto there are two entrances over against North Nolsoe,
between Stang and Ostness, and over against South Nolsoe* between Baarn and
Skadlehoffoed; afterward there is Kalbacksfford, then Kollefiord; next
thereunto Thorsviig, and Qualviig, one cannot come further with Ships, for on
the North of Qualviig, Stromoe and Osteroe, are as it were bound together by a
ground that is between the Islands, over which runs a very rapid stream, and
there is no Current on either side of the ground. From this stream it is that
Stromoe is so called; at North of Stromoe is Haldersviig, an indifferent
Harbor, into which one enters on the North side; on the north side there is a
very fair Harbor called Westmans Haven, which is sheltered by Waagoe lying
over against it.

Waagoe lies West of Stromoe, being divided from it by a straight called
Westmans*haven seund, a mile and a half broad, thorough which there is a safe
passage. The Land of Waagoe is almost of a Triangular or Quadrangular Figure,
being eight miles in Diameter, it is cut in by two long Creeks, first by one on
the South East side, called Midvaage a good Summer Harbor, then at West there
is another Creek called Sorvaage. The Land it self is all full of Hills; hard
by the South point of Sorvaage, there lies two little Islands with high clifts
on them, called Tineholm and Gaaseholm.

Myggeness lies out at the West of Sorvaage two miles from the Land, it is
three miles long, and one and a half broad, having a high territory with high
promontories round about it, there being but one place to come on Land, it
stretches it self most to the North East and South West. Toward the South
West end of it lies Myggeness Isle, having a high clift round about, it is
flat above, though sloaping like the roof of a house on the North East side; it
is separated by a little Riff three or four furlongs broad.

Kolter lies three miles to the South-East of Waagoe, and above two miles to
the West of Stromoe, it is a little Island a mile long, and about half a mile
broad, stretching it self most to the South and North, having a high Mountain
at the North end, but at the South end it is low and narrow, having a high
Promontory on the West side.

Eighteen years since in the midst of Summer, there was found on the highest
top of the Mountain of Kolter, the quantity of many tomies of Herrings spread
along; The Mountain where the Herrings were found is above two hundred fathoms
high.

The vulgar sort will perhaps ask how these Herrings could come there?
whereunto is answered, that they are carried thither by a whirlewind for the
Sea it self when it is most boisterous, seldom casts any Fish on Land, but
rather Seaward from the bottom; for as little as strong wind can hinder the
flight of Birds, as little can the strongest motion of the Sea hinder the
swimming of Fishes; but if either wind or water grow too strong for their
inhabitants, as Birds hide themselves in trees, holes, and nests; so the small
Fishes that lie under the Land float on the deep to save themselves there, as
long as the storm lasts, as is frequently seen in Feroe. Wherefore those
Herrings were carried there on Land by a kind of Whirle wind called Typhon,
which in the Danish Tongue is named Oes. That sort of Whirlewind is formed
amongst the Clouds, and strikes from thence on the Sea and Earth with such a
sudden and mighty whirle, that if it falls on Land it takes up Trees, Bushes,
Stones, Flesh, and what else it meets with; and where buildings are too great,
it strikes them down and breaks them to pieces. If it falls on the Sea it
takes up an incredible quantity of water, so that one may see deep Cavities in
the Sea till the water runs together again, and what Fishes are then in that
water are drawn up by such a whirlewind. Mariners that have tried the dangers
of the deep, can speak enough of this whirlewind, and have first given it the
name of Oes, because it draws up the water of the Sea; Expert Seamen, when they
are aware of it, let presently fall all their Sails, or else they would lose
them, and sometimes come in great danger of their lives. What this Oes takes
and draws up from one place it lets it fall on another, when it has wrought
out and left its strength; whence it comes that one sees in some places rain
down Stones, Flesh, Mice, and particularly the Lemmings or Cats of Norway; and
in this manner are also these Herrings rained down on Kolter. The Hurricane of
the West Indies, which is sufficiently known, is doubtless of this sort of Wind.

Sandoe lies two miles south of Stromoe and Hestoe, stretching it self most to
East and West, it is eight miles long, and four miles broad; having but one
Creek on the South side, near Sand, neither is it a very good Haven: At West
toward the North point there is a little Isle called Troldhoffret edging off
from the North East side to the South West, with a high Promentory, thereon
feed wild Oxen and Sheep.

Skuoe lies two miles to the south of Sandoe, stretching it self to the East
and West, being three miles long and one broad; it is a high Land with high
Clifts.

Store Diemen, or great Dam, liethhalf a mile at the Southeast of Skuoe, it is
almost round* a good mile in Diameter, it is a high Territory, for the most
part flat and green above, with great Clifts round about. If this Island were
garrisoned with thirty warlike men, it would not be easy for any Potentate to
take it in, there being no way to get up, except in one place at East, and that
difficulty for one man at a time; and therefore could easily be so strengthened
by art, that none at all could come up. Neither could Ships lie on the Sea
about the Island, because of the strong current, nor could they be taken by
Famine, there being Cattle, Sheep, and Foul enough on the Island.

It happened some years ago, that the Countrymans Wife on that Island kept secret
love with the serving man, and they both murdered the Master; Wherefore, that
they might avoid the punishment of the Magistrate, they held out the Island a
long time; but the innocent being unwilling to keep such continual watch with
the guilty, and they at last being grown secure, some nimble men of Feroe, by
the Bailiff of the Countries order, came on the Island by the East side, and
took the Delinquents Prisoners, who afterward received their just punishment.

Lille Diemen lies two miles from Store Diemen, at South South East; it is
inhabited, and to be accounted for an Isle, it arises from the Sea as a round
and sharp Clift, thereon feed wild Sheep.

Suderoe is the last and Southest Island lying two miles south of Lille Diemen.
It is almost twenty miles long and eight miles broad where it is broadest,
bowing with one end to the South, the other end stretching it self to the
Northwest; it is full of Hills, having on the West side many Clifts; neither
can one land on it, but in four places, and yet with difficulty. At East it
has four long Creeks, namely, on the North end Q^ailviig, near the close;
second Qualboe, whence a Valley stretches it self on the West side a mile
long; then Trungesvaag, within which Inlet is a very good little harbor called
Punthaven, besides which, between a little Isle and the Land, one may fasten
Ships with a Rope, and go from Shipboard to Land on a Planck. There is besides
every where in the Inlet good Harboring in Summer.

Finally, here is also Vaagesfiord, whence there runs also a Valley a mile
long on the Southside. In that Inlet there is a bowed Creek, where there is one
of the best Havens in Feroe called Lebroe.

It appears by the premises, that Feroe does consist of seventeen inhabited
and Cultivated Islands, namely, Fugloe, Suinoe, Wideroe, Bordoe, Kunoe, Kalsoe,
Osteroe, Nolsoe, Stromoe, Waagoe, Myggeness, Kolter, Hestoe, Sandoe, Skuoe,
Store Diemen, and Suderoe, and four little Isles or Holms, to wit, Tintholm,
Myggenessholm, Trolehofred, and Lille Diemen, whereon only Pasture,
VVild-Sheep. Besides, here are several other Holmes, whereof the most notable
and necessary to be known of Mariners are these, Hossvigsholm, Kirckboeholm,
and Comboeholm.

There are also under the Land several Rocks arising out of the Sea, whereof
two are considerable for Mariners to know the Land by, the one at North of
Fugloe, called the Bishop, which is a round and pretty high Rock, it does not
lie so far from the Land as it is set in the Map, but only a stone cast or a
Musket shot off. The other is at the South of the Land, a pretty way at South
East of Sumboe; it is also a round high Rock called the Monck. Near this Monck
is a dangerous whirlepoole, which in still weather draws Ships to it self,
and brings them in great peril; for the waves strike every where into the Ship,
nay in the very Mast; and the Ship cannot be steered, but one must let it drive
as the stream will have it, till it be appeased. It is most dangerous in still
weather, for then one cannot easily get from thence* with a Gale of VVind one
may take a care not to come into it.

Jautoe, which Mr, Peter Claason speaks of in his book called, a Description
of Norway, is not extant, but is only an enclosure called Got, and is twofold,
namely, North Got and South Got. Neither is he to be blamed for it, since he
has written with others pen, and seen with others eyes.

It is related by a part of the Inhabitants, that North of the Land, there has
at several times appeared a Floating Island; not only by the relation of our
Predecessors, but also by that of those that yet live, who verily relate that
they have seen it during some hours, discerning hills and dales on it, and
running Rivers flowing through the Valleys, and could perspicuously fee that it
was green in the Valleys below.

Last year the 28 of April, 1671, came to Feroe, a Skipper, Paul Badsted, with
his Ship, and both he and two young Priests which he brought over with him to
Feroe, namely, Mr. Gregory Peterson, and Mr. Peter Clementson, relate, that
they on their voyage to Feroe, being by storm driven out of their course to the
south thereof, perceived an Island, and being come near to it, saw it
perfectly, with the Hills, Promontories, and Rivers thereof running down the
Island, green with Grass toward the sea side, with Rocks and Clifts near the
Land, not unlike in all Circumstances to the Islands of Feroe, but perceiving
no other Islands by it, they found themselves to be deceived, and therefore
made to the North, and after some sailing, found the Islands of Feroe, and the
Master related, that, according to his conjecture they had found that Land
eleven Leagues from Feroe, at south east. If there had been any steady Island
in that place, it would have been found longago, those that sail to this Island
often sailing by that place, and all Ships that come from the South, and will
go to the North of He^land, directing always their Course to Feroe, and
therefore do necessarily pass by it, so that if that Island had been fast, it
would long since have been discovered.

The Island of Enckhupson found, and so named by the Hollanders, which lay
under the 65 degree of Northern Latitude, 45 Leagues North West of Feroe,
seems to confirm that opinion, since it is no more to be found, I leave herein
every one in his own opinion, whether such a mass of hard Rocks could Float,
and now again sink: If it were of the nature of a Pumill Stone, it might very
well do so, but then it would ever Float; as Floating Islands in fresh water,
that are grown together with roots, and covered with a little loose Eearth,
decked with grass.

The Inhabitants besides, rehearse a Fable of Suinoe, that it was at first a
Floating Island, and believe that if one could come to the Island so often
seen, and cast Steel thereon, it would remain fast, which agrees with the
superstition of Duckers or Diverse, that lay Steel upon what they find at the
bottom of the Sea, that Spirits may not remove it when they are hoysed up,
which otherwise they find to be removed. Many also tell much of these Floating
Islands, and believe there are such in Nature; but I cannot give faith to any
of them, nor to any ones superstition. If this were not described by the
proprieties of many Islands* I would say it were a Mountain of see, that came
Floating from Greenland, which if it be not, I believe steadfastly it is some
deception or illusion of the Devil, who is in himself a thousand fold
Artisicer; for he has often before deluded them in many other manners, it
being almost every man's talk in the Land, how formerly Satan in the dark, when
they were risen early in the morning in Winter, as they yet always do, to go a
Fishing, did appear to them in the Figure of a Boat, with Fishermen and all
instruments belonging to Fishing; did speak with them, gave them Fish baits,
and told them where there was good Fishing to be found, and many can yet relate
Satan's words, when he discovered them where there was good ground for Fishing.
If Satan could then in the Figure of a Boat delude the Inhabitants, he may also
do it now in the Figure of an Island, possibly to allure the Children of the
unbelievers to him, and bring them into mischief.

This Province of Feroe; with the Islands belonging to it above named,
stretches it self in its greatest length, from North to South 60 miles, and in
breadth 40 miles, or a little above, having at East Stat in Norway, at South
East Orkeney and Scotland, at South Ireland, at West the South end of
Greenland, at North West Island.

The height of the Pole or Latitude of Feroe, according to the supputation of
all, is at the South end 61 degrees 15 m. and at the North end 62 degrees 10 m.
though I have found the Land (according to the height of Thors Haven at 62
degrees 2 m. which I have several times taken) to lie something more
Northwards; I have as much as possible, sought the Longitude, and have found
the length from the Meridian of Euraniburgh 20 degrees 20 min. which makes one
hour 21 min. so that the Longitude of Thors Haven is 16 degrees 20 min.
reckoning from the Pico of Teneriffe in the Canary Islands, if I can discover
it better in time, I shall notify it where it will be convenient. And since
the Land lies under 62 degrees, there is but little night in Summer, not fully
5 hours; When the Sun is in the Sign of Cancer there is no night perceived for
a whole month, because the Sun does not go 18 degrees under the Horizon, whence
it comes, that in the midst of VVinter they have but little day, though the
Crepusculum and Diluculum are something more longer here then elsewhere,
especially when the Sun is in the South or Northerly Signs, for when it is at
highest and makes the longest day after 62 degrees Latitude, it rises at 2 of
the Clock and 7 minutes, and goes down at 9 of the clock and 53 m. and then
the day is 19 hours and 46 min. long, and the night from Sunsetting until it
rises 4 hours and 14 minutes, during which time there is no difference to be
perceived between day and night, the Sun being then but 4 degrees 29 min. under
the Horizon, and cannot therefore make any difference for a whole month, there
being then also but little difference in the Suns declination, whence it comes
that we have no considerable might until the 17th. of August, when the Sun
first comes 18 degrees under the Horizon, which is its right depth, so that one
can perceive nothing of its splendor. Now the Sun rising in the midst of
VVinter at 9 of the Clock 53 min. and setting at 2 a Clock and 7 m. and there
being therefore but 4 hours and 14 minutes of day. The Crepusculum and
Diluculum add much to its length, since one can perceive something of the day
in the midst of VVinter at 8 a clock in the morning, and at 4 a clock at
night, whence it comes that they have not in Feroe such tedious long nights, as
one might well imagine.

These Islands of Feroe consisting of a hard Stone, there is found here and
there a Loadstone therein, on which if one sets a Compass it will vary very
much in some places to the East, and in some other to the West. At the South
of Suderoe there is a whirle pool in the midst whereof stands a high Rock
called Sumboe Munk near that Rock there are six others that rise a little above
the water; on which when one sets the Compass, it turns round, and is so
spoiled, that it is afterward of no use, for some years ago, there came a Ship
too near this Sumboe Munk whereupon all the Compasses, that were in the Ship
(as the Master related afterward to the Inhabitants of Suderoe) were spoiled,
and his Voyage had been so too, had not a Seaman of the Ship by chance had a
Loadstone, wherewith he touched the Compasses anew. The ordinary declination of
the Loadstone on Feroe is otherwise, 13 degrees 19 minutes, to the North West,
which Severin Lawson, formerly chief Merchant on Feroe, a Burger of Copenhagen
very expert in the Art of Navigation, did mark and reckon out in the year 1659
the 26 of December, at Thors Haven, on Ferce.

Since we have described the Land of Feroe, especially so, that honest
Mariners may the better know the Land Marks; we will also here comprehend
something of the Streams. Between these several divided Islands there runs
many strong Currents in several manners, according as the necks or points of
Land meet against the streams, and according to the situation of the said
land, which causes specially in VVinter when there is a storm, and the wind
blows against Tide, a terrible and turbulent Sea, principally where there is
ground near the surface of the water; for where those grounds stretch
themselves toward the Land, the Sea raises it self and tumbleth about against
it, so that it is terrible to consider, yea it breaks so strengly against the
Land that scarce any Ship where it is sufficiently deep, can get over them,
which grounds with breaking waves are called in the Language of Feroe, Boffves.
If there comes any Boats on these Boffves, when they break, it is presently
sunk, with men and all.

It happened for 16 years ago, that Mr. John Hanson Hardy, Curate of Suderoe,
on his Voyage to Thors Haven (in a Sex^ing, that is a great Boat rowed by
twelve men) came on such a Boffve in pretty good weather, yet both he and his
wife, and all his Children, with other of his Folks, to the number of 21 souls,
were all drowned, And the Boat sunk by the Boffve; It happened in that sad
accident that amongst these drowned Folks, the Curates Wife floated up again
eight days after, and was found driving in the Current, whereof doubtless the
cause is, that she had greater veins then ordinary, as is usual for women to
have, by the blowing up of which her Corpse was brought a Float.

It is very observable, that when the said Boffve breaks in bad weather, it
does so three or seven times together, without ceasing, and then rests some
time, therefore when the Inhabitants come to such a Boffve, and must needs over
it, they lie still until the Boffve has broken, and then get over it speedily
with their Boat.

Besides, the Boffve breaks also in still weather, when it is very warm, and
when there will be Frost or Snow. Thirdly, when some Boat goes something near
the land over the Boffve that breaks not then, but lies still, it breaks up
unawares of it self, and often brings people in danger. I have been told by
an old honest man yet living, very expert from his youth both in Currents and
Boffves, who knew all the Boffves round about the Country where he lived, that
it happened some years since, he went with a Boat from the Land, whereon he
dwelt, namely, Kol^er* over to Stromoe, to set there a man on land, and went
into a little Creek of the length of a Boat, and half so broad, where he set
the man on shore, it being then quiet and still all about, when against all
expectation, a Boffve broke upon him, so that he and all his folks were in very
great danger of their lives; having never from his youth, nor since that time
perceived any Boffve to be there.

The Inhabitants are in this simple opinion, that the Sea is sensible, and that
the Boffves cannot endure the Iron of the Boat. But hereupon these are my
reflections; that the Boffve breaks up a certain number of times happens by
the providence of God, that has created all things according to weight,
measure, and number, but that the Boffves break either against warm weather, or
against a North wind and Snow, or a so when some Boat goes over the same must
have an occult cause, which is hard to be found out; and that one may the
better understand the cause of it, one must consider, that there is this order
in nature.

All motion that happens between the Elements and other beings, that have
neither sense nor life, does happen by a Magoetical Sympathy or Antipathy; that
is a hidden and inward affection in senseless beings, whereby some things love
eath other, and are easily united together; some hate one the other, and cannot
be united, whereby there is made a motion in nature, as if there were some life
in the things which move themselves, or suffer themselves to be moved. This is
perfectly seen in the Loadstone, which by Sympathy loves Iron, and turns it
self toward it. This is manifest enough amongst Medicaments, and specially it
is seen and perceived in Antidotes, that is Medicines against poison, and in
the poisons themselves; for when a man has taken some poison, and thereupon
takes in an Antidote, the poison is then driven out by the Antidote.

Chemists do find the same amongst Metals and Minerals, for Gold hates
Brimstone, driving it away, and contrariwise loves Salt, drawing the same to
it self, being easily united with it in Operations; Silver on the contrary
hates salt, drives it away, and instead thereof loves Brimstone.

There is a natural Sympathy and Antipathy between the Elements, and is even so
as we have now expressed between Metals and Minerals; for suppose a Circle
divided in 4 parts, with A. B. C. D. Let A. be Gold and Earth; B. Silver and
Water; C. B^imstor^ and Air; D, Salt and Fire, as A. Gold suffers it self
easily to be united and melted together with B. Silver, so A. Earth is easily
mixed with B. Water, attracts it willingly to its self, and draws its fatness
from it; water also loves Earth, as its proper mansion, wherein it rests.
Secondly as B. Silver; loves C. Brimstone; so B. Water makes much of its
neighbor C. Air, suffers it self easily to be attracted into it, and joins it
in operation with it self. In the third place as C. Brimstone is united with D.
Salt, to work with joined forces on Metals, so the Air C. takes easily to it
self the Fire D. to play with it in Nature; the Fire again loves Air so much,
that without it it is as dead, and has no force. On the otherside the Fire D.
adhears to the Earth A. as to a fit matter, from which it receives force, and
can exercise its Functions; and Earth again receives Fire lovingly, that it
may be warmed by it, and produce its fruits. As Salt D. adhears to Gold, A. as
to its fit subject, wherein (...) can operate, so Gold again receives Salt
joyfully, as its kindest Friend, of whomi it receives food and nourishment.
More. over, as we thus find a natural Sympathy between the things now
mentioned, we find also an Antipathy between them; for as Gold A. cannot suffer
Brimstone C, nor Silver B. Salt D. who as their respective Enemies stand
opposed in the Figure; so the Earth A. cannot abide the air C. nor the water B.
the Fire D. which therefore stand also over against one another in the figure,
and yet they are bound together by an orderly Sympathy, for air it self cannot
be shut up within the Earth, and if it happens so, it does not tarry long in
that Lodging, but breaks out with great force, and causes those terrible
Earth quakes; neither can the Earth remain above in the air, but stays in its
proper Seat, and if the Sun draws any thing from it into the air, that gross
unpolished guest knows not how to behave himself in that subtle habitation,
neither can the Air well abide it, and therefore there arises a quarrel
between them, with terrible Thunder and Lightning; In the same manner Fire
cannot be united with Water, without one of the parties destruction, as is
known to every body.

Notwithstanding that the Elements are in their nature so contrary to one
another, neverthelese the one will not, nor can be without the other, suffering
each other by a temperature, but when that is wanting, so that there be either
excess or defect, nature then suffers, and is moved by Antipathy, by which
reason, this unexpected motion does happen in the water over those grounds that
are called Boffves.

For it is seen in Feroe, when the Air is very warm, so that there arises a
Fog from the Sea, rendering the Air dusky, that not only the Currents run a
great deal swifter and stronger then at other times, but the Sea also grows
stormy, beating against the Land, and the Boffves break out though it be still
weather; which happens because of the Antipathy that is between Water and
warmth in its excess, whereby Water suffers in its nature.

Quite contrary, this happens also when there will come a strong Frost and
Snow in Winter: the Currents grow then stronger, The Sea beats, the Boffves
arise, though it be very still weather, because there happens a deficiency in
the temperature of warmth, water being forced to lose a part of its natural
heat, and therefore cannot keep its innate fluiddity, but must, by suffering in
its nature, let it self be changed to a standing rigid matter, namely Ice,
which affect the Elements, do perceive before hand, and by the virtue of their
Magnettical Antipathy, move themselves.

This Motion is also perceived in houses, for it happens in Feroe, that when
there is a great storm, and the wind cannot have its passage between those many
hills, as in plain ground, that it is sometimes quite still in the Valleys; so
that one may go with a light between the houses; and on the contrary the
gathered wind comes afterward a great deal stronger and more terrible, but
before such weather comes, or that one can perceive any thing of it, as the
water arises before the coming of a hard Frost, so are the houses moved before
this stormy weather comes, so that every nail of the house cracks, though the
houses be scarce moved afterward, when the storm beats upon them, they being
low and Fortified about with thick walls of Turffs and Stones, which motion
must therefore necessarily happen in the manner aforesaid.

But that the Boffves break when there comes a Boat over them, has a far more
hidden cause, though it may happen by the aforesaid Magnettical Sympathy. We
have declared above how it is with the Loadstone in that Country, on the Rocks
near Sumboe Munk and I doubt not but there being so strong a Magnet in those
Rocks that are so little above the water, there may also be a Magnet in such
grounds, whence it comes, that when a Boat passes over them, the Loadstone by
its Sympathy, attracts the Iron of the Boat, which that shallow water not being
able to endure, rises it self, though I leave herein every one to his own
judgment.

Concerning the Current of the stream it runs very swistly about the points
of Land, especially in the new and full Moon, eight men in a Boat not being
able to overcome it, but must stay till it has run out, and turns it self by
reason of which it happens often, that when the poor Inhabitants are at Sea
about their Fishing, and there comes an unexpected storm, the stream being
against them, they must stay on the same place, at all adventure, until the
turning of the stream, and till they get the Current with them toward the
Land; but if the storm grows too strong, those poor people often come to
misfortunes. It cannot be well expressed with a pen, how fierce the Sea is, nor
to what height it raises it self, when the wind and the stream are against one
another. And it is observable as is said above, that when the Current runs
against the wind, the wind blows with greater force then it does else, and
when the stream runs before the wind, it stilleth it self, so that they seem
at first to strive against each other, as two enemies, and afterward to grow
milder when one of them does fly. I must here relate an Example of the Sea's
terribleness by the reason aforesaid. The little Island Kolter, which is
described above, is exposed to the open Sea on the west side, and there is
toward the Main a Promontory thirty Fathoms high, where the Sea almost every
winter breaks over with a Western wind, and that in such quantity, that the
Inhabitants are sometimes in danger, though the Sea has yet 50 Fathoms to run
without the Clifts, before it reaches the Land.

It happened for some years ago, that there lay a large stone six foot long and
four foot thick and broad, on a corner of the said Promontory, which stone the
proud Sea tumbled about and threw some paces from the place where it lay
before; that seems incredible, if one considers the bigness of the stone, and
the height of the Mountain, and one might well say how is it possible that the
Sea can rise fifty Else up in the Air, but it is nevertheless a perfect truth,
for it has not only been related to me by the Countrymen of the Island, but it
lying in my Parish, I have my self been there, and exactly considered the
place; and he that takes good notice of it, may rather wonder, then conceive
how it can be so.

The Fishers say also that when there has been some days such a strange storm
of water and wind, and the wind afterward stilleth it self; so that the
Inhabitants dare row out on Fishing. There is nevertheless an extraordinary
great motion every where at Sea; so that sometimes they are as it were, lifted
up to the Heaven, and presently come down as it were, to the Abyssm as David
says, Psalm. 127. which motion of the Sea they call Alda, and certify, that
when they are sunk in it, they can see no land, though it be above 300 Fathoms
high.

As for the motion of Tides themselves they perfect their course according to
the Moon here as well as in other places, where there are ordinary tides, by an
ebb of six hours, and a Flood of the like space of time

Yet their course is different according as they beat against the Rocks and
points of Land, and as the ground is under them; whence it comes that the
particular streams alter their course, and run directly against the general
Tides, such streams being called here Ider.

Concerning the general Currents here, the Seaman that is not much acquainted
with the Land may have this for information.

In the first place, where the streams run even between the land, there is a
principal Current; as between Suderoefiord, Staapenfiord, Kalsoefierd,
Skuofiord and Fugloefiord. When the Current runs here to the West* it is
called West-fall, and when it runs to the East, East-fall; but in
Kalsoefiord the East-fall runs Northward, and the West-fall Southward,
because of the points of Land.

Secondly it does not run with equal rapidity during the six hours, but its
course can be divided into three parts; In the first third part it runs
prerty fast, changing and augmenting its force more and more. In the second,
third part, it is very rapid, and is here called Braaddew; In the last third
part it loses its force by little and little, till it comes to turn, and then
the stream is as it were half dead. In the third place, the Tide is not allways
equally strong, but it is strongest in the new and full Moon, three days before
and three days after, losing after of its force till the first and last
quarter, and it renews its strength again from the first and last quarter, till
the new and full Moon, though according to the Moons virtue it be neither
always equally strong, but in the Spring and Summer when the Sun acts most on
the earth, so that the warmth reflecteth thence, and in the Dog days, when the
air is hottest, by reason of the heat of the Canicule, it is stronger in every
change of the Moon, then it uses to be in Autum or Winter; from which effect
may doubtless be concluded, that the Sun, together with the Moon, and the
inward warmth of the Earth does produce the motion of the Tides.

For the 4 th. when the stream runs in the Inlets at E. or when it is
East-fall, it is then West-fall by the land, and in the Iders, and so quite
contrary, so that when the Master of a Ship cannot advance his voyage in the
middle of the Inlets, he must seek his advantage by the Iders, for they stretch
themselves in some places a mile from the Land.

Fifthly, the Tide begins, that is, the water rises at West fall, and when
that is out, and it is Braaddew, it is Flood or highest water, that is
West-fall in all the principal streams of every Inlet, but afterward comes
the East-fall from the Land, beginning thereby by little and little to grow low
water, but how high or low the water rises or falls in Feroe, cannot be
exactly described, there being a great inequallity in it, both by reason of the
changes of the seasons of the year, and of the Moon, wherein the streams are
strongest; Notwithstanding the stream arises much higher at west of the Land
then at East, usually seven Fathoms at West, and but three at East.

In the sixth place it is very needful for a Pilot to know when it is high
water or West-fall in Feroe, not that he might thereby run securely over Rocks
and grounds; for he has no great need of that in Feroe, but that he may know
how the stream runs, and advance his voyage accordingly; all Mariners
having erred therein till this day, even the Sea expert Hollanders, who in
their Sea Mirror, write that a South and North Moon makes highest water in
Feroe. Those that have traded in this Country and in their Voyage have taken
notice of the Tides, have found it otherwise, and believe quite contrary, that
an East and West Moon gives highest water; wherein they do not much err, but
I have enquired about this business of old understanding men, who nevertheless
take little notice of highest water, nor know wherefore it is so observable;
but only note their West and East fall, which they nevertheless only mark by
Flood and low water, not understanding what an East or West Moon signifies,
and they say altogether, that the second day after New or Full Moon, it is
perfect West-fall, that is highest water at six of the Clock in the morning,
and East-fall or Low Water at twelve of the Clock at Noon; whence an expert man
can conclude that a North East Moon, and a South West, make highest water, the
first day the Moon begins to fill, that is at five a Clock and fifteen
minutes in the morning, and then they have highest water, or West fall, in new
or full Moon* in Feroe, a North East and a South West Moon making highest water
in all the principal Streams above mentioned. In the other particular Streams,
it is high water at different hours, in some before, and in some after the
ordinary time; for in Leerviigs-fiord, an East North East, and West South West
Moon makes highest water, that is, when it is four a Clock and a half in the
Morning; In Nolsoe fiord an North East and South West Moon, that is at three a
Clock, and in Westmans haven and Myggenessfiorda North West and South East
Moon, that is at nine a Clock in the forenoon, so that here is a strange
difference in the rising of the water, between these many Islands, which comes
altogether by reason of the points of Land.

I dare not undertake to explicate the several Streams, with their Iders, there
being often in one Inlet five different Currents that run against one another;
so that I verily believe if the Learned Philosopher Aristotle were here himself
to undertake that work, he would find no less difficulty therein, then in his
Euripe. Nevertheless I cannot forbear writing something of the little stream,
between Stromoe and Osteroe, which seems very strange. Though that stream on
both sides of the water be wholly still and dead, and there be a very short way
over the grounds between both Lands, it runs nevertheless forward and
backward, according to the ordinary Changes of the Moon, so swiftly, that it is
impossible to row against it; but one must expect till it returns. Whereof
the cause is this; There goes neither Ebb nor Tide at South of the stream, but
at North the water rises and falls, though there be no stream; therefore
when the Tide comes, the water runs over to the South Sinus, and when it
falls again, it runs over the grounds from the South into the North, yet
no stream can be perceived, because the Inlet grows wider on both sides, and
is deep in it self, even as in the Main Sea. Before Feroe no stream is
discerned, though there be some, as every where in the world, but when it comes
to the Islands, the free slow course of it is hindered; and therefore it is
forced by the narrow Streights between the Islands, to thrust it self between
the Lands, as a River would do through a Sluice.

Besides, these several Streams, there are also some other, that turn round
about, which they call Male Stromme or Whirle-pool, whereof there are many that
have been known hitherto, and are of all esteemed to be Sea-Abyssms; which
error comes, because none could Sound their bottoms, by reason of the danger
attending it, they drawing to themselves all that comes near them, whirle it
to the bottom, and after a certain time, cast it up again.

There are in Feroe three such Whirle-pools; the one between Videroe, Suinoe
and Bordoe, not very dangerous, the other at South of Sandoe, by Da^es Cliffts,
called the Mill, dangerous when there is a storm or a strong stream. The third
at South of Suderoe, running about Sumboe Munk, very dangerous. The cause of
these Whirle pools is not that there is a bottomless Abysm at the bottom of the
Sea, wherein the water should run, when it is Ebb, and Flow out again when it
is Tide; so that this should cause Ebb and Flood, according to the opinion of
some; for if it was so, it would not rage so much, the stillest water having
the deepest bottom, but it proceeds from round grounds, with Channels or
Conduits in them.

I have dilligently inquired about these Whirle-pools, of the two Deputies sent
with me from Feroe to Denmark humbly to represent the general necessities of
the Country, and one of them named John Jonason, dwelling on Suderoe, told me
that he had been the first that durst undertake to row over the VVhirle pool,
that lies South of Suderoe, about Sumboe Munk, whereof he spoke with certain
and long experience

First, this Stream is very terrible and dangerous of it self, especially when
there is a Storm and a strong Current, it draws to it self all that comes too
near it, and as it were swallows it up, so that a Ship cannot save her self nor
avoid it, if she approaches it too near. For a few years ago, the said John
Jonason saw about Christmas Tide in Stormy weather, a great Ship come into that
Stream, whereof he saw sometimes the Foremast, sometimes the Mizen-mast, and
the Sea strike above the Maine Quarter, a while after which, he could see
nothing more of the Ship. The Sea expert Baggowandel, in his book called the
Watching Eye, makes mention of this VVhirle pool, and says, that Skipper
Peter Odevald gave him knowledge of it, I remember the time that the said
Odevald got to know this Stream, for he and his Folks told me that his Ship was
drawn into it before he was aware, and that he could not then Steer her, the
water beating in on all sides, to a great height of the Mast, and he could not
save himself with his Sails, because it was quite still weather, the Master
affirming that he was never before in such peril and danger, though at last it
pleased God to assist him, so that he came off again by the reflux of the
Stream, and arrived safe to Thors-haven, whither he was bound.

Secondly according to the said John Jonasons Relation, the ground round about
this VVhirle-pool is eighty or ninety Fathom deep, over which ground the Stream
goes still and quiet, without any boistering, afterward round about the
VVhirle-pool, the ground lies 25, 30, to 35 Fathoms deep, over which ground
the Sea with its waves begins to lift it self, to work hard, to draw, and to
whirle about: afterward there rises a third ground, which lies eight, ten,
to twelve Fathom deep, which forms it self Snaile wise in a Circle four times
double. Nature has made this high ground with points, as the tops of some
Cliffts; whence it comes that upon the points there is only eight Fathoms deep
of water, and between them ten or twelve Fathoms: wherefore when a Fisher Boat
comes upon that uneven round Bank, it is whirled about by the stream that turns
round about these high Cliffts, and that with such a swiftness, that young
people unused to such a whirle, must lay themselves down in the Boat to avoid
giddiness of the head, and it is to be noted, that, besides this swift and
hasty Gyration, the Boat is turned about in another Circle, according to the
Snail-wise figure of the ground.

In the third place, between these four round grounds, there are three Channels
or Conduits, wherein the Sea works still and runs about in the said small
turnings; and before, on the East side, where the ground begins, there is a
Gulf where the stream runs in, as through a Sluice; though within it works but
softly; These Channels are 25, 30, to 35 Fathoms deep; now these Channels
having uneven bottoms, and the water flowing about in slow whirles, it seems,
that the form of the bottom must be like that of the Superficie, that is to
say, with small bowings and Cavities in it.

Fourthly, in the midst of this VVhirle-pool, there is a deep hole, that is 50
or 55 Fathoms deep, near the very bottom; in the middle thereof it is
generally 61 Fathoms deep; the inward water is even and still above, only it
runs slowly in a Circle, which may easily be seen by the Seas Scum, falling out
of the Whirle pool, that flows round; on the South side of that hole arises
out of the water a Rock ten Fathoms high, called Sumboe Munk about which there
is but fifteen fathoms deepth. At North of Sumboe Munk, there are six lesser
Rocks, between which and the Munk there is the depth of three or four Fathoms.
And it is to be noted, as is said above, that on these Rocks the Compass
runs round about, even as the Whirle-pool it self; whereby it is spoiled. So
it is worth observation, that on Sumboe Munk there is an extraordinary great
cold, even in the hottest Sunshine and best weather of Summer, so that the
people that get up the Munk to take Foul, can hardly endure the cold, besides
the Fowls that are hatched and keep themselves there, are very lean, so that
there is nothing on them but the bare Feathers. I am in great doubt whence such
an extraordinary cold should come; the water about Feroe, though it be cold in
it self, yet by reason of its faltness and perpetual motion* causing usually
there a temperate Winter; I cannot therefore conjecture that this Streams
continual motion should contrariwise cause such an extraordinary cold on the
Munk. One may conclude, that since there is so strong a Magnete in the Center
of the aforesaid lesser Rocks, there may be also a strong Magnete in the other
round grounds, by reason of whose virtue, besides the Streams, Ships can so
easily be brought into that danger. And if there be a Magnetical virtue
therein, whereof I doubt not, I leave to others Judgment, whether it can be the
cause of that extraordinary cold.

Insert here the second Figure.

Fifthly, at North of the Whirle-pool over against Suderoe, some other grounds
do advance equally forward, wherefore the streams altogether equally, and cause
there also a terrible motion of the Sea. The Premises can be better seen and
discerned in the annexed figure, which when the Intelligent Reader rightly
considers he can easily understand what terrible The Form of the Whirlpoole at
the South East of Sumboe with the Soundings. Page* 52
and dangerous stirring there is in such a Whirlepool, when there is a strong*
storm and current: Since there is such a motion of the Boats over it, when it
is still weather, a mild Sea, and the reflux of the stream, for then only
Folks venture themselves to fish thereon.

The Whirle*pool under Sandoe turns about to its very middle point, and has
no depth in the midst, I have my self been twice on the third Whirle-pool
between the North Islands, and when one comes near it, it droweth the Boat to
it self, as if it would swallow it; so that the people have enough to do to
keep the stream from getting the upper hand, all those of one side rowing
strongly against the Gulf with their Oars, whilst all those of the other
side, with their Oars, row quite contrary. And if the stream gets the upper
hand is whirles first twice about with the Boat and then twice back again,
continuing so four or five times; whence it is easy to conclude how the ground
is figured below. These sorts of grounds have tortured many sharp
understandings, and the fury of the stream being so great, that none in a long
time durst venture himself to search such grounds, the reason of the most part
has concluded that such whirle-pools were Voragines or bottomless pits, that
caused Ebb and Flood.

Amongst others Athan. Kircheny, l. 3. Hydrog. writes of the Renowned Whirle
pool under Norway, called, Moske Strom, that it is a Sea Gulf, wherein the Sea
runs down under the land of Norway, and runs out again at another Sea Gulf
within Sinus Bothnicus, or Botthen, whose opinion Mr. Herbinius in his public
dissertation held at Copenhagen in the year 1670. does follow, which opinion
being grounded upon uncertain relations, is very erroneous, as will be proved
by the following reasons.

First of all this Whirle-pool lies under the Land, between two Territories or
Islands, where the bottom of the Sea arises, and does not descend in deep
cavities, even as is found in all the Whirle pools of Feroe, and in that of
Botthen. In the like manner, the said Kircherus in his Tabula Geographica
Hydrographica, describes many Sea Gulfs through the whole world, but they are
all found near the Continent, or between small Islands; Scylla and Charybdis
are so in the Scicillian Sea, the one under Scicilly, the other near the point
of Calabria, and to confirm the thing the more, Kircherus says, that there
stands a high Rock in the midst of the stream which must be as the Munk in the
midst of Sumboes Whirle pool described above. God doubtless has naturally set
such high Rocks in the midst of th^se kind of streams, as a Beacon for Seamen,
that they should not come into danger.

Secondly, Mr. Peter Clauson in his Description of Norway writes, that the
water runs about in such turbulent and boisterous manner, that one can hear it
some Leagues off at Sea, which would not be if there were any deep ground to
make a swallowing Gulf, since the stillest water has the deepest bottom; but
that great noise is made, first, because it is a narrow and small passage,
between two Islands for the large Ocean to run through with the Tide to the
Continent, and as narrow to fall back again into the Maine Sea; and besides
that overcome those high grounds, which being winding in the manner of a Snail,
reason does persuade that huge beating and running about must make a terrible
noise.

In the third place, Mr. Peter Clauson aforesaid, writes, that what whole Trees
that stream draws in, come out again ^ugged with torn Roots and Branches,
which happens by reason that these high round, and sharp grounds, between
which the Trees are whirled about by the strong stream, does beat and wear off
the Roots, Branches, Bark, and the uppermost of the Trunk thereof. Of which
sort of Trees there comes many ashore to Feroe, which would not happen if there
were any pervious Gulf, for then the hole would be large; and the water run
still round about, and when any thing came to the Gulf, it would hastily run
through it without any damage, as one may plainly see, putting a piece of Wood
in a Funnel, and fill the Funnel full of water, etc.

Kircherus, to strengthen his opinion, writes, that near that high Rock in the
midst of the stream, there is an Abysme, through which the Water is swallowed;
in that manner there should first be a Vortex or Whirle pool, and within it a
Vor^go or Sea-gulf, that should have its way under Norway, and its out let
within Botthen. If it were so, there would not then come out again the tenth
part of what it swalloweth, whereas the Whirlepool renders as much as comes
into it, and the matter that is come out of it never returns into it again, the
stream that has driven it out, transporting it into the Main, whence it ^omes
driving to Feroe, Island, and Greenland; as is more then sufficiently known. In
the like manner what comes up again in Botthen, is driven by the stream to one
of those Sea Coasts, or else out into the East Sea, and one should then see
many of those Sea Wrecks in the East Sea, whereof nothing has been yet
perceived. Finally, it is openly known to all those that have any ways
frequented the Northern Countries, that the Inhabitants that dwell on the
Islands and the Continent about Moskoe-Strome, row out upon the Whirle pool,
when the weather is good, and the stream slow in its reflux, and fish there
abundance of fish called Sey, as I have been newly told by a Reverend man
worthy of belief, very well known in that place.

I confess nevertheless, that there may be a deep hole near that high Rock,
which if there be, as I do not at all doubt, then Moskoe Strom does agree in
the ground perfectly with Sumboes Whirle-pool. And it is in truth an admirable
work of Nature, that as she has wonderfully formed the Shell of a Snaile, so
she forms the like figures in the air, for Whirl-winds, and in the ground for
Whirl-pools, setting in the midst of such whirlepools, a token to be aware of
danger, and that nature might not be a hinderance to it self, it has made
therein a receptacle or deep hole to receive and keep what the stream draws
in from time to time, and afterward restored it when it runs out again.

Neither will the Gulf within Botthen be found to be otherwise then a round
ground, since there is also perceived such a terrible noise and boistering as
Olaus Magnus makes mention of, which comes from the rapid ebb and ^loud through
the long Bothmicus of the East-Sea, whose great force yet is not much
perceived, because of the deep ground every where, and therefore beats the
harder upon such ground as arises within Botthen, which is perceived likewise
in the straight near the Isle of Alland, where because the grounds lie shallow,
here is heard a terrible noise, which Mr. Herbinius affirms in his Dissertation
to have himself experimented, believing not before that such things were in
nature.

As Whirle pools have hitherto given much to think to many, so straight
Currents have not busied the thoughts of a lesser number, to explicate
fundamentally their true cause, ground, and manner: and though they did invent
some causes, they have not yet found the true Form and Model.

My intention is not to set up my self against such eminent Philosophers, but
only to write down what I have experimented and discerned in nature; if I can
thereby bring any light to natural History, I hope it will not displease the
Ingenious Reader.

First, here is set down the inward cause, namely, the secret Magnetic
Sympathetical and Antipathetical virtue, proved and explicated above, by which
Nature works between the Elements, and brings them into mo^ion

Secondly, there are found two other active external causes, the one is the
inward warmth of the Earth; the other the heat of the Sun and Stars.

The warmth of the Earth is not as some wrongfully think, a subterranean fire;
for then the Sea should be most moved near Island, Italy, and S^icily, since
there are seen visible signs of it near them, namely, burning fires in the
Mountains of Hecla, Vesuvio, and Aetna. But there is a natural warmth in the
Earth by virtue whereof, Grass, Herbs, and Trees have their growing motion,
which ^s proved by this, that the Sea has principally in the Spring, in March
and April; its chiefest motion and greatest Ebb and Flood in Feroe; when warmth
gets the upper hand, and the Earth opens it self for Plants to break out of
it, which motion with its Ebb and Flood does not come, as Cartesius supposes,
from the the Earths Conjunction with the Moon in the Collure of the Solstice.
The Earth being removed under the Eqnator or the Line, and the Moon under the
Ecliptic, meeting together in Aries and in Libra, where the Equator divides
the Zodiac, and therefore the Sea and Stream are strongest in the Spring and
in Autumn. We will not enter here into the dispute about the motion of the
Earth, but only say against it, that if it were so, the Floods should be
greatest, and the Streams most rapid both in the Spring and Autumn, as
Cortesius himself affirms, though notwithstanding Ebb and Flood is greatest
in the Spring and almost least of all in Autumn, as is known to all the
Inhabitants of Feroe, besides which, it would also follow that in Summer, when
the Moon and the Sun are in Cancer, or in Winter, when they are in Capricorn,
or in the Collure of the Solsticies, the floods should be least, and the
streams weakest, whereas in the midst of Summer the Flood is found to be
greatest, and the stream almost strongest, one may therefore reasonably
attribute it to the cause, which has then most force, namely, the warmth of
Earth, which then ascends, and produces its virtue.

Reason might well persuade it to be impossible, that such a great and deep
water should be altered thereby; such a warmth being very moderate, my reason
would also dictate to me the same, if the Magnetical Sympathy whereby this
warmth is so qualified in the Water, were not in nature. There is neither but a
mean warmth in a man's stomach, which when it is hottest of all, cannot be
compared with the heat of fire, yet in a short time, it Cooks and Digests Meat
to such an alteration, by its natural virtue, that the greatest fire could not
do the like with any meat in a Kettle or boiling Pot.

It is also proved that the heat of the Sun and Stars moves the Water, by
this, that when the warmth of the Earth is ascended in Plants, and there is
Rain and Cold Weather, the Stream is then moderate, but when the Sun shines
hot, and it is Calm weather, not only the Water is moved, and the Boffves break
out, as is said before, but the streams also are then very rapid, and the Ebb
and Flood higher then ordinary; specially during the Dogdays, when the
Canicule, together with the Sun are hottest, but when the Dogdays are past, and
the Sun advances to the South, the force of the Streams is weakened more and
more until Winter, during which season it is but half as strong as in summer.

Besides this, there is an other extraordinary cause of the increase of the
waters motion in Winter, which i^ the hardness of the frost, and having spoken
of it above, the Reader is referred thereunto.

God having thus created nature, the Sea in the beginning was brought into a
motion, which will last as long as the world does exist.

The form or manner of this Ebb and Flood has most of all perplexed
Philosophers, every one having invented an Hypothesis to Explicate it. God is
wonderful in all his works, and what seems hardest and difficultest of all to
our understanding is often most plain and easy; so this wonderful augmentation
and diminution of the water does consist in a mere motion to and fro between
the Continents, from East to West, and from West to East: and that in great
waves, as will be proved by the following arguments.

First, the whole may be known by its parts, seeing that the drops of water are
of a round figure, one may conclude that water is round. Likewise, as one sees
the Superficies of the water to be moved by the wind into waves, one may also
assuredly conclude, that the motion of the great Ocean is made in Ways; so the
Boffves, whether it be by heat or cold, forming themselves into waves, the
larger Sea does the like also.

Secondly, this is proved by experience in Nature; Those of Feroe, by this
experience call this manner of Ebb and Flood East and West-fall; East-fall is
that which with its waves falls on the East of Norway; West-fall is, when the
Sea is moved and falls back with its waves to the West part of Greenland.
The East-fall gives in Feroe Ebb or lowest water, falling to the East of
Norway; and making there highest water: West-fall makes highest water or Flood
in Feroe, because when the Flood falls back from the West of Norway, the
Waves rise and form themselves higher and higher against Feroe, according to
the nature of Waves, which is plainly proved by this, that at East of Feroe the
Water rises but three Fathoms, and at West seven Fathoms; the distance whereof
is but forty miles in Longitude: Yea, one may easily perceive the Sea to arise
higher at West of Suderoe, then at East; though the Land where it is broadest,
be not above eight miles broad.

On the contrary, Galilaeus Galilaei teaches, that it is the nature of water
to lift up it self toward its extremities, and run Horizontally between the
Latitude, whereunto it is answered, that when the water has its own motion
without resistance, it flows Horizontally, without waves, as through
Conduits, but when there is a resistance on both sides, the bottom is uneven,
and there is no outlet, the one part by its perpetual motion driving the other,
it must needs, according to the supposition of Kircherus, arise and fall in
waves, wherefore if it were as Galilaeo believes, either there would never be
Ebb or Flood in Feroe, in the Flemish Islands, or the Islands of Cape Verde,
which both lie in the midst of large Seas, where the Ocean should flow
Horizontally, or else both West-fall and East-fall should make there Ebb and
Flood, which never happens in Nature.

Ebb and Flood consist therefore without doubt and certainly in the motion of
the Sea, like that of waves, to and fro from one Continent to another, or in
the fall where the one wave falls upon the other, driving one another against
the Land* Now since the ground arises toward the Land, and the waves lift and
cast themselves over it, that must needs naturally cause the increase of the
water toward the Land, whence it happens that East-fall makes highest water
under Norway, from the North Cape to Bergen, where the Sea has a free course;
as likewise to the west of Scotland and England, except it be that Ireland lie
in the way. As also to the west of Ireland, France, and all Africa, until the
Cape of good Hope, contrariwise, VVest-fall gives highest water under all the
East Coast of America, and on the other west side thereof until Mare del Zuz.
And on the contrary West fall makes high Water in Mare del Zuz under the
East point of Tartary and China. In the mean time, sometimes VVest-fall, and
sometimes East fall, makes high water about the Islands which are spread
abroad in the Ocean, and in the still Sea, according as the difference of their
Meridian is, and the Seas motion does augment its waves. For Example, when the
Sea falls west on Feroe, the waves of the Sea fall then highest thereon, and
therefore VVest-fall makes highest water. Quite contrary, when they fall back
again, on the East, the waves have their cavities turned toward Feroe, and
therefore East-fall gives there lowest water.

It is certainly true, that as God has created all things according to weight,
measure, and number; a certain wave falling at the west of Feroe in its
retiring, Nature has equalized these waves in certain number, thickness and
length (never to be altered) according to the distance that is between the
Continents; and they are moved in such an unalterable perfection, that neither
the strongest contrary wind can hinder their course or fall, nor a fore wind
procure that they should come sooner or later; the reason is, that the wind
moves but the uppermost superficie, but cannot move the deep Abyss thereof:
Whence it comes, that when the great waves fall on upon the ground of Feroe,
and the water must thrust it self over the grounds between the Islands, as
through a ^^^ce, and when there comes a strong Storm against the Tide, which
cou d well move the water from the bottom, in the same place where it seems
that the course of the stream might be hindered, it can nevertheless not happen
so, the force of the next wave coming from the main deep, beating after it, and
the greatest driving the least, the wind not being able to hinder the cause,
can neither hinder the effect of it; yet none of them being willing to yield
they strive against one another with such fury, storm, and roaring of the Sea,
that it cannot be expressed with a pen, and when the Tide falls back in its
time, the waves grow quiet, and the wind appeaseth it self, as two mighty
Enemies that can win nothing on each other, do at last agree, lay down their
weapons, and walk the same way together. But as a great wind cannot hinder,
neither cana fore-wind further the course of the streams; because of the great
wave that goes before at the bottom of the deep, which cannot be driven
further then its natural course does require, after which the stream that is
driven by the wind must needs regulate it self, all what a fore-wind can do,
is only that what water it drives before it self from the Superficie, may serve
to increase the flood; whence comes flood water, that breaks over Banks, and
endamageth many places; though from this generality particular streams must be
excepted.

For a further proof of this former explication, it were to be wished that one
had or could get an exact description of the West Coast along Europe, and
Africa, and on the other side the whole East Coast of America, and afterward
in the still Sea, all the west Coast of America and East Coast of Asia, as far
as it lies open to the Sea, when it is highest water at the points, and in the
Bays, how high the water rises and falls in every place, and what is their
Longitude? As also that one could get these three Points dilligently observed
about the Islands over the whole world, or as far as might be; which if it
could be performed one could plainly see and perceive that this demonstration
is so in nature, yea, one could also find how big and long every wave is formed.

None ought to doubt of it, because such waves are not perceived by Mariners,
for as little as they can discern the motion of the water in the Main Sea, as
little can they perceive the waves rising or fall, For the difference in forty
miles in Feroe being but four Fathoms of the waves rising, how could it be
observed by Sailers, Neither can it be discerned any where, but about such
Islands at Sea: and having been undiscovered and untried hitherto, the wit of
many has invented several Hypothesis, which are not in nature.

Much less ought any one to suffer himself to be seduced by particulars, which
are all irregular, and much of what is written thereof, upon the relation of
others, erroneous. Thus the Hollanders have erred in describing the Currents of
Feroe after the declaration of Mariners: in the same manner Kircherus, after
the Description of Olaus Magnus, and the relation of Seamen: also the stream of
Moskoe, whereupon he has grounded a great absurdity to explicate the nature of
Ebb and Flood; which has made Mr. Herbinius in his public disputation to err
so much that all his suppositions fall of themselves.

But all particulars are explained when universals in their true grounds are
right understood, and the Inlets and Points diligently observed. For an example
we will take the stream under the the Low Countries in the North Sea, Catigate
and the East Sea; according to our general demonstration we find the Ocean to
fall and run into the Channel with the great waves of its motion by an
East-fall, as also to both sides thereof of France and England, afterward it
fills all the Inlets and Harbors of the Coast of all Netherland, thence the
stream is divided into two parts or branches, whereof the one runs
Northward, between England and Norway, and on both sides fills up all their
Havens; The other runs toward the East, between Norway and Jutland, toward
Sweden, and ends there its working; running back again six hours after from
thence to the Channel, joining it self to the general motion of the Ocean at
the West of America, where then it makes highest water, about this particular
Stream, and its Ebb and Flood are these following points to be considered.

First, that it is caused by the general motion of the Ocean, and therefore the
noting of the time thereof cannot contribute to the explanatio^ of this
Phenomenon; but the time o^ the flood without the Channel ought only to be
considered, and from thence learn the motion of the Ocean; all what is within
turning it self, according to the ends and points of Land, by a mere Flux and
re-flux, as the Ocean falls sometimes on the East, and sometimes on the west
part thereof.

Secondly, it is observed that on the East side of England and Scotland, as
also over against it, under Norway, there cannot be a strong Current, nor great
Ebb and Flood, by reason that the wave which the Ocean drives into the Channel,
is diminished by the many Inlets and Havens that are at the south end of
England, and in the reach of Land between high Sand to the Elbe, and the stream
running afterward partly Northward; and the North Sea between England and
Norway, not being perfectly moved, because of its narrowness here and there at
East and West, that little stream, according to its proportion, fills both
sides; whence it comes that one perceives no great stream in Norway, till one
comes pretty well North, where the Ocean ^loweth without hinderance, and it is
even so under the remote part of Norway, and other neighboring places.

In the third place, it is to be doubted, whether this Flood and Stream (which
comes in through the Channel, and runs against Gottenborough, runs not
through the Catigate into the East Sea, and makes there an ordinary stream of
Ebb and Flood in six hours, as in the Ocean. Our Herbinius denies the East Sea
all this, and for ought I could learn of our Seamen, they are almost all in the
same opinion, not knowing any other thing of a Stream there, then what a
constant Wind can cause, either out or in through the Sound. Nevertheless, the
Stream which comes from the Channel runs into the East Sea, and out again,
though inperceptibly, and all the East Sea (though it cannot easily be
observed) has its ordinary ebb and s^oud, which is not only proved by the
stream of Botthen above mentioned, but can also be easily perceived by the
little Current running between Fa^ster and Zealand, which orderly runs East
and West, absolving its Ebb and Flood in six hours, as I have newly been
informed, and have experimented; we have also the like examples in Feroe: at
North of Nolsoe Stream, between Stromoe and Osteroe there is no stream
perceived, neither ebb nor flood that can be discerned, because of the depth of
the ground; though it be there nevertheless, as is proved by the strong stream
at North of Stromoe, in the straight between the Islands over the high grounds,
described and explained above, which has its course with the Stream of Nolsoes
Inlet.

The third proof of the manner in which ebb and flood is effected, depends of
the Moon, which God has created as an assistant to the motion of the Sea, in
exercising two offices, by helping the motion thereof, and by directing it.

That the Moon contributeth to its motion, is plainly seen, because the stream
is in general, during the who^e year, according to the propriety of every
season, strongest and ebb and flood greatest, in New and Full Moon, increasing
and diminishing according as the Moon increases or diminishes its light:
wherefore such a thing happens, I humbly conceive to be this, warmth being a
principal cause to the motion of water in general, and the Moon being of a cold
and moist nature, when the same receives its light from the Sun, it grows
warm thereby, and by this warmth moves the water. Now since it is most warm
when it is in Conjunction or Opposition with the Sun, because then it darts its
beams directly upon the Moon. The Moon is then therefore most able to move the
water, when it is New or at Full. Now the Moon generally retiring every day
from the beginning of the New Moon, twelve degrees from the Sun, or coming
every day after full Moon twelve degrees nearer it, so as it retireth or comes
nearer the Sun, it shoots its beams awry on the Moon, and the more byassing
the Suns light is distributed, the less warmth does the Moon receive, and
therefore moves the Sea as its warmth diminishes, or is increased; and
therefore the motion of the Sea with its flood and ebb is greatest, not only
when it is new, or full Moon, but also three days before and after, and is
least when the Moon is in the Quadrate, or first and last quarter, but because
the Moon being in the Perigeum, or in Conjunction with the Sun, is then nearer
both Sun and Earth, it seems then to have the greatest warmth of the Sun, and
to be able to exercise its overture on the Sea better, then when it is in the
Apogeum, furthest from the Sun and Earth, in its opposition or filling. The
operation of the Moon is nevertheless equal both when it begins to be new,
and when it is filled; for the Moon having greater warmth and force at new
Moon, it is thought to act by reflecting its light toward the Sun; the dark
and cola part being turned to the Earth; yet having less warmth and force when
it is full, it can nevertheless more conveniently and better pour down what it
has on the Sea, by turning its splendid aspect directly upon it.

But it is very remarkable that two or three days after the beginning of the
new or full Moon, the Stream increases at Flood, and does not diminish; which
seems to contradict and destroy our demonstration, whereunto we must seek
another cause then the Moon; which in my opinion is this, whatsoever is heavy
and is brought into motion by some violent force, does not straight ways
diminish its said motion, when the cause has lost its force; but rather
augments it: it is even so in this case; The Moon has some difficulty to
augment the course of the stream when it is weakest, in its first and last
quarter, but when it is grown rapid in new and full Moon, it cannot so still it
self again, but increases naturally; specially the Mover having lost in two
days time something of its force. This is plainly seen in the Sea, for when it
has been moved by a great Storm, it is more unquiet the next day, when the
storm is appeased, then it was whilst it lasted; for then comes that terrible
Alde which we have described before, and at the same time that huge flood which
strikes up high in the Air against the Land. We might also discern, that by
the Suns effect on the Earth, for it shines hotter in the afternoon then
before Midday; not that its heat is then in it self greater then before; but
because the Sun must in the forenoon drive away the cold from the Horizon, but
in the afternoon produces its heat without any hinderance. This explication
does very well agree with the name, which Seamen give to that time of the Tide,
calling it Spring, as if it sprung by its own force, and would not be directed
by the Moon.

Secondly it is plainly proved that the Moon governs the Sea, by the
Quadruple motion of it, twice to the West, and twice to the East, in 24 hours
and 48. min. according to the course of the Moon, though our Master Herbinius
will not grant that; not thinking there is such a thing in nature as that the
Moon by Antipathy could now in 6 hours and 12 min. drive the Sea from it self,
and afterward by a Sympathy, in six other hours attract that again; whilst
nothing of all this happens by Antipathy, in the opinion of Herbinius.

For, according to these principles, the Sea is in a perpetual motion to and
fro, as water in a Vessel between its limits, against which if it beats, it
cannot get over; but must appease its proud waves and fall back again; which
will last as long as the world continues. But the God of order that has created
and ordained all things according to weight, measure, and number, has made the
Moon to govern thereover, not only as a moving cause with the rest, in the
manner aforesaid; but also regulateth its motion according to its own seasons,
and the Moon having two Motions, the one from East to West, together with the
Sun, and other Planets and Stars; the other from West to East, by which it
moves every day usually 12 degrees, from and to the Sun, which makes 48 min.
of time: so there can be no Antipathy between the Moon and the Motion of the
Sea, to what side soever it turns it self.

And God having made the distance so broad between the Continents, that it can
be six hours falling back from one Land to another, which it would perhaps
perform a great deal sooner if it might follow its own propension; nay it might
well in its fury and rapidity, overwhelm the whole Globe of the Earth, by
reason of the aforesaid causes; therefore the Moon is made to hold back by its
course that of the Sea, that it may not perfect its motion from one Coast to
another in six hours or less, but in six hours 12 m. which makes in the four
Tides of a day 48. m. so that the Moon governs the Sea, as a man does a
running Horse; sometimes putting him forwards, sometimes making him go slowly,
at other times giving him the Bitt, and sometimes keeping him back; and
notwithstanding makes him so run, that it comes to his Stage at the appointed
time.

This is my poor opinion concerning Ebb and Flood, grounded upon my own
experience and dilligent enquiry, whereby, having written it in our Danish
Tongue, I would specially give Seamen occasion to enquire into nature
wheresoever they come, after this manuduction; which if they do, I doubt not,
but they shall make such observations, that this explication will thereby be so
confirmed, that it will not be easily refuted. We will here transport us from
the salt Sea to the fresh Water on Land, God can never be sufficiently praised,
that has so wonderfully and abundantly blessed that Country with well tasting
and wholesome Fountain Water, Springing some Fathoms high on the top of the
highest Mountains; which in the greatest drought runs constantly almost
every where; so that there is scarce a Cottage, but there runs along a
little Spring water, or a great Brook, gathered of many such Rivelets; whose
water is generally colder in Summer then in Winter, though they have there no
healing Fountain for many diseases, as in other Countries, except one, in
Osteroe, near Got; which yet is not much made use of* this water is of that
nature, that it is much warmer in Winter then other Water; and if one will keep
it a whole year it continues without corruption. One might, it seems,
reasonably conclude, that since Brimstone is hot and keeps Wine from
corruption, that there may be Brimstone in the rock through which the water
flows, whereby it is tinged with this quality, and therefore there is
doubtless a great virtue hidden in that water, for the use of man, if it were
as convenient to come to, as it is discomodious. Since all what seems strange
in the beings that God has created, when reason cannot comprehend it, is
presently taken for a miracle, though it be an effect of nature; one may also
justly hold this for admirable, that God by his wonderful wisdom and power,
has so ordained it, that the mortal body aggravates the soul, and the earthly
Tabernacle oppresses the wandering senses, so that they scarce reach the
things which are on earth, and hardly perceive what it has under hand, as the
wise man speaks, in the ninth Chapter of his Book of Wisdom; whence comes,
that many of the Sons of Men, that will not trouble their Brains with such deep
thoughts, do merely consider such effects of nature as wonders, others give
themselves no thoughts at all about them, making use of them as unreasonable
creatures; others, to whom God and nature has given more light of
understanding, do not persist in searching the secrets of nature, so as to tire
themselves therewith. Amongst these secrets of nature there are not the least
but the most in water, namely, its course, and its ascent to the top of hills,
and its flowing down from thence.

The strange stream between Boetia and the Island of Negropont, called Euripe,
which runs in and out 7 times in a day, troubled so much that accute
Philosopher Aristotle, in his deep Speculations to comprehend the cause
thereof, that he, as Historians believe, took his Death thereupon.

The said Aristotle has also taken great pains to understand the natural cause
of the Springing of Fountains; but he has been deceived in the invention of
his reasoning; Scaliger having long since refuted him. But the Wise King
Solomon in Eccles. 1. 7. teaches us whence the water Springs come, and what is
their natural cause: all waters, says he, flow to the Sea from whence they
flow again; but he teaches us not the manner how it happens, nor the cause
whereby the water can Ascend, from the Sea, some hundreds of Fathoms high,
through the Mountains, as it does generally here on Feroe. Magirus in his
Physilogia lib. 4 c. 6. brings in the opinion of Scaliger, in this manner;
although we know not the cause of this natural thing, yet we judge that the
water does not mount up in a direct line, but through many turnings, and there
being hollow veins in many places of the Earth and Rocks, the water does run
through them, and those Conduits being narrow, the Sea lies heavy thereon and
presses them so that the lesser water must needs rise above, and seek a way to
get out where it can find it, whence come Springs and Fountains. Thus far
Scaliger.

Out of this meaning of Scaliger, the Ingenious Reader can easily perceive that
there are many trooked Veins or Conduits, under the Earth and Rocks, but yet
it does not follow that they cause or help the ascent of the Water; for it
cannot ascend directly up, as we see it does not through a hollow Post. By the
help of nature and art, Archimedes invented a screw to make Water ascend from
the place where it lies still, which Screw was a hollow Leaden Pipe, that was
twined about a round and long staff in the manner of a Screw, but it was to be
turned about, and so the water was screwed up; such are not naturally found in
the Earth, and though there be no such crooked Conduits in the Earth, the water
can nevertheless ascend from the lowest part of the Earth, to the highest top
of the Mountains, as shall be demonstrated hereafter. Besides, it is to be
noted, that the water of the Sea does not throng or press up the water of the
Fountains, because it is more abundant or heavier then the water that is in the
veins of the Earth; for if one lays a horn on the back, so that both ends
are equally high Horizontally, and one fills it full of water, though there
be then much more in the thicker end then in the smaller, which it seems by
reason of its gravity, should endeavor to seek the bottom of the Horn, and so
drive out the lesser water, it cannot nevertheless do so, for the greater water
cannot drive the lesser higher up, then it self lies high; whence it follows
that the water of the Sea is as high, yea higher, then the highest Mountain, on
whose top there springs Fountain water, which must be proved.

All Mathematicians do truly affirm that Earth and Water make a round Globe
together, as it may be perceived by the Eclipse of the Moon, when the Earth
lies between it and the Sun; for what is then darkened is round, because the
interposed Earth is of a round Figure. That Water is absolutely round as the
Earth, is proved by the custom of Seamen, who when they will discover Land
climb up to the Main mast, whence they can discover it, when no body else can
see it in the Ship; the cause whereof is the roundness of the Water; for if it
were flat they could as well see the Land below in the Ship, as above on the
Mast.

Finally, the whole is like its parts, and therefore if a drop let fall on a
Table, or on a Cloth forms it self round, the whole Mass or body thereof must
have the same nature and propriety.

That Fundament being firm, and without contradiction, the wide Sea can soon
mount, in the roundness of its figure, higher then any Mountain on Land is high.

And therefore naturally, according to the aforesaid nature of Water, can
easily weigh up and press the lesser water through the Conduits of the Earth,
though they be not crooked, and that as high as the Sea is in its highest
Superficie; which is demonstrated by the following Figure.

diagram.

Let this round Figure be the whole Globe consisting of Water and Earth, let D.
E. and F. G. and H. I. be three parts of the Land, and the space between water:
Let A. be here the highest Superficies or uppermost part of the water: let K.
L. be a Spring on the high Mountain* D. K. L. now water presses on its highest
near A. down toward the Center C. through which it cannot come to the
lowermost Superficie, and therefore seeks a passage through the earth, and
amongst many, let there be a vein near M. running up, either straight or
crooked, from M. to I. K. as may be seen in the Figure, which it can easily do,
till B. lying first Horizontally with A. but the Sea cannot drive up the least
drop thereof to N* because it is higher then A The Water therefore runs thus
from K. down the Mountain over the Plain near L. and thence into the Sea, by O.
which it will do as long as the World lasts; and since the perpendicular of
the Mountain I. K. is a third part of the length of the earth, semidiameter C
I. which alter the supputation of Astronomers is 859 Leagues, so the Mountain
is high perpendicularly 286 Leagues, no Mountain being so high; no, not Mount
Olympus, that is esteemed the highest in the World.

And this supposition shows the rising of the Sea in the motion of its waves,
expounded page 64. for if there be so great a difference of Flood in the space
of ten Leagues, what difference is there then in hundreds of Leagues.

This Demonstration is confirmed by a rare example of a water in Feroe; for
there is on Suderoe toward the South, near a little Village called Famoien, a
little Lake, pretty high on the Mountain, that has ordinary Ebb and Flood with
the Sea, but it has doubtless larger Conduits then other veins of water,
through which it can easier rise and fall; so that this example is a singular
proof of the demoustration aforesaid: for if that Lake had Ebd and Flood
immediately of it self, other fresh waters that lie still, would also have the
same nature: but if this happens mediately, by reason of the motion of the Sea,
it follows, that fresh water ascends from thence.

That there runs salt water in the Conduits of the Earth, and comes out
again fresh, is by this reason, since all Metals and Miner^ls, as Chemists
prove clearly, are produced of Salt, and the Earth has its fatness of the
same, they draw then the Salt from the Water for their maintenance and
nourishment, as the flesh draws from the blood in the veins of a man's body,
that whereof the body has its increase and fatness. And wheresoever there are
Metals and Minerals in the Earth, the Water Attracts their qualities, and is
tinged according to their nature; whence does proceed several healing waters,
that Earth draws Salt to it self, is proved by an Artificial Experiment* for
if one will bind a piece of linen Cloth over the one end of a bottomless Cask,
and fill the Cask full of Earth, pouring on the earth a quantity of Salt water,
and letting it sink through the Earth two or three times, the Water at last
will come out fresh, the Earth having drawn to its self the Salt thereof.

If any would conclude fresh Springs to come of rain water, because when it
raineth there runs out more water at the Spring, then when it has been a
long time dry weather, the Spring being then drained, and producing no water;
It is answered thereunto, that rain cannot be the cause of Spring water on
Feroe, the Land consisting in hard stony Rocks, and high Steep Mountains,
through which the Water can find no passage, and because of their steepness,
must presently run down, nevertheless the water flows more abundantly from
the Springs, when it raineth in Feroe, and less when it is corystan drought,
some of the Springs growing then wholly dry; which comes from the harmony that
is between the Air and the Earth.

For it happens constantly and naturally, that when the Air is resolved into
moisture, the Earth also produces then its humidity, as may be seen on the
Stones of Walls, and when the Air is a long time dry, the earth is so likewise,
and when the Earth is moistened by the Air, it sucketh from the Sea Water
nothing but the Salt, but when the Earth is dry, it thirsts* and therefore
sncketh in, not only the Salt, but also the water; whence it comes that little
Springs are dried up in long droughts, but where there are great veins, as
there is also difference amongst Conduits, the water is indeed diminished, but
not wholly dried up, for we have sometimes great droughts in Feroe, so that the
Earth splits it self to the very Rock, Water is then wanting in some places,
but in some other never.

Fire and Water being almost the two chiefest necessaries of mankind; nature
having denied this Land Trees, so that there grows here none, except some
little Junipers that grow in some few places near the Earth, nature has
recompensed that defect with abundance of Turf, whereof though the Earth be
fast, there are found many sorts excellent good, in several places, so that
some of them are made use of by Smiths, to work Iron with instead of Sea-coals,
which is not found here, except in one place of Suderoe, unto which yet a man
can hardly come.

The Air of these Islands of Feroe is no less considerable then the Water; In
Summer it is temperately warm, not very hot at any time: neither is the Winter
very cold, though the Land lies under 62 degrees of Northern Latitude, it
freezeth seldom a month together, neither is the Frost then so hard as to
produce Ice in the open Inlets, wherefore all Horse and Sheep go into the
Fields during the whole Winter, and never come under shelter, the cause of such
mild eir is the Salt Sea, wherewith the Island is embraced round about: which
being warm both by its saline nature, and perpetual motion, produces ever a
warm vapor, which tempers th e Air, and takes away the rigor of its
coldness, and together causes a moist air, so that there falls most melted
Snow, mi^ling and rain in the Valleys, though it freezeth upon the Mountains;
from this moist air and watery Clouds is produced much storm and terrible
winds, which sometimes tear up the stones from the ground, turn up the Earthen
crust from the Rocks, and roll it together as one might roll a piece of Lead,
and those stormy*winds are very variable, according as the Gapps are between
the tops of the high Mountains, betwixt which the winds gather and throng
themselves through, with a wonderful force, when sometimes it is, amongst the
Folks that dwell in the Valleys under these Mountains, during such a storm, so
still, that one may go from one house to another with a light burning, and
then afterward it comes again so terribly by Gusts, as if the the Hills would
be torn to pieces, and it is worth consideration, that before the said
impetuous wind comes or is perceived, the houses crack and make a noise as if
they would straight fall down, which afterward though not much moved, being
low built, and on all sides well defended with thick Walls made of green Turff
and Stones.

Otherwise there being such high Hills, so that the wind cannot blow straight
forwards, but now hitts against one corner, then against another, and so
against a third, one of those strong winds thus meets another, and as it
were, begin a Fight together, whereby are caused terrible Whirle-winds; which
having a long time stormed about between the hills come down over the Inlets,
and whirling round about, run again through them, some whereof are above three
miles lone, a great way into the Sea: and then it is very dangerous for Boats
that are met thereby, which must presently let fall their Sails, or else they
are overturned men and all, it also happens often, though the Sail be not up,
that the Whirlwind overturneth the Boat and the people, as many examples do
witness, and as Boats are in danger by such Whirle-winds; so ships have
sometimes no less cause to fear those Gusts from the Mountains, when they fail
in greatest security; for they in the like manner fall down from the Mountains,
when it is still weather, as has been expressed of several contrary Stormy
Winds, which Foreign Mariners that come with their Ships between these Lands,
must well observe or else they may possibly come in danger thereby.

Specially it is to be noted about these Whirle-winds, that sometimes on Land
between these Rocks, when it is pretty good weather, and there is no danger,
one of them will come on a sudden so furious, that it beats a man down from
his Horse, yea, bears down Man and Horse, as also strikes down those that
are going on Foot, sometimes hurting them; wherefore those that are used to the
Country can easily perceive its coming, for it is heard before, with a
terrible boistering between the Clifts, when the weather is also very quiet;
wherefore the Rider alighteth from his Horse and lays himself on the ground,
holding fast to the Grass, or to a Stone, as he thinks himself securest.

That sort of Whirlwind happens but seldom, and is doubtless of that sort,
which naturalist call Exnephia, that are caused by the Clouds on the top of the
Mountains, as Kircherus relates, that it happens on the Mountain called
Table Mount, at the Cape of good Hope, on which Mountain there is perceived by
the people a little cloud before, whence is caused such terrible and unlooked
for whirl-winds; which Cloud when they see on the Hill, they run amain to their
Ships, Lanch from the Land, and so preserve themselves and their Shipping.

There is told a strange Story which is said to have happened in this Country,
by reason of a Whirlwind; which the most part of those that read it will
perhaps not believe, though it be true. It happened a pretty long time since,
that a Priest of Suderoe called, Brother Anderson, traveled to one of his
Parishes, namely, Sumboe, and when he came in those parts, in a place called
Sumboe Horse, which is a very high Clift, above 200 Fathoms high, and has
several points, by reason of which, besides the height of the Mountain, whether
the wind blows from the Land or to the Land, there may be caused a strong
Whirlewind, and the high way being very near the edge of the promontory where
there is always a pretty storm, though it be still weather every where below;
(which happens by reason of the promontories height and hinderance of the
Airs free passage) happened that the Priest coming that way toward Sumboe
Horse, there came a strong Whirlewind that took away the Priest and Horse
together, and carried him beyond the edge of the Promontory, and another
whirlewind coming directly against it, threw him again on the Land, without any
hurt. Though this seems incredible to many, it is nevertheless told for a truth
by many worthy of belief; I have my self been at and visited the place,
according to the Situation whereof, it seems that it might naturally happen, a
stronger whirlwind having overcome that coming from the Land, it may then
according to the nature of a whirlewind, have driven both the weaker wind and
the man to Land again, which I do not only grant might naturally be, but
believe also that God, by his Omnipotency, and the Protection of his Angels,
has contributed thereunto; others may believe hereof what best pleases them.
Otherwise, the ordinary winds that blow here, are for the most part West and
South West, specially in the Spring and Harvest, these Winds being very moist;
and it happens usually that on the side of the Land where the wind blows,
there is Rain and bad weather, whilst on the other side it is fair and clear:
which comes by reason of the Lands great height.

Here being no very hot Summer, neither is there any thunder heard during that
season; but only in Winter, when there is a great Storm, and there falls
Rain, which is the more terrible, all being then turbulent.

By reason of the Premises, there flowing almost by every man's house, a running
stream, washing away all impurities that might infect the air, and the salt
vapor of the Sea, keeping it from corruption, as salt keeps bodies from
rotting; and though finally some poisenous vapors might ascend into it, it is
nevertheless continually cleansed by the perpetual Strong Wind and Thunder,
that happens usually in Autumn, Winter and Spring: there is usually in Feroe
a wholesome Air, free from Pestilence, Infection, and Contagious Diseases,
which do never range here, except they be brought in by other sick people.
Neither are any here troubled with Agues: but it is experimented, that they who
had it, and could not be quit of it in other places by the use of Medicaments,
have been freed of it coming hither by the Lands nature, without using any
other Medicine, whence it comes that the people live longer here, then usually
in other places. Neither are children here plagued with the Small Pox as else
where, this sickness not being known here, except it be brought from Foreign
parts, and then here is seen a great misery, Men and Women, Children and
Servants, old and young, lying then at once in bed of that sickness; so that
none of them can help the other, and the Sound shunning the Infected as death
it self. In the Year 1651. when I arrived first into this Country, there came
a young man the same Summer from Denmark to Thors-Haven, who had been sick of
the Small Pox, and had brought along with him the Shirt he lay in, unwashed,
which he gave a Woman to wash, that was straight ways infected by the damp of
the said Shirt, and by her again, others, that did not know the Disease at
first; wherefore, when I came to that place, there was a great calamity, almost
every one, both old and young lying a bed of the Small Pox, it being a great
misery not only by reason of the Disease it self, that took away old and young,
but also because the Sound shunned the sick, and refused to bury the dead, the
Peasants durst not come to Thors-Haven to buy their necessaries, and though
they all so much shunned the sickness, they were nevertheless Infected with it,
till it had spread it self over the who^e Country, even over Suderoe, that
lies most out of the way.

Though the Air as aforesaid be wholesome, the land nevertheless is not
therefore free from Sickness, but this Country, as well as other, has its
particular Diseases, for the air being first cold and moist, whereby Phlegm is
daily augmented, the Inhabitants are almost all troubled twice a year, with a
strong Rhume, which they call Kriim in the Spring and after Harvest, for it
falls at once on the Nose and Lungs, with a strong Cough and Spitting, head
ach and pain in the Limbs, so that many must lie a long time in bed, and some
dye of it. Against this Sickness they drink sower Whey, as hot as they can
suffer it, but this sickness is a wholesome Sickness to them, for nature in its
fittest time, does purge the body of all impurity contracted by the cold
moisture of the Air, which might otherwise cause many and great Diseases.

Secondly, of this cold moisture is caused, though not every year, a hot
sickness, called Landfarsoett, because it bareth over the Land, not unlike to
the hot Sickness, which Soldiers are taken with in cold and moist Leaguers in
Winter; for that disease is very hot, with accute pain of the Head and
Distractions, with Flux of the Belly in Summer, and does not cease till it has
consumed the very Marrow of the Bones, but they dye thereof. Though the
greatest part are Healed by the Providence of God having no other Remedy
against it.

In the third place, this cold and moist Temperature, together with their
dwelling on the Sea side, causes, especially in Phlegmatic Folks that do not
much stir themselves, this dangerous Sickness, the Scurvy, that sort of people
not being here able to preserve themselves easily from it; they Cure themselves
usually with new Milk, wherein has boiled Scurvy Grass and many with new Milk
alone.

For the Fourth, the said Air giving the Scurvy to some, causes also in some
few, according to their Complexion and Diet, that Incurable Disease the
Leprosy, for Scorbutus and Lepra, according to the opinion of Physicians,
being as Brother and Sister, it follows that they have either a Father or
Mother together; Of which Leprosy, and its Causes and Quallities we will make
further mention in a fitter place.

CHAP. II.
Of the Lands Fertility.
OTher Countries are justly esteemed for their great riches, namely, several
Metals, Minerals, Precious Stones, Pearls, Wine and Corn, but God and Nature
have denied all this to these Islands: here might possibly be found some Copper
and Iron Mines, which might be concluded by reason of some small Rivolets
running down the Hills in Summer, which are found to grow Green in dry weather,
as Verdigrease, but I dare not undertake to affirm any thing about it; amongst
Mineralls here is found Talk in the North Islands, but in very little
quantity. I have found here two sorts of Saltpeter stones, whereof Saltpeter
can be prepared, though not in great quantity. On the Sand near the Seaside,
there are found in some places, a kind of Pellucide-stones, so hard that one
can Write on Glass with them; they are white, or of a bluish white calour,
some of them yellow; some of them are so even Polished, that they serve to put
in Rings, whereunto they are used by some. It is found that they grow in the
Clifts, and are washed off by the Sea-waves: no body could yet know whether
they be of any worth; for some of them have by curiosity, been carried to
Jewelers; but they have not been esteemed any thing.

My late private precept or the Learned and Famous Olaus Normins, at my
departure for Feroe, showed me amongst other Rarities, in his Cabinet, that
sort of Stones, sent him from Feroe, and conceived they were Jaspis stones,
telling me also that they had lost their color since he had them, and desired
me that I would send him some more of them, which I did accordingly perform.
The Pearls whereof Mr. Peter Clauson writes in his Description of Norway, that
they are found in Muscles here; are no other then those that are found in the
Muscles of Denmark concerning the Stone which he also writes, is found here by
the sea side, shaped like a Heart o Kidney, called by the Inhabitants a Fairies
Kidney, that as Mr. Peter writes, according to the received opinion of the
Inhabitants, does bring forth another Stone when it is kept long; it is very
certain that Fairies Kidneys ore found here, but the Inhabitants have not that
superstitious opinion of them; neither is it any Stone, but a West India Bean;
as has been told me by a very knowing man, for it has a hard outward shell of
a Chestnut brown color, and within a sweet Kernel. This doubtless falls in
other places off from its stalk into the Sea, and is brought hither by the
Stream. They are carried to Foreign Countries, and there carved to make Boxes
for Sunff, Tobacco; here is also found but in small quantities, some brittle
Crystal, which cannot be wro^^ht.

Though God has denied this land the riches aforesaid, it has nevertheless
pleased him to enrich it with what can hardlyer be wanted in nature, if the
Land could be tilled every where, as in other places, it would in Fertility of
Corn go beyond other Countries equally large; but here a Countryman cannot sow
above one or two Tuns of Corn, but in many places they Reap again 20 or 30
Tuns, for one Tun of Seed, specially in the Southerly Islands, where they reap
so much Corn that it need none to be imported from foreign Countries. Here is
nothing sowed but Barley, for other Seeds will not come to maturity, and there
being here but little sowed, there is the more ground for Pastures. In several
places Grass is found so abundant and juicy, that Oxen feed thereon both Winter
and Summer, growing sometimes so Fat, that one can get in an Ox that is not big
of growth 100 pound of Tallow, and such places they call Feidelands. It is very
remarkable, that where there are such Feidelands, they ever turn to the North
East and North, wherefore would not think that the North or North East Wind,
could cause any Fertillity, they being cold, but rather the South West or West,
these being warm and moist, and having more the Suns assistance to operate with
them: whence it comes that the old Grecians called the West Wind Zephirus, as
that which caused life in Plants. Nevertheless the contrary is found in these
pastures. It is also observed that in Island the North part is more Fertile
with Grass and Cattle, then the South Greenland is also found to be given with
Grass on the North East side, whence it has also received its name; but on the
West side there is found little or no grass. If you will inquire the natural
cause of this, we must consult the Chemists, who write much of their great
Monarch or Lion of the North, especially mentioned by Theophrastus Paracelsus;
whereby they mean nothing but Nitre a special Agent in Chemical Operations: The
cause wherefore they call Nitre a Monarch and Lion of the North, is, that in
the Snow, coming from the North or North East, there is naturally found Salt
Peter. Wherefore, when one cannot have other more convenient liquors to make
Salt Peter of, or sor other Chemical Operations, they make use of North or
North East Rain and Snow. Besides there is found in their writings that Salt
peter is not only used in the particular transmutation of Metals, but also
that being dissolved, and Corn dipped in it, it may be sowed without dunging, in
the very leanest ground, giving it an extraordinary production, all dunging
whereby the Earth is made Feftile, having its inward virtue and essence
consisting in Nitre, or the Salt thereof, which is clearly proved by an example
known almost every where, for those that make Salt Peter dig up old Floors from
under Cattle or Sheep, whereof they extract the Nitre, that is engendered there
of the Beasts virtue, whence it comes that Dunghills, where Cattels Urine,
remains and rots are better for D^ngning then dry dung it self. For a further
example, it is seen here in Feroe, that they take Sea weeds from the Shore,
and lay them on heaps to ^ot, wherewith afterward they lung their ground,
which then bear^th abundance of Corn, that effect proceeding doubtless of the
Salt in ^he Sea weeds, since Salt Peter can naturally be prepared of Salt: from
the premises, North East Snow and Rain, having Salt Peter in it self, and all
lunging consisting in Nitre. The Reader may easily conclude that such pla^es,
as are exposed to North East Winds, must consequently be more fruitful then
others. But here is also ^o be observed that the said places are Valleys,
arising usually with a high Promontory against the Sun, which also helps to
their Fertility, the Scorching Beams of the Sun being hindered thereby. One
might here well imagine, that since it Snoweth and Raineth from the North East
or North over the whole Island, and the Sun draws Plants out of the Earth, it
might be most fruitful, where the Sun does shine the whole day with its beams,
it is found in nature that the Sun it self does not produce the Plants from the
Earth, but warmeth nature, and the night cools and moistneth what the Sun
has dried and scorched, whence principally Plants are produced. In the Lands
which lie under the torrid Zone, nothing at all could grow, because of the heat
of the Sun, if the night was not as long as the day, and by its cooling and dew
did not temperate the Plants.

It is observed here in Feroe that in the midst of Summer, when in two months
time there is almost no night, Corn grows but very little, though it raineth^
nor herbs though they be watered in dry weather, and when the night begins
to be longer, Corn and Herbs grow more in a night and day, then otherwise in
fourteen: from whence it is seen, that the Sun at certain times does indamage
Plants, and where it strikes directly down, with its gathered Beams, consumes
the moisture and fatness of the ground; but where, by a moderate reflection, it
warmeth the Earth, (which happens in the Valleys aforesaid, where the
steepness of the Hills intercepts the force of the Suns Beams) the Earth
keeps its Fatness and Seed in it self, bringing forth more Fruit; then
elsewhere.

The Earth does not only produce Grass for Cattle, but also many Herbs for the
use of man; for here grows not only Garden Herbs, namely, Turnips, Carrets,
Colworts, Lettice, Cresses, Pennyroyal, and such like; but also several and
many wild Herbs: specially Feroe is to be esteemed for four sorts of wild
Herbs, that grow here in abundance.

First, of all, there being no Country that God visits with any particular
sickness, but he causes to grow in the same Countries some wholesome Plant
against the said Disease; and Feroe, as aforesaid being by its nature very
subject to the Scurvy, God has abundantly blessed the Land with Herbs, good
against it, namely, Cresses, Scurvy Grass, Beccabunge and Sorrel.

Secondly, here grows a huge quantity of Tormentill, which the Inhabitants
having no Bark of Trees to Tan their Hides with, make use of; God and Nature
having revealed to them the dryness of that Herb, so that they Tan their skins
with it, and therefore call it Bark.

In the third place here is found abundance of Angelica, which they call
Quander, not only in Gardens and Churchyards, where it is planted, but also in
the open fields, and on the high hills: the Inhabitants take pleasure in eating
the great hollow Stalks of it, that are not yet grown to Seed, whereof they
peel first off the outward rind, afterward they tear off the long filaments,
eating the rest for pleasure, as they do elsewhere the fruit of Trees: they
make also in time of dearth use of the roots of Angelica instead of other
victuals.

The fourth Plant that grows here is Radix Rhodia, called in the Language of
Feroe, Hielpe-Rod, whereof the Learned Doctor Simon Panly, in his Flora Dania
writes, that it is in vain to seek it in Country Gardens, and much more in the
wild Fields or such other places, it being only found in principal Gardens
where it is planted; nevertheless it has pleased God to adorn Feroe with that
Plant above other Countries; if then Denmark by the said Doctor Simon Panly, is
praised for its Scurvy Grass, Norway for its Gentiane and Chamaemorus, and
Island for its Angelica; Feroe ought also to bear the prize for its Rhodian
root; I have distilled Water of the said root and found it in oder and taste to
be like Rose Water, having made use of it in my occasions and found content
therein as in other Rose Water, yet it does not grow in every place, but only
on the sides of Hills, overrunning waters or Lakes.

Here grow no Trees except some Juniper Shrubs, in some few places, close to
the Earth; and some Willow Bushes, but they do not grow high: It has been
tried to Plant Fruit Trees, but they will not prosper, it may be the saline
damps of the Sea are the cause of it.

There being such an abundance of grass and herbs in the Land, there is also
plenty of Cattle to feed thereon; here are no Wild Beasts axcept Mice and Rats,
though they are not found in all the Islands. Wherefore some think they cannot
live where they are not seen, but we will leave that undecided. Venomous
Beasts, as Serpents and Snakes are not found here neither; perhaps the
propriety of the Earth will not permit them to live thereon. Of Tame Cattle,
they have Kine, Horses and Sheep; those that live in great Farms which are but
very few, have sometimes twenty Oxen a piece, the Cows go often out to Grass
the whole Winter, provided there falls not too much Snow. The Cattle is for
the most part little though fat, according to the ground it feeds on. The
Horses are also of a little growth, but they are strong, and go surely and
swift, where the way leads, without Horse-shooe, on these high hills; so that a
man may more surely rely on them then upon himself; they feed abroad both
Winter and Summer, without ever coming under shelter. Their Sheep feed also
abroad the Winter over, and are half wild, some quite wild; nevertheless they
go always, and feed in one place; so that they seldom go from their owners
ground into another man's, though they be only divided by Hedges, as in other
places; yea, what is more, every Flock feeds in the same close, and does not
mingle it self with any other. For if a Countryman have many Sheep, some 200,
some 300, 400, or 500, they are divided into Flocks, which they call Oner,
consisting each of about an 100, or an 150 Sheep; which Flocks feed always in
their usual places, and the Countryman knows where he is to find every flock;
the cause wherefore they do not go from their own place into another, or into
another man's Close, though they be Wild, and there be no separation between
them, is this; the Countryman sets at first young Lambs on the place where
he will have them to feed, which he causes to be looked to, and kept there a
whole year, and suffers them not to go any where, but where he intends they
should be, and when they are so used to a place, they always feed there; the
old ones keeping company with the young that are bred of them, the Flock
remains feeding on its place as long as there is any living, and if a Flock
dies or perishes by the ^igour of Winter, they straight ways place another in
the manner aforesaid.

It happens notwithstanding when a Country man puts too many Sheep in his
Close, that they throng themselves into his neighbors; and then the owner must
take them back and kill them, for they cannot be disaccustomed of it: about
which they have a particular ordinance called, Siode, Breffvet.

It cannot be expressed what these Beasts must suffer, when there comes on a
hard Winter, for when there falls a hasty and lasting Snow, and the Shepherd
is not straight present to drive them into the Snow shelter (that is a place in
the open Fields as a Fold enclosed with Fences of Earth and Turffe against the
North, that Sheep may shelter themselves there) the Sheep gather themselves
close together in the open Field, and then it happens, that the Snow wholly
covers them; so that the Country man cannot see them, till at last he
perceives a damp arising from the Snow, by reason of their warmth, and then he
goes and makes a passage for them, that they may get out, and seek their
Pasture It happens sometimes that they cannot be found by reason of the
extraordinary great Snow, and sometimes, though seldom, that they then remain a
whole month under the Snow, and suffer great hunger, so that they eat the Grass
by the Roots: They also eat the wool off of one another, being able to remain
alive as long as they have any marrow in their bones; and though a part of them
be driven in time into the Snow shelter, yet there is no Hay given to them, but
they must suffer what they can, and scrape the Snow off of the Banks, that they
may get a little grass; but that those that are covered with Snow may sometimes
save themselves, they let go in every Flock some gelded Weathers, which being
bigger and stronger then the rest, break usually through the Snow, and the
other Sheep follow them to seek their Pasture; by reason of this accident in
Winter a Peasant must be very careful not to put more Sheep in the Close, then
it can feed; and every Peasant knows how much his Close can maintain and
nourish, which they call Skibning; they observe also that the Closes cannot
feed so many Sheep now as they did formerly; nature growing old and weak; and
if any puts in too many, in hopes that the Winter shall be mild, they are
usually lean: because of their number; and then, if there comes a hard
Winter, they are not able to suffer much hunger, and therefore many dye away,
specially toward the Spring when the Sun begins to shine warm; for then
they are so weak in that heat, that they lie on the place they are, and dye, as
it were in a sleep, It happens also, when there is a great Snow, that much
thereof hangs beyond the edge of the Clifts, over the Sea, which they call
Skagel: whereon the Sheep often go and stand, and when the Snow begins to
glide, all the Sheep fall into the Sea, hundreds at ouce. Wherefore the owner
must be very watchful to keep in time his Sheep from those Clifts, so that be
it never so bad weather, even in the night time, he must sometimes go out with
all his people; except he will receive damage.

These poor Inhabitants receive often great losses, when there comes a hard
Winter, often losing a half part of their Sheep. By reason of these accidents
their Sheep must have good care taken of them, whereunto there is always a
certain man appointed in every place, called a Soidemand, that is as much as a
Shepherd, and it is either the owner himself, or his principal Servant, if his
Farm be so much that he is able to keep one whose employment is not only to
take care of the Sheep in time of danger, but also to make them tame and
obedient, driving them according to his will, when there is Snow. When one will
take either the Wool or the Lambs from the Sheep, the Shepherd cannot do it
alone, but must have three or four Men with him, and Dogs beside, just as one
goes on Hunting: such a Shepherd that is capable of his employment can know by
his continual looking to the Sheep, every one of them, though he had a thousand
in his custody, and they were all white, as they are for the most part, and
knows also when any of them is strayed, discerning it amongst other Sheep,
without apprehending it, or looking on the mark.

They seek after the fruit of their Sheep twice a year; in the Spring when they
sheare the Wool of them and mark their Lambs; and in Autumn when they take of
them to kill, and setthem to go and feed the Winter over, having when this is
to be done, a place in the close by the sea side, which they call Retten, and
is likea Sheepfold, usually compassed about with a Stone Fence, having a hole
before instead of a door, that they may drive their Sheep through it into the
Retten, which when they will do, the Soidemand goes out with five or six men
more, having each his Dog with him, and gather first one Flock driving it
toward the hill, whilst some men with their Dogs go by the side of the Flock,
and some after, till they have driven the Sheep into the Enclosure, it being
observable that these Dogs do almost as much in that work as the men, for a
part of them runs also along with the Sheep, and a part after, with the men;
if any of the Sheep will separate himself from the Flock, the Dog is presently
ready to drive him again into its order; if any Sheep runs away, as it often
happens, the Dogs pursue it presently, and do not leave*off till they have
brought it back again, if ti be so that the Sheep will not be forced back;
every Dog takes his Sheep by the Wool, and throws it down, without ever biting
the Sheep in the Flesh, and when the Sheep are so overthrown, they lie still
and dare not rise till the men come and take them up; these Dogs are so taught,
that when the Shepherd will have but one Lamb of the Flock for some occasion,
he goes in the Fields with his Dog, and what Lamb he only points at, the Dog
takes the same presently without hurting it. These Dogs are long and small
almost like Gray hounds, and when they are well instructed, they are esteemed
of equal price with a Cow; because of such Sheeps hunting, the people must also
run very much, so that they often vomit blood, and such continual running
makes here many swift Folks that are good and lasting runners. In Suderoe the
people are something lazy, but they have lighter and swifter Horses then in the
other Islands; wherefore when they go about their Sheep, they ride, and their
Dogs follow them, they knowing how to ride with their Horses up Hills and down
Dales in a full Gallop, through Moors, and over Rocks and Stones, so that the
Horses care for nothing when they hunt after Sheep, and where the place is too
difficult to ride over to pursue them: the man leaps from his Horse in the
midst of its course, and takes his best advantage against the Sheep, the Horse
running after him till he leaps upon it again; in the mean time the Dogs follow
also, till they have driven the Sheep into the Retten. A part of these Horses
are also so taught, that the man over reaching the Sheep on Horse back, the
Horse graspeth the same between his fore legs, till the man takes it up. They
never shear their Sheep in Autumn, for they could not suffer to be bare in
Winter, neither are they milkt at any time, no body being able to approach
them, because of their wildness; in some places they are quite wild and cannot
be driven into the pound, but must be taken with Dogs; the Sheep are white of
color, or of a brown red; on the North the most part are white, but on the
South they are most black and colored, being seldom white, which is conceived
to be by reason of the Sea vapors that continually fall on these Islands,
lying for the most part more in the open Sea, then those of the North that lie
closer together. If one sets white Sheep on Lille*diemen, which is seldom
free from vapors of the Sea, they change their color and grow black, which is
not so to be understood, as that they should presently change their color, but
it is done in space of time though sooner on Diemen then on Snderoe or Sandoe;
though I do not believe it happens as the Inhabitants think, by reason of the
Sea vapors, having further inquired after this business, and found that the
Sheep grew first spotted about their legs, afterward on their thighs, then
under their Bellyes, and finally all over. Wherefore the cause is in the earth,
whether it be Brimstone or Salt Peter, which both are found there that causes
it, I leave to the judgment of others.

The riches of the Inhabitants does consist in their Sheep, for those that have
many of them, though few grow rich thereby, those means being, very casual; for
when there comes a hard Winter and Sheep dye, they are almost all equally rich.

Besides Sheep, God has plentifully blessed the Land with several sorts of
Foul, whereof the greatest part serves for the food of man and are taken
every year in great numbers; a part of them being Land Fowls, and the other
part Sea fowls: whereof some fly away toward Winter, and some stay here the
whole year over, those that fly away are a kind of Land Fowl, being a manner of
Sn^pe called Lofver, and Spofver, and some water Foul.

Those that stay here continually, are some profitable, as Doves, Stares,
Grellings, and Snow Foul; which is seen but one time of the year, namely,
toward the Spring. When there comes sharp Frost and Snow, and never else,
though they tarry continually in the Land, and keep themselves on top of the
highest Mountains, the Damageable ones are, Owls, Sparrow-Hawkes, Crows and
Ravens, which last does a great deal of damage on young Lambs and weak Sheep,
wherefore they are much hated, and there has been an ordinance in the Land,
which is yet sometimes observed, that every man that roweth in a Boat must
bring at St. Olaus Tide, every year into the Session-house, the Beak of a
Raven, which Beaks are laid on a heap and burned and he that has brought none
must pay a Raven-fine, that is, for every one that has neglected it, one skin,
which makes two pence half penny. Amongst those Ravens there are found some
white, though few: but those that are half white and half black are fit, when
they are taken young, and have the Tongue string cut, to be taught to speak. I
have made a notable experiment upon a young white Raven, whole Tongue string
was cut; and yet I had no thought of teaching him: but calling usually in the
morning upon my Boy, whose Name was Erasmus, and the Raven cominually in the
morning harkening to that word Erasmus, begun at last to call out Erasmus,
before the chamber where the Boy lay, forming its voice exactly after mine: the
Boy hearing it, answered, anon Master; and therewith arose and came into the
Chamber, to know what I would have: but I telling him that I had not called
him, he went to bed again, but was again called in the same manner, and was so
deceived by the Raven several Mornings, till we perceived it was the Ravens
voice, and nevertheless the Boy was often since deceived thereby, not being in
a long time able to discern, whether it was I that called, or the Raven. When I
perceived that the said Raven could speak, I begun purposely to teach it, and
as long as I would inform, it would not go from before me, though it were the
space of two hours; and what I taught it in the day time, it repeated early in
the morning; putting the Syllables together* till it could at last speak out
the whole word, as children do, when they learn to spell in the Schools. This
Raven was at last killed without my knowledge, for the mischief it did.

Besides, here comes a Fowl with half a cloven foot, that lives both on Land
and Water, called a Teale, and in Norway a Sea*pye; it is a Foul as big as a
Crow, having a yellow, long, round and ob^use bill, it is the Ravens enemy, for
being swift in its flight, it flies hastily to the Raven, striking it with its
stump Beak, so that the Raven cries out; wherefore the Raven often hides it
self from it, whence it comes that the Countrymen make much of the Teile, and
will not suffer it to be destroyed, because it drives Ravens away: amongst
Water Fowls some are here continually seen, as many sorts of Ducks and
Plovers, Eiders, Maws and Teisters; A Teister is a good Bird to eat, it
changes its color in Winter, and becomes Gray, the Eider cock is brown as
the Hen, when she is young, but when he is old, he grows almost white, and is
called Eider-blick, from this Foul is gotten Eider down which the Eider plucks
off from its Breast, and lays in its nest about the Eggs, when it hatcheth
them, and when they are come out, and are fled away with their dame, this Down
is taken up from the Nest, being then full of Moss and Straw; wherefore it is
dried and cleansed over a Basket; the Down which is plucked off at other times
from the Eider is good for nothing, for it is fat and rotteth. Here is besides
seen a strange water Fowl called Imbrim, that is never found on the Land; the
Inhabitants take it to be the Halcyon or the Kings Fisher, but it does not
agree with the description, which Francius has in his Historia Animalium
sacra, Chap* 17. for he writes, that the Kings Fisher is no bigger then a
Sparrow, and is blew, with other of its qualities, that do not at all agree
with the properties of this Fowl; for this is bigger then a Goose, having a
long Neck and a pretty long Beak it is gray on the back, checkered with white
spots, its neck is also gray, something whitish down toward the breast, having
a white ring about the middle of the neck. The cause wherefore it is thought to
be the Kings Fisher is, they have heard and read, that the Kings Fisher
hatcheth its young ones on the Sea, which they believe the Imbrim does also,
since it is never found on Land, and can neither come upon it, for its feet
stand too much back, and are so weak, that it cannot go with them; besides, its
wings are so little that it cannot fly therewith. In the third place, there are
two holes, one under each of its wings, capable to hold an Egg, wherein they
suppose it hatcheth its eggs, till the young ones come out, neither is it ever
seen with more or less then two young ones; which conceit seems not
unreasonable, it being possible that it might be of a larger proportion in cold
Countries then in hot; it is often seen near the Land in Harbors, when it is
either bad weather or like to be so: and then it cries out so that one
presently perceives its arrival; if a man waveth a white linen to them, the
young ones will easily be allured to Land that one may shoot them, but the old
ones are more wary.

Here comes also a water Foul in Summer, called Liomen, not unlike the Imbrim
in bigness and voice; its legs hang also back, so that it cannot go, and its
wings are so little that it can hardly fly; wherefore when it is on the Land,
and men run after it, lit tumbleth over and over, being hardly able to escape,
though it flies pretty well when it takes its flight from the water,
specially when there blows any wind. It makes its nest on banks near fresh
waters, so close to the water that it can drink thereof sitting in the Nest;
and if the water increases by reason of rain, so that it flows over the eggs
it sits on them, nevertheless, and hatcheth out the young ones. Besides
these, here comes also a rare water Foul, called Garfugel, but it is seldom
found on Clifts under the promontories, it has little wings and cannot fly; it
stands upright and goes like a man, being all over of a shining black color,
except under the belly where it is white; it has a pretty long raised Beak
though thin toward the sides, having on both sides of its head over the eyes a
white round spot as big as a half Crown, showing like a pair of Spectacles: it
is not unlike the Bird Pinquin, that is found in Terra del Fugo, painted and
described in Atlas minor mercatoris. I have had that Bird several times, it is
easy to be made tame, but cannot live long on Land.

Here comes also some damageable Fowl in the Summer, namely, the Swarth bag,
the True, and the Skue. The Swarth bag is a great Bird like a Kite, it is white
all over, but the back, where it is black, and therefore is called a Black
back, it is of the figure of a Mew, and is also reckoned amongst that sort of
Fowl, it hunteth after lesser Birds to eat them, and has nothing olse worthy
of writing* The True or Thief is called so, because it threatens and steals
the meat from other Birds; for it hunteth after and* strikes at them till they
let the meat fall from their Beaks, and then he catches the meat in falling
through the air very dexterously, and lives thereby, not being able to plunge
in the Water after Fish; and when it has gotten something from the one, he
seeks presently another, continuing so the whole day over.

The Skue is of the same Species with the True, but something larger as big as
a Raven, being very fierce in the defense of its Eggs and young ones, so that
if a man comes by its nest, he must take a care of himself, for it flies
straight ways at his head, and strikes him cruelly with his wings; wherefore
the Inhabitants that know the temerity of it; fasten a knife upright on their
head against it, and it happens often that in falling with vehemence on the
man, it is run through with the knife, and falls down dead; being called
Skue, because it shoots it self so hastily on men.

The profitable Water Fowls, that come hither in Summer, are Wild-Geese, which
are of three sorts; ordinary gray Geese, reddish Geese, and Helsin Geese, that
are less then ordinary Gray Geese, coming hither in great numbers, and keeping
themselves in great Lakes of fresh Water. When they Mew, the Inhabitants go
sometimes on Goose Hunting with little Boats on the said Lakes, taking
sometimes a great store of them. Swans come also hither in the Spring, but they
only rest themselves and proceed straight on their way to other Countries. But
specially there comes hither in the Spring in great numbers, to the
Inhabitants great profit and advantage, some other sorts of Birds good to be
eaten; amongst which the first is principally worth taking notice of; it is
called Sule, and is found no where in Feroe, but on the Islet or Myggoness,
whereof the Inhabitants have yearly a great help to their house keeping, they
rehearse a strange Fable of the reason, wherefore that Fowl is only found
there, and no where else, whereof we will speak in another place. The Sule is a
pretty great Fowl being of a bluish gray, it is also found in Scotland, and is
called by Seamen, a Gentleman.

The other eatable Sea Fowls are found in great quantities every where in the
Land, namely, the Skrabe, Lunde, Lomvifve, and the Sea-Daw. The Skrabe comes
in February, about St. Matthews day, and fares away about St. Bartholomew
Tide. The Lomvifve and Sea-daw come about St. Gregory's Tide, and fly away at
Mary Magdelens; These Daws are none of those that are so frequent in Denmark,
those being Land Birds, that are seen here also, though very seldom. The
aforesaid sorts of Birds lay every one but* one Egg, and get but one young
every year, and though they be those that chiefly are sought for, and there be
well taken of them a hundred thousand every year, there is nevertheless more of
them then of any other sort; yea, by the admirable providence of God, they are
so plentiful, that they in clear weather can darken the shining of the Sun. as
it were with a thick Cloud, making such a terrible noise and sound with their
wings in flying, that they, who hear it, and do not know the cause thereof,
would not think otherwise, but that it were thunder. Every one of these Birds
builds its nest, and brings forth its young ones in a particular manner.

The Skrabe builds on the Land under the Earth, scraping with its Beak and
Claws, lying on the back, whence it is called Skrabe, it diggeth under ground
in some places a foot deep, in some other eight or ten foot in several
turnings, seeking specially to dig it self behind a stone, where it thinks to
lie surest. It breeds as aforesaid, but one young: it being remarkable, that
this Bird is the whole day away from its young, and never comes to it, but in
the night to feed it, and if it flies not from its young at the dawning of the
day, it stays with it the whole day over, till the night comes, and then
flies out to Sea, till the other night comes; and though the young is fed but
once a day, yet it is so fat, that no Goose, though it have been three weeks
fatned, can be fatter: and they call those young ones liars, they do not by
reason of their fatness, make present use of these young ones, but salt them to
eat them in Winter; melting their fat, which they burn in Lamps. They have to
take them out several hooks half an Ell or an Ell long, wherewith they pierce
them through, and draw them out. They do not usually take the Dame her self,
except she be sometimes hurt with the hook, so that she cannot live; but if
they cannot get the young one with their hook, or by thrusting their arm into
the Birds Nest, by reason of the many turnings, they dig a hole down unto it,
as near as they can guess, and then thrust about with their hooks till they can
get it; which hole they must again stop so close that not one drop of water can
come into it, for else she will forsake her hole, and never come thither more;
which otherwise she does every year in the wonted place; so that the
Inhabitants know in what place under the Earth they can every year find that
Bird.

The Lunde is a little Bird, something bigger then a Pidgeon, whereof there is
a vast multitue; It has a strong crooked Beak, so that if it biteth a man in
the hand, it teareth off the Flesh; having also sharp Claws. It wageth War with
the Raven, that comes and will take it away, and its young ones; It being a
wonderful spectacle to see their fight, for as soon as the Raven comes near,
the Lunde catches it under the throat with its Beak, and graspeth it about the
Breast with its Claws, so that the Raven cannot hurt it, but must fly away with
a great crying; the Lunde holds it fast in the mean time without letting it go,
till they come into the Sea, where ^lipping it, it is drowned. Yet the Raven
does often take the Lunde at unawares, rusheth into its hole, takes it and eats
it up. The said Bird, the Lunde, builds its Nest sometimes on the Continent,
far from houses, digging it self two or three yards, according to the nature of
the place, under ground, lying on its back as the Scrape, sometimes in Ures
(that are places under high Clifts, full of great and small stones, that fall
from the Clifts, and by length of time, are filled between with Earth, and
covered with Grass) in which places they dig themselves into the Earth, or
build where there is no earth, their nest under and between Stones, where they
can come to breed their young with most security.

The most part being taken in such places, so that man can often take above an
hundred Lundes in one Ure; some of them build on the side of promontories,
where they find great tuffts of earth in flat places, and when they fly from
their Nests, they first make them clean, scraping all the dirt and old roots
out of the holes, and putting fresh grass in them again. The Lundes that make
their Nests in the Fields, are taken as is said, above of the Skrabe; but for
such as are under those many stones, they let run unto them some little Dogs,
that are so taught, which bring out both Bird and Egg to their Masters; but
when the Birds are fled, the men take them flying, which is done in this
manner: they have a long Pole at the end of which there is a hoop drawn over
with a net, whereof the mashes are almost as big as the quarrels of a Glass
Window, being like the Net, wherewith they take Shrimps in some places; and
this they call a Stang of Staff; with this Staff the Fowler sits on the
Clift, or in the Ures between the the great Stones, where he knows most Fowl
to come, which they call flight places; and when the Lunde comes flying either
from or to the Land, he lifts up the Staff and the Net against the Foul, and
when he has got it into the Net, he turns the Staff about, that it may
entangle it self the better therein; a man being sometimes able in that manner
to take 200 Lundes in very short time, besides those that are taken in their
Nests.

The Lumwifve is a pretty great Bird, wherefore they are generally called great
Fowls; it is black on the back and white under the belly. The Daw is something
bigger then the Jack-dawes they have in Denmark, being also black on the back
and white under the breast, having white strokes about the Jaws, and a sharp
pointed Beak. It hatcheth its young ones in holes and shinks of high
Promontories, but the Lumwifve lays her eggs on the bare points and Clifts,
that are many in the said Promontories, there lying sometimes on these Clifts
some hundred Eggs according as the place is large, but three fingers breadth
from one another; and when the Birds fly away, the Eggs roll often down into
the Sea; but laying but one Egg she sits straight thereon, and continues so
a months time, never stirring from the place till her young one be hatched: in
the mean time the Cock bringing her to eat, and they Lay in this manner sitting
close to one another, Bird by Bird, all over the place, so that the Clift
seems quite black, and the young one being hatched, she remains yet three
weeks with it, and then the Hen takes the young one on her back and carries
it to Sea; but when the Fowler comes to that place, if there have not often
been there men before, it happens sometimes that the old will not leave their
young ones, and therefore are taken with the hand, as many as they are, and
killed, but where they are grown wild, by reason of man's continual hunting
after them, they fly away, the young ones running together in a Flock; and when
the Hen comes again, she seeks the same place where she fate before, and
clacketh so long till her young one comes to her, being very well able to
discern its own Dame, though they be all shaped alike; and when she gives her
young to eat, she puts her head back under her wing, giving it so to eat
backwards.

It cannot be expressed with what pain and danger they take these Birds, in those
high and steep clifts, whereof many are above 200 Fathom high; there being men
apt by nature and fit for that work, called Fowlers, who take them usually in
two manners; for either they climb from below up into these high Promontories,
that are as steep as a wall, or they let themselves down into them from above,
with a thick, strong, hemp-rope, when they climb from below, they have then a
pole five or six else long, with an iron hook at the end, which they tha are
below in the Boat, or on the Clift, fasten unto the man's Girdle, or another
Rope that the Fowler has about him, helping him thus up to the highest place,
where he can get footing: afterward they also help up another man, and when
there are so, several come up, every one with his Fowling Staff in his hand,
and the long Rope between them tied to each others wast, they climb so as high
as possible they can; and where they find difficulty they help each other up by
thrusting one another under the breech with their Poles: and when the first
has taken footing, he draws the other up to him by the Rope fastened to his
wast, and so they proceed on till they come to the place where the Birds build;
going then after them about the hill as they please, and there being many
dangerous glaces to climb about, having hound themselves at the Ropes end, the
one seeks a convenient place where he can stand sure and hold himself fast,
whilst the other goes about these dangerous places; if it then happen, that
he chances to fall, the other that stands firm keeps him up, and helps him up
again: but if he passes safe, he likewise fasteneth himself till the other
has passed that dangerous place; and so they go about the Clifts after Birds
as they please; though it often happens, the more is the pity, that when the
one does not stand fast, or is not strong enough to hold up the other in his
fall, that they both fall down and kill themselves; in which manner some do
perish every year.

Mr. Peter Clauson in his description of Norway writes, that there was
anciently a Law in the Country that whosoever climbed so on the Clifts, that
he fell down and dyed, if the body was found to be buried, his next Kinsman
should go the same way; but if he durst or could not do it, the dead was not
then to be buried in Sanctified earth, as one that had been too full of
temerity, and was his own bane. But there is found nothing of that Law now
adays.

When they then are come, in the manner aforesaid, to the birds, within the
Clifts where they seldom come, the Birds are so tame that they can take them
with their hands, for they will hardly leave their young ones; but where they
are Wild, they either cast the net over them on the Clift; and against those
that either fly from thence or thereunto, they oppose the Fowling Staff with
its net, and entangle them therein. In which manner they take a great multitude
of Lumwifves, Daws and Lunds. In the mean time there lies a Boat beneath on
the Sea, wherein they cast their birds killed; and in this manner they can in a
short time fill a Boat with Fowl. When it is pretty fair weather and there is
good Fowling, the Fowlers stay in the Clifts seven or eight days together, for
there are here and there holes in the Rocks, where they can safely rest, and
they have meat let down to them with a line from the top of the Mountain. In
the mean time some go every day to them to fetch home what they have taken.

Some Rocks are so difficult, that they can in no manner get unto them from
below, wherefore they seek to come down thereunto from above, which they call
to Sie, and is the second manner to pursue birds, being performed in this
manner: They have a Rope 80 or 100 Fathoms long, and three Fingers thick, the
fowler makes the end thereof fast about his waste, and between his legs, so
that he can sit thereon, and thus is let down, with the Fowling Staff in his
hand; six men hold by the Rope and let him easily down, laying a piece of wood
on the brink of the Rock, upon which the Rope glideth, that it may not be worn
to pieces by the hard and rough edge of the stone: They have besides another
smaller line that is fastened to the Fowlers body, on which he pulls, to give
them notice how they should let down the great Rope, either lower or higher, or
to hold still, that he may stay in the place whereunto he is come; here the man
is in great danger, because of the Stones that are loosened from the Clift by
swinging of the Rope, which often fall upon his head, and he cannot avoid it,
wherefore he has usually on his head a Sea man's Cap, that is thick and very
shaggy, to defend him in some measure from the blows of the Stones, if they be
not too big, otherwise it casts him his life. They put nevertheless
themselves continually in that danger, for our wretched bodies foods sake,
hoping in Gods mercy and protection, unto which the most part of them do also
devoutly recommend themselves, when they go to that work. Otherwise they say
there is no other great danger in it, but that in it self it is a toilesome and
artificial labor; for he that has not learned to be so let down, and is not
used thereunto, is turned about with the Rope, so that he grows giddy and
troubled in his head, and can do nothing, but he that has learned the art
takes it but for a sport, knowing how to swing himself on the Rope, to set his
feet against the Rock, casting himself some fathoms from thence, whence he
shoots himself again to what place he will, and knows where the Birds are;
he knows also to sit on the line in the Air, and hold the fowling Staff in
his hand, taking therewith the birds that come, or fly away, and when there are
holes in the Rock, and it stretches it self out, making underneath as a
sieling, under which the birds are he knows skilfully which (is the greatest
art) to shoot himself a great way from the Clift, and swiftly to swing himself
under the roof, and there take footing, making himself, when he is in these
holes, loose of the great Rope, which he tieth to a stone of the Rock, that it
may not slip from him to the outside of the Clift; and then he goes about in
the Rock, taking the Fowl either with his hands, or with the Fowling Staff;
according to the manner aforesaid; and when he has killed as many Birds as he
thinks fit, he ties them in a bundle, and fastneth them to the little Rope,
giving a sign by pulling, that they should draw them up, working thus the whole
day: and when he will get up, he sits again upon the great Rope, giving a
new sign that they should pull him up, or else he works himself up climbing
along the Rope with his Girdle full of Birds. It is also usual that where there
is not folks enough to hold the great Rope, the Fowler drives a post sloaping
into the earth, and makes the Rope fast thereunto, letting so himself down
without any bodies help, to work in the manner aforesaid; some Rocks are so
formed that one can go in them from the Land, and there he takes his Comerades
with him, proceeding in the manner aforesaid, each taking as much Fowl, as the
Girdle about his waste can hold, and as much as he can carry in a bundle on his
back, carrying them in that manner home. There are also in some places high
steep Clifts, under the Land, that arise above an hundred Fathoms from the Sea,
that are almost as bad to come unto, as the Rocks, whereunto they help also one
another in the aforesaid manner, taking a strong Rope with them, which they
fasten here and there about the Clift, and let it hang there the whole Summer,
by which they nimbly climb up to take Foul when they please.

These manners are more terrible and dangerous to see, then to describe,
specially if one considers the steepness and height of the Rocks, it seeming
not possible that a man could come to them, much less climb or be let down into
them. They go also in some places where they can only fasten the ends of their
Toes and Fingers, not shunning such places, though there be a hundred Fathoms
height between them and the Sea.

It is a dear Meat for these poor people, for which they must venture their
Lives so extremely and many after long venturing at last do perish therein.

When that Foul is brought home, a part thereof is eaten fresh, another part,
when there is much taken, being hung up to dry for Winter provision. The
Featers being gathered to make Merchandise of for other expenses.

The Inhabitants get a great many of those Fowls as God gives his blessing,
and fit weather. Yet this is not every where in the Land, but only in the
Islands that lie toward the Sea, and have great Promontories, as the Northern
Islands, Myggyness, Waagoe, Skuo, the Diemens, and Suderoe.

And when it is dark Weather, they take most, for then the Birds stay in the
Rocks, but in clear Weather and hot Sunshine they seek the Sea, and against
their flying away, they keep themselves most there, sitting on the Clifts
toward the Sea side, where people go also sometimes to them with Boats, and
take them with Fowling Staves.

CHAP. III.
Of the Waters Fertility.
AS the Justice of God for the Sins of men has deprived many places of his
blessings in their waters, he has done the like for the sins of the people of
Feroe; for in former times Fishing has been so abundant, that the Inhabitants
could maintain themselves with it alone; but it is now so diminished, that some
years they cannot fish for their own corporal necessities; so that the poorest
sort that have no Lands to Till, suffer sometimes great indigency. Nevertheless
God doth' sometimes show the Liberality of his Mercy to these poor Inhabitants,
to incite them thereby to better themselves; and knowing that the nature of
this people is not to deal with too much riches and opulency, without abusing
thereof, he takes care they should not have satiety of all things at one time,
for it is plainly perceived, that when he crowns the land with abundancy, the
Fishes are driven from their Seas, and contrariwise, when he takes away the
beasts of the Fields, he gives them very abundant fishing.

The Fishes wherewith this people maintain themselves are of three sorts;
first, small Fishes, secondly Seals, and in the third place Whales.

The most Fish that is fished here, are Cods, a kind of Whiting, and great
Flounders; there is besides fished places, Trouts and Sand Flounders, specially
God sends them a sort of small fish called Murt, which are a kind of (I
think) Pilchards, and that in such a quantity, that the Havens and Creeks are
sometimes filled with them; specially [towards Autumn, though that happens
not every year, there comes such an abundance, especially of them, sometimes
hither to Thors Haven, (where there lives many needy souls) that one cannot
perceive the bottom for them, seeing often with pleasure many children that
have little to eat at home, stand by the Sea side morning and evening, fishing
as many of them as they and their Parents can eat, not taking usually any more
then will serve them for one meal.

Cods are usually found in certain places of the Sea called Meads, having a
certain time when they come and when they go away. These places are well known
to the Inhabitants by the Points of Land, whence they take their distance to
come to the right place, wherefore they call it Meade or Measure; These places
being usually grounds, where it is thought there are Springs of fresh water, by
reason whereof those fishes like to be in such places. The Seal Dog, called in
the language of Feroe, Kob, is found in great numbers, some in the Inlets,
which are called stone Kobs, because they lie upon stones, when it (...)
weather. They bring forth (...) ones in the beginning of (...) suck their Dams
till St. John's Tide, some are found on the Sea side, and are bigger then those
of the Inlets, they are called Later Kobs, and are as big as a Cow, they lay
themselves upon the Clifts and out Rocks, under high Promontories, where no
body can come to them with Boats, and when they bring forth their young ones,
which happens in September, they retire themselves in great cavities under
the Rocks, which the Inhabitants call Later. They have many ways to take them,
besides shooting them, they cast Nets over them; formerly they took them with
Dogs instructed thereunto, which few make now use of, the Kob does not so well,
and sleeps usually when he lies on a Rock, whereupon the Dog goes to him
against Wind, least the Kob should smell him, and having sneaked (...) upon
him, catches at him (...) Throat, holding him fast till (...) comes that
kills him (...).

The third manner is very remarkable, and is called to go on Later, this word
Later is not a Latin Word, but an old word of the Language of Feroe,
signifying as much as coupling, for when the Kobs are coupled together, they
call it then properly at Lateris. For here are many hollow places, from the Sea
into the rocks, being large and wide cavities, as great Vaulted Cellars, before
which there is a little hole, as a door, so that a small Boat can go into them;
within the hole the water is deep, so that one can yet go farther in with the
boat, but it becomes shallower and shallower; and at last is dry ground, with
a spacious Vault, so that there is a great Echo within when any body speaks,
being so dark there, that one cannot discern whether it be day or night.

The Kobs have their habitation in these Vaults or Caves, sometimes above 100
together; and because the Inhabitants are of opinion that they couple therein,
they do therefore call them Later, and to seek those holes to kill the Kobs, is
called by them, to go on Later, These Caves are of two sorts, whereof the ones
entrance is under water, where no man can come in, and is called Kaufve-Later
because the Seals dive under water when they go into them* the other whose
Orifice is above water. The Peasants have particular small boats to go into
these Caves with, wherefore when they know that the young Seals are great and
fat, they go with their Boats into the Cave, having usually two Boats, with the
one of which they get in, the other staying without at the entrance, having
between the Boats a Tow of 80 Fathoms length or larger, that if the Boat which
goes farthest in, be filled with water, as it often happens, the other, that
is at the entrance, may pull it out with the people in it; and the Cave being
narrow, they have a pointed stake on each side, wherewith they thrust
themselves in: They have also two Candles in the Boat, that they may the better
see to kill the Kobs, it being so dark within; The said Candles are as thick as
a man's arm, and they hide them in the Boat, least the Seals should see the men
before they come on dry ground. When they are come so far in the Cave that they
can feel ground, which they try with their pointed Staves, first one Man
leapeth out from the Boat into the water, as deep as he can wade, having a club
in his hand to fell the Kob with, which they call Kob grass then leaps the
second man after him, having a Candle in each hand, which he must hold over his
head that they be not put out with the water, after them comes the third man,
that has also a felling Club to strike with, when the Seals lying on dry
ground, begin to see the Light and men, they will flee to Sea, wherefore the
old ones rise themselves on their paws with their Jaws open directly against
the man, specially if it be a He, for then he will not flee from the man, but
the man must avoid him, and when he strikes at him he meets the blow with his
jaws, snatching the Club from the man's hands, and casting it on that side,
where there is no body. Then comes the other man with his Club, and strikes him
over the neck, but if it be a She, she is not so fierce, and flees from the
man if she can. When they hit them right over the head, they fall down in a
sound and then the men are presently ready so cut their throats. When they have
done so with all the old, they come to the young ones that lie all still, far
from the water, and never take notice of men nor light, till they come and kill
them; when the slaughter is finished, they hale the dead Kobs to the Water
side, and tie them fast to the Rope, wherewith those in the Boat without pull
them to them. Last of all the men get out with the Boat that is within, but if
the waves be great, the said Boat and men are also haled out. In this manner
they get sometimes many Seals, often half a hundred in one Cave, the old Kobs
are as big as an Ox or Cow, and so fat, that one can get three Loads of Fat
from them; they use their skins for Shoes, and eat the flesh of them: they
melt the Fat into Train Oil, and salt a part thereof to eat.

There are found several sorts of Whales under this Land, amongst which there
comes one sort, called Grind-Whale; Grind according to the explication of Mr.
Peter Clauson signifies all sort of grates or Trellices, either of Iron or
Wood, and because this sort of Whale swimmeth side to side by one another, when
they go on coupling, such a Flock of Whales is called a Whales Grind. These
Grind-Whales are not great, the biggest being but five else long, and the young
ones an ell and a half, they come in great Flocks under the Land, when it is
dark or foggy weather, so that they cannot see it; which is therefore called
Grind-weather. When the Inhabitants are out about their Fishing, and see a
Flock of Whales, those that see them first call and make signs to the other
Boats that are about them, who leaving their fishing, come presently together,
and go to the Whales, to drive them in toward the Land; but when the Whales
will turn back toward the Sea, they cry out and make the most noise they can
in the Boat, throwing stones and what else they can find at them, till the
Whales turn again, and then when God gives his blessing, they can drive them
where they please as if it were a Flock of Sheep or Cattle. When they come to
Land they send a man or two to give notice every where, and this messenger must
go speedily day and night, and is called Grind-message. Those then that get
notice of it presently, kindle a brand on a certain place, that they on the
next Island where the message is not come, may get timely notice of it, who can
know by the place whence the Fire or Smoke arises, what it signifies:
whereupon there comes speedily a great number of Folks together, some by Land
and some by Water, having their Whale Spears with them. When they have then
brought as many Boats together as they think needful, they drive the Whales
into an Inlet, or Creek, where they know there are good Whale-banks, and flat
sandy grounds, whereon they drive the Whales, with great crying, noise, and
casting of Stones, driving them as fast as they can upon the Sands; then if it
be necessary, the Boats divide themselves into two companies, the one lying
below in the form of a half Moon, to meet the Whale if it wou d flee away
during the slaughter, the other advancing into the midst of the Whale Flock,
thrusting their Whale Spears into their bodies; in the mean time some of the
people lie in an ambush on the Land, till the Whales are come on ground, and
wade to them as deep as they can, and then kill them chiefly with their
Weapons, with such fury on both sides, that the water becomes as red as blood;
whereby the Whale is also blinded, so that it cannot see to run away; it is a
strange thing, to see that these strong creatures make no resistance, but only
plunge as well as they can before the boats, and people, till death comes upon
them, and then they strike terribly about with their Tails, so that they beat
sometimes the boats to pieces, and the men come in danger, if they do not know
how to have a care of them. Some of them get again loose from the Sands, and
carry sometimes the boats a great way with them on their backs, over-turning
them here and there and striking them full of water, yet those that are below
drive them in again, but if they are not able to force them thereunto, the rest
come to their help, and so make them return, though it happens also
sometimes, that they will at last suffer themselves to be driven in no more,
plunging and diving so much and a long way under the water, that they must let
them go; the same happens also at Sea, when they see them first, and will
drive them to Land, for then they plunge sometimes so much that they must give
them over, whence one may conclude that this work does only consist in a
blessing of God.

When they have killed as many as they can get, which lasts well a whole day
or longer, they hale them on Land, and those that are killed at Sea float up
the next day, and are also driven thither. When all the Whales are thus brought
on dry ground, and are tolled, first the Tithes are taken of them, then the
Finding-Whale for him that saw them first; the rest being divided into two
parts, the one whereof belongs to the people that took them, and the other part
to the owner of the Land under which they are taken, whether it be the Kings,
some Noblemans, or belongs to some Freeholders son; sometimes the whole Flock
of Whales comes into the Inlets of it self in foggy weather, no body driving
them, sometimes they come in with the Tide, in a dark night, running on the
Sands, where they lie dry when it is low water, so that when folks come out in
the morning they see sometimes the Sand covered with dead Whales; which
happened also for few years since in Tiorneviig,

In ancient time there came greater multitudes of Whales and oftener then in our
days; though it happened that in the year 1664, there were taken in two places,
about a thousand. Wherefore the Lord, as also for his other benefits be blessed
and praised.

As we have said before, these Whales have short heads, and little eyes, they
have a black skin with a white stroke under the belly, and are pretty fat; they
have a palm thick of fat, the head is almost nothing but fat, they partly melt
the fat of the whole to make Train Oil, salting the rest with black salt, to
make use of it as of Bacon. This sort of salt they prepare of sea weeds, which
they dry and burn to ashes; where with they salt their fat, preserving it very
well thereby, being hung in a dry place, it looks black and as smoked Bacon,
but within it is white as the other; he that knows it, is not, will not be
able to discern it from Swines Bacon; another part they also make use of
instead of fat or butter, which they use to put in their meat, as shall be
spoken of in another place. They dry and eat the flesh when it is fresh, the
same looking and smelling as Beef; and what they cannot straight consume they
cut into long segments and hang it up to dry in the wind, consuming it
afterward in time, as other smoaked flesh. Foreigners sometimes pickle
something of the tail, which tastes very like neats feet, wherefore the
Inhabitants take these Whales to be, and call them Sea kine.

Mr. Peter Clauson writes in his Description of Norway, that these Whales are
driven in by a Whale-Dog, whereof I have often enquired, but could never get
any certain knowledge of it; yet I cannot abstain from informing the curious
Reader, of what is at last come to my knowledge. It happened in the year 1664,
when there came many Whales in Skaalesord, about Harvest, as aforesaid, that
when the greatest part of the Whales were killed, there appeared a Sea Monster
swimming about the Whales, between them and the Land, that was in every manner
like a Dog, as for those parts that were above water, it was of a gray color,
hairy, with long ears like an English rough Spaniel, this has been told me by
men worthy of credit, and the fame of it grew common over the whole Country,
John Theodore de Bry in his description of the West India Voyages, writes that
there is a sort of Sea Dogs found in the Magellanick Streights, that are hairy
on their foreparts to the midst of their body, with short ears, as one uses
to cut those of rough Dogs, or like Lions, their fore feet being like the hands
of men, and their hinder parts like a Fish: They are great and terrible to look
on, whence one may finally conclude that there are such Whale Dogs, though I
cannot decide whether they be of the same sort with those that are in the West
Indies; There are doubtless more Sea Monsters yet, then have been known
hitherto.

Here is also taken another sort of Whales, which they call Doglings, and are
usually found in one Haven of this Country, namely, that of Qualboe in Suderoe,
and seldom in Vaage in the same Island, and that usually in Autumn, three, or
four, or six almost every year, and if they fail one year there comes the next
year twice as many; they are 7 or 8 else long, and very thick, being about 2
else broad, where they are thickest. They are taken in a very strange manner;
for when the people perceive them without the Inlet, they row out to them with
some Roaps in their Boats. If it be bad weather, so that they cannot come near
them, they drive them into the Inlet, as they use to do with those called
Grinds. But if it be calm weather, they row close to the Whale, that lies
there still by the Boat, thinking it perhaps to be its Mate: In the mean time
they pierce a hole in the fat of its eye lid, wherein they fasten the Rope; the
piercing whereof hurts it not, but only tickleth it, wherefore it suffers
the same willingly; when they have thus fastened the Rope, they row to a Sandy
Bank, whither it suffers it self easily to be drawn, and the rest follow
after, till they are all gotten on the sand, and then in like manner they make
the Rope fast to the other Whales, tying the other end fast to some stones on
Land, and lastly row out to them with their Boats, piercing them with their
Whale-Spears, till they lose their blood and dye; but then the men must retire
and have a care of themselves, for they beat then terribly about them.

The said John Theodore de Bry in his History of the West Indies relates, that
the Indians on the Coast of Florida take Whales in this manner; when any one
sees the Whale on ground, they row to it with a Boat, having a strong Rope with
them with two stakes on both ends; when the American comes to the Whale, he
climbs upon it, and strikes first the one stake into the Pipe through which it
draws breath and blows up water, driving also the other stake through the
other hole; whereby the Whale is choked at last, and when it is dead, there
comes more people to help him to draw it on land. This manner seems strange,
but ours in Feroe is no less wonderful. The flesh and the fat of these Doglings
are not good to eat, for if one eats thereof, it pierces through the pores,
so that ones clothes look yellow and smell of it, the Oil thereof being so
subtle that it must be mighty strong and fast wood that can hold it. It is
very remarkable that this Dogling Whale comes usually no where in Feroe, but
in Suderoe, and that specially in Qualboes Inlet, every year about Michaelmas.

Here is related a strange story about it, which can be accounted but for a
Fable; They say, it happened once during the darkness of Paganism, when Feroe
was first inhabited by men, that a Giant under took to possess himself of the
Island of Myggeness, a Sorcerer dwelling on the land would hinder him,
wherefore the man did often fight with the Sorcerer, and at last vanquished
him; wherefore the Sorcerer made an agreement with him, that if he would not
destroy him, but let him have his habitation in the Island, he would yearly
procure him a sort of Whales and Fowl in the Land, which were not gotten in
other places of Feroe; and that for him and his Successors as long as the world
should last; though with this condition, that if any one mocked or derided his
Whale, it should never come any more: which condition the man accepted, and
since that time there came yearly a particular sort of Whale under the Land; as
the Inhabitants relate and have by relation of their Predecessors, the said
Whale had but one eye; finally it happened that an indiscreet man, being weary
of the labor he had every year by reason of that Whale, did contemn it, for
having but one eye, wherefore it never came there since; the Inhabitants
believing it removed thence to Qualboe in Suderoe, they alone, and almost every
year having them, though they have two eyes as other great Fishes. The Fowl
wherewith the Sorcerer did present Myggyness, is the sule described above:
which is neither found any where in this Country except there; this is sold for
the price it cost. Though many things happened in those dark times amongst the
Children of infidelity, both there and other places, that seem now in this our
light, to be very disconsonant and incredible, as yet daily many things are
perpetrated by Witches, which the childten of light cannot apprehend, much less
imitate them therein.

The Inhabitants receive also sometimes a considerable profit from the Whales
that are pierced at Sea, which come sometimes floating hither to the Land.

Here are besides seen under the Land great living Whales, as the Roar and
Witch-Whale, on which the Inhabitants dare not venture. The Roar is very great
and long, and the Witch-Whale very dangerous; for it will play with Boats:
sometimes it rises from under the water under the Boat, so that it stands
fast on its back as upon a Rock, which often brings the people in great
danger. But God and Nature have revealed them a strange secret means to drive
away such dangerous Monsters, namely, Castoreum, which usually they carry in
the head of their Boat, boaring a hole in the Wood, and putting Castoreum in
it, which they stop afterward with a peg; others have it enclosed in a piece
of wood, whereunto they link their Fish lines, and carry it always with them in
the Boat; and when the Witch-Whale comes under such a Boat, or that they cast
that piece of wood upon it, it sinketh to the bottom as a Stone. This Whale
must have a very good scent, and cannot suffer the smell of Castoreum,
wherefore it retireth presently to the deep. It is believed here by old
experience, that Castoreum has this property, that if a man has any about him
and comes in danger upon the water, he cannot save himself, but sinketh to the
bottom, as a piece of Lead, and drowneth; for it has been proved by
experience, that a person that could swim well, perished at Sea having
Castoreum about him; being sunk and drowned, whilst others that were in the
Boat and could not swim, saved their lives; whereof the samous expert and
learned Dr. Thomas Bartalinus writes in his Centuries of Anatomical History,
Cent. 2. Hist. 17.

The Inhabitants say also that if they have no Castorum, they carry with them
Juniper wood, whereof they cut Chips and cast toward the Whale, whereby it
also sinketh. It was a great while before I would believe this, till the
Provincial Judge, a very prudent man, named Jonae Poulson, that is well
informed in the proprieties of this Country assured it me to be true; I would
nevertheless hardly believe it a long time, till I had found the natural cause
of it, which is this: Since Castoreum that can drive down the Whale, has the
virtue to drive the dead Foetus out of its mothers Womb; by which virtue the
Whale is also driven; and the Oil of Juniper has the same virtue as Castoreum
to drive out the Foetus, it may also be that Juniper Wood, whereof the Oil is
prepared, may also drive the Whale; and there must be a great Antipathy between
the Whale and such things which by reason of its acute scent, it presently
perceives, and is weakened in its nature, so that it must presently sink to the
bottom, by which reason it follows also, that all other Medicaments expelling
the dead Foetus, have also the virtue to drive down the whale, as are Assa
Foetida, Myrrha, Galbanum, Oppoponax, Scammony, Brimstone, Cinnamon and Mace,
or these Herbs, Rue, Sabina, Foenum Gracum, Hollow Herb, Felworth Matricary,
as also these Herbs which grow in Feroe, Samphire, Mugworth, Time, and others,
though part of the Species aforesaid, be but the ingredients of those
Medicaments. Experience must further teach what is hidden in nature, if it be
so as is argued of this Species; and if Castoreum has the propriety and virtue
to depress a man down to the bottom of the Sea, so that he must drown,
notwithstanding he can swim, it follows also that the aforesaid Species have
that propriety to the depression of a man. One does besides often hear that
when people come in danger, sometimes the greatest part are easily saved, one
or two perishing; some can neither be saved by others nor save themselves, as
if it was so disposed by God, that they before others should infallibly dye
such a death, and could not escape; as might be proved by example, if it were
needful: who knows whether any of them had not about him some of the things
aforesaid, which might easily and ordinarily happen with Mace and Cinnamon.
Much is hidden in nature that is yet undiscovered, and in time will be brought
to light.

For a conclusion, as in my time during my abode in Feroe, the said Seamonster,
namely, the Whale-dog was seen, so in the year 1670, there was seen at the West
of Feroe, before Qualboe plain, a Mair-maid close by the Land, during two
hours and a half, by many men not only of Qualboe, but also of other places of
Suderoe, she stood upright above the water, having long hair on her head spread
on the water round about, holding a Fish in her hand with the head downwards;
it was also told me, that the same year the Fisher men of Westmans haven in
Stremoe had seen a Mermaid at the North of Feroe, whether these Monsters do
(...) Feroe any evil hereafter, time will teach us, that consisting Whales in
the providence of God, passing by what other Monsters have appeared in Feroe in
the Figure of Boats, whereof we have mentioned something already.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Inhabitation of Feroe, and the Facts of the Inhabitants.
THese Islands of Feroe lying in the midst of the storming Sea, far distant
from other Countries, have during a long time, whilst Navigation was not so
much practiced, as in these later times, been uninhabited; being only visited
by the Fowls of Heaven, till the time of Harold Pulchricomus, first absolute
King of Norway, when as we are taught by the Chronicle of Snore Sturleson, this
land was first possessed by men, and inhabited in the year of our great Monarch
Jesus Christ's Nativity 868. having been uninhabited from its creation during
the time of 48^5* years, and has been tilled, till the date of this book, a
little above 800 years. The cause of its inhabitation being this; It happened
that Harold Haldanson Pulchricomus, principal Ness or Promontory, King in
Norway, beginning to reduce the Kingdom under him, made War upon the
Inhabitants upward of 10 years, from the year of Christ 858 to 868, and having
during that time put to death a part of those little Kings and Princes, reduced
a part of them under himself, driven another part out of the Land, and the last
year, some Kings and principal men having made alliance to resist him, and
raised a great Army, King Harold destroyed their Forces; after which time he
found no more resistance in Norway, and then saiih the History, namely, the
Chronicles of Norway page. 49, many desert Lands were inhabited, which the men
of Norway had begun to frequent before, Jempteland, Island, Grkeney, Hotland,
and Feroe were inhabited; for many rich and oppulent men fled from the Wars of
Norway, because of Harolds power, and many other able men yielded to Harold,
and planted the Land with him; by which History it is also in some manner
intimated, that Feroe was known to the people of Norway, and frequented by
them; but then perfectly peopled and Inhabited; though there be a great
uncertainty in Histories written in such obscure times, for Mr. Peter Clauson
in his Description of Norway, page 154. teaches that in the sixth year of King
Harolds Reign, a Pirate called Madoder, sailed from Norway intending sor Feroe,
but was driven by the Tempest under Island, which was then quite desert, and
was peopled since by King Harold Pulchricomus's invitation and command, whence
it appears that Feroe was inhabited before Iasland; But the Author seems to set
a general certain time for an uncertain. If those Inhabitants of Feroe had been
as diligent to leave their Successors some narration from the beginning, as
those of Island, one might now have had better information, and it may be also
they have not neglected it since there came no lesser men to Feroe then to
Island, but doubtless the Pirates have destroyed them. It being certain that
other documents which were kept in the public Chest of the Country, were
within these 100 years robbed and carried away by such men.

The first that settled himself in Feroe was, they say, called Grimar Camban,
which happened before those that fled from Norway came thither, and wholly
peopled the Land.

This Grimar Camban was doubtless a Pirate or Sea Robber, Piracy being in those
days honorable. Hetland and Orheny being then but the habitations of
Sea-Robbers, and it being doubtless even so of Feroe; but in King Pulchricomus
his time, in the 10 year of his Reign, many considerable men, with their Wives
and Children, Goods and Movables, took their habitation in Feroe, which was
before discovered to them by Grimar Camban, who having first found the Land,
gave it also its name and called it Feroe: the History mentioning, that Fero's
Name was known in Norway, before they fled thither, and possessed it. There are
several opinions concerning the derivation of this word Feroe; some think that
the land has that name from Sheep (called in Danish Faar) because of the
multitude of Sheep that is bred there, which is an incongruous opinion; Grimar
Camban having found no Sheep there at his arrival, neither has it received its
name since there have been Sheep planted there; for before the principal Colony
of people and Cattle went over thither, the Land had already its name. Besides
which, Faar is a Danish word, which is called in the old Norway Tongue, Saud,
and in that of Feroe, Soid, others would deny their names from Feer or
Feathers, which is also contrary to reason, for they little thought then of
Feathers, and knew nothing of their use in commerce. Their Merchandise being
for the most part Wool, as appears by the History of Trunder of Got in the 256
page of the Chronicle of Norway; who lived in Feroe 150 years after it was
first inhabited, for he said to his Brothers Sons Sigurd and Toerd the Sons of
Torlack; there is a great difference in the age of a man, when I was young I
did not lie on a Bench when it was good weather, as you do; now the Ships lie
on ground and rot under the hills, and the whole house is full of Wool, but
none of you will carry it to the Market; if I had some years of my age back,
things should not go so. Torloft of Diemen is now a better Husband then you.
Sigurd grew angry, started up and made himself ready, with his company of 12
men and sailed out with Tarloff, and they came late at night to Norway; hereby
it appears first, only they have endeavored to make money of their wool. But
secondly, that they have had their Trade in Norway, where Feathers were not in
price; they having themselves Fowl enough on the North Coast of the Land, and
therefore there was no thoughts of Feathers, to give the Country a name from
thence, in the beginning; and so much the less because neither they themselves
now, nor anciently ever used Beds filled with Feathers. Some will derive it
from Far, it being a Land that lies far from Norway, and therefore should be
called Feroe; which is also doubtful, Island and Greenland lying yet at a
further distance, and therefore ought with more reason to bear that name.

I must add my opinion concerning the Etymology of that name, and methinks the
land may have taken its name from the Word to Fare, which is the same in the
ancient Language of Feroe, as Ferrie in English, the same being also used in
our old Danish; for places in Denmark, where one crosses from one shore to the
other in Boats or Ferries, are called Ferry places, from ancient time to this
present: and Feroe consisting of many Islands, where one not only must cross
with Boats and Ferries, called in that Tongue Faevinger, from one Land to
another, but one can also with such Boats go along between the Islands; it
seems probable that this qualification of the land may have given Grimar Camban
occasion at his arrival to call these Islands Feroier, as they are called to
this day in the language of Feroe, I leave herein nevertheless every one to his
own opinion; but the Islands being many, they ought to be called the Feroes, as
they are Feroier by the Inhabitants, and in Latin Feroae, as the Oreades,
Canaries, and other Provinces that consist of many Islands.

Many principal men of Norway, as abovesaid, having transplanted themselves and
their whole Families into Feroe, they divided the Islands amongst themselves,
every Chieftain appropriating to himself his Island, or more according to
opportunity, where they afterward subdivided the Land to be possessed and tilled
by their Servants, in the manner and places as it is found to this day, most of
the Chiefs having made the Country their properties and inheritance, not only
those places where they lived themselves, but also the other; so that the least
part remained to their Servants, whence it comes that Trundoff Jote in the 270
page of the Chronicle of Norway, calls the Inhabitants of the East, and North
Islands, his Tenants, when he gave Tribute for himself and them to Charles the
Myrske or Tender, sent thither by King Oluff the Holy, whence many old Folks
can yet relate that a part of their predecessors were very rich in Lands, so
that they have possessed above the half part of Suderoe, this that great Village,
and the other, many Enclosures; but now there is nothing of such glorious
riches to be seen, for some of them having been a cruel people, did forfeit
their possessions to the King, by committing Murders and other misdeeds, as
one might prove by example, almost within the remembrance of man: some in the
Popish times forfeited their estates to the Bishops for eating of flesh, as
many can yet relate; for the Bishops forbad their hearers to eat flesh in Lent,
and they being us d thereunto and desi^ous to eat it, as a meat that was
plentiful in the Country, could not observe such interdictions, wherefore those
that were discovered were forced to give their Estates as a Mulet, except they
would fall under Excommunication; some also gave away their possessions
willingly, in that time of superstition, for the saving of their souls, to
Bishops Sees, and Churches; and those Bishops being removed at the time of the
Reformation; all such goods came under the Crown; so that now the King is
Proprietor of most part of the Country. What Lands the owners did keep; have
since been divided by their heirs in so many small parcels, that they cannot
live thereof; so that it seems, those that were in the beginning the richest
and most powerful, are now grown the poorest and most indigent of the Country;
for the Inhabitants born to Land, as they call them, or freeholders, are the
poorest people; those that possess the Kings Lands being the principallest and
richest men. Here are nevertheless found some noble men's Lands, as the
Benckestockers, the Resencranthel, and the Lady Adeluzies, whether they are
come to them by inheritance of these Chiefetaines, or they have purchased them
is uncertain. Here are also certain Lands called Rytter's Lands that were
purchased here in the Country by one Mathias Rytter. It seems nevertheless,
that some of the Nobles Lands are possessions bought of others, there being
some that reckon themselves born heirs thereunto. The said chiefs of the Land
enjoyed the Government of Feroe till they were reduced by the Kings of Norway:
There is nothing found in History of their orderly succession; the first that
is read of being Trund of Got, who was an old Chiefetaine during the Reign of
some Kings, ruling over the North and Eastern Islands. Those that were Rulers
with him were Breast and Beine, two Brothers, and Kinsmen of Trund, that
governed other Islands.

It is possible they may have been the first Chiefs that have both taken the
Land in possession and governed it, or else their next successors; since they
lived in Harald Greybeards time; for they lived then long in the Land, as some
do yet. But the aforesaid Trund, being an infamous bad and deceitful man,
caused his Cousins and Fellow Rulers, Breaste and Berne to be treacherously
killed, that he alone might have the Supreme Government. In the mean time he
took to himself their Sons Sigismund, Breaste's Son, and Torgild, Berne's Son,
under preteuce of breeding them up, but sold them afterward privately as two
Slaves out of the Country, (of whose remarkable History we will hereafter make
further mention) and so he governed the Country alone, till the time of King
Oluff Tryggeson. That Sigismund, Breasts Son, came again to Feroe, to revenge
his Fathers death, and killed Trund of Got, remaining so only Chiefetain over
Feroe a long time, till he was murdered by Turgrine Ilde and his Sons in
Suderoe; after which the Son of Trund of Got ruied over the Land, being also
called Trund, like unto his Father in name and dee^s, though he ruled but over
the North and East Islands; Leiff Asse^son being Chieftain over all the
Southern, lived in King Oluff Haraldson, the Holy's time; they also having then
a P^^vincial Judge, called Gilke, see the Chronicle of Norway, p. 269. It is
not known who succeeded them afterward; though the Country has a long time
after had its own Governors. Though the Inhabitants have not been very
powerful to resist the mighty absolute King of Norway, they kept nevertheless
their liberties under these their chiefetains, by reason of the great division
and civil war between the Sons of Harald Pulchrycomus, and their Successors,
specially between the Sons of Erick Softear, and Hagan Jarle the good, that
reduced the whole Kingdom of Norway to his obedience, till King Oluff Harald
Son the Holy's time, who took care not only to amplify the Kingdom of Christ,
but also his own; wherefore he undertook to reduce the Feroes under his
obedience; but he durst not venture to do it by force, fearing it may be the
courage of the Inhabitors, as also the dangerous access of the places:
wherefore he endeavored to do it by good deeds, and made many friends in
Feroe, whereby they gave themselves under his power. But putting afterward
burdens upon them, whereunto they were not accustomed, they fell off from him
presently again, wherefore the King sent a message to Feroe, that the best men
of the Land should come to him in Norway; Gille the Provincial Judge, Lieffe
Asserson, Torrulff of great Diemen, and many other Countrymens Sons made
themselves ready to go into Norway, but that cunning Fox Trund of Got
pretended sickness, and went not with them. When all these came to the King,
they were obliged to take their oath they would remain his subjects, and
promised they would send him a Tribute, and that the Folks of the Land should
be his Subjects. And the King made them gifts and presents, and dismissed them
bountifully; which the courteous Reader can find more largely expressed in the
Chronicle of Norway, page 246, 247, 248, etc. But what loyalty the Inhabitants
intended to have, for King Oluff appeared in time presently afterward, see the
Chronicle of Norway, page 249. for when the King sent a Ship to Feroe to fetch
his Tribute, the Ship was lost; so that he could never come certainly to know
what was become of the Ship or men. But having the next year had some relation
that they were lost at Sea, he sent again another Ship with men, but it
happened to them in the like manner, and there were many opinions what might be
become of the Kings Ships, for in the Chronicle of Norway, page 268. King Oluff
keeping often his Court with his Chiefs in Sundmor, gave out that he would send
to fetch from Feroe the Tribute which they had promised him, complaining for
the men he had lost on that Voyage, and named out some men, that should Sail
thither; but they said all nay, and refused to undertake the voyage.

Then rose up a great man well armed, having a red Coat on, a Helmet on his
Head, his Loins girt with a Sword and a great Halbert in his hand saying, you
have a good King, but your selves are cowardly men, that you dare refuse the
voyage which he commands you, having received so much honor and benefit of
him. I have not hitherto been the Kings Servant, neither has he been a
gracious Lord unto me, but I will now proffer my self to go to Feroe, if there
be no other remedy. The King asked who he was, and what was his name, that
answered him so undauntedly? for he knew him not; The man answered, my name is
not considerable, though I think you have heard it named before; I am called
Charles the Tender. The King answared, it is true, Charles, that I have heard
thy name before, and a time has been, that if we had met, thou should not
have carried the news of it abroad; but I will pardon thee altogether, since
thou will undertake this voyage for me, and thou shall be my guest to day, that
we may speak further about it.

This Charles (see the Chronicle of Norway* page 269) had been a cruel Robber
by Sea and Land, and the King had often sent out his men to kill him, but he
escaped always; he was of a great Family, and very courageous, valiant, and
expert in all things: he made himself ready for his Voyage to Feroe, and had
about 20 men with him; he got a good wind, and when he came to Feroe he arrived
at Thors haven in Stremoe, and let summon, all the people to a Court. There
came Trund of Got with many Folks, as also Leiff Aserson, and Gille the
Provincial Judge, the Kings sworn men, with many people. When they had pitched
their Tents, they came to Charles and embraced him; Charles saluted them from
the King, and expounded then his friendly commands, to raise and pay in the
Tribute, showing them a token from the King; they promised to promote his
errand amongst the people, and to give him their best assistance. Then came
Trund of Got (that base Traitor) and Saluted Charles, inviting him to a
winters meal; Charles excused himself, because he had taken his lodgings by
Leiff Aserson, but he desired that Trund would gather the Tribute of the East
and Northern Islands; Trund promised he would do so. In the winter Leiff raised
the Tribute of the South Islands of Feroe. The next Spring Trund grew very
sick, and amongst other diseases was much troubled with pain in his eyes; he
came nevertheless to the Assembly, as he was wont, and encamped under a black
Tent; and when Leiff and Charles came to him to receive what Tribute he had
gathered; he could not come out to them by reason of the weakness of his sight,
wherefore Leiff went into him in his black Tent, and Trund gave him a bag with
money, which he carried out to Charles, and cast the money in his Shield,
stirring them about; and Leiff asked Charles what he thought of it? who
answered, I believe that all the false money that could be found in the Northern
Islands is come hither. Trund heard this, and asked Leiff if it was not good
Silver? Leiff said it was false money, Trund put the fault upon his Servant that
had gathered the Tribute, whilst he was himself sick. Leiff went in and took
another purse of money from him for Charles, and when they viewed them they were
neither so good that Leiff would receive them for the Kings Tribute. Trund's
Cousin Gautt the Red, arose on the Bench whereon he laid, and said, it is an
old Proverb, The older a man grows the worse he is. It is now so with thee
Trund, that suffer Charles the Tender to search in thy money so often this
day. Trund sprung up and was angry at Gaute's words, and bad Leiff come in and
take another bag, saying, my own Tenants have brought me this, though I can see
little, yet the Shirt is nearer then the Doublet; and he desired Leiff to go
out to Charles and weigh the money for him, for he could not be present himself.
Leiff and Charles went out into the Fields, and all their Folks were in arms,
as if they had gone to a war. Charles took his Helmet from his head, and cast
the money in it, and they found 'twas good Silver, but as they were sitting,
they saw a man coming to them that had a Pole Ax in his hand, this was Gaute
the Red; he stuck his Pole Ax in the ground, and said, have a care thou Tender
Charles thou do not get a mischief to day of my Pole Ax; there came at the
very same time a man running, calling to Leiff Aserson, and desiring him to
come straight ways to Gills the Provincial Judges Tent; for there had rushed in
Siugurt Tolakson, Trunds Kinsman, and had deadly wounded one of the Judges men;
Lieff went presently thither and all his folks with him, and Charles remained
sitting with his people standing round about him. Then came Gaute the Red and
Thoer the Short, and Gaute struck over a man's Shoulder and hit Charles on the
head, though it hurted him not much; but Thoer struck presently with the Pole
Ax that stood in the ground, so that the Ax struck in his Brains; and there
came many people out of Trunds Tent. Trund showed as if this action had much
displeased him, and paid the mulct for his Cozen; but Leiff and Gille banished
Sigurt for the Judges man whom he had killed, and Gaute and Thoer for Charles,
whose men returned to King Oluff, and told him the news. The King grew very
angry, and protested he would revenge it, but he was hindered of it by the wars
which were made against him; and there were great disputes between Trund and
Leiff ever since that day. Thus far Snow Sturleson. Thus Charles the Tender got
to know what men were those of Feroe, whereby they showed sufficiently what was
become of the two other Ships, though it may be also they perished. King Oluff
Haroldson the Holy, having thus been hindered by the defection of his Subjects,
and the oppression of Canulus the Great, King of Denmark* that took the Kingdom
from him, those of Feroe were for a time their own Masters, not only under King
Canuius the Great, that had more weighty affairs to think on, but also under
King Magnus the Son of Oluff the Holy that was disturbed with wars in Denmark
against King Swenoe Estredson, till the day of his death, as also during the
time of King Harold Redhair, who during his Reign was troubled with foreign
wars till he was discomfited in England. His son King Kyrre lived in quiet, and
was contented with what he had; but his son King Magnus Barefoot sought much
foreign Countries, and thereby lost his Life in Ireland. It seems also that he
did not then forget Feroe, though History makes no mention of it, and Feroe
having not been reduced by him, because he made many foreign wars, and reigned
but ten years: it seems it was put under the Crown of Norway in King Sigurd the
Hierosolomite's time, or in the Century of years 1100. since, in this Century
there were not only Bishops constituted in Feroe, but districts men, that had
the power of these Chieftains; For it is related in the Chronicle of N way p
ag. 500. that when Erling Shack, with his Son King Magnus Erlingson, who ruled
30 years after Kiug Sigurt the Hierosolomite's death, in the year of Christ's
Nativity 1163. did endeavor to destroy all the Kings line Male, Suerre
Sigurtson, who was the Grand child of Harold Gilde, King Sigurt the
Hierosolomites Brother, being then but 5 year old, went over with his Mother
Gonild, and his Father in Law Vnas, to Bishop Roar in Feroe, who was his Father
in Laws Brother, and stayed there till he should be ordained Priest. But
hearing then of his Mother, that he was the ^on of King Sigurd Haroldson, he
said he would not change the Kingdom of Norway for a Priests living in Feroe,
and therewith threw aside his Gown and went to Norway to take in the Hereditary
Kingdom of his Forefathers. After this King Suerre a man of Feroe called
Erling raised up himself, giving out that he was this King Suerre's Son, and
went to Norway on the Ship of Hiner a districts man, whereof see further the
Chron. of Norway in the 589 page.

From which example it appears plainly, that not only Bishops, but also
districts men that should take care of the Kings affairs, and gather his
contributions, were constituted in Feroe by the Kings of Norway; and therefore
Feroe has since that time been subject to the Kings of Norway with
contributions and all other duties, but it cannot be known in what year this
begun, neither is it much worth enquiring after. For as this Bishop Roar is not
found in the description of Norway amongst the Bishops of Feroe, in the
Catalogue, and the Historian has neither mentioned that this Bishop was the
first, nor when or by whom he was established, so the Author has neither cared
for, when Feroe was laid under the Crown of Norway, as a thing which did not
properly belong to the scope of his Treatise. Feroe having ever since the time
mentioned been a Province subject to the Kingdom of Norway, it has not only
happened, that the principal men thereof, as Members of that Kingdom, have been
made use of in businesses of great importance, as we read in the Chronicle of
Norway, page 635. that in King Hagen Hagensens time, who was King Suerres
Grandchild, Swerke Bishop of Feroe was with others in the Assembly of the
States in the year of Christ 1223. when King Hagen Hagenson was by all the
States sworn and judged to be the true Heir of the Kingdom of Norway; but they
have also as faithful subjects received Justice from the Kings of Norway in
doubtful causes, as appears by a particular Law, called Soide-Breffvet, or an
ordinance about Sheep, declaring how one must deal therewith, that the one may
not wrong the other.

There is a great error in the date thereof, mentioning it to be given at
Opslo^, in the year of Christ 1040. which time is but a short while after
Charles the Tender was killed in Feroe, whereas it has been proved that Feroe
was not then under the Kings of Norway. And this error is not only proved
hereby, but also by these arguments. First, it is mentioned in the Sheep
Ordinance, that it was Hagen Duke of Norway, King Magnus the Crowned Son that
gave it out; and there is found no King Magnas before then, till the time of
King Magnus Oluffson. The first King Magnus that was Crowned, was King Magnus
Erlingson, who reigned in the year of Christ 1164. and had one Son called
Hagen, neither did any of his Children rule in Norway, being himself killed by
Suerre, and all his Progeny driven out and destroyed. Secondly, there is named
in the Sheep-Ordinance, Bishop Erlander, who in the Catalogue of the Bishops of
Feroe, is the third after Suerquire, of whom is said above, that he was in the
year 1223. in the general Assembly of the States, whence it plainly appears,
that there is a great error in the time it was given out.

But that we may come to some certainty about the date of this Sheep-Ordinance,
we find in History that King Magnus Hagenson Lagebetter, who Reigned over
Norway in the year 1263. had two Sons, Erick and Hagen; Erick became King after
his Father, and was called Erick Priesthater, who reigned 19 years, and died in
the year 1299. In this King Ericks 19 years reign, his Brother Hagen was as a
Duke in Norway, though History does not speak plainly of it; yet it can be
easily concluded by the circumstances; for anciently, since the time of Harolds
Pulchricomus, the Kings of Norway's Sons were called Graves or Earls; but Hagen
Hagenson, the Father of King Magnus the Crowned, brought first the Title of
Duke over into Norway; making his Queen's Father, who was before an Earl or
Count, to be a Duke. After which the Title of Duke was ever given to the Kings
Sons; whence it appears that this Sheep Ordinance was given out in the 19
year of that Duke, when his Brother Erick dyed, and he became King; that is in
the year 1299.

The circumstances of History does much confirm this opinion in other manner,
for as Duke Hagen calls himself, for Honors sake, the son of King Magnus the
Crowned, so there are none of the former Kings so remarkable by their
Coronation as this King Magnus, who was Crowned during his Fathers Life,
without any contradiction, but rather with the desire of all; which never
happened before: for which reason it may be, he was called King Magnus the
Crowned. This King Magnus bettered the Law, wherefore he was called
Law-betterer. He writ also a particular law for those of Island, as also the
Ordinance of Christianity, which was sent over to those of Feroe; whereupon it
seems they found something to complain of, as appears by the Proeme to the
Sheep-Ordinance, of which it seems those of Feroe took then occasion to desire
of his Son that particular ordinance concerning Sheep; much misdemeanour being
used therein, which had in that long space crept amongst the commonalty; of
which law we will further speak in the sixth Chapter, when we treat of their
Policy.

This ordinance concerning Sheep was confirmed by Christian the IV. King of
Denmark, of happy Memory, and Printed upon the humble desires of the
Inhabitants of Feroe, though this fault was left uncorrected; but this must be
imputed to the simple negligence of the Inhabitants, who have had a Copy of
that Law, kept by them during so long time, the original having been robbed
away.

As they have received Laws and particular ordinances from the Kings of Norway,
so they have from time to time sworn Allegiance to the said Kings; for one
reads in the Chronicle of Norway, page 707. that in the year of Christ 1240.
the Inhabitants of Norway. Orkeny, Hetland, Feroe, and Island swore Allegiance
and Fidelity to young King Hagen Hagenson, which custom may well have been
followed as well in regard of the succeeding Kings of Norway, as of those of
Denmark; though nothing of it be noted in the Annals. The same duty being also
performed in our days for in the year 1649. the high and mighty Prince
Frederick the Third, King of Denmark, Norway, of the Goths and Vandalis, now
Deceased, sent to Island and Feroe, the Right Honorable Lord Henry Bialk. Lord
of Elling-Guard, Knight, Governor of Island, his Majesty's Rix Admiral,
President in the Council of Admiralty, and Assessor in that of State, with
Gabriel Ackel^ye Knudson, Secretary, to take the Oath of Allegiance to his
Majesty of all the Inhabitants; which was done by the Inhabitants of Feroe,
with what Solemnity that Country could afford, in Thors-Haven, the third of
August in the year aforesaid, as Jens Lauritson describes in his Norrigia
Illustrata.

In the year 1662. the States of Denmark having chosen his said Majesty, King
Frederick the third and his Successors, to be Sovereign Hereditary Lord of
Denmark and Norway, arrived the second time the 14 of August, his aforesaid
Excellency, the Lord Rix Admiral Henry Bialke, to take of the inhabitants of
Feroe the Oath of their Hereditary Allegiance to his Majesty (whose Hereditary
Throne the King of Kings establish for ever, and continue his seed till the end
of the World) which they presently with greatest devotion performed. When it
pleased the great Lord of Heaven to call the said high and mighty Prince
Frederick the third, first Sovereign Hereditary Lord and King of Denmark and
Norway, from this Temporary, to his Eternal and Heavenly Kingdom, in the year
1670. the 9. of Feb. and his beloved Son, The great and Mighty Hereditary
Prince Christian the Fifth, sat on his late Fathers Royal Throne, to be
Sovereign King over Denmark and Norway, and the Subjects and States of Denmark
had sworn Loyal Fidelity and Obedience to his Majesty's absolute Government;
his Majesty the same year, the 23. of April, graciously dispatched his
Commissary the Honorable Jens Rodsteen, Hereditary Lord of Leer Beck* his
Majesty's Vice Admiral and Assessor in the Council of Admiralty, to Island and
Feroe, with full power in the name of his Majesty to take the Oath of the
subjects and Inhabitants thereof, where the said Commissary Jens Rodsteen
arrived from Island, and put into Thors haven in Feroe, on Tuesday the 16, of
August, and on Friday the 19. of the same month, all the Deputies or
Inhabitants of Feroe themselves were gathered together, and after the Service
of God was performed, took their ready and submissive Oath, first together in a
body, and afterward every one particularly under his Hand and Seal, according
to every ones State and quality.

Neither must we here omit, (to his Royal Majesty, our most Gracious Hereditary
Lord and King, King Christian the Fifth's Immortal Praise and Clory, and to the
subjects of the Land, both that now live and will hereafter succeed, their
admonition and remembrance to keep exactly the Oath they have taken in all its
points and clauses, not out of compulsion and fear, but by an humble, free, and
loving devotion till Death) that his Majesty was graciously pleased to prevent
the Inhabitants, in giving them notice by his Patent, that whatsoever either
the States or any private man for himself, had to petition and solicit his
Majesty for; they or he should deliver it to his Royal Commissary, and he
receive it to carry unto his Majesty with a most gracious assurance, that his
Royal Majesty with a particular care and favor would be concerned in what
could be judged beneficial to them, according to the time and occasion.

The wise King Solomon in the 19. chap. 12. verse, of the book of Proverbs
compares admirably such Royal grace to the Dew that falls on-Grass, for as
Dew vivifieth withered and down-fallen Grass, so that it rises again and
grows bravely up; so has this, his Royal Majesty's Grace, revived the hearts
of the Inhabitants of Feroe, which were almost fainting away for one cause or
another; and therefore the Subjects, both Ecclesiastical and Temporal,
delivered the said Royal Commissary several Petitions concerning some of their
grievances, wherewith the said Commissary on Sunday the 21 of August after the
Service of God, departed from Feroe for Denmark. Thereupon in the year 16-2*
three deputies were sent over with full power, humbly to represent the Lands
necessities; and his Majesty was graciously pleased to give the Inhabitants a
very profitable Ordinance, to prevent and take away all damage and ruin from
the Land.

Whilst the Inhabitants of Feroe were under the subjection of the Kings of
Norway and Denmark* or before that time, one does not find much that any have
been famous for their valiant actions, (though they have been a hard nation
from the beginning) except two; namely Sigismund Bretteson, and Magnus Heirson,
whose Histories excepted, the one out of Snore Sturleson, and Mr. Peter
Clauson's Writings; the other out of Jens Lawritson's Norrigia illustrata, and
a credible Manuscript of Feroe, are for the Readers sake worthy to be here
inserted. After Trund of Got, of whom we have made mention before, had
treacherously let murder his fellow Governors of Feroe, and his Kinsmen,
Breast and Beine, s^lling their Sons Sigismund Bresteson, and F^rgill Beinson,
privately out of the Country to perpetual Slavery; it happened that he that
bought them was b^ st^rm and bad weather, set from (...) course with his Ship,
to the East of Norway, there ran the two boys away from him, and got up into
the Country: ^ow there had been in the Country some time before, a young m^n,
whose name was Torkild, that wa^ an excellent Huntsman and Shooter, and lay
usually out on Snow and Ice in the night, seeking to kill Wild Beasts, caring
neither for cold nor frost, whence he got the name of Torkild endure Frost: he
fell in love with a considerable man's daughter, called Ingeborrig, whose
Parents refusing to give her unto him, he took her in the Wild Woods, but her
Father, Brothers, and Kinsmen sought her out, and took her back again. Torkild
came to her the second time, and she went away with him; but considering that
he could not be in quiet for her kindred on that side of Dorfields, he went
therefore over the Mountain and settled his habitation close at the North of it,
in a great Wilderness and savage Forest, where no body came through, there
being a great way from thence to Towns where people lived, and his Servants
went into the district of Trundhein to sell skins and hides of wild beasts,
buying therewith what he had need of* and he lived there many years, having
changed his name.

Sigismund Bresteson and Torgild Beinson being fled from their Master, as
aforesaid, went up into the Country intending to go into the North of the
District of Trund heim; but when they came on Dor fields they lost their way,
and wandered some days, ^^ill at last they came down to the place where Torkild
Endure Frost lived, and went in. His Wife received them well, giving them meat,
and desired them to tarry there the night over. When Torkild came home from the
Woods, she went to meet him, and told him there were come to them two beautiful
Boys, desiring him that he would do them no harm: he grew angry, because he
had forbidden her to receive any body in the house, or show any one the way
from thence, saying, we shall doubtless be found out and taken at last, losing
our lives for such thy foolish humanity. He was nevertheless persuaded, and
received friendly the two Children, entertaining them some years, and loving
them dearly; he taught them to Shoot, to Fence, and Swim, and all other
exercises, specially those that are serviceable in war; and Sigismund surpassed
always his Cozen in all things. When they were at last grown to men's stature,
he forbad them going any time in the Forest that lay North of the house, and
they wondered wherefore he did so; once as Torkild was gone on Shooting,
Sigismund took an Ax in his hand and went with his Cozen into the Forest at
North, where they presently perceived a terrible great Bear that came right
against them: Torgild ran away, but Sigismund retired behind a Tree, and when
the Bear came up to him, he struck at him with his Ax and cleft his head.
Afterward they took the Bear and raised him with props against the Tree, and
so returned home, presently came their Foster-father toward them, coming with
his Bow and Arrows to seek them out, for he was afraid the Bears would have
hurt them He was very glad when he found them, and they incited him to go with
them against the Bear, though they told him not that it was dead. Torkild shot
an arrow into the Bear, which not falling, he wondered very much at it, and
being ready to shoot again, Sigismund began to laugh, and said it was no
wonder, he was so afraid of Bears when they lived, since he feared this now
being dead.

Torkild rejoiced and perceived well what man Sigismund would be; therefore he
sent him to Hagen Lade Jave the Rich or Good, who was Earl of the District of
Trund heim, ruling then over all Norway, and he (...) i^ great favor with
Count Hagen (...) peace for Torkild from Hagan, and all the Kinsmen of
Ingebo^ig Afterward Sigismund Married the Daughter of Torkild called The One. He
was with Count Hagan and Erick in the Battle of Jornsviking, which the
Champions and Chieftains of Julin, and other Danish Lords gave them; and it is
writien, that Sigismund Bresteson out off with a back blow, both hands ^n the
joints, o^ Boedigree, who presently put the stumps in two Chests of his, and
cast himself therewith overboard. Sigismund was afterward converted to the
Christian Religion by King Oluff Tryggeson, and by his command went to Feroe,
and caused all the Folks of H^tland and Feroe to be Baptized, as also those
that were not yet Christened in Orekney. Sigismund was a great while on that
voyage, and revenged the death of his Father by killing Trund of Got: here is
sung in Feroe an old Song of the actions of Sigismund, wherein it is said, that
Sigismund found much difficulty, and was in great danger ere he could take Land
in Feroe; For Trund of Got, by Sorcery and Witchcraft had raised great Storms
against him. King Oluff Tryggeson gave Sigismund all Feroe to rule over; but
after his death it came again under the Son of Trund of Got, that was also
called Trund, whereof is made mention before in the History of St. Oluff.

Sigismund Bresteson sailed back to King Oluff to Trund heim, after he had
caused all these people to be Baptized, and practiced all exercises with the
^ing; for Oluff Tryggeson was very expert in Swimming and Shooting, either with
a Bow or Hand-dart; he could run about on the brinks of a Ship, he Fenced
equally well with both hands, and could play with three hand-shears at once
(they were short Weapons to dart with) so that there were always two in the
air, he could cast two darts at once, and could climb upon a hill before any
other, none being able to follow the King so near as Sigismund Bresteson. See
the Chronicle of Norway, page 166. and 167.

It happened as Sigismund would return again to Feroe and spoke with the King,
that he had a thick Gold Ring on his Finger, which Count Hagen had given him;
the King would try how much Sigismund loved the Earl, and therefore desired
the Ring of him, but Sigismund said that he would not give it him for Count
Hagans sake. The King grew angry at it, and prophesied him, that this Ring
would be the cause of his death; Sigismund was afterward murdered in Feroe in
Sandvijgge, in the Island of Suderoe, by Torgrim Ilde and his Sons, for that
Rings sake, Sigismund being then weary and weakened by Swimming, for he had then
swum about a League over an arm of the Sea. Thus far Mr. Peter Clauson, and
Snore Sturleson.

This Sigismund must have been a very strong man, for those of Feroe say, that
he swam over from Skuoe to Suderoe, as far as Porckeroe, which is above two
Leagues off the Sea, where there are several streams and currents. Sandviig is
not in Suderoe, but according to old Tradition he swimm'd to Porcheroe, where
Torgrim, which those of Feroe call Thore dog lived; and when he came thither he
lay on the Sea Weeds for weakness, when Thore and his Sons came to him, and
seeing the Golden Ring, he bad give it him, and that then he would help him;
but as Sigismund would not do it, Thore out of couetousness for the Gold,
killed him, and because he had no Weapon he bit out his Throat; wherefore he
was ever since ealled Thorre-dog.

The other Champion of Feroe was Magnus Heinsen, of whom Jens Lawritson writes,
that he was born in Norway. It seems, that as the Subjects of Hald^n the Black,
disputed to know where his dead body should be buried, and not being able to
agree about it, divided his Corpse into four parts, each taking his and burying
them in four places of Norway, so those of Norway and Feroe dispute, after the
death of Magnus Heinson, whose Country man he was. All those of Feroe
unanimously maintain, that he was born in that Country, his Father having lived
there, and his Brothers and Sisters having lived, and being dead there also;
his Cozens and Kinsmen living there to this day; his half brother Jonas
Heinson, dwelling in Lammehaufve, was Provincial Judge of Feroe. Magnus had
also a natural Son living here in the Country, dead not long since, whose name
was Erasmus Magnusson, his Fathers Name was Mr. Hoine Hauffregster, Curate of
Osteroe, of whom it is truly related, that Heine with six other Students, were
in a Boat about their pleasure in Norway, when a contrary wind drove them from
the Land, carrying them far at Sea, out of sight thereof, and at last drove
them under Feroe; the six Students returned straight to Norway by the first
Ship, Heir alone remaining, who was first the Bishop of Feroes Servitor, and
afterward. Parish Priest of Osteroe: he married a Woman of Feroe, which being
dead, he went into Norway and Married a Norway Woman named Gery, with whom he
lived a good while here in Feroe, begetting of her Magnus Heineson. It is said
besides, that the said Mr. Heine returned into Norway, where he got another
living, by reason whereof, possible, Magnus is esteemed a Norway man. The said
Magnus Heineson Sailed first as a Merchant from Bergen to Feroe; afterward he
took service in Holland against Pirates, Sea-Robbers, and Dunkirkers, till at
last he grew a Renowned man, and therefore was taken into the service of his
Majesty of Denmark King Frederick the secoud of happy Memory, being admitted as
a Ship Captain, and afterward came to so great honor that he Married a Lady
of Noble Parentage.

His said Majesty made continually use of him to cleanse the Seas, and take all
Pirates and Sea-robbers, that did then great damage under Norway, Island, and
Feroe. There are many recitals of his courage and valiant actions, he was not
only bold and courageous to meet his enemies, but also intelligent to devise
cunning Stratagems against them, when they were too strong for him.

For it happened once that a famous Pyrate, with a well rigged Ship came under
Norway, and cast Anchor near Valdhowe; whereof Magnus being advertised, and
having caused the Ship to be espied, found that he was not able to fight her
openly, he therefore invented this stratagem; he clothed himself in a Peasants
clothes, got a Fisher Boat, and provided himself with old Nails, Lead,
Leather, a melting spoon, and a tinder Box, which he hid all under his Nets and
Ropes in the Boat: being then come from the Land, and having taken pretty many
Fishes, he rowed to the Ship, and whilst he sold them Fish, knew so well to
counterfeit a gross simplicity, that they had no suspicion of his stay, but it
was a pleasure to them; which when he perceived, he desired leave of the
Captain to fasten his Boat at the Stern of the Ship, pretending that he used
often, by reason of his poverty, to lie out at Sea in the Summer. The Captain
having granted his request, he fastened his Boat near the Rudder. The Watch
that was set at night took little care of what was done at Stern of the Ship,
and had no suspicion of such a fellow: wherefore when Magnus perceived that
every body was at quiet, he thrust as many Nails as could go into the holes of
the Rudder, he clustered them with Leather underneath, then struck fire, melted
his Lead, and poured it into the holes of the Rudder. Having now done all this
without being perceived by the Watch, he retired in the morning to his own
Ship, and made all things ready for fighting, Weighed Anchor and put to Sea,
sailing against the Pyrate and engaging him to fight, but he not being able to
govern his Ship, the Rudder being fast and immovable, he was easily and
without any great resistance overcome, and taken Prisoner by Magnus Heinson.
Whereas Magnus Heins n did earnestly endeavor to ruin these Sea-Robbers both
by subtle devices, as well as by force, he destroyed many of them, and his
name grew famous abroad; wherefore these Pirates did prosecute Magnus again,
and made all their endeavors to surprise him with advantage. A Sea Robber
having had notice that he lay secure in Thors-haven in Feroe, he did seek him
there, which Magnus perceiving hid all his digging, and took flight upon
Hestoe; the enemy having heard of it, pursued him thither; but Magnus had so
provided himself aforehand with stones, which he rolled upon them, that he
drove them all away, and forced them to retire to their Ship again, and put to
Sea.

But Magnus, that he might be free afterward for such unexpected surprises of
the enemy, raised a Sconce near Thors haven, which is yet to be seen; repaired
so his Ship, manning her as well as possible, and put to Sea again to revenge
himself upon his enemy: at last he heard that he was in Norway, and knowing
that he was not strong enough to fight him, he sought to surprise him;
commanding his Folks to lie in Boats in an off side from the Ship; he took a
number of Stones with him and came on board the Pirate; who not knowing him
took him for a simple Peasant. Magnus carried himself now as before, with his
cunning folly, and a good while made the people merry on the Deck, till at last
feigning as if he had been drunk with their Beer, he begun to try whether he
could climb up the Mainmast; carrying himself very simply in his trials, as if
he had not known what they called the Mast, or what it served them to; he did
thus so long with them till he got up into the Mast quarter, and then presently
with a Dagger which he had hidden under his clothes, cut off the Sail Ropes,
and with the Stones which he had about him, drove the people under Deck,
blowing then in his Whistle, whereat all his folks came from their ambush, got
into the Ship, and bolted the Hatches till the rest of his men came with his
Ship, and took all the people Prisoners.

Magnus, as many more was something inclined to drunkenness, whence it happened
once, whilst he lay here in a Harbor of Feroe, being gone to Land, where he
drank hard with all his men, so that he fell asleep, and lay that night on
Shore, that in the mean time a Pirate came into the Harbor, and having notice
where Magnus was, they came subtly to him and took him Prisoner, whilst he
was asleep, amongst all his men, and carried him on board, though they
afterward released him on this condition, that he should swear and promise
never to persecute them more. Magnus being at liberty did not think himself
obliged to observe any forced Oath, therefore to revenge the shame they had put
upon him, as well as to curb their unjust Piracy, which they then exercised
every where about this Country, without any fear thinking themselves in
security by reason of Magnus Heineson's obligation; he engaged with these
impious men, and in a short fight overcame and took them Prisoners. In such
manner was the fear of Magnus come upon his enemies, that they durst not kill
him when they had him Prisoner, and thought themselves free of all danger if
they were but in security of him. The courage and valor of Magnus was so
great, that not only he did not avoid danger, by engaging often with more
powerful men then himself, and happily overcoming them: but they neither failed
him in his greatest danger, for once the most part of his own folks, consisting
of several Nations, having conspired together to kill him, and run away with
his Ship; he alone in a fury mastered 1^ of them, and drove such a fear in the
rest, that they let fall their feracity, and appeased themselves.

And as he was courageous, so was ever fortune on his side, it happening
usually that Fortune helps a Valiant man, but luck is inconstant and often
changed. It happened even so unto Magnus for he was again by force overcome and
taken Prisoner, but his great courage did never forsake him, for being asked by
him, that had taken him, what his mind was then; he answered without any sign
of fear, if I had power over thee, as thou have over me, I would make thee
suffer the cruellest Death that I could invent. Whereupon his Victor seeing his
Heroical courage, gave him his liberty, without being desired; and Magnus kept
this courage till the hour of his death; for when, as will be said hereafter,
he was forced, though for an innocent cause, to stretch his neck to the
Executioner, in the place before the Kings Palace, and the Executioner asked
him whether he would have a handkerchiefe tied before his eyes* as is usual, he
answered no, saying moreover to the Executioner, I have seen so many drawn
Swords without fear, have thou but a care thou be not afraid.

Thus by his Fortune and valor he came greatly in the favor of the aforesaid
King Frederick the II. of Glorious memory, who not only made constant use of
him in several such expeditions, but also because of his great experience in
the North Sea, sent him to discover Greenland, in the year 1577. and it is
thought he was the first subject of Denmark that undertook to find out
Greenland. He set his course according to old Navigation, directly for Island,
and from thence again till he perceived the Mountain White Serk, where he met
with a great deal of Fog and bad weather, with much driving ice, nevertheless
he got sight of the Land, but could not come thereunto; neither seemed it he
could come from the place where he was, though he had a good wind, by reason of
the Loadstone, which he believed to be at the bottom of the Sea, and hindered
his voyage: wherefore, the days growing short, he was obliged without
performing what he went for, to return for Denmark.

By reason of Magnus Heineson's expeditions, his name grew famous in the
neighboring Countries and Kingdoms; many loved him, many feared him, and many
also hated him. He found likewise envious men in Denmark; It happening often,
that virtue is not without envy and persecution: yet they could not hurt him as
long as the good King Frederick lived; but after his decease, this brave Sea
Captain was forced to yield his neck to the Sword, which many enemies could not
obtain by their force; for it happened in the year, 1588, during the Minority
of King Christian the IV. of Glorious Memory, that the said Magnus Heineson*
being treacherously accused of a dark and wrongful crime, was arrested in the
Palace of Copedhagen, and being condemned to lose his Life, was beheaded on the
place before the said palace, and from thence transported to be buried in St.
Nicholas's Chur chyard.

But God, as a just Judge, made his Innocence appear, appointing for that
purpose the Right Honorable John Lindenow, Lord of Olsloffe, Provincial Judge
of North Jutland, who concerned himself in Magnus Heinesons innocent cause and
execution; and by a lawful suit and sentence vindicated him, at the General
Sessions held at Kolding, in the year 1590. the 6. of August, out of S.
Nicholas Churhyard, whence he was with pomp transported from Copenhagen into
Jutland, and Buried in Olsloffe Church, near Viburg; his Valor having been
very renowned in this Kingdom, where he had Married a Lady of Noble Parentage,
and for the false accusation, for which he lost his life, there was given 3000,
Rix Dollars, by friendly reconciliation and agreement.

The Right Honorable Lord Lindenow, writ over this Valiant Sea Champion the
following Epitaph.

Epitaphicum.
Pietate, prudentia, naturae excel^oris instinctu, ac longo rerum maximar u^
usu proestantiffimi viri, Magni Heinsonii, qui mu^tis laboribus examlatis
rebus, domi forisque praeclare gestis, Hafniae perplexa questione accusatus
est, and non sine omnium bonorum luctu tandem decollatus.
Magnanimum Magno ^i^xit me nomine magna
Majestas: magnum nomen and omen habet.
Vixi etiam magnus, majorem magna ruina
Erexit, tandem maximus (^uge) vocor.
Magna gerens quondam studuit me reddere parvum;
Sed frustra: Magni nomen ut ante viget.
-- Vivit post funera virtus.
Johannes Lindenovius Senior posnit, Anno, 1590.
Thus Englished.

The Epitaph.
Of Godly, Prudent, Generous and Expert man, Magnus Heineson, who, after many
exploits Valiantly performed at home and abroad, being accused of a doubtful
crime, was beheaded at Copenhagen, not without the grief of all good men.
Gods greatest Majesty gave me of Great the name,
As a great sign I should in time, come to great fame.
Thus I have lived great, grew greater by my fall,
And now at last, you see, I am greatest of all,
One, that could do great things, did strive to make me less,
But in vain for my name has now obtained redress.
Virtue lives after death.
Written by John Lindenow the Elder, in the Year, 1590.
So that these two valiant men of Feroe have not been much unlike one another,
not only in virtue, courage, and valor, but also in the manner of their death,
having both received evil for their good deeds.

Besides these two, there have been none of Feroe that by valiant actions have
left any famous name to posterity; having from the beginning applied themselves
to a quiet course of life, contented with their poverty; by which long
tranquallity they have lost their old Heathenish ferocity and vigor, though
they have continually been troubled by French, Irish, and English Pirates: but
their means consisting in Lands, Cattle, and Wild Sheep; whereupon the enemy
could do little damage, they ever saved themselves on the high Rocks. Those of
Suderoe nevertheless held once a fight with the Irish Sea-robbers, who would
not forsake the Land so soon as they desired, whereupon they gathered
themselves against them, and slew them every one. Such sort of people have
exercised great violence against the poor Inhabitants of this Country, there
passing formerly scarce any year, but they were troubled by them.

For the last Bishop, Mr. Peter* Ribe, was several times plundered by the
French; so that he was at last forced to remove from hence.

They tortured so Mr. Erasmus Curate of Suderoe, with a Rope about his head,
for his mon^s sake, that he (...) afterward almost unfit for his calling.

They used also very ill Mr. Martin of Thors haven, they took away the Lands
^^^st, with the Writings; carrying also with them what Merchants wares and
goods of the King they found here, taking such Ships as were sailing hither,
and committing many other ^ppressions.

The English Fishers had an ordinary custom, going every year to fish under
Island, to take of the Inhabitants of Feroe whom they found first, without
distinction of persons, not excepting the very Priests whom they carried with
them on their Voyage, as if they had been slaves, to help them to Fish; and
when they returned and were under the Land, they set them on Shore, where they
could best be off with them. Feroe has in this manner, during a long time,
been as a prey to such ravenous Wolfes. Neither has the Turk forgotten it; for
in the year 1629. there came two Turkish Ships into Suderoe, that dealt very
cruelly in the Country, taking away without exception, whosoever came before
them. It happened the same time, that the Priest of that place, called Mr. Paul
Erasmuson, fled upon a Rock with a little child; the Turks pursued him, and
took first the Child, which he had laid down, and afterward pursued the
Priest, wherefore he leaped down from a very high promontory, under which many
people had hidden themselves from the enemy, and God made it come to pass so
wonderfully that he stopped upon a Turffe of Earth that was soft and well
overgrown with Grass, there being round about nothing but Clifts and Stones;
yet, though his body was not endamaged, his mind was nevertheless very much
distracted by that high fall. Wherefore his Majesty of Denmark, King Christian
the IV. rig'd out a Ship commanded by the Honorable George Daa, who likewise
did his utmost to destroy such a company of Thieves. Amongst other, he
surpised an Irish Pyrate, in Westmans-haven in Stremoe.

A part of the Pirates crew run presently over the Land, and took one of the
Inhabitants Boats, wherewith they fled from Feroe to Hetland; those that were
left*behind were taken and hanged. After the said Daa, his said Majesty
commanded other Ships to cruise under Feroe, which harbored usually in Skaale
fiord in Osteroe; whence it is, that the harbor has gotten the name of Kings
haven.

But there going more charges yearly to fit out such Ships then the revenue,
which the King received of the Land, could import; King Christian the IV. was
pleased to cause to build a Fort in Thors-haven, against the unexpected
invasion of all enemies. There being not only kept the Kings contributions, but
also all Merchandise for the maintenance of the whole Country; which was done
after the Turks falling into Suderoe; and since that time, they have in some
manner been free from such Sea-robbers, except when there has been war between
Denmark and the neighboring Kingdoms, for t^^n, as is probable, they have
often been disturbed by neighboring enemies.

It is not heard or read, of any civil war, or inward tumult in Feroe, as in
Island, though there be an old tale of some troubles in the Country, and there
has been showed me a valley in Calsoe, above the village of Migledal, where
two armies of the Inhabitants have fought together, and two hills under which
they say, the dead are buried; though they know not the true ground thereof. I
am almost of opinion, that this happened in the time of King Ingi Baard's son,
in the year of Christ 1211. by Erling Suerrison, of whom the Hystory of Norway,
page 581. makes mention in this manner. There was a man in Feroe called
Erling, that gave himself out for King Suerreson; his Mother was Astride Rois
Daughter. He marched about in the Islands with some gathered men, doing great
violence and oppression; he had 7 Children, and went since for Norway in the
Ship of Einar the Sheriff; ren ^ring himself to Philip and the Lady Christina,
she received him very well, and acknowledged him for her Brother, he dyed some
years after of an effusion of blood, after blood letting. It may be, that he,
as an heir to the Crown of Norway, would reduce Feroe to obedience, but that he
was discomsited and forced to go out of the Country to seek the assistance of
his Sister Christina, and that his design vanished by his death. Here is also
spoken of another uproar that happened for a good while since, by some few that
gathered themselves together, and would possess themselves of Feroe, putting to
death all those that would not be of their Faction, which company they call to
this day the Flock men, from their thus flocking and being gathered together.
The Inhabitants of Feroe having thus continually been, as well free from civil,
as from foreign wars, except what oppression the Sea-robbers and those of their
party did them; they have during their long tranquillity taken great care to
cultivate the ground, having not only tilled, Planted, and built the places
that are now inhabited, but other places besides, that are now left untilled,
and are seldom renewed.

They devide the ground which they till, into acres; the acre being subdivided
into else, so that by an acre of ground is understood 320 Hamborough Else four
square; whereunto belongs also a part of the ground that is without the
Enclosure; yet there is a great difference in the greatness of the divisions,
though every acre of Land be reckoned for 320 else. And the Acres consisting in
that sort of measure, the poor freeholders know to divide it after their
deceased Parents in many small parts, namely, in 80, 60, 40, 20, and 10 else,
and an acre of ground costing, according to the ancient price of Land, sixteen
Gylders of Feroe, they call usually such small parts a Gylder, namely 80 Else
about 4 Gylders, 40 Else 2 Gylders, and so forth, till it comes to be so little
that it amounts but to five Skins of earth, which is Land for 10 pence. This
division being very damageable to the Country, for it makes many poor people;
they do not plow their ground, but dig it, making deep furrows laing the earth,
which they dig out of them, on the ground close together, the dung being laid
under it before. Neither is each Field above 3 else broad, usually with a ridge
on the one side, that water may always have its fall into the furrow, and
continually flow away, there falling here very much rain; afterward they break
the Earth that was laid over, with a spade instead of harrowing it; and when
they have sowed their Seed, they clap the earth over with flat pieces of Wood;
instead of rolling it over. So that they have a great deal of labor and pain
in the Tillage of their ground, which cannot otherwise be, because of the Lands
propriety. The ground which they thus Till, they let rest 8 or 10 years, for it
will not bear fruit every year; but in the mean time it yields excellent Grass
for Hay, which they only mow, and not that which grows in Moorish grounds, as
they do in other Countries.

As they have a great deal of labor in the Tillage of their ground, so they
have no less about their Corn; for they cut it off with an ordinary Knife, and
puck every Ear from the Straw, drying them afterward in a Kilne; the Corn not
coming here to perfect Maturity. Afterward, instead of Thrashing, Women tread
the Ears of Corn with their bare feet; all this labor about their Corn taking
up a great deal of time almost unprofitably; which might well be remedied, but
they are so minded in general, that they will not change their old customs no
more in this then in many other things.

CHAP. V.
Of the Qualities of the Inhabitants.
IT is so ordered in nature, alas! that Tares will commonly grow amongst Wheat.
It is here even as in other places, where there are bad and good, and since the
bad ones cannot be much praised for their virtue, we will speak little of their
vices, it being undecent to blame very much him that cannot be praised. The
duty of a Christian being rather to cover his Neighbors faults under the
Mantle of charity. As for what concerns the good, though one might think in
other places, that these Islands being so far remote, there should live in them
a rude and barbarous people; notwithstanding one may in truth write of them,
that for the Countries convenience, they are not only understanding people, and
skilled in their Laws, but also much more civil then Peasants use to be in
other parts: who nevertheless see every day more gentleness amongst those that
live in Towns, then this Country can afford. For they are humble in their
Conversation, civil in their carriage, and courteous in their speech; specially
toward strangers, and those that are better then themselves: they are
serviceable, obedient, willing, and liberal to their Magistrates; and those of
Feroe must be praised above many other Nations in this, that a stranger
traveling through the Land, not only is well received by them, and treated
with the best they have, without paying any thing; but also, when they depart,
if the Host is able, are gratified with a present, and besides helped with free
carriage to the next habitation; which happens here, because it is not so
ordinary for strangers to travel over the Land, as in other Country s; for if
it were so, they would be obliged to become of the same mind as others. They
are charitable to the poor and needy, for there being here many that possess no
lands, living only of their fishing; when they sheare Sheep in Summer, they go
about to beg wool, and they give them as they are able, yea some more then they
are able, to their own damage; for none would willingly have the reputation of
niggardness, whence it comes, that the poor Countrymen of the villages live
near as well, as those that live on the Kings Farms; so that they are almost
all equally rich in money; only the Farmer has his Sheep and Cattle more then
the other, and therefore here lives generally a poor people, poor indeed in
Gold, but rich in the grace of God.

By reason of such liberality and charity, this people have despised riches,
and loved poverty; very few having ever cared to lay aside any money or other
necessaries against a time of need, but the most part have let every day
provide for it self, believing that the fruit of a year would be the food of a
year, whereby that filthy vice covetousness has during a long time been
without habitation in Feroe; but Christ has not in vain warned all true
Christians. Luke 21. 34. that they toward the end of the World should not
trouble their hearts with care for the maintenance of this Life, for he knew
very well that avarice would, about that time, get the upper hand amongst the
children of men. Wherefore since it advances now toward the evening of this
World, yea that it is already come, avarice has also crept in amongst some of
our Christians of Feroe. May be they have had their informers; but as they are
not generally covetous, neither is Theft known amongst them. The poorest and
neediest fort may indeed commit some falsehood* and theft, but they steal
usually what is good for food, to maintain themselves in their poverty. But as
for Gold and Silver there is found in that a great faithfulness amongst them
all; for if one of Feroe comes in an able man's Kitchen, and finds there
Silver, Pewter, and Horn Spoons, and has a mind to steal, he will let the Silver
Spoons alone, and will rather take those of Pewter or Horn; he takes rather
the Pewter Spoons, because he can melt it and make thereof Ilet Rings for
women's bodies, but dares not touch Silver or Gold, because he knows not how to
alter or change it.

They are for the most part inclined to sobriety, for they care not to consume
the Beer which they buy in, but keep it, to treat therewith a strange guest, o^
to comfort their teachers, when they come to visit them, by reason of their
calling ^ but they do not use to make any debauch in drink amongst themselves;
except about Christmas, and then here, as well as in other places, they cheer
up themselves with a joyful and merry cup; yet we cannot say they are all free
from drunkenness with Brandy, which is lately crept into Feroe, but specially
among the less understanding, and those that have scarce wherewith to pay.
Their daily diet is moderate and frugall; observing always their forefathers
manner of eating without bread, beer, or salt, those that have any possessions,
live according to the seasons of the year upon Flesh, Milk, Fish, and Gruel.
They dry their flesh in the wind without Salt, as they do Stockfish* hanging it
in the Wind-house; which is built in the following manner. There are half deals
fastened on the sides, two fingers breadth from each other; that the air may
the better blow through and dry the fish and flesh.

As fish are dried in these houses, without corruption, and are afterward
transported over into the farthest part of the world; they do likewise dry
Flesh here without any ^p^trefaction, though the Inhabitants will rather have
it a little tainted, and half rotten dried* for particular use* They also salt
a little, some parcel of Flesh, and hang it afterward to dry; which being a
year old, they eat as one eats smoked meat, it is pretty favoury, but of a hard
digestion to him that is not used to it. They call that sort of dried flesh
Skerpe. And Salt meat, salted Skerpe. They know not how, neither care they, for
dressing any particular dishes, but perfist in their own simplicity, for they
boil their dried meat in water, and put a little Barley meal in the bro^,
making of it a gruel which they call Subbe, and this is their ordinary pottage,
they call the fat which comes from that hard dried ^lesh Madeboed, because it
betters the mea^, and causes the water and meat. when it is grown cold to be
like Pease Porridgel, wherein they pour a little Vinegar; when the flesh
sus^iceth not, they put some preserved Tallow in the water, wherewith they
^oile the Porridge instead of butter. The said Rue* Tallow is prepared as
follows, they put fresh Tallow, rolled in pieces, awhile to rot a little.
Afterward they cut it small and melt it half, casting it out afterward in
great pieces, that weigh about a load or 36 pound, which pieces of Tallow they
dig and put in moist earth to keep it, it growing the better the longer it is
kept, and when it is old and is cut, it tastes like old Cheese. They gather
this sort of Tallow every year, and use it in meat instead of Butter. The most
able Peasants have ever much endeavored to bring together a great quantity of
that Tallow, so that a Countryman had sometimes in the Tallow Dike (that is a
place in the earth where it is kept) above 100 loads, and this has always been
looked upon as the greatest riches of Feroe. For when Sheep dye, such Tallow is
very necessary in the Land, the longer it is kept being so much the better, and
foreign Pirates having little desire to rob it from them. It may therefore not
unreasonably be termed a hidden treasure which rust does not consume, nor
Thieves steal away. The poorer sort that have not this Tallow, use instead of
it Whales sat, as is said before, With that plain diet the people of Feroe have
lived from the beginning; and are so much the more to be praised for it, that
they rather agree therein with the ancient simple frugality, then with the
delicate abundancy and curiosity of these times, whereby almost all other
Nations know nothing of their Predecessors course diet, and it may be would
not be able to endure it, by reason of their natures delicate custom. For what
has Daniel and his Comerades Porridge been but a kind of meal broth wherewith
they were dyeted in their Fathers Country, though they descended from the most
honorable Families there; whereby is also manifested the plain diet of the
Israelites, what was the Greeks (...), and the Romans Alica, whereof Pliny
writes, but as a meals broth, wherewith these two mighty and renowned Nations
did*maintain themselves in their first simplicity, though the manner of
preparing it was different, whereof the Author also speaks. And as long as
these two Potent Nations lived with that frugality, and were free from
covetousness, they were invincible: but as soon as they grew partakers of the
Asians and Persians riches and pleasures, they partaked also of their
effeminate courage, whence the said Pliny does not a little blame this their
delicateness in comparison of their ancient frugality; thinking always on
delicate Vi^nds, so that they loved better a Stork then a Crane; wherefore
Horatius, lib. 2. sal. 2. is angry at them, and gives them this touch, writing
of them as follows.

Tutus erat Rhombus, tutoque cicon^ a ^ido,
Donec Vos anctor d^cuit Praetorius, --
The Turbot in the Floods, and the Stork in her Nest,
Lay safe till Praetorius his Palate both oppressed.
Historians are of opinion that Asillius Praetor, some others that Sempronius
Praetor took pleasure therein, and that the Stork being esteemed sacred amongst
the Heathen, Sempronius was forced to lose his life for it. This manner did
since eat it self through Italy into Germany, and from thence was brought over
into Denmark in King Inges's time, whereof our Danish Historian speaks plainly.
After which it has from time to time so taken the upper hand, that subjects
will therein be equal to Kings and great Lords, between whom there ought
nevertheless to be as much difference as between the glory of King Solomon and
his Subjects. This frugality of Fe^oe is not therefore preferred to our Danish
diet; but all Mediocrity in the fear of God is praise worthy, and every thing
whereunto a man is accustomed is wholesom^st and more convenient for him: but
intemperancy is every where worthy of blame.

They are prudent in their housekeeping, for they, according to the ancient
manner, give a certain portien or measure of meat to every one of their people,
every meal; a man servant having then twice as much as a Maid; and as they have
their measure of meat; so they deal also their work, for they weigh every
morning to every Man and Maid as much Wool as they must spin and knit that day,
that is to say, two pounds of Wool to spin^; and two pounds spun to knit
thereof a pair of Stockings in a day, and when they have done, they weigh them
again at night when they receive the work from them. The Inhabitants have from
ancient time observed a Mediocrity in, and one fashion of clothes. The men
dress themselves in Flannel: those that are able men putting on holy days, or
when they go to market or other public meetings sine Flannel: their Coats are
short and wide, so that they fly about them when they go. They wear seldom
any linen, but woollen Shirts. Women's Clothes are made alike both for the rich
and the poor, the Bodies and Petticoat being sowed together without any skirts;
their Petticoats are wrinkled in small folds, as mourning Mantles in other
places, their clothes in general being of course Flannel; but on Holydays they
have them of cloth, and love very particular colors in their clothes,
specially a dark blew, and some red, their facings are Fringes at the end of
their sleeves, with 3 yards of black Velvet sowed on red cloth, having besides
no other trimming on the whole suit. They have great Stomachers before their
Breasts, which they endeavor much to adorn with silk Fringes above, and some
knots of Ribbon or Lace on the upper part of the Stomacher, they have a little
oblong and ^oursquare Ornament of silver gilt, with Buckles, whereon hang some
Gilt gingling thin plates, fastening it under their chin through the Stomacher.
The common and poorer sort make also use of the like ornament, but of Copper;
they have all a Copper Girdle about their bodies, Maids going barehead with
their hair p^eated in a plain manner; Married Women wear all red knitted caps
without rolls; they hide but a half part of the head, being circle round,
arising directly as the head, like ancient Bonnets, or Scotch caps. They are
purposely made in Holland, and are not much worn in other places. Their Shoes
are of Sheep skins, but the men's of neats Leather tanned with the root of
Tormentill; they have but one sole, only a little sowed together about the Toes
and Heels: they fasten them with Shooestrings at the Heels, and tie it about
the leg above the ankle. Their Bedding is even as plain, for they lie on
nothing but Hay, with a piece of flannel spread over it.

This people is not unfit for Handicrafts, for they sow their own clothes
themselves: some of them apply themselves to build houses, and to Joyners work:
some employ themselves in building of Boats, framing very handsome, light, and
convenient ones to sail with in these dangerous Seas: so that the Boats of
Norway are not comparable to these of Feroe: others exercise themselves by
their own industry in Smiths-work, making all what can be desired of Iron.

The women besides their course flannels, weave also a great deal of fine
bed-cloth of several colors; they knit also fine stockings and woollen
waste-coats, though not many, which in s^neness do not come behind the English.
They prepare themselves several colors, green, yellow, and red; the red is
almost chestnut coour, and they call it cork color, which cannot be imitated
in other places by Dyers.

They are not inclined to any unprofitable pastimes, but delight themselves
most in singing of Psalms on holy days, except in their Weddings, and at
Christmas, that they recreate themselves with a plain Dance, holding one
another by the hand, and singing some old Champions Ballad: but they use not
then to exercise themselves at any scandalous play.

Besides, at their vacant hours, they take great pleasure to play at Chess,
wherein many are very expert, as well women, as men.

They are by nature something inclined to Astronomy, for they do not only know
some Stars, and take diligent notice of their course; specially the Star
B^oetes, which they call the Star of the day; because in the heart of Winter
they know by its course in the morning, what a Clock it is, and how long it is
till day, that they accordingly may row out on fishing, or begin some other
work at home; they also understand in some manner the course of the Moon, that
is, when it will be new Moon, though not by reason of its motion, but by the
increasing and decreasing of the Sea; which being governed by the Moon, they
know by the streams alteration, as the effect of it, on which day there is new
Moon. When there is no Almanac brough into the Ceuntry they understand their
computum Ecclesiasticum, and can direct the course of the year in the moveable
and immovable Holy Days, without any fault or error.

They speak the Language of Norway, though in these times most Danish, having
nevertheless many Norway words. There is also a great difference between the
Northern Islands Dialects, and those that live in the Southern Islands.

The Air being here, as was said before, pretty wholesome, and the Inhabitants
using always one diet: here are also usually found very ancient folks beyond
other places; so that, not only they attain to the highest age of man, whereof
David speaks, namely 80 years, but many also reach to 90, and 100 years of
age and above.

There is a very remarkable Example of an old man of this Country, that died
not long since, whose name was Erasmus Magnusson living in Harold Sound, in the
Northern Islands; who was Magnus Heinesons natural Son, of whom is spoken
before. This Erasmus was first married with an old woman, with whom he lived
many years, and begot no children of her: at last his said wife died, he being
then about 90 years old; desiring nevertheless to leave an Heir of his body, he
married a young woman, of whom he begot 5 Children, and was 110 years old when
he died, his youngest Child being seven years of age, which he begot when he
was 103 years old: That one might not think there might be some seandalous
suspicion in this, the woman was an honest woman, and of good reputation,
having left a very good name after her death. His eldest Son does now possess
his house, being a great and strong young man above many of the Land: I have
know his Father in his ancient age; who was a strong and courageous man. This
example is more admirable than th^^ of Abraham, who thought strange in his
time, that he should beget children being 100 years old. As the time for women
to bear Children is well known to all understanding men, so Physicians and
Philosophers have designed the natural age for a man to beget Children to be
under 65 or at most 70 years; whereupon ancient Historians do remark, as rare
and strange Examples, that some men (as Alexander Masser. pract. Med. lib. 4.
de sterilitate, writes) have begotten Children when they have been above 80
years of age: much stranger, and more worth writing, is this Example of one,
that has begotten Children being above 100 years old, and in this late and weak
age of the world.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Policy.
THe Policy of this Country may be divided into three parts, namely,
Acmdministration of Justice, Merchandise, and providing for the Poor.

1.
Of the Administration of Justice.
The Reader may easily perceive by the Histories related above, how this
Country was governed in the beginning, when the Common wealth thereof consisted
in an Aristochracy, and was governed by principal men or Chiesetains: as also
in some manner how, when the Country came under the Kings of Norway, there were
constituted Bishops and Sheriffs over the Nation, besides the Kings Bailiff,
that gathered Taxes and contributions.

Since the time of Reformation, we know not that this land has been reduced to
a government or District, wherewith the King of Denmark's Ministers have been
intr^sted; but their Majesty's have ever had their own Bailiffs here, that have
governed the Land and received the Kings duties, which have been paid to them,
that either by gratification or contract, ought to have the same, till in our
time, the high and mighty Prince, our Sovereign and Hereditary Lord, Frederick
the III. of Glorious Memory, has therewith as with a Government graciously
gratified his Excelence, the Right Honorable Christopher von Gabel, his
Majesty's Stateholder, Privy Counselor, and Assessor in the Counsel of State;
not only with the receipt of the Revenues, and the jurisdiction thereof, but
also with the liberty of establishing and ordaining there his own Bailiff or
Deputy, to dispose and dispense as he thought fit in matters of Commerce; and
his said Excellency has since that time kept his own Bailiff or Deputy over
the land to administer in his place; having Sheriffs under him, for the Land is
divided into six divisions or districts, namely, Norderoe, Osteroe, Stromoe,
Waagoe, Sandoe and Suderoe. Which Sheriff, each in his division does judge of
all small causes; but they summon the others to the Sessions: They receive the
Kings Tithes, and put in execution what is desired of them by the Kings
Commissary; Here are also besides, Spiritual and Temporal Judges. In the
Ecclesiastical State, though here be no Bishops, Canons or other learned men,
that make up a Chapter, in other places, yet there is a Synod kept yearly, as a
Convent or Chapter of Priests:

The Provost, and all the Priests Assembling themselves at Thors haven in
Stremoe about Saint Olaus Tide; the Sessions being then also kept in the same
place; and if there be any Chapter cause, they are pleaded and judged in the
Assembly, wherein the Bailiff of the Land presides in the place of the
Governor; and there is also consulted what may be for the advantage of the
Commonalty.

The Temporal Justice is twofold, particular and general; The particular is
yearly rendered in every division, and it is the same thing as the Districts
court or first instance in Denmark, and is called the Spring Sessions, for
there being not so many controversies amongst the Inhabitants here, as in other
places, it is kept but once a year, namely, in the Spring, whence it has the
name of Spring-Session; where it is the charge of the Sheriff to preside, and
of the Sworn Recorder to judge; what causes they cannot decide, or do it
wrongfully, are appealed of to the law sessions, which is the general Court,
and is as the Provincial in Denmark, where his Majesty's Bailiff does preside,
and has with him all the six Sheriffs, who, one after another exhibit to the
Court what Law Suits they have, either regarding his Majesty or Private
Persons. The Provincial Judge gives the sentence, having under him 36 men
established by Law, six for every division, and the sworn Recorder, that
Registreth what is done and judged, as long as the Court is kept; all the
Clergy being there also, the Service of God is celebrated every day in the
forenoon, with Preaching and Singing in the Church; and in the afternoon, when
the Bell rings, the Court is kept. The first day they sit, all the Priests are
called together, and when the Court is sat, there is only considered that day
of what concerns the common good in general; and all causes and other
controversies being the other days brought to an end, and the Court being then
ready to be dissolved, the Clergy is called again into the Court, to know if
any general matter is yet to be considered of, and when all things are come to
an end, the Provost of the Churches does declare on which day St. Michael's
days of Prayers begin to be observed, as also if there be any other particular
day of prayers appointed by his Majesty, as also what space there is between
Christmas and Shrovetide. After all this the Provincial Judge arises and
dismisseth the Court, pronouncing peace upon all them that go from the Court to
their houses: declaring also a peaceable possession of all proprieties and
freeholds in the Land, promising our Gracious Lord and King Tribute as
anciently; and then for a sign of consent, every boby that is present, clap
their hands, the Bell being afterward rung, that every body may know the Court
is dissolved. The same day in the evening, both Ecclesiastical and Civil*
gather themselves in the Sessions House, to Feast and be merry together, where
according to an ancient custom they drink the healths of his Majesty, of the
Queen, and of the Prince, the Counsels, their Governors, and other principal
healths, with the following particular Ceremony and Speech. First one of the
eldest Priests begins a verse of a Psalm, which they sing out together, after
which the same Priest alone sings it in Latin, according to the ancient
manner, and the guests answer, singing in Latin as follows.

The Priest sings.
1. Omnis Speritus, 2. Benedicamus Domin^, 3. Benedicite,
The people answers,
1. Laudet Dominum, 2. Deo gratias, 3. Domino.
Afterward the Elder of the company arises and mentions the health that is to
be drunk with the following Speech, which being old Language and very
remarkable, the Interpreter has thought fit to put it here both in Danish and
English.

Good vere med vor allernaadigsie Nerre oc Ronning, Presium oc Alerctum, Leigum
oc Lerdum, for sin Blessen-Sang oc fauffver formaale, baade her oc huert ^itne.
Ner er and Nederligt Mind begyndt, some er vor allernaadigsie Nerris oc
Ronnings, etc. Stuble veer saa fare med samme Mind, some, det summer oc se der
allumgodum Mannum, veer stullum hell a^munne, dricte, giore vel* oc icte biude
them some stiencte, for end vel er affdructen den stal veere, Good fierisi, some
meest dri^^er oc mindst sparer. See! det er Billie min Nerre Rongis: At Bi^^^n*
Jogden, Laugma^d, Presier, ^ldermend, Gild-Brodre, oc Gild-Sostre* Gicster oc
Neime-mend, s^ulle all vere Good oc vel^ommene.

Thus Englished.

God be with our most Gracious Lord and King, Priests and Clerks, Lays and
Learned, for his blessed sake and fair promise now and for ever. Here is begun
an honorable health, which is that of our most Gracious Lord and King, etc.
one must proceed as far with the said health, as suits and becomes every
good man, every one must (...) it to his mouth, drink, (...) give it again to
him (...) till it be drunk out; he shall ^e best beloved of God that drinks
most and spares teast, behold! it is the will of the King my Master, that the
Bishop, the Bailiff, the provincial Judge, the Aldermen the Brothers and
Sisters of the Feast, the Guests and Hosts should be all welcome, thereupon
they all arise and drink the health of one another.

This ceremony is used at every remarkable health that is drunk; when every one
is satisfied with drink, they return to their Lodgings, and the next day to
their houses, not seeing one another together again, till the same time the
next year.

They have no particular law as in Island, but govern themselves after the law
of Norway.

Those of Feroe have a particular Law, that determines how one must deal with
sheep, called Soid-Brevet, or Sheep Ordinance: and having made some mention of
it above, to the Histories better explanation, for the satisfaction of the
curious Reader, and profit of the Inhabitants, I have thought fit to insert
here the said Ordinance, word by word, which is thus:

CHristian the Fourth, by the Grace of God, King of Deamark and Norway, of the
Vandals and Goths, Duke of Sleswig, Holstein, Stormarn and Dytmersk, Count of
Oldenburgh and Delmanhorst, etc.
Be it known unto all men, That whereas many of our beloved Subjects of our
Land of Feroe, have humbly desired that we would graciously confirm and ratify
unto them an Ordinance concerning their sheep, which the late King of Norway
gave them, the tenor of which is word for word as follows:

HAgen, by the Grace of God, Duke of Norway, Son to King Magnus Crowned, sends
all men that shall see or hear this Patent, the blessing of God, and also our
spiritual and dear friend Mr. Eliender Bishop of Feroe, and Mr. Sifvort
Provincial Judge of Hetland, which we have sent you to end the Controversy
amongst the commonalty, about the Points which they wanted in the Ordinance for
profitable Houskeeping, and therefore, we have let stitch together these four
leaves concerning the Affair, and the Sheep business, which we have with the
counsel of our Principal men prepared, as we know shall be most profitable for
the Commonalty.

But for the Ordinance of Christianity, we cannot for the present alter it, but
it must remain as our Lord and Father the Crowned caused it to be collected,
and delivered it in the hands of Mr. Ellender the Bishop, as the Country
Records themselves do manifest. It is our absclute Command and true will, that
every one do exactly and well observe this Ordinance about sheep; that neither
we, nor our Successors, come in disrespect for it; till with the counsel of our
principal men we make another Ordinance, which God grant may be for the best
advantage of the Commonalty. In witnes^ whereof we have sealed this Ordinance.

Given in Opslo on Saturday next after St. John's week last past, from the hour
of Jesus Christ's birth, One Thousand and Forty Winters, that is in the year
1040. and of our Dukedom the 19th. Lord Achis the Chancellor sealed, Sr.
Theyter dictated this Law, and Baardue Peterson the Notary writ the Patent.

ARTICLE I.
To know Sheep.
WE have been informed of a bad custom, that has been in the Land more than it
should, about sheep; neither ought we to have suffered it so, but rather let
every one be contented with his own, as it belongs to him, according to Law:
Now it is so, that if two men or more have sheep in one close, and both will
kill their sheep, each takes what he can get that is not marked, with dogs or
otherwise, whether it be lamb or old sheep, and whether it belong to him or no:
now of this it seems unto us and other good men, that it ought not to be so;
and that nothing unlawful be begun in the Land, we therefore make this
Ordinance thereupon, That if any will take out his lambs and old sheep, that
are unmarked, he must produce two impartial witnesses, that they are his sheep,
and that they know their dam; if he wants such witnesses, let him be as owning
nothing therein.

II.
Now if a man goes into another man's field or close, and drives away his
sheep to his damage, so that it be worth half a mark, he must answer the full
price to him that owneth the close, as he is able, and to the King half a mark
of siver, and restore the sheep as good as they were; and if a man accuses
another that he has been in his close or field, and done him damage, let him
pay the damage if there be witnesses, according to the Sentence of lawful
Judges, or deny it by lawful Oath, which 6 understanding men shall declare
good; and let those to whom the sheep and close belongs be warned and
summoned three days before to the common pound, that is the enclosure wherein
they use to drive their sheep; let him, that does not appear lose his cause,
and be fined to the King two Ortes of silver; now let every man know, that if
any own close and sheep together, they must not have more dogs than honest men
will judge fit; and if no dogs are agreed upon, let them be for their equal
advantage.

III.
Of putting off Sheep that feed unlawfully.
Item, If the fields are situated together, and two men have each their close
or fields, and sheep go from the ones close into the others, being wont
thereunto, and going therein always; and he that owneth the close will not
suffer it, but speaks about it, he that owneth the sheep must take them out,
and carry them all into his own close; but if the same sheep run into the same
close a second and third time, those sheep shall belong no more to him that
owneth them; except he that owneth the close will let out the field, whereupon
the sheep feed for a Gilder; but if he will take no hire, he that owneth the
sheep may proffer to sell him half part of them; and if he will neither buy
them, nor let out his ground, let him that owneth the sheep, take them out at
his convencie within the space of twelve months: but if he that owneth the
sheep will not proffer any hire, nor sell the half flock to him that owneth the
close, let him forfeit his flock: which men should drive into the pound where
they feed, and each hold the pound open according as he has part in the sheep:
If it be done otherwise, let them be fined 3 Ortes of silver to the King, and
damage paid to him that receives damage, according to the Law. If men are
together in a common pound (that is the enclosure, wherein they drive sheep
together) let each one mark his lambs according as the dam belongs to him,
and look how many there be, that have two lambs; and if there be any strange
sheep in that pound, the shepherds must take notice how many have lambs, and
mark the lambs of every one, as many as have lambs and are not gelded; but if
any mark sheep false, let him have his sheep that owneth it, when it is well
known, or the equivalent; for he forfeits nothing, that marketh amiss in the
same pound.

IV.
Of wild sheep.
Item, If men own wild sheep together in one close, and some will make their
sheep ^ame, and others will not; let them choose that will have their sheep
tame, and bid a price to the rest, that will play for them both, and let him
rule his sheep that owneth tame sheep, and if there comes wild amongst them,
let him hinder it, and not let wild sheep come amongst the tame; but if he
slips wild sheep amongst the others tame ones, let him therefore undergo the
Law, and pay the Adversaries fine according to Law, and 3 Ortes of silver to
the King, and then let every one make tame his sheep, which are left in the
close.

V.
If any goes alone in another man's Close.
If any man goes in a close without sending word or warning him, that has
Sheep in the same Close, and marks the Sheep or Lambs of any, putting his mark
upon them that were not marked before, without telling the owner of it; he has
marked in secret: Therefore let him pay to him that owneth according to
sentence, and to the King 3 Ortes of Silver, if it be worth Ortes, but if it be
less, let him be declared a dishonest man. Furthermore, if he marketh Sheep
that were marked before, and puts his mark upon the mark of him that owneth
them, then he is a Thief.

VI.
Of Dogs.
If any man takes along with him in the Fields or Closes any Dog that bites
other men's Sheep, let him give the owner as good Sheep again; but if he biteth
oftener, let him pay as if he had killed it; but if the Dogs, that are consented
to, indamage any Sheep, let the man whom the Dog follows, give as good Sheep
again, and have afterward a good care of his Dog. They are pernicious Dogs
that bite Sheep more then once, and some go out of themselves to kill Sheep;
there ought to be as many sheep in a Close as there has been formerly, except
one can see that the Close can feed more; then let as many be put in as will be
agreed upon, and no more in each Field, neither Sheep nor Kine, then one
knows to be just, and keep them in ones own Close, and not in another man's,
or answer for it according to Law.

VII.
Of Interdiction concerning Sheep.
If a man lets his Sheep Feed or grow in another man's Close or Field, and will
not cease, though he that owneth the close will not suffer it; the owner must
make interdiction thereupon. Whereof the first forbidding must be from St.
Olaus week, till St. Andrews day; and if the Sheep be not then taken out of
forfeiture, the proprietary thereof shall have a third part in the said Sheep.
The second Interdiction is from St. Andrews day till Lent; if the Sheep be not
then taken out of forfeiture, the proprietary of the Close is then to have two
parts in the said Sheep. The third interdiction is from Lent to St. Olaus week;
if the Sheep be not then taken out of forfeiture, let the proptietary of the
Close keep all the Sheep, except there has been great distress, so that he
could not take out his Sheep, though he would, yet in that case the proprietary
of the Close shall be paid for it. That Sheep is close fast where she brings a
Lamb, and continues the Winter over.

VIII.
How one must go into a Close.
If the Closes or Fields are ^lying together, and the ones Sheep go into the
others Close, let him that will go to divide the Fields, warn the other to meet
him, or go together with him, following so together; if the one will not come
or go, let him that warned him, go into his own close, and not in the others;
but if he goes to divide Fields, and in another Close, let him answer the
other in Law for it, as if he had not warned him. But if he has not given him
warning and goes nevertheless, let him answer in Law the other that was at
home, since he does him wrong, and pay all the damage that is done that day,
by reason of his going, as also the adversaries Mulct, and 3 Ortes of Silver to
the King.

IX.
How to tame Sheep.
If any have a Close or Field together, wherein are wild Sheep, and some will
make the Sheep tame, and others will not, let them choose that will tame the
Sheep, and will bargain for his Cattle, and not they that will play for them
both, or let those that will not make tame bear all the damage that can come
thereof, except there has been great calamity.

Therefore we have consented and ordered that the ordinance above written, in
all its points and articles, shall be ratified and coufirmed; forbidding all
and every one to hinder or obstruct in any manner therein, the said Inhabitants
of Feroe, under pain of our displeasure. Given in our Palace of Anderskouff the
24 of February. 1637.

The Reader may take notice of the fault that is found in the date of this
Sheep Ordinance in our 4th. Chapter, there seems also to be a great error in
the 5th. article, where it is said, that he shall be declared a dishonest man,
that marketh Sheep less worth then an Orte. For one would think, according to
the Law of Nature he ought to be a dishonest man, that marketh Sheep worth more
then an Orte; for the greater a fault is, so much the greater ought to be the
punishment; but this error is proceeded from the long kept Sheep Ordinance in
writing, that was put out in Print, without being altered.

Concerning Mulcts or Fines, they are much greater in regard of the worth in
Feroe, then in other Countries or Provinces lying under the Crowns of Denmark
and Norway, the highest Mulct in the law of Denmark being but 40 marks; King
Hagen Hagenson of Norway mitigated his Law and gave away the two parts of these
40 marks; whence it comes that the greatest Mulct, namely, 8 Ones and 13 marks,
in the Law of Norway is but a third part of 40 Marks. A Marks Mulct in Denmark
is expounded in the Danish Law-Glossary for a Rix-mark, but the Honorable Jens
Biclke, in the explication of the Glossery of Norway, counts 8 Ortugs and 13
marks of Silver to be worth 8 Rix Dollars, yet in Feroe one is fined for a mark
of silver, 2 Gilders and 8 Skins, which makes 2 Rix-Dollars, and for 8 Ortugs
16 Skins; that is, 4 Danish marks: so that one gives in Mulct for 8 Ortugs and
13 marks of Silver, 32 Gilders of Feroe, amounting in money to 26 Rix-Dollars
and 4 marks. Neither does any body know whence it comes, that the worth of
those Mulcts is risen so high in Feroe, above what it is in Norway; since they
enjoy a common Law, that has been mitigated by the Supreme Magistrate; and on
the other side there is found no particular ordinance of any King for
augmenting the said Mulcts. Whether this be the just worth of an ancient mark
of silver, I leave to more skilful persons to judge.

II.
Of Merchandise.
One may perceive by the Chronicle of Norway, as is said before in the History
of Trund of Got, that the Inhabitants from the beginning have had Yatchts and
small Barks, wherewith they have themselves transported their Wares into other
places, and there put them off; neither is it long ago, as many old people can
witness, that the Inhabitants had yet Ships wherewith they brought themselves
over their necessaries from other Countries; for which there are yet found
privileges given them by King Frederick, the Second of Glorious Memory; but
those, that had procured them, having no skill in Merchandise, and the
Commonalty not being provided with what they had need of, and no stranger
furnishing the Country with necessary things, the said King Frederick was
graciously pleased to establish and confirm a certain Company, that should
furnish the Country with all Merchandises, and that the Inhabitants should only
trade with the Merchants thereof.

The old people of the land say, that the Hamburgers have first by Privilege
from the King, had their Staple in Feroe. After them the Burgers of Bergen have
had a privileged commerce there; since that time the Privilege thereof was
granted the ancient Company of Island established at Copenhagen, which being
dissolved in the year 1662. his Excellency, the Right Honorable the Lord
Statholder Christopher von Gabell, by virtue of the Authority granted him over
the Country, transported that Commerce to Mr. Jonas Tr^llund, of whom the
traffic has almost ever since depended. And that Commerce might might be the
better improved, and the poor people provided with all necessary things, King
Christian the Fourth of Glorious Memory, was graciously pleased to grant the
Company certain Privileges upon all Merchandises, transported to, and
transported from Island and Feroe, granting them besides the Revenue of Feroe
for a moderate price, namely a load of fish for every Gilder of Feroe, and
besides obliged them to transport all necessaries thither, and reciprocally
forbad the Inhabitants to traffic with strangers. The Priests, and all
Officers under pain of losing their employments, and the Peasants of forfeiting
their houses. And that this Monopoly might not be prejudicial to the
Inhabitants, there was a certain Tax laid upon all Merchandise usually brought
hither, and sold, namely a Tun of Barley for two Gilders, of Malt 3 Gilders, of
Rye 2 Gilders and a half, of Meal 3 Gilders; and in that manner all
Merchandises that are transported hither have their certain price.

And here being no traffic with silver money, but all Trade being Ware for
Ware, there is also a certain price put upon the Commodities of Feroe, as are
Skins, Feathers, Tallow, Train-Oyl, Fish, and Stockings, viz. a Bundle of Skins
consisting of 40, for 2 Gilders a Load of Feathers and fish for a Gilder; a Tun
of Tallow and Butter 10 Gilders; a Tun of Trane-Oyl 6 Gilders; a pair of
Stockings 4 Skins; formerly Wool was sold instead of Stockings, few of them
being made here, though the price of those that were made was 5 Skins. But
fishing having continually failed for 50 years since, the Inhabitants have been
forced to work the wool into stockings, and instead that only some hundred
pairs of stockings were then every year transported out of the Country, there
are now, and carried out yearly above 60000 pairs, when it pleases God to
preserve their sheep, by giving a mild Winter.

The Wares that are either sold or exchanged here are reduced into money of
Feroe, namely Skins and Gilders a Skin is as much as 4 Danish Shillings; so
that a Sheepskin or 4 Marks of fish does cost one skin; a Gilder is as much as
5 Danish Marks, so that 20 Sheepskins, or a load of fish makes a Gilder; a
load is 36 pounds or two Lis pounds and four single pounds; so that though two
single pounds, or 4 Marks make but one skin, and 36 single pounds are really
but eighteen skins, the load nevertheless, according to the old Tax, either in
fish or other wares, that are sold by the Load, is worth a Gilder; and though
the Law of Norway orders that the Ell of Zeland, and the the Tun of
Copenhagen shall be made use of all over Norway, they use here nevertheless
from ancient time, the Ell of Hamborough, and the Tun of Rostock, which by an
old custom is shaken three times. It may be the Germans, who had the first
Privilege of Commerce, have brought these measures into Feroe, where they have
remained ever since.

Besides this, the Inhabitants have a particular greater price of things
amongst themselves, which is called a Mark of Feroe, that is worth 16 Gilders,
or current Dollars. They call it a Mark, because a Mark of ground in Feroe by
the ancient Tax is reckoned for 16 Gilders of Feroe. The Inhabitants pay also
their Rents to his Majesty in the Rent-chamber, according to the Tax aforesaid;
yet his Majesty's Bailiff takes one skin more in the Load of his Majesty's
Revenue, which the late Provincial Judge Jonas Heineson, granted his Brother
Magnus Heineson, who then received and transported away his Majesty's Revenue;
may be, lest he should come short upon the Merchandises; for the great Leakage
there is on Butter and Tallow; whence it is since come into perpetual custom:
and whereas all his Majesty's Tenants have in their houses the Kings Inventory,
consisting principally in sheep and Kine, which is called the Kings Furniture,
they give therefore to his Majesty besides their Rents, a a yearly Revenue;
namely for every sheep a sheepskin, or the worth in Tallow, and for every Cow a
load of Butter for every Mark of ground, where there is no Kine, ten skins in
other Wares; and some Countrymen having 3 or 400 and above of Furniture sheep;
it is too difficult for them to pay all in sheepskins; wherefore they lay down
the half part in skins, and the other half in tallow; and whereas a skin, or 4
Marks of Tallow, are worth a skin and a half, and a Tun of Tallow 10 Gilders;
the Tun of Tallow is taken by the weight, viz. when it weighs 6 loads and 2
Bismar-pounds; which weight a Tun of Butter ought also to weigh, since likewise
it is worth 10 Gilders of Feroe.

III.
Of providing for the Poor.
Besides the portion which poor, indigent, old, and helpless men have of the 4
th part of Tithes, every one in his place; the able Inhabitants assist them
according to their power: but besides these, here are also found poor leprous
men, with whom one cannot converse, by reason that sickness is infectious;
wherefore deceased Christian Kings have founded a particular place called Arge,
near Thors haven, whereunto belongs 4 Marks of ground, to feed their Cat^le
upon, and besides have graciously perpetuated 100 Gilders of Feroe that are
paid by his Majesty's Bailiff. The infected are brought and kept there, both by
the said Annuity of the King, as also by what the Inhabitants, out of Charity,
give thereunto; as also what can be brought in by their particular diligence;
wherewith they are now so plentifully maintained, that almost as many may be
entertained there, as are infected; whereas before there were yearly but 12
persons admitted therein.

The word of God is Preached unto them, and the Sacraments administered by the
Parish Priest of Thors haven, when they send him word, they have their own
inspector, that takes care for the Tilling of the Manor, provides the sick
what they have need of, and travels yearly through the Land, to gather for the
Hospital what charitable people do freely give the poor. His Sallary to
maintain himself and his servants, is the third part of the Kings annuity, and
what else is gathered round about in the Country.

As for Leprosy it self, I would not omit for the Readers sake, to mention
something of its nature.

Physicians write, that there are three so its of Leprosies, namely, Tyri^,
from the Serpent Tyr^^: In this Leprosy the Patients skin is soft, and
sometimes falls off in shells, and they have many spots and white Wartes
thereon. The second is called Alopesia, by reason the hairs fall off, as those
of a Fox; he that is infected with this Leprosy has a red face, and his Beard
and Eyebrows fall off.

The third sort is called Elephantia^^^, from the Elephant, to whom they become
like on their skin, the body and face of him that is infected with this Disease
is full of knobs. The Leprosy wherewith they are troubled in this Country, is
usually Elephantiasis; for the face and limbs of almost all the infected are
full of blew knobs, that break sometimes out, as Boyls, whereby they look very
deformed in the face; being besides, all Hoarse and speaking through their
Noses, the sickness takes them most in the Spring and in Autumn, and then many
of them dye thereof. I find the cause of this Leprosy to be the air and diet;
for as we said above, here is usually a pretty cold and moist air, which
usually causes the Scurvy to those that lead a solitary life, and this has a
great affinity with Leprofy. Besides the meat of all, specially of the poorer
sort, is half rotten flesh or fish all their nourishment in Summer being
likewise fresh fish and sweet Milk, without any Salt; wherefore he that is not
of a strong and good complexion, may easily have his blood corrupted, the
sickness gnawing then it self throught he body, before it breaks out, and
when any one is so infected he may easily give it to another, that is of the
same complexion with the sick. Now that Disease acting a great while in a man,
before it breaks out, it happens that many that think they be clean on both
sides, do marry together; and yet afterward the one is found to be infected.
God and nature deals wonderfully with such people in their marriage, for
amongst the children they beget, some clean and some unclean. I have 3 examples
in my Parish of Women that have been unclean, and have brought forth many
Children, whereof most are married, none of them being yet found to be unclean;
wherefore the Inhabitants take but little care in their woing, whether their
Parents have been clean or no. I have also an example, that the Father has
been unclean, and yet the Children healthful. It has also been taken notice of,
that two living together in Marriage, though the one be found infected, they
live together as before, as long as one does but murmur of it, till the
Magistrate does separate them, and yet the sound remains uninfected, whereas
another is often taken with the Disease by a very little conversation. Here are
examples yet before our eyes, that poor Cripples, clean but helpless, have been
put among the sick in the Hospital, eat with them, converse daily with them,
and are not infected in the whole time of their lives; what is this? but that
God confirms the truth of his word, taking pleasure in them that live in a just
Wedlock, and wander in Lawful ways, putting their hopes in him, that neither
fire nor Water, contagious disease, nor dangerous Pestilence shall hurt them.

CHAP. VII.
Of Religion.
And first of Teachers.
SOmething above 100 years after Feroe was inhabited with people, it pleased
God out of his Grace (according to his Divine Providence and Promise, in the
66th. of Isaiah, I will send some of them that are delivered to the Heathens a
long the Sea, and far out to the Islands, where none has heard of me, nor seen
my glory, etc.) to settle his Domicil, and build his Tabernacle here in Feroe.
For King Oluff Trygeson, in the fourth year of his Reign, and in the 1000 year
of Grace, when the word of God was Preached in Denmark, did send Sigismund
Brosteson, a man of Fero^, (of whom is said before, that the King caused him to
be Baptized) to Feroe who Baptized all the people there.

Though the Inhabitants of Feroe did not, after the Death of Sigismund, break
the contract of their Baptism with Christ, as is perceived and concluded by
the History of King Olaus the Holy, who not only acquired friends in Feroe, but
also called them to him, and made them take their oath which he had not done,
if they had not confessed themselves to be Christians, having continual work
with those of Island that came to him to be converted to the Christian Faith,
as the Chronicle of Norway plainly teaches. Nevertheless one may well perceive
that the beginnings of Religion were very mean, the Inhabitants in a long time
refusing to acknowledge the Kings of Norway for their Sovereigns. Whence we
find also, that it was long before they got any Bishops in the Country: for
Bishop Sarquir, that is the fifth in the Catalogue of Bishops, which Mr. Peter
Clauson reckons, lived 200 years after Sigismund Bresteson; for he was Bishop
in the time of King Hagen Hagenson, in the year 1223. as is said before in the
4th. chapter. Wherefore, if the Preaching of the Gospel had continued without
interruption, there would needs have been more then four Bishops in two ages,
though there may be an error in the Catalogue, since we find that there has
been a Bishop in Feroe, in the time of King Magnus Erlingson, in the year 1277.
whose name was Roar, by whom King Suere was brought up, whose name, though the
most renowned amongst them is left out of the Bishops Catalogue; it might
therefore more probably be, that some of their names are left out, of whom we
find nothing in History; yet howsoever it be, all beginnings being difficult,
specially the light of the word being obstructed by the Prince of darkness, it
may very well have been so in matters of Religion, here in Feroe, till at last
there came Bishops into the Country, but we cannot find when that was; possible
in King Sigurd the Hierosolumites time, in the age 1100. when the Kings of
Norway were well settled, wherewith the Catalogue of Bishops does best agree.

When the said Bishops came first higher, they had their residence at Kircke
boe in Stremoe, where there has been formerly many stone buildings that are
now ruined, there only remaining a stone house with a great Parlour of Timber,
built after the ancient fashion.

The Church which they had then in that place, is yet standing, and is made use
of: it is built of freestone, but of a very poor and low structure. There
stands besides, another new Church-wall, which one of the last Bishops called
Hilarious did build, it is a curious Edifice of even stone, and the frames of
the Windows are of Stone, purposely cut for that use. The Wall is yet in some
manner unhurt, and one might yet build a Church of it, if the hearers would not
spare their pains.

The Bishops in those days here as in other places, have had great revenues of
the Country, but the Priests have fared very meanly; It is not certainly known
how many Bishops have been in Feroe: Mr. Peter Clauson in his Description of
Norway, reckons up the following, Sudmunds, Mathias, Kroll, Suein or Swerke,
Peter, Gauti, Serquir, Erland or Ellendar, Laden, Sigvar, Giaffvard, Hanard;
besides these, there is found Bishop Roar in the History of King Suerre, who it
seems should be the third in order, and besides the said Bishop Hilarious, that
built the new Church wall. Arrild Huitfield in the Chronicle of King Frederick
the I. in the year 1532. writes, that Amund Oluffson was chosen Bishop of
Feroe, being a Canon of Bergen, and gave the King 1000 Gilders of Feroe, for
his confirmation; for Kings took then that pretended due, which the Popes of
Rome received of Bishops pro pallio, or the Investiture, having at last better
discovered the covetousness of the Pope. This Amund was the last Roman
Catholic Bishop of Feroe, King Fred^rick dying the year after, his Son
Christian the III. as soon as he was settled in his Kingdom, removed all his
Lord Bishops in all his Kingdoms and Provinces. Since which time here has been
but one Evangelical Bishop, called Mr. Jens Riber, that lived here during some
years, till at last he was several times robbed by French Pirates, and being an
ancient man, he returned from hence to Copenhagen, from whence he was sent to
Stawanger in Norway, and was there Bishop in the year 1556. after whom his
Majesty of happy Memory, King Christian the third Ordained that there should
always be a Provost over the Churches there, who was under the Bishops of
Bergen, as long as the Trade of Feroe was established there; afterward he was
subjected to the Bishop of Copenhagen, when the Comerce of Feroe was removed
from Bergen to the Burghers of that City; which the convenience for traveling
by Sea has been the cause of. His Majesty has been Graciously pleased to
grant a Manor in Andes^^rd in Osteroe called Gaard Hodcle to the said place of
Provost; the first whereof was Mr. Heine Haugregster, as we have said above in
the History of Magnus Heineson; after whom was Provost Mr. Oiden in Osteroe,
Mr. Toll Priest of Feroe in Osteroe, Mr. Christian Marsing Parish Priest of
Thors haven, Mr. Jens Skrwe Parish Priest of Sundoe, Mr. John Rasmuss^n Feroe,
Parish Priest of Thors-haven, Mr. John Gabrielson Milens Feroe, Parish priest
of Norderoe.

Besides this, his Majesty did divide all the Congregations of Feroe in seven
Church-Corporations, and therewith gave every Priest a free house, where they
do reside till this day. The said Church-Corporations are something large,
there being in each of them many, that is to say, 4, 5, 6, or 7, Parish
Churches.

The Church Corporation of Norderoe. Wederoe is the Chief Church where the
Priest lives, his annexed Churches are six, viz. The Churches lie remote from
the Priest, Leagues. 1. Fugloe. 1 2. Suinoe. 1 and half 3. Bordoe. 3 4. Kunoe.
2 and half 5. Megledal. 1 and half 6. Hasum. 3 and half.

Osteroes Corporation. The Parish of Ness is the chief, where the Priest lives.

The Annexed Churches are six, viz.
The Churches lie remote from the Priest, Leagues 1. Siow half 2. Got 1 and h
alf 3. Fugle-fiord 2 4. Ande-fiord 2 and half 5. Funding 3 and half 6. Eide. 4
and half

Stromoe on the South-east end is, Thors haven, where the Chief Church is, and
the Priest lives. The Annexed Churches are three, viz.
Remote from the Priests, Leagues 1. Nolsoe 3 quar. 2. Kalback 4 quar. 3.
Kirk^boe 1

Stromoe, on the North-west end is Kolde-siord, the chief Church where the
Priest has his habitation. The annexed Churches are four viz.
Remote from the Priest, Leagues 1 Quid^vyg 1 2 Westmanshaven 2 3 Qualvyg 1 4
Tiornoeyg 3

Wagoe. The Church of Midvaag is the chief Church where the Priest lives. The
annexed Churches are four.
Remote from the Priest, Leagues 1 Sandevag 1 quarter 2 Sydervaaaeg 3 quarters
3 Boe 1 and a quart. 4 Myggeness. 3

Sandoe. Sand-Church is the principal Church where the Priest lives. The
annexed Churches are four, viz.
Remote from the Priest, Leagues 1 Skaalevyg 1 and half 2 Husevyg 1 and half 3
Skuoe 1 and half 4 Store-Diemen 1 and half

Suderoe. Qualboe-Church is the principal Church, where the Priest keeps
house. The annexed Churches are five, viz.
Remote from the Priest, Leagues 1 Frodeby 1 and half 2 Porcker 2 and half 3
Vaag 3 and half 4 Sumboe 4 5 Famoien 1 and half

Thus there is in Feroe 39 Parish-Churches; the said Churches are but little
according to the meanness of the Congregations; they are built with deals, and
without covered with stones: except the Church of Thors haven, which is pretty
great, being built of whole beams, with a steeple thereby, whereunto King
Christian the Fourth of happy Memory, gave Timber, and caused it to be built in
the year 1609. And the Congregations lying so wide scattered from each other,
the Priests have a great deal of pains, and undergo great dangers in Winter in
visiting them often; besides, some lie a great way from their houses, and the
Churches that are far remote on the little Islands cannot always be attended,
because of storm and bad weather. And when one comes there, the Service of God
must be regulated according to the Tides; which if neglected one must tarry
there six hours longer, and in the mean time the wind may change; so that storm
and bad weather keeps one there a whole fortnight. When the Priest will visit
great Dimen, they must draw him up, and let him down with a rope: neither can
he come to them but in the Summer. They do not visit their Congregations every
Sunday, but every 5th, 6th, or 7th week, as the season of the year will permit.

The Priests Revenue is this, They have of every one of their hearers, that
receives the Sacrament, one skin, that is four Danish shillings, instead for
their offering, the three great Feasts of the year; which may ameunt to the sum
of thirty Gilders; in some placestwenty Gilders, or less. 2ly they have for
Tithes, the 4th part of Corn, wool, butter and fish. In the Southern Inlets
where the Land is most fruitful, their Tithes may amount in Corn to eight or
ten tuns. In the North Inlets to four or six Tuns. In the Northern Inlets, they
have in the greatest Corporations 10 or fifteen Loads of washed wool, in the
lesser Corporations, 4, 6, or 8 Loads, according as God makes sheep prosper;
and thus some years more, and some years less. In the Northern Inlets, namely
in Sandoe and Suderoe, where sheeps wool is short, and of several colors, they
get little or no Tithes thereof. They have a Tun, or something more of butter,
in the best Parishes, and 10 or 30 Loads of fish; some years very little,
according as God blesses their fishing, though it be there now very little
esteemed. The Priests have ever from the beginning had a house, which his
Majesty was pleased to givet hem; whereof if the rent were to be paid, it would
amount according to the Book of Rents, to a matter of 20 Gilders.

Fishing having now failed this many years, so that the Priests could hardly
subsist, and there being no means to assist Priests Widows, that did not marry
the Successor; his Majesty King Christian the Fourth (wherefore the Lord
reward him cternally) upon their humble Petition, graciously granted every
Priest of this Country yet another free house, namely in the year 1632, the 23
th of April; the Revenue whereof may amount to 20 Gilders: by which Grant the
condition of Priests is pretty well bettered. According to the premises the
Revenue of a Priest put together, in the best Corporation may amount to a great
100 of Gilders; where with noue can maintain himself and his wife and Children;
but, as in Denmark the Priests have pretty good Revenue of their own tillage,
in their free houses; likewise here home bred sheep and kine do continually
feed the Family, but wool must contribute most to houskeeping, the best and
clearest money proceeding from thence. Wherefore a Priest in Feroe, when his
duty does not take him up, must not only be a good Husbandman, but also a good
Tradesman, that is, a Hose-knitter; for he, and his wife, must diligently look
to it that his people do spin and knit stockings, that may be merchants ware;
which if they do not, they fall to ruin. And that Houskeeping requiring many
people, one must have at least 5 or 6 Serving. men, and as many Maids for
working the wool, and doing other services of the house; which great
Houskeeping does very much eat up it self. Besides, a Priest here does not know
how to provide for his Sons, but must needs keep them in other places to learn
something wherewith to get their living in time, which puts them to pretty
great expenses. Wherefore, that they may satisfy every body honestly and well,
they farm also some of other men's grounds, as they find most convenient;
specially that field, which lies in their free close, that they may enjoy their
own in liberty for themselves; a common enclosure producing usually Quarrels in
that Country.

That we are able thus to live, we have specially to thank most humbly, after
God, first those deceased Godly Kings, that have granted us those Privileges;
the Lord let their Souls be bound in the bundle of the living, and be their
precious reward in the Resurrection of the Just. Secondly our most Gracious
Sovereign now reigning, King Christian the Fifth, who not only lets us enjoy
the same free houses, but also out of his innate mildness, has proffered us
other favorable Graces. The great King of Heaven give peace unto him, with a
long peaceable and happy reign* the Lord give him victory over his enemies, and
cover him under the shadow of his wings, let no evil come near his domicil, let
his holy Angels ever pitch their tents about him whithersoever he goes,
satiate him, Lord, with a long life, and let him ever see thy salvation.

And although the Parishioners (which yet ought not to be) govern themselves
according to the ancient Ordinance of Christianity, and do not after the
Church-ordinance of Denmark, after the three great Holy Days of the year,
except in Thors-haven, (which I cannot here omit) but will record to the
eternal praise of my Parishioners, who for some years ago in the time of my
Predecessor, without being required, have willingly begun to offer on the said
three principal Holy Days of the year; which they have not only continued in my
time, but also augmented it, both those able strangers that reside here, as
also the poor native Parishioners, God grant them and all pious Hearers, that
they may offer unto God their hearts as a living, holy, and pleasant sacrifice;
the Lord receive their prayers as a perfume, and the lifting up of their hands
as an evening offering; I say, although they offer not, we seek not our right
or power therein, but rather, according to the Example of St. Paul, maintain
our selves by our own tillage of what his Majesty has granted us; that we may
not seem to seek more the Corinthians means, than the Corinthians.

But there being but little wool in the South Inlets, in the Corporations of
Sandoe and Suderoe, and no Tithes thereof being paid, the Priests cannot
maintain themselves with their calling alone; though they as well as others,
have a Tenement of augmentation, except fishing be more abundant.

As the Christian Magistrate has provided for the office of Priesthood here,
so God has furnished these remote Islands with able Preachers, who teach the
pure word of God, according to the true Confession of Ausbourgh; and though
they cannot, as in other places constantly visit their Congregations, they
perform nevertheless the service of God every Sunday and day of Prayer, in the
principal Parish. In the mean time they oblige their hearers to have their
meetings in houses on Holydays, and to read an Homily, and sing Psalms to the
Praise of God: obliging also Parents to instruct their Children, since one
cannot inform them every Sunday, which if they are not able to do they are
admonished to appoint one in every Parish, that reads best, to teach them for
a reasonable sallary, and besides the Provosts General examining in his
Visitation, every one hears his own, according as time and opportunity will
permit.

They do not only observe all Saboths, Holydays, and new Moons, Prayer days, as
in other places; but also twice a year three certain general days of Prayer,
namely 3 days in the Week of the Ascension of Christ, from the Sunday to the
Ascension, and 3 days in Michaelmas week. The 3 days in the week of the
Ascension were established 469 years after the birth of Christ, by Manertus
Claudius Bishop of Vienne in France: by reason that during his time in the
Bishopric, there happened not only a great deal of terrible Thunder and
Lightning, with fearful Earthquakes, but Wolves also did run about, and not
only tore Cattle to pieces in the Field, but ran into Towns, and did the like
with men. Wherefore, to appease Gods anger, he ordained these three Prayer days
to be kept in all his Bishopric; which Godly Ordinance the other Christians
elsewhere took up of themselves, whereof read Mantuanus lib. 4. Fastorum. And
they were afterward confirmed and ordered to be kept through all Christendom
by Pope Leo the III. in the time of the Emperor Charlemain, in the year 816.

The 3 Prayer days about Michaelmas, are also established by the Popes of Rome,
who have yet ordered more Litanies, but by which of them it was done, I could
not perceive by their acts, Religion being resormed in Feroe, the Teachers and
Hearers have out of Godly intention, kept these 2 sorts of days of Prayer,
doubtless to the end, that in the Spring they might pray to God for his
blessings upon the Land, with good Fishing, increase of Corn, and augmentation
of Cattle; and in the Autumn thank God for his blessings and benefits; which
custom being pious, it is continued to this day. The Lord accept of all to the
Glory of his Name.

Of the Hearers,
THough the Popish Doctrine be much mixed with humane Superstition and
Figments, whereby the pure word of God has been much obscured, and the simple
not able to understand the true ground of their Salvation, which does consist
in Christ alone; and thereby did put their trust and hope in their own and dead
Saints good works; nevertheless I find that merciful God h^th preserved this
poor people in the midst of Popish darkness, with the true knowledge of their
Salvation, though some part may have been spoiled with old errors and
Superstitious Injunctions, as the rem^an^s thereof do witness in some. But that
they have kept the right ground of their Salvation, by an uncorrupted Faith in
Jesus Christ, shows a very ancient Spiritual Psalm, which they in their
ancient language, call Kiomer, wherein are contained the four States of
Mankind, namely, their Perfection, Corruption, Regeneration, and perfect
Redemption to eternal Life, Wherein is also comprehended the Birth, Passion,
and Death of Christ. It seems to have been made in Island, there being many
words of that Language in it; Loimer is as much in Danish, as Light or
Splendor, for the Suns beams are yet called in the language of Feroe, the Liom
of the Sun. Wherefore the word of God being compared in the Scripture to a
light, splendor, or shining, they have called the said Psalm Liomer, as the
best splendor and light of Gods word they had; I have enquired after it, but
what I could gather thereof is very imperfect. This I must blame in our people
of Feroe, that almost all of them know the most part of the old Giants Ballads;
not only those that are Printed in the Danish Book of Ballads, but also many
more of the Champions of Norway, that may be are forgotten elsewhere, here in
fresh Memory, being usually Sung in their Dances. But they have so absolutely
forgotten that gracious and useful Song of the true Champion of Israel Jesus
Christ, that I could not, amongst many of them find one person that knew it
wholly. If our Countrymen of Feroe had as carefully preserved it, as they have
kept their Giants Ballads; they had not been much to blame for the last; for
the praise of our Ancestors ought neither to be put in oblivion, though it may
be the number of new Psalms has brought this in contempt and driven it into
the Land of forgetfulness. Let us therefore hear what good they know, and have
(...) instead thereof. It having (...) God to kindle a great light for these
Inhabitants, by the true Exposition of the Gospel, they have since so prospered
in the knowledge of the true God, and of their Salvation, that one may truly
affirm, the like in the knowledge of Religion, are not found in Denmark. For
having so seldom the convenience to hear the Word of God by the voice of their
Teachers, the hearers do exercise themselves in reading, having their Danish
Postills, where, in the absence of their Priests, they read the Explication of
the Gospel: having besides other spiritual Books, as well as that of the holy
Scriptures, which they read diligently; whence they are so well grounded in the
word of God, that they know in good manner how to confer with their teachers in
their meetings about several points of Religion, and other passages that are
remarkable in the Word of God. For all their household sitting for the most
part at home in (...) they exercise themselves cont^^ually in Singing of
Psalms; so that they know more of them without Book, then can here be credibly
related; Wherefore, when the Congregation does me^t with the Priest in the
Church to serve God, they have no need of a Reader to direct their singing; but
the Priest begins, and all the hearers sing of themselves after him, how
difficult soever the Psalm may be; for they not only sing without book, but
almost all the men have their Psalm books with them, and ancient hearers, being
so well informed, teach also their children; whereunto they are continually
admonished by their Priests, and the Provost in their Visitations. Wherefore
many of the young ones that are not above 10 or 12 years old, know not only the
Catechism of Luther with its plain explication, but also Doctor Jasper
Brockmans Sentences, collected out of the Holy Scriptures, upon every article
of Religion.

So that this poor people is richly filled with all sort of wisdom and
intelligence in the Lord: God grant them all to dispose their lives according
to his true fear; least they do bring upon themselves a greater punishment;
that Servant that knows the will of his Master, and does it not being worthy of
many stripes.

Of the School.
WHen the Roman Catholic Bishops lived in their house of Kirkeboe, they had
their Monks with them, that were learned in the word of God; and in the Latin
Tongue, according to the rudeness of that age, whom they ordained Priests in
the Country, as is seen by the aforesaid History of King Suerre. Since the
Reformation, the Bishopric being reduced to a Provostship, the abovementioned
pious King, Christian the III. ordered, that the Parish Priest of Thors-haven
should also be Schoolmaster there, and inform such youths as were put to
School, where his said Majesty appointing 100 Gilders of Feroe to be paid the
Schoolmaster by his Majesty's Bailiff of Feroe; whereof the Schoolmaster
takes 70 Gilders for his Sallary, the rest being employed to the benefit of the
School, and Scholars. Besides which the Scholars of Feroe are privileged,
when they become Students, to have their diet in the Royal University of
Copenhagen, but that employment having been hither to a great but then to the
Priest there, there is little or no fruit proceeded of it in a long time, only
such youths as were sent to School, have been informed in their first elements,
that there might not grow a general barbarism in the Country; which could
hardly be otherwise, a Teacher having enough to do with his Priesthood, if he
will attend it as he ought. Besides, there are often other hindrances in one
manner or other; and finally a man grows old, weary and weak; by reason of
which the School must at last lie vacant; neither can the School-mastership be
taken from the Priest* his benefice being very meau in it self, except the
Supreme Magistrate would be graciously pleased to appoint the place something
else instead thereof. Nevertheless there are some of the Natives, though few in
so long time, that have been sent from that School to other places, to be
further informed, who at last have been Priests in Feroe; namely, the
following, Mr. David in Quivig. Mr. Paul Rasmusson in Suderoe, Mr. Gabriel
Tolleson in Osteroe, Mr. John Gabrielson Mittens in Norderoe, Mr. John
Rassmusson in Thors haven, Mr. Jonas Michelson in Koldefiord. Which though it
had not been, yet the School has done this profit, that those persons who have
gone to School, and have learned to read and write, are spread about in the
Country, of whom many of the Inhabitants have learned to read in Books, and
others a little to write, whereby most part of the men of the Country can read
in books.

But the Inhabitants being here so poor, that they are not able to keep their
Children to School, whereupon they usually excuse themselves. My late
Predecessor, Mr. John Rasmusson, represented most humbly their indigency to his
Majesty of Glorious Memory; King Christian the IV. petitioning for some
maintenance for these poor Scholars; which his said Majesty received
graciously, and by his Royal Liberality in the year 1647, the 27 of March, gave
in perpetuity for the maintenance of poor and indigent Scholiars in Feroe, a
Vicarage then vacant in Roeskilde, called, Bonaaltar is Wilhelmi, with all the
Rents and Revenues of it, in such manner, that the Bishop of Zealand shall have
the inspection and surveigh of the said Vicarage, that all things be regulated
according to the Statutes of the Chapter, and the certain and uncertain revenue
thereof be yearly paid, and delivered in time to the Bailiff of the Country,
who is to take care that it be presently put in the hands of the Schoolmaster,
to be afterward by his and the Eldest Districts man's consent, equally
distributed and divided as they Intend to answer for it, so that every Scholar
that has need of it, and has wit and inclination to learning, as far as the
said revenue can reach, may receive about the sum of 10 current Dollars, or 10
Gilders of Feroe yearly; and the Bishop is to cause the said Schoolmaster to
give him an account how this money is given out, and as far as is possible, look
that those that have means themselves do not enjoy this money, least the poor
should suffer need by missing it, in regard it has been graciously appointed
by his Royal Majesty out of a Godly and Charitable intention for the relief of
the poor only. Besides this, his said Majesty gave the same year to the School
of Feroe, 50 Rix Dollars in Specie, and the right Honorable the Lord Nicholas
Trolle, of Trolholme, then Councellor of State in Denmark Governor of Roskill,
and Vice Admiral of the Kingdom, likewise gave of his own Liberality 50 Rix
Dollars in Specie, and ordered that the said Capital of 100 Rix-Dollars should
be left upon interest to the Provost of Feroe, that should be inspector of the
School, one after another; and thereof should be paid to poor Schol ars
maintenance yearly, at Easter the rent, viz 6 Rix Dollars. They engaging their
year of Grace for the Capital rent, and other damage that it might incuire; for
which 200 Rix Dollars Mr. John Gabrielson Mittens, for two years since bought
two Fields in Suderoe, that the yearly revenue of the School might be received
without troubling the Provost, he not being able to make use of the money, and
it not being possible t^ employ them otherwise in that Country.

Since that School has been so endowed by the Kings Munificiency, (wherefore
the Merciful God be unto his Majesty as well as his said Excellency (both dead
in the Lord and in good Memory with men) a great reward eternally) there has
been a pretty conflux thither, whereof is come no littel fruit, for in the year
1660, in my time three Scholars were dismissed with Testimonies to the
University of Copenhagen, where they were approved and admitted. There were
afterward several persons, something grounded in Humanities, sent to
Copenhagen also, where they obtained honestum locum, and there are now thence
as many Learned Persons of Feroe, as could supply all the callings thereof,
four of them being alteady Priests in that Country; but because (it would be
tedious to expect till all those callings were vacant, that they might be
provided with their own Countrymen, some do seek preferment in Denmark,
wherefore his Majesty of Glorious Memory, King Frederick the Third, preferred
two of those that were sent from that School to the holy office of Priest,
namely, Mr. John Hanson Chaplain in Helsingor, and Mr. Thomas Jacobson, Parish
Priest of St. Peter's Church in Borringholme, which are the first persons of
Feroe that have been advanced to any Priests office in Denmark; so that more
Prophets could yet come from that poor Galilaea, if their Parents would
sanctify them to the Lord from their youth.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Specters and Illusions of Satan in Feroe.
THough the Hearers are here free from false Doctrine and Heresy, yet Satan
does not omit to trouble them in other manners, that he might overcome them.
There are many examples related by people that live yet, how he has deluded
their Parents in the darkness of Popery; which we will altogether pass by as a
Fable (though much of it may be true) and here only insert how the said common
enemy has behaved himself toward many persons, since the pure light of the
Gospel does shine amongst us, in deluding, seducing and leading them out of the
right path of Gods word; for we have here many Examples how he has taken some
away, and carried away some, restoring them afterward, though weakened in their
understanding; whereof I will only mention some certain Histories, that are yet
in the memory of man, and some others that have happened whilst I was my self
at Feroe.

I had not a mind to meddle with that matter, it being of a very arcane and
hidden nature, that can scarce or not at all be comprehended by a mortal man,
but there being many of a weak faith that will not believe there are such
Apparitions in nature: though many wise and learned men maintain it in their
writings, and specially Ludovicus Lavaterus, a famous Divine, in a particular
Treatise de Spectris* and is so generally known in Feroe, that almost every
where in the Country, where they have read no Books thereof, nor heard any
relation from other places, know it so perfectly by the open works and
apparitions of Satan, that they are in no doubt at all of it: yea, that unquiet
spirit has lately played a trick in my Congregation, and in the whole Country,
whereby he gave me enough to do, though he was forced with shame, by the virtue
of God to creep away and retire into his darkness; therefore in spite of him,
to the destruction of his Kingdom, to strengthen the believers, and convince
unbelievers, I have made bold to insert here, and put forth the following true
Histories and matters of fact.

It happened about fifty years ago, or above, that there lived a Tenant called
Simon Simonson in the ancient Bishop-house of Kirkeloe, whereunto belongs a
little Island under Sandoe, called Hode or Troldboffred, whereupon Oxen feed
Winter and Summer. There was found on the said Island an Ox, which did not
belong to the Farmer, nor to any man of the Country, wherefore the Bailiff did
chailenge the propriety of it in the Kings name, and commanded the Farmer to
bring him the said Ox, which he prepared todo, having with all his folks a
great deal of pains before they could overcome it, and lay it bound in the
Boat; but being departed in good weather from the Is^and, he was with all his
folks and the Ox carried away, the Boat coming back safe and whole, with all
the Oars to land, so that there was no sign at all the people could be perished
in other manner. Besides the Countryman had taken with him in the Boat three
of his own Oxen, that swam in the Sea near the Boat, and were taken up. This
happened, as is known to all understanding old people in the year 1617.

It arrived for a short while ago, namely in the year 1665. that the Tenants
Daughter of Froldenesse Gaard, in Kalsoe of Norderoe, a marriageable maid, went
in the evening from her work, and was lost, so that she was never found since.
Neither is there any likelihood she should be perished, the Sea being far from
the house, and she never having had any sad thoughts, wherefore she should undo
her self.

Our Danish Historian, Saxo Grammatticus, is much blamed by Foreign Writers, for
having, amongst other things, inserted in his History such incongruous
accidents with reason; specially how King Hading was led away under the earth
by a spirit in the figure of a woman, and yet came back again. It may also be
that the ingenious Reader will blame me, as one that fills this Treatise with
Fictions and Fables; but I know certainly that what I write did happen so,
though we cannot comprehend it by reason. It was not so strange, that such
happened in the darkness of Paganism, Satan being then powerful amongst
unbelievers, as it is wonderful it should now come to pass God having implanted
his true faith in the heart of the Children of men, wherewith they might
extinguish the eburning dart of Satan. But these Histories being useful, partly
by their remembrance to draw men from the security of fin, incite them to
continual prayer and invocation; partly, that one may not so easily reject the
Relations and Writings of the Ancient, though they do not* agree with these
times; I will therefore proceed to relate some Examples of those that have been
carried away, and are returned, as King Hading; joining thereunto my poor
meaning and explication; desiring never theless the courteous Reader to take,
all in the best meaning, and not judge or condemn before he understands it
perfectly.

It happened for a good while since, when the Burgers of Bergen had the
commerce of Feroe, that there was a man in this Country in Servaag called Jonas
Soideman, who was kept by spirits in a mountain during the space of seven
years, and at last came out; but lived afterward in great distress and fear,
lest they should again take him away; wherefore people were obliged to watch
over him in the night, and at last, for fear of that, he returned from hence to
Bergen in Norway.

Whilst Mr. Taalle was Priest in Osteroe, it happened that one of his Hearers
was carried away, and though returned again; at last the said young man being
to be married, and every thing prepared, and the Priest being arrived the
Saturday before at the Parish, the Bridegroom was carried away; wherefore they
sent folks to look after him, but he could not be found; the Priest desired his
friends to have good courage, and that he would come again; which he did at
last, and related, that the spirit that led him away was in the shape of a most
beautiful woman, and very richly clothed, who desired him to forsake her whom
he was now to marry, and consider how ugly his Mistress was in comparison of
her, and what fine apparel she had; he said also, that he saw the men that
sought after him, and that they went close by him, but could not see him; and
that he heard their calling, and yet could not answer them: but that, when he
would not be persuaded, he was again left at liberty.

Mr. Erasmus Ganting Parish Priest in Waagoe, whose Son Mr. John Erasmussan was
my Predecessor in Thorshaven, his daughter called Christine, being young, went
once in Summer, in the absence of her Father, to play in the fields with her
other young Brothers and Sisters; and as they were playing, there came to them
a Duck running in the grass, fluttering with her wings, and the Children
running after the Duck, this Girl ran before them, and coming behind a house
after the Duck, they saw her no more, and knew not what became of her.
Whereupon her father being come home, and hearing this, was very much troubled,
and seeking after the child, but could find her no where. At last he sought the
assistance of God by prayers, and invocation, and going once into the field;
did seek as far as he could; and it being eight days after her loss, he found
her, unhurt, and warm, sleeping and wrapped with her head-cloth about her head,
lying on a high rock above a hundred fathoms high, just at the brink of it. He
took her so home along with him, but the child could relate nothing of the
business; saying that a great man carried her away, whom she thought had been
her Father. When she came to years she was of a weak understanding, and was
nevertheless married in the Country, having many children: she died a few years
since, her Mother and three sisters being yet living.

For thirty years since, it happened, that a woman of Westmans-haven in
Stremoe, was carried away, and by common prayers in the congregation, was found
again on the eighth day, but dead and yet warm, lying in the amidst of a high
way.

In the year 1668, the second of August, Domin. 2. Trinit. the daughter of
Olluff Hanson, of Velberstat, was mist on the way, as she was returning from
Church, having the same day received the Sacrament of me, whereupon in the
evening, as well as two days after, they sought for her every where but could
not find her; at last her father complained unto me, and the next Sunday, being
the 9th of August, in the Congregation of Kalbach, which I then visited, I
earnestly admonished them to fall down with me before God, for the deliverance
of that poor creature. The Lord also heard our prayers and intercession, for
the next day at three a clock in the afternoon, she was found by some
Milk-maids in the next Hamlet to Volberstat, namely ^uderdal, lying between two
stones at the higher part of the close, having her cloth wrapped abaut her head,
she would speak to no body that went by, neither durst the Milk-maids speak to
her, but went and discovered it to the man of the house; who went and spoke to
her, desiring her to rise; which she did then, first speaking to him; and the
man asking her how she was come thither, she showed him beyond them a pretty
high clift, whence she had glided; down though the man assures, it was
impossible for any man to come down from thence without hurt; besides, her
linen and clothes were as clean, and her shoes as new, as the day she was
missed, though there had been during some days and nights great storms and
rainy weather: neither did she according to her own confession, eat any thing
during these nine days, and yet being come home, was well disposed to receive
and digest whatsoever meat they gave her. I have endeavored by all means to
make her confess (...) whole business unto me, but in vain* for she said
always, that she lost her self in the mountain; which cannot be, the ground
lying high, and being but a League broad; from the top whereof one may see the
Sea on both sides, whereby one may easily find the r ght way, and from Kirkeboe
to Velberstat the way is along the Seaside, and over the high mountain, so
that a Beast cannot lose it self, much less a reasonable creature, except one
does it put posely; and yet it would be great labor to climb up that great
mountain; but I have found also by other Examples, that would be too prolix to
insert, that most of such people are not only seduced in their bodies, but also
in their minds; so that they will by no means discover that business; and there
are others that do not know well themselves how it was; nevertheless, if there
has been a natural wandering by the fancy of that simple Creature, as the
Reader will possibly imagine: I doubt whether the party could live nine days,
without the least hurt or damage of nature: Hippocrates telling us, (...), That
is, a man cannot live above seven days without meat; whereunto all Physicians
and Naturalists do agree, it being daily confirmed by experience. Levinus
Lemnius writes, that a man can live seven or nine days without meat, but then
nature is already indammaged, and the forces of the body weakened. Arild
Heuitfield writes upon the relation of others in the History of King Erick
Menveds, that Duke Woldemur, who with Duke Erick his Brother, was east in the
Tower of New Kiobing by their Brother King Byrge of Sueden, that they might dye
of hunger, lived 11 days without meat or drink, and his Brother but 3 days. But
this seems to be guessed by the discourse of the common people, and gives no
certainty; for the History says that the Tower was well shut with Locks and
bars, and the Keys east into the River; so that none could tell exactly when
they expired. If the one Brother, as is related, lived so long, he must have
sustained himself with the body of his dead brother. Whence follows also,
that this maid could not naturally be kept alive without meat.

In the same Harvest a man of Suderoe was also carried away, as the Parish
Priest there, Mr. Jacob Christianson, writ me, and afterward further related
me by word of mouth^; He was absent several days, but by the prayers of the
Priest and Congregation, he returned shortly after, being then dumb during a
fortnight: at last by their general Prayers, having recovered his speech, he
spoke blasphemous words against God, and his holy Scripture, but by the Grace
of God came again to his right sense; and afterward related, that whilst he
was away he perceived nothing, but when he should return he saw a great many of
that sort of Spirits that pushed and thrust him away from them, and then he
returned without hinderance. Doubtless the Devil by the Commandment of God,
upon the prayers of the Congregation durst not keep him longer.

In the year 1669. Satan did here torment two Children of a man of Saxan in
Stremoe, the Parish Priest of the North Church Corporation, whereof Mr. Gregory
Hanson vaard, writ also unto me; the man's name is Christopher Absolonson; His
Son was first troubled by him, but by the assistance of God the boy overcame
him; so that the evil spirit fled when ever he saw him, and the boy could also
plainly see when he came: but as soon as he begun to pray or sing, the Spirit
vanished? He afterward troubled his Sister from the beginning of August to
Christmas, the Maids name is Mary, when the spirit came to her she grew very
sick, and has almost continually been sick and weak of understanding ever^
since he begun to trouble her. But that I might have certain information
thereof, I have sent for the Boy, from whose mouth I received the following
relation. He told me, that he saw him first about St. Olaus day in the evening,
before the house in the Figure of a great man in gray clothes. The next time he
saw him was on Christmas Eve, when he came into the house and took out his
Sister; wherefore the Boy pursued him and found him near the River, standing
over the Maid, which lay on the Earth near the water; but at the Boys coming he
went away; wherefore the Boy carried his Sister into the house, she being sick
and weak: but the Spirit followed him softly to the house, and when the boy
came out again, he stood yet before it. The next day in the evening he came
again in the room, and the boy saw him leaning against a Post; but they being
awake in Prayer and invocation, he did not tarry long: and when he went out the
boy followed him out of doors, wherefore he spoke to the boy, and asked
wherefote he followed him so? the boy asked him again, what he had to do there?
whereunto he answered that he should get what he came for. And the boy replied,
that he should not get it at all. Whereupon he went away, as another man; but
came nevertheless again several times in the night, when they were watching
over the Girl, being in the mean time in continual Prayers and Singing of
Psalms, but he did them no harm, except that he put out the light, and the boy
grew some* thing sick, the Girl not being able to speak as long as he was
there: the 23 th day, being Christmas Eve, the Boy being absent, the spirit
came in, as she sat by the Table, and was playing at Cards with her other
brothers and sisters, and struck her on the one side as she sat, so that she
spit blood afterward. Since came the Parish Priest to them, and sent her over
to Got in Ostereo; from which time they have perceived nothing of the spirit.

In the aforesaid Examples there are many things considerable which ought not
to be passed by in silence.

For the first, that they let themselves be seen in outward and corporeal
shape, is not only proved by Profane and Church Writers, specially Sulpitius
Severus, in vita Martini Episcopi Turonensis, but also by the Holy Scripture,
in the Devils tempting of Jesus Christ in the wilderness. Matthew. 4th.

Secondly, that they have their habitation within Mountains in Caverns and
Holes, vacant and dry places; our famous Divine Doctor Jasper Brockeman,
teaching us also in his Systeme of Divinity, that they inhabit in those places
that are polluted with any crying sin, as effusion of blood, or where unbelief
or superstition has gotten the upper-hand.

But it seems they go into the mountains, where the eye of man can perceive no
entrance; the possibility whereof Stephanus Johannis Stephanius, in his Notes
upon Saxo Grammaticus, teaches us to be by the cunning power of Satan: but in
what manner it happens, is an Art the Devil keeps for himself.

Thirdly, that they will abuse the body of men to luxury was well known to the
Heathens, who called them therefore Inc^bus and Succubus; as also to the holy
Fathers, wherefore Hieronymus by reason of their great luxury, called them
sicarius's; yea, many witches confessions of the seduction of Satan, do plainly
witness it; whereof many examples are found in Theatr^ de veneficis, and other
writings.

Fourthly, that they cannot easily carry men away, as they please, happens by
the Almightiness of God, whose power is greater than the Devils, and assisteth
those poor men, for else it would be as easy for them to carry away men in
their infirmities, as it was for the tempter to carry Christ through the Air,
upon the Pinnacle of the Temple.

Fifthly, That they cannot do men more harm than God permits them; which is
plainly perceived in the Book of Job: That they may be seen by some men and not
by all, might be proved by more Examples here in Feroe, that being a mere
endowment of their nature, and that people grow much altered, when they see
such Apparitions.

The curious Reader may, perhaps, be desirous to know, what they may be? There
have been many before now, and are yet, that will not believe such Apparations,
esteeming them to be only the mere fancies of melancholy people; but it is as
great error to deny them, for the many examples, both here and elsewhere, not
only amongst common people, that do easily deceive others or are deceived, but
also amongst many understanding men, as is read in History, together with the
Holy Scripture sufficiently prove their existencie; notwithstanding that the
eyes and ears of men, in many sights and Apparitions, by an error of the sense
are deceived.

And as the Disciples took Jesus Christ when he walked upon the Sea, and when
he appeared to them the doors being shut, to be a Phantasm or a Spirit; so many
simple people pretending they have seen or heard spirits which were not so,
makes that the most part contemn the opinion, there should be any.

We call such Apparitions Specters, because they present themselves to the eyes
of men, appearing as if they were real bodies, whereas they are spirits, that
take upon them an external figure, and in respect to a right created body, are
to be considered but as shadows. Wherefore Christ says to his Apostles, that
took him to be such a spirit, Why are you so afraid? and why come such thoughts
into your hearts? look upon my hands and feet, it is my self; feel and see; for
a spirit has neither flesh nor bones, as you see I have; that is, though a
spirit appears with the outward figure of a body. By which words Christ does
not refute the Apostles opinion of spirits, as vain and erroneous, but agrees
with them, that there are Phantasms, that they are spirits, and that the figure
they take, has not the propriety of a natural body. Secondly, Christ grants,
that they had cause to have been afraid, if he had been a Phantasm. Whereby we
are taught, that our own nature proves their existencie, since we are afraid
when they appear, by reason of the innate emnity which is between men and such
spirits. Wherefore when Eliphas of Theman saw a spirit going before him, and
there stood an image before his eyes, whereof he did not know the figure, but
heard a voice, the hair of his body stood upon end. In Latin they call them
Spectra, that is, such spirits as are seen, so that the invisible good Angels
when they appear in visible forms, for as much as they are seen, may also be
called Spectra; but we according to the Holy Scriptures, and the explication of
all Learned men understanding only by Specters, spirits who in several visible
Figures and likenesses appear unto men, either to hurt or frighten them; of
which sort was the figure that appeared to King Saul in the likeness of Samuel,
1 Samuel 28. as also the Devils outward shape, that spoke with Christ, and
tempted him in the wilderness, Mat. 4.

The Heathens, in their writings, call some of those Specters, Eaunes, Satyrs
and Panes, which we call in Danish, Skow and Bierge-Trold, that is Wood and
Mountain spirits; those of Feroe call them underground people, hollow men, and
Foddenskemand. The Holy Scripture calls them Gods of the Woods, Esaiah 13 th.
and also field Gods, Deuteronomy. 32. which really are none but unclean spirits. I
have read in the writings of a godly man, who pretended that, besides the good
and bad Angels, there were also external spirits of the world, which were not
eternal, and took their natural origin of the worlds visible spirit, and
finished also naturally; which if it were, they should then be some other
Creatures then the eternal spirits, or the visible shaped Creatures. Though
there be much whereof our eyes cannot see the essence, our reason comprehending
no further, then what is discovered in the outward corporal nature, which yet
it harldly comprehends; as the wise man complains; nevertheless one ought not
to affirm such things, as have no ground in the word of God, though it were so
in nature; and therefore we will only contemplate these Apparitions by the
clear light of Gods word, and thereby, together with understanding Learned men's
writings, see what one may conclude and judge of them.

One would think it might be worth a particular Speculation, that the Holy
Scripture speaks of Phantasms together with Zijm, Jim, and Ochim, Esa. 13. 21.
cap. 34. 14. Jer. 50. 39. for the Lord threatening Babylon with its last
destruction, says by the Prophet Esaias, Babylon shall be changed as Sodom and
Gomorrha, and no man shall inhabit there any more, neither live there for ever;
but Zijm shall there pitch their Tents, and their houses shall be full of
Ochim, Ostridges shall live there, and wood devils leap thereabouts; Owls shall
sing in their Palaces, and Dragons dwell in their pleasure-houses.

The Prophets calling them Zihim and Ohim is not expounded by Luther in his
Bible by any other word, but he writes in the Margin, that he takes them to be
all sorts of wild Beasts; understanding, without doubt, such wild Beasts as
the wise man describes in this manner, Wis. 11. ver. 19, etc. The Lord, says
he, sent over them because of their sins, new shaped, cruel, unkown Beasts,
that either breathed out flame, or blew out cruel smoke, or darted sparks
terribly from their eyes; which not only could bruise them to pieces with
terror, but murder them with the terribleness of their sights. The wise man
reckons also up these unknown Beasts, Chap. 17. ver. 3. 9. among spirits,
wherewith the Egyptians were terrified. Maldonatus in his Scholia upon Esaiah,
esteems this kind of cruel, unknown, wild Beasts to be a sort of Devils.

That excellent Philosopher and Divine, Johannes Henricus Vrsinus, in the sixth
Book, Chap. 27. of his Anal^ecta sacra, writes, that these names can signify
both cruel wild Beasts and men, but more properly Devils, for Zijm from (...)
dryness, are properly those that inhabit dry and desert places; Jijm from (...)
an Island, those that live in Islands; Ochim from (...) a funeral Bird, those
that cry out with a terrible voice; but in the Prophet he understands Devils to
be so called; first, because seirim or Wooddivel is also mentioned there;
secondly, because Saint John does so expound it in the Book of the Revelations,
Chap. 18. ver. 2. when he says, she is fallen, she is fallen, Babylon the
great, and is become the habitation of Devils and the domicil of all unclean
spirits, and the repair of all unclean birds. Thirdly, because it is plain both
by holy and profane writings; and experience teaches actually, that Devils
have their habitations in desert places.

My poor conclusion is this, that the examples and clear words of the Holy
Scripture do agree both with other Histories, as also with the abovementioned
of the apparition of spirits, that they were not fancies, but were real and
indeed; and those Images not being substantial bodies, they must be spirits in
external figure; and appearing to hurt men, that they are not good, but bad
spirits, that is very Devils. And such as are mentioned in the abovesaid true
Histories* whether they appeared in the Figure of man, or of any Beast, are
doubtless that sort of Devils which the Holy Scripture particularly calls
Fieldgods in the fifth Book of Moses, Chap. 32. ver. 17. 2 Chronicles. Chap. 9. ver.
15. For Devils can far easier turn themselves in several such forms, than in
that of Angels of light; it being all one what name one gives such Apparitions,
if one but knows their Chief, who as the deadly enemy of all mankind, that
walks in every Element to hurt man; Sinesius teaching that there are six
sorts of spirits, that are all bad, appearing to men specially to hurt them,
namely, those that are in the air, in the fire, in the water, upon the earth,
under the earth, and in darkness; all sorts of men both good and bad being
obnoxious to be troubled by these spirits* the good to separate them from God,
as the examples of Job and Christ do witness; which God does permit that their
faith may be tried, and that they may learn to walk warily. The bad, over which
though Satan has a great power, yet he appears to these following, Murderers,
oppressors of the poor, disobedient to their Parents, despisers of God's word,
unbelievers and superstitious people, and those that have made a contract with
him, whom he so long deludes, till at last he takes them away both body and
soul.

As long as these Islands of Feroe have been uninhabited during so many hundred
years, it seems they have been nothing but an habitation of Devils, a Domicill
for unclean spirits, and a Den of Goblings, it being sufficiently known in
History what power the Devil had anciently in the Countries of the North
Island, Finland, Varmeland, and Lapland; and many know how powerful they are
there to this very day. Besides the solitariness of Feroe, there are not only
found great Chinks, and long dark holes above in the Mountains; but also below
underneath some places, quite through the Land. Whereof one hears sometimes
tell strange Stories enough, amongst which there may also be some truth;
besides here are also those terrible Caverns mentioned above which they call
Latters; and when men took in the Country to possess it, those spirits could
not be driven out by Fighting, force, or Weapons, as the abovesaid Fable of
Myggenesse would persuade; for iron is like straw, and brass as a rotten wood,
as the Lord says, Job, Chap. 41. ver. 17. against the strength of Leviathan,
or the Devil. Besides, the people here have chosen their habitation near the
Seaside, but the mountains with their holes and chinks are uninhabited to this
day; and though the whole Country were inhabited in all places, it would not
therefore be free from these unclean spirits; for what Country is so populous
but the Devil may be there? where is there ever a Church built, but the Devil
builds himself a Chapel? where is there any wheat sowed, but the enemy sows
tares amongst, Matthew. 13. ver. 25. he runs about amongst men, to see whom he
can devour, 1 Pet. Chap. 5. ver. 8. The evil spirits that are cast down from
Heaven from their first origin are wide spread abroad, not only in the air,
but also over all the earth; they take no room neither are naturally contained
in any place; for they are bound together with obscure chains, live in outward
darkness; nevertheless they are in greater number about men, than one can
believe; neither can a little space hinder their presence; for if a whole
Legion of Devils can have room enough in one only man, how many then could be
contained in a little Chamber, with one only man? Oh! that some men's eyes were
but opened, they would then with greater fear and trembling work out their
salvation: yet, though they be manifold in every place, they have not an equal
power every where; when the inhabitauts of Feroe were heathens, and strangers
to the knowledge of Jesus Christ, these spirits had power enough amongst them
by reason of their unbelief, Ephesians. 2. yet in this time he has been for the
most part quiet; but when the Lord had sent them his word, the Ministers
thereof, alas! mixed that pure word with humane Superstition and figments and
filled their Hearers hearts more with errors and superstitions than with true
and justifying faith. But as darkness is never so thick, but the light does
break through, so the light of God's Word did shine in those dark days for
them, that did seek invisible things, and they received a true faith shining in
their good works; but others that gaped after outward splendour, which was
though but darkness, and remained in obscurity, being blinded in their errors
and superstition; whereby Satan made at that time more proofs of his Mastership
than at any other, as well here, as in other places, by many false sights and
miracles, that he might the better extinguish their spark of faith, and wholly
darken their understanding. Finally, God having out of his Grace, driven away
such darkness of errors, by the great new kindled light of his Gospel; the
great Prince of darkness was forced to retire and hide himself; but, it seems,
he has not been in quiet, and therefore by the permission of God, breaks out
and sometimes openly deludes these poor Inhabitants, seducing them sometimes to
their eternal ruin, and sometimes to an error and delusion for a time.

Christ teaches us how this comes to pass in the Gospel according to St.
Matthew, Chap. 12. ver. 43. That the unclean spirit finding no rest in his dry
mansion, returns then back with seven other spirits worse than himself; that
is to say, with many gross sins and vices to precipitate a man into. Truly, the
deeds and effects show the words of Christ to be true: for it cannot be expressed
how steadfastly some keep their old Traditions and superstitious customs, which
they do secretly and diligently observe, thinking themselves very subtle if
one cannot with sharp admonitions and warnings from the word of God root them
out.

Besides, many gross sins and vices, as in other places, here in use amongst
many, (the true Children of God being in no ways meant hereby) here grow up
young people that are disobedient to their Parents, stiffnecked and
contradictory; wherefore the Devil, as is said before easily appears.

Tell me, Christian Reader, what is this? but that the old Spirit of
superstition is come again into his house, has found lodging with those many
errors and superstitions, and with other unclean spirits, work out many
abominations (God grant this were but in Feroe) so that it is no wonder if he
thus far deludeth man; but it is to be wondered, that the Devil does not oftener
appear, taking and carrying more men away than he has done already. We must
thank God therefore that has put a ring in his nose, that his goodness and
long-suffering might incite men to better themselves and repent; yea, it is the
cunning of Satan not to appear so often in a visible figure to many impious
people, that continually call upon him, and curse by him, that at last he may
lead them captives at his pleasure into perdition.

There may possibly yet be found some that will not believe all this, because
they never saw any such Apparitions or Devils: whereunto I answer, that I never
saw them neither, and pray God I may never see them; and which I also wish all
my Readers: and if ever I should see them, God being pleased to tempt me
thereby, I will beseech him to give me his Grace and a good Spirit, that I may
overcome them by faith; this Opinion being otherwise an humane weakness, not
unlike the infirmity of Thomas, that would not believe-except he saw; whereas
faith does consist in believing things which are not seen, nor can be seen. It
is a poor conclusion in reason, that because one has not seen a thing,
therefore it is not extant in nature: every one has a reasonable Soul in
himself, which is an immortal living Spirit, and yet none could yet see it
forsaking its habitation, and the parting from the body. The Angels pitch their
Tents about the Godly, yet who ever saw them? none can ever see God and live
afterward in this mortal body; is there therefore no Soul, Angel nor God
existing. As long as we are in this mortal body, we can naturally see none but
corporeal creatures, and yet our eyes are so weak, that they cannot discern
many things, but by the help of an instrument invented for that purpose.
Nevertheless there are men that have seen such spirits, as is showed by the
aforementioned Examples, and other Histories; but then those spirits had taken
upon them some visible shape. The Specters abovesaid are as well spirits, as
the Angels, all being invisible to our eyes; nevertheless we read in the Holy
Scripture, that many have seen them, specially the good Angels, in such an
external figure as the business about which they were sent* did require; for
the Ass of Balaam saw the Angel of the Lord with a drawn sword in his hand,
which Balaam could not see till the Lord opened his eye. Saul saw a figure in
the likeness of Samuel; Elisha saw a whole Army about him upon the mountain in
the likeness of flaming wagons and Horses, which his servant Gehazi could
neither see until his eyes were opened; King Belfhazar saw a hand before him
writing upon the wall; to pass by the examples of the Maccabees. That tempter
the Devil went openly to Christ in an outward shape, and may be in that of a
man, since he spoke as one. By which Examples this matter is clearly proved by
having been seen; and therefore he that will not believe the aforesaid Examples
happened in Feroe, because he has not seen such Apparititions (though the said
Examples be as certain as if they had been sworn before a Court of Justice* and
therefore will be irrefragable as long as the world lasts; no body being though
(bound to believe more thereof than pleases him) yet he must believe those
examples that are in the holy Scriptures, except he will of his own accord
precipitate himself into error.

Sa^an has also endeavored by special visions and learning to seduce the
Inhabitants of these Islands from the true word of God. For it happened in this
Country, in the year 1667, that a person called Jacob Oluffson, being then at
Giow in Osteroe, in the 24 year of his age, the 17 of Jan. fell into a
sickness, lying a bed during a fortnight, and on the 14 day of his disease;
namely, the 20 of Jan. on Sunday night, as he lay asleep, there came one in to
him with shining clothes on, whereat he wakened, and perceived him in that
figure in the bed by him, the room appearing full of splendor, and he gave the
young man a serious salutation and respect. Secondly, he asked him where his
pain was? whereunto the young man answered nothing; afterward he stroaked him
with his hand along his breast, and round about; whereby the said young man was
presently healed, and he enjoined him then that he should say a prayer thrice
every day, pronouncing the prayer 3 times unto him; whereby the young man
learned it instantly, it being as follows.

O Thou worthy, Holy Ghost, comforter of all sorrowful and afflicted! thou
know best what cur flesh and blood can suffer in the cross, where it goes
but sadly with us, except we receive help from another place, then from our
selves; be thou therefore my comforter and my Shield, strengthen me by thy
power, help me in my great infirmity and assist me; cheer up my heart and mind,
that I may call and cry unto thee for help in my necessity: strengthen my
faith, that I, with a firm expectation and assurance, may expect help and
counsel from above: give me grace that I may suffer with patience thy fatherly
rod, and do not with murmuring and impatience offend thee. Since we know not in
our ^^ess, what we should pray for and desire; do thou the best, and pray in
us; Thou, who with the Father and the Son art an Almighty God to all eternity,
Amen. Afterward he told the young man, that he should say this Prayer the
first time he should come to Church; first on the threshold of the Church door,
kneeling down with his face turned from the Church, commanding also that the
people of the Country should pray unto God, saying this Prayer, with joined
hands and bowed knees to the Lord thrice every day, so the Lord would turn away
the punishment which threatened the Land; and commanded, that he should admon^sh
the people to convert themselves, leave off their cursing and swearing, and
desist from all other sins; and that so God would appease his anger Having said
that to the Lad, as he would go away, he added, Rise sound, and sin no more!
Departing so from him, and going away through the Roof-hole. Five days
afterward he appeared the second time to the young man, before it was clear
day, as the Lad was sitting in his bed, and sung the Psalm, My Shepherd is the
living Lord, etc. it came in his mind as if one had desired him to go out,
though he saw nothing; whereupon he arose, and put on his clothes, and went out
before the house, where he saw in the South South-west, the Heavens open, and
one coming down from thence, who stood by him in the yard with a Priests habit
on, that reached down to his feet, the habit being red and white, with a red
Cross on the back; and he said to him that he should not at all doubt but he
came from God; and therewith left him hastily, ascending to the place from
whence he came. The next Sunday night, which was the seven and twentieth of
January, he came to him the third time, as he lay awake, in the same form as
the first time, through the Roof hole into the bed; and asked him if he had
spread abroad what he had commanded him? whereunto the youngman answered, yes.
Whereunto the other replied, not so earnestly as it ought to have been done:
asking him withal, whether he had not seen some signs in the Heavens? the Lad
answered, that he had seen no signs, but that other folks said, they had seen
two Suns in the Heavens (Samuel Powelson, Eclendar* Anderson, Sineve, Jonas
daughter, and some more of Eldevyg witnessed in the Court, they had seen these
Suns) then he said, that they did look as if they had been Suns, though they
were not; but a sign that they should begin to keep Holyday, from the time
they saw the true Sun arise, which was on Saturday at half an hour past 12 in
the afternoon; and that Sermon which they preached ou Sunday, should be
preached on Saturday in the afternoon; and that when they rowed out, they
should sing the Psalm, My Shepherd is the living Lord, etc. and as the Lad
going about to wake his Stepfather, that lay in the bed with him, he departed
as before, going out through the Roof-hole. The next night, Jan. 28 th. he
appeared unto him the fourth time, as he was awake as before; the young man
asked him then who he was? He answered, that he was Saint John, that lay in the
bosom of Jesus at the Lords Supper, and spoke no more, but vanished away, as
formerly. He came to him the fifth time in the night, presently after the
Parish Priest Mr. Peter Hellison Wiberg* was gone to visit his Congregation,
and asked the Lad if he had declared to the Priest what he had commanded him?
the young man answered yes, adding thereunto, that the Priest found very
strange, that he should appear unto him, who was so great a sinner. Whereunto
the pretended Saint John answered, that the Lord had given many signs, and
gives yet many signs, that are not manifest. These apparitions became public
in the Country, and many of the simple hearers did put great faith therein.
Whereupon I did send for the said person, examined him, and earnestly
admonished him, that he should not have any thing to do with any such invented
figments; but the young man persisted in the same affirmation, that the said
matter was past in the foresaid manner; wherefore I have written the matter of
fact word by word as he told me.

But the fire being once kindled, would not go out of its self, but kindled it
self further round about; for his fame was spread over all the Islands, and in
all Congregations: the common people giving great credit thereunto; specially
servants for holydays sake, and begun in many places to keep Saturday holy,
believing really that it was just, the person to whom this vision did appear,
being esteemed by all to be very Godly, so that one had never heard a vain word
or oath from his mouth. Wherefore many observed dilligently their new holyday,
but they could not desist from cursing and swearing: besides this, they invented
themselves many other visions and spread them over the Country, the people
being much inclined thereunto; yea, these superstitious people out of their own
foolish imagination, framed themselves many arguments, giving out, that as God
had illuminated some poor fishers, he could also illuminate this simple man;
that God would make Apostles of Angels, and spirits to preach unto men; That
the Devil cannot take the shape of an Angel, can do no good, and cannot speak a
true or good word; concluding thereby, that the sanctification of the Saturday
was commanded by God and pleasant unto him, as a pious action in it self, and
therefore ought to be observed, for the world coming near to its end, which the
Lord will shorten, so ought the last day of the weeks work to be shortened, and
the day sanctified betimes. Whereupon some did rise up against their teachers,
as it happened unto me by one of my Congregation, who stood fast thereupon,
that to pray and keep holy was a good act and no sin, and therefore none could
blame or forbid it. Thus the common people is easily deceived, and deceives
others. Satan having thus suddenly seduced many simple persons from the true
Prophetical word* and their plainness in Christ, I sent to every Priest in the
Country a copy of the parties confession about his Visions, and therewith added
my censure thereof; that they might read it in the Pulpit, and the hearers know
how much thereof babbling people had invented and added to these visions and
illusions of the Devil; and they at the same time teach and mildly admonish
their hearers that they should persist in the constant word of God, and not
seek another way of worshipping him, then is contained therein, or is enjoined
by the Supreme Magistrate to his honor, how seeming holy soever it might be.
Having also in the explication of the Catechism in my visitation, according to
the spirit and grace which God has given me, done my best to bring them out of
that superstition and cunning error.

At last it happened, that the said, as was thought, Godly person, the
following year, by the induction of that unclean spirit, fell into the sin of
Fornication; wherefore I did in writing refer the great scandal and disturbance
he gave in the Congregations, to the most Reverend Father in God, Dr. John
Swanning, Archbishop of Zealand; from whom I received orders, according to the
Kings Ordinance, that I should publicly admonish the said Jacob Oleson out of
the word of God, as al^o absolve him of his sin, and represent to the
Inhabitants their great error in the Church of Thors-haven, when the Sessions
should be kept, and most of the people be present: which was done accordingly
in the year 1668, on S^ John the Baptist day; whereby God be praised all this
emotion was suppressed, so that nothing at all has since been perceived of it,
That the Canded Reader, may not yet frame himself strange imaginations, or be
so credulous as to believe any such illusions, figments, and cunning
deceptions, if Satan, either here or elsewhere, in the like or other manner,
practice any; this example not being the first nor the last; it being more
difficult to be aware of the white devil then of the black; I have thought fit
to add hereunto a plain explication that one may the better know Satan, though
he change himself in the holiest, and most beautiful Angel of Light.

It is no strange thing that such deceitful apparitions should happen, to bring
a man into superstition; specially in this Country, since the Prophecy of
Christ must also be fulfilled here amongst us, saying, Mat. 24* 9* that in the
later times there shall arise many false Christ's, and say here is Christ and
there, etc. so that even the ^lect should be in danger of being seduced,
wherefore he also gives a very earnest admonition thereupon, saying, do not go
out to them, and believe them not. God permits such things to prove men, and
try whether they love him out of all their hearts and souls, Deuteronomy 1^^3. But
that none may suffer himself to be seduced by every bubble of temptation, we
will consider and ponderate all h ^ circumstances of this deceitful vision.

As for the person, that appeared in a white shining Garment, and afterward
(...) the Habit of a Priest, and spoke pious words and admonitions; we know
that Satan can change himself into an Angel of light, 2 Cor. Chap. 11. ver. 14.
yet the Devil cannot so disguise himself as to hide his Claws, which is here
perfectly seen by his giving himself out for Saint John, that lay on the bosom
of Christ, at the Lords Supper; and besides would teach men a particular
Holiday, and thereby draw them from the pure revealed word, from which no body
might swerve-either to the right hand or to the left; from which one must
neither take, nor add thereunto; except we will draw upon us all the curses
mentioned in the Holy Scripture, Revel. 22. v. 18. wherefore we will conclude
with Saint Paul, Gal. 1. ver. 8. That if an Angel of Heaven would preach
another Gospel, than Christ and his Apostles have preached, let him be an
Anathem. Upon the Premises I cannot judge, but that this apparition has been a
Phantasm, or illusion, and all the admonition, that simple young man had had a
Fantasy. There is enough written of Phantasms in several Treatises, and they
are of many sorts.

1. Phantasms or Illusions, that happen in the Air, and are called by
Naturalists Phoenomena's, being several Visions, that are seen in the Air;
namely, strange Suns, Armies, Ships, and such other things.

2. Phantasms, that seems to be, and are not; as when the Apostles believed
Christ to be an apparition or spirit, when he, in a strange manner, did walk
upon the Sea, and after his Resurrection came in to them, the doors being shut.

3. Phantasms, that by natural causes, namely the temperature and sickness of a
man, or what they think much upon, do appear in dreams. In this manner the
Emperor Nero did no sooner fall asleep, but he had strange dreams, having
killed his own Mother; his Tutor, and many other Citizens innocently. Thus
choleric and melancholy folks are troubled with Visions, according to the
predominant humor; whereof Physicians and Naturalists write at large. St.
Austin de Civit Dei, l. 18. writes, that one had related him, that before he
went to bed, in his house, he saw a certain Philosopher come to him, expounding
him the Books of Plato, which he had desired of him before, but he would not do
(...) and having afterwarks asked the same Philosopher, wherefore he came and
expounded in his house, whereas he was before unwilling to do it in his own? he
said, I did it not, but I dreamed I did so. In this Example the one saw in a
dream, what the other saw waking.

4. Phantasms in themselves, as they are and appear to men, when they are
awake, that have properly no bodies, but assume one for a time, to delude
mankind, such commonly announce men punishment and universal calamities, or
bring them a despairing horror for their sins. It was such a one that appeared
to Saul in the likeness of Samuel, and announced him his death. Plutarch
relates, that there appeared a spirit to Marcus Brutus, as he was awake; and
Brutus asking him who he was? he told him he was an evil spirit, and that he
should soon see him in the Philippian Fields. It is written of a Duke of the
Athenians called Polyzelus, that he, in the fields of Marathon, saw a spirit
bigger than a man, whereupon he grew blind, and yet having lost his sight won a
great Battle upon the Enemy; such spirits do vex men, and either hereby
strengthen them in their old errors, or will bring them into new ones, as the
adoration of strange gods, and superstitious works, which happened but too much
in the times* of Popery. All Learned Divines tell us, what we must believe of
such apparitions, namely, that they are evil spirits.

In the relation of this simple man, there is made mention of two sorts of
apparitions; the one seen in the air, namely an u usual Sun, that was nothing
but an illusion of Satan, whereby he endeavored to introduce a strange adorat
on of God, and superstitious acts, which God does not require from us, that so
he might by these Visions, seduce them from the true word of God, to believe
deceitful errors. Satan that brought down fire from Heaven upon the Cattle of
Job, Job 1. ver. 16. could easily cause to shine a bright fire in the sky, evil
spirits, reigning in the air, Ephesians. 6. ver. 12.

The other was properly a Phantasm, or spirit: I am in doubt whether one may
refer apparitions in dreams to Specters, it being first come to him in his
sleep, when he was sick, which might indeed cause such a fancy; but since it
has oftener appeared to him afterward, when he was in perfect health and
awake, and I often diligently asked the party, whether this was really seen by
him; which he ever constantly affirmed* we must conclude, that it was a spirit
and apparition; and though it had not such terrible aspect as the former
Examples, yet we know that Satan can transform himself into an Angel of light,
that evil spirit knowing very well that he could have promoted his Kingdom but
little if he had appeared in his terrible figure, and put the black-side
outward; wherefore he clothed himself in a white shining Garment, and a
Priests Habit, which is not his first Master*piece; for Sulpitius Severus in
the life of Martin the Bishop writes, that Satan appeared once unto him when
he was in bed and prayed, having a golden Crown on his head, and a white
shining Garment on, with gilt shoes, who spoke to him, saying, I am Jesus, who
being come down on the earth, would first appear unto thee. Martin having
looked upon him, and bethought himself, said, Jesus did not go in this manner
on earth, depart from me Satan. Whereupon he presently vanished, with a great
stink. Plinius Secundus Novocamensis, Hist. 7. Epist. relates, that there lay a
Boy and slept amongst other Children in the Chamber, when two spirits in white
Clothes were seen to come therein, that cut the Boys hair as he lay asleep,
going so away; and in the morning the Boy was found with his hair cut, and
spread about in the bed. There are Examples enough of Ghosts that have appeared
in Priests clothes, during the time of Popery, which we will omit, because of
their prolixity. Thus the white clothes and holy Garments of this evil spirit
cannot avail him, for he discovers himself, not only by his erroneous Service
of God, but also by pretending to be the Person of St. John that lay in Christ's
bosom at the Lords Supper. For having not been constant in truth, neither can
he always speak truth. And we know that God sends his Angels, for their sake
that are to inherit Salvation, and not the Souls of the dead; for they are in
the hand of God, where they rest from all their labors. And if any of them
appeared unto us, they should either do it of their own Authority, which they
cannot in the condition they are now, or by the command of God, which happens
not; for men have Moses and the Prophets, unto whom they should hearken during
this life, Luke 16. ver. 26. and it were in vain for them to appear, since none
must believe them, under great punishment of God, Deuteronomy. 18* ver. 11. yea, the
Soul of dead Saints have left all thoughts and care of earthly things; for
Abraham knows nothing of us, and Israel remembers us not, Esa. 64. v. 16.
Finally, we read no where, either in the Old or New Testament, that God has
any time converst with the living by means of the dead; God spoke indeed many
times, and in several manners, to the ancient by his Prophets, but now he has
spoken to us by his Son, and his Son withdrawing from us his visible presence,
sent to us his Apostles and Disciples, Matthew. 28. ver. 19. therefore says Paul
we are Messengers in the place of Christ, for God admonishes by us; so we pray
now in the name of Christ, we reconcile our selves unto God, 2 Cor. 5. ver. 20.
We may perceive by the premises, that the spirit of lies was not the person
whom he pretended to be, being much less sent of God, as he gave out, but was
the unclean spirit himself. This salutation also gives no little suspicion of
him, when he used an earnest salutation and worship! which agrees little with
that of holy Angels, but is rather like that of Apollo, the Idol of Delphos,
which always contained some hidden Mystery. Neither ought it to be an occasion
of error to any, that he healed him: It may be the young man was cured of
himself on the fourteenth day, but if it be so, as the party solemly
protests; it is easy for the Devil to heal and do good for a bad end, that
he might thereby confirm men in their errors. God has ratified his word by
Miracles, that he might thereby strengthen men in the true vivifying faith; and
besides, we have a constant prophetical word, which alone we ought to believe,
2 Pet. ver. 19. But Satan is the ape of God, doing often the like things, that
he may seduce men from faith and the word, to superstition, and thus be
powerful in them, Ephesians. 2 ver. 2. The Apostles showing great signs and
miracles, by healing the sick, and making the blind to see, that they might
bring blind Heathens from darkness to light, and from Belial to Christ; Simon
the Magician is presently ready to do the same by the help of Satan, as
powerfully and masterly to the eyes of all Samaria, so that many stuck to him
and said, this is the great power and virtue of God, Acts 8. 9, 10. It is
needless to add more examples, but we must consider that the devil does not do
this for a pastime, for Christ says of him, that he was a Murderer and a liar
from the beginning, John 8. 44. and it is his own nature to speak lies, and as
the Father of lies, disperse them amongst the Children of men. Therefore Paul
says plainly to the Thessalonians, 2 These. 2. 7. what he seeks by his si^^^
which is thereby to induce man to believe lies, wherefore he calls those signs,
lying wonders; not but that they do sometimes happen amongst men, as this
example witnesses, but because he seeks thereby to strenthen his lies against
the truth of God; his false worship against Gods true adoration; his
superstition against the true justifying says for God is truth, and his word
is truth, his will being that all men come to the confession of truth, and be
saved, 2 Timothy 2. 4. But Satan is the Father of lies, all his words being
nothing but lies, and therefore would seduce men from truth to falshord, and
thereby to damnation with him: and what he cannot do with his false words, he
seeks to execute by his false miracles and signs. The prayer which he taught
that young man, is at the end of Mr. John Thomason's Psalter, and has been
continually used in houses in the same Town, where that young man lived; and I
do in a manner believe there is some falsehood in this relation; he having
continually heard it said in that place. But if it be so, that Satan has
taught him it, he has himself found it in the said Book, or been present; when
it was read, and therefore could (...) the young man, which is not (...) ^e
being present in the (...) Lord, and rooting the word out (...) hearts of many,
Luke 8. 12. neith^^ (...) it a new thing for him to speak the w^rd of God, for
he knew excellently to make use of the word of God out of David's Psalms against
Gods own son, Mat. 4. 6. but it is a wonderful thing, that he cannot make use
thereof without falsifying it; He therefore commanded the party to say it,
lying upon the threshold of the Church door, with his head outward, which this
simple man did accordingly, till he was converted from his Errors. Which
foolish and false command of Satan is more worthy to be mocked and laughed at,
then refuted; only hereby is perceived his power of seducing, wherewith, as in
a net, he would have taken that poor people. The Psalm which he commanded to be
Sung when they Rowed out, was wholly needless; the Inhabitants never going to
Sea, but they sing that and other Godly Psalms. The Prayer which he commands
them to pray, is most imperfect in many sorts of occasions; for which and all
other we have a perfect one, which the Son of God has taught us himself, Mat,
6. 9. etc. That he commands Godly exercises, and reprehends sins worthy in
themselves *of reprehension, and are alas! but too many amongst the children of
men, threatening thereupon imminent plagues and punishments, is his old
Sanctity, when he will give himself out for an Angel of Light, and though all
that be good in i^ self, yet he knows to extract his own evil out of that
good, which he also does by his signs and miracles, only endeavoring thereby
to draw and seduce the children of God from the fast Prophetical word, from the
plain Preaching of the word, to believe visions and certain apparitions. And
when he has brought them thus far, he knows himself powerful in their
superstition, and can lead them captive according to his will, from one error
into another, and at last make them believe manifest lies. It was already come
so far with this poor people, that some cared but little for their Teachers, as
appears by what we have already said, which God in his mercy forgive them,
for they knew no better. This is the most dangerous means whereby Satan can
seduce men; whereby he steals the word out of their hearts, which is the only
sword wherewith they could put them to flight. By what is already said the
foolish and erroneous arguments of the common people fall of themselves, and
are reduced to nothing, whereby one may see how easy it is to lead such poor
Sheep into errors, from whence they cannot come out, except their Shepherd and
Archbishop of their souls recall them by his servants.

O Christian Reader! thou that have perused the premises and their explication;
I admonish and warn thee out of a brotherly charity to take occasion from
thence in spirit and truth to call daily upon the Lord thy God; to leave off
thy great sins and thy bloody oaths not because Satan puts thee in mind
thereof; but because the Lord commands it thee, least Satan, who is the
continual accuser, be not only a perfect accuser but also a true witness of thy
disobedience. Remember to keep the Saboth holy, according to Gods own
institution, learning thereby to rest from thy sins, not only on Holydays but
all the days of thy life, that thou may become worthy to keep the ever
lasting Sabath before the throue and the Lamb eternally. Ho y Father sanctify
us in thy outh for thy word is truth, Amen. FINIS.

