A Declaration OF THE KINGS Most excellent Majesty's proceeding With his Army
at OXFORD, And elsewhere. As it was related by a Student from thence.

LONDON, Printed for I. Wright, and are to be sold in the Old Baily. 1642.

The copy of a Letter written from a Student in Oxford to his friend in London.
Sir:
IT has brought much joy unto my heart, (which languished before under the
feelling and apprehension of these civil tumults) to understand the good ^ewes
of your health, and that the malignancy betwixt our old Collegiates, Doctor
Pickering and Doctor Turner is happily reconciled. I know with a laboring
desire you almost travail with this Post to be informed how the affairs of
his Majesty here in Oxford do advance themselves, which I must dispatch in my
old and dull way; and though I shall offend you with my rudeness, I shall
content you with the truth.

His Majesty's forces having for many considerations been retired from
B^nbury, were not long since brought nearer unto Oxford, and billetted at Bril,
a high and hilly place, and where (before it was disforested) was fuel and
billet enough. The situation of it is no less known unto you, then to my
self* we have often made it our scene of pleasure, which must be now of danger
and of terror to the adjacent Country, or to whatsoever forces shall take up
arms to unwinter his Majesty from Oxford, or offer to invade his Armies. Our
neighbors in Buckingham shire begin to startle at it, and seeing the tempest
that threatens to destroy them, they know not which way to avoid it. They who
were before so obstinate as to refuse Prince Roberts Orders for bringing in
victuals to his Majesty's Army, are now employing their utmost studies and
endeavors in providing victuals for themselves. The height of the place, and
the strength of it will over awe the adjacent plains, and the neighboring
hills, which before did hold up aloft their proud and unrivaled heads, must be
now taught to stoop to the supremacy of Bril. Even Shot-over it self bears
down his ^nweildy shoulders, and acknowledges the sport and chasing of the
Dear to be far inferior to the honor of Bril, and to the game of war. Even
Wood stock, famous for the delight of Princes, and for the fountain of
Rosamond, and for her beauties, clee^er then that fountain, refuses to hear
the h^story and flatterings of her forgotten glories, and in glad silence and
obedience listens to the commands and thunders of Bril: while the Barnes, open
as hospitality, strive who shall first send in the tribute of their grain, and
the richer houses the tribute of their Plate, which trasported to Oxford must
receive there an impression, as well as Paper. The King is the Vicegerent of
God, the Parliament the Vicegerent of the King, and the closer they seek after
peace, and the unity of Religion, the nearer they arive unto the Essence and
the Monarchy of God. The Pesants themselves, whose churlish understanding lies
only in the Spade, the Coulter, and the Flayle, whose narrow brain cannot
distinguish betwixt a Gospel and a Pamphlet, bring in their hands and hearts to
the advancement of this great Design. Loyalty is a word of great extent and
latitude in nature, and striking an impression in the most cruel and most
unreasonable creatures, too oftentimes convinces man to be the most unruly
beast in all the field. Whiles I am writing this, my Servitor has brought me
in the tidings of the great joy in London which he is informed has possessed
the City for taking the Lord Grandison prisoner at Winchester; if he can be as
safe from your Pamphlets, as his person is from your Dragooners, I doubt not
but his Honor will be secure enough. You may do very well to blot him out of
your lists, and many more Commanders with him, whose names, and not whose
persons, you have taken prisoners. It would much rejoice me to hear of your
petitions for peace, in which every honest and ingenious spirit would here
petition with you, and jointly with humbled hearts, and the eloquence of bended
knees, petition all to the great God of peace, that this so great a blessing
may speedily and really be derived to us, for the protection of the true
Religion, who lifts up her innocent hands to Heaven, and from whose eyes rain
down more blood, then from her professors wounds, to see the distraction and
horror of these present times; and that she who does most lament it, should
be accused to occasion this most unnatural war. For the preservation of his
Majesty's person, and his posterity, whose inclinations have been suitable to
his great Fathers, and ever more desirous of peace then war. For the
advancement of learning, the Arts enjoying now their best harmony amidst the
sound of the Drum and of the Canon, and Arms again by a rare happiness
finding their best welcome in the habitations of the Muses: For the flourishing
of the state in general, and of every private person in particular, in which
he should be as truly glad to see you, as you him who is,

Sir your true friend to serve you, W. C.

The Answer to the former Letter.
SIR,
I Am glad to hear of your health, and I am sorry to find you are so mistaken
in your letter, both in the manner and the matter, and which is attended rather
with flourish and invention of a Poet, then with that easy and natural grace
which a familiar Epistle does delight in. For the matter of it, it s;temes as
far from truth as substance, (I must beseech you to excuse my boldness, for
being my ancient friend, I am bound to deal uprightly with you:) you seem
with great glory to advance the retreating of His Majesty's forces from
Banbury, and their retiring unto Brill, where you would make us believe there
is a fort now raising of great consequence, which shall secure the City of
Oxford, and oppose the neighboring County, and all invadors whatsoever. Such a
design may be in agitation and like enough, but it is so far from the modesty
of a Sholar to boast of the making of works for the maintenance of war, that
it is scarce suitable to the condition of an honest man, and in the mean while
you pray for peace, you observe not in what a lamentable condition this
Kingdom is like to be involved by the Papists Army now under the command of
the Earl of Newcastle, who is maching up toward Oxford to His Majesty with
them; and it is worth observation, that the King of France being a great
Catholic, has removed many Papists Councillors, and taken Protestants in
their places, and that the King of England being a Protestant should refuse the advice of his Protestant Parliament, and seek unto Papists for his strength and
Council, but God (I doubt not) will preserve his sacred person, and speedily
in his good time settle him in the eyes of his best Councillors, and in the
hearts of his best Subjects; yet I must not forget with what closenes and
subtilty the Papists have a long time endeavored to withdraw His Majesty's
heart from his good people and to endeavor the ruin and devastation of the
Kingdom. When then they found it was impossible for them by open strength to
induce their religion into the Kingdom, they labored night and day to make a
misunderstanding betwixt His Majesty and his Council, and by that means to
withdraw His Majesty's person from his Parliament; when they had fomented this,
and mischievously accomplished it, they found the Kingdom would immediately rise
up in Arms against them, if they should make open show of what they intended to
put in practice, they found therefore no better course to cry up their
religion, then by crying up our own; here upon proceeded so many Protestations
from His Majesty, (whose zeal to the true religion no man will deny) for the
preservation of the ancient religion settled in the days of Queen Elizabeth,
and King James of happy memory: this they knew would make a great impression in
the hearts of the people, and cause them to think evil of the Parliament, and
draw the greatest part of the land to side with his Majesty: When they found
that this design took effect, many great men that were known before to be
open Papists, the better to comply with the times, dissembled their religion,
and the more to endeere themselves to His Majesty, would resort unto the church
with him: It was reported then that the King had not a Papist in his Army. The
cuntry thronged in abundance to assist His Majesty, who (they said) received
much damage and injury fom his Parliament. When they found the King had made
himself strong with the Arms and numbers of his people, and that according to
their expectation much blood was shed, and that there was such a heart-burning
amongst the Nobility that it is to be feared this age will not extinguish,
then they began to pull off their vizards of hypocrisy, and to show themselves
in earnest. First there was drawn a Declaration by my Lord of Newcastle to
countenance the Papists taking up of Arms; presently a great resort of
Papists, Commanders and others addressed themselves unto him. Many notorious
Papists in the Kings Army were not ashamed openly to confess themselves, and
it is to be feared that His Majesty, who at the first entertained some for
their assistance, in the end of the war must be enforced to gratify some for
their necessity; who by reason of their service, being gracious to the King,
will continue to infuse ill counsel into his sacred ears, or be of power with
his Ministers and agents of State to procure a toleration at least for their
Religion. You see my Lord of Newcastles Army is marching toward Oxford, and
what true heart that does not bleed to consider the cruelty of the bloudthirsty
Papists? You may do well to turn your thoughts from the fortification of
Brill, to a consideration in what an imminent danger His Majesty* our Religion,
and the whole Kingdom is, if (which God forbid) the Earl of Newcastles Army
should prevail, and from the praying for peace (for how can there be peace as
long as Idolatry, and bloodshed and rapine reign?) to petitions with uncessant
prayers Almighty God to bless our Armies that are going forth, to return them
safe with honor and victory, to pluck his sacred Majesty from the pernicious
hands of such desperate men, and to reduce him safe to his great Council:
neither do we despair of it, for we are informed that his Excellence has sent
forth some Regiments to hinder the progress of the work, and that the Country
round about do take up Arms to frustrate it. I must desire you to excuse the
sharpness of my pen, and to impute it to the love and not the harshnesse of
him who is.

Your ever loving friend. T. H.

FINIS.

