

A CHECK TO Debauchery, AND OTHER CRYING SINS Of these TIMES. WITH Several
useful Rules for the attaining the contrary Virtues: To which are annexed some
Directions and Heads for Meditation and Prayer, taken out of Holy Scripture.

Except the Lord had left unto us a very small Remnant, we should have been as
Sodom, and we should have been like unto Gomorrah. Is. 1.9. Oct. 26. 92.
Imprimatur

Edm. Bohun.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Butt in Princes-street near Covent Garden; and are
to be sold by Randal Tailor near Stacioners-Hall. 1692.

A LETTER TO A FRIEND.
SIR.
I make you this small Present, as knowing a Gentleman ought to be as zealous
for Virtue as he is for Honor; and to show his Courage chiefly in conquering
himself. Your Example influences very far, being so well known, and so well
beloved: And I need not tell you how many, out of mere Emulation, are apt
enough to become your Creatures and Followers.

The Conversation of some Gentlemen is not so innocent as becomes their
Quality, and as it ought to be: But it is commonly either Drollery, or, hard
drinking. In the former, they neither spare Friend nor Foe; have no regard to
Modesty or good Manners; and many times not to sacred Things themselves: And in
the latter they are obnoxious to all other, even the greatest Sins. It is
Solomon's Observation concerning Drunkenness, that it leads to Whoredom and all
Lewd things, and renders Men more insensible than Beasts; and yet (so great is
the sottishness of its followers) they will seek it still and not refrain;
Prove. 23.33. etc.

Those false Maxims so much in Vogue with some, God will deal with me as a
Gentleman, a Soldier, a Courtier and the like, so often urged in Excuse of a
Vicious Life, were invented by the Common Enemy of Mankind to justle out the
Laws of God, and to render all good Instructions of Pious Men ineffectual.
Whereas the H. Scripture assures us, That God is no respecter of Persons, but
in every Nation he that fears God and works Righteousness [i. e. becomes
and does the duty of a Christian] is accepted of him and none others; Acts
10.34, 35. John 3.18. And if we profess to know God, and deny him in our Works,
we are no better than Infidels; and if we say we do know him and not keep his
Commandments we are Liars, let our Quality or Station be what it will. Tit.
1.16.

Many Saints now in Heaven, were indeed, not always so upon Earth; but then
resolutely reforming themselves and retracting their past Course of Life (the
Divine Grace and assistance being never wanting to such) they afterward by
incessant virtue became great Instruments of God's Glory in the Salvation of
innumerable Souls. This is more or less applicable to every Man whilst he lives
in this World; who has always some fault or other (if not ill habit) to
retract, which by God's assistance he may do when he pleases; and it is his
greatest wisdom not to delay his Endeavors, as the contrary his greatest
folly. I hope therefore you will not think me your Enemy because I tell you the
truth: Who am on the contrary, Sir, Your Faithful Friend in this highest point
of Friendship, and most ready to serve you in any thing conducing to your
eternal happiness, at least my poor Prayers shall not be wanting

SIR, Your most Sincere Humble Servant. L. D.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THese Collections were designed chiefly for the good of my self and some
particular Friends, but may perhaps be of service toward the awakening and
exciting others to endeavor the pulling down those abominable sins which walk
our Streets at Noon day, with a Whores forehead unmasked; and inhabit with us
in our very Gates, even in the most Eminent and most frequented places of our
Cities, without any notice taken of them, unless it be to Caress and Encourage
them.

The wiser Heathen would have thought such gross sins a reproach to Reason, and
a Disgrace to Humane Nature; and therefore, for Christians to spend their whole
lives here in them, and expect Heaven at the last (which is the reward only of
Virtue and Holiness) would be the greatest folly and madness in the World. The
way to Salvation is now by Grace, not by weak Nature; by what is revealed to ^^
to be the will of God, not what we can think, or can know any other way; by
Faith, the evidence of things not seen by the Light of Nature, yet most certain
to us, not by sight or blind Reason; by denying, not pleasing our selves.
Paradise is not to be gained the same way it was lost, but the contrary: Not by
eating, but by forbearing to eat the forbidden Fruit. Not that ceasing to do
evil is sufficient to make us happy, unless we also learn to do well; we must
besides bridling our Appetites, perform such daily duty to God as he requires
of us: Go on from Grace to Grace, from Virtue to Virtue, from one degree of
Holiness to another, till we come to the measure of the Stature of the fullness
of Christ.

The first and principal step however to Virtue is the ceasing to be Vicious;
and this cannot be done without renouncing all sensuality, and subduing our
Lusts. In order to which we are to pray for the assistance of God's Grace, to
consult good Men and good Books, and resolve to follow their Example and
Directions: And if this short Treatise should conduce any thing toward the
reclaiming of but one single Sinner from a lewd, sensual, debauched Course of
Life, to become a sober, chaste, sincere Christian, it would be thought more
then a sufficient recompense to

Courteous Reader, Your Faithful Friend for the Good of your Soul. L. D.

The Contents.
CHAP. I.
OF Gross Carnal Sins in General. Page 1 Marriage a lawful Remedy. Page 3 And
so also our Lord's Counsel of a Single Life. Ibid. The practice of the present
Age too contrary to both. ibid.
CHAP. II.
Of the impurity and filthiness of such sins. Page 6 They proceed wholly from
our selves. Page 7 Natural Infirmities no sins. Page 6 Opposite to God's own
Holiness. ibid. A particular mark set upon them in Scripture. Page 8 Opposite
to the cleanness and sanctity which ought to be in the Body as well as in the
Soul of every Christian. Page 9 Diseases, Sores, etc. are not the uncleanness
her meant. ibid, The Body, the Temple of the Holy Ghost, a Member of Christ,
his Spouse, purchased with his precious Blood, therefore to be kept holy. Page
10, 11. Fornication, etc. Dishonorable and Disgraceful to the committors
thereof. Offers the greatest indignity to Christ's Incarnation. Page 12 Filthy
Discourse tending thereunto to be avoided. ibid. A Natural shame accompanies
such sins. Page 14 The Habit thereof changes Men into Beasts. Page 15 These
were the sins the Heathen sell into when abandoned by God for their Idolatry.
Page 15, 16
CHAP. III.
Of the punishments of such sins. Page 17 God a revenges of such sins himself.
Page 18 Punishments dreadfel and sudden. Page 19 Flood, Fire and Brimstone,
Sword, Loss of Kingdoms, etc. and what exceeds them all, eternal Death. Page
19, 20, 21
CHAP. IV.
Of the chastity of Marriage and of the purity of a Single Life. Page 23, 68
Marriage very honorable, compared to that, of Christ with his Church. Page 24
Many degrees of Conjugal chastity ibid. Some abstain for a shorter time upon
the account of some Solemn Devotion, Communicating, etc. Page 24, 25 Some
longer for good ends also. Page 25, 26 Some their whole life (by consent) for
the better serving of God. Page 26, 27 Of a Single Life's being, 1st. more pure
than chaste Marriage it self. Page 27, 28, 29 2ly. Freer from Worldly
distractions, etc. Page 29, 30 More sensible of God's presence. Page 34 The
Gift of Continency attainable by all sincere endeavourers. Page 35, 36 Fitter
for Contemplation. Page 33, 36. More Heroical Page 37 The reward in Heaven
greater. ibid. Of the purity of the Soul. Page 38 The sins more immediately
opposed, Pride, etc. with the Remedies, Humility, etc. only barely named. ibid.
A blind Understanding and perverse Will the causes. Page 39 Rebellion according
to St. Judes Description. Page 39, 40 Some Rules for the preventing and curing
the sins of the Flesh. Page 41, etc.
CHAP. V.
The first Rule, of our Affectiens, etc. Page 42 Of th Passion of Love. ibid.
If wrong placed ruins us. Page 44. If rightly placed makes us happy. ibid. Of
the Memory and Imagination Page 41 The Storehouse of the Soul Page 46 When
advantageous. ibid. When Destructive to us. ibid. The outward Senses must be
watched Page 47 Several ways of getting rid of Temptations from them, by
meditating upon our Savior's Passion, the 4 last things, etc. Page 48, 49,
etc.
CHAP. VI.
The Second Rule, Of Suggestions. Page 52 Whence they proceed. ibid. What to be
done if they tempt to habitual sin. Page 53 Using external Actions. Page 54
Delaying the Execution bid. Concerning strong resolutions Page 53, 54
Resolutions Conditional upon a Forfeiture Page 56 Resolution of returning and
repenting upon a relapse. Page 58 Telling the Temptation to some other. Page
60, 61
CHAP. VII.
The third Rule, The Occasions of Lust, etc. to be avoided. Page 62 1st. No
making provision for the Flesh to, etc. ib. Temperance in meat and drink. Page
63, 64, 65, etc. Frequent fastings ibid. Moderate sleep and sometimes
watchings, Page 66, 67 2ly: Lewd Company to be avoided, Page 70 No conversing
with such, Page 71 This for our own security and their good, Page 73 No eating,
etc. with them when obstinate, ibid Cases of Necessity excepted, etc. Page 74
The Church in her Councils and Canons very strict in this matter, Page 75 Lewd
Books also dangerous Companions Page 75 Good ones the best Companions in the
World Page 76 3ly. Infamous places to be avoided ibid Whether single houses or
whole cities, Page 77 No cohabiting with lewd Persons, ibid. A caution
concerning Discourses, Page 79, 80, 81 Especially in much Company, ibid
CHAP. VIII.
The fourth Rule. Of Divine Assistances, etc. Page 82 Three things prenoted.
ibid. The first Grace given at Baptism. Page 83 More added upon our using the
first well, Page 85 Of the Grace of Charity or the love of God. Page 86, 87 The
force of Spiritual Gifts against the Flesh, Page 89 How to Experience the good
of Christianity, ibid. Of frequent Examination of Conscience. Page 90 The
Subtility of the Devil. Page 92 2ly. The means of obtaining divine assistances,
Page 93 1st. Prayer, Repentance, Page 93, 94, etc. 2ly. Frequent Communicating,
Page 98, etc. The Sum of the whole. Page 102
Some short Directions and Heads for Meditation, etc.
CHAP. I.
OF Meditation, its Requisites, and how it differs from Contemplation. Page 105
CHAP. II.
Of the Subject of Meditation, with Heads for the first Week. Page 111
CHAP. III.
Heads of Meditation for the Second, Third, and Fourth Weeks. Page 121
CHAP. IV.
Meditations for the Fifth Week. Page 130 The Letany of Christian Virtues,
taken out of the Holy Scriptures. etc. Page 139
A CHECK TO DEBAUCHERY.
CHAP. I. Of gross Carnal Sins in General.
THE spiritual Man, and good Christian, has no greater Enemies than those he
carries about with him; his own depraved Appetites and inordinate Desires,
especially to sensual Pleasure and carnal Delights, for which Flesh and Blood
so strongly plead. These, the more common, and the less heeded they are, so
much the more dangerous to, and more destructive of, the Soul. There are no
Temptations so vigorously assault us, or so easily beguile us as these: Which
are therefore said by the Prophet to seize and take away the Heart; Hos. 4.11.
and the Desire of them entreaseth the more we descend to a particular thinking
or discussing of them, even tho it be with a design to leave them. They make so
strong an Impression, have so much of Force and Stratagem together, that there
is no Conquering of ^^em by our contending with them, but by our running away
from them: So many wiles and secret devices; so many promises and specious
pretenses; so many windings and turnings which the Wise Man calls the way of a
Serpent upon a Rock, Prove. 30.19.
the way of a Man with a Maid, that it is next to impossible to find them out:
And that, because, 1. Being born in Sin our very Nature is depraved: And, 2.
inbred Lust, when not subdued in us, so Captivates and Incarnates the Soul as
to restrain its liberty of Reasoning or thinking upon any thing else. This
therefore is the greatest Temptation, and the vanquishing of it, the great
perfection of a Christian. 1 Thessalonians. 4.3.


Hence it is that Almighty, God in pity to frail man, has provided him
(whosoever likes not to follow our Lord's Counsel of a single life) a lawful
remedy of his Lusts by Marriage; Mat. 19 12. 1 Cor. 7.2.
upon condition he live within the bounds of it, and not endeavor the
satiating his desires any other way, or with any other Person than his own
Wife. But alas, how contrary to this is the practice of the present Age,
wherein a Virtuous single Life is almost grown Scandalous; and Marriage will
hardly be allowed to be Honorable, save only upon the account of Legitimating
Heirs and keeping up Families. Nay is it not rather reckoned as more Gentile,
even amongst Persons of Quality (to their shame and dishonor be it spoken) to
have variety of Misses (as they are pleased to call their lewd Prostitutes) tho
themselves, perhaps, very well married? And then, amongst others of less
plentiful Fortunes, Marriage (tho styled by the Holy Ghost Honorable) is
looked upon as a mean and despicable thing, and little less than utter undoing:
Because, forsooth, they cannot then so near equal their Betters, their elder
Brothers, and the like, in Eating and Drinking, and Clothes, and other
Formalities of worldly Grandeur. Whereas now they can live without Care, or any
sort of Seriousness; keep what the World calls the best Company; have their
choice of Women and Wine, and deny themselves nothing of Sensuality: And all
this (as the World now goes) without running any great Hazard of losing their
Reputation; but not of losing their immortal Souls, which sure ought most to be
regarded by them.

To these supine Christians, and Slaves to their own Lusts, who know better,
but yet, as it were in their own Defense, take the Liberty, not only of living
Counter to, but also of drolling upon, all that is serious or sacred (even the
Holy Scriptures, and our blessed Savior himself) rather than be stopped or
checked in their Career, or in the leastwise hindered the following the full
Swinge of their own unbridled Appetites, and ungovernable Wits, I can only
propose; First, The Impurity and Filthiness of such Sins; and, Secondly, The
severe Punishments that inseparably attend them.

CHAP. II. Of the Impurity and Filthiness of such Sins.
PAssions, Frailties, and Infirmities, are the common Plea and Pretense of
Sinners: Whereas the defect and proneness of our Nature to sin, is in it self
no Sin, so long as not compli'd withal; and besides, is abundantly repaired,
and supernatural Assistance recovered by the Incarnation of our Savior, and
the Means he has afforded us to a holy Life, if we are not wanting in the
Application. The loss of our Innocence has not deprived us of any of our
Faculties. Our Understanding and Will are still the same, and we have the same
freedom to choose the Good and reject the Evil; nor is the divine Assistance
(God be thanked) denied to any that seek it. So that the Commission of Sin is
entirely from our selves, ( Perditio tua ex te, Thy Destruction is from thy
self, Hos. 13.9.
says the Prophet) and the preventing of it wholly in our own power. And one
would think we should not readily fall in love with so great deformity. My
present Subject however is, those grosser Sins, the Sins of the Flesh; as being
most rise amongst us and such as destroy all seriousness, the foulness and
filthiness whereof appears Seraphims could find none greater when they sung,
Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabbath. Besides the Divine Nature being
absolute Purity without any Mixture or Composition whatsoever; and being also
absolute Perfection, so that no defect or want of any good thing is in him; it
must needs be, that what is contrary to those, as is all imperfection and
evilness, must also be opposite to him: Which speaking according to the manner
of men, is to be displeasing, to be grievous, to be loathsome and odious to
him; but most of all these grosser sins.

And this we know also from God's putting all along in Scripture a particular
mark of his displeasure upon them; setting them in the front as the Captains
and Ringleaders of the rest. These are the members we are to mortify upon
Earth, Col. 3.5.
Fornication, Uncleanness, inordinate Affection, evil Concupiscence, etc. So
again: 1 Cor. 6.9. be not deceived neither Fornicators, etc. nor Adulterers,
Romans 1 24, etc. These. 4.5. Ephesians. 4.1.
nor Effeminate Persons, nor Abusers of themselves with Mankind, etc. shall
inherit the Kingdom of God. These are the sins with which the Gentiles when
they offended God most of all, before the light of the Gospel shone amongst
them, stand every where in Scripture principally charged. Nay so great an
offense are these sins to the Holiness of Almighty God that he seems to equal
them to the greatest sin of all. 1 Cor. 6.9. Rev. 22.15. Col. 3.5.
And therefore in Holy Write, we find them ordinarily linked together with the
sin of Idolatry: And sometimes also with Covetousness, taken in its largest
sense for Coveting either Persons or Riches, which last is said also to be
Idolatry: And the former may be called so too for the same reason, because it
is hard to say which of the two, Harlots or Money, is most powerful and most
idolized in this lower World.

Job, Lazarus, and many other great Saints who had been well pleasing in God's
sight, were before men very loathsome Persons. But it is a real defilement of
the Body, as the Body is the honorable Instrument and Associate of the Soul,
and ought by it to be employed to a more noble end, even together with the Soul
to be employed to the Glorifying God, and one day also to be presented with it
before him in his Heavenly Tabernacle. 1 Thessalonians. 4.4.
This is the will of God (says St. Paul) even your Sanctification, that you
should abstain from Fornication, that every one of you should know how to
possess his Vessel (i. e. his body) in Sanctification and Honor, Verse. 7.
not in Lust of Concupiscence, for God has called us not to uncleanness, but
unto holiness. And the same Apostle in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, 1
Cor. 6.20.
addresses himself to the Men of this Age, as well as those of all others,
after a most prevailing manner, Know you not that your body is the Temple of
the Holy Ghost which is in you, and not your own, or at your own disposing, for
ye are bought with a price, the precious Blood of our Lord [to be also his
Spouse and his Members] therefore ought to glorify God both in Body and Soul
which are God's. And is there not good reason that after being purchased (even
our body as well as soul) at so dear a rate as the Inestimable Blood of our
Lord, we should at least in gratitude sanctify and devote our selves wholly to
his honor and service? But to compel us to it, unless we will deny our selves
to be Men and rational Creatures, the Apostle's Argument here and in his other
Epistles, runs thus: The Church is the Spouse of Christ, Ephesians. 5.29, 30, etc. 1
Cor. 6.17.6 13.
whom he bought and purchased to himself with his own Blood and Life, whom he
Cherishes also with the like care as the same Flesh and Bone, and the same
Spirit with himself. And for the same reason is now our Body as well as our
Soul, for the Lord, and the Lord for the Body. If therefore the Wife have not
power over her own Body, but the Husband; no more has Christ's Spouse, the
Church, or we her Members, 1 Cor. 7.34.
power over our selves, but Christ. And though it be said only of Virgins that
they more especially care for the things of the Lord, how to please him in
every thing, and so become Holy both in Body and in Spirit; yet are Married
People also, as the Circumstances of their Stations will permit, obliged to
care for the things of the Lord above all other things; for the Spouse of
Christ, the Church, being a chaste Virgin (as St. Paul calls her) we that
profess ourselves Members of that spotless Church, 2 Cor. 11.2.
whether we be married or unmarried, ought also to be chaste, and neither in
action or thought make the Members of Christ the members of an Harlot.

The same Apostle in his first Epistle to the Corinthians Argues still more
against Fornication: 1 Cor. 6.18.
Fly Fornication (says he) and why so? For every other Sin that a Man does is
without the Body, i. e. does not so immediately touch the body with any proper
Infamy or so entirely remove it from under the power of our Lord: But he that
commits Fornication (and much more if Adultery, etc.) sins against his
own body, i. e. dishonours it the most he can by degrading himself to so base
an Alliance as to become one and the same with that vile nasty Creature with
whom he sins, and so from a pure Member of Christ, he renders himself the
filthy Member of an Infamous Harlot, or something worse. I here add that this
sin offers also the greatest Indignity to the Incarnation of the Son of God
imaginable, who did therefore take upon him our Flesh to exalt it into his own
nature (his Heavenly Image) that no such filthiness might any longer inhabit in
it. To prevent which vileness in us, the same Apostle also peculiarly
concerning this sin, or any filthy Discourse tending toward it, gives charge
that it should not be so much as named amongst such as would pass for
Christians. But Fornication (says he to the Ephesians) and all Uncleanness,
Ephesians. 5.3, 4.
etc. let it not be so much as once named amongst you as becomes Saints. Nor
Filthiness, nor Foolish Talking, nor Jesting, which are not Convenient: And the
Apostle there assures us that no Whoremonger or unclean Person has any
Inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and of God.

Besides, the Seal of the Covenant of Grace with Abraham, was it not ordered by
God to be so particularly placed upon all the Faithful as to become in a manner
a punishment of their Lusts? And is there not a Natural shame upon every man in
the committing of those sins, or any thing like them though lawful? So as that
the light of the Sun, the sight of a pious Picture, the coming in of a little
Child, or almost any of God's Creatures, even a pious thought (which proceeds
also from God) is sufficient sometimes to overawe, prevent, and put by, the
most hardened Sinner from embracing the Temptation. And is it not a burning
shame that the presence of Almighty God and His. Holy Angels, who (with perfect
hatred of all Impurities) are continually looking upon us and dissuading us to
the contrary, should not be much more prevalent with us against such enormous
wickedness? But yet so strong are the habits of such Sins as in a manner to
dispoil us of all shamefacedness, and wholly to alter and corrupt the Nature
and Reason of those Persons in which they are; insomuch that the Practisers but
of one Species of them are called in the Revelations by the name of Dogs; Rev.
22.15. Phil. 3.2.
and so are the Gnostics by St. Paul, for their being guilty of some such like
impurities: As if the Custom and Beastliness of such sins did utterly depose
men from their manhood and change them into Dogs.

And lastly, not to omit the greatest Argument of all of the Deformity and
Filthiness of the sins of the Flesh, Romans 1.16.
we find in the Epistle to the Romans, when God had abandoned those Heathens
that had first forsaken him to follow their own Imaginations (since they would
not hearken to his Commands which were Holy, Just, and Good) they committed
such monstrous, unnatural Lusts that were the greatest disgrace to Humane
Nature that possibly could be: Men with Men, and so Women also, committing
those things that were unseemly and unbefitting rational Creatures. God grant
that we be not so left to our selves, so given over to our own hearts Lusts, a
certain sign of God's highest displeasure, and a forerunner of his heaviest
Judgments!

CHAP. III. Of the punishments of such Sins.
TO those dissolute, unthinking Wretches, who will not by the preceding
Arguments be prevailed on to leave their lewd, unmanly Course of Life, I shall
propose, in the second place, the Terrors of the Lord to persuade them, the
severe Punishments which inevitably attend such sins, that the Practisers
thereof may most rightly measure the greatness of their faults (which they make
Natural, and for that reason excusable,) by the great revenge God himself takes
of them. Thus St. Paul warns his Thessalonians to abstain from the Fornication
of the Gentiles, 1 Thessalonians. 4.6, 7.
the defrauding our Brother of his Wife, etc And what is the reason, because,
the Lord (says he) is the avenger of all such, all manner of Lusts, even those
committed only in the heart. And so in his Epistle to the Hebrews he pronounces
the same thing, Heb. 13.4.
Marriage is Honorable, and the bed undefiled, but Whoremongers and Adulterers
God will Judge. And in detestation of such unlawful Lusts, the Lord appointed
under Moses's Law, That a Bastard should not enter into the Congregation of the
Lord, Deuteronomy. 23.2.
until the tenth Generation. And does not the Prophet Jeremiah most
particularly threaten in God's Name such Sinners for their Assembling in Troops
into Harlots Houses, and running like fed Horses after their Neighbors Wives,
Shall I not Visit for these things (says the Lord), Jer. 5.7.
and shall not my Soul be avenged of such a Nation as this? Those Expressions,
The Lord is the Avenger, God will Judge, the Lord appointed, shall I not visit,
plainly show that God takes the punishing all such abominations into his own
hands, that they may be sure not to go unpunished even in this Life.

But this is not all, we find in Sacred Scripture God inflicting on these sins
not ordinary punishments, but such fearful Judgments to which none other can be
compared. The drowning of the whole World (about a Thousand Years after its
Creation, when all Flesh, excepting some very few Persons, had corrupted their
ways) was it not to wash away its pollution from these sins with a Flood? And
how many thousand Souls better than our selves perished in that Deluge? The
dreadful Raining of Fire and Brimstone from Heaven upon those miserable brutish
Cities, Sodom and Gomorrha, and the Cities about them (which yet perhaps were
not so bad as some Cities even nowadays amongst us) was it not to purify
their Land (which was once a Paradise upon Earth) from those loathsome sins by
Fire? The driving out all those mighty Nations from Canaan, and destroying
them, and giving their Land to the Children of Israel for a possession, was it
not for these abominable sins? See the eightenth Chapter of Leviticus, Lev. 18.
whereafter variety of those sins rehearsed (such as are not fit to be named
amongst Christians but with horror and detestation of them) it follows, Verse.
27. For all these abominations (the Name God himself there gives to these
loathsome sins) have the Men of the Land done before you and the Land is
defiled; and therefore in the Verse following, this defiled Land is said to
have spewed out the Inhabitants thereof who defiled it. In like manner the
Destruction of the Shechemites, the Death of Sampson, of Amnon, the Judgment of
God upon the Three and twenty thousand of the Children of Israel, 1 Cor. 10.8.
who fell in one Day at Baal-Peor, before they entered Canaan, were they not
for such Sins as these? And for the like Sins (even for one luxurious,
adulterous Act) was not the whole Tribe of Benjamin cut off, Judge. 20.
except only Six hundred Men? I might here add the remarkable Wars and
Slaughters that suddenly followed upon David's Adultery: as also the rending of
the ten Tribes from Solomon, as a Judgment for his being seduced to the
Toleration of Idolatry, by his exorbitant Lusts and unlawful Marriages; and
many more the like sad Examples, even out of the Annals of our own and other
neighboring Countries. And here also I might set down more at large God's
particular Denunciations against such Sins, by the Mouth of all his Prophets;
sometimes inflicting his great Judgments, Plague, Pestilence, Famine, Sword,
removing his Candlesticks, etc. But I think what is already said is enough to
show that these Sins of Uncleanness, tho seeming most excusable, and natural to
Man, are most abominable and loathsome in the sight of God: Especially, since by
the new Contract that is made between us and our Lord, we are become in a more
peculiar manner, Ephesians. 5.
the Spouse of Christ; and are therefore to keep our selves Chaste and Holy: We
are become likewise by a particular and higher degree of Sanctification, the
Temples of the Holy Ghost, 2 Cor. 6.19.
and are therefore not sacrilegiously to violate 'em, but to cleanse them from
all Filthiness, 2 Cor. 7.1.
so perfecting that Holiness which becomes God's House for ever: Ps. 92.5.
And this at our utmost Peril, For these Temples (says St. Paul) whosoever
defiles, 1 Cor. 3.17.
him will God eternally destroy. And a great Moralist that lived at the same
time with Saint Paul (and probably also was made a Christian by him, with some
others of Nero's Household) says in a manner the same thing (according to
Lactantius, De Div. Instit. Lib. 6. C. 25.) The most agreeable Temple we can
build for God, is to consecrate him in our Hearts: And therefore to build
otherwise would be to ruin our selves to all Eternity, which transcendently
exceeds all temporal Punishments put together.

CHAP. IV. Of the Chastity of Marriage, and the Purity of a single Life.
THus far concerning, First, The Impurity and Filthiness of the Sins of the
Flesh, with their Oppositeness to the Purity and Holiness of Almighty God, and
the defilement and dishonor they bring to the Persons that commit them: And,
Secondly, the severe Punishments and tremendous Judgments of Almighty God
toward such Sins above others.

But, I would not, by any means, be thought so to have censured in the
beginning of this Discourse, the present Age, as if there were not many amongst
the married Persons, whom God has reserved to himself (even in our own Nation)
most inviolably constant to one another, and that live strictly within the
Bounds and Obligations of that honorable State: And some also of the
Unmarried, that live single out of Choice, not Necessity; upon the account of
Virtue and Religion, not Licentiousness and Luxury: And many also, who after
one Marriage, abstain from a Second, upon the same serious account; as did
those Widows in the Primitive times of Christianity, 1 Timothy 5.
who were for that very reason taken into the Charity and Service of the Church.

MARRIAGE.
Marriage is Honorable in all and the Bed undefiled with sin: Ephesians. v. 32.
So Honorable that St. Paul compares the Union of Man and Wife with that of
Christ and his Church: But yet doubtless conjugal Chastity has many Degrees in
it, and in some is far more pure than in others. More pure in those who for
better performance of Holy Duties; or in Times of Humiliation, such as Lent,
Ember-Weeks, etc. before receiving the Blessed Sacrament, and the like, abstain
and separate, that they may give themselves to Fasting and Prayer. So in the
Old Testament, Exodus 19.15 1 Samuel 21.4.
before the descent of the Lord upon Mount Sinai, the People were commanded
three days Sanctification, and not coming at their Wives. Women kept from the
Young Men for about three days, and the Vessels of the Young Men Holy [i. e.
from their Wives.] And in times of more earnest Addresses to God, this
separation from Carnality was continually used amongst the Jews as appears from
the Prophet Zechary. Zech. 7.3.


But Conjugal Chastity is still more pure in those, who being separated for a
longer time, either upon the account of Sickness in one Party, or by necessary
absence of either of them about Worldly Affairs, in Journeys, Public
Employments, Embassies, or being taken Captive by an Enemy and the like, yet
both continue constant and faithful to one another, and this perhaps for many
years, notwithstanding the many strong Temptations the world presents.

So in the Case of Divorcement, or of a resolved Separation by consent, many
there are who take from hence an occasion of being more diligent in the Service
of God, and afterward perhaps of removing themselves out of all danger of
being ensnared and ruined by the Solicitations of Sense. And so likewise after
Espousals, some there have been, though not many, who according to the
Transcendent Example of our Blessed Lady and her Espoused Husband St. Joseph,
have never proceeded any further, but instead of Consummating the Marriage,
have transferred their Love and Affection to our Lord. So St. Austin treated
with his Spouse, and after having once vanquished himself and his exorbitantly
Incontinent Desires (of which himself so much complains, and in his Confessions
Laments) so as to be content even without Marriage it self, became a most Holy
Bishop, and one of the most Glorious Lights in the Church of God that ever the
World saw since the times of our Savior and his Apostles. And in our own
Nation King Edward (commonly called the Saint) lived together with his Queen a
holy Virginal Life, as Surius shows out of a very Ancient Manuscript. As did
also Henry the First Emperor, Bolislaus (the modest) King of Poland, Alphonsus
II King of Castile, Peter Vrceoli Duke of Venice, with may others. And St.
Austin in his 45 Epistle encourages a chaste Married Couple to persist
unalterably in their Holy Intention of abstaining, by urging to them some great
Examples, and telling them that Wedlock may still be maintained without
Carnality, by preserving entire the affection of the mind.

Since then those Marriages are to be Esteemed most Chaste which come nearest to
a Single Life, Single Life.
and allow most time for Devotion; and since also there are none in a Married
State so pure as to propose nothing else by Marriage, but the having of
Children and bringing them up in the fear of God and so filling Heaven with
immortal Souls, without any mixture of gross sensual Pleasure and Carnal
Satisfaction to themselves; and that many times beyond the bounds fixed and
allowed by almighty God, who ordained Man and Wife to be helps to one another
chiefly in spirituals; it must be granted in favor of those few (few
Comparatively speaking) who in Colleges, Inns-of-Court and the like, make
choice of a Single Life, that such a manner of Life (when truly Virtuous) has
the Pre-eminence of the Married State (ordinarily speaking) even in its
greatest purity. i. e. with sin, yet is the Virgins Bed more undefiled, more
Angel-like in respect of Corporeal purity. Luke 20.35.
And therefore hereafter not to Marry, nor be given in Marriage, but to be like
the Angels of God, is reckoned as a thing more Honorable for the body.
Concupiscence indeed has a share in the Single Life as well as in the Married:
But before the fall there was no such thing in humane Nature as Concupiscence;
and since the fall it is manifest the Single Life aims at a higher Degree of
that Primogeneral. Virginal purity that was in Man in the State of Innocence:
What else can be the meaning of that Expression of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 7.34.
The Virgin cares, etc. that she may be holy both in Body and Spirit? Holy,
that is certainly more holy and more pure than she could have been in a Married
state.

Single Life is free^ from Distractions, Worldly Cares and Impediments than the
Married Life can be. When a Man has double Obligations relating to this World,
and the next, and both of them require the greatest part of his time, he is as
it were divided between two, and knows not which to attend to first, or how to
quit his Obligations to one without incurring the displeasure of the other.
Whereas if a Man have his Liberty (which when we can have we are rather to use
it 1 Cor. 7.21.) and is not entangled with the present World, has no Wife or
Family and none to take care of but himself, what can hinder him from
Dedicating himself, his time and all that he can do or suffer to the Glory and
Service of God? I would have you (says the Holy Spirit by St. Paul to his
Corinthians) be [as much as may be] without carefulness; 1 Bor. 7.32.
especially the Pastors and Watchmen of Gods Church, who are to give an account
of the Souls committed to their charge. Heb. 13.17.
And it follows in the same Verse, He that is unmarried cares for the things
of the Lord, how he may please the Lord; but he that is Married cares for the
things of the Wo^ld, how he may please his Wife, and so she that is Married how
she may please her Husband: And yet the Married (both Men and Women) must
endeavor also to please the Lord (who has an absolute power over them
precedent to all others) and so are divided in their thoughts and cannot attend
upon the Lord [in Prayer and other holy Duties] without great distraction and
solicitude. For indeed nothing can be more contrary to Spiritual Exercises
(such as Prayer, Fasting and the like) than Carnal Pleasures; which by the very
Excesses they feed upon, and are therewith kept alive, discompose our Temper,
and divide and divert our Love and Affections to the Creature, which are always
best spent upon and consecrated to the Creator himself.

The Prophet Elijah, who was the first that set up the Standard of Virginity
upon Mount Carmel, was also himself a true Emblem of it, as being all Fire and
Zeal for the service of God, Prophesying and Preaching the Truth boldly, even
at Court, without having any regard either to worldly interest or his own
safety: And therefore after a Pure, Virginal, Angelical Life here, God
Translated him by an extraordinary manner that he should not see Death. 2 King.
2.11. Genesis 5.22, 24.
Which indeed happened also to Enoch a Married Person, for his walking with God
and giving a good Example in those early days of Religion, before the World was
come to such perfection as to know the Excellency of Virginity and the Single
Life; and besides that good Patriarchs Family being then perhaps the only
Church of God, he might justly think the increasing of it to be then of
absolute necessity: Especially since even in our times there are not wanting
some Eminent Persons, who Marry for no other end than to raise up Godly
Families that shall imitate themselves in Piety and Devotion, and in walking
like Enoch with God. Which nevertheless, though it be the most perfect Scope of
Marriage, yet comes not up to the Purity and Perfection of Virginity and the
Single Life, that is always sitting at the feet of Jesus, and incessantly
attending on the service of God.

It is upon this very account that St. Paul in his comparing these two States
together in his 1st. Epistle to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 7.38.
gives the preference to a single Life before Marriage. He that gives her in
Marriage does well, but he that gives her not in Marriage does better. And so
of a Widow, Verse. 40.
the same Apostle pronounces her happier in his Judgment if she so abide.
Better and happier then is the Single Life to those that can live continently
(and who ever used the means of Fasting, Prayer, frequent Communicating,
avoiding Occasions, etc. with sincerity and failed?) because such being freed
from Worldly cares, which occasion distractions, their Affections and
Understanding are better disposed for meditating and contemplating on Divine
things, and for receiving more and more Gifts and Graces of the Holy Spirit,
and so may be said to live more sensible of the Presence as well as the
Blessing of Almighty God, which is the only happiness (in this vale of
miseries) of humane life. And such Single Persons as are of meaner
Understandings, and so not capable of these higher matters, have yet by living
Single more leisure for Works of Charity toward their Neighbor, which are
altogether as acceptable to God, but yet not without the other necessary Duties
even of the most ignorant Christians, such as daily Prayers, frequenting the
Blessed Sacrament, Spiritual Pastors, etc. which ought not to be omitted upon
any even pious Pretense whatsoever.

The Encomiums of a Single Life are endless. St. Paul recommends it to all
Christians (much more than to the highest rank of them) 1 Cor. 7.32, 35.
before the pleasures of Marriage (to avoid the great Carefulness and
Distractions that necessarily attend that State:) Even to those also that after
enjoyment have left their Wives ( i. e. by mutual consent) upon the same
Spiritual account. And when our Savior says, There be some who have made
themselves Eunuchs (by embracing a Single Life) for the Kingdom of Heavens
sake, [i. e. For the better serving God in any way.] He who is able to receive
it, let him receive it, what is it but a Recommendation to his followers
(particularly to his Disciples and Guides of his Church) of that happier
Condition? And as to that popular pretense of multiplying the World and
continuing a Succession of Generations, that is not the care of Man but of God;
and Individual Persons (as many as are so resolved in their minds) may safely
choose the better State in order to their own greater happiness without fearing
the ruin of the World to ensue. And indeed our Savior (the fountain of all
Purity) by that Expression of making themselves Eunuchs, seems to grant (as St.
Crysostome observes) the power of living a Virtuous Single Life, a life of
Eunuchism, to all sincere endeavourers. And St. Paul also when he reckons up to
his Corinthians, his own good Actions and Labors, 2 Cor. 6.6.
inserts amongst them Pureness or Chastity; which he would not have done if he
had thought it the mere Gift of God without any concurrence or acquisition of
his own Watchings and Fastings and Prayers. If then those Married Persons are
commended and promised a Reward who keep themselves within the bounds of
Marriage, chaste from Adultery, Uncleanness, and all unlawful Carnal Pleasures;
and those also a higher Reward who Renounce the pleasures of Marriage and leave
their Wives (consenting thereunto) for the Kingdom of Heavens sake, that they
may love God the more entirely with all their Heart, all their Soul and all
their Strength, (which is the great Commandment of all); what shall be done
with those Virgins that have with much pains and difficulty abstained, not only
from unlawful, carnal Pleasures, Fornication, etc. but also from the lawful,
those of Marriage? It is certainly more Heroical (as a Holy Man observes) with
Virgins wholly to repel the importunities of the Flesh, than with the Married
only lawfully to satisfy them: A greater virtue to subdue, than only to
moderate the most Violent of our Passions. Their reward therefore in Heaven
must be proportionably greater, answerable to the several greater Degrees of
Purity to which they have here attained. Of them it is said in the Revelations
(at least of those of the highest degree of Virginal Purity) These are they who
were not defiled with Women, Rev. 14.4.
for they are Virgins: And they are there also called, The first Fruits unto
God, and unto the Lamb: And their Transcendent reward is, They follow the Lamb
whethersoever he goes. And of whom else is it said, but of the most pure
Virgin Mother of our Lord, That all Generations shall call her Blessed. Luke
1.48.


If it should here be objected, That in this Discourse there is little or
nothing said concerning the sins of the Flesh being also contrary to the Purity
of the Soul as well as of the Body; it is answered, That such sins are more
directly opposite to the purity of the Body, as being committed in it, and
cannot be committed without it, and are thence called the sins of the Flesh:
Care therefore being taken of the Purity of the Body, the Purity of the Soul is
included as to these sins. Not but there are other sins called Spiritual, more
proper to the Soul and more directly opposite to its purity, and more dangerous
also, because not so easily discernable by us as are the sins of the Flesh,
such as Pride, Hypocrisy, Ambition, Envy, Wrath, Contentions of Argument,
Disobedience to Superiors, Rebellion, Witchcraft, Curiosity of Science,
Schism, Heresy, and the like, which together with their chief Remedies,
Humility, Lowliness of Mind, Submission of Judgment, Contentedness, etc. would
be sufficient matter for so many different Discourses. And I might here insert
how far an obstinate Blindness, Ignorance or Error in the Understanding, and a
Peevish Perverseness in the Will, may be said to be the chief, if not the only,
Causes of these subtiler and more Spiritual wickednesses of the Soul. But at
present it shall suffice to have given some short account of the abominable
sins of the Flesh, and the sad Consequences thereof; Superadding only (which I
could not omit) what is so particularly marked out to us by St. Jude concerning
Rebellion: Jud. v. 8.
The Heads and Contrivers of which, he calls, Filthy Dreamers, that defile the
Flesh, despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities. This Character is so
plain that I need not point out the Persons concerned in it. For who are these
Filthy Dreamers, but those who pretend Revelations and Illuminations from God
to serve their own Lusts, who forsaking the Guides and Governors God has set
over them; and setting up for their own Passions, either of Revenge, or
Covetousness, or Ambition and the like; and finding no encouragement either in
God's Word or from good Men for what they do, perhaps do persuade themselves,
at least pretend to others, that they have new Advices, new Instructions, new
Lights from Heaven: And vainly puffed up in their Fleshly mind, do think to
shelter themselves and their wickedness under a pretext, under the Fige leaves
of Godliness and Spirituality; till like Corah and his Company Dreaming
themselves holy, Number. 16.31
and offering to God false Fire, they are suddenly swallowed up, even before
they can awake out of their filthy Dream.

I proceed next to the Cure and Prevention of the Sins of the Flesh, by
observing to the serious Reader, some few useful Rules out of those many,
Prescribed by Pious and Learned Men for the direction of themselves and others.

CHAP. V. The first Rule, Of our Affections, Memory and Imagination.
Its Bands are strong, Cant. 8.6.
strong as death, says the Spouse in the Canticles; Death that swallows all.
All our Faculties and Powers become Vassals to this Passion (even our fears
often proceed from our too great love), it hurries them on and when not rightly
placed, it never stops but in our ruin: Forcing us many times against our
minds (video meliora proboque, deteriora, etc.) to transgress our duty to God
and our selves, to lay aside our Liberty and Manhood together, and become Dogs,
Swine, absolute Slaves to our Lusts, and so wholly defacing the glorious Image
of God engraven in us, transforms us into Vessels of Dishonor fitted and
prepared by our own folly for Eternal Destruction. The Young Man that is
deceived and enticed by a Whore (who invites him in with a Stolen Waters are
sweet, Bread eaten in a corner is pleasant, or some such little Inveigling
Devices of the Devil;) follows her (says the Wiseman) As an Ox goes to the
Slaughter (i. e. with Greediness, as thinking he is going to a fresh Pasture;)
and as a Fool to the Correction of the Stocks, without any foresight at all;
Prove 5.5.9.18.
not knowing that he is in any danger till a Dart strike through his Liver. Where
as her house is the ready way to the Grave, going down to the Chambers of
Death, and her steps layhold on Hell. Behold the dreadful end of a sinful
dishonorable Love: Which well considered is certainly the best Remedy to stop
the Foolish beginnings thereof: And to cause Virgins to fly to their Veil to
secure their Beauty from occasioning their ruin, and to take Adulteries out of
their bosom and beware of the Curiosity which is always Criminal. But then on
the contrary if this powerful Passion of Love be rightly managed, so as to be
once fixed upon its true object, Almighty God, and to hate for love of him all
sin, and with St. Paul, Phil. 3.8.
count all things loss and dung to gain Christ; it then surmounts all
difficulties and casts out all fears, and renders the whole duty of a Christian
easy, and Sufferings and Persecutions for Christ's sake desirable, that he may
thereby more please God and become more conformable to our Lord, of which more
afterward.

Israelites, when they were delivered by God himself from the midst of a sinful
Nation, and miraculously fed in the Wilderness with Manna from Heaven, Number.
11.5, 6.
longed and lusted after the Fleshpots of Egypt, and so displeased Almighty
God more by wishing for them again than when they actually enjoyed them. So St.
Peter Compares a Christians returning to the Filthiness, from which he has
once escaped, 2 Pet. 2.22
to a Dogs returning to his vomit, and a Swine that is clean to her wallowing
in the mire. And our Savior himself has particularly forewarned us. Luke 9.62.
That whosoever has put his hand to the Plough [i. e. professed himself a
Christian] looking back [with any delight to his former sinful course of life]
is not fit for the Kingdom of Heaven. We are therefore most carefully to mind
these two Faculties, especially considering they are the very Storehouse of
the Soul: (See St. Austin in his Confessions ( lib. 10.8.) concerning the
boundless Capaciousness of the Memory for the comprehending the Images of all
things that can any way fall under Man's Consideration:) Which therefore if
filled with filthy Idea's, obscene Representations, and the like, most of all
disturb and distract us, and are the greatest hinderance to Piety imaginable;
and indeed the main Engine by which the Devil works (according to the power now
left him) his malicious designs upon us. Whereas on the contrary if they be
filled with good Objects, devout Representations, they do unavoidably cause
great Piety and Devotion in us, and our hearts cannot but be set upon such
Rich, Heavenly Treasure: Because our Imagination alone has so great influence
upon us either to good or bad, that such as our Fancy is, such is our Love, and
such is the whole Man. Every one is drawn (trahit sua quemque, etc.) by some
forcible Fancy, something that pleases, and according as that is thereafter are
our thoughts: It is well therefore if that something be either Truth or
Justice, or Beatitude and Eternal Life, the only true End and Scope of a
Christian.

Now in our watchfulness over these two faculties we are to have a particular
Eye, Our outward Senses. Not suffering them to approach, at least not dwell
upon, sinful Objects; but removing them presently from us or us from them. For
not Arguing with, but rather running away from them is the surest Remedy
against the Temptations of all sensual Objects; it being much easier to keep
our selves from any knowledge or experience of them, than after experiencing
them (so great is the Pravity of our Nature) from longing after them,
especially those which are Incitements to Lust. A Whorish Woman (says Solomon)
will hunt for the precious Life of a Man; Prove. 6.26, 27.
and you may as safely take fire into your bosom, or walk upon hot burning
Coals as Converse with her, or even look upon her without having first made a
Covenant with your Eyes.

When therefore our Circumstances are such that we cannot well avoid the
presence of a Tempting Object, our best Expedient is, stands always knocking
ready to be admitted and to enter with us into our Soul) and particularly to
pray and beseech him either to remove the present Temptation or preserve us
from it. Rev. 3.20.
Or (the sooner to put it out of our mind) we may recite any Affectionatly
pious Devotions or Psalms, we have ready stored up in our Memory, which will
make our Intention (not capable of long minding two things at once) unawares
quit its former sinful object. Or we may consider with our selves the
bitterness and sting sin (whatsoever) committed leaves behind it, by reason of
the uncertainty of our true Repentance and Sincere Reformation of Life. Or we
may meditate on the Dolorous Passion of our Savior which rent the very Rocks;
Heb. 6.6.
or any part of his sufferings in the Garden, at the Pillar, upon the Cross;
and that Voluntarily to sin is as much as in us lies to Crucify him afresh. Or
on some one of the Four last things. On Death, which puts an end to all Earthly
pleasures in a moment, and separates a wicked Soul not only from the Body, but
from God forever. On the last Judgment, when the dreadful Sentence on Drolling
Debauchees and all Impenitents will be, Go ye Cursed. Mat. 25.41
On Hell, That everlasting Fire whither the Cursed are to go. Or lastly, On the
Unspeakable Joys of Heaven, which may be so advantageously represented to the
Soul as to drive out the thoughts of all other pleasures. For there the Blessed
have their Knowledge perfected, Ps. 63.5.
their Afflictions rewarded more than they were in the least worthy. Romans 8.18
Rev. 22.4.4.8.
They possess all Riches, all Honor, enjoy all Pleasures, are ravished with
the Beauty and Holiness of our Lord; Ephesians. 4.10.
Joh. 17.21, 23.
filled with the fulness of God, made one with Christ and with God: Which are
those high things so far surpassing our Understanding that (according to St.
Paul) Eye has not seen, 1 Cor. 2.9. 2 Cor. 12.4.
nor Ear heard, nor has it ever entered into the heart of Man to conceive them.
And if none or all of these Meditations and innumerable others relating to our
Savior and another World (with which the Holy Scriptures and other good Books
amply supply us) cannot prevail to secure us, it is certainly much better
rudely to quit the Company and leap out of the flames, than to stay out of
Complaisance to be burnt in them.

CHAP. VI. The Second Rule, Of Suggestions.
THE Second Instruction is, To take great care of Suggestions, and to observe
from what Principle or Cause they proceed: Whether, 1st. From our selves, or
our own Lusts; Or, 2ly. From the Devil; Or, 3ly. From the H. Spirit of God; and
accordingly we are either to entertain or reject them. Now it is not easy,
even for the greatest Asceticks to discern upon all occasions from which of
these Principles a Suggestion arises; but if it be such as tempts us to any
Notorious sin, any Filthy uncleanness, we may presently know from whence it
comes. And then it is much better and easier to suppress it in its very
beginning, to stifle it in the Embryo before it be conceived in us by our
consenting to it, or at least before it break forth into any outward action,
which when finished brings forth Death. Jam. 1.15.
Filthy, unclean Suggestions we cannot always prevent, but we may refuse
consenting to them, or taking any delight in them; and so suppress and keep
them under (by God's Assistance) till at length we Totally extinguish them. O
that God's Holy Spirit would take such full possession of my heart as not to
suffer any unclean Suggestion to enter there!

But if the sin to which we are tempted be habitual to us, or the sin which
does most easily of all others beset us, Heb. 12.1.
we are then to bend all our forces against it, make the strongest resolutions
we can, for some short time at least, suppose for a day, and so renew our
resolutions every Morning (the known practice of a Renowned Bishop of the
Church of England in Point of Matrimony) taking particular Notice how often it
assaults us, and in the midst of the Temptation using some external action (if
nothing but violence will do) such as throwing our selves down upon our knees
or face, beating our Breast, supplicating our Lord with sighs and tears (when
God pleases to give them) for his assistance, who has promised that he will
not suffer us to be tempted above what we are able, 1 Cor. 10.13.
but will with the Temptation make a way for our Escape, or enable us to bear
the pressure of it. At least, it is wisdom to delay the Execution of the foul
Act to which we are tempted, for by deferring it, our reason may gather new
forces, our Passions abate; or some External Accidents may intervene: Some
pious reflection of our own may occurr; or some good Friend may come in, to
whom we may impart our deplorable Condition and ask his good Advice, who at
such a time is much better able than we our selves to give it; and in this
sense chiefly it is that the bearing one another burdens is the fulfilling of
the Law of Christ. Gal. 6.2.


After the vanquishing of such a Temptation, and the leaving as far as we can
our own Nature to go over to Grace, there usually comes an Angel to comfort us,
or what is better, some holy Inspiratons of the Divine Spirit to incline us
(who of our selves cannot so much as think a good thought) to thank God for our
deliverance, 1 Cor. 3.5.
and to pray for more Grace and Strength against another time. Such holy
Inspirations we must take care not to repel; for that would be more or less to
Resist, Grieve, and Quench the Holy Spirit of God in us: But on the contrary we
must Cherish all good Thoughts, and by them endeavor to introduce, by little
and little, Virtues instead of our ill Habits. When once we intend to begin a
new Course of Life, we must not in the least consult with Flesh and Blood, but
rather fall immediately upon it. If at any time, why not now, if not now,
perhaps never? Was the saying of St. Austin. And in the acquiring of any
Virtue, suppose Continency, Chastity or the like, we may (with the same Father)
boldly throw our selves upon God who will not withdraw himself to let us fall,
Projice te in Deum, etc. But yet our own sincere Endeavors after a pure mind
and right intention must not be wanting, to which God always gives a Blessing
though we are not always sensible of it.

Now some perhaps may think Solemn Resolutions to one Just beginning to break a
long custom and habit of any filthy sin to be both Rash and Dangerous, because
when once broken (as many times first Resolutions are, the ill habit being as
yet much stronger than the good one to be introduced) the overgrown Sinner is
apt to be either too much discouraged and so fall into despair; or to be more
hardened in his most shameful Vice, and so Incorrigibly go on still in his old
wonted Road of Debauchery: It may therefore be much safer for a beginner to
make a limited Conditional Promise and such as is Releasable upon a
Forefeiture. Suppose (for Example) we resolve to abstain from such a filthy
sin, from such lewd Company, for so long a time, or if we do not we will
indispensibly pay so much Money to be given to the poor, say so many Prayers,
fast so many Meals, shut up our selves so many Days from all Company, and the
like (and this besides and over and above the necessary requisites of our
Repentance); which present forefeiture or punishment (in our Purse or
otherwise) many times has a greater Influence upon us toward the breaking off
a Debauched Custom, than either the fears or hopes of what may and certainly
will happen to us (according to our deserts) in another World.

Moreover, the resolving upon such a Penalty for the Forefeiture as does really
afflict the Body, such as Fasting, long Retirement, Watching, etc. or
diminishing our beloved treasure and substance, by giving large Alms to
Prisons, Hospitals, poor Housekeepers, etc. will certainly fix in our memory
an hatred of the sin, and so mind us of every Suggestion of it, and deterr us
from embracing it: because, if a temporal punishment be immediately to follow
it much lessens the desire of the imaginary pleasure, and oftentimes occasions
the reflecting also on the future real punishment, eternal Death, which is the
final Doom and the Inseparable wages of all unrepented, Romans 6.23.
unforsaken sin. But then to every good purpose we must not forget to join this
Resolution also, that if we should at any time by infirmity, or surprise,
relapse into the detestable sin against which we have resolved (for he that
stands must take heed least he falls, Romans 11.21.
and be not high minded but fear) we will not however abandon our selves to it,
but on the contrary renew and make stronger Resolutions against it with severer
Penalties annexed, and so valiantly continue on the fight till it shall please
God to give us the Victory.

Such voluntary Mortifications are likewise Efficacious not only for the taming
and keeping under the body, but for the obtaining also from God (by our thus
siding and taking part with his Divine Justice against our sins) the particular
Gift and Grace of which we stand in need. Some unclean Lust is not to be
subdued, Mat. 17.21.
some Devil not cast out without Fasting as well as Prayer. Our sparing
Self-Mortifications, is like sparing the Rod to the Child, but the using of
them is the ready way to prevent God's Judgments from falling upon us in
particular; or upon our Country for our sakes, and by reason of our sins, or
to remove them when begun Thus Ezra and his People fasted and besought God,
Ezra 8.21.
and he was entreated for them. And so another time Queen Esther and the whole
Jewish Nation just as they were going to be Massacred, Est. 4.16.
were preserved by the same means of Fasting and Prayer. The Ninevites also
were spared upon the same account of their great Humiliation, Jon. 3.10. And so
the Prophet Daniel attained to so great Knowledge and Wisdom, and so high a
degree of the Divine Favor, by his long fasting and mourning and praying for
God's only Church and People; Dan. 1.17. Dan. 10.3. And indeed I know no other
way of stoping God's Judgments, even when they are breaking out upon us, than
by thus applying our selves to Mollify his Justice that we may not fail of his
Mercy.

But yet the greatest Humiliation of all, and most Beneficial, Jam. 5.16.
is the telling our sins to one another as often as we commit them,
particularly to our Spiritual Pastors, which will be apt to awe us (if not
hardened) from sinning in that kind any more; and our Pastor by his good
Directions, Prayers, and the power with which Almighty God has entrusted him,
is able (with our concurrence) to administer the best Remedy to all our sins.
And then another Person, though he were not more Learned, being no way concerned
or interested in our Affairs, must needs be more void of Passion, more
Impartial, and Consequently can better Judge of us, better Direct and Guide us
than we our selves O that we could thus die to all things but God, and take no
pleasure but in Self-denials and Mortifications for the sake of Jesus: From
whence flows that Humility and Purity of heart, Mat. 5.8.
to which our Savior has Emphatically annexed the Blessedness of seeing God!

CHAP. VII. The Third Rule, Of the Occasions of grosser Sins.
THirdly, We are to avoid the Occasions of the sins of the Flesh. Some of them
I shall name. Provision for the Flesh to fulfill the Lusts thereof. Romans 13.14.
Strong Meats, strong Drinks, high Sauces are not convenient, as being many
times very hurtful to the Memory and Understanding, always heightening and
disordering the Passions. Be not drunk with Wine (says St. Paul to his
Ephesians) wherein is Excess: Ephesians. 5.18.
And in Excess a Man knows not what he does, but is ready to go along with his
Company, and to commit with them the greatest lewdness and outrage whatsoever,
under the pretense of a Frolic. Lev. 10.9.
Wherefore Priests under the Old Law, in the time of their Attendance on God in
the Execution of their Function, were forbidden such things. And all Christians
now are in some manner God's Priests. Rev. 5.10.
Great Caution therefore is to be taken of Invitations and public
Entertainments. It is much safer to eat alone, or with few and those Abstemious
Persons. And then rather mean Diet to be chosen than Delicacies, (poor Peoples
Children we see thrive best;) often calling to mind the hard fare of our Lord
and his poor Disciples (whom he chose poor) Who fed on Ears of Corn,
Barley-Bread, Mat. 12.1. Joh. 6.9.
Fish, an Honeycomb, Water, and the like, and St. John Baptist, upon Locusts
and Wild-Honey, and the holy Men of Egypt (according to St. Jerome) upon much
harder Fare. Often remembering also, the All-satisfying Food promised us in
Heaven, which will keep us from ever hungering or thirsting any more. Blessed
are they that shall eat Bread in the Kingdom of God. Luke 14.15. Rev. 19.9.
And Blessed are they that are called to the Marriage Supper of the Lamb. Lord
evermore give us that Heavenly Bread that never perishes, and that Heavenly
Water also which shall be in us a well of Water Springing up to everlasting
Life.

The great reason why we ought (if we intend to avoid the sins of the Flesh) to
take particular care of living Temperate in our Diet, and of observing frequent
Fastings, especially the Solemn Fasts of the Church, is, because by our Eating
and Drinking the Flesh arms and furnishes it self as it were with new
Provisions for fighting against the Spirit: New Matter and Fuel is administered
to Concupiscence, and the Brain many times so heated as not to be able to make
a right Judgment of things. It was after a great Dinner when Herod for the sake
of a filly Dancing. Mar. 6.21.
Girl, consented to the beheading of the Venerable and Chaste St. John Baptist,
as having been an open Enemy to his Incestuous Marriage. It was in Drunkenness
when Lot committed double Incest with his Two Daughters. Genesis 19.
Hos. 4.11. Romans 13.13.
And we find all along in Scripture, Drunkenness and Gluttony inseparable
Companions of Lust. And then the necessary Repairs of our Body returning so
often, we are obliged in a manner to be continually upon our Guard, and to put
a Knife to our Throat (as the Wise Man advises) that we be not overcome by our
Appetite. This Concupiscence in Eating and Drinking (by reason of the daily
necessities of the Body) is no such thing (says St. Austin in his Confessions)
which we can resolve to cut off at once and touch no more as we may do other
things. Eat and Drink we must, yet not to Excess. The reins therefore of the
Throat are to be held with a moderate hand between too little and too much; And
who is he O Lord (says the same Father) that is not sometimes transported
beyond the Lists of Necessity? Whoever he be, a great one he is, let him
magnify thy Name. So that in one word our living temperate and watching over
our Appetite, so as to thwart it in every thing, is the taking away the chief
and most principal occasion of Lust, and as I may say the quenching of it in
its very Cause. Fraena gulam, etc. Bridle your Appetite (says Thomas a Kempie)
and you will the more easily bridle every Inclination of the Flesh.

To Temperance in Meat and Drink, and frequent Fastings, we may add Watching
and Moderating our Sleep, which (as Experience shows us) very much tames the
Flesh (as it does even the wildness of the most savage Beasts) and in a manner
produces the same effects upon it as Fasting, renders us less disposed to
sensual Mirth, and more inclined to Silence and Recollection. When in Bed, if
we cannot sleep, Praying and Medirating is necessary, and sometimes rising from
our Beds (when we cannot otherwise drive away impure Thoughts), and passing the
whole Night under God's wing in Devotions without any sleep at all, according
to the Examample of our Lord, Luke 6.12. 2 Samuel 12.16.
his Apostles, King David and other Saints. For lazy Sleep, and indeed all
manner of Sloathfulness, is so near a kin to Lust that nothing can break it off
but violence and strong resolutions against it: Forcing our selves out of our
Chair or Couch to some Virtuous Action, or Pious Company, or the ordinary
business of our Employments, or what is much better, to our Prayers And it is
worth all our pains and trouble, if it were only for preserving our Chastity:
To which Virtue alone the Two great Monarchs of the World, Cyrus and Alexander,
seem to have owed the success of their Arms; and the Apostate Julian (when he
had left all other Virtues) most truly owned that this Queen of Virtues made
Lives more Beautiful than Painters Could Faces Fair; and the Reason given by
Salvian of the Goths gaining the Empire of Rome is, That they were a Nation far
more chaste, and sent on purpose by God to chastise the Effeminacy of the
Romans: And yet that Virtue in them so Eminent, how far short came it of true
Christian Chastity, which ought to be embraced for the sole sake of Christ, and
accompanied also with all other Christian Virtues which they wanted. The Truth
is, to sleep and loyter away our time (which is one of the most precious
Talents with which Almighty God has entrusted us) is altogether mispending of
it; and so is also the passing of it in Drunkenness, high Gaming, etc. from
whence naturally proceeds Swearing, Cursing, Damning our selves and others, all
which are far worse than Idleness it self. A diligent Employment therefore,
such as together with our Prayers, and the Exigences of Nature, (not exclusive
of some short innocent Diversions) measures out all our time, is absolutely
requisite even to the greatest Personages: And the more of it that is spent in
the Immediate Service of God the better, as coming nearer the eternal
Employment of the Blessed in Heaven. But of all the Labors, the resisting
Temptations and our Passions, and all encouragements to Sloth and Idleness, (so
frequently recommended to us in Holy Scripture under the Name of Vigilance and
Watching) is the greatest and most worthy a Man; and time is never b^^ter spent
than in so doing. Blessed is that Servant whom our Lord when he comes shall
find so Employed. Mat. 24.46.


Seneca long ago concerning the Temper of the World in general: That he could
never go abroad in it one day and return home again at night with the same
manners he carried out with him; but was still rifled of some Virtue or other,
and rendered either more ambitious, or more luxurious and the like. Which holds
much truer of Lewd and Debauched Company nowadays, who are the very Scum and
Reproach of Mankind, setting up (as the Infidels did the Statues of Venus and
Adonis in the place of the Holy Cross) Debauchery in the place of Piety, and
having accustomed themselves to Fleshly Lusts, perfectly hate all Spiritual
Actions and Persons whatsoever, and knowing the Judgment of God against the
Committers of such things, yet not only do the same, but take pleasure in them
that do them; whose very words also, and sometimes breath is contagious; and
many times, to keep up and maintain their lewd Courses, they are forced to
become common Mercenaries in all sorts of Wickedness to buy themselves bread
(as is notoriously evident to the whole World); and you cannot converse with
such without being in danger, either, 1st. of partaking of their sins (which
they think only necessary accomplishments to fit one for their Company) even by
not reproving them; or, 2dly of being infected by their ill Example, they
always crying up Liberty and Luxuty against Mortification and Chastity: Eccl.
13.2. 1 Cor. 15.33
Whereas there is no touching of Pitch without being defiled therewith, no
having Communication with ill manners without being insensibly corrupted by
them.

Our Conversation therefore is more safe with Virtuous Persons: And those
rather few than many; such as may either better us, or we them. But as for
open, lewd, profane Livers, who publish their sin as Sodom, glory in their
shame, boast of their Debaucheries as so many great Achievements (as if the
Christian Hero was to be known by often violating, not by defending the
Bulwarks of Chastity) and being perhaps Gentlemen think they are above all
Ordinances whatsoever; and so having removed all Landmarks between good and
evil, and owning no Obligation to a Supreme Power, besides what is Suggested
from Nature, profess themselves downright Libertines, and count it their
greatest Excellency to have neither Virtue nor Religion (which they call Chains
and Fetters; whose death however is commonly in Despair): We are strictly
forbidden having any Society with such. I have written to you (says St. Paul to
his Corinthians) not to keep Company if any Man that is called a Brother be a
Fornicator, etc. or a Drunkard, etc. with such a one no not to Eat. And this,
1st. in order to the bettering of him by making him ashamed. Or at least, 2ly.
for the preserving our selves from being insensibly corrupted by him. Or, 3ly.
from giving Scandal to others by our frequenting such ill Company. Thus St.
Austin's Religious Mother carried herself toward her own Son, who till he had
Renounced his Manichaean Heresy and Vicious Life together, and become a good
Christian, would not so much as eat with him; tho nevertheless when alone she
was almost always in prayers and tears to God for him, till she had obtained
his Conversion.

It is a saying of Matchiavil, That the ready way to ruin a State or Kingdom
is to fill it with ill manners. Good reason then for good Men to take care how
they Converse with ill, and to suspect all they do not know; least at length,
not only themselves but the Public also be endamaged by it. But then Cases of
necessity are to be exempted, when either we or they cannot subsist or perform
our ordinary Duties without our coming together; or there is high Probability
of our Reforming them by our Conversing friendly and virtuously with them.
Otherwise we are forbidden all manner of Conversation with such notorious
Sinners, so long as they continue the Custom and Practice of their lewd and
wicked Courses and seem obstinately resolved so to do: Because our siding and
herding with such is plainlly the declaring our selves on the Devils side, open
Enemies to God and all goodness And for this reason it is that the Church of
Christ (like a most wise Mother) has in all Ages taken strict care to secure
her obedient Children from the Infection of the Disobedient, by making severe
Canons against Praying, Communicating, and (in some Cases) speaking with the
Perverse, whether their Errors were in Faith or Practice. Because she not
discerning the hearts of her Children, can only level her Censures against
their External Profession as she perceives them faulty either in Doctrine or
Manners; and those that will not be restrained, must blame, not her, but
themselves, if they incurr her Anathema's instead of her Blessings. Can. Apost.
See Can. Apost. 11, 12, 13. Conc. Laod. Can. 33, 38, 39. Council. Carthag. 4.
Can. 72, 73. St. Aug. Ep. 48. and Ep. 152.

To Lewd and Debauched Company we may add lewd Books, as the worst and most
dangerous Companions of all: Because they usually take us alone, and when
perhaps least upon our Guard. By lewd Books I mean nasty Ribaldry, Novels,
Poems, Songs, Pictures, Romances, and many of our Modern Plays (which of that
kind are so much the worse as their Language is better) the Authors whereof
(even when they become Penitents) can never (ordinarily speaking) make a
sufficient Satisfaction to God and the World, without a Solemn Retractation of
them. Many unwary, both Men and Women, have been ruined by them, none bettered,
because indeed they with all the Pomp imaginable recommend the Debauchery they
pretend to expose; and if you observe it, always speak more wittily for, than
against the Vice they are describing. But as bad Books are the worst, so good
Books are the best Companions in the World: The safest retreat from ill
Company, more advantageous than the best, and the greatest Felicity on this
side of Heaven. In omnibus requiem quaesivi, etc. I sought my quiet in all
things of this Life, but could not find it, only in Angello cum libello, with a
little good Book in a convenient Nook.

grown almost into a Fashion amongst us, are to be most watchfully avoided by
us, whether they be single Houses or whole Cities. No trusting to the smooth
words of an Harlot, who lays in wait at all the Corners of the Streets, Prove.
7.5.10.16.
enticing whom she can to her house; pretending all things are made ready for
them, when at the same time she intends only to make a prey of them. And the
same Wiles and Crafts may be observed in common Drunkards and all profligate
Sinners, who are also very dexterous in using their Witticisms and little
Artifices to deceive and draw in others. Thomas a Kempis advises against too
great Familiarity with any (especially Women) how good soever, much more with
lewd Persons, or Cohabiting with them. No safe venturing into their Houses
where this Leprosy has been spread: No secure coming into Sodom, even for an
Angel. Righteous Lot, or any good Man, must not stay there when he cannot
convince them, least he be consumed with them. And I suppose Tire and Sidon,
and the other Cities about them, to have been in the same condition. And yet we
find our Savior pronouncing greater Woes upon some other Cities (in his time
of Conversing visibly upon Earth) that had received greater mercies, greater
means of Salvation; We to thee Chorazin, Mat. 11.21.
woe to thee Bethsaida: If the mighty works that have been done in you, had been
done in Tire and Sidon they would have repented long ago, sitting in Sackcloth
and Ashes. Therefore it shall be more tolerable for those Cities in the day of
Judgment than for you. And I pray God those Woes may not reach our ungrateful
Cities, which have seen so many of God's mighty Works, and felt so many of his
Fatherly Corrections, yet are still so overrun with all sorts of uncleanness
and sensuality (as too many profligate Wretches will tell you without blushing)
that we cannot expect less than that the utmost of the Divine Vengeance should
forthwith after an extraordinary manner (as lately upon Jamaica) be poured out
upon us. God's ordinary dreadful Judgments, such as Plague, Fire, Sword,
Poverty, have not reclaimed us, and nothing now (as it seems to me) but a
speedy Exemplary Repentance, like that of Nineveh, can avert our ruin. Our
good Lord give us such true, universal, over-prevailing Repentance, before it
be too late.

Before I conclude this Chapter, give me leave to add one Caution more
concerning Discourse, as being the most dangerours Occasion of the filthiest
sins. All levity therein, foolish Talking, Jesting, Buffoonery, Superfluous
Facetiousness, Affectation of Wit and the like, must be avoided; because they
tend wholly to the pleasing of men, and that many times not without grossly
offending of God: and woe to them that (in such manner) Laugh now, for they
shall eternally weep hereafter. Luke 6.25.
It is good Advice therefore which is given by a very Learned Person upon this
Point, to use an Holy Reservedness in our Conversation, even with intimate
Friends, and not to turn our inside outward, or to speak all that comes in our
thoughts. Because, having many imperfections most of our thoughts must needs be
weak and unrefined, and we apprehend at first sight according to Nature, not
Grace, unless some Preconsideration be used. And in much Company we are to
accustom our selves rather to silence (sometimes imposing it upon our selves if
given to talk much) so far forth as is consistent with our Duty and Common
Civility: And not to permit the lewd or idle Discourse of others to interrupt
(as little as may be) our Praying continually, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.
always giving thanks, rejoicing always in the Lord, which is the true Life and
perfection of a Christian. The Guarding thus our own Tongues well and Watching
other Men's, cuts off perhaps the greatest occasion of our corrupting or being
corrupted: As may be seen more at large in the many particular Discourses upon
this Subject, to which I referr the Reader. Subjoining only the warning our
Savior has given us, That of every idle word we speak (much more of our
Perjuries, Mat. 12.36, 37.
Obstinacies, palpable Lies and Blasphemies) we must give an account at the day
of Judgment, and that according to our words we shall either be Condemned or
Justified. God grant we may not out of our own mouths be condemned in that
terrible day.

CHAP. VIII. The Fourth Rule, Of Divine Assistances and the means of obtaining
them.
FOurthly, The last Rule I shall mention is, The being mindful of the Powerful
Assistances afforded Christians above all others in the Conquering their Lusts,
and of the means also of obtaining those Assistances. For it is to be noted,
1st. That no one Sin is Pardoned but by the Death of Christ. 1 Cor. 15.3.
2ly. That to the applying the Merits of Christ's Passion to us there are
required some Conditions on our part, Phil. 2.12.
namely our Assenting and Cooperating with God's Grace. 3ly. That by such
Application not only our sins are remitted, Ephesians. 2.5.4.25.
but we receive the Grace of Regeneration, changing us in our minds, implanting
us into Christ, enabling us to good works, Romans 2.13. Joh. 1.12.
to become doers of the Law, Sons of God, etc. The manner of such our
Regeneration and of the Divine Assistance is thus. First, Mat. 28.19. Ephesians. 5.26.
When we are Baptized into Christ's Church, not only past sins are washed away
(supposing us rightly disposed thereunto) but also a new Power and Ability
Supernatural of Living holily for the future is conferred and superadded: Tit.
3.5, etc.
Acts 11.16
The Holy Ghost being then personally given us, and God's Grace Efficaciously
planted in us for newness of Life, Romans 6.4.7.6.
and bringing forth Good Works. By the Assistance of this Grace therefore our
corrupt Nature is so perfectly restored and made capable of all Virtue, that we
may and are obliged also therewith totally to subdue our Lusts; so as to live
free from the habit even of unclean thoughts, Gal. 5.24.
and from the commission of all unclean Acts, at least of those greater before
mentioned, which we are sure (from God's own Word) exclude the Kingdom of
Heaven. By this new principle of Grace, Ephesians. 5.5.
which works with us, (and without which our working signifies nothing) a
real Holiness, and Facility to Good, is conveyed into our Souls; our
Understanding is Illuminated so as readily to embrace the Holy Mysteries of
Christ's Religion which are above it, above it is natural Knowledge and Reach,
and past its ever finding out but by Revelation: Our Will from time to time
inspired with new and divine Affections and at length influenced (at least in
some Persons) with an impatient Love of God above all other things. And the
same Holy Spirit, which thus Acts and Assists within us, interceeds also for
us, Romans 8.26.
with groans which cannot be uttered: groans irresistably prevalent at the
Throne of Grace.

To the first Grace therefore given us at our Baptism, if we make a right use
of it, more and more is added ( to every one that has [improved his one
Talent] more shall be given, Mat. 25.29.
and he shall have abundance:) And sometimes to the same well-disposed Person
are conferred several Talents, several different Gifts (for God's greater
glory) of the same Holy Spirit; but yet the most excellent Grace which we are
above all to covet, 1 Cor. 12.31.
as being that without which all other Graces signify nothing to us, is, 1 Cor.
13.13
Charity or the Love of God: Which is the most effectual remedy of all our
Lusts or false Loves, and when once obtained does in a manner the whole work of
a Christian it felf, because by its secret Energy it centers all our Affections
in our Lord, so as sweetly to compel us to seek in all things a punctual
Observance and conformity to his holy Will, and in nothing to displease him,
with whom our Soul being ravished is sick of love for him and languisheth with
a perpetual desire, Cant. 5.8.
either, 1st. of suffering for him (thereby at once to show the Truth of our
love and to purify us as Gold in a burning Furnace;) Or, 2ly. of praying to Him
(the only way of Conversing with him upon Earth); Or, 3ly. Of fully enjoying
him in Heaven, even though it were through Martyrdom it self. Which great
Virtue shined most Eminently in St. Mary Magdalen, whose sins which were many
were therefore forgiven her, because she loved much: And her chosing to sit at
the feet of Jesus to hear his words, our Savior himself calls the unum
necessarium, the better and sublimer part of a Christian, which nothing can
take away.

And albeit this love of God inferrs and comprehends the love of our Neighbor,
and of our selves, and of all things that belong to God, yet these not after
the fashion of the World, but only as consistent with and much increasing and
enflaming our love of God. So that by showing our love to God (as we are
obliged) all the ways that we can, we are continually enlivening and augmenting
it, and still think it little and unworthy of eternal life; and that it is want
of our Endeavors, and not of God's Grace, which hinders us from attaining
still higher Spiritual Gifts and a more intense love of our Lord; every little
Inclination in us to any thing else, if not thoroughly mortifyed, being enough
to retard our progress in this true way to perfection: This one thing I do
(says St. Paul to his Philippians) forgeting those things which are behind
[already obtained] and reaching forward to those things which are before [not
yet obtained] I press toward the Mark for the price of the high calling of God
in Christ Jesus. Phil. 3.13.
And if so great an Apostle, when he had so far attained as perhaps none
farther, in the Love of God and Self-mortifications (witness his Watchings, 2
Cor. 6.5.11.23.
Fastings, Labors, Stripes, Imprisonments, Deaths) was still pressing forward;
much more ought we to mend our pace who are so far behind, so far from perfect
Charity and perfect Chastity as to be still wallowing in our ^usts, still
hankering after the Gratifications of Sense. We ought not only to be mindful of
the powerful Assistances God has afforded us to Purity and Holiness, but also
actually to make use of them for that very end and purpose; those Assistances
of the Holy Spirit being such as continually war against the Flesh, Col. 3.1.
stirring us up to seek those things that are above and supernatural; and so
after an ineffable manner (if we endeavor to correspond to them) unite us to
Christ and God and bring down Heaven into our Souls, quenching in us the thirst
to all sensual Pleasures, making them by degrees seem more and more
contemptible to us and at length odious: Quas sordes, quae dedecora, etc. what
filthiness did they Suggest, what disgrace and dishonor? says St. Austin in
his Confessions concerning his formerly beloved, but then much more hated,
Lusts.

The way therefore to experience the good of Christianity, is resolutely to
enter upon practicing Christian Virtue by a more strict observance of Gods
Laws, and purging our selves from the contrary Vices. For none (how learned
soever) can truly know God, but they that serve him: And a poor Shepherd, that
faithfully serves him, will by experience know more of God in his chiefest
Excellencies, than a Doctor of the Chair that does only talk of him. And as the
Grace of God is the principal Instrument of a good Christian Life; so the next
to that, is frequent examining our Consciences, once or twice a day; that so we
may learn to know by little and little how to distinguish between the motions
of Grace and those of Nature, what are Temptations and what not (and here the
Judgment of some wise conscientious man more skilful than our selves is to be
taken in) least we should place our greatest Consolation (as the Soul always
does in something) in any thing that is not God. We are to think our selves
below all, and that there are none more frail than our selves; to empty our
selves of all affections to Earthly things, and to have no propriety or desire
that shall in the least wise hinder our love to God from being pure: To leave
our Lusts and that forever, which though with St. Austin we may find difficult,
yet with him also we shall thereby find our selves freed from a Chain: To be so
indifferent, lastly, to joy or sorrow, Temptation or quietness, Life or Death,
and all things in this World, as to expect no Consolation here but what flows
from the Cross. This is dying to our selves and all Creatures, that we may be
united to God; which the Holy Scriptures call partaking of the Divine Nature, 2
Pet. 1.4.
turning our heart to God, conformity to his Holy Will, walking in the Truth,
serving him with a pure mind ( i. e. without anxiety or Expectation of reward)
rejoicing in him, acquiescing in him, 2 Pet. 3.1.
going out of our selves into him by a perfect Abnegation of our selves, Mark
8.34.
referring all things to his Glory and making him all in all to us, 1 Cor.
25.28 Ephesians. 1.6.
which is the perfection of Religion, as may be seen more at large in Thomas a
Kempis and other Spiritual Books.

But then in our endeavoring after this perfection we must beware of the
highest cunning and must subtle Device of the Devil, which the Scripture calls
his transforming himself into an Angel of Light. And that is either, 1st. By
his stirring up in us a secret self-conceit of our good Actions as if they
could not possibly be mended. Or, 2ly. His throwing in some little specious
Reasonings and Fallacies to make us abate or alter them (as he always pretends)
for the better and for God's greater Glory. For example; in the exercise of our
Charity toward our Neighbor, to corrupt that Divine Love, he usually suggests
something from Reason to induce us to change Divine into Rational; then
something from Nature to change Natural into Carnal, then something from our
Flesh alone to change Rational into Natural, till by degrees he renders that
love in us, which was at first Divine and Pure, altogether impure and unchaste
and most opposite and most displeasing to Almighty God. But yet for the most
part he takes care not to deface all Virtue in his Servants, that neither
themselves nor others may easily discern the wickedness he intermixes, and so
be frightened into Repentance. Such are the Wiles of the Roaring Lion who
continually goes about seeking how to devour and make a prey of us: 1 Pet v. 9.
Whom we are commanded to resist steadfast in the Faith with all sobriety and
watchfulness: But do thou O Lord, have mercy on us and strengthen us to
overcome him.

Phil. 1.19.
2ly. Frequently Communicating. If we would (for Example) obtain in opposition
to our Lusts (those false Loves) that most excellent Gift of loving God above
all things (which is the) only true love) and doing every thing to please him,
First, Pray for it. And this we cannot do with that earnestness and integrity
we ought, before we sincerely repent of our False Loves, our Darling Lusts. For
God hears not unrepenting Sinners, and admits of no Rivals in our Affections,
he will have our whole heart or none. Then after our deep sorrowing for those
Heinous Sins (and what sins are not heinous?) Even so sorrowing as not to be
content without the Absolution of the Church. (See Bishop Andrews's Sermon on
John 20.23. Whose sins ye remit, Joh. 20.23.
etc.) and to be ready to submit to her severest Discipline for the good of our
Souls (See the Preface to the Commination in the Common Prayer Book,) in great
Humility and Lowliness of Mind and Self-abjection, and with a steadfast Lively
Faith also, that God both Can and Will answer our Request if it be for our
Good, we may again and again discover to him our particular Follies (which he
already knows, but yet expects to be as it were anew Informed of them by us)
bemoaning our vileness, and opening to him our present wants with all the
Motives which we can think will cause true Contrition in us, and incline Him
also to Grant our instant Petition. We desire (for the purpose) what he
commands us, the loving Him above all things. Let us lay before Him, besides
our own weaknesses and Infirmities, his Perfections, Beauty, Wisdom, Love and
Mercy toward us, which one would think were enough to excite our love to him
without his commanding us to love him who are most unworthy of his love. So
many Blessings, so many Deliverances both Temporal and Spiritual, will they not
move us? Has he not Redeemed us from all our Enemies, the World, the Flesh,
and the Devil? taught us what to do and what to refrain? given us tender
Consciences (the greatest Blessing upon Earth) to admonish us? Enabled us by
his Holy Spirit to perform what he requires? And yet when we continue vicious,
is he not still patient and long-suffering for our Repentance? Preventing our
Conversion with his Grace, renewing his Image in us, and making us again
capable of Immortality and Glory? For all which Benefits, and Ten Thousand
more, can we do less than pray we may hate our Selves, our Lusts and all things
else, and become Dead to sensuality and the World for love of him, who first
loved us even to Death?

Some there are and always have been, who by Assiduous Praying, having attained
to the love of God, think Prayer the greatest pleasure of their whole Life, and
themselves never well but when they are thus conversing with Almighty God (whom
they reverentially apprehend to be always with them, either before, or within
them:) And are continually offering to him his own most precious Gifts, which
he therefore vouchsafes them that they may have something valuable and worthy
to offer: And so by their Devotions they also prepare their Souls for the
receiving those particular Graces, for which they pray, and of which they stand
in need.

The Power and Prevalency of Prayer (whether Vocal or Mental) with Almighty
God, and the great benefits to ourselves and others from the several parts
thereof, Self-Examination, Confession, Thanksgiving, Petition, Praise,
Resolution, Intercession, Oblation, and every kind of Devotion wherein we
either speak to God or God to us, together with proper Forms and Directions for
every occasion, the Reader may amply learn from the public Liturgies, Manuals,
Catechisms, Lives, and Devotions of holy Men, etc written and allowed of by the
Ancient Fathers, and the whole Church of God in all Ages. And then, as to the
necessity of Prayer, if we consider our many wants, Temporal and Spiritual, to
be relieved; many sins, wherein we still offend God, to be pardoned; many
Temptations and Dangers from which to be preserved; many Benefits and
Assistances received; and all these with a respect also to our Fellow
Christians; we cannot but acknowledge every moment of our Lives (had we no
other necessary Duties) too little to be spent in this one Great Duty of
Continual Prayer. 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.
Our good Lord assist us by his Holy Spirit in the diligent and sincere
performance thereof.

The other Chief Means of our obtaining Divine Assistances against our Lusts;
the Reader (without meddling with God's power therein which transcends all
Humane Conception and Comprehension) the Immense Benefit of this Holy Mystery
to each worthy Communicant in reference to his particular Necessities. For
obtaining Remission of this or that Sin; a Remedy of this or that Infirmity; a
Deliverance from this or that Affliction; for receiving a Benefit, or giving
thanks for a Benefit received; for helping our Neighbor; for increasing the
Holy Spirit and Love of God in us. Because, as by one Spirit in Baptism, We are
made one Mystical Body of Christ, 1 Cor. 12.13
so likewise, in the Eucharist, are we made to drink into [the partaking of]
one Spirit: The Blessed Eucharist being as necessary for the continuing and
increasing, as Baptism for the first receiving the Holy Spirit. Because also,
this is that particular Nourishment instituted by Christ for the preserving our
Body and Soul to Everlasting Life; that particular Pledge and Assurance of our
Resurrection; that true Bread from Heaven, which mystically also Incorporates
us into Christ, and makes us continue and grow up into perfect Members of his
Body, that so thus partaking of the Nature and Spirit of the Second Adam, the
Heir of all things, we may become with him Sons of God, Heirs of Eternal Life,
as we were by the First Adam, of Eternal Death. That true Heavenly Bread,
lastly, so Exalting and Assimulating our Nature into Christ (when worthily
Communicating) as to make us one with him, as he and the Father are one:
According to our Savior's Prayer when he was Instituting this Blessed
Sacrament. I pray thee Father, John 17.
that they may be one, as we are one. O Blessed Union between poor Man and his
Maker! O happy those Souls who here worthily feed on this Heavenly Bread, the
only true Nourishment of the Life of Grace, enabling them in the Strength
thereof to walk even to the Mount of God, the Life of Glory.

The Conclusion.
THE Sum of this Discourse is, The Sins of the Flesh are most dangerous,
because most natural, to us: And by reason of their filthiness most loathsome
to Almighty God, and most severely punished by him. For not only those of the
greater magnitude, Fornication, Adultery, Incest, Sodomy, Beastiality, are
followed with God's most Tremendous Judgments; but also we find in Scripture
Uncleanness and Laciviousness, Gal. 5.19. Ephesians. 5.3.
destinct from the foregoing, and of a less denomination, every where joined
with such Sins as exclude the Practisers thereof from the Kingdom of Heaven.
The way to prevent such Sins and to avoid the punishment of them, is, To
mortify our Passions, our Memory and Imagination; to beware of impure
Suggestions, cheirsh Holy Inspirations, and avoid all the occasions of such
Sins; to Improve, lastly, the Grace of God in us by Assiduous Prayer, daily
Examination of our selves, perfect Repentance, frequent Communicating and all
other holy means; pressing still farther to higher and higher Gifts,
particularly to the attaining that most excellent Gift of Charity, which makes
us love God above all things, and our Neighbor as our selves; hate even our
own Lives for love of Him who first loved us, undergoing the the greatest
sufferings with Thankfulness and Complacency, performing all our Actions on
purpose to please him, referring them to his Honor, offering them up to his
Praise and Glory: To whom Father, Son and Holy Ghost, be all Honor, Praise and
Glory to all Eternity, Amen.

God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in
Truth, Joh. 4.24.

Grace and Truth [i. e. means of Salvation] came by Jesus Christ, Joh. 1.17.

God sent forth the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, that they that live,
should not henceforth live unto themselves, but to him who dyed for them, Gal.
4.6. 2 Cor. 5.15.

Wretched is that man who is all for the good things of this Life, a good
House, good Apparel, good Provision, etc. and is content to have a bad Soul.
Int. Christ.

Some Short Directions and Heads of Meditation for the Persons Concerned in the
Preceding Discourse.
CHAP. I. Of Meditation, it is Requisites, and how it differs from Contemplation.
MEditation is called the first Essential part of Prayer, leading to
Contemplation, Thanksgiving, Petition, etc. in which all the Principal
Faculties of the Soul, the Memory, Understanding, Will, and Affections, are
severally employed. The Memory recollects the matter to be Meditated upon, and
also places the Soul in the Divine Presence: The Understanding judges of the
Subject and its Virtues, and accordingly proposes it to the Will. The Will
excites in, us diverse Acts and Affections, either of Love, Affiance, Gratitude,
etc. toward God: Or of Hatred, Compunction, desire of doing better, etc.
toward our selves, which is indeed the main Scope and end of Meditation. Then
follows our Praying and representing to Almighty God our Miseries, Necessities,
Temptations, which we most earnestly beg him to redress for his own Love and
Compassion's sake, and the Merits of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. But
when the Faculties of the Soul are unactive or slow in their Operations (as it
often happens) they are to be excited by the help of good Books, which ought
always to be at hand when we Meditate: and in all such holy exercise we are to
approach the Divine Presence with our greatest Reverence and Humiliation.

And it is also necessary before every Meditation, to make a strict Examen of
Conscience 1. What Benefits we have received that day from Almighty God; for
which we are to return Thanks. 2. What Sins we have that day committed (running
through every hour) in thought, word and deed; for which we are to beg pardon.
3. We are to resolve upon an amendment in every particular by the Grace of God.
After such strict Examination of all our Thoughts, Desires, Words and Works,
judging our selves that we be not judged of the Lord; and Confessing our Sins
in the bitterness of our Soul as the Church requires, and taking also revenge
of our selves according to the Example of St. Paul's Penitent amongst the
Corinthians, we shall by such fifting our Consciences be the better able to
sever the Wheat from the Chaff, and know also what is fittest to offer to
Almighty God, what to pray for, and what also to meditate upon.

In which particular Examen of our Consciences (wherein we are to endeavor to
produce Acts of Contrition, Self-confusion, Humility, Resolutions of amendment,
Resignation, etc.) we must observe to what Vice we are most inclined, and be
sure to bend all our Forces against it; for that Captain-Imperfection being
Conquered, the rest will easily submit: And in the next Examen, we must
Impartially enquire whether our relapses in that kind are as frequent as
formerly, and so continue on the Fight with new Fervor, Vigor and Constancy,
till it shall please God to give us the Victory.

Now the difference between Meditation and Contemplation is said by holy Men to
be as follows. 1. We Meditate when by the help of the Understanding we seek and
cast about, and at length fix our thoughts upon such Truths and Reasons as are
in our present Circumstances, most apt to move and affectionate the Will, to
the embracing the Love of God, Christian Virtues, Works of Piety, etc. but
sometimes the Inclinations of the Will (the Holy Spirit operating more
principally in that by Love, than in the Understanding by Illumination;)
preceed the Acts of the Understanding, though most commonly it is the other way,
the Will and Passions not easily moving without the Reasoning of the
Understanding to excite them.

2. We Contemplate when we steadfastly and unmovably behold God by Faith,
believing that he is really with us and within us (as he truly is); and so
leaving all other Objects, Idea's, and Discourses, we Internally look on him as
present, love him in silence, and feed on his All-satiating Sweetness. And this
Contemplation is either by the help of Sensible Idea's, or Intelligible, or
surmounts them both, which is the highest sort of Prayer. But this is not my
business at present, I intending only some short Meditations, such as the
Reader may easily carry about with him, even in his Memory.

CHAP. II. Of the Subject of Meditation, with Heads for the first Week.
THE Matter and Subject of Meditation may be any thing whatsoever Divinely
revealed, or that any way conduces to our Salvation. But most commonly it is
adapted to the Three Degrees of Christians, the lower, the middle, and the
highest. Some Learned Men recommend the method of the Church in her Liturgies,
beginning with Advent, Nativity of our Savior, and so on to his Preaching,
Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, sending the Holy Spirit, taking in the
Epistles and Gospels of all the Dominica's and Holy Days. This Rule is Chiefly
observed by the Clergy. Others advise the Selecting some certain number of
pious Subjects for every day in the Week, and keeping to them only, and this
seems also a very useful way of Meditation.

Heads of Meditation for the first Week.
Monday Of the Chief end of Man. Consider, 1. Why he was Created; namely, to
praise and glorify God* 2 How far this is observed or transgressed by us, and
how far the ample means offorded thereunto abused. Reflection 1. Give God
Thanks. 2. Ask Pardon. 3. Promise Amendment in every particular as need
requires.

Tuesday. Of God's Benefits. Consider, our Being from God, Preservation,
Redemption, Sanctification, Spiritual Gifts, and Graces, the Holy Sacraments,
Eternal Life, etc. All that God gives is freely out of his own Goodness, not
for his own but our profit. Reflex. 1. Give great Thanks with all possible
Humility. 2. Offer up your self, all your Thoughts, Words, Actions and
Affections to God, to be sincerely directed to his Glory only.

Wednesday. Of your Sins. Consider, 1. Who it is you have offended, viz. God
most Munificent, who has done so many and so great things for you, and
promised more and greater. 2. God Omniscient, who sees all things most clearly.
3. God Omnipotent, who can destroy you in a moment, and none is able to resist
him. 4. God most Pure, who abhors all sin; and for that Reason threw the fallen
Angels out of Heaven for one single Sin. Adam out of Paradise, and condemned
him to above 900 Years Penance for one single disobedience. Reflect. What then
will become of Impenitent Sinners? And how great Reason to Fear and Tremble at
so great Power and Justice of God!

Consider, 2. Who thou art that offend'st and resistest so great a God? A most
vile and inconsiderable Worm. The whole World in God's sight is but as a drop
of the morning dew. Sapient. 11. What is man then so minute a Particle of that
Drop? Who is indeed nothing of himself, and compared to Infinity bears no
Proportion. Reflect. How great the Clemency of God in bearing so long with so
great Sinners, and your self the Chief, and very greatest of all.

Consider, 3. For what Cause you offended God? For some very vile thing, some
vain Honor, some beastly pleasure; and that knowingly and wilfully, not out of
Ignorance or Infirmity. Reflect. Detest thy Foolishness before God. Acknowledge
thy Fault. Beg mercy.

Thursday. Of Death, Consider. 1. The certainty of it, and the uncertainty of
the time. Recollect all the sudden Deaths you have ever seen, heard, or read
of, and conclude it the greatest madness and folly in the World to live on in
such a State in which you would not die. Reflect. You can die but once, and if
not well your loss is irreparable.

Consider. 2. Of what things Death deprives you. Of all External things,
Riches, Pleasures, Honors, Friends, for which and whose sake you have so often
offended God. And that nothing will accompany you to the other World, but your
works whether good or bad. Reflect. Imagine what a wicked man restored to Life
from Hellfire would do, and that do you.

Consider, 3. The State of your Body and Soul. Your Body (for which you have
been so Sollicitous) will be carried out to be meat for the Worms, your Soul
immediately hurried to Judgment by the Angels, and from thence by an unknown
way to an eternal State either of bless, or misery, according to the Actions
done in the Flesh. Reflect. Use now all possible means by your self and others
to make Christ (who is to be your Judge) become propitious to you: And pray to
God for Grace that you may now both know and do what upon your Deathbed and at
the Judgment Seat you will wish you had done.

Friday, Of the last Judgment. Consider, 1. The particular Judgment that
passes upon every man at his Death, and remains unalterable. 2. The
dreadfulness of the last general day, when the Heavens will be rouled together
as a Scrol, the Sun it self darkened, the Moon not give her light, the Stars
fall from their Orbs, the Earth quake, the Mountains and Islands remove out of
their places, and Men's hearts fail them for fear. 3. An Universal appearance of
all the Sons of Adam (the Earth and Sea giving up their Dead) and a particular
Examination of them according to God's unerring Books which will then be opened.

Consider, 4. The Difference that will then be between the Good and Bad. The
Good (having Co-operated with God's Grace) shall be Clothed with Glorious
Bodies, and placed on Christ's Right Hand. The Bad (not Cooperating with God's
Spirit) Clothed with Corruption, and placed on Christ's Left Hand. And the
Consciences and Thoughts of all hearts will be then laid open. Reflect. What
shame, and confusion will it then be to the Impenitent, when out of their own
Mouths and Consciences they will be both Accused and Condemned!

Consider, 5. How astonishing it will be to the Wicked, to hear the Sentence of
the Judge, Go, ye Cursed, into everlasting Fire. And how joyful to the
Righteous to hear, Come, ye blessed, possess the Kingdom prepared for you, etc.
Reflect. Make firm Purposes to live well, and in virtuous Circumstances; and
entreat the Judge to be propitious to you, and that you may always bear in mind
this terrible Judgment and Sentence to escape it, which is said to have
occasioned the Institution of the severest Order of Christians in the World.

Saturday. Of Hell. Consider, 1. What a Punishment it would be to be bound Hand
and Foot, and cast into a hot fiery Furnace, there to remain burning and
unconsumed, tho but for a short time: And as every Member of the Body, so every
Power and Faculty of the Soul receive its peculiar Torment.

Consider, 2. How hard and unsupportable it must needs be to be Slaves to the
Devils and Companions of the damned, amidst the most exquisit, Tortures, and
incessant Blasphemies and Cursings of Allmighty God.

Consider, 3. How long these Torments will last. If after some Thousands of
Years there were to be an end, it would somewhat lessen them: But after an
Hundred thousand Years succeeds an Eternity that cannot be measured.

Reflect. How foolish is it to choose such endless Torments for a transitory
Pleasure. Endure any Punishments here to avoid them. Here cut, here burn, but
save me in the World to come, was St. Austin's Prayer. Entreat Almighty God
that you may be so awed by them, whilst living, that you may not deserve to
experience them when dead.

Sunday. Of the Joys of Heaven. Consider, 1. The Place and the Company. How
great Joy it must needs be to inhabit in the City of God, the heavenly
Jerusalem; and converse with the holy Angels, and all the Saints which have
been from the beginning of the World: Who having the same Charity one for
another (being all filled with the same holy Spirit) rejoice in every ones Good
as if it were their own.

Consider, 2. The greatness of the Reward. The Body it self will be
spiritualized, and all its Senses and Powers exalted and adorned with most
admirable Gifts. And the Soul enabled to see and know God as he is, and to love
and enjoy him to all Eternity, which is the only true Blessedness. And though
there be far different degrees of Glory, yet no Envy, but on the contrary
Rejoicing. See the preceding Discourse.

Reflect. Give God thanks, who has given you to hope for, and made you capable
of this Glory; and humbly implore him mercifully to preserve you (though
ungrateful) in true Virtue and holy Living, that you may at length come to that
glorious Place, and there praise and magnify him to all Eternity.

CHAP. III. Heads of Meditation for the Second, Third, and Fourth Weeks.
Second Week.
MOnday. Of the Incarnation of our Savior. His leaving the Bosom of his
Father, and taking upon him Humane Nature Voluntarily, and yet by consent of
the whole Trinity. A Mercy denied to the fallen Angels: And a Mystery which the
good Angels desired to look into.

Tuesday. Of the Visitation of the ever-Blessed Virgin, and the Salutation of
the Angel. Hail, etc.

Wednesday. Of the Nativity of our Lord in a Stable, yet honored with Miracles.

Thursday. Of the Shepherd's Vision, the Angels Hymn, the coming of the Three
Kings by the Guidance of a Star or Angel.

Friday. Of the Offering up of our Savior in the Temple. The Humility of the
Mother of our Lord, being not obliged to any such Oblation. Old Simeon's
Prayer, Lord now let, etc. He could not die till he had seen the Lords
Christ.

Saturday. Our Savior's Baptism and the Testimony the Father and the Holy
Spirit then gave of his Divinity.

Sunday. Of our Lord's Transfiguration and the Consolation the Three Disciples
also took therein. It is good for us to be here, etc.

The Third Week.
MOnday. Of the Eight Beatitudes, the Sum of Christian Perfection; placing
happiness in things seemingly most contrary to it, such as Poverty,
Persecution, etc. But yet the true and only way to Blessedness, declared to be
so by him who is Wisdom it self, and who himself also became our Example in
sufferings.

Tuesday. Of the Lord's Prayer; containing all the good things we are to pray
for, and all the evils we are to pray against.

Wednesday. Of the Rich Glutton and the ten Virgins. The difference between
Dives and Lazarus, both in this World and the other: And between the ten
Virgins in the other World, notwithstanding their seeming equality in this.

Thursday. Of the Conversion of Mary Magdalene and the Woman of Samaria. Both
of them great Sinners. The former possessed with seven Devils, and the latter
lived in Fornication. But their Repentance was as remarkable as their Sins: And
their after life as Virtuous, as their former had been Vicious.

Friday. Of the Paralytick at the Pool of Bethesda; and of the Man born blind.
Both cured by our Savior: And both afterward openly Confessed him. To leave
our sins and follow Christ, takes away the Cause of Sin: For there is a
Lameness and Blindness also in the Soul.

Saturday. Of the Prodigal Son, and the Man that fell among Thieves. The
Prodigal was received by his Father upon his returning and repenting. The poor
Man fell among Thieves by his leaving his right way, Jerusalem for Jericho, God
for his pleasure, the Church for the Company of Thieves and Robbers. Reflect.
Conversion to God's Church and Repentance the only Remedy.

Sunday. Of our Savior's raising from the Dead Lazarus, the Son of the Woman
of Naim, the Daughter of Jairus. One of them was newly dead, the second carried
out, the third three days buried. The newly dead immediately upon our Savior's
speaking, rose and walked and was perfectly cured, the rest not so soon.
Reflect. So it fairs with Sinners. More difficulty for habituated Sinners to
rise to a Life of Grace.

The Fourth Week.
MOnday. Of the Institution of the Blessed Eucharist. He that Eats worthily of
this Bread shall live for ever, shall overcome his Lusts, be filled with
Celestial Joys, etc. But he that Eats unworthily eats his own Damnation (if he
dies in that condition) not discerning the Lord's Body.

Tuesday. Of our Savior's Passion in General. Who it was that suffered? The
Son of God, God himself, Innocent, etc. What and how grievous things he
suffered? So many griefs. So great Ignominy. He has born our griefs. Behold
the Man. Behold and see, were there ever sufferings like his? And all this for
his Enemies, (ungrateful sinners, and me in particular) to Reconcile them to
God. Reflect. Oh the Obedience, Humility, Patience, Perseverance, Charity of
his sufferings!

Wednesday. What passed in the Garden. His Agony. His Soul was heavy even to
Death. He sweat drops of Blood. He Prayed against the bitter Cup, but with a
Resignation to his Fathers Will. Thy will not mine be done. And soon after with
unparalleled Fortitude surrendered himself, If you seek me let these go their
ways, desiring to tread the Wine Press of God's Wrath alone.

Thursday. Our Savior's Usage before Annas, Caiphas, Herod, and Pilate. Before
Annas Questioned for his Doctrine. In Caiphas's house false Witnesses were
brought against him. He was kept Prisoner there all Night. Mocked by the
Soldiers and others. Denied by Peter. Before Herod despised. Before Pilate
first declared Innocent, but afterward Condemned by him for Treason, to please
the People and secure his own Interest with them. St. Peter's Repentance very
speedy. But the Obstinacy of the Jews continues to this very day.

Friday. Our Savior's Usage at the Pillar; his Crown of Thorns; his Journey to
Mount Calvary bearing his Cross; his barbarous Crucifixion, the Wounds he
received; the sweet words he uttered, Father forgive them, etc. yet the Rocks
were more Compassionate than the Jews and We.

Saturday. Of our Saviors Burial. Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathea, his
Blessed Mother and St. Mary Magdalene, and some other Honorable and Holy
Persons were concerned in it. They washed his Wounds with their holy Tears, and
Embalmed his Body with their Sighs and Prayers and Richest Odours. He made his
Sepulcher with the Rich and Honorable, but yet the malicious Jews sealed the
Stone, and set a Watch to prevent, if possible, his rising again to Glory.

Sunday. Of our Savior's Resurrection, Ascension, and sending of the Holy
Ghost. 1. The manner of his Resurrection. His Conversing Forty days upon
Earth, Comforting his Friends, Strengthening his Disciples, and giving them
charge over his Flock. 2. his Ascension into Heaven, siting on the right hand
of God, that our Hearts and Affections might thither also ascend. 3. His
sending the Holy Ghost on the Day of Pentecost, his Disciples having Fasted,
Watched and Prayed continually day and night for ten days before. Reflect. His
Resurrection the first Fruits and earnest of ours. His Ascension to draw us and
our affections after him. His sending the Holy Ghost that the same Spirit that
raised up him the Head, might also quicken us his Members.

CHAP. IV. Meditations for the fifth Week.
MOnday. Of the Nobility of the Soul. 1. Created by God after his own Image. 2.
God gives his Angels Charge over it. As the Hills stand about Jerusalem, so
stands the Lord round about them that fear him. 3. Of so great value is the
Soul that our Savior left the Bosom of his Father to redeem it, even with the
price of his Blood.

Tuesday. Of a pure Conscience, a right Faith, and doing all things for God's
Honor. These Three constitute the good Christian, for the Life we now live is
by Faith. And the pure in heart shall see God; shall have a clear and more
naked perception of him even in this Life. No Image or Idea can represent a
Spirit, such as God is. He is Purity it self, perceptible only to the pure in
Heart after an ineffable manner, and void of all sensible Idea's. Reflect. The
purging therefore our Consciences is to be carefully minded.

Wednesday. Of the Presence of God. With the thoughts of this so great
Presence, many holy Persons have preserved themselves from sin. Enoch walked
with God and was translated. Abraham walked before God and was perfect. King
David set God always before him, that he should not sin. So Elijah and Elisha,
God lives, in whose sight and presence I stand. And nothing more certain than
that God fills and works in all his Creatures. In him we live and move and
have our being, and all things subsist and are upheld by his immediate hand.
But he more nearly dwells and inhabits in every good Man, and directs him by
the Interior Language of his Inspirations and gives him leave also to
Communicate to him as to a most faithful Friend all his Wants, Desires,
Resolutions, Infirmities, Temptations, etc. And the oftener he recollects his
Faculties from external objects, and retireth into himself to God so much the
better, and his progress in holiness greater and more easy. Reflect. How great
a folly therefore is it to live insensible of the Assistance of so great a
presence so near us, even within us!

Thursday. Of the Conjunction of the Soul with God. Which consists in a
Conformity of our Will to the Divine. We must Will the same thing with God and
the same means to it. My Son give me thy heart, says God by Solomon. It is good
for me to cleave to God, says David. And St. Paul nothing could. separate from
Christ: Neither Life, nor Death, etc. 2. Such a Person is always Examining his
Conscience, Keep's a strict guard that his thoughts wander not abroad, or be
over long busied in outward Affairs, for fear of losing that presence, that
Consolation he always carries about with him in his Soul. Prayers, Meditation,
Contemplation, Recollection, the Holy Sacraments, are in a manner the
entertainment of his whole Life. Reflect. All these things are irksome and
nauseous to the Carnal, Worldly Man.

Friday, Of Humility. 1. The Humble man retains a true sense of God's Favors.
What great things he has both done and suffered for him, and that out of a
free and most amazingly generous Goodness, without any the least merit on his
side. And on the contrary what returns he has made, how many and how great
wickednesses committed against that good God. So that he knows not which way to
turn himself: Thinks no place vile enough for him, who for his sins deserves
the greatest Afflictions, the greatest Torments. He has no way but to humble
himself before God, with Confusion of Face, and Offer and Resign himself wholly
to his boundless Mercy, to deal with him as his Compassion pleases.

2. The true Humble Man is Servant of all; Especially his lawful Governors and
Teachers, to whose wiser Judgment he readily submits his own less wise: As
knowing they have more ability to judge than himself, and more assistance also
promised not to mistake. To these therefore he submits as to Christ himself,
being commanded so to do; Ezekiel. 33.7, 8. Heb. 13.17.

3ly. Being contemned he rejoiceth; being honored he referrs the honor to
God, and so all other Benefits he receives. But the shame of his sins he takes
to himself; and confesses with the poor Publican that he is not worthy to lift
up his eyes to Heaven.

4ly. What humilty can equal that of our Lord in all his whole Life, and who
also humbled himself to death, even the death of the Cross? And we are to be
like him, meek and humble. Reflect. The undeserved Favors of Almighty God. The
Ingratitude of our repeated sins. The behavior of the poor Publican. The
Example of our Lord himself. Great Lessons of Humility.

Saturday. Of the Advantage of being Christians. We live under the Covenant of
Grace, which is founded in Remission of sin, and upon promises of eternal
rewards to the observers of it, who are also enabled to observe it. We are
redeemed from all our Enemies so as not to fear them: Death it self being now
only a Passage to immortality. Are we not also made Sons of God, Members of
Christ, Kings and Priests, and Co^heirs with our Elder Brother of an Eternal
Inheritance.

Sunday. Of the Benefits of the Holy Ghost. By him (who was sent by our
Savior) we are begotten and born again and made new creatures. By him
Illuminated to understand the Mysteries of our Redemption. By him the Love of
God is spread abroad in our hearts, so as to love even our Enemies for God's
sake. He purifies and cleanses us from all filthiness. He Interceeds for us and
teaches us how to pray. He comforts and supports us in all our afflictions with
his peace and joy. He is the Seal of the Divine Promises and the Foretaste of
Heaven. The great power of God in us, over Sacan and all his Instruments. And
by his Virtue and Efficacy, our Bodies also will be Spiritualized and we raised
to Immortality and Glory. Reflect. This Comforter abides with us for ever, and
is grieved whenever we do any thing to chase him from us.

To these few Heads of Meditation (taken chiefly out of Holy Scripture) might
be added infinite more concerning God's Attributes, Gifts, Miracles, etc. with
innumerable more passages both of the Old and New Testament; but these are
thought sufficient to show the manner of Meditation (which is so considerable a
part of Religion) and to serve also as a Succidaneum to those that have not the
opportunity of larger Books, which is all that was intended by the Collecter of
them.

Let the words of my Mouth and the Meditation of my heart be acceptable in thy
sight, O Lord, my Strength and my Redeemer, Psalm. 19.

I meditate on all thy works, Ps. 143.5.

In his Law does he meditate day and night, Ps. 1.2.

The Letany of Christian Virtues, taken out of the Holy Scripture and the
several Texts Annexed.
O GOD the Father of Heaven,

Have mercy on us.

O God the Son, Redeemer of the World,

Have mercy on us.

O God the Holy Ghost,

Have mercy on us.

O Sacred Trinity, one God,

Have mercy on us.

O Lord just and good, Heb. 11.6
and a rewarder of all those that seek thee diligently;

Have mercy on us.

Who createdst our First Parents in Innocence and Holiness, Genesis 2.
after thine own Image; and gave a Testimony to the offerings of just Abel;
Genesis 4.


Have mercy on us.

Who savedst in the Ark from the Flood, Genesis 7.
Noah, a Preacher of Justice; and deliveredst from the Fire Just Lot vexed with
the filthy Conversation of the wicked; Genesis 19.


Have mercy on us.

Who gave the Promise to Abraham, Genesis 22.
found Faithful after many trials;

Have mercy on us.

Genesis 29.
Who deliveredst Jacob, endued with a wonderful patience, and confidence in
Adversities, from all evils; and gave a joyful end to thy Servant Job, Job 42.
that Pattern of Patience;

Have mercy on us.

Genesis 39.
Who rewardedst the singular Modesty and Chastity of Joseph with the Rule over
Egypt; Genesis 41:


Have mercy on us.

Number. 22.
Who chosedst Moses the meekest Man upon Earth to be Ruler over thy People; and
Electedst Joshua, Deuteronomy. 31.
notable for Valor and Constancy, to lead thy People into the Land of Promise;

Have mercy on us.

Who gave the Priesthood to the Sons of Levi for their great Courage in
vindicating thine Honor; Exodus 32.
and deliveredst from all dangers the Prophet Elias for his incomparable Zeal
for thy true Worship against the false Prophets; 1 King. 18.
2 King. 2.
and at length tokest him up into Heaven;

Have mercy on us.

Who set Samuel Judge over thy People, 1 Samuel 7 12
a lover of Justice, and free from Bribes: And liftedst up David, 1 Samuel 16.
a man after thine own heart, in the faithful Service of thee, to be King of
Israel;

Have mercy on us.

Who replenishedst Solomon, 1 King. 4.
humbly begging Wisdom of thee both with it and many other Graces: And
Adornedst Daniel and his Companions, Dan. 1.
being singularly Temperate and Sober, with Wisdom and Beauty;

Have mercy on us.

Who did choose the Blessed Virgin Mary, Luke 1.
Adorned with singular Chastity, Humility, Obedience, and all other Virtues, to
be the Mother of thy Son;

Have mercy on us.

Mat. 3.
Who sentest John Baptist a Forerunner of thy Son, a Preacher of Penitence, and
of great Austerities and Abstinencies;

Have mercy on us.

John. 17. 1 Pet. 2.21.
Who sentest Jesus Christ, thy only begotten Son into the World, the Pattern of
all Holiness, that we should follow his Example;

Have mercy on us.

Ephesians. 1.
Who have chosen us in him before the Foundations of the World, that we also
should be Holy and Unblame able in thy sight;

Have mercy on us.

Who have Predestined us that we should be made conformable to the Image of
thy Son; Phil. 3.
Ephesians. 2.
and have created us in him to good Works, which thou have ordained that we
should walk in them;

Have mercy on us.

Who have Redeemed us from our vain Conversation by the precious Blood of
Christ, 1 Pet. 1.
and have Regenerated us by thy Word unto a lively hope of an Eternal
Inheritance;

Have mercy on us.

O Jesu, 1 Pet. 2.
who knew no Sin neither was Guile found in thy Mouth, 1 John 3.
but appearedst to take away the Sins of the World;

Have mercy on us.

1 Pet. 2.
Jesus who barest our Sins in thy Body on the Cross, that we being dead unto
Sin, may live unto Justice and Holiness;

Have mercy on us.

Col. 1.
Who have delivered us out of Darkness into Light, from the power of Satan, Acts
26.
into thy Kingdom, and have bestowed upon us the Remission of Sins and an
Inheritance amongst thy Saints;

Have mercy on us.

Mat. 19.
Who promisedst thy Disciples, that forsook all, for thee, Joh. 21.
Twelve Thrones Judging the Twelve Tribes of Israel; who committedst unto St.
Peter, notably confessing, and loving thee, the feeding of thy Sheep;

Have mercy on us.

Joh. 20.
Who vouchsafedst to St. John notable for Chastity, the singular privilege of
thy Love; Have mercy on us.

Who sendest thy Holy Spirit, Romans
whereby Divine Charity is spread abroad in our hearts:

Have mercy on us.

Be merciful, and spare us, O Lord:

Be merciful, and grant unto us, O Lord,

The Virtue of Humility, Mat. 18, Luke 21, Mark 5. Heb. 13.
and Patience; Spiritual Poverty and Meekness* Longanimity and obedience to
those that are set over us:

Grant unto us, O Lord,

A quiet mind and contented with our present Condition, 1 Pet. 3. Heb. 13. Romans
14.
true peace and joy in the Holy Ghost:

Grant unto us O Lord,

Temperance and Modesty; Gal. 5. 1 Timothy 2.
Sobriety and Chastity; a true love of Thee and our Neigbours; Mat. 22.38
the Contempt of our selves and the things of this World, 1 Timothy 6 17 2 Cor. 9.
Bounty and Compassionate Affections:

1 Pet. 3.8.
Grant unto us, O Lord,

Diligence and constant Vigilance; 2 Pet. 1.5. 1 Pet. 4.7. Mat. 5.6. 1 Cor.
7.11 Acts 28.15 Mat. 10.22
a Hunger and Thirst after Holiness: Zeal and Fervor of Spirit; Christian
Fortitude and Perseverance to the End;

Grant unto us, O Lord.

We Sinners beseech thee to hear us, O Lord.

Rom, 5.10.
That being reconciled to God, Col. 1.20.
by the death of Christ, we may present our selves Holy, Jam. 1.
Unspotted, and Unblamable before him, that we may walk worthy of God, 1 These.
2.12
Phil. 4.18.
in all things well pleasing, fruitful in good works, and increasing in the
knowledge of God; Col. 1, 10.


We Sinners beseech thee, etc.

Col. 3.10.
That whatsoever we do in word or deed, we may do all to the Glory of God; that
we make not void thy Grace, 2 Cor. 2, 21
or receive it in vain;

We Sinners beseech thee, etc.

That we be careful to sanctify our Lord Jesus Christ in our hearts, 1 Pet. 3.15
Phil. 2.21.
that we seek not our own things, but, before all, the things of Jesus Christ;

We Sinners beseech thee, etc.

That looking up to Jesus who suffered, Heb. 12.2, 3.
we be not wearied and faint in our minds; 1 Timothy 6.11
but considering the Conversation of the Saints, imitate their Faith and
Patience;

We Sinners beseech thee, etc.

That as Soldiers we entangle not our selves in the things of this World; 1 John 2.15
but having Food and Raiment let us be content therewith; 1 Timothy 6.8.


We Sinners beseech thee, etc.

That by good Works we make our Faith and Election sure; 2 Pet. 2.10
that we do good whilst we have time, Gal. 6.9.
and faint not, for that we shall reap in due season.

We Sinners beseech thee, etc.

That we forbear one another in love, Ephesians. 4.2.
being careful to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace; Gal. 6.2.
that we bear one another burdens and so fulfill the law of God;

We Sinners beseech thee, etc.

That being Strengthened in all Virtue through the power of his Grace, Col. 1.11.
we give thanks to God with all Patience and Longsuffering;

We Sinners beseech thee, etc.

2 Pet. 3.14.
That waiting for the coming of our Lord, we be careful to be found in him pure
and unspotted in Peace, 1 Pet. 1.9.
that we may receive the end of our Faith, even the Salvation of our Souls; and
in the mean time work out our Salvation with fear and trembling; Phil 12.12.


We Sinners beseech thee, etc.

O Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the World, increase our Faith.

O Lamb of God that take away the sins of the World, infuse Hope.

O Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the World, enkindle Charity.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

Let us Pray.
O God, who justifiest the ungodly, we humbly beseech thy Majesty Graciously to
defend with thy Heavenly Grace, and assist with thy continual Protection, us
thy Servants, relying on thy Mercy; that, constantly running in the Course of
Virtue, we may at length receive the Crown thereof, and by no Temtations be
withdrawn from serving thee; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Ame^

ERRATA.
PAge 3. Line 4. Almighty God,. P. 27. l. 7. many. p. 29. l. 5. Primogeneal. P.
34. l. 4. Blessings. P. 38. l. 19. but that. P. 40. l. 19. Fig Leaves. P. 43.
l. 9. deteriora etc. P. 74. l 15. plainly. P. 92. l. 21. Rational into Natural.
l. 23. Natural into Carnal. P. 98. l. 21. frequent. P. 103. l. 1. cherish. P.
118. l. 21 exquisite Tortures. l. 23. Almighty.


