A DECLARATION FROM The City of Bristoll: BY The Mayor, Aldermen, Sheriffs,
and others of the City: DECLARING Their Resolution and fidelity to the
Parliament and their designs: Also a Petition from M. Maioresse, M. Holworth,
and 200. of the best Citizens wives in Bristoll, to the Mayor and Common
Council of the City, for admitting the Parliaments Forces into their City, and
many other things worthy of observation.

Sent from M. John Ball in Bristoll, to M. James Nicolls, a Merchant in
Fanchurch-street London.

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Matthewes, and John Nicolls, and are to be sold in
the Old Bailey. December. 23. 1642.

The Declaration of the Major, Aldermen, and Sheriffs, and other Citizens of
the City of Bristoll.
THings are now wheeling about toward this City, which has hitherto been a
Goshen, when other places are as Egypt, obscured and darkened with the dismal
clouds of a Civil intestine War. Let me discover how the inhabitants stand
affected; and surely although here are many malignants of the great ones
amongst us Colston, Yeomans, and their brethren: and some of the Clergy, as
Loveoing, and Willjamson, whose invective diveilsh letter was lately
intercepted, directed to Bathurst Chaplain to D. Skinner late Bishop of
Bristoll, now of Oxon. wherein he calls the Major (a religious and well
affected gentleman) Knave, with some other base passages, yet I conceive that
the Major part of this City is the best part and stand firm for the Parliament.
This year the Major and Sheriffs are right which we hope will-prove a great
blessing to the City.

There came 3 letters to the City, one from the King, sent by Sir Baynam
Thregmorton, the sum whereof was this, that the King said, he had been little
beholden to them for their forwardness, to go against the Marquess at
Sherborne, and Mendip, but would pass that by, and that although he was
brought to that low ebb by this war yet he had not hitherto taxed them, or
been burdensome to them, but did hope to find them loyal Subjects in the
conclusion, charging them not to admit of any Parliament forces into the City;
which they observing, he said he would not trouble them with any of his forces
(as he promised Shrewsbury) but if they did let any in, they should speedily
hear from him. The second letter from the Parliament requiring them to admit
of some forces for the securing of the City, and their own safety. The third
was from the Marquess of Hertford in Wales, sent by Prior his Chaplain,
desiring them that if any garrison were to be set there he would send 1500 men.
Upon these 3 letters the common Council sat the most part of the day: But
what answer was returned to each letter I know not.

There came to Bristoll, that worthy active Gentleman colonel Popham, and Sir
John Seymer, a stirring Gentleman desiring to know of the City their
Resolution, whether they would admit of any forces for the securing of that
City being of Consequence, and so near the Marquess his forces in Wales, and
lying Westward to Devonshire where Sir Ralph Hopton has an Army; there was
much agitation of the question, some being for admitting forces, some against
it. The Sheriff Seniour Iackson, Alderman Lock, and Master James went to
Gloucester, charging them not to come with any forces if they did upon their
peril be it, but the Gloucester shire men were so incensed against them, that
they clapped them up, and would not set them at liberty, until they had engaged
their lives for the admission of a Garrison in Bristoll.

The Gentleman forenamed Col. Popham and Sir John Seymer came again to the
Common Council for an answer to give and return to the Parliament, whether
they would admit force or not into the City. A very great combustion there
arose the business was canvased, some said it would be an invitation of the
Kings Army suddenly, others said, it better to admit the Parliaments Garrison,
which would be a great means to unite the City with the Counties adjacent in a
firm association against the Cavaliers, or any malignants to the Parliament.
There is news brought, that unless a strength were admitted into the City,
the Country would starve the City, keeping all manner of provision, by Land
and Sea.

The well-affected women (some of the chiefest) as M. Maioresse, M. Holworth
and others, to the number of 200 frame a Petition to this effect Humbly
showing, that if the Parliaments forces were opposed, the effusion of blood
would be great, in regard they were resolved to enter: and therefore to prevent
the mischiefs that might arise by a violent entering the town, and being much
perplexed with the fear of scarcity of victuals, were much afraid and amazed,
lest the Gloucester and Somersetshire men should stop the market-people from
bringing provision to the city, they humbly desired therefore that country
people might on market days have free passage into the city with all manner of
provision, as formerly they had, and that the Parliaments forces might in a
fair and peaceable manner be admitted into the city, it being for the
security, safety and general good of the city.

The Parliaments Forces having billeted themselves near the city over night,
marched in the next day about eleven a clock, although the Malignants had hopes
to keep them out, and to raise a mutiny and insurrection in the town, they
hire some seamen to go to Froome-gate, (supposing it to be the place of
entrance) and stand with their muskets, and their swords drawn, and set two
pieces of Ordnance charged at the gate, an uproare and tumult they made,
wounding one, and hewing another; but they were prevented of their purpose, the
horse and foot coming in at Newgate, and Pitty-gate: but the uproar could not
be appeased: although M. Mayor himself came down to the gate, yet such was
their divellish malice and barbarous behavior, that they resisted the Mayor,
and when he turned the Ordnance from the gate, they turned them back again: but
some telling them the Parliaments forces were entered at another gate, they
desisted and quitted the gate: So that now are nigh three thousand in the city
who are resolved to defend the city. Here was a rumor spread by the malignant
party that the King was within ten miles of the town, but it was but a
bug-beare to affright people; this city, if at unity, doubtless is able to
resist a great Army, the Castle being fortified with twelve pieces of Ordnance
at the top, besides Ordnance are placed round upon the walls, and two at every
gate, and well furnished with powder, match, and all sorts of ammunition.

This day Marlborough men bought of our men two pieces of ordnance of some good
weight for the defense of that town, yet such was the malignancy of the
ill-affected members there, that diverse came and got porters and themselves
together, and threw them down out of the cart, although the man that bought
them had the Majors Warrant for carrying them out. But it is feared they will
come too late, the news being here that part of Marlborough is burnt by the
Cavaliers, and that they are stripped of all, and left most miserable people.
The Lord avert them from ruinating this place, and all other, if it be his will.

Yours as heretofore, J. B.
Bristoll, December. 18. 1642.
A Declaration of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament.
Die Jovis 23 December 1642.

WHereas in and by a late ordinance of both Houses of Parliament, it is
ordained for the cause therein expressed, that all persons of ability, within
the Cities of London and Westminster, and Suburbs of the same; and also within
the Borough of Southwark, who have not at all, or not answerable to their
estates, contributed toward the maintenance of the Army raised by authority of
this present Parliament, shall be assessed in such manner and proportion as in
the said Ordinance is directed; Of which the Lords and Commons now assembled in
Parliament do expect a vigorous and speedy execution: but finding some doubt to
be raised upon the point of time, whether that clause of not contributing at
all, or not in proportion to their estates, be meant of not contributing before
the passing of the said Ordinance in both houses of Parliament, of to be
extended to any time before the assessing of them, and giving them notice of
it, in such manner as in the said Ordinance is appointed. We the said Lords
and Commons in Parliament assembled, do hereby declare, That if any person or
persons who have not contributed at all, or not answerable to their estates;
shall before any assessement of them be made, and notice thereof left at their
houses, according to the said Ordinance, contribute toward the maintenance of
the said Army, by loan or otherwise, according to their several and
respective estates, as others well-affected have already done, without evasion
or collusion, every such person so contributing, shall be accepted as doing an
acceptable service to the Commonwealth, and be freed from the payment of all
and every tax and assessement of him to be made by the Assessors, authorized
by the said Ordinance for that purpose; as likewise from all distresses,
imprisonment, and other punishments to be inflicted by virtue of the said
Ordinance, or any addition to, or explanation made of it, for the not paying of
any such assessement: And hereof all such Assessors and Collectors are hereby
required to take notice. And for this end, it is ordered by the said Lords and
Commons, that this Declaration be forthwith printed and published.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliament.

FINIS.

