A DECLARATION On the behalf of the Church of Christ Usually meeting in
Coleman-street, in Communion with Mr. John Goodwyn, against the late
INSURRECTION Made in the City of LONDON.

Acts 26.1, Then Agrippa said, Thou art permitted to speak for thy self.

Genesis 18.23, 25. Will thou also destroy the righteous with the wicked: That be
far from thee -- shall not the judge of all the earth do right?

Romans 13.3. For Rulers are not a terror unto good works, but to the evil.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold in Fleet Street, 1660.

A DECLARATION On the behalf of the Church of Christ, usually meeting in
Coleman-street, in Communion with, etc.
AS the notion is not more common then true, that nothing ought to be dearer to
a man then his reputation, and he, who has outlived his credit, and honor,
amongst sober and judicious men, may seem to have outlived himself, and has
little or nothing of any value more to lose: And because nothing can be of
worse resentment and reception amidst the public endeavors, to restore the
peace and unity of the Nation, then discords, animosities, tumults, and
insurrections, we finding our innocence in the late disorders, nor to be our
full security and just protection in this kind, are constrained to give an
account of our selves, in relation to those high misdemeanors, and to make
this our Declaration to the world.

We cannot but wonder what should bring us so much as into suspicion of being
countenancing, favoring, abetting, or any way accessory to the late
extravagant and bloody attempt, unless it were, that meeting sometimes under
the same roof, we come merely upon this account, to be entitled to the same
transgression, wherewith notwithstanding in reason, we can no more be charged,
then a man of one family might be with murder committed by a person of another,
only for that, both of them were lodged under the same roof.

We have a record within us, how zealous we have been from time to time against
all such destructive principles, as tending to the very ruin of the essence
and being of all rule and Magistracy, which we have always looked upon, and
sought to uphold, as the useful and necessary Ordinance of God; and have
endeavored what in us lies to abate that unnatural heat, and regulate that
ill-nurtured zeal, which in some men, like Nebuchadnezzars furnace, continually
evaporated smoke and fire; and this we did, as became us, out of the sense of
our duty, for their sake, and for our own, and for the sake of Religion, and
the peace of the Kingdom.

As for that strange and unparalleld act, of turning their oratory into a
Magazine, and their prayers and tears, the spiritual armor of a Christian,
into swords and helmets, and under the pretense of Religion, and the
advancement of the honor and kingdom of Jesus, after an hostile manner to
enter the City, force the guards, and kill his Majesty's good subjects doing
their duty, in keeping the peace, we cannot sufficiently declare our utter
dislike and deep detestation of such things; neither will posterity believe
that attempts of this nature could ever be made by true English men, by fellow
Citizens, least of all by Christians professing the fear of God, and faith of
the Gospel.

For the Principles leading the late Actors to this sad Tragedy.

1. We concur with them in the common faith, and general expectation of
Christ's coming again to the earth, he is not removed from us for ever, he is
gone cum animo revertendi, with a purpose to return to us again at his
appointed time. He is that Noble man mentioned in the Gospel, Luke 19.12. Who
is gone into a far Country, to receive for himself a Kingdom; and to return.
But to think to accelerate and hasten his coming by force and violence, or
precisely to limit his time, and fix him a day, either in his person, or in his
power, for the erecting for himself a Throne here, is the insolency and
immodest presumption of some men's spirits; yea, and is not only irrational,
impious, and absurd, but (as very many learned and sober men conceive) contrary
to the very letter of the Scriptures, and express words of our Savior, Matthew.
24.36. Of that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels of heaven, but my
father only. And we wonder the rather at those, who being Predestinarians in
their opinions, and holding all things to succeed by the secret force of an
irresistible Decree, should thus, immaturo fato, preposterously anticipate the
heavenly determination, which in due time of absolute necessity must have taken
effect, unless they thought themselves particularly decreed and designed ab
eterno to this miserable enterprise.

2. We enter our just protestation against their unchristian and unman-like
principle, after the custom of Mahomet, to propagate Religion by the sword:
The Gospel we own and profess, is not Evangelium armatum, an armed Gospel; the
weapons of that warfare, wherein we serve as Christians, are not carnal, but
spiritual: The Scriptures, Reasons, and Arguments, are those offensive and
defensive arms that we have taken up, in the quarrel of Religion, and with
which, and no other, we seek to defend, propagate and maintain it. If it were
their principle to reduce men to the obedience of Christ, in a way less mild,
rational and convictive, we assure the world it is none of ours.

And though we have made our selves enemies to them, and many of our brethren
in the Nation, by our denying all external force and compulsion in matters of
Religion, as judging it eccentrick and disagreeable, both to the divine Wisdom
and the rational creature man, yet we cannot but be still of that opinion, and
are the more fixed and settled therein, by the late violent and irregulat
attempts amongst us.

3. And further, we declare to all the world by this public paper, what yet we
presume has been enough evinced already in our manners and deportment; that we
are far from disowning the present Powers and Dominions of the earth, and
inparticular that of his Majesty, utterly renouncing that principle, whether
appropriately Papal, or by whomsoever owned or professed, That all temporal
power is founded in grace; since the present Kingdom of Christ is not of this
world, and that the Rulers and Governors that be, hold not in capite of
Christ, as head of the Church, but (as we humbly conceive) of God the Father,
whose Deputies and Vicegerents they are: He it is that pulls down one, and
sets up another; as it is said, He removes Kings, and sets up Kings,
Dan. 2.21. For by the same reason, they might null and make void the titles of
the present Kings and Princes of the earth, to their respective Crowns and
dignities, they might destroy the right, interest, and title of all wicked men,
quatenus wicked men, to all their earthly inheritances and estates, lawfully
purchased, or descended upon them from their Ancestors; then which nothing
could be more subversive of weal-publick, pernicious to humane society, and
destructive of all right and property in the world. The Kingdom of Christ that
now is, being spiritual, seeks not to intermeddle by outward force or
violence with the Kingdoms of the earth that are worldly and external; neither
indeed, being duly and orderly managed and promoted, can it; so different are
they in their natures and qualities one from another: Besides we look upon and
follow, both in our principles and practice, Christ and his Disciples, as our
best teaching examples, who in the administration of this Kingdom did not
detract from, or deny obedience to those in power and authority, our Savior
himself injoyning tribute to be paid unto Caesar; and the Apostles pleading
subjection to Nero, notwithstanding they were such as yielded no obedience or
subjection unto Christ in his Kingdom.

There is no reason then we should either in whole, or in part, suffer under a
crime, we never knew of, much less consented unto; or that we should in the
least, be thought concerned in the guilt of those persons, since they
themselves upon their strict examination, did fully acquit us, as knowing right
well how averse, and contrary, both in our principles and practices we have
always been to them in all their violent procedures.

And though our own testimony concerning our selves, goes not far, either in
Law or reason, toward our full justification, yet the credit and authority of
our known Principles, diametrically repugnant to practices of this nature, in
conjunction with our loyalty, never yet stained with any impeaceable or
tumultuous deportment, under the civil government of these Kingdoms, but
constantly testified, by our ready subjection, to all its just demands,
promoting the interest, honor and safety thereof, according to our power, and
opportunity, will (we hope) upon serious reflection, and calm deliberation, be
our sufficient vindication. For we are sure, we are so far from being enemies
to government (the usual charge brought in against the people of God) that if
we have fallen it has rather been on the other hand, by a constant and
uninterrupted submission to all that are, or have been set over us, for
conscience sake; we little question, but our moderation in this respect, is
known unto all those, whose eyes have not been either colored with prejudice,
or weakened by looking on us, in our Christian fellowship, at too great a
distance.

And thus we justly seek to vindicate, and clear our selves from the fears,
jealousies, and suspicions of the late tumults without further censuring, or
stigmatizing those, who have already satisfied the Law, and are gone to give an
account of their actions, and to receive their final, and more definitive
sentence. To close up all

We do not much complain of that restraint that was laid upon our Christian
liberties, in the heat of action, and perplexity of affairs, whilst a perfect
discrimination twixt the nocent and the innocent, could not easily be made; but
now that time which discovers all things, has mace apparent who those
offenders were, and brought them to examplary punishment, we hope the Kings
Majesty will hear and distinguish, twixt the good, and the bad, and restore us
to our pristine liberty, purchased by the blood of Christ, and confirmed by his
Majesty's voluntary promise, and unextorred Declaration, imitating the Judge of
all the World, who mingleth not the innocent, with the guilty; neither
punishes the righteous, with the wicked, shall not the Judge and Ruler of the
Nation do right?

And though we have intermitted our weekly course of joint prayers, and
supplications to the God of Heaven, for our selves for the King, and for all
that are in Authority, and for our Country, and for the whole people of God,
until we have made this our just vindication, we hope to answer it the better
another day, to the father of spirits, and the God of our communion, since we
have not forfeited our liberty, by abusing it in any unworthy or unchristian
deportment, no not (to the best of our knowledge) so much as by a careless
syllable, or undue expression.

Signed on the behalf of the Church by Richard Pryor. John Weeks. John
Wightman. George Backlar. Joseph Huchinson. Edw: Addenbrook.


FINIS.

