A DECLARATION OF THE AGREEMENT OF THE 11. OF JANVARY, BETWIXT HIS MAJESTY and
the Inhabitants of the County of OXON.

For Provisions for His MAJESTY'S Horses Billited in this County.

Printed, by His MAJESTY'S Command, AT OXFORD, January 16.

By LEONARD LICHFIELD Printer to the University. 1642.

JANVARY 11. 1642. An Declaration of the Agreement of the 21. of December last,
betwixt His MAIESSY and the Inhabitants of the County of Oxford, for provision
for His MAJESTY'S Horses billited in this County.
WHereas it was desired by His Majesty, that the six Regiments of Horse
containing eight and Twenty Troops, quartered in this County for His Majesty's
service, should be provided for at the charge of the Jnhabitants of this
County, which charg being cast up after the rate of seven shillings the week
for a Horse, and three shillings six pence a week for a man, amounts to the
sum of two and forty pounds a week for every Troop, the whole charge of the
eight and Twenty Troops amounting in all to the sum of Eleven hundred
seventy and six pounds a week. The gentlemen and Freeholders of this County,
who attended the Lords and others his Majesty's Commissioners at Christ-Church,
did for their own parts, and for so much as concerned themselves agree, and did
believe that those who were a^sent, would for their parts likewise agree to
supply His Majesty with the weekly Loan of the said sum of Eleven hundred
seventy and six pounds, for the uses aforesaid in manner following, to be
raised upon the whole County, as other public payments are usually made, viz.

lib. s. The Hundred of Banbury weekly 73 10. The Hundred of Bloxam 73 10. The
Hundred of Poughley 147 00. The Hundred of Wootton 147 00. The Hundred of
Chadlington 147 00. The Hundred of Bampton 147 00. The Hundred of Bullingdon
100 00. The Hundred of Them 42 00. The Hundred of Dorchester 38 00. The
Hundred of Lewkenor 50 00. The Hundred of Pirton 42 00. The half Hundred of
Ewelme 80 00. The Hundred of Binfield 39 00. The Hundred of Langtree 35 00. The
Town of Henly 15 00.

Which several sums shall be subdivided by the high-Constables of every
Hundred, upon the several Townships in the said Hundreds, as is usually done
in other paiments, and shall be collected by the ^etty-Constables in their
several Townships, and Villages, and by them be paid over to the
High-Constables, and by them to be paid to such general receiuors as are
hereafter named for that purpose, etc.

In the Hundreds of Banbury and Bloxam. to Sir Thomas Pope K^.

In the Hundreds of Poughley and Wootton, to Sir Thomas Coghill Kr.

In the Hundred of Chadlington, to Sir William Walter Baronet.

Jn the Hundred of Bampton, to Sir Thomas Whoord K^.

In Bullingdon Hundred to Broom Whorwood Esquire

In Them Hundred, to Vincent Barrey Esquire

In Dorchester Hundred, to Timothy Doylie Gent.

In the Hundreds of Lewknor and Pirton to John Chamberlain Esquire

In the Hundreds of Langtree, the half Hundred of Ewelme, and the

Town of Henley upon Thames, to Henry Stephens Gent.

In Bynfield Hundred, to Humfrey Elmes Esquire

From whom it is to be received for the purposes afoersaid, by the Commanders
or Officers of the Army hereafter named in manner following, viz.

Sir Thomas Byron, or such as shall be appointed thereunto by warrant under his
hand and seal, to receave for the six Troops of the Princes Regiment weekly,
two hundred fifty and two pounds; one hundred forty and seven pounds thereof to
be paid him by the Receavor for the Hundreds of Banbury and Bloxam, and the
residue being one hundred and five pounds to be paid by the Receavor for the
Hundreds of Wooton and Poughley.

The Earl of Carnarvan, or such as he shall appoint, to receave for his five
Troops, and the Lord Wentworth's company of Dragoneers the like Sum of two
hundred fifty two pounds, one hundred eighty nine pounds thereof to be paid by
the receavor for the Hundreds of Wootton and Pough lie, and the remainder being
sixty three pounds to be paid by the Receavor of the Hundred of Chadlington.

Sir John Byron, or such as he shall appoint to receave the like sum of two
hundred fifty two pounds for his six Troops? eighty four pounds thereof to be
paid him by the receavor of Chadlington hundred one hundred forty seven pounds
by the Receavor for the Hundred of Bampton, and the residue being Twenty one
pound, to be paid by the receavor for Bullingdon Hundred.

The Lord Andover, or such as he shall appoint, to receive for his three
Troops the sum of 126. l. to be paid him by the Receivour of the Hundred of
Langtree, the half hundred of Ewelme, and the Town of Henlty upon Thames.

Colonel Gerard, or such as he shall appoint, to receive for his three Troops,
to the sum of one hundred twenty six pounds; seaventy nine pounds thereof to
be paid him by the Receivers for Bullingden hundred, thirty nine pounds by the
Receivour for Binf^^ld hundred, and eight pounds by the Receivour of Dorchester
hund^^d.

The Lord Digby, or such as he shall appoint, to recive for his four Troops
the sum of one hundred sixty eight pounds, forty two pounds thereof to depaid
him by the Receivour for the hundred of them, forty two pound more by the
Receivour for the hundred of Pirton, fifty pounds by the Receivour for the
hundred of Lewknor, thirty pounds by the Receivour of the hundred of
Dorchester, and four pounds by the Receivour of the hundred of Langtree.

If any Inhabitant refuse to pay his ratable proportion to this service, the
petty-Constables are to return the default to the high-Constables, and they to
the Receivours in their several limits, who are to certify the same to the
Lords Commissioners, that such course may be taken therein, as His Majesty's
service may receive no prejudice.

If any man deliver in provisions, according to the Rates hereafter set down.
to the Army, or have Horses billeted with him, the Tickets of those that
receive such provisions, or that are quartered in such houses or places where
they are furnished with such provisions, shall be esteemed as ready money; And
if any particular man send in more provisions, or billet more Horse or men,
then his proportion, it shall be made good to him out of the money paid to that
quarter, to which he sends in his provision, or where he is charged with the
billet.

The Rates are agreed by Consent to be thus.
For Hay by the Todde, -- 5 d For Oats by the Bushel. -- 20 d For Beans by
the Bushel. -- 2 s For Straw to make litter, by the load. -- 6 s -- 8 d
Every man that paies his part of this Weekly Lo^ne, and of the free
Contribution of one thousand eight hundred pounds a month, to be free from all
other extraordinary payments whatsoever, and to enjoy his Horses, Cattle, and
other goods quietly, from being taken away upon any pretense, and severe
punishment to be inflicted on such as shall offend therein.

If there be any Horses or Dragoones already billeted, or hereafter to be
billeted in this County, more then the six Regiments before mentioned, His
Majesty is graciously pleased to promise they shall be removed out of the
County, into some other parts, or in case there be a necessity of their being
in this County, no man that paies his proportion to this present Loan, and the
Contribution, shall be compel^ed to billet such Horses, but upon payment of
ready money.

If any alteration be made of the six Regiments, intended to be provided for by
this Loan, and so^e of them be removed into other Counties, and other places
in their steads here, they who so come in (not exceeding the number of those
that go out) shall be provided for, as the former were.

This Loan to begin as upon the 23th of December last, and all rules and
directions hereby made for the time to come, are to be observed from the 21th
of December till this time respectively, and to continue three months from the
said 21th day, unless His Majesty please sooner to withdraw His Army out of
this County, to a place more commodious for it, or that in the mean time there
be a cessation of Arms, and when either of those shall happen, if any money
remain in the hands of the petty-Constables, chief-Constables, or Receivours,
they shall repay it proportionably to the several Towns from whence it was
received.

That the security whjch His Majesty shall please to give for the repayment of
this money, shall be made to six or more of the Gentlemen, named herein to be
Receivours of the said Loan, as men in that behalf trusted for the whole
County, in such manner as Council shall reasonably advise. And it is humbly
referred to His Majesty to propound the security Himself.

Lastly, that this present agreement may by His Majesty's Command be speedily
published in Print, that the whole County may take the more public notice
thereof, and that the chief-Constables, without expecting any new Warrant, may
forthwith proceed to Assesse and gather the Arreares from the 21th of December
till the time, and so to continue the payment of this Weekly Loan to (...)
general Receivours, as are by this Agreement nominated and (...) pointed for
that purpose; Wherein it is expected, that the h^^ Constables shall proceed
with all expedetion that may be, after the receipt of this Agreement signed by
his Majesty's Commissioners.

FINIS.

