A DECLARATION Of all the WATERMEN In and about the City of LONDON, between
GRAVESEND and STANES.
OR, A Hue and Cry after Col. WHITTON and his Decoys.
Whereas it has been seemingly by the insinuations of some few of us, cast on
our whole Company, that we would lay our shoulders, and stretch out our helping
hands, for the upholding of something, which to our selves is both unknown and
uncertain; and may likewise in probability, be a cause of disturbance, if not
breaking the peace of the Nation: We, to manifest Our innocence, in the one
particular, and vindicate our selves from the scandal thereof, as also to show
our real and hearty concordance, with all other, Noblemen, Gentlemen, Citizens
and others, of the several Counties of England, whose Declarations are exposed
to the public view, do cordially, unanimously, and freely declare.

That the List annexed of our names to a Petition pretended by our consent to
be presented to the Members sitting at Westminster, is not at all by us owned,
neither do we know any other Authors or Abettors thereof, then some few here
under-mentioned, our names in truth being gained by Colonel Whitton, under the
pretense to put down Hackny Coachmen; but by him converted to another use, and
that so contrary to our thoughts and intentions, that we would sooner have
quitted our nearest relations, than have consented to such ebulliences. For the
undeceiving therefore of the Gentry of this Nation, to whom many, yea, most of
us are obliged, and consequently not unknown; for the rectifying the
judgments of such as know us not, and for the satisfaction of the whole
freeborn Subjects of England who with us claim a birthright in Magna Charta,
and the Petition of right, we do further, with one consent, declare.

That we conceive it fitting, for the redressing the grievous wants and
pressures, that lie upon all the good people of this Nation, that according to
Fundamental Right, the People in Parliament may have their representatives,
who may receive their grievances, and present them in their behalf, whereby to
obtain a remedy.

And because Faction and Schism, has already too great a root, that honest and
prudential men may be elected, whose Estates (as to temporalls) and Religion
(as to spirituals) may obliege them sincerely, to endeavor a settlement both
in Church and State.

The only means for attaining of which ends, we conceive by the blessing of
God, to be a full and free Parliament, which as we know the Nation groans for;
so we cordially desire, and we shall not acquiesce, till we have regained that
our undoubted right, hitherto unquestioned Privilege, and never to be denied
Lawful Demand. In the defense whereof, we shall account nothing too dear to
lose, being ready to quit not only our employments, but to lay aside our
relations, and lay our lives at stake.

This Representation is owned by Ten Thousand of us, (which if desired) shall
be acknowledged both with our hands and hearts, against all the malicious
underminings of Col. Whitton the Painter and his Decoys: who upon the tendering
that forged Petition to the Watermens Hall, being conscious, that the ranckness
of the Trepan would be presently sented, addressed themselves to Mr. Pryn, to pen
their Protest against it, their names are hereunto annexed.

Will. Lemond. Josias Smith. Will. Crop. Will. Goodale. Thomas Slator. Tho.
Wasborn. John Howard. Will. Bugby. Robert Crop. Tho. Vincent. John Foster. John
Lee. Will. Sound. Jacob Meade. Will. Clerk. Martin Craul. Roger Phillips. Fran.
Borrick. Richard Thusee. Will. Butler.



