A DECLARATION, and INSTRVCTIONS, For bringing the several Branches of the
Revenue and Stores in IRELAND, unto one Head of ACCOUNT.

And for the better preventing irregular Issues of Moneys or Provisions.

DVBLIN, Printed by W. BLADEN, Anno Dom. 1652.

IRELAND.
By the Commissioners of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND for the
Affairs of IRELAND.
FOR the better Ordering and bringing of the several Branches of the Revenue
and Stores in Ireland, into one Head of Account* And for the better preventing
of irregular Issues of Moneys or Provisions; And to the end the State of the
said Accounts may be always within the View and Knowledge of such as shall be
Chiefly Entrusted with the Government and Affairs of this Nation, It is hereby
Ordered and Declared, That the rules and method here after prescribed, be
punctualy Observed and speedily put in Execution by the Commissioners of
Revenue, Tresurers of the Public Revenue, Keepers of Stores, Commissaries for
Musters, Auditors, Officers of the Custom and Excise, and by all other Persons
employed about the Revenue or Stores in the respective Precincts in Ireland,
according to their respective Trusts and Duties: That is to say.

I. That there be an Office erected near the place of the Commissioners of
Parliaments most constant Residence and Sitting, into which the State of all
Accounts of the respective Branches of the Public Revenue and Stores, and
Abstracts or Duplicats of all Monthly Musters be brought, in such Manner as is
hereafter Expressed.

II. That the Commissioners of Revenue in every respective Precinct in Ireland,
do exactly Examine the State of the Revenue and Tresure within their Charge,
from the first of November 1651. until the first of November 1652. and Certify
the same to the Commissioners of Parliament; In which they are to set down
distinctly every Branch of the Certain Annual Revenue: as Rents of Lands, Rents
of Houses, Rents of Tithes, etc. Under dtstinct Heads, wherein they are to
insert the Names of every respective Tenent, and of the Thing Leased or Let,
the Continuance of the Term, and the Rent reserved. And likewise for the Casual
or Uncertain Revenue: as Customs, Excise, etc They are to set down what the
same did severallie amount unto, every Month for the time aforesaid; They are
likewise to Certify what Money remains in Cash in the Tresurers hand, upon the
said first day of November, And what Rents or Debts are then due in Arrear and
not paid into the Tresury; And what Warrants are Charged upon the Tresurer and
not paid, mentioning the Dates and Contents of such Warrants, which Returns or
Certificats, the respective Tresurers are to Sign; They are likewise to
Certify the Certain Annual Issues out of the Revenue within their respective
Charge, for Pay of Civil Officers, Maintenance of Ministers to Preach the
Gospel, Schoolmasters, Pentioners, Pay of Officers of Hospitals, Governors,
Town-Majors, and Gunners of Garrisons, and all other Certain Settled Charge,
Issuable of Course, with the Names of the respective Persons that receive the
same. The said Commissioners of Revenue are likewise to Examine exactly the
State of the Stores of Provisions of Victual and Clothes, as they stand within
their respective Precincts, upon the said first day of November, and what
Quantities of Provision have been a^ any time lent out of their said Stores and
not paid in, and likewise what Quantities have been Sold or delivered out for
Money, and the Money not accounted for; And to Certify the same under their
and the Commissarie of the Stores Hands.

The State of the Stores of Ammnnition and other Furniture of War, is proper
for the Commander in Chief of the Precinct, or Governor of the Garrison, to
View and Certify in manner and form as aforesaid.

III. The Certificats and State of the several Revenues above mentioned being
returned to the Commissioners of Parliament: That the same be transmitted into
the said Office, there to be Entered as a Foundation to Carry on the General
Account for the future, excepting only the Certificats that shall be made
concerning the Stores of Arms and Ammunition, which are to be returned only to
the Commander in Chief.

IV. That the Commissioners of Revenue within the several and respective
Precincts, do cause transscripts of all Bonds heretofore taken, either in the
late KINGS Name, or in the Name of the Commonwealth, for Customs, Excise, or
any other Money due to the Commonwealth, and not paid before the said first
day of November; And also of all Bonds allowed to be taken for the Use of the
Commonwealth, which shall be taken after the said first day of November, be
forthwith from time to time returned into the said Office, That the same may be
given in Charge and duly Collected.

And likewise, that all Bonds, whether for Port-Cocquets or otherwise, and all
Recognizances, taken for the Use of the Commonwealth when due or forfeited,
and all Judgments and Fines in any Court of Record, whereby any Benefit is to
accrue to the Commonwealth, be from time to time every four Months. Certified
into the said Office, that the same may be given in Charge; And when any of the
said Bonds or Recognizances are duly discharged, or Fines remitted or
qualified, that the same be likewise Certified, to prevent undue Molestation,
Trouble, or Charge to the People.

V. That after the said first day of November, no Issues be made of any part of
the said Revenue, without Warrant or Order from the Commissioners of
Parliament, or others appointed thereunto by their Authority, And that such
Warrants or Powers given to others, to Issue Moneys as aforesaid, be attested
to be Entered in the said Office, by the Keeper thereof, To the end it may be
known, whether the Power and Instructions given, be Observed.

VI. That after the said first day of November, no Issues be made of any part
of the Stores of Provisions, but by Warrant from the Commander in Chief, or
whom he shall empower for that purpose, and the said Warrants and Powers be
Entered and attested by him that shall be appointed to keep the said Office.
That a Checque upon all Stores may likewise remain there.

VII. That the Collectors of Assessments, Customs and Excise in every
respective Precinct, do Monthly pay over unto the Tresurer of the same
Precinct, what shall be received by them as aforesaid, and also all such Rents
due for Lands, Houses, and Tiths, as shall be received by them, at the usual
times of payment from time to time, and enter their Acquittances before the
Commissioners of Revenue there; To the end they may Certify the same, every
six Months from time to time into the said Office, there to remain as a Charge
upon the respective Tresurers:

VIII. That the Commissioners of the Revenue in every respective Precinct, do
from time to time, Certify into the said Office, what Alteration, Change,
Increase or Diminution is made in any of the Branches of the Public Revenue,
with the time when, and the reason wherefore the same is made.

IX. That four or more Persons be forthwith appointed as Auditors, to take the
Accounts of every respective Person, that has been employed in the receiving
and Issuing out of any Money, Provision of Victuals, or other Stores, at any
time from the first day of May 1649, to the said first day of November: And to
Certify the said Accounts to the Commissioners of Parliament, that the
Accomptants, upon clearing their Accounts may be duly discharged: And likewise
to receive all Original Books, Invoices, Rent-Rols, Vouchers, and other Papers
which may tend to the Justifying of the said Account, and Charging the Persons
unto whom any Money or Provisions have been paid or Issued, And to return the
said Original Books, Invoices, Rent-Rols, Vouchers, and other Papers into the
said Office, there to remain for Public Use.

X. That for the future, such Persons as shall be appointed Auditors, do once
in every six Months, take all Public Accounts of Money and Provisions, and
Certify the same to the Commissioners of Parliament, and do return all Books,
Vouchers, and Papers for the Justifying such Accounts into the said Office* In
which Accounts, they are to distinguish and balance every respective Branch of
the Revenue, all which Accounts so drawn up as aforesaid, are to remain in the
said Office, as a Charge upon such Persons, unto whom any Money or Provisions
have been paid or Issued.

The Accounts mentioned in the precedent articles, to be taken and stated by
the Auditors and Certified to the Commissioners of Parliament, are to be from
thence transmitted unto the said Office.

XI. That once in every six Months, out of the Accounts returned into the
Office as aforesaid, there be a general Account formed by the Persons, who
shall have the Charge of the said Office, of all the Receipts and Issues
throughout the whole Nation, of the whole and every respective Branch of the
Revenue, distinctly balanced as aforesaid; At the drawing up of which Account,
such Persons to be present, as the Commissoners of Parliament shall appoint, as
Inspectors or Viewers of the said Account, (whereof one of the Commissioners of
Parliament to be one) To the end, that the same (being carefully Examined and
approved of by the said Persons) may afterward remain in the said Office, as
an Account of Record fully determined, for so much as shall be contained in the
said Accounts, and approved of as aforesaid.

XII. That for the better Checquing of such Accounts, as shall relate to the
Soldiers Entertainment, Duplicats or exact Abstracts of all Monthly Musters, be
returned by all Commissaries for Musters, into the said Office; And that
likewise Duplicats of all Warrants for the Issues out of all Provisions, and
for Pay of Soldiers: And all Orders for reducing any part of the Forces, and
all other Orders or Warrants, which may relate to the Diminution or Increase of
the Pay of the Forces, may be returned into the said Office, once every six
Months by the Auditor General for the Army: And that all Establishments
likewise for the Pay of the Army, be also Registered in the said Office.

That for the more regular Issuing out of the Revenue and Pay of the Soldiers;
All Warrants may be drawn in the ensuing Forms, in all Cases where the said
Forms may be proper, ( viz.)

THese are to require you, forthwith out of the Money in your hands, of Custom,
or Excise, or Tith-Money, or Sequestered Goods; to Pay unto A. B. the Sum of 00
l. 00 s. 00 d. for his Salarie, as and c. Commencing and c. and Determining and
c. or (in full of the within-written Bill) for Work don in or at and c. for the
States Service: And for so doing, this, together with the Receipt of the said
A. B. shall be your sufficient Warrant. Dated, and c.

To C. D. Treasurer of the E, etc.
THese are to require you, out of such Moneys, as are or shall be appointed for
Payment of the Soldiers; to Issue forth with, and Pay unto Captain A. B. the
Sum of 00 l. 00 s. 00 d. upon Account, which with 00 l. 00 s. 00 d. discompted
for Provision, delivered in kind out of the Stores, is for Payment of a Months
Pay (according to the present allowance of Pay) including Carriage-Money, to
the Officers and Soldiers, in the Company of Foot, under his Command part of
C. D. Regiment, Commencing and c. and Determining and c. According to the
Computation of Pay on the back side of this Warrant, agreeing with the Musters
of and c. And this with the Receipt of the and c.

A Warrant for Captain A. B.
l. s. d. l. s. d. Captain. -- 00 00 00 Lieutenant -- 00 00 00 Ensign -- 00 00
00 In Money. -- 00 00 00 2. Sergeants - 00 00 00 In Provision. -- 00 00 00 6
Corp. Dru^ and Gent. 00 00 00 100 Soldier - 00 00 00 Carriage. -- 00 00 00

The Computation to be Entered in a Book.
I. BY means of which, all differences of Pay will be easily determined, and
the same Warrants again without Trouble Examined.

II. By the Warrants so Framed, there may be a distinct Account kept, of how
much Money, and how much Provisions each Captain on each Regiment receives. (
viz.) l. s. d. PAid Captain A. B. of C. D. Regiment for himself and Company,
for six Months Pay, Commencing and c. Determ. and c. As appears by Warrant and
Muster Roll. and c. Money -- 00 00 00 Provision 00 00 00

III. By those Warrants also, the Storekeepers may be Checqued in each Inland
Precinct, and of each Private-Store.

As to bringing the Stores to Account.
THat all Invoices from England, be brought to the aforesaid Office, and there
Entered and Computed, And all Charges of removing Stores and c. may also be
added to their Original Price, and both added together as a Charge for Stores;
And for that end, distinct Accounts of Disbursments for Provisions, or
appertaining to them, is to be kept.

That the Division of Stores to the several Precincts, being by Warrant as
aforesaid, and Entered in the aforesaid Office; The same be forthwith Computed
at the States Rates, by him that has the charge of the said Office, and that
Computation forthwith sent to the Auditor General of the Army; To the end,
that the Treasurer of every Precinct may pay the real value of such Provisions,
as shall be appointed for supply of the Soldiers within that Precinct, into the
hands of such Persons, as shall be Authorized by Warrant to receive the same,
and the same reserved as a Treasure for buying new Stores.

That from that Office may immediately (on Receipt of Invoices) Issue forth a
Copy of the same to the Store-keepers where the same is to be Landed, that they
may know what to receive and when the same is received, to signify the same
back to the said Office under his Hand.

And the Commissioners of Revenue in every respective Precinct, are hereby
strictly required, forthwith to examine the State of the Revenue and Treasure
within their Charge, and the Receipts and Issues of the same, from the first of
November 1651, to the first of November 1652, in such manner as is before
specified; And Certify the same to the said Commissioners of Parliament.

And to the end that all Persons concerned in this Service, may the better know
what is hereby required of them: It is further Ordered, That six hundred Copies
of this Declaration he forthwith Printed, and sent into the respective
Precincts, to be by the Commissioners of the Revenue, dispersed to the
respective Persons employed in the Receipts Issues, or other Management of the
Revenue and Stores respectively.

Dublin, November 30. 1652. Charles Fleetwood. Miles Corbet. Edm. Ludlow. Jo.
Jones.



