A SHORT SURVEIGH OF THE Grand Case of the present MINISTRY WHETHER They may
Lawfully Subscribe and Declare as by the late Act of Uniformity is required.

AND The several Cases thence arising, especially about the COVENANT.

By Some Conformable Non-Conformists

1 Pet. 4.19. Wherefore let them that suffer according to the Will of God,
commit the keeping of their Souls to him in well doing as to a Faithful
Creator.

Printed, in the Year, 1663.

Courteous Reader,
OUr Condition is sad, and the more sad, by reason of those Severe Censures
which Sober, and Learned men pass upon us, as if peevishness and groundless
Scrupulosity were the only cause of our present Cross.

Do we need to Appeal to God that we love our selves? We conceive Natural Men
should believe us without it; And if we may be believed therein, can it be
supposed we would not willingly receive satisfaction to our Doubts?

Let us tell thee we have read what has been written to offer us satisfaction,
but we find none.

The Grand Case of the present Ministry has made the fairest proffer, as
professedly written for our sake to help the pinch of our Case; but yet it has
also failed our expectations and left us on the Rack of our doubts, or rather
Shipwreck of our Resolutions.

Least we should by a sinful Silence justify the severe Censures which pass
upon us; We have adventured to digest our dissatisfactions in the ensuing
Tract, that our haesitancie in the conformity expected from us may be visible,
and if possible removed.

But now we have stated our doubts, we are in doubt of some severe moderation
by the Interposition of Authority, yet why do we doubt? did ever the English
Protestant Genius determine a Crime in a sober Disputation? We affirm nothing,
only urge what sticks with us as the Remora to that Negation which is
expected from us.

In the following Tract it might be expected we should have said something to
the Case of Reordination, but we are not therein concerned; and our Reverend
Casuist says nothing but turns us over to Mr. Humphry whose sad experience
of the Fact he retracts, and yet defends, does add no little to the real
weakness of his Argumentation on that point; we could tell thee we have seen
two several Answers to his last piece on this Subject, which are smothered
least their appearance should break their bruised Reed, and add Affliction to
him whom God has grieved. Unto this Treatise with which we deal is added some
considerations about admitting some inexpediencies, for the necessity of our
Ministry unto this (which we think sufficiently obnoxious to exception) we have
said nothing, because we have admitted, and could admit many inexpediencies for
the Liberty of our Ministry, and our Conscience does conceive formal, positive,
and special sin in what is required from us; So that until the Act be acquitted
from Sin, the Case of Necessity and expediency cannot take place in our Souls.

Through the whole we wish it may be observed we may appear as Apologists for
our non-complyance with what is required, rather then as Antagonists to what is
affirmed: We have therefore propounded our own dissatisfactions, rather then
disputed against what is urged by the Reverend Author of the Grand Case of the
present Ministry, to whom our doubts are directed.

A SHOHT SVRVEIGH OF THE GRAND CASE OF THE Present Ministry, Whether they may
Declare and Subscribe as is required in the Act for Uniformity, in an Epistle
to the Author of the Grand Case.
The Preface.
Reverend Sir,
WE, some of your Brethren, in compassion to whom you have been pleased to
compose and publish your Candid and elaborate Tract, Entitled the Grand Case
of the present Ministry. Having seriously considered the same, as being therein
concerned; after some silence, have assumed the boldness of addressing these
Lines unto you, thankfully to acknowledge your Zeal, Sobriety and Charity,
therein expressed; and modestly to signify to you, it has not made on us that
Impression, nor produced that effect, you might rationally promise to your
self, and our selves cannot but observe it has effected in many others, Yet,
Sir,

2. We must and do acknowledge your Grave and serious Preface, most truly
stating the Case of self-created Sufferings, and the sinfulness thereof; has
seized on our Spirits with no mean force.

3. Truly, Sir, we are not a little troubled to apprehend men, yea wise and
learned men reprehend us as felones de se, we have esteemed life sweet, and are
pressed to pursue the preservation thereof, not only in reference to our
selves, but also in reference to our Wives and Children; some of them can make
our hearts ache, crying for the bread of our late lost Benefices, and so keep us
from any proud, profuse, contempt of the comfortable livelyhoods we did enjoy.

4. The thoughts of being fures de se, do much terrify us, we are convinced we
are not our own, our Persons, our Parts, our Ministry, are Gods, his Churches,
and the Kings, from whence we may not withhold the same, for a moment unless
superseded by some sin, which we dare not commit and break through for the
greatest good.

5. You make our hearts tremble when Boanerges like you pronounce us, Proditors
de se, and that in the great concernments of our Ministry, dearer to us then
all our lives, as committed to us for the salvation of precious Souls, many
more then our own, or those of our own households.

6. The consideration of these things, have constrained us to press upon you,
and to present to you our dissatisfaction (and the grounds thereof) in your
serious explications of, and expostulations with us, in the matters which
appear to you the Grand Cause of our present case, to which we beg your leave
to pass with all plainness and brevity, that if you can convincingly reply to
it, we may bless God for you, as our Redeemer out of our present dark and
comfortless condition.

The Grand Case.
Whether it be Lawful to declare, as is required in the late Act, Entitled an
Act for Uniformity of Public Prayers.
SIR, Pa. 1st.
your book does profess to deal with such Who could Conform, but could not
declare and subscribe what is required in, and by the Act of Uniformity; but
you wholly pass by those men, who are against the use of the Common Prayer
Book: We Sir, must needs confess our selves, to be Ministers of the Rank with
whom you deal; yet we must profess we should rejoice to see some Satisfactory
discourse directed to the latter, many of whom we know to be men of Learning
and sobriety, faithful Subjects to the King, and profitable Ministers in, and
to the Church of God.

2. These men we do discern to stumble, at a Liturgy, generally (throughout
all Acts in Ministration of Gods Ordinances,) and Exclusively (so that men must
be tied to those forms, and none other.) Imposed, because they conceive the
Modifying Gods Ordinances in, and to the Church by personal Ministerial Gifts,
is the formal Act in and by which they must fulfill the Ministrey to them
committed.

3. These men are, Sir, of Age sufficient to speak for themselves, and do
complain they have spoken, and are Answered by Rigor without Reason, we shall
therefore leave them to themselves, and being singled out by you, we shall
adventure to speak for our selves, because for our sake it is you have been
pleased to take so great pains.

4. Sir, we take it for granted, you conceive the Declarations required from
us, to be Tantamount to an Oath, they are to be Solemnly made in the
Congregation, by Ministers qua Ministers of the Gospel, in which virbum
sacerdotis is the Sacred Rivet of that Obligation, which resulteth from such
Declaration, to our Conscience in the sight of God, and his Church.

5. On this Consideration, we presume you will have Charitable table
apprehensions of our present Haesistancie as to the Subscribing and publishing
such Declarations, for it is a Snare to devour holy things, and after Vows to
make enquiry, and we shall in unbiassed Judgments weigh your grounds on which
you determine this Case, affirmatively moving in our Observation, according to
the Method of your Argumentation.

The Declarations are these two, by you truly Transcribed.
The First is this.
J. A. B. DO here declrae my unfeigned assent, and consent to all and every
thing contained and prescribed in, Pa. 2.3.
and by the Book Entitled, The Book of Common Prayer, and Administration of
the Sacraments, and other Rites, and Ceremonies of the the Church, according to
the use of the Church of England, to gether with the Psalter or Psalms of
David, pointed as they are to be Sung, or said in Churches, and the form, or
manner of making, Ordaining, or Consecrating of Bishops, Priests or Decons.

The Second is this.
J. A. B. DO Declare that it is not lawful upon pretense whatsoever to take
Arms against the King, and that I do abhor that Traitorous Position of taking
Arms, by his Authority against his person, or against those Commissioned by
him, and that I will conform to the Liturgy of the Church of England as it is
now Established by Law; and I do declare that I do hold there lies no
obligation upon me, or any other person from the Oath commonly called the
Solemn League and Covenant, to endeavor any Change or alteration of
Government, either in Church or State, and that the same was in its self an
unlawful Oath, and imposed on the Subjects of this Realm, against the known
Laws, and Liberties of this Kingdom.

Theseare the Declarations which you affirm may be subscribed and made, as is
required, your reasons for this your Judgment you produce in the particular
following Cases, which we shall consider.

Case the First.
Whether it be Lawful to declare in the words of the First Declaration.
THe first of the Declarations you distribute into two parts, Pa. 4.
that which concerns the Liturgy, and that which concerns the Book of
Ordination.

2. You first determine concerning the latter of these viz. The form and
manner of Making, Ordaining, and Consecrating Bishops, Priests, and Deacons;
Pa: 45:
and determine it Lawful thus to declare in this part of the Declaration which
you thus enforce: Most that have Livings have subscribed this already, at their
Ordination, and read their allowance of it, openly to their several
Congregations upon their Induction, besides had not this been required in the
Act, who knows not that no Conformity without subscribing and reading the nine
and thirty Articles could legally suffice. To this Sir, we say:

3. Our question is not what could legally suffice, but what may be
Conscientiously done; for this must not be violated unto the satisfaction of
that.

4. Your Argument, is an Argument of fact, which if admitted true, will not
conclude your Resolution; for you well know a facto ad jus will not follow,
most have done it, therefore all may lawfully do it, is Logic; which the fear
of God favors not. Yet Sir:

5. We presume to gainsay your confident Assertion, That the most who had
Livings, had at the writing your book, subscribed the form and manner of
Making, Ordaining, and Consecrating Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, required by
this Act, cannot but conceive strangely of it; we do not know the most who then
had Livings, and therefore cannot ask them the question; but we think they must
be most of them Reordained according to the new Form, Presbyterial Ordination
had sure been very Active, and Extensive, and Presbyters were easy Wheelers,
who had well learned Tempora mu tantur and nos mutamur ab illis.

6. Sir, give us leave to tell you, we had good Livings until the 24th. of
August 1662. and yet we were not of the Number of those who subscribed this
Book, Form and manner at our Ordination, and we believe most who were then in
Livings, and Episcopally Ordained, were in the same common Capacity with us,
and subscribed the Book which we subscribed, and sure this Book was not then
born, if conceived in our Bishops brain, it was not brought into the World many
days before this Book of yours which gives it suck.

7. We must indeed confess we have been informed that the most of the Ministers
in Cheshire (and it may be some other Diocese) in zeal or love to their
Livings (more manifest then Conscience or discretion) did by a Monstrous
implicit faith subscribe this Book before the 24th of August. These may evince
something of your Argument a facto, and yet we must tell you they were not all
then Ordained, and if this will conclude ad jus, we must tell you these men did
at the same time, subscribe the Book of Common Prayer, and both these
Declarations, and all this they did in obedience to the Act for Uniformity
before their eyes saw either of these Books; Ergo all may lawfully so do.

8. Moreover, Sir, we must presume to acquaint you that we know the Reading so
many of thirty nine Articles, Which contain only the Doctrine of Faith, or of
the Sacraments, with an omission of that which concerned the book of
Consecration would Legally suffice, we are confident you will make no more of
this form and manner of Making, Ordaining, and Consecrating Bishops, Priests,
and Deacons, save a Political though Ecclesiastical order, and that neither
Doctrine of Faith nor Sacraments, and an Assent to such Articles as contain
Those, and Only those is required by the Law; The Statute which dictateth Legal
sufficiency.

9. We expect, Sir, you should reply to us, that the Book of Consecration
Established by King Edward the Sixth and enforced by Queen Elizabeth, is much
what the same with this, and therefore in subscribing that, we have subscribed
this.

10. Good Sir, excuse us, sinaile nonest idem, there are in this book some
Additions, and alterations which were not in that, and this may bar our
subscription to this; Moreover, Sir, the form of subscription required by this
Law, is such as was never required before by any law, nor given by us to any
form or manner of Ordination and Consecration. This requiring our unfeigned
Assent and consent which we unfeignedly profess we cannot give.

11. But, Sir, You have hit the white in your conjecture, that the first part
of this Declaration is that which sticks with us, Pa. 5:
(viz.) that which concerns the Book of Common Prayer, Sect 5.
and is thus expressed.

I. A. B. Do declare my unfeigned Assent and Consent to all and everything
contained and prescribed in and by the Book Entitled, The Book of
Common Prayer, etc. For, Sir, although we could have conformed, we could not,
Page: 6:
nor (considering what you have said) can we yet make and subscribe this
Declaration, Sect 7:
though we are not like Children affrighted with a long Title, we are not in
judgment satisfied to declare concerning the Book what is required.

12. We Sir, embrace your Suada, and will not set an edge on the words to
wound our selves; yet we must say, your gloss does not so much as dull the edge
your self has put upon the words; you tell us the Object of our Assent and
Consent is not the words but things, there are several expressions which though
we could safely read, yet we do not so heartily approve^ them, as we seem to be
required, not every thing as there expressed, but every thing contained in the
expressions must have our Assent.

13. Sir, We must be bold to tell you our Controversy is about Wordy things, a
Liturgy, a Rubric, a Form, of Prayer, and the like: The question is whether
these be right words, to be pronounced? and a fit form to be used, that in our
Ministry we may be bound couse these and none other,? and as such Sir, your
things are words and matters expressed, is the Mode of expression; to which,
our Consent and Assent must be yielded; the Assent to a Creed may have the
matter expressed for its object; but Assent and Consent to a Common Prayer Book
has no adaequate object but the Mode, Words, Expressions, Forms to be used and
pronounced; though Sir, we could Minister in and by some such Expressions, we
must be well advised before we declare an unfeigned Assent and Consent
thereunto, The Nonconformaists geneally allow the matter of Doctrine, or
Petition, in the Common Prayer, expressed and contained, and have ever
quarrelled the Mode, as not a full and fit wordy Direction or determination of
the ministration directed in and by it.

14. But, Sir, admitting your gloss; some things contained in such expressions,
and signified by such words, are such to which we cannot Assent nor consent:
For Instance, in the Absolution, a word is altered which we conceive has
altered the thing, (Wherefore we beseech him to grant us true Repentance, etc.
In the old Book is a formal Prayer) but (let us Beseech him in the new book)
seems to alter it into an authoritative Sacerdotal absolution which we are
not convinced to be a standing piece of solemn Worship in every approach to
God, or into a Ministerial exhortation of the people, and then not to stick at
the impertinent Amen of the people, thereto subjoyned; we are to be convinced
that the words of the Lords Prayer are the necessary and only lawful Petition
for pardon of sin in every approach to God, yet that is constantly subjoyned.

15. Again, Sir, Answer, in the Rubric is a word, but the direction of popular
responds; the Invitation, Accompany me with an humble voice, Analeps. Analepth.
Pa. 58.
and say after me, the different Characters in the Petitionary part of the
Letany and Decalogue are directions for popular Conclamations, all which (be
not offended if we tell you in Mr. Croftons Dialect) is so directly repugnant
to the Apostles rule; Let all things be done decently and in order; who in the
case of extraordinary and immediate Elolitions of the spirit allowed the people
no more, save an audible Amen: That we dare not assent nor consent to things
contained in these words.

16, Again, Sir, Holy is an adjunct to Table frequent in this book, and
signifies a Thing which we cannot admit; we know no holiness o^ places or
Instruments under the Gospel, yet will contend that such be handsome: Sir, Mr.
Crofton whom you specially assault has to our knowledge opposed the Profane
neglect, contempt, and abuse of the Churches: Irreverend, unmannerly usage of
the Table, reserved for the Ministration of the Lords Supper, and the
Consecration of Churches, holiness of Table^ with an equal vigor.

17. Again, Sir, The corrupt Translation of the Psalter, or Psalms of David,
pointed (unto manifest nonsense) to be sung or said in Churches, varying the
Text from the Original, yea from the truth it self, rendering it contrary
thereunto in those several particulars excepted against by the Non-conformists,
whose loud and long clamor, would have engaged the correction of errors, so
gross, and obvious, yet even these things are retained and returned, as things
contained in and prescribed by this Common Prayer, book, and to which we must
declare our unfeigned assent and consent: To this, Sir, we may and must add the
corrupt Translation of the fourth Commandment, (wherefore the Lord blessed the
seventh day, and hallowed it) contrary to the Original Text, the Bible
Translation, and the prudent correction thereof, made in the book prepared for
and sent into Scotland, by our late Prelates: Though, Sir, we could
submissively bear these things, our Reformation not being at the first
perfect; yet before we declare our unfeigned assent and consent to such words,
speaking things so falsely, we must have a better Argument then this (you are
not concerned in the Expressions) which expressions are manifest directions,
and significations wilfully retained, and severely imposed after and against
undeniable exceptions and earnest Petitions for Reformation.

18. Give us leave to add one more (viz.) those words in Baptism; It is
certain by Gods word that Children being Baptized dying before they commit
actual sin, are undoubtedly saved.

19. Sir, it is true, these are but words, and an expression, but these words
contain in them a Position and Doctrine asserted with the certainty of an
Article of Faith, to which we cannot consent: we can Christianly believe the
Regenerating Nature, Use, and efficacy of Baptism, and charitably hope the
salvation of such who die subjected thereunto, but that the undoubted salvation
of all baptized Infants dying before they commit actual sin is ortain by the
Scriptures, We confess we cannot see, nor do we believe, we do believe Gods
Sovereign Election and Reprobation of persons, The Scripture does declare, God
loved Jacob and hated Esau, the Children being not yet born, much less
Baptized, nor having done good or evil, that the purpose of God might stand
according to Election not of works, that all who pass under the administration
of a saving Saving Ordinance are Undoubtedly saved is not clear from
Scripture, but rather the contrary, things that are revealed belong unto us,
and to our Children.

19. We cannot but hope you will in a second review of these, and the like
expressions, find our assent and consent is required to those Words, which
Without forming an edge to wound our selves, do contain and prescribe things to
which no rational man in his right mind can declare the same.

20. We now proceed to consider another Objection which you slate and resolve
in this Case, viz.

Though we could Use the things, Pa. 7. Objection 2:
it is only for peace sake, and in obedience to Authority, and not that we
would choose or can absolutely approve of these things indifferent.

To this Sir, you tell us we may not approve Absolutely but Comparatively.

The first you say in Charity to our Governors we conceive to be required in
the Declaration, Page: 8:
because it is impossible, all men should in so many perticulars, and various
Circumstances be of one mind: But Sir.

21. We humbly conceive we do not break Charity to our Governors, if we
conclude that they knowing all men could not in so many perticulars, and
various circumstances be of one mind; and believing Unanimity to be the bond
of Uniformity, did determine to knock off from public Ministration in the
Church, all who were not of the same mind, and who would not Declare the same
in such words as were by them prescribed.

22. Truly Sir, we see very little cause to believe the Act will allow such a
Comparitive approbation of the Common Prayer book as you do expiers. It might
something satisfy us, if we had our assurance from our Legislators that such a
Comparative approbation would satisfy the Law, but they are herein silent, and
the Law gives not sufficient Reason on which we may conclude it.

23. You say the Grounds of this Assent and consent are not specified in in the
Act, if by the Grounds you mean the Reasons inducing the Legislators to require
such an assent and consent; we must be bold to deny what you ^ff m^nd entreat
you to let us know what you make there words in the Act; Now in regard that
nothing conduces to the settling to peace in this Nation (which is desired by
all good men,) not to the honor of our Religion, and the propagation thereof,
then an Universal agreement in the public worship of Almighty God, and to the
end Uniformity may be effected, it is enacted etc. Sir, we know not how to
understand an Engglish Law, if Universal Agreement, and Uniformity to be
effected, be not declared Grounds for enjoying such a Declaration of Assent,
and Consent.

24. Such a Comparitive Assent and Consent, Pa. 9:10
as you assert will not well pass as unfeigned, avoiding a severe Penalty
securing a good Living, and a Legal opportunity of serving the Church, not
showing our selves cross to Authority, and delivering our Family from ruin,
are bad enducements to an unfeigned Assent and Consent all men will understand
them Temptations to a Faint unfeigned Assent and Consent, let what will be
required, if this comparison may bear weight, it shall not pass without an
unfeigned Assent and Consent.

25. Sir, we see with little cause you have to quarrel, Pa. 10.
that it is reported the Assent and Consent declared must be Free; For Sir,
this Freedom is necessary and Essential to unfeigned: An Act Extorted will
never be judged unfeigned, but suspected of Hypocrisy; if any report it to be
expressed in the Declaration, let them bear their blame, but truly we think
it is unavoidably employed.

26. Sir, To remove all scruples from us for ever, Pa. 11.
you offer us the Act for the interpretation of it self, It would to some of us
be worth some hundreds by the year, if you could lend us your understanding
also; we grant to you that the words, immediately forgoing the Declaration are
these; Every Minister shall declare his unfeigned Assent and Consent, to the
use of all things in the said book contained and prescribed in these words and
none other; But what then.

27. We agree with you, we must declare our unfeigned Assent and Consent but to
what? To all things with respect to their use, and that in these words, and no
other; But Sir, that this refereth our Assent and Consent to the using Act, and
That only we cannot see, these Acts have for their Object, All things contained
and prescribed in and by the Book of Common Prayer, etc. And the use thereof is
the End of this Assent and Consent, so that the Act puts this plain
Interpretation on the required Declaration, Every Minister shall Uniformely use
the book, but unanimity being the spur and bond of Uniformity, they shall
declare an Unfeigned Assent and Consent to all things contained and prescribed
in and by the book; So that we must Use the Book with a Mind persuaded of the
Truth and Goodness of the things to be used.

28. This Sense of the Law we are induced to receive because.

1. This Declaration Respects the use of the Comomon Prayer, and is the
Security of Unfeignedness in that Act; the use of it without a Mind fully
Assenting to the things contained, and Freely consenting to the things
prescribed in and by this Book, would be but formal, forced, and feigned; we
are confident our Legislators intended to obviate all haltings in Conformity,
and this is only done by requiring an unfeigned Assent and Consent to the use;
upon an unfeigned Assent and consent, to all and every thing therein contained
and prescribed. 2. The Use of the book is not once mentioned in the
Declarations as the Object of the Assent and consent, but the Things therein
contained and prescribed are ever expressed in the Declaration, and the Use of
it is exptessed in the Law, only as the End secured by the Declaration. 3.
Universal agreement in the public Worship of Almighty God, is declared to be
the ground of this Law, and Uniformity is the end thereof, both which can be
only effected by the unanimity of the Administrators, in the things to be by
them uniformely used. 4. The using Act is provided for, promised, and secured
by the next following Declaration in these terms, ( I do declare that I will
Conform to the Liturgy of the Church of England as it is now Established by
Law,) Conform; what is that to a Minister? But that I will Use it, and the the
things contained and prescribed in and by it: This is Sir, your own sense of
Conformity; and sure Sir, you will not say this second Declaration does Actum
agere do over what was done in the first Declaration, these two must differ
each from other; That Declares Assent and Consent to the Matter and Things.
This to the Act and Use thereof; Sir, until your sense of the Declaration be
cleared from these exceptions or declared by the Legislators, give us leave to
tell you We could do some things directed in the Rubric, but cannot Assent or
Consent to the direction.
We could at the Communion commend the poor to the Charity of the people, but
we understand not their other Devotions to be then gathered, the affected title
Offertorie makes it look like something exploded at our first Reformation from
Popery.

We could receive the Collection from the Deacons or Churchwardens and place
it on the Table, but we understand not the humble presenting and placing it on
the holy Table, it hereby sounds like a Sacrifice; we could Eat and Drink
the remains of Bread, and Wine with some of the Communicants, but we know no
distinction (Communion ended) between Consecrated and unconsecrated Elements,
nor see we on what ground to Consent and Assent that the one be Eaten at the
Holy Table by the Priest and Communicants, and the other Taken home to the
Curates House.

We could hansomely cover the Bread with a Napkin, but we understand not what
is meant by Reverent placing them on the Holy Table, and covering them with a
Linen Cloth, nor can we Assent or Consent thereunto.

29. Reverend Sir, Our Fathers were, and our selves might be content in some
things to Symbolize with Rome, when our face was from hers, but we cannot
unfeignedly Assent and Consent unto such Simbolizing with her; Now most men
think, and Nonconformists boldly affirm our face is toward her, yet we pray
for the peace and Glory of Englands Church, that the Gospel may in her Flourish
in Power and Purity.

Case II.
Whether it be lawful declare in the words of the second Declaration. Case.
2th. Pa. 13:14

1. SIr, we must tell you, The many words in this Declaration affright us not,
yet we cannot but be affected to observe the persons who quarreled at the
Covenant, to impose an Oath, or Declaration Tantamount, so full of words, Turpe
est Doctori.

2. But we consent to attend your motion in taking this Declaration in pieces,
and you distribute it into three parts, that which concerns the Taking Arms
against the King, Conformity, and the Oath, called the Solemn League and
Covenant, in each of which we shall consider your resolution and Reasons; The
first part you divide into these two Cases.

Case III. 1. Case 3. Pa. 15:
Whether it be lawful for us to delare that it is not lawful upon any pretense
whatsoever, to take Arms against the King.
Case IV.
2. Case 4. Pa. 16.17.
Whether it be lawful to declare that we abhor that Traitorous Position of
taking Arms by the Kings Authority, against his Person, or those that are
Commissioned by him.
1. SIr, These two you conclude in the Affirmative on so sharp promises that
none dare, or in prudence can speak the Negative, or withstand you; Tower and
Tyburne are terrible places.

2. This part of the Declaration does not much concern us; out opposition to
the late Rebellion against the King, our resistance of the Arms taken against
him; our constancy of Loyalty under the Cross; do Iondly witness you and we
cannot be in this particular at any great distance; yet we know some Loyal
hearts who stumble, for whose sake we wish you had more thoroughly argued those
Cases by some Medium which they might venture to meet you at, we will tell you
what we have heard whispered by men of Loyal hearts.

3. Some say this Declaration is the personal affection of a present private
opinion, which being changeable can give no security, and so reaches not the
end for which it is exacted; these men in zeal to his Majesty could pass a
Promissory Oath that they would not take Arms against the King, for they
conceive their Act is fully within their power, though the stronger reasons
they may meet with in men or books, may alter their present opinions though
declared under the most sacred Oath.

4, Some say this Declaration is Dogmatical; by persons whose Opinion cannot
end the Political strife which has been, and is in the World about it, and so
it cannot reach the end of so solemn Declaration. These stumble that the terms
are so indefinite as to render the Position applycable to every Kingdom.

5. Some say the terms are dubious if not false, it being indefinitely
inserted, It is not lawful to take Arms against the King, on any pretense what
soever; These think though this may be true, and square to the Laws of this
Kingdom, the constitution of other Kingdoms may make it contrary, and
although our King is, and we hope ever will be so qualified that in reference
to him it may be true; yet it is not impossible for a King Regis personam
exuere, in a natural or moral madness, or Frenzy, to turn Tyrant, yea Beast,
waving his Royal Place, violently extrajudicially, extramagisterially to
assault his Subject, as Saul did David: In this case men think Nature does
dictate it, and Scripture does justify a man, Se defendendo vim vi repellere,
to take Arms, though by rallying the men of Belial^ not to resist yet to
restrain the King, and those who are Commissioned by him, until they make good
their retreat, and more safely run out of his reach: And this Sir, is some
pretense, on which to speak of the Law of Nature, is not as you affirm a
Subterfuge, and in answer to your what says the Scripture? they say it seems
to be their Shield, this pretense being square to and consistent with professed
obedience.

6 To some it sounds harsh to declare it a traiterous Positian to take Arms
by the Kings authority against the Kings person or those Commissioned by him,
these will not be persuaded that if Queen Elizabeth had by virtue of the broad
Seal, (brought to her in Sanctuary by the then Archbishop of York) arrayed and
armed men against Richard Duke of Gloucester, possessing the person of King
Edward the 5th. she had thereby become a Traitor, these men think it not
impossible for England again to see a perfidious Protector of the person of an
Infant-King, and tremble to think that this Declaration may become the basis of
Treason, and Guard of Rebellion, if some Russians should (which God defend)
seize the person of a King, he is a man from whom Commissions may be by fear
extorted, whereby true Loyalty must be on their side, and Treason on the part
of the Kings Counsel, Kindred and Ministers of State, if Arming against his
Person, by his Authority though on such a pretense, quo posito absurdum sequens
non est ponendum; But Sir, these are a Noli me tangere which we shall not
defend.

Case V.
Whether it be Lawful to declare that we will Conform, Case 5th.. Pa. 19:20
to the Litturgie of the Church of England, as it is now by Law Established.
THis Sir, is the second part of the Declaration to which you have said little,
and we shall say less, only mind you that this declaring Our Assent and Consent
to the use of the Liturgy; the foregoing Declaration does determine Our
unfeigned Assent and consent to the Things and Matters to be used; that
unanimity, is the spring and spurr, ground and guard of this promised
Uniformity.

2. But Sir, we hasten after you to the Consideration of the third part of this
Declaration, which concerns the Solemn League and Covenant, which is, indeed,
the Great Mountain in our way, to be removed by a faith of Miracles; This you
do again divide into three parts, its Obligation, its unlawfulness in its self,
and its Opposition to the Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom, but your
Resolution is to the particular Cases following.

Case VI.
Whether we may lawfully declare in these words, Case 6th. Pa. 221:23.
I do bold these lies no Obligation on me nor any other person from the Oath
commonly called the Solemn League and Covenant, to endeavor any Alteration of
Government either in Church or State.
1 TO this, Sir, you tell us it is No great venture to say such who have taken
the Covenant may thus declare, This we confess is facile dictum, but the quod
demonstrandum restat, the convinceing demonstration of this has made many
learned men sweat, and appears, Hic labor, hoc opus, a knot cut by the sword
of Authority, whilst it cannot be loosed by Religious Reason.

2. We consent to your concessions to the contestors for the Covenant (viz.)
That the Covenant illegally taken and given may bind: Secondly, That it binds
not to alteration of the Government of State: Thirdly, That the unlawful matter
made it void, ipso facto: Fourthly, That Mr. Crofton, and the Covenanters-plea
do grant that the unlawful matter dath void the Covenant ipso facto. But now
Sir, give us leave to call for your strong Reasons.

3. Here Sir, you pitch, and your work is to prove that the Covenant so far as
it engages the Takers of it against Church Government to the Exstirpation, or
change of it is unlawful, and sinful in the matter of it; This made good Nobis
eris magnus Apollo: We shall therefore with all diligence observe your motion
in maintenance hereof.

4. Your first onset is by Dr. Saundersons distinction of Iuramentum illicitum
de se, and per accidens, and you grant the matter of the Covenant, is not
simply and of it self unlawful; your Antagonist lie strongly entrenched in
this, and thence defend the Covenant against all other assaults, it had been a
noble Enterprise to have beaten them at this weapon; but ad impossible nemo
teneatur: We join issues with you on the second, and wish we may see you may
prove the Covenant Ratione subjecti by the accident of its Takers condition and
Capacity is unlawful in the matter of it; Yet Sir,

5. We must make bold to mind you that the learned Casuist (on whom you depend
in this Case and Determination) has determined with an Ordinary, his words are
Hac Iurament a ordinary non obligant, or dinarie dico quia fortasse possunt
dare Casus in quibus Iuramentum quod videtur alicui legi communitatis aut
vocationis adversari, and si non debuerit sussepi suseptum tamen potest
obligari; Sir, we study loosing, not binding in this great Case, yet cannot but
say on all sides the Covenant is confessed to be an extraordinary Oath, and it
is a question whether it can be brought within your Casuists Ordinary, the
advocates of the Covenant think it no hard task to bring the Covenant into
your Casuists Exception, and so conclude Suscepi non debuerit susceptum tamen
obligat, we leave it to them if they dare to make it good, our work is to weigh
what you say to the contrary.

6. Addressing your self to your proof you have most prudently waved the Ius
divinum of your Church Government, which to affirm Non multum ab insania
differt; you consider the Covenanters as single Persons, or as vinted in the
great body of the Nation; Now Sir, your field fills us with a reviving murmer,
of of which alas we must sit down and sing.

Expectata seges vanis illusit arenis.

Case VII.
Whether any private or single person can lawfully endeavor the alteration of
Church Government by virtue of the Covenant. Case 7. a. 26

1. SIR, This (you say) seems much to be the proper Case, because the
Parliament which imposed the Covenant are dissolved and become private persons,
But Sir

2. Do you not here build on a Petio principii? That the long Parliament is not
dissolved, we dare not say; but it has been said: and those words in the
Statute which concerns their continuance, whatsoever shall happen or be done
to the dissolving them shall be void and null, are a stone at which our
Consciences cannot but stumble whilst we are in obedience to present Laws
submissively silent.

3. You conclude the Covenant to be only private and personal an obligation on
single persons: but Sir, Mr. Crofton has affirmed, An ^alepsis Sect 6.
it is public and National, Iuramentum reale obliging all the Nation, and all
after-Generations, fide Anglorum thereby engaged. This he has demonstrated
beyond our capacity of contradiction and enforced by the consentient judgment
of 600. Divines most of them yet living. You, Sir, are pleased to tell us, you
have not used one Argument answered or prevented by Mr. Crofton; yet Sir, Pa.
13^.
you nor any other have not so much as attempted an Answer to this Position of
Mr. Croftons which stands entire and unaslaul^ed.

4. You suppose each single person who swear the Covenant in such a capacity,
as to be concludent by your subsequent Arguments; The Truth is, our Affections
are such, as make us wish it were so, but to satisfy our Consciences in
abjuring (you are angry at that word, we will therefore say disclaiming,) the
Obligation of the Coverant, we must have our Jadgements convinced it is so,
because our Declaration does discleim the Obligation of the Covenant on our
selves or any other person; which cannot be done if we conceive any person to
have taken it who is not in the same common capacity with our selves.

5. Upon these ungranted Principles you conclude, for such to stand engaged by
a public Covenant against a settled Government, to endeavor the exstirpation
or change of it, is palpably sinful; both as such a Covenant, and such
endeavors are against the Right of the King; the Laws of the Land, the
privileges of Parliament, Liberties of the Subject; and former obligations
laid on the Nation, all Arguments of weight; but so sick of a Noli me tangere,
that they sound in our ears, a Ne plus ultra. Edge-tools which make your
Antagonists cry Toll legem, and fiat disputatio Who dare touch at them, did
not your sencures of us as Fures, Felones, proditores de se cut our consciences
and constrain our consideration and utmost endeavors of conviction; we
therefore affirming nothing, will adventure to weigh your following
demonstration of the sinful matter of the Covenant in reference to those
particulars.

Case VIII. Whether to endeavor to alter the Government of the Church be
against the Right of the King. Case 8th. Pa. 28.29.30.

Case IX.
Whether to endeavor thus against the Right of the King as obliged thereunto
by the Covenant, Case 9th. Pa. 32.33.
be sinful.
1. THese two Cases contain your first Argument to prove the matter of the
Covenant sinful and unlawful. An Antagonist would much quarrel at your method,
management and terms in his discourse: but we seeking satisfaction pursue your
scope, and pass by such Peccadilloes.

2. Your major Proposition is determined in your second case, (viz.) that to
endeavor against the Right of the King as obliged thereunto by the Covenant,
is sinful.

3. In this, Sir, we shall not dissent from you, we find Mr. Crofton grant it,
heartily conceding to the Oxford Reasons, [that no peace can be firm and well
grounded which is not bottomed in Justice, whose proper and adaequate act is
Ius suum cuique, unless. the Authority, Power and Liberty, of King, Parliament
and Subject, be preserved full and entire; he therefore cries out Specify the
defect in this Covenant as to these particulars, I cannot read or understand if
they be not all secured by the same] Truly Sir we cannot but do the Covenant
that right, as to observe, it binds its Subject, to preserve the Authority as
well as the Person of the King, and we cannot easily believe it binds, in any
thing against the Kings Right.

3. We hope, Sir, we may without offense observe, the Kings Right of
Prerogative is ill pleaded by such who themselves despise and disregard it,
disobeying the directions of his Royal Declaration, concerning Ecclesiastical
affairs dictated by his Supremacy in Ecclesiastical causes; they give cause to
be suspected to throw it in the way of Antagonists as a stumbling stone on
which to break their legs or necks, who use it as a stepping stone in the way
of their unwarrantable rigor and severity.

4. Sir, we are so heartily devouted to the service of the King, that we dare
not in the least detract from his Royal Prerogitive; we well know England has
its Statute de Prerogativa Regis, as Rome had her Lex Regia; we unfeignedly
wish this were amplified and made as legible as other Statutes: yet, Sir, the
severe censures passed in Parliament upon Dr. Manwaring, and Sibthorp do loudly
proclaim a possibility for Churchmen, to scrue the Prerogative of the King
beyond its due pitch, and the proportion of Englands Constitution.

5. Your Major proposition allowed, we might weigh your proof of the Mino^,
(viz.) your Eighth Case, To endeavor to alter the Government of the Church, is
against the Right of the King.

6. To the proof of this you tell us, it is against the Right of the King as
Executor of the Law: and you assign for your first Reason, Church Officers are
the Kings Commissioners, and they taken away the head must fall; Good Sir give
us a clear Answer to these two Enquiries.

1. Are Ecclesiastical Officers essential to the Regality of the King; No
Bishop no King has been an Eventnal, but is it a Moral truth? Were there no
Kings where there was no Bishops? Were not Kings in Nations, when all Church
Government was in the Pope, and his Substitutes? Supremacy in Causes
Ecclesiastical may add to the glory but not the being of the King; Erastus
himse would not say Kings cease to be King; if they mind, meddle not with,
Church-affaires; we are not-yet persuaded that a Royal head must needs stand on
Religious Shoulders, and fall when these are withdrawn. 2. Are these specifical
Commissioners essential to the Kings Regality, that, Archbishops, Bishops etc.
taken away, this Head must fall? May not National, Privincial, and Classical
Presbyteries become the Kings Commissioners in the slead of Archbishops,
Bishops, Deans, Commissaries, Chancellors, etc? May not the Kings Supremacy
exsist in, and be executed over, and by them, subsistuted thereunto?
7. Your first Medium seems to be of little force to prove. To endeavor
after Church Government, is against the Kings Right as Executor of the Law:
your next is more general (viz.) Con^ to endeavor to e^pate the Government of
the Church, does directly oppose the whole comse of our lives against the Kings
Government; and that, lay you, is the sense of the Covenanters themselves.

8. Sir, If you had said, To endeavor to exstitpate, does oppose us ni to this
Government the whole course of our affections, you had indeed spoken the
Covenanters sense; yet they will not slick to extend it to the whole course of
our lives, under those limitations, Acts lawful, In our places and Callings,
through the grace of God. But, Sir, they will tell you, These are Acts of
endeavor for exstirpation, other then what you mention: such are theological
disputation, submiss supplication, popular Groans, or Complaints of greivances
by and under it, which are consistent with submission to it whilst existent,
thus it may be in all Corperations, and the Church is not excepted.

9. But, Sir, some do and will deny this Government to be the Kings Government,
Established and animated by the Laws whereof it is his Right to be Executor:
this you attempt to prove, and in its time and place we shall consider; At
present let it be observed, this Government was not at first animated by the
Kings authority, Acted not in the Kings name, but challenged sometimes a
forinsecal, but ever a Divine intrinsecal power, for its principle distinct
from, yea opposite to the Kings Authority: its subjects were with much
difficulty, and the pinch of Praemunire brought to the submission of the
Clergy, after which the Kings Laws have indeed limited, restrained, regulated,
directed, and in some things authorized' these Governors, who yet Acting in
their name, and under their own Seds, and affirming themselves to be the
upholding Essential animation to Regality, by their Cry No Bishops no King;
make Covenanters conceive, they yet think scorn to o^ this Government as
animated by the King and his Laws, though they object it as a stone, on which
they wish to see their Opposers run their heads until they dash out their
brains.

10. You further urge To endeavor the alteration of Church Government is
against the Right of the King as Legislator; Pa. 30.
the Covenant binding to do, without the Kings consent, and whether he would or
no.

11. Sir, to this we must tell you, we do not find in the Covenant any such
words as that we shall endeavor to exstirpate or alter the Government without
the Kings consent; not do we find in it any words which by a fair and genuine
construction can bear any such sense, and we find the Covenanters do deny it:
Mr. Crofton whom you most assault does own the King as chief, Ana leps. Ana
lepth. Pa. 98.99
though not sole Legislator, and allots Acts of endeavor to procure the Kings
consent, to which the Covenant, he says, does oblige.

12. Truly that limitation on the Covenant is so just, full, and legible (viz.)
Through the grace of God in our places and Callings, that we cannot but yield
to Mr. Crofton; the defense of the Kings power, is not repugnant to the dutys
of our particular Callings, and Capacities. I hope, a Minister may by his
preaching, Id pa 7.6.6
or a Divine by Disputation in the Schools endeavor the Correction,
Reformation and Exstirpation, of any Error, Heresy, Schism or Superstition,
and yet not entrench on his Majesty's Jurisdiction, yea, in reference to a
judicial Correction, Reformation and Exstirpation, which cannot be done without
the Kings consent, men's endeavor may be in their places and Callings by
Counsel, Proposals, Remonstrance, Petition and Supplication to procure his
Majesty's consent, and Authority: Sir, this limitation is so clear, and
comprehensive that we think, if the King please, is so fully conditioned in the
Covenant, that it must be procured to effect the exstirpation Covenanted, only
the Covenanters stand obliged to a constant endeavor to persuade and procure
the same.

13. The condition in which the King was when the Covenant was made, we cannot
commend, we can not but lament and condemn. Yet Sir, to do all men right, [the
Messages, Remonstrances, and Petitions of the two Houses of Parliament, the
conference at the Isle of Wight, the Votes upon the Kings Cocessions, (though
but to supposed Episcopacy for three years, the violence to which themselves
were exposed] do loudly witness all faithful Covenaters did conceive themselves
bound to procure the Kings consent, not to exstirpare this Government, as you
say whether the King would or no.

13. Now admitting what you say to be true, the Government of the Church is
under the King, the alteration thereof did concern his power, and the King gave
not consent unto the Covenant, yet you find something does intercept your
conclusion; For Sir, there are Acts of endeavor for Alteration and
Exstirpation, which are lawful proper to Subjects, and consisient with the
Kings Executive, and Legislative Right and power, yea unto the persuading and
procuring his Consent and Concurrence to and with the same.

14. You Sir affirm the King did not consent unto the Covenant but did
Proclaim his dissent.

15. The Proclamation against the Covenant has been often urged, and by the
advocates for the Covenant admitted, yet it remains upon us a doubt, whether
there ever were any such Proclamation; we do not conclude it, but shall give
you the grounds of Conjecture: (1.) We never saw it, nor Copy of it, (2.) The
Anticovenaters, neither Oxford Reasons, Doctor Langbain, Doctor Gauden who laid
much stress upon it, have ever produced it, or transcribed its Copy; Doctor
Featly his Ghou (as Mr. Crofton calls it) gives us by mistake the
Proclamation against the Vow and Covenant, instead of the Proclamation against
the Solemn Leage and Covenant: (3.) His Majesty in his Meditations on the
Covenant makes no mention of such Proclamation, and only aggravateth the same
as imposed without his consent, not against his Interdict.

16. Sir, be pleased to help us to a copy of this Proclamation and inform us
where to find the Original, for until it be produced the Anticovenanters have
no ground on which to stand, nor can the Obligation be (without it) voided;
your Problem whether the Kings future consent could revive it, does fall,
until it appear he did fully formerly void it.

17. Sir we readily subcribe Amesius his rule [ Datur irritio juramenti
aliquando per Superiores but it must be [in illa ipsa materia sint Superiores
circa quam versatur juramentum] But sir Mr. Crofton has told us the Effect
cannot be produced without the consent and concurrence of Superiors, but the
Act about which the Covenant does converse and to which it does obliege is
fully within the power of the inferior or subject; Analeps. Analesth. Pa. 121
he urges from the Reverend Bishop of Lincoln: [vix quenquam quigaudet usu
rationis, ita plene sub alterius potestate esse, quia ut fit quantum ad aliqua
saltem sui juris] and it infers, I hope no adult child, on observation of
the irregularities in the Government of a Family shall be barred from vowing in
his place and calling, to his power and capacity, to reform the same;
exstirpation is a parental Act, but the child may endeavor, and he does
conclude of this Covenant [Obligat hoc genus juramenti non ad effectum sed
conatum] Again Sir, The Superior must in the day he hears of it renuendo
renuere, tollendo tollere; you must let us see the Proclamation before we can
conclude our Superior did thus void this Oath.

18. Sir, your Proclamation allowed, you are of Divines the first, who has
made it a Problem, Whether the Kings after consent could revive the voided
Oath, Secundae cogitationes sunt meliores, Parents may, on second thoughts,
allow what in passion they may condemn, their condemnation is not fatal, and
irrecvocable. The casuist Prelate has determined Impossibility arising from
the right of another may be removed by after consent; Doct. Sauuderson.
and this once removed the Oath binds; It is not clear the late King did void
this oath, but it is clear he did declare Good men should best please God and
me by keeping the Covenant. And as things now stand does witness this
Declaration to be the result of serious and second thoughts.

19. You Sir, in close of your Argument, tell us The sword cut off the hard
bargain for suspension of Episcopacy for three years, and the objection with
it; Let us make bold to tell you, Pa. 36.
the same sword brought out succeding Superior under a more and express assent
unto this Oath, and mandate to all his subjects to advance it: Sir it is a
Problem which we cannot resolve; Whether political parents being changeable,
(One Generation passes and another comes) he who suceeding existeth our
present Parent do not by his mandate oblige us to the Oath disallowed by his
Predecessor, whose interdict dyed with him. Sir, we offer this to be
considered; we do not conclude it: for so to do who sees not it is neither
safe nor prudent.

Case X. Whether the covenanting to endeavor the exstirpation of Episcopal
Government, Case 10th. pa. 37.
be against the Lanes, and consequently sinful.
1. YOur resolution to this Case is most-what a recapiculation of your former
Argument obnoxious to much exception, but we resolve not to stumble at terms
and expressions, but to weigh the strength of Reason, seeking satisfaction to
our consciences, that if possible we might again recover our Livings, this (we
note) urges your second Argument, to prove the matter of the Covenant unlawful
because against the Laws.

2. You observe, Mr. Crofton, and the Covenanter plea deny Episcopal Government
to be Established by Law, which, say you, to prove, is a task impossible. That
is true, for they cannot prove a Negative, if you make good the contrary you do
the work as proper for you, as Negation is proper to them, Affirmanti incumbit
probatio,

3. But, Pa. 39.
Sir, your plain distinction will not serve the present turn, it is this, we
endeavor against Law when the things is Established by Law, or cannot be
Established without Law: Pray Sir, is it against Law for Subjects, much more
Legislators to endaevour the alteration, yea the abrogation, of some Laws and
things thereby established; this is that your Antagonists affirm must be proved
and brought into the conclusion to prove the matter of the Covenant against
Law, and consequently sinful: May not an obedient Son of the Church, burdened
with some Administration, authorized by Law, endeavor by all just means and
swear he will so do, to have that Law repealed, if so how poor is your plain
distinction.

4. But you doubt not to assert that such an endeavor to Extripate Church
Government as was Covenanted was against the Law both Antecedent to the
Covenant and subsequent, this done would much avail; we shall attend your
evidence.

Case XI. Whether the present Government of the Church were Established by Law
in England, Case 11th. pa. 41.
before the taking of the Covenant.
1. TO this, you profess you have no insight into the Laws, but so much is in
the surface of them, that you wonder at the doubt; we do Sir, believe you; for
in the Index of the statute book, there is so large a Table of Bishops,
Archbishops, etc. that it may well be wondered that any should doubt whether
this Government be established by Law. But had you taken the pains to read and
consider the nature of the Laws, you would find Fronti nulla fides, your
insight would find wanting what a superficial verive of the surface concludes
present.

2. The fallacious use of, established by law, is in your own fancy your
Antagonists never did limit it to an appointment of Statute, but have traversed
the Canon, Civil and Common Law, and in none they find an establishment by Law,
but have put the assertors thereof to prove it, which task you have undertaken,
and thus you argue.

3. Is it not pretty to observe that learned men should be so far subdued by
prejudice, Pa. 42.
as to question, whether Episcopacy be established by Law, when Episcopacy has
so long had an hand in establishing the law it self.

4. This Argument has, Sir, little force, we shall not be laughed into a
persuasion, that Episcopacy is established by Law; and such establishment is a
non sequitur to the Legislative Act of Bishops; it cannot be both cause and
effect, its praeexistency to the Law does suppose unto it a more sublime
principle then the Law, which we know not unless it be that of Nature, or
Scripture, or (as the Covenanters-plea does well observe) the Roman Papacy,
which forinsecal power existing in England as other Nations Usurped a
Legislative power, which it yet holds by this Episcopal root.

5. Sir, Would it not be pretty to hear a Jesuit retort and prove your
Argument, crying is it not pretty to observe learned men, and Prelates are so
far subdued to question whether the papacy were established by Law, when the
Papacy for a thousand years established yea made laws to Christian Nations,
and disposed their Crowns an Scepters; if laughing will do it the Papacy has a
good claim, and you seem to us to admit succession in fact, a sufficient title
against the most manifest obtrusion, invasion, and usurpation which can be
admitted.

6. Such Divines who found Monarchy in nature, and proclaim Monarchs to be
above the Law, will give you little thanks for this Argument, which estateth
their Title on an establishment by law, because they are chief makers of the
Law; but you proceed to further demonstration of an establisnment by law.

7. You say, Pa. 43.44.
you will venture to strike this scruple dead, by a distinction or two.

8. Your first distinction is this, The law establishes by appointing it de
novo, or by allowing and granting it on all occasions. The first you yield; the
second you hold upon, and thus infer, Thus the Law does sufficiently establish
the Government of the Church not only by those special laws which relate unto
it, but indeed in every law which expresses the consent and advice of the
Lords Spiritual.

9. A fair Establishment, most laws do indeed express the asscent and advice
of the Lords Spiritual; we hope, Sir, you did not forget Lords-Abbots, and Lord
Cardinal were some of them.

But, Sir, is every Hypothesis in law an undeniable position? Will Arguments, a
facto, conclude ad jus? and ab esse a jure esse? and yet, Sir, this only
concludes for Bishops, what becomes of Deans and Chapters, Commissaries and
Chansellors, etc. Are these Lords spiritual in the sense of the Law; they do
indeed exercise a spiritual Lordship in the Church; Will an Argument from
persons of existence in such a capacity conclude an Establishment of things?
Lords Spiritual were in Parliament, Ergo, the Government of the Church by
Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Chapters, and that Hyrarchie were established by
Law, will you stand by this Argument?

10. That Bishops, or Lords Spiritual were in Parliament, De facto, is granted,
but quo jure, is the question, the Romans will tell you by the Popes Spiritual
Power, and the Covenanters think how ever they are there preserved they were
first planted by that Forinsecal Power.

11. Your next Distinction is this; Pa. 4.
This Government as to its office is before the Law, but as to its exercise it
is Established by Laws, for its Names, Jurisdictions Crimes and Punishments,
are mentioned in the Laws.

11. The first of these we allow you, but tell you that is the thing in debate,
for the Establishment of a Government is the Creation of such an Office, in
Execution of which, men shall have the Power, Titles, Names, and Honors of such
Officers: And herein your Government must be yielded to be the Popes Creatute;
for we find no English laws which ever framed or founded the same.

12. As to the Exercise of this Government in its way and order, by Courts,
Canons and visitations, we must tell you we find its names, Crimes and some
punishments in our Laws) yet we question whether it were Established by Law)
because we find these things are inserted into our Laws) to limit, regulate
and restrain the same, which existing from a Forinsecal Power, grew
exorbitant, and called for Boundaries, from our municipal laws which rides it
with a prohibition as its bridle, and scourges it with a praemunire; Both which
Writts do know it to be a Power and Government distinct from that Established
by Law.

13. Sir, This is far from an Establishment by Law, be not offended if we tell
you Usury has as good an Establishment by law as this amounts unto, it is
limited, regulated, restrained by law, and kept under the Cudgel of the
Statutes against Extortion. But I pray you is it so established by law, that
the oppressed poor man may not swear, he will in his Place and Calling
endeavor the Exstirpation of biting Usury or pinching Prelacy.

14. Your third Distinction is this Government Established by a Statute
immediately appointing such a Form, Page: 45:
or immediately by a Statute impowring a Person to Commissionate such
Governors to the Church.

15. The first of these you grant, your Government has not, nor do you prove
the second your Argument does at most conclude for Governors, and the Question
is about the Frame of Government: Your Proof is for Governors, indefinite, and
we have told you the Supremacy of the King may exist in, and operate by, Church
Governors under other Appellations; We do not say, men must Exstirpate
Governors, they may subsist, when their capacities are changed, but a full
Establishment of this Special Government by Archbishops, Bishops, etc. we are
as ready to seek, and as far from finding now we have read your distinctions,
as we were before.

15. What you urge concerning the Common Law, common usage is so fully obviated
by the Covenanters-Plea, that we shall say nothing to it; only let us tell
you; Prescription is a poor Fence to Usurpation, and a bad Guard for a Power in
its origo manifestly Forinsecal. Usury is a common usage, yet no man will say,
it is sinful and against law; for men to swear in their Places and Callings,
they will endeavor to exstirpate an evil custom though a common usage.

Case XII. Whether the Covenant taken first can oblige against a future Law?
Case 12. Pa. 47.

1. IN this Case you urge an Establishment of Episcopal Government, by a Law
made since the Covenant was taken; But, Sir, you herein move upon a Petitio
principii, and conclude what we must make bold to deny.

2. We have perused the late Statutes, and find indeed Bishops restored to
some priveledges which had been denied to them, and this Government is guarded
against some Batteries to which it was obnoxous, both these are speciallities,
under which the Government is left to stand on its old bottom, for it has not
received any more express Establishment then it had before; Now, Sir, if Usery,
should by a new Law, be restored to Eight per Cent. we hope it had not acquired
any new Establishment which should make the endeavor of its exstirpation any
more sinful then before.

3. We must make bold to tell you, you read without book when you say this
Government is Established by the Act for Uniformity, that so much as endeavors
of alteration are prohibited, and Ministers are bound to declare, they may not
so much as endeavor against it; For Sir simple endeavor is not by this Law
prohibited, not is this to be declared against, which certainly were
destructive to the liberty of the Subject, and priveledge of Parliament, who
must have a freedom to the alteration of Laws as they prove inconvenient.

4. This Law does bind Ministers to disclaim a principle, not to disavow a
power in themselves, to declare that the Covenant does oblige to endeavor, not
that endeavor shall be simply unlawful, they are not barred from lawful
endeavors on good ground, and woeful experience of the evil of this Government,
but from improving the Covenant to provoke the same; from a special, to
conclude generally, is no good Argumentation.

5. Your first proposition failing, does save us the labor of discussing the
second, how far an Oath may bind against Law; we shall only tell you that your
Antagonists cry out that you conclude this also in our Case on a Petitio
principii, taking for granted what they deny, As: 1. That this Governmet is in
it self Lawful, which they say is sinful. 2. That inconveniences may not
necessitate and warrant an alteration, and lawful endeavor to alter, or remove
a thing in it self lawful, and by Law Established. 3. That this Oath was
private and personal by fingle men, and so square to the Case of your Jesuits;
which they say, Analeps. Analepth. Pa. 133. Sect 6.
and Mr. Crofton, as we before told you, has averred to be public and
National, sworn by the people Collectively, and Distributively considered. 4.
That the Oath of the people so sworn, lays no bar on the Laws, Decrees, or
Act of the Magistrate, the contrary whereto Mr. Crofton has asserted from the
Oath of Israel hindering Saul's Law, and Oath against Jonathan, to which you have
given nothing in answer, we think few Politicians will conclude the subjection
of Political Children to be so fully and formally puerile, as you suppose it is.


6. We, Sir, insist not on these things, because we undertake not to become
your opponents, we only crave leave to let you know, Oaths are sacred things
and Post-laws are a ready Papacy to absolve them, according to your Divinity,
we have sworn allegiance to, and an acknowledgement of the Kings Supremacy, and
cannot be willing his Majesty's Subjects should be made to believe a Law by a
Queen Marys Parliament will absolve their Consciences and Oath. Yet we are not
convinced that it is simply unlawful for Princes to give up their power, or
part thereof unto some foreign Potentate, but we for bear because these
strings are not struck with Prudence or Piety; These affirmed sound Atheism and
Irreligion, these denied sound Treason, or at least Sedition.

Case XIII. Whether submitting to the Penalty annexed, Case 13th Pa. 60.
be a due fulfilling or obeying the Law in the point of Conscience.
1. SIr, To what you urge against us in this Case, we say, First you suppose
that to be in the Law which we find not to be in it, as we have before noted.

2. you state your Case to narrow, when you confine it to a single Act, of
obedience to a single Law, we well know who so suffers by a Law, suffers as a
transgressour of the Law, which is fulfilled by punishing him, whose Act was
not conform unto it; The Case, Sir, we conceive ought to be thus stated.

Is not a quiet and cheerful submission to the Penalty assigned by a Law
commanding an Act which conscience (judging sinful) does inhibit a formal Act
of that Conscientious obedience, Christianity binds us to yield to all
Superiors.

This Sir was the honor of the Christian Leagions, that they were willingly
led by droves to the Slaughterhouse, and did not run into Mutinious and
Rebelious routes, though armed with power when commanded to sin, Christians as
Christ have a formal obedience unto the Cross; This Sir is yet our Comfort,
though we be transgressors to this single Law, we are by Loyalty and sincere
obedience resigned in the to will of our Sovereign Lord the King, and
Conscience to do what is commanded, or cheerfully to suffer what is adjudged,
is the security of human peace, and order.

Case XIV. Whether to endeavor the Exstirpation of Church Government by
virtue of the Covenant, notwithstanding the Laws to the contrary, Case 14th.
Pa: 67:
be not against the Privilege of Parliament and consequently sinful.
1. THis Sir you assirme, and about it make many words, which yet reach not the
least satisfaction to our minds because you take for granted things denied.

First, That the Covenant was an Oath private and personal; good Sir will you
please to tell us, whether England is not a subject capable of a real Oath, as
well as other Nations, consider the nature of a real public and National Oath,
may it not bind all Successors to, or against some specials? Was the Law of
Saul, the Princes of Israel against the Gebeonits to be justified? Why should
they and all other Conventions of them be bound by the Oath of Joshua, and the
Princes with him? Pray? Resolve Mr. Crofton that the Solemn League and
Covenant is not Iuramentum, real.

Again, Sir, is the Conatus of a private capacity consistent with the freedom
of all Parliaments? This so pinched upon you that you are constrained to cry,
then keep your Covenant, yet you call on us to declare we are not bound to
endeavor.

Sir, weigh well these two, that Conventus Anglorum may bind themselves and
successors, and lawful endeavor is sui juris to every man, and evince the
Injustice or violence done to priveledge of future Parliaments if you can.

Case XV. Whether it be lawful to endeavor the Exstirpation of Episcopacy by
virtue of the Covenant, Case 15th. Pa. 74.
notwithstanding the Act of Parliament.
IN this Case, Sir, we cannot but observe you do, Magno conatu sudare de verbo,
sweat much at the Word Endeavor; endeavoring to avoid it rather than
understand or explain; After which you not only leave us unsatisfyed, but
engaged more then you found us.

2. Sir, You cannot possibly deny but that there are more ways of Endeavor
then by Violence and Sedition, though you keep such only in your eye, and have
an heart so affected against the Covenant, that you could wish there were no
other; and seem pinched that your Antagonists do explain Places and Callings,
to limit Endeavor to Acts just and lawful, Yet you are constrained to tell us
to such Endeavors the Covenant does bind, and the Act does not require us to
disclaim.

3. You have professed to explain the meaning of this word Endeavor, and
appear angry that none has done it before, and yet you have not given us any
Etimologie, Acception, or Interpretation of the word; only you have pitched on
some special Acts, by which endeavor may operate, which in the height of
prejudice you improve to show your dissaffection to the Covenant without giving
the least satisfaction to those for whose sake you profess you have written.

4. After all that is said by you, we must enquire if any of the Acts of
endeavor, you observed be lawful; or, if there be lawful Acts of endeavor,
which you have not observed; Must we disclaim them? Are not these positive
duty? You have determined these in the Affirmitive; But Sir, we will go to the
utmost: Is it no possible for those very Acts which bear in your eyes the worst
aspect to become lawful endeavors, (viz.) The Minister to preach, the Lawyer
to plead, and the Soldier to fight against Episcopacy, if by any previous
endeavors, King and Parliament can be persuaded to exstirpate this Government,
and they make Laws to pluck it up, but its subjects are stubborn, and
Rebell-rasing Bellum mere Episcopal, so that lawful Authority requires these
Acts, from these Agents in their places and Callings to the utmost of their
power, and unto their lives end. Sir, the limitation of Endeavor in the
Covenant is so square to Reason and Religion, that rage may rend it Religious,
reason cannot release the Covenaters from it.

5. Sir that we may if possible obtain satisfaction, we shall give our
apprehensions of this Clause in the Covenant, that if you can evince our error
or its sinfulness, you may please to do it.

6. Sir, The words of the Covenant are these, We shall in like manner, that
is, sincerely, really, and constantly, through the Grace of God in our Places
and Callings, endeavor the Extirpation of Prelacy, viz. Church Government by
Archbishops, Bishops, their Chauncellors and Commissionaries, Deanes, Deanes
and Chapters, Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on
that Hierarchic.

7. This promise contains in it the Act Endeavor, the Object Exstirpation,
the quail of the Act sincerely, really, and constantly, Through the Grace of
God in our Places and Callings.

8. The Act is Endeavor, an Act general and indefinite, a word easy and plain
to be understood, and of a large Signification, an Act within the reach of
every man's Arm, to be done by men in any Calling, or Capacity; and able to
employ the utmost power and skill, the Latin word is Conamen, or Conatus, the
Greek (...) or (...) Temptation, and in the Hebrew (...) acquisition by all or
any means, it Signifies a personal Act, the least personal Act, and the utmost
personal Act what we can, and all that we can do, it intends not the effect,
but a motion toward the effect; the least motion of our selves, and Natural
power to that effect, a simple Conari to which Manibus pedibusque is an Adjunct
like that in Terence, timet ne se deseras p. egone istuc conari queam, I cannot
so much as endeavor it, this is the Act promised generally and indefinitely,
without those special Acts by which it must operate.

9. This Act may be feeble feigned Language, and by sinful means, It is
therefore in the Covenant qualified with sincerity, reallity, and constancy,
such as may be animated by the Grace of God, and must be lawful in our places
and callings; So that unlawful Acts of Endeavors are abandoned, and all
Hypocrisy, Luke-warmness, and Inconstancy of Endeavor are to be avoided.

10. Analeps. Analepth. Page: 37:
Upon the consideration of the Act Endeavor, and its qualification, We see not
how Mr. Croftons interpretation can be avoided; We have in the Covenant sworn
with very much caution, not to effect, but in our Places and Callings, to
endeavor: But this must not be by a bare wish for purity, and then welcome
corruption, a consent to Reformation, and then a compliance with Superstition,
a faint refusal, and then free reception of the estate to be Exstirpated, no it
must be a stout and strenuous endeavor, withal force and fervor, as Dr.
Saunderson in this case well notes; Obligat hoc genus juramenti non ad
effectum quem supponimus esse impossibilem, sed ad conatum quam dieu spes ulla
superat; imo quo plures and majores abijeiuntur difficultates, eo abnixius
conandum, and fortioribus annimis ob intendum est.

11. You see, Sir, the promise in the Covenant explained; and it is plain that
the Covenanted-endeavour is by the Declaration to be disclaimed, nor will this
disclaimer admit of any sense in which you endeavor to construe it; the
Covenant binds to a general and indefinite endeavor, yet this, Ministers
must as generally and indefinitely disclaim and declare against, which we
(considering endeavor is sui juris to the meanest Subject, and most private
man; and this endeavo covenanted, must be orderly and regular in their places,
and callings; and Religious, through the Grace of God) cannot consent to
disclaim and delare a non Obligation on them who swear it.

12. Sir, Having considered the Act, we bear such affection to Episcopacy, that
we would have passed by the Object of this Covenanted Act; You are pleased to
tell us it is a change in the Government: By altering some things and letting
the frame stand, not of the Government by pulling it down; And this sense you
say you gather from some moderate Covenanters, who openly declared on a solemn
occasion, that might they see any material alteration in the Government, they
should hold themselves satisfied as to the Covenant in that point,

13. Sir, Can the Declaration of single persons though Covenanters determine a
sense upon the Covenant, which the Logical resolution, and Grammatical
construction of the words will not allow; We cannot but commend Mr. Croftons
Candor (be his Prudence what it will) nor do we see how his Interpretation can
be fairly avoided, Prelacy (a term though general in its signification, yet by
long and common appropriation as obvious to vulgar capacity to denote a special
kind of Government in the Church, as Tyranny in the Commonwealth.) restrained
by a particular denomination, Hierarchy and specifical description of its
enumerated parts, Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Deans and Chapters,
Commissaries, Chancellors, and other Officers depending thereupon, not in sensu
composite (that the removeal of any one Officer might serve,) but sensu
complexo the Government containing these is to be exstirpated not by mutation,
mutilation, limitation, or regulation, but utter abolition, una cum stirpe
evellere.

14. Sir, If the sense of the Covenant were so far as you do suggest, we can
the less declare its non obligation; for that is, to disclaim what you cannot
but on as good and true, and to determine it does not bind, wherein it is
manifest it does bind those who took the same, and your self dare not deny its
Obligation.

Case XVI. Whether the Covenant be not against the Liberty of the Subject in
this particular, Case 16th Pa. 89.
and therefore sinful in its matter.
1. THis you affirm, and to make good your Argument, you tell us of the hard
usage the Bishops met withal, being thrown out of the House of Lords, etc. But,
Sir, What is this to the Covenant, they were thus used before the Covenant
formed, and by the consent of the King; if they met with Injustice and Violence
shall the Covenant be blamed, it bound to no such thing, though to the an
endeavor of Exstirpation of the Government, by all just and lawful means.

2. You tell us the Bishops and their dependents were a society, had and their
Free-holds and Interests. But, Sir, remember it was, Qua tales as Bishops, and
sure, Sir, you will not deny this as all other societies are fully, Sui Iuris,
to Parliament, as to their very esse, as well as Jurisdiction or
Administration, to be wholly disposed at their will, and by their Power; We
cannot believe, Sir, you will in cooll blood, and on second thoughts say, that
for the King or Parliament to swear to Exstirpate any society, it is as if a
man should swear to bring me his Neighbors Horse; Mr. Crofton has averred
Episcopacy to be more fully and formally the Right of Parliament or King to
dispose of.

3. You say, The Petition of Right tells us, it is contrary to the Liberty of
the Subject to have an Oath imposed without an Act of Parliament; But, Sir, Mr.
Crofton has told you and us, that the Petition of Right tells us no such
thing, Annaleps. Annalepth: Pa. 115:
he says the words of the Petition ate these; Whereas many of them have had an
Oath Administered unto them, not Warrantable by the Laws and Statutes of this
Realm; And he Affirms this Petition complains of some special Oath, Ex
officio, or for discovery of the Subjects Oath, he further tells us that
Colleges and Corporations, constituted by the Kings Charter, give Oaths, which
the Petion of Right complained not against, and yet they were not imposed by
Act of Parliament; We do not believe you will say these are against the Liberty
of the Subject. Sir herein we must tell you your Argument is manifestly
prevented by what Mr. Crofton had said, and so indeed in most that you have
written on this, as on your other Cases.

Case XVII. Whether the matter of the second Article in the Covenant be not
against former Obligations, Case 17th: Pa. 98.
and consequently Sinful.
1. THis you affirm, and to prove it, you pretend to a threefold Obligation, to
which the Covenant is repugnant, viz. To obey Authority, to keep our Oaths and
Promises, and to serve the Church.

2. The first you build upon your former Principles, that the matter of the
Covenant is against the Right of the King, the Laws of the Land, Priveledge of
Parliament, and liberty of the Subject; which we conceive are all laid in the
dust, your Conclusion must needs fall with your Promises.

3. For the Oaths and Promises which were first upon us, you specify the Oath
of Allegiance, Supreamacy, and the Protestation: 5 May 1641. In all which you
are so fully prevented by Mr. Crofton, who has noted them to be consistent
with the Covenant, that we cannot but wonder you should with such confidence
impose on us, without a full answer to what is said by him.

4. One thing we must not pass, viz. Your Observation that the Protestation,
was imposed by the same power, and taken by the same persons, generally who
took the Covenant, which is enough by Mr. Croftons Logic, to make it public
and National; Sir, we believe Mr. Crofton would not stick to allow you the
Nationality of the Protestation; yet we observe it wants one material thing in
Mr. Croftons account, necessary to constitute Iuramentum reale, and therein it
does differ from the Covenant: The Protestation was sworn with an I. A. B. by
that personal name, which perished with the Takers thereof; but the Covenant
was sworn by those real Capacities, Noblemen, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens,
Ministers of the Gospel, and Commons of all sorts, which pass, and will pass to
our Successors, whilst England is England.

4. Your last Oligation is our service to the Church, superseded by the
Covenant; But, Sir, you do not tell us whether it be Natural or by Accident,
man's Corrupt nature interposing between that Act and our Service to the Church.
Sir, we conceive the best of Actions may be as capable of an Impeditivum boni,
by the intervenient inhibiting Decree of Caesar; and we are to be satisfied,
that in that case, the guilt of non service to the Church is chargaable on our
Soul, we may not sin that good should come thereof.

The Conclusion.
WE have, Conclusion:
Sir, considered your great undertaking, to charge Sin on the matter of the
Covenant, in which, Sir, we must say you have not spoken any thing of
satisfaction to us, nor Rational contradiction to those whom you pretend to
Answer.

2. Finding the matter of the Covenant lawful, we are not solicitous concerning
the Mode of its imposition; we could easily declate what in that Case is
required from us; We therefore not appearing as your Antagonists, but seeking
satisfaction to our main doubt, which is, how we can declare the Covenant does
not oblige us nor any other person to Endeavor, shall abide wholly silent as
to your next three Cases concerning the Act and power of the two Houses, the
unlawfulness of the Oath, and illegality of the Imposition.

3. We are, Sir, sorry to see you so obnoxious in many expressions, to
correction of your Antagonists, if any of them durst be so hardy as to
undertake an answer to you, as indeed you are; But, Sir, this is not our work,
we are satisfied in our selves, that howsoever men count us, Fures, Felones,
and Proditors, de se, we can appeal to our Judge, Conscience is the cause of
our choice of that sad condition in which we are; Whilst we can conclude with
that learned Casnist the late Reverend Bishop of Lincoln, Juramentum de re non
illicita, fit aliunde illicitum, ex aliquo externo defectu, vel propter aliquam
indebitam circumstanstiam respectu actus jurandi possit obligare, jurantem ad
implendum quod promisit: though we were not advancers of the Covenant, when
first imposed, though we are no Advocates for the Covenant to be disclaimed, we
are Expectants of Gods avengement of the Covenant now it has been taken; and
do believe it is presumption, Non ferenda quod pulvis and cinis assumeret
potestate in auferendi obligationem qua home obligatur Deo: We therefore yet
dare not, cannot, will not declare the Covenant does not oblige me or any other
person to endeavor our alteration of the Government in the Church, But if you
have more clear demonstrations that we may so do; We have attention and
consideration for the same, we are, Sir,

Your Brethren praying for the Peace, though not conforming to the whole, of
the order of Englands Church. M. D. S. C. I. F. O. R. A. T.

Oct. 16. 1662.

