WE Vnder-Subscribers Masters and Professors in the College of New-Aberdeen,
are constrained by pressing Necessity to give this Candid Declaration of the
low Condition of this Famous Seminary wherein we bear charge. It has pleased
the Lord so to bless this House both in our time and in the time of our
Predecessors, that as eminent men, yea and renowned at home and abroad for
Godliness and Learning, and that in all Sciences and Professions have sprung out
hence as this Nation has afforded. But we can hardly look upon our scurvy and
ruinous Edifices without weeping, we having neither Houses fitted for our
public Actions and Commencements, nor for Aeconomy, neither for the
Accommodations of Students. And the poor Cottages we have are quite ruinous and
that by many sad accidents, as by Fire, which consumed a quarter of the whole
building, the rise whereof is not known to this day, so that all strangers,
whom the same of this House draws hither to visit us, condole and
compassionate our Condition; That a Seminary so eminently blessed of God,
should have so bad Accommodation, and these which we have threatening present
ruin. We can hradly express how irksome it is to us, to publish our
Indigencies abroad, but we might justly be judged accessory to the ruin of this
House, if we should not represent the low Estate thereof, before the lovers of
Godliness and Learning, whose bowels we doubt not, will be moved with
compassion toward so Famous and fertile, but now a perishing Nursery of both.
Wherefore we have Commissionated the Reverend Bearer, Mr. Alexander White, one
of our number to go through the most eminent places of this Island, and to give
a more full account of the languishing Condition or our Famous College, then
in such a line can be expected from us. And if the Lord shall incline the
hearts of those, who tender the flourishing of Holiness and Learning, to
contribute for the building of an Edifice amongst us, for the accommodation of
our Students, though our College has no public Revenewes, besides the petty
Salaries of the Masters, yet all who have Charges, resolve to abridge
themselves in their own Emoluments, to promote the work. We are not in any
capacity to promise retribution to those who shall hearken to this our request,
but good works of this Nature, when sincerely performed, have a reward in their
bosom: Yet if any oppertunity shall offer, to do any office to Them or
Theirs; we shall not be forgetful of their beneficence, and in the mean while
they shall be had in grateful remembrance amongst the Public Benefactors of
our College.

Mr. Will. Moir Principal. Mr. John Meneis. Professor of Divinity. Dr. Will.
Moir Professor of Medicine. Mr. Rob. Forbes Professor of Philosophy. Mr. Joh.
Forbes P. P. Mr. Will. Meldrum P. P. Mr. G. White Professor of Humanity.


WE being necessitated to call home our Commissioner Mr. Alexander White to
attend his charge amongst us before he could fully accomplish the business for
which he was commissionated, have therefore thought fit to appoint, and do by
these presents empower and entrust our Worthy and well beloved friend Laurence
Mercer Merchant, now resideing at London to prosecute our above-written
Commission and Supplication: and do devolvefull Power and Right on him to Act
in all things that may conduce for the advantage of the business. And in
particular that he may receive what Charitable Contributions of moneys the
Lord shall be pleased to enlarge the hearts of any to bes;tow in a matter of
such public concernment. This we have given under our Hand and Seal.

Given at our College Marischall in New Aberdeen, the 7 th, of Febr, 1660. Mr.
Will. Moir. Principal. Mr. John Meneis, Professor of Divinity. Dr. Will. Moir,
Professor of Medicine. Mr. Rob. Forbes Professor of Philosophy. Mr. John
Forbes, P. P. Mr. Will. Meldrum, P. P. Mr. G. White, Professor of Humanity.


At a Meeting of the Deligates of the University of Oxon, May 23.1660.
WHereas the College of the University of New Aberdeen in Scotland, having
suffered great damage by Fire, and the Building which remains is so Ruinous,
that there is no convenience and accommodation for Students, nor for the
performing of their Acts and Commencements. A certificate whereof under the
Seal of the said College subscribed by the Professors and other Members
thereof has been brought to this University, desiring a Charitable
Contribution to be made toward the rebuilding of the said College: The
Delegates of the University of Oxon, seriously weighing the Premises, did
think fit in an especial manner to recommend the desires of that University,
to the several Colleges and Halls in this University, desiring the Heads in
their respective Houses effectually to promote so good and charitable a work.

Ben. Cooper, Registrarius Vniversitotis Oxon.


