A DECLARATION Of the Gentry of the County of DEVON, Met at the General
Quarter Sessions at EXETER, for a Free Parliament: Together with a Letter from
Exeter.
To the Right Honorable WILLIAM LENTHALL SPEAKER of the PARLIAMENT.
WE the Gentry of the County of Devon, finding our selves without a Regular
Government, after your last interruption, designed a public Meeting, to
consult Remedies, which we could not so conveniently effect till this Week, at
our General Quarter Sessions at Exon: Where we find diverse of the Inhabitants
groaning under high Oppressions, and a general defect of Trade, to the utter
ruin of many, and fear of the like to others, which is as visible in the whole
County, that occasioned such disorders, that were no small trouble and
disturbance to us; which, by God's blessing upon our endeavors, were soon
suppressed and quieted, without Blood. And though we find, since our first
purposes, an alteration in the state of Affairs, by your Re-assembling at the
Helm of Government, yet conceive, that we are but in part Redrest of our
Grievances; and that the chief Expedient for it will be the recalling of all
those Members that were secluded in 1648. and sat before the first Force upon
the Parliament. And also by filling up the vacant places. And all to be
admitted, without any Oath and Engagement, previous to their Entrance. For
which things, if you please to take a speedy course, we shall defend you
against all Opposers, and future Interrupters, with our Lives and Fortunes. For
the Accomplishment whereof, we shall use all Lawful Means, which we humbly
conceive may best conduce to the Peace and Safety of this Nation.

Exon, 14th of January, 1659.
SIR,
THE Enclosed is a Copy of what this Grand Meeting, to which the most
Considerable of the Gentry have Subscribed. Mr. Bampfield, Recorder of Exon, is
gone this night Post to deliver it to the Speaker. That the Cornish men have
done more, is no News.

This City, in very great numbers, Lordly expressed their desires for a Free
Parliament. The Apprentices and Young men of the City got the Keys of the
Gates, and keep them locked, without taking notice of the Magistrates, and less
of tho Soldiers.


