A DECLARATION AND REMONSTRANCE OF THE ALDERMEN AND MEMBERS of Common Council,
Now Imprisoned in the Tower OF LONDON.

Published for general satisfaction.

LONDON, Printed for George Horton, 1660.

A DECLARATION AND REMONSTRANCE OF THE Members of the Common Council, now
Imprisoned in the Tower of London.
WEre it as Lawful to utter Truth, as Unlawful to Suffer for Truth; to
compare the nearest of Our Thoughts with the most notorious of Our Actions, and
present them as in a Mirror to the Public Eye, We might then Declare; That as
We have engaged Our selves in one Sacred ^ye of Covenant, so therein We have in
all fidelity persevered, declining neither Law, Religion, Parliament, nor
Liberty, necessary in professing Christians, properly natural to true Subjects.

The Covenant binds all (without exception) within the Pale thereof, to an
Unite Defense, and Mutual Co-assistance of each other: But as in the Divine
Law, the Breach of One Commandment, pleads the Offender guilty of all; so We
presume in this humane Law, the Covenant, the forfeiture of one Branch brings
self-guiltiness on all the rest. We pray for mercy on this National sin.

And seeing, with too Transparent Eyes, both Nature and Religion turned
Antipodes, acting themselves into a self-antipathy, as if Man, above all
sublunary Creatures, was only compound of all contrarities, seeing the
foundation; on which next under Heaven Out hopes depend, of Our Laws, Our
Religion, Our Proper Rights and Privileges, We say not Oaths and
Protestations, blown up by the very roots, by such a strong Tempestuous
violence, which beats down all things before it, making the loftiest Cedar
level with the lowest shrubs, until it has vented it self into a Universal
Destruction; that the Fearful overawed and beguiled Multitude, may in the
view of Our present Condition be sensible of their Own Ruin: Thus unanimously
We unbosome Our selves unto the World, showing that in all Our Enterprises,
since these unnatural and Domestic Divisions, We have endeavored to keep a
good Conscience toward God and all men; and how unsavory the fruit of these
last Years have relisht with Us, none, better then our own Souls, can attest;
what forwardness for the Public Good; what backwardness in the Enbrewing our
selves in unknown Allarums, especially of Blood; what assistance both in our
Persons and Purses, for the cutting off the neck of this unnatural War, and the
closing up of all distractions in the Arms of Peace and Unity, not done in
closets, nor promoved in secret corners, the whole City and Nation can bear
witness.

And when We had exhausted our selves for the General of the Natian abroad the
Sword being by Divine Mercy plucked out of the Hand of our Enemies hoping then
We should receive a sweet and blessed issue of all our travels, finding our own
Sword still drawn, yet no Enemy to oppose, and too sad probation of sinister
reaches; We could not but reflect upon our selves and apply our endeavors to
the safety of that wherewith God and the Laws had entrusted Us at home. Will
any man suffer his Estate and Livelihood to be Entrencht on by another that
has no right thereto and be silent? Have not We through many Generations, by
the Gracious influence of many glorious Parliaments been possessors of an
Honorable and Free Charter, the very sinew of the City, and Fee simple of our
being, and shall it now, Vi and armis, be wrested from Us, and We be accounted
Enemies to others, for endeavoring to preserve our own? if such things pass
for Law who can be Master of what he has? What can the Nations expect when
those out of the very Bowels of the City seeks her ruin?

Neither did We ever harbor the least thoughts of an Embroyling War, as by our
daily and incessant actings with the Parliament did appear; straining our
selves to our utmost Power and the highest Key of pure Conscience, to Qualify
all things into a right sense; But the returns of our endeavors with our
hopes, are like Pills gilded over with specious glozes and pretenses.

And, that which We value above the richest price of Nature our Religion is
made an Odium, become a laughing stock unto many; who like Ramping Lions,
rather then Lambs of Christ, rend and tear down the pale of his fold, from a
Christian conformity to a Platonical Community, and that uncivilized Liberty,
the flood gate to a perpetual confusion, and yet they and We are Brethren: Do
they stand up for a Liberty? Why not We? No, We deny our own Liberty that We
may be the Lords Freemen.

And We call Heaven and Earth to witness, that We have not failed in any thing
that may plead Us innocent; We have been more then Servants to the Parliament,
more then Votaries to the Army; less We were not, more We could not be: We have
procured the dislike of many, and are slighted for emptying our selves to make
others full, and for others Liberty We stand Imprisoned.

Hear, O Heavens, and judge, O Earth, the cause of the distressed: And because
with Man there is neither Truth nor Mercy, may the Divine Arm of Justice carry
on these things unto a blessed issue, whilst from the bottom of our hearts We
unfeignedly do pray, That God would be pleased to pour Oil and Wine into our
Nations wounds, to the everlasting peace and consolation of his People, that a
Free Parliament may with highest honor be chosen in this Nation, and remain as
a fixed Star in the Firmament of the Church, that they may judge righteous
judgment, and settle our Divisions in a peaceful posture, That the Army, as
hitherto, so they may still be faithful to their friends, victorious over their
Enemies; and that the whole Nation may enjoy that Liberty, which by Religion,
Law, or Custom, they can claim.

FINIS.

