A DEFENSIVE VINDICATION OF THE Public Liturgy, Established Ceremonies, And
settled Patrimony, OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND; Against Such as (putting themselves
to an ill occupation) have unjustly impeached, or oppugned them.

By A peaceable Son of the same Church, no way addicted to Novelty or
innovation.

If any man lust to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the
Churches of God. 1 Cor. 11.16. Quarein praecisione vultis magnificare nomen
domini? quare duos populos ex uno vultis facere? Why will you in a scismaticall
precisencs magnify the Name of God? Why will you make two divided nations, or
people of one? London, Printed by J.R. for R.W. and are to be sold at the sign
of the Kings-Armes in Paul's Churchyard. 1641.

I FOr the public Liturgy of our Church, (which is the first thing I undertake
to defend) some there be that except against it, because it is a set The best
stratageme that Satan has, who knows his kingdom to be no way more shaken
then by the public devoute prayers of Gods Church, is by traducing the form
and manner of them to bring them into contempt, and so to shake the force of
all men's devotion toward them: from this forge has proceeded a strange
conceit, that to serve God with any set form of Common prayer is superstitious,
Hooker lib. 5. eccles. polit. 26.
prescribed Liturgy, but these men who mislike that any set form of Prayers
should be imposed in the public Service of God, may do well to consider that
God himself not only allowed, but prescribed set forms of Prayer to the
Priests of the old Law, teaching them with what form of words they should
bless his people, Numb. 6.23. and deprecate his Judgments, Joel 2.17. Hosea
14.2. that our blessed Savior in the new Testament, prescribed a form of
prayer to his Apostles, as St. John the Baptist, his immediate forerunner had
formerly done to his disciples, Luke 11.2. that the prayer which Moses
pronounced at the removal, and resting of the Ark was a set form of Prayer,
Numb. 10.35, 36. that all the Psalms of David are prayers, or praises of God in
set forms, and words, answering the length and number of Music notes; that
Saint Paul often used the same set form of prayer without variation, Romans 1.7.
1 Cor. 1.3. 2 Cor. 1.2. Gal. 1.3. Ephesians. 1.2. and it is vain to think that a
set form of prayer should not be as pleasing, and acceptable unto God, as that
which is varyed or that God should be so delighted with varying of words and
phrases, that when we have the same suits and requests to make unto him daily:
Yet we must alter our words and manner of asking, otherwise he will be
displeased with our prayers: Surely our Savior was of another mind, who best
knew the mind of his heavenly Father, for though he had a better gift in
praying than any man in the world, and could have varyed his words better than
any other; yet when he had the same suit to make unto his father, he used the
same words diverse times, saying once, again, and yet a third time, Father, if
it be possible, let this Cup pass from me, Matthew. 26.44.

But, say these men, we cannot pray with the spirit, and use a set Form of
Prayer: why not? There are but two acts of the spirit about prayer, the one of
direction, to direct us how to pray, the other of assistance, to assist us in
praying; and I hope those that use prescribed set Forms of Prayer, do pray by
the direction of the spirit, as well as those that use conceived extemporary
prayers, nay, we are bound to believe that the Spirit of God was rather with
the Carolus Magnus, I am sure was of this belief, who would permit no pravers
to be used but those which were allowed by the Church orationes, quae abecc^sla
probitae no^ s^nt re^iciantur Microlog. de ^c^^es. observe. c^^. 5 and conc.
Carthag 3. which decreed, Can 23. quascu^que sibi preces a'iquis deseribit non
iis ^tatur, nisip^ius eas cum iastruct^oribus cont^l^rit, that what prayers
soever a man framed for himself, he should first acquaint those that were wise
and learned with them, before be presumed to use them, and the reason is given
in the twelfth Canon of the Mil^vita^ C^^^ell. N^ forte aliquid c^ntra fidem
v^l pe^^gno ^^^ia^, vel per minus stud^um sit com^ositum. Least by a sudden
ext^mporall effusion of prayer without good advice, and medication some
expressions might slip from him, either thorough ignorance, or careless^nesse,
which were not conson^^^ to the faith of Christ's Church, no, no^ b^s^emin^ the
^^fall M^iesty of Almighty God.
Church, to direct her how to conceive, frame, and pen set Forms of Prayer for
the behoof of all her children, than with those, who prefer their sudden
undigested prayers, before the excellently conceived, and well digested
Prayers, or Collects of the Church.

And for the second, why may not the Spirit of God assist us in praying by set
Forms of of Prayer, as well as in reading set Chapters and Lessons, or in
singing set Psalms? Dic Quinti hunc colorem.

Others there be, who allowing set Forms of Prayer, yet will by no means allow
of ours; but therein they show themselves to be of a different judgment from
the glorious Martyrs, and other holy Divines of our Church, who did highly
approve of our Communion-book, As it was then s^t forth by King Edw 6.
and were ready to maintain against all opposers, that it was in no thing
repugnant, but in all things agreeable to the Word of God.

Archbishop Cranmer. Acts and Mon. fol. 1571.
offered (so he might have the assistance of Peter Martyr, and a few others) to
make it evident, and to prove against all gainsayers, that were of a contrary
opinion, That all things in our Communion-Book, were agreeable to the Word of
God, correspondent to that which Christ and his Apostles delivered, and the
Primitive Church observed. Librum sacrorum quantum potui per interpretem
cognovi, nec quicquam in illis deprchendi quod non sit ex verbo d^id sumptum
aut saltem ci ^on adversetur commode acceptum Bu^. inter scrip. Auglic. p. 456.
Martin Bucer being entreated to give his judgment of our Service Book,
resolved upon mature deliberation, that there was nothing therein contained,
which was not taken out of the Word of God, or at least, consonant to Gods
Word, being rightly understood, and not misinterpreted. Bishop Ridley in a
Letter of his to Dr. Grindall (who was afterward Archbishop of Canterbury)
writes thus of the Service Book, The Church of England of late, says he, has
the whole Service, all common and public Prayers ordained to be said, and
heard in the Congregation, framed and fashioned to the true veins of holy
Scripture: And when he understood from Dr. Grindall, who was then beyond Sea,
how Mr. Knox took many cavelling exceptions at our Liturgy, to the great
disturbance of the Church there; The copy of the letter is extant in Dr Cowcls
brief answer to Mr Burges, Reasons p. 69.
he wrote back unto him in this mild, yet passionate manner: Alas that our
brother Knox cannot bear with our Book of Common Prayer, in matters against
which, although I grant a man of wit and learning may find to make some
colorable exceptions: yet I suppose he cannot soundly by the Word of God,
disprove any thing in it. Bishop Jewel in his Apology for the Church of
England, professes, ^^el. Apol. pro cee^^sia. Angl. Accessimus quantum maxim
potuimus, ad ceelesiam Apos^l^rum and v^tevum Catholicorum Episcoporum and
Patrum, nec tan^um doctrinam nostram sed etiam Sacramenta, precumque publicarum
formam ad little r^us and instituta di^eximus.
That in our Doctrine, Discipline, and Service, we come as near as we could
possibly, to the Apostolical Church, and ancient Catholic Bishops. M. Dering,
in a book of his called, A spare restraint, makes this challenge to Mr.
Harding, look, says Derings answer of Hardings, Epist. t^ ^uell. fol. 5.
he, if any line be blameable in our Service, and take hold of your advantage;
our Service is good and godly, every tittle grounded upon holy Scripture, and
with what face dare you call it darkness? Lastly, Dr. Tailor was so in love
with the Service Book, that he Acts and Mon^fol. 1385. I might add to these
that at Franckford, when some exiles disliked our Service Book, and some of our
Church ceremonies, other most reverend persons stood strongly for them, as
Thomas Leaver, John Mullins, John Parkhurst, Lausence Humfrey, James
Pilkington. Alexander Nowell, James Haddon, Edwin Sands, Ed^^^^d Grindall, etc.
who being exiles at Franckford, wrote to the like exiles at Zurick, persuading
them to stand to the death for defense of our Church service and ceremonies,
and Master Fox was one of them that subscribed to the letter. Discourse of the
troubles at Franckford, Fol. 16, 17, 22, 23. etc.
used it to his comfort all the time of his imprisonment, and at his Martyrdom,
commended it, as the last token of his love, to his dear wife.

And these men were in that age the Diamonds of the Churches ring, and many of
them sealed the truth they held, not only with danger and exile, but with
their blood: Yet now he is but a mean silly man in repute, that cannot spy much
superstition, much Popish trash and idolatry in that godly book, which the holy
Martyrs, and best learned men of our Church And not only of our Church but
some also of forregin Churches, as Alexander Alesius (a worthy Scotsman of
great account and note) who much commends our Book of Common prayer, and the
ordering of our Church according thereunto, calling it praeclarissimum and
divinum factum, and he complains that any contentious minds should move any
to mislike it, and says, that the contention of brethren about this Book comes
from the devil, who failing one way seeks another way to do mischief to the
Church. Proem. before his translation of the Common Prayer Book in Script.
Anglican. Bucer. fol. 373 375.
then living, did highly commend, and approve to be in all things agreeable to
the Word of God, and to the most ancient and best reformed Liturgyes in all
ages.

Polycarps speech shall end this point, O Deus in quae tempora reservastinos?
Oh God, for what times have thou reserved us? wherein that Service of thine,
which has heretofore had the high approbation, applause and commendation of
many learned Divines, and glorious Martyrs, is now in every Parish almost
thorowout the Kingdom, neglected, vilified, contemned, as popish and
superstitious, by persons of mean quality, and meaner knowledge. I beseech
those who have power in their hand to redress things amiss both in the Church
and State, that they would not suffer this sacred Form of Gods Service to be
exposed any longer to the careless neglect, to the proud contempt and scorn of
newfangled, and misaffected persons, whose particular exceptions against it, or
any passage in it, have received full, particular, abundant satisfaction, by
the learned pens of Many things our non-conformists say are ^^^ss^, many
instances they give of things in our Common Prayer, not agreeable as they
pretend with the Word of God. It has in their eye too great affinity with the
form of the Church of Rome, it differs too much from that which Churches
elsewhere reformed allow and observe; it is not or derly read nor gestured as
beseems; attire disgraceth it; it requires nothing to be done which a child
may not lawfully do; it has a number of short cuts or shreddings, which may be
better called wishes, then prayers, it intermingleth prayings and readings,
etc. it is too long, and by that means abridgeth preaching, it appoints the
people to say after the Minister, it spends time in singing, and in reading
the Psalms by course from side to side, it uses the Lords-prayer too often, the
Song of Magnif. Beaedictus, and N^nc dimittis, it might very well spare, it
has the Letany, Creed of Athanasius, and Gloria Patri, which are supersluous,
it craveth earthly things too much, some things it asks unseasonably, as
deliverance from thunder, and tempest when no danger is high. Some in too
diffident manner, as that God would give us that which we for our unworthiness
dare not ask. Some which ought not to be desired, as deliverance from sudden
death, riddance from all adversity and the extent of ^aving mercy toward all
men; all which exceptions Hooker answers punctually and fully, and so as may
give any intelligent and indicious Reader, abundant satis^action, Lib 5. p 241,
242, etc.
Hooker, Cowell, Hutton, Fisher, etc.

II Now secondly for the Ceremonies, as they are used in our Church, howsoever
some do take offense at them, yet they can give no just offense: for we put no
merit, no matter of salvation, no worship of God in them; we use them not for
exercises of piety, but only for These ceremonies are retained for a
discipline and order, which (upon just causes) may be altered and changed, and
therefore are not to be esteemed equal with Gods Law: in the Preface before
the Book of Common Prayer. Vain then and ignorant is there doubt, that think
our ceremonies are imposed as parts of Gods proper worship.
order, and decency, according to that general Church Canon of the Apostles,
wherein he prescribes that all things in the Church be done decently, and in
order, 1 Cor. 14.40. which Apostolical Canon being a Canon of Canons, by which
all Ecclesiastical Canons are to be R^gnla est, ad quam omnia quae ad ex^ernam
politiam spectant, exigere conveait. Calv. in Loc.
regulated and squared, calls for comeliness, and order in the Church, and
requires that all outward duties of Gods public worship and service, be
performed in the face of the Church, after a decent, comely, and orderly manner.

Comeliness becomes all actions, but more especially religious actions, and is
duly to be observed in all places, but chiefly in the Church, which is (...)
the School of comeliness, as Clemens Romanus calls it, lib. 8. cap. 31.

For the Church is Gods House, the place of his special presence, and if men
be careful in the presence chamber of an earthly King, to do nothing uncomely,
or unbeseeming the respect which they owe to so great a Majesty, much more
ought we to be careful in the House of God, which is the presence Chamber of
the King of Kings, to do nothing uncomely or unbeseeming so great, and sacred a
Majesty.

And as all things in the Church are to be done decently, or in a comely
fashion, so are they to be done orderly, for where disorder is, there is tumult
and confusion, but where order is, there is discipline and peace, it is S.
Ambrose gloss upon the forecited Canon of the Apostle, by virtue of which
Canon the Apostle gives power and authority to all Christian Churches to make
orders, to ordain rites, and ceremonies for the more decent, and orderly
performance of Gods public service, and wills all who live under the
Government of such particular Churches obediently to conform themselves to the
orders of the Church wherein they live.

First the former Rule or Canon prescribed by the Apostle, is (says Pareus) of
very great importance, Et universaliter ad ecclesiam pertinens, and does
universally concern all Christian Churches thoroughout the world, decorum enim
and ordinem eorum arbitrio relinquit, for it leaves all matters of outward
order, and decency in the Church, to the free disposal of Church Governors.
When the Apostle says (...) Let all things be done, ritus externos in
liberate nostra ideo reliquit, ne putaremus culeum dei illis inclusum, he
leaves the ordering of all external or ceremonious rites in every particular
Church to their free power, and determination, least we should deem them
essential parts of Gods worship, and of absolute necessity to salvation, says
Calvin, in the judgment then both of Calvin and Pareus every Christian Church
has warrant from the forecited Apostolical Canon to ordain These things the
Lord left to the liberty of every Church pattly because they are not of the
substance of his worship, but adjuncts only; partly because one form thereof
cannot fit every Country, but must be varyed, and applied to several nations
and times, as shall be found most convenient thus teaches S H^erome, E^ist.
28. concluding with this saying unaquaeque p^ovincia abundet in sensu suo, thus
S. August. Epist. 86.118.119. and thus Zanchius (the great reformed Schooleman)
Tom. 8. loc. 16. de tradit. ecclesiast. page 821, etc.
external rites and ceremonies, and to make ecclesiastical Laws and Canons
for the more decent and orderly performance of all religious duties in their
public assemblyes.

That their is such a power left to each Church, and to Church Governors it is
evident, for if every man might do what he list, and serve God at what time, in
what place, after what manner he pleased, or according to his own humor and
fancy; what other can be the issue, and sequel of such licentious, and
unrestrained liberty, but infinite distraction, and disorderly confusion in the
Church. For the preventing of which, we must of necessity grant, if we will be
reasonable, that each Christian Church has power to make laws, and to ordain
rites for decency and orders sake, and to command, and force her children
obediently to observe them.

And their is not any reformed Church but is of this mind, they all with one
consent hold this opinion, that it is not necessary ecclesiastical rites, and
ceremonies should be in all places alike, but that they may be diverse in diverse
Countries and Churches, so that nothing be ordained against Gods Word, that
this is the judgment of our Church is plain from the 34. Article, that all
reformed Churches are of the same judgment with ours, M. Rogers in his
explication of that Article makes it manifest by particular instances.

And reflect your eyes back to the primitive times, and you shall find that
even in those days every particular Church was allowed to have those orders,
and ceremonies, which she in her wisdom thought most fitting, and convenient.
So we read that some Churches used to receive the Sacrament thrice, others
twice a week, others only upon the Lords day, some Churches gave the Eucharist
in the morning, some at even Aug. Epist, 118. ad Ian. some Churches did dip the
infant baptized thrice in the water, others but once only as Tertullian
witnesses, de Coron. milit. cap. 3. all which Churches notwithstanding the
diversity of these, or the like ceremonies, were the true Churches of God, and
held Union and Communion one with another, Dissonantia in his non sustulit
consonantiam fidei, they knew that although the Kings daughter were all
glorious within, yet her clothing was wrought about with needle work of diverse
colors, by which needle work of diverse colors, Sit una si les universae, quae
^^iqu: dilatatul, ecclesiae tanquam intus in memmis, etiam si ipsa sidei unitas
quibusd^m div^rsis obs^rvatio (...) celebratur, qui^us ^udo modo quod in side
vorum est, impeditur Omnis enim pu^^^^^udo filiae Regis intrinsecus, illae
autem observatio^es quae variae celebrantur, in eius vest intelliguntur, unde
dicitur in fimb^iis au^eis circuma^^icta v^ricta^^, s^dea quoque vestis ita
diversis celebratiombus varietur, ut non adversis contention^bus d^ssipetur.
Aug. Epist 86. ad casul.
S. Augustine understands the diverfity of ceremonies in particular Churches,
and if the judgment of one or two Churches must be hearkened unto, and may not
be despised, or contradicted rashly: much more ought the judgment of all
reformed Churches to be regarded.

Certainly for a few persons to call in question that which has been held for
a truth at all times in the true Churches of God, argues such singular persons
to be singularly proud, and possessed with a spirit of contradiction.

I will conclude this point with the This is not the doctrine of Calvin only,
but it is the constant doctrine of all O^thodoxe Divines and Churches both
ancient and modern, that God has sufficiently and perspicuously del^vered the
whole substance of his own proper worship, and all things necessary to man's
salvati^n in the holy Scr^ptures; and that these things must evermore be
unalterably the same in all Churches, but the cir^^mstances and ceremonies of
his public worship, as of place time, ornaments, gestu^e; etc he has left to
the wisdom of every national Church, to determine and make choice of, so
that all things be done according to the Canon of Canons, delivered by S. Paul,
1 Cor. 14.40.
judgment and resolution of judicious Calvin, who in the fourth of his
institutions, Cap. 10. 30. resolves thus, Dominus totam verae justitiae summam,
etc. God says he, has in the Scripture evidently set down the whole sum of
true righteousness, and all the essential parts of his worship, without
omitting any thing necessary to salvation, and in thief he is the only Master
to be hearkened unto: but as for outward Discipline it pleased him not to
prescribe punctually, and in particular what we should follow foreseeing that
this depends upon the diverse condition, and state of times, knowing very well
that one form or fashion in these externals would not fit all ages, in this
case therefore we are to have recourse unto the general rules of order and
decency, [quae pro moribus unjuscujusque gentis and seculi vary accommodari
debent ad ecclesiae aedificationem] which are diversely to be accommodated
according to the manners of several Nations and ages as shall be most for the
behoof, and edification of the Church.

Now as particular Churches have full power, authority, and Commission to make
Ecclesiastical laws and constitutions, and to prescribe Rites and Ceremonies
for the more decent, and orderly performance of religious duties in their
sacred assemblies, by virtue of the former Apostolical Canon, so by the
regular prescript of the same Canon, they that live under the government of
such Churches, are to conform themselves to the orders of the Church in which
they live, and respectively with ready obedience to observe the same.

S. Austin Dis^iplina nulla est in his melior gravi prudentique Christiano quam
ut eo modo agat quo agere viderit ecclesiam ad quamcunque sort devenerit.
August. Epist 118. ad Casulan.
says, That there is no rule of discipline so fit for a grave and prudent
Christian, to regulate his carriage by, then to do after that manner as he
sees the Church to do unto which it falls out that he shall chance to come,
and Tu ad quam forte ecclesiam veneris eius movem serva si cuiqua^ non vis esse
s^andalo nec quemquam tibi. Idem. Ibid. s^d ex ^re Ambrosii.
that to whatsoever Church he comes, he ought to observe the customs, or
ceremonies which be there in use, if he will not give scandal unto others, nor
receive scandal from others. Quod neque contra fidem, neque contra bo^os mores
iniungitur, indifferenter est habendum, and pro eorum inter quos vivitur
societate servandum est. Idem. Ibid.
Provided always, that the customs their used, be neither opposite to the
faith, nor yet contrary to good manners: which counsel S. Ambrose gave to
Monica the mother of S. Augustine, to direct her how she ought to behave her
self in the Church of God, and whosoever he be that will not observe the
decrees of Church Governors in his de quibus nihil certi statuit Scriptura, in
those things concerning which the holy Ghost has set down, no certainty in the
Scripture, he offends God, who has given power to his Church, to enjoin the
observation of such ceremonies, which power were fruitless, and to no purpose,
if men might do what they list, contrary to the ceremonial constitutions of
the Church.

But is not this an abridgement of Christian liberty, to restrain and limit the
use of a thing indifferent? No certainly for to make the restraint of the
outward man in matters indifferent, an impeachment of Christian liberty, what
is it else but even to bring Anabaptisme, Anarchy, rebellion, popular parity,
disorder, and confusion both into the Church, and State, and to dissolve the
bond of subjection, and obedience to lawful authority.

Consider (I pray you) wherein can the power and authority of superiors
properly consist, and the duty, and obedience of inferiors be showed toward
them, if not in these indifferent, and arbitrary things, for things absolutely
Hoc advertendum quod quaedam suat pura bona quaedam pura mala, and in his
nullam deberi hominibus obedientiam, quoniam nec illa omittenda sunt, etiam cum
prohibentur, nec ista vel cum iub^ntur committenda inter hoc sunt media quaedam
quae pro modo, loco tempore vel persona and mala possunt esse and bona, and in
his lex posita est obedientiae, in his fas non est nostrum sensum sententiae
praescribere magistrorum, Bern. epist. 7.
necessary, as precisely commanded of God, we are bound to do, whether humane
authority require them or not, and things absolutely sinful, as precisely, and
determinately forbidden by God, we are bound not to do, whether humane
authority forbid them or not: there are therefore none other things left,
wherein to express properly the obedience due to superior authority, but
things in their own nature indifferent, and whosoever shall interpret the
determination of Superiors in the use of things indifferent to be prejudicial
to Christian liberty, or under that color shall exempt Inferiors from their
obedience to such determinations, he is one of those (says a learned Divine of
our Church) of whom S. Jude speaks, that dispiseth Government, Jude 8. and he
teaches otherwise then Saint Peter did, who wills us to submit our selves to
every ordinance of man, 1 Pet. 2.13. and contrary also to the doctrine of S.
Paul, ^ D. Sanderson.
who tells us that we must needs be subject, not only for fear, but for
conscience also, Romans 13.5.

And what probable reason can any man give, why a child is bound to obey his
Father, or a servant his Master, when he limits him in the use of a thing
indifferent; and we should not be bound to submit our selves to our Superiors
appointment in the like things, when as it cannot be denied, but Superiors have
the same authority, for the peaceable ordering of the Church, and Commonwealth,
that fathers, and masters, have over there children, and servants, for the
ordering of their families. Surely but that the Scripture has foretold there
shall, and ever will be differences, sidings, and partakings in the Church, 1
Cor. 11.19. a man would wonder, how ever it should sink into the heads of sober
understanding men to deny either the power in Superiors to ordain, or the
necessity of inferiors to obey the laws and constitutions of the Church
touching times, places, vestments, gestures, and other ceremonial
circumstances, requisite to the more decent orderly, and solemn performance of
Gods public worship and service.

Our Church, I am sure is of another judgment, for it is the Tenet of our
Church in the thirtieth Canon, That things of themselves, and of their own
nature indifferent, do in a sort alter their natures, when they are commanded
or forbidden by a lawful Magistrate. And therein it teaches rightly for in
such matters of a middle or indifferent nature, nec jussio, nec prohibitio
principum aut praelatorum est contemnenda, neither the Commandment, nor
prohibition of Princes or Prelates is to be contemned (says S. Bernard, Epist.
7.) Sed quicquid vice dei praecipit homo, quem pro deo habemus, tanquam deum
audire debemus. But whatsoever in things of this nature man commands, who is
in the place of God, we are bound to obey as God, (says the same Father) ipsum
quem pro deo habemus, in his quae aperte, non sunt contra de^m, audire debemus,
Gods vicegerents must be heard and obeyed ^n all things, that are not
manifestly Nullius prohibiti^ valet obvi^re ^^aeccptis, (...) ^ussio
praeiudicare prohibitis. Ber^. ubi supra.
contrary to the revealed Will of God. And such a limitation in the use of
things indifferent, brings no diminution to our Christian freedom or liberty
which is seated in the mind, or judgment, but if we will draw, and extend our
liberty unto a freedom of actions, thinking that we may do what we list in
things indifferent, Some mislike our Churchti^es because no where commanded in
Sc^iptu^e, be ^^^o: no more a ^^hose which they ^^^e: is the Cap. or Surplesse,
no where commanded? no more is the night cap, or cleak, ^^kn^e^^^g, no where
commanded at the receiv^^g of the ^^mm^nion? (...) is sitting o^ standing, and
so of (...) are any of these ^^^bid (...) the Scripture?
without control, or without any reverence, or regard, unto the Magistrates
orders, or to the Churches decrees, our liberty in the end will prove a
licentious disturbance both of the Church and state.

Those men then go quite contrary to work, even to the fearful purling of
their own, and other men's consciences, who use to argue in this manner. This I
have no warrant to do, for where is it commanded? Whereas they ought rather to
argue thus, this I have good warrant to do, for my Superiors command me to do
it, and being no where expressly forbidden in the Word, I may lawfully, nay I
must of necessity obey my Superiors in every thing they command, that is not
repugnant to the Word of God: but it is not repugnant to the Word of God, to
wear a Surplesse to sign the child with the sign of the cross at the time
of Baptism, according to the ancient use in Primitive and purer times, to
kneel at the receiving of the holy Communion, to stand up at the recital of
the Creed, or to use any other reverend Gesture prescribed by the Church. If
these be any where forbidden in the Scripture, let the places be shown (as for
far fetched, and fallible deductions, I value them not) let one text, or
tittle of Gods Word be produced, where all these, or any ceremony appointed to
be used in our Church, is forbidden, and I for my part will never use it,
though I should hazard the displeasure of all my Superiors, by forbearing the
use of it; but if it cannot be shown, that these things are any where
forbidden, the use of them is warrantable, and made lawful by the Word of God,
and being commanded by lawful authority, I am bound to use them, because God
commands me to submit to every ordinance of man, 1 Pet. 2.13. and to obey my
Superiors in things lawful, Heb. 13.17.

Neither will it help the Patrons of licentious libertinisme a whit to say,
that some of the forenamed ceremonies were superstitiously abused by the
Papists: be it so, yet they cannot deny, but that they were used in the Church
long before popery did bear sway, and the abuses mixed with them by the
Romanists we affect not, we allow not, we defend not, but have purged them from
their abuse, and restored them to their Primitive use, and things abused, may
be well used, and need not to be clean abolished, Our worthy Ancestors (says
S. Austin) took the Temples dedicated to Idols, and made them serve for holy
Oratories, or houses of prayers, they took the revenews which were devoted to
the Gods of the Gentiles, and converted them to the maintenance of Gods
Ministers. And that holy Father saw no ^oel^cisme or incongruity in it, Hoc de
illis sit, quod de ipsis hominibus cum ex sacrilegis and impiis in veram rel
gionem immutantur. The change of them from an impious to a pious use, was in
his judgment, but like the change which is wrought in men, when of bad, they
become good, of Sacrilegious, religious. August. epist. 154. where he gathers
out of Deuteronomy. 7.25. that the gold, silver, and other rich o^namen^s of Idols may
not be taken to men's private uses, least they should seem to destroy the Idols
for covetousness, not for piety: yet such things may be converted to Gods
service, as wicked Idolatrous men may be convert^d to h^s service, as the water
of Fountains dedicated to false gods, may be used for Baptime, as Bells rung to
the service of Idols, may be rung and used to the true Gods service; and this
he further confirms by Joshua, his preserving the Silver, Gold, vessels of
Brass, and Iron, Josh. 6.19.24.
useful for Gods service, to be kept in Gods Treasury, when all other things
in the facking of Icricho, were accursed and destroyed: and Gideons sacrificing
a Bullock unto God, and burning it with the wood of the grove dedicated to
Baal, by Gods own appointment. Judges 6.25.26. the sacred Vessels of the Temple
had been fowly abused in Babylon by Nabuchadnezzar, and Baltazar, yet when
Cyrus had given Commandment for the restoring of them again, Zerubhabel made
no scruple to employ them in there former holy uses. The Magicians had abused
the Stars, yet God made use of a Star to conduct them unto Christ the
Athenians had abused the Altar, that was dedicated to the unknown god, and yet
Saint Paul made use of an inscription written upon that Altar, to preach unto
them the God which they knew not. Shall we (with Lycurgus) pluck up the Vines,
because some will be drunk with Wine? or with Cotta in Tully, condemn reason,
because some have made use of it to plead an ill cause? No, where crimen non
est in rebus, sed in vitio utentis, the fault is not in the thing, but in him
that uses it, there we may apply it to a right use when we have removed the
abuse.

But were the impugners of our Church ceremonies put to it, they would find it
a very hard task to prove that any one individual, or particular ceremony used
in our Church, has been at any time abused by the Papists. For those
Surplesses, and other vestments which we wear, those particular crossings
wherewith we sign Infants at the time of their Baptism, in token that they
should not be ashamed, to confess the faith of Christ crucified, but manfully
fight under his Banner, against the world, the flesh, and the Devil, and
continue his faithful soldiers, and servants, unto their lives end, were made
long since popery was banished out of the Church, and so could not be
superstitiously abused by papists, unless they abused them before they had a
being, or were in rerum natura.

If any then take causeless offense at the use of such innocent ceremonies,
(as they are rightly styled by the reverend and learned Bishop of Duresme) it
is an offense taken, not given, and he that takes offense where none is given,
must answer for it both as the giver, and as the taker; all that we can do, is
to be sorry for it, that they should be offended without just cause, but we may
not redeem the offense of private persons, by our disobedience to public
Governous, for the rule is certain, that where lawful authority determines
our liberty, their the respect of private scandal cease; and that restraint
which proceeds from special duty, is Superior to that which proceeds but
from common charity, the duties which we owe to our Governors by way of
justice, are more strictly obligatory, then those which we owe to private
persons only by way of charity, as I could prove by many convincing arguments,
were it needful.

For a close and up shot of this point, I wish from my heart that men now a
days, had more of the Spirit of conformity, and obedience to In his Book of
the three Innocent Coremonies.
the constitutions and commands of lawful authority, and that they would
respectively observe the prescribed orders, and ceremonies of the Church,
according to the Churches prescription, which they may do without prejudice to
their Christian liberty, without danger of idolatry, superstition, or giving
any the least just occasion of scandal, and which they cannot refuse to do,
but they must become guilty of disobedience, irregularity, and of
nonconformity to the Our ceremonies make the very outward face of our Church,
as like as may be, to the most ancient, and purest Churches which yielded so
many thousand Martyrs, for the testimony of the truth, in their times, Iud.
A^ol.
ancient Church in the primitive and purer times, who used all or most of these
ceremonies which we use, in the same manner that we use them, and shall we
defert, and condemn Antiquity to please a few novelists, ill affected to the
discipline of our Church, who under a pretense of hating Idols, persuade men to
commit sacrilege, to rob God of his due service, and the Church Malach 38. Will
a man ^ob God? yet ye have rob^ed me, but ye say wherein have we robbed thee?
in tithes and offerings.
of her patrimony which cannot safely be alienated or applied to any other use
then that, for which it was principally intended, as I undertook to show in the
third place:

III. It is well known, and confessed that the state of the Clergy, in every
good Commonwealth has had its lot, and portion not only spiritual in the
Lord, but also temporal in the Commonwealth, being a state of men, as of the
best desert, if they do their duties: so not to be fed by the Air, as the
Cameleons are, but by the fruits, and increase which proceed from the earth,
and other tithes, and offerings, and therefore they have had allotted them by
the law of nature, as Melchisedech had Genesis 14.20. by the law of Moses, as the
Priests had, Levit. 27.32. Numb. 18.21. Deuteronomy. 26.12, 13. by the allowance of
our Savior Christ, haec oportet fieri, you ought to give tithes, even of the
herbs that grow in Gardens, Matthew. 23.23. and by civil and provincial laws
in Christianity, have they had allotted them, not only the tithes of the fruit
of the earth, because they have bellies to be fed, and backs to be clothed,
and families to be maintained: but they had there Cities and there Lands
belonging to them amongst the Jews, and also their parts in the sacrifices and
offerings, and amongst Christians there demaines temporalties, and special
privileges: yea they had their special privileges amongst the heathen, for
when Joseph bought all the land of the Subjects in Egypt, the Priests land was
not sold, Genesis 47.28. that became not Pharaohs.

And were not men deeply infected with a spice of Plato says, that the
Sacriligious hold one of these three things, either that Godis not, o^ that he
regard^th not the ^^ings alone by m^n, or that he will be easily reconciled to
them that sacrilegiously ^ob him, L^b. 10. de legibus.
infidelity, they would not touch, or meddle with that portion which is
allotted to God and his Ministers, they would not turn that to private uses,
which belongs to the Church or Churchmen, they would not desire to reap that
which they never sowed, nor take away that which they never gave, they would
not make the Monuments of their forefathers liberalities, the eternal
testimonies of their sacrilegious robberies; it is a lesson set down in the
rules of the law, quod semel deo dicatum, non est ad usus humanos ulterius
transferendum, that which has been once dedicated unto God, is not any more to
be transferred to the uses of men, and quae recte data sunt eripi non licet,
and that things well given must not be taken back, or be employed to civil, or
profane uses.

Calvin in an Epistle of his to that most Reverend Father Cranmer Archbishop of
Canterbury complains, Quod praedae expositi sunt ecclesiae reditus, that the
Church revenews were made a prey, and he calls it malum sane intollerabile, an
evil or mischief intolerable no way to be endured. Bentius in an Epistle
prefixed before his Homilies on the Acts says, that not only Antichrist by
his impiety, and the Turk by his cruelty, threaten the destruction of the
Church, but those also, says he, seek the utter subversion thereof, qui
occupationibus, and direptionibus facultatum ecclesiasticarum, adolescentes a
studio sacrarum literarum deterrent, who by invading and spoiling the Churches
possessions, do deter young Students from the study of Divinity: for although
says he, the Church of Christ being built upon a rock, does not absolutely
need the aid of external riches, tamen hiqui facultates ecclesiasticas
deripiunt, and in privatum suum usum transferunt, depraedationibus suis id
efficient, quo pauciores sacris literis operam dent, and ad obeunda publica
munera erudiantur, profecto ecclesiam dei quantum in ipsis est, evertunt, and
devastant, yet forasmuch as they who spoil the Church of her possessions, and
put them to their private use, do by there spoil, and robbery, bring matters so
to pass, that fewer will addict themselves to the study of Divinity, or be
trained up to the public functions thereof, as much as in them lie, they
overthrow, and lay waste the Church of Christ, and this he styles (non ferendam
barbariem) a Barbarism not to be suffered.

Gualter on the 21. of S. Lukes Gospel speaking of the poor Widows two mites
cast into the Treasury, and our Saviors preferring them before the greater
gifts of the richer sort, Forasmuch, (says he) as Christ is wont to behold
such things, we must remember that he also sees them [qui opes ecclesiasticas
sacrilega manu ad se rapiunt] who with sacrilegious hands, take the Church
goods unto themselves [grave illorum seelus, and omni detest (...) one d^gnum
sacrilegium est, opes illas in usum alienum convertere, five id public fiat,
sive privatim] heinous is there offense, and a sacrilege by all means to be
detested, to convert those possessions to any other use whether public or
private, and yet not only in the papacy, says he, but even by some of them
[qui Evangelii nomine gloriantur, and religionis reformatae sectatores videri
volunt, impudentissime thesauri sacri distrahuntur.] Who glory in the name of
the Gospel, and would seem the most sincere professors of the reformed
neligion, the holy Treasures of the Church, are most impudently wasted, some
snatching part to their own private use, some casting all that is left into the
public treasury, or exchequer: whence it will in time come to pass [ut
Scholae frigeant, doctissimi quique dilabantur] that Schools will every where
be contemned, and learned men decay by degrees, and slide away insensibly like
water. Mr Knox in a Letter The Copy of the Letter is in B. Coopers defense, or
decalogy against Mr Hames, Paralogy, page 66.
which he wrote to his brethren of the Ministry in Scotland a little before
his death amongst other things, charge and commands them with uprightness,
and strength in God, to gainstand the merciless devourers of the Churches
Patrimony, if men will spoil, says he, let them do it to their own peril and
condemnation, but communicate you not with their sins, of whatsoever estate
they be, neither by consent, nor yet by silence; but by public protestation
make this known unto the world, that you are innocent of such robbery; which
will are it be long, provok Gods vengeance upon the committers thereof, God
give you wisdom and courage in so just a cause, thus he; yet now adays men
take what they can from the Church, but give little or nothing to the Church.

Holy David, when he sat in his house, and had rest round about from all his
enemies, did advise to build Gods house, 1 Samuel 7. his peace bred in him piety,
his rest religion, and the zeal of Gods house, had eaten him up: but the peace
of many has bred in them policy, and their zeal (might they have their will)
would eat up Gods house, while they hunger not so much for the good, as the
goods of the Church, and deal with the Lords Ambassadors, as Hanun did with
David's, curtailing their livings, as he did their Garments, or as Dionisius did
with Esculapius, who took from him his golden glittering robe, as too heavy for
summer, and too cold for winter, and bestowed on him a courfer garment; they
are very skillful in the ablative, but ignorant in the Dative, Arithmiticians
only in substraction from God, to make up an addition to themselves, and their
estates.

Go to the Isles of Chittim, and behold, enquire of the nations round about Ier.
2.9. if any such things be done amongst Turks and Pagans to their gods: what
Temples or religious places once dedicated, do they deface, or expose to
contempt, ruin, or decay? or who of them ever robbed their Churches, or
religious houses sacrilegiously of their revenews and patrimony?

Let men think what they will, but assuredly the Lords portion will be to those
who unjustly possess it, and to their estates, as that worm which was at the
root of Ionahs goard, that caused a speedy fading, and final decay thereof;
like Achans execrable thing, which proved the ruin of him and his whole
family, ^s the Ark to the Philistimes, which never ceased to plague them till
it was sent back to to the right owners, as aurum Tholossanum, the gold of
Tolouse which impoverished all those and their families that had any of it, as
the coal stolen from the Altar by the Eagle, which set a fire of her whole nest:
or like the cursed water to the guilty woman, though it may cause a swelling of
their rents at the first, yet it will bring upon them and their estates, a
consumption at the last; for whatsoever was mortified, and bequeathed to the So
ran the dispositive form in all grants, Deo and ecclesiae.
use of God, and his Church, it had a curse or imprecation set upon it, that
any who should take it away, or alienate it to another use, might be Anathema,
and his account without mercy at the dreadful day of judgment, when he shall
come to receive his doom from the hand of the judge both of Heaven and Earth,
to whose service the same was principally dedicated.

Dionisius having spoiled the Temple of Proserpina at Locris, of Inpiter at
Peloponesus, of Esculapius at Epidaurus; because Proserpina drowned him not as
he sailed to Syracuse, nor Jupiter struck him in pieces with his Thunderbolt,
nor Esculapius made an end of him by some miserable consumption, both he
himself, and some others accounted such his sacrilege to be just, and lawful:
so some because they thrive a while, and prosper with those spoils which have
been taken from the Church, they think God approves and allows such a
sacrilegious act; and will never call them to a reckoning for it, but they
shall find that curse to take hold of them, and their families which the
Prophet Habakkuk pronounced against Nabuchadnezzar who enriched himself with
the spoils of the East, Vae accumulanti non sua, woe to him that coveteth an
evil covetousness to his own house, Habuc. 2.9. Thesauros quos devorarunt,
evement, they shall one day be forced, as Job says, to vomit up those
Treasures which they have unjustly devoured, (...), their wicked gain
(according to the Greek Proverb) shall bring a rod at the back of it, to whip
them with. It is an old rule voluntas sola quoad ecclesiam punitur, that a
Sacrilegious intent shall not escape without punishment, and how the action of
sacrilege has been punished, what story yields not an instance? what heathen
but took notice of it?

Novimus multaregna, and Reges eorum propterea cecidisse, quia ecclesias
spoliaverunt, resque eorum vastaverunt, alienarunt, diripuerunt, we have known
says Charles the great, many Kings and Kingdoms brought to speedy ruin and
destruction, because they spoiled Churches, and laid waste, alienated, and made
a prey of their revenews. Virgil notes that the Grecians offered violence to
the Temple of Pallas.

Corripuere sacram effigiem, and inferres thereupon, Ex illo sluere and retro
sublapsa reforri Spes Danaum.

That they never prospered, but had ill success ever: when Baltazar abused to
profane uses the sacred Bowls of the Temple, then appeared the writing upon
the wall, which showed that his days were numbered, and that his Kingdom was
cut of from him and his posterity for ever, Dan. 5. Antiochus dyed miserably,
and confessed at his death, his sin of sacrilege, how that he had taken
vessels of gold and silver from the Temple of Jerusalem, 1 Mac. 6. Heliodorus
being sent by King Saleucus to spoil the Temple of Jerusalem, of the treasury
that was laid up there, as he was about to take it away, suddenly two young men
appear before him, notable in strength, excellent in beauty, comely in
apparel, who scourged him continually and gave him many sore strips, so that
he fell on the ground, 2 Mac. 3.26, 27. and lay speechless, without all hope
of life, Verse. 29. till by the prayer of Onias the high. Priest, he was
restored to health, Verse. 33. and he returning to the King, when the King asked
him who might be a fit man to be sent yet once again to Jerusalem for the same
purpose, Verse. 31. he answered, if thou have any enemy or traitor, send him
thither, and thou shall receive him well scourged, if he escape with his life,
Verse. 38. for in that place there is no doubt, a special power of God which
defends it, and beats, and destroys them that come to hurt it. Verse. 39.
After Julian had robbed the Churches of their plate in scoffing manner, saying,
Ecce quam pretiosis vasis ministratur Mariae filio, are these fit vessels or
cups for the Son of Mary to be served with? he was suddenly wounded to death
with an Arrow (as Theod. eccles. hist. lib. 3. c. 11.
Theoderet thinks) shot from Heaven. Pompey noted by Tully, and Livy for one
of the most fortunate men in the world, till he entered into the Temple at
Jerusalem, and offered wrong to it, then continually after he had unhappy
success, and dyed miserably, when the Vandals came with a puissant army
against Gabinius, (as Eutropius relates the story) the Duke sent some of his
Captains disguised to see whether the Vandals reverenced the Temples of the
Christians, or spoiled them, if they spoil, or violate them (says he) the God
whom the Christians worship, who they say is a powerful God, will not spare
them that spoil his houses, and so it came to pass; for the Vandals marching
forward enriched with the spoil, and goods of the Church were vanquished in
battle, slain, and put to diverse torments.

And that I be not infinite in examples we see by daily experience, that of
goods sacrilegiously gotten, perpetuus nulli datur usus, no man possesses them
long, but they pass from man to man, from heir to heir, from family to family,
as the Ark did from Ashdod to Gath, from Gath to Ekron, and could find no
place to rest in among the Philistines, but troubled them wheresoever it came,
till they returned it again to its proper place, 1 Samuel 5.

If any be offended with this my discourse, I must answer for my self, as
Tertullian did in another case, conditio praesentium temporum provocat hanc
admonitionem nostram, the condition of the present times do provoke, and in a
manner embolden me to offer unto the view of those, who please to read it, this
my admonitory information, that had its conception, and birth, was begun, and
finished in a very few days space, which I now intimate, not thereby to assume
any glory to my self, but by way of excuse or apology, if I have not performed
answerably to the goodness of the cause, in defense of which it had been fit,
I should have used more mature deliberation, least truth it self suffer by this
my over hasty indiscretion.

But when I had waited long to see whether the ancient and men of ablerparts
would speak, and continually heard many mouths open to defame the service, and
ceremonies of our Church, and few, or none open to defend them from those foul
unjust aspersions, which are in many libellous Pamphlets cast upon them,
Vexatus toties Rauci Theseide Codri
-- Quis tam ferreus ut teneat se?
Rather then so good a cause should want an advocate to plead for it, or that
our Church should not be justified of some (though one of the meanest) of her
children; I have presumed to publish in a very homely dress, such as it is,
this my defense, and vindication of the Service, Ceremonies, and settled
Patrimony of our Church, which craves audience against those, quibus quieta
movere magna est mer es, who love to fish in troubled waters, and hold the
disturbance of the Churches peace, a sufficient hire to set them on work,
making it (...) their whole endeavor, their special study, night and day, to
keep a faction on foot to maintain opposition and sidings. And that late
reverend Bishop of Winchester, Doctor Andrews has told us the true reason why
such men love to be contentious,? why, says he, It is the way to be somebody,
in times of peace what reckoning is there of Wat Tyler or Jack Straw? Make a
sedition, and they will bear a brain with the best.

Primianus and Maximianus were the heads of the two factions of the Donatists
in S. Austins time, he says, it was well for them that factions fell out, else
Primianus might have been Postremianus, and Maximianus might have been
Minimianus well enough, but in a faction either of them was a jolly fellow,
head, and leader of a party; and this tickling desire of vainglory, to be
magnified up, and down in the mouths of the people for the head of a faction,
will make men contentious, and they will take order that we shall never want,
needless contentions, and quarrellsome brawls, both in the Church, and State,
if they be not timely prevented and suppressed.

But since there can come nothing of contention, but the mutual waste of the
parties contending, till a Divide and impera. Matthew. 12.25. A Kingdom divided,
etc.
common enemy dance in the ashes of them both, I do wish heartily that the
grave advice which Constantine gave for reuniting his divided Clergy, may at
the length so far prevail with us, who profess our selves to be the sons
of the same Church, that things of small moment never disioyn us, whom one God,
one Lord, one faith, one baptism, bands of so great force, have lincked
together; and that we would bear such respective love to our Mother, this
Church of England, (which has nurtured us in the truth, and from our infancy
has tendered all good means, that we being taught in the Word, may now many of
us teach others) as not upon needless, and trivial occasions to disquiet her
peace.

It cannot be denied, but that some unto whom the execution of the
Ecclesiastical Laws belong, have been much faulty, and through want of either
of care or conscience, have suffered many irregular abuses and corruptions, to
creep into their Courts: but these are personal faults, of which I am no
Patron, the best defense of them is speedy redress, and amendment: that which
I defend, is that all personal adventitious abuses being severed, and set
apart, there is not in the form of our Church polity, nor in our Liturgy, nor
in the ceremonies of our Church any thing, which has not in some sort warrant
from Divine authority, or Primitive antiquity; and which has not been allowed,
approved, and also justified by the glorious Martyrs, and best learned Divines
of our Church against the cavilling exceptions of gainsayers.

Wherefore I wish once again from my heart that the ceremonies, and especially
the service Book of our Church might be continued without any, or with as
little alteration as may be, for the reasons given by those of our English
Church at Strausburgh, to them of Franckford, why they should continue the Book
of Prayer they had: 1. Because they that should alter it, might be thought to
condemn the chief Authors of it, who suffered as Martyrs. 2. Because it might
give occasion to the adversary, to accuse our doctrine of imperfection, and
mutability, and to upbraid us, (as usually they do) that we have only
menstruam fidem, a changeable faith. 3. Because it might move the godly, to
doubt of that truth whereof before they were well persuaded.

It is an old received rule that omnis mutatio est periculosa, all change of
things settled is dangerous: nam mutatio consuetudinis etiam quae adjuuat
utilitate, perturbat novitate, for the very change says S. Augustine of settled
customs, though it may seem to help with some commodity, yet will it do more
hurt with the novelty. Which occasioned the Locrines to decree that whosoever
would bring in a new law amongst them, should come and declare it to the
assembly with an halter about his neck, that if it were not approved good for
the Commonwealth, he might presently be hanged for his desire of innovation:
and because many dangerous inconveniences do commonly follow upon the
alteration of things settled. Our late wise Solomon, and gracious Sovereign K.
James (in his proclamation prefixed before the Book of Common prayers)
admonished all men, that hereafter they should not expect, or attempt any
further alteration in the common and public form of Gods Service from that,
which was then established; for (says his sacred Majesty) neither will we give
way to any to presume, that our own judgment having determined in a matter of
such weight shall be swayed to alteration by the frivolous suggestion of any
light spirit, neither are we ignorant of the inconveniences that do arise in
Government, by admitting innovation in things once settled by mature
deliberation; and how necessary it is to use constancy in upholding public
determinations of states: for such is the unquietness, and unstedfastnesse of
some dispositions affecting every year new forms of things, as if they should
be followed in their unconstancy, would make all actions of state ridiculous,
and contemptible; whereas the steadfast maintaining of things by good advice
established, is the weal of all Commonwealths.

Let no fancy then about ceremonies, no blind affection to any foreign Church
discipline, no itch of innovation, no singular conceit of pride, no humorous
contrariety alienate your minds from the public service and ceremonies of our
Church by law established. Do not, with the Pharisees, strain at a gnar, and
swallow a Camel, Matthew. 23.24.
stumble at a lawful ceremony, and foster a lawless schism; but let it be
your only strife to fly all needless strife and contention about such
things, and in your daily prayers, pray for the peace of Jerusalem, bowing your
knees, lifting up your eyes, hands, and hearts unto the God of peace, that he
would at the length settle a firm peace in his Church: never was there more
need of this prayer, then in this fearful combustion, and confusion of the
Christian world, wherein there is nothing almost heard of, but fraction, and
faction, schism, and separation; nothing but wars and rumors of wars,
Christian against Christian, Church against Church, Nation against Nation,
Kingdom against Kingdom, as if those last perilous times were come upon us
which our Savior spoke of, Matthew. 24. therefore Pacem spiremus and suspiremus
coram domino, let us breath out prayers, and sighs for peace before the Lord,
and especially at this time we should pour out our devoute, fervent prayers to
Almighty God for the representative body, the great Council of this Kingdom
now assembled in the high Court of Parliament, most humbly beseeching him, so
to steer all their consultations, that by a joint unanimous consent they may
decree only those things, as shall make most to his glory, to the advancement
of truth, and piety, to the joy and contentation of His Majesty, to the peace,
welfare, and safety both of the Church, and State, carefully avoiding all
extremes, without turning aside either to the right hand or the left, which God
in mercy grant, etc. *

ERRATA.
Page 5. Lin. 12. for Quinti hunc, read Quintiliane, page 18. l. 17. for
purling, read pusling. page 25. lin. 18. Bentius, read Brentius.

FINIS.

