A Declaration, Or Resolution of the County of HEREFORD.
WHereas the Kingdom for many years past has groaned under Taxes of Loanes,
Shipmoney, and the like dismal effects of an Arbitrary Government, and a high
stretched Prerogative: for the Cure of which distempers a Parliament was held to
be the only good old way of Physic to cleanse the Body Politic from
oppressing Crudities (which was heartily desired) but not by over-strong
Purgations to weaken it in the principal Part, charging it to receive a
disposition to the like distemper, or a Relapse into the same, or a worse
Disease, which in stead of restoring it to its primitive vigor and health,
must needs drive it to a fatal Period. Such is our misery, such the just
Judgment of God upon our Sins.

This wholesome Physic has not wrought in us that blessed effect as was
either believed by some, or hoped for by all men: but as if God had answered
our importunity for a PARLIAMENT as he did the old Israelites for a KING in his
anger; we drive on with much more haste then good speed to the other extreme,
which portends no less Symptoms of ruin and destruction than the former. So
that having maturely considered what has proved destructive to this or other
Parliaments, we may the more easily avoid those Rocks upon which others have
split themselves, viz. 1. The venting of particular ends of Avarice and
Ambition in the public Cause. 2. Private Combinations or Chamber-Conventicles
to resolve be forehand what shall be done in the House. 3. Hindering the freedom
of speech by imprisonment of their Persons. 4. Denying information by the
humble way of Petitions from the County, as that most excellent Orthodox
Petition of our Brethren of Kent and of rejecting information of Letters to our
Knights and Burgesses. 5. The ready swallowing of informations and jealous
rumors against his Ma: styling them the malignant party and enemies to the
State which were only truly and consonably his friends. 6. The private if not
public mutinous rabble, which ill Spirit was ready at all times to be raised
by a whisper from any of those worthy Members, Emphatically so called, if not
exclusively, as if all Justice, Reformation and Government were only to be
expected from them. 7. The new unheard of State Law and Logic to style and
believe that a Parliament that is divided in it self, is severed from the King
the Head thereof: if they may be remedied (as we hope they are not past cure)
we shall rather desire to change some of our Physicians then Physic, there
being no better way, nor more necessary to preserve the health of a
Commonwealth than a well tempered Parliament. Wherefore we as faithful
Subjects to his Majesty, as freeborn Englishmen, do join in an unanimous
Resolution to maintain. 1. Protestant Religion. 2. The Kings just power. 3.
The Laws of the Subject. 4. The liberty of the Land.
For the first, The Protestant Religion; we cannot but with grief of heart
remember how it has been assaulted in the In-workes and skirts of it, the
Liturgy and decent Ceremonies established by Law; yea in the very body of it
the 39. Articles. In what a danger this Church of England has been, to be
overcome with Brownisme and Anabaptisme let all the world judge. For the
second, The just power of the King; God knows he has been so far unable
to defend that from violence, as it was Gods great goodness rather then his
own Power which secured, or rather preserved his Person from violence, What
their aim was, who to please the vulgar rabble would uphold and not punish
them for their insolences, as we fear and imagine for the present; so we
cannot but with horror and amazement doubt the Consequence.

Not can we conceal our joy of heart, or thanks to his Majesty's good
Subjects of the County of York, for endeavoring to secure his Person with a
Guard (being of much more value then many thousands of us) and putting him in a
posture of defense, which some have ignorantly or maliciously interposed by
suggesting it an intension of War against his Parliament, whereby it is plain
enough his Majesty's desires are only to secure himself and servants from
prodigious tumults and disorders as have endangered his sacred Person: Nor can
we blame him considering Sir John Hothams Act at Hull, and Sir Henry Ludlowes
Speech in Parliament.

For the two last, The Laws of the Land, and The Liberty of the Subject which
must not be separated, how have they been violated after by some of those who
were chosen to be Conservators of them, by imprisonment of men's Persons,
contrary to the Petition of Right? assessing of the Clergy without a Body of
Magna Charta; shuffling the Convocation into a Synod, or an Assembly, or
Conventicle, without the Choice, Consent or Election of the Clergy; as if they
were neither the Kings Subjects, nor Gods servants.

As we conceive our selves obliged by the Law of God, the Law of the Land, by
the Dictates of Natures reason to maintain all these; so by Gods grace
assisting us, we hope we shall not be ^errified or compelled to yield any
active obedience to any disioyned part of Parliament without the consent of the
whole (which we heartily desire may be united) or to any uncertain Debates,
Votes or Ordinances, that are not digested or settled into Laws; nay, which
seems to contradict former Laws, and yet are tendered to us with so much
earnestnes, as some dare hardly deny them with safety, or obey with Conscience.

Nor shall we ever yield our selves such Slaves, or so betray the liberty
purchased by our Forefathers blood, and bequeathed unto us as to suffer our
selves to be swayed by an Arbitrary Government whatsoever, nor stand with too
much contention of Spirit to cast off the yoke of one Tyranny to endure many
worse.

And seeing his Majesty is graciously pleased to maintain the true Protestant
Religion; His own just Power, the Laws of the Land, The Liberty of the
Subjects, and that these waters of Reformation, having been long stirred; we
want only the favor of his Princely Majesty to let us in and heal us: So we
do reciprocally declare that we conceive our selves bound to maintain him in
all the Premises with our Lives and Fortunes.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London for Tho: Jews. 1642.


