News from the New-JERUSALEM, Sent by Letters from several Parts, relating
some Hints, and Observations of that City, All conspiring in a Testimony that
renders it exceeding Glorious.

Revel. 21. 5. And he that sat upon the throne said, BEHOLD, I MAKE ALL
THINGS NEW. LONDON, Printed by G. D. for Giles Calvert, at the sign of the
Black-spread Eagle, at the West end of Paul's, 1649.

To the Christian Reader, and more especially to the Saints, that wait upon God
in the use of Forms.
Reader,
THou have here presented to thy view, a copy of certain Letters, written to
private friends, not at all intended for thy use: But since it is their fate to
fall into public hands; and since there are somethings in them well worth thy
notice and observation: A well-wisher of thine, for thy good, has thought fit
to usher them to thy hand, by writing one letter unto thee; the rather to
engage thee, by reading that which is thine own, to take a survey of the whole
parcel, that therein thou may behold, the breaking forth of God, and the
spirit that now breathes in many Saints, which seems to prophecy and promise,
that God is about to do some great and notable thing for his people, according
to their long expectations, and as an answer to their prayers.

But although God be breaking forth upon the world in a greater degree of light
and glory then former ages have seen: yet thou art to know that we are as yet
but in the twilight: we see only the dawnings of an approaching day; we are
at the utmost but upon the borders and confines of this glory; and therefore (
Reader) in thy examination of doctrines, and inquisition after truth, two
things would be carefully heeded: First, not to receive every thing for truth,
that comes abroad under that notion. Nor secondly to reject every thing that is
new to thee as error. Least thou take darkness for light, and light for
darkness. As thou would avoid falling into the gulf of error on one hand;
so beware thou dash not against the rock Christ on the other; for there may be
a dangerous miscarriage on either side.

This is most certain, that whenever God, the father of lights, begets and
brings forth any fresh discovery of light and truth in the world: the Devil,
the father of lies will transform himself into an Angel of light; and will
press upon the most conscientious * It is as least a very probable argument
that truth is rising and springing out of the earrh; when error and delusion
walk abroad under pretense of coming down from heaven.
Christians, his falsities and delusions, under such specious and plausible
colors, that will deceive (if it were possible) the very elect. And this he
will do diversely, by working upon a different subject.

First, in regard there is but a mixture of light and darkness, in the most
knowing Saints; he will take advantage by the remainder of darkness in them, to
make them instruments to promote error as well as truth: and the seed of
error falling into the soil of this dark principle may grow there for some
time, till the principle of light wholly overcome and expel this darkness.

But secondly, he does more usually make use of forward, formal professors,
and these he dare trust, though they hold forth the truth for a time, because
he knows when they fall off, and discover themselves, they will raise the
greatest scandal, and bring the greatest odium upon the truth; so that its no
safe rule, to judge of persons by their doctrines, nor of doctrines by the
persons, that brings them.

Therefore ( Reader) thou feast, what need thou have to harken to the Apostles
counsel; Try the spirits whether they be of God: least thou feed upon
Scorpions, and cast away the true bread; least thou abide in darkness, and see
not the brightness and glory of that day, that is near approaching.

Thou can not be ignorant, that the Scriptures, as well the old testament as
the new, bear witness of a glorious day that shall shine forth in the last
times, when the light of the Moon, shall be as the light of the Sun, and the
light of the Sun as the light of seven days, which as it shall be a glorious
day, so it shall be the joyfullest day that ever the Saints beheld, for it
shall be their wedding day; Then shall that voice of acclamation be heard, Let
us be glad and rejoice and give honor unto him, for the marriage of the Lamb
come, and his wife has made her self ready. To make the Lambs wife ready,
has been the great work of God in the world. How near we are come to this
time, I shall not undertake to determine, but much may be guessed, by Gods
preparations for the same, for almost six thousand years, and by his various
appearances, and graduall approaches unto his people from the beginning, to
this present time, of which take this brief experimental Narrative.

Though the Lord our God be one Lord; and has said of himself, I am alone,
and there is none besides me: yet in another sense he has said, That two are
better then one, and; It is not good the man should be alone; therefore this
One Onely-wise Being, for the setting forth of his own glory has greatly
delighted to multiply and bring forth himself in a world of variety and
distinction, that he might again gather up all things into himself, in the
most perfect and absolute union: Or in a larger naration take it thus; This one
God has branched and spread forth himself, in this great Fabric of heaven
and earth, furnished and garnished the same with infinite variety of his works,
and creatures, and then made man, the topp of this creation: And for the
special favor he bare unto man, whom he had made after his own likeness, he
bestowed upon him the dominion and Lordship of this lower world, or of the
whole earth, and in the midst or chiefest place thereof, planted a paradise, or
garden of pleasure, and placed the man therein; where he conversed with his
maker, in the highest enjoyment of God in the creatures: But God leaving open a
posterne door, (the man being deceived by the Serpent) sin entered into the
world, and drew after it at the heels, all sorts of misery, confusion, death
and bondage, and brought upon the whole creation ten thousand distempers, and
distractions, fractions, and divisions, and especially upon man the cause
hereof, who now became nothing else but a perfect map of misery; but God, to
heal and cure all this, immediately threw open the broad gate of glory, and
sent forth his beloved Son, that by his death and sufferings, he might
restore all things into a blessed estate, redeem the world out of bondage,
reduce all things to a sweet harmony and agreement, reconcile all things to
himself both in heaven and in earth, and gather up all things (thus scattered
abroad) into a perfect agreement, and the nearest union, with himself; Col. 1.
20. And all this by carrying on a marriage, betwixt himself and his creature
man; And so the Lord of heaven and earth (in a condescension to the creatures
weakness) becomes a suter to the lowest and vilest earth, which he has
transacted, by certain steps and gradations, upon this account.

This, now unhappy creature man, through the enmity of his mind, arising from
the guilt of his disobedience, looking upon God as an enemy, says unto him,
Depart from me, I desire not the knowledge of thy ways; But God being resolved
not to loose his creature, because he had set his heart upon him, with an
intent to marry him to himself; and knowing that man in his apostate
condition, was not able to dwell with devouring fire, and everlasting burnings,
saw it needful to set up certain vailes and partitions betwixt himself, and
his creature, that he might treat with him at a distance, and break down
those partitions one after another, and so make nearer and nearer approaches
toward his beloved, as he should enure her, and train her up by degrees, to
more strength and maturity.

Now the steps and stages by which God makes toward his beloved, are those
several transactions or dispensations, wherein God from the beginning, and
from time to time has appeared unto her; by which, as by certain medium's,
under and below himself, he has administered to gain the affections of this coy
creature; To this purpose, in every address he makes toward her, he appears
clad in a new suit of apparel, such as he knew would best suit with every age
and measure, of her stature.

1. Gods first setting forth in this expedition, you have upon record in the
beginning of Genesis. The seed of the woman, shall break the Serpents head.
Here God keeps himself at a great distance, as if he would but barely
propound his business, or only publish his intention abroad to the world; as
if he would as yet be rather heard then seen, and heard only to whisper and
murmr out his mind, in soft and inarticulate sounds, rather then in express
and distinct voice and language; yet hereby he gains a faint, weak, implicit
consent, for by this were the Patriarcks saved; This was the first dispensation.

2. The next step God takes, is a journey to Mount Sinai, where he appointed a
solemn meeting to treat with his beloved; Here God keeps himself still at a
great distance, and is feign to make use of Moses, (a friend to both parties)
as a meet Mediator between them; Here God drew up an agreement of his own hand
writing, digested into ten Articles, offered it to the consideration of his
beloved, and was afterward consented to by each party; but poor man (or poor
woman rather) was so scared and affrighted with Gods attendants, of thunders,
and lightnings, and a thick cloud, the voice of a trumpet exceeding loud, and
smoke, and fire, and an earthquake; that the consent on the woman's part,
proceeded rather from fear, then from any great love. This was indeed an hard
and harsh dispensation, but such as divine wisdom had appointed and as suited
with his design.

3. After this God kept his beloved company forty years in the wilderness,
in a pillar of cloud, and a pillar of fire: And the more to allure her in this
wilderness, he pitched a tent, and within that (for better accommodation) he
built a tarbernacle, to treat further with his beloved; Here God appointed more
solemn and frequent meetings, that his beloved might get some further
knowledge of him; In this tabernacle God showed his beloved an imperfect, dim,
shadow of his own image or picture, that so she might be able to make some
guess of his person and comely proportion; but a clearer view of himself as
yet he gave her not, in regard of her tender sight which could not behold
majesty; therefore God held forth himself unto her in certain dark,
shaddowie representatations, as sacrifices, ceremonies, etc.

4. The next journey God undertakes, was to Mount Sion, where he gave his
beloved a prooffe and experiment of his fidelity, in giving her a rest and
settled habitation, in a land fl^wing with milk and honey, after her long and
tedious travail, according to an ancient promise, made to her ancestors; and
that he might acquaint her yet more with himself, and put the greater state
upon his negotiation, he built here for his beloved a magnificent and
beautiful palace: In this palace, God presented unto his beloved a perfect
shadow of his own image that she might be able to make so^e better judgment of
his person, feature and stature; Here God also appeared to his beloved in the
same kind of representatons as before, but these more irradiated, and
illuminated by a nearer approach of his glorious and divine presence.

And while God kept his residence in this palace, the more to draw on the
affections of his beloved, he would sometimes knock at her chamber door, and
other whiles look through the lettice upon her; but his naked presence, was an
object yet too strong for her sight.

5. After this, God, to move the more effectually in his suite, and a little to
stir the affections and move the bowels of his beloved, He gets on himself
a suit of her own apparel, clothes himself with her own flesh, takes upon
himself her own nature; and (coming thus near her) caught her by guile; Now
the partition wall that stood betwixt them, is broken down, the thick veil of
ceremonies is rent ass^nder; the old representatives are laid aside as of no
longer use. Now was unfolded part of the great mystery of godliness, God
manifest in the flesh, of Emmanuell or God with us. Here God presents unto his
beloved the lively picture, the express image and character of his own person;
as great Princes when they fetch them wives from remote and foreign parts,
are wont to woe by their Agents and Ambassadors, and to represent themselves
to their Ladies, by their own pictures; Hereupon his beloved gives her consent;
and now both parties are agreed.

But between all these woing passages and expressions of love on Gods part; O
how many hard hearted denyals? How many uncivil repulses? How many unmannerly
revoltings and startings back? How much uncertainty and inconstancy, falsenesse
and persidiousnesse, does God meet withal on the woman's part? Never did the
wild Asses Colt, that is brought forth and bred in the wilderness, discover so
much peevishness and perverseness; Insomuch that God (who was resolved to
gain her by fair means or by foul) was saine to chastise her with 430,
years bondage in Egypt; to nurture her (by leading her about) forty years,
in a vast, howling wilderness; and (for her fornications and whoredoms after
all this) to imprison, manacle, and fetter her, by seaventy years captivity in
Babylon; But notwithstanding all this, Gods affection being still the same, he
held fast his purpose and resolution, to prosecute his suit to the utmost, and
to make this untoward woman, a meet help for himself, though it should cost
him the life and blood of his Son and heir, which now he had already in part
performed.

6. Therefore God, (who well knew the mutability and inconstancy of flesh and
blood) that he might at last come within his beloved, and at one blow strike
the match dead, or rather put so much life into it as might secure it from all
hazard of revocation and repenting; He secretly winds and insinuates himself
into her heart; conveies his own spirit into her inward parts; makes her
partaker of his own divine nature; so that now they are not only one flesh,
but one spirit; Now there is but one heart and soul betwixt them; God has so
gotten into her heart, that he can boldly talk to her, as to his wife, and
snee to him, as to her husband. Now she can say, My well beloved is mine, and I
am his; nothing is wanting to complete this marriage but the spouses making her
self ready. Thus you see Gods graduall proceeding in this undertaking, and how
near the business is brought to a final conclusion.

And because there remains now but a veil or two more, that keeps up a
distance betwixt God and his Spouse, which being removed, the union would be
entire and absolute; therefore he resolves forth with to break through these
also; and inasmuch as God (or God-Man) has already uncloathed himself of
natural flesh (of which the rending of the veil of the Temple was a figure)
by suffering it to be crucified that he might enter into spirit, or return
into the highest glory of the Father.

7. So the Saints or mystical body, in conformity unto Christ the head, do
uncloath themselves of the rags of corrupt and sinful flesh, by suffering it
to be crucified, that the divine nature, or image of God may shine forth in the
humane, till God discover his dwelling in the flesh of the Saints, as he dwelt
in the flesh of Christ, and afterward this flesh be taken up into spirit.

8. In order whereunto God has so far advanced that he is pulling down the
partitions that remain. He is tearing the veil, not only of the natural,
but of the mystical flesh of Christ, or that whole administration of Christ,
consisting in forms and ordinances.

9 Yea, God is not only taking down this tabernacle of the mystical flesh of
Christ, but he is destroying, the mystical or spiritual flesh of the Saints
(if I may so call it) standing in their own righteousness; that good
persuasion they have had of themselves, raised up and built upon their
qualifications, religious duties and performances. The reading of this veil,
will rend the heart, and the caul of the liver of many Saints, because most of
their comfort has sprung from this root; most of their evidence has been
laid upon this foundation: This must needs startle them to have their heaven,
their evidence for heaven thus shaken; and this (by comparing together Heb. 12.
26, 27. and 2 Pet. 3 13.) I conceive will be the ultimate and final
accomplishment of that place in Haggai, 2. chap. 6. I will shake the heavens
and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land, and I will shake all nations, and
the desire of all nations shall come. This great work has God begun to take
in hand; To shake the old heaven and earth, and to make new; To destroy our own
righteousness, and instead thereof to bring forth Christ in spirit, who is the
Lord our righteousness; and how does the devil rage and strive by his
stratagems on all hands to make this child an abortive? Without doubt God is
removing out of fleshly administrations, and calling upon his people to come up
and serve him in that which is more spiritual; God is withdrawing from forms,
that he may draw his people after him into spirit and power.

Nor is this intended to take those off from forms, that enjoy Gods presence
in them; but to give an account of those that walk not informs, and to call
those higher then forms, from whom God is apparently departed in forms; for
there are diverse degrees and measures of christians; Some find God (it may be)
in every ordinance; others find him in none at all; some enjoy his presence in
one public ordinance and not in another; others God meets in their private
duties, but not in the public; Let every Saint abide in the station where God
sets him, till he say unto him, come up hither: And why should thou wonder
at this? Has it not been the sad complaint of many serious christians, for
these many years, that ordinances have been barren to them, and themselves
barren in the use of them? What should the meaning of this be, but that God
calls upon such to look out for higher discoveries of himself, then attend
those old ways?

This thing many poor souls have been ignorant off, and therefore have layne
down under the burden of grief and sorrow, as if God had utterly forsaken them.

It is not denied, but that as there may be the form of godliness without
the power; so the form and power may both stand together; but there is a time
when God will go forth, out of form into power, out of flesh into spirit; out
of formal and fleshly administrations into that which is more spiritual.

These forms (or this mystical flesh of Christ) have been as Jonahs gourd,
under which the Saints have long reposed themselves, enjoyed much sweet shelter
and shadow, and therefore cannot bear the parting with them, neither in
themselves nor others; but now if God upon design, to carry up his people to
more spirituallity, has prepared a worm at the root of this gourd purposely
to kill and dry it up, do thou well to be angry Jonah? Yes (thou will say) I
do well to be angry to the death, for some have not only left off
ordinances, but preach them down and speak contemptibly of them. Answer,
Blame not all that have left them off, for some may have done it upon a right
ground; As for those that speak contemptible of them I excuse them uot at all;
but this I say, If there be a worm at their root and they must needs dye,
then (as Calvin once said of the Ceremonies of old, so say I of those) Let them
have an honorable burial; As the weak Saints yet under forms would not be
despised by those above them, so let them not be harsh accusers of those that
see their liberty and stand fast in it; This was the Apostles rule to preserve
peace and love, Romans 14. between dissenting brethren; For further satisfaction
in this Point, I refer theee to the 28. Letter.

Christ was three days in the grave, and then rose out of it again; Christ
has been in forms; to some he is still, to others he is risen out of forms;
Tell me, would thou have these seek Christ in the Sepulcher, in forms, when
they see he is risen, and perhaps have been told by an Angel, he is not here,
he is risen? Be not weaker then the weak disciples, who hearing their Lord was
risen, departed from the sepulcher; after which it was not long that they heard
he was risen, by some that had seen him; nor long after that again, that he
appeared unto them, and raised up their faith which was sinking and ready to
dye. What do thou mean (poor Saint) that with Mary lie puling and weeping
at the sepulcher, when as thy Savionr is risen? Why do thou seek the living
among the dead? Thou see how many dispensations God has passed through
(besides other intervening, less remarkable appearances, which, have been
omitted;) God was in the flesh of Ghrist; but that having done its office, he
laid it aside; God is entered upon a dispensation of spirit, and calls upon his
psouse to follow him; but she is so fallen in love with this suit of old
clothes, this garment of flesh, that she is loath to lay it aside, as if she
meant to be married in it* But tell me, would thou tie God always to one
dispensation? or if thou caust not, but that he will advance higher till he
come to the highest, will thou tarry behind him, and dwell always in the same
place? Do thou not know that the consummation of Gods marriage with thee, is
the completing of thine own happiness? And do thou not see that God is
gone before thee? Do thou not hear him calling thee, come up hither? If God
be gone before, why do linger and laggar behind? Do thou stand still and
please thy self with beholding thy present seize? or do thou look back
and admire thy former good work? Remember what Paul says was his practice;
forgetting those things that are behind, and reacoing forth to those things
that are before, I press toward the mark etc. Call to mind also Peter's
admonition, Looking for, and hastening unto the coming of the day of God, etc.

God forbid, that thou should limit the holy one of Israel; that thou
should tie and bind down God to any form or administration, longer then
will serve his own design: And God forbid, that thou should stop and stay
in a dispensation, after thou find he is departed from it.

God took up dispensations only to serve a turn; to bring about his design of
making his creature happy, by its union with himself; The finishing and laying
down of dispensations, is the perfecting and finishing of the creatures
happiness, and the introducing of that glorious day before hinted; which will
be by the arising of the Sun of Righteousness, not in one Horizon of the
world only, but throughout the whole earth and heaven; which day of the Lord,
as it should be to us the most desirable thing in the worle, so it should seem
to be at hand, and to stand knocking at our doors; by some glimpses of glory
that appear already, and particularly by those rays and beams of light, that
stream forth in these ensuing letters.

In some of these Letters, thou shall hear the stammerings and lispings of
children, rather then a pure language or perfect speaking; but let not that
offend thee: If thou art a Father of children, a thousand to one, thou art not
so morose and austere, but thou have taken delight to hear thy children
prattle, though they spoke but half words, and broken sentences; and why should
it trouble thee to hear thy brethren, the children of thine, and their heavenly
Father express themselves in such language as they are able: Is is not said,
Out of the mouth of Babes and sucklings, thou have ordained strength; or, thou
have perfected praise?

In others of these Letters, perhaps thou may meet with some things that may
be paradoxes and hard sayings to thee, which thou can not bear; but sit not
in judgment to condemn this neither, as if thou would take upon thee to
know all things: suspend, censure, till thou have a clearer light (of which
surely thou art not out of hope): perhaps that day may not be far from thee,
wherein thou shall speak and understand harder sayings, and higher mysteries,
then thou shall meet withal in these Letters.

Nor yet do I undertake to justify all that is written in them; It Is yet but
the dawning of the day; The clear est principle (for ought I know) has a
mixture of earth and darkness in it; The light is yet neither clear nor dark;
it is neither night nor day, but in the evening time it shall be light, Zach 14.
6, 7. And then it is possible an higher appearance in the same persons that
wrote these Letters, may judge some things in them to the fire, as hey and
stubble.

To conclude, thou shall find one letter among the rest, written by a precious
Soul, walking in darkness and having no light; wrapped up and mantled in a
black night of trouble and dejection of Spirit: Let this Letter (that may seem
not to suit with his fellows) serve as sharp sauce, with sweet meat, to give
a better relish to the rest: Doubtless, the Lord has a gracious design upon
this good soul, and has but withdrawn himself for a little moment, that
witheverlasting mercies he may embrace it; that he may discover himself unto
this soul, to be nothing but light and love, and bring forth himself in this
smoking flack, in an higher and brighter flame of light and glory, in a more
glorious appearance then ever: And when God shall bring this to pass, if thou
please, in the mean time, to taste of his tears, peradventure when he reaps
his harvest, thou may be made partaker of his joy.

September. 24. 1649. A wel-wisher of thine, and of the truth, as it is in Jesus.
S. P. D.

Errata.
PAge 20. line 16. dele of. page 21. lin. 16. for new, read more. page 23. lin.
14. read with spiritvall. p. 38. l. 10. r. consider. l. 13. r. the creature. l.
16. r. as with a creator. l 17. r. as with a Father. p. 40. l. 3. r. billowing.
l. 22. f. does, r. were. p. 41. l. 1. r. a greater then whom. p. 41. l. 17. f
meanest, r. nearest. l. 24. r. was higher. p. 42. l. 12. r. son. p. 5^. l. 3.
f. lo, r. to. p. 54. l. 5. r. the best. p. 56. l. 19. and p. 57. l. 2. r.
spirits. p. 58. l. 26. r. swords. p. 60. l. 10. r. overrunne. p. 61. l. 22. r.
not moved. l. 24. r. scattering. p. 62. l. 7. r. accomp^ni^s. l. 22. r. having.
p. 63. l. 9. r. And this a. l. 18. r. who ripe for. p. 66. l. 3. f. our, r.
one. l. 14. r. is known. p. 67. l. 3. r. raisers of. l. 5. r. near. p. 91. l.
9. r. onenes. p. 105. l. 18. r. not imagined. p. 145. l. 28. r. external. p.
146. l. 19. f. sure, r. free. p. 149. l. 18. r. the box is in your heart. p.
145. l. 6. r. this tabernacle. p. 155. l. 24. f. torn, r to me.

News from the New- Jerusalem, sent by Letters from several Parts, etc.
1. Letter.
Dear Sir,
I Have received your loving Letter, and therewith Mrs. M. kind token, which
before my opening, I had thought had been some Book: Her remembrance of me
does much refresh me, and she is made therein an instrument of making me
partaker of much of the love and goodness of God. I had been in some sad (but
yet withal sweet) thoughts but just before they came o me; when they came, I
said, these are to wipe away tears from mine eyes, and that love that sent
them assuredly will. Sir I pray you remember me to her, and thank her, and if
I may come with good company to her, I shall be glad to give her a visit when I
come to London, that is, with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, for
there is our fellowship, without whom it is a dry feast and a fruitless visit;
nevertheless I shall (I trust) be willing to be seen of her barren, or as I
am, be it however; for we neither stand nor fall to our present abillities or
actings.

Sir, For your desire of something to be written touching the first and second
appearance of Christ, I wish I were but fresh to give you my thoughts I had
thereof this morning; but after twice preaching this day, and now after supper
I am more disposed to sleep then write: Your inquiry is after two things, the
difference between them, and the trasition or passing over of Christians from
the one to the other; For the first, It shall only acquaint you with some
places of scripture which to me do seem to hold forth the difference between
these two, and they are 1 Pet. 1. 5, 11, 13. Romans 6. 5. Heb. 9. 28. by which
scriptures it may appear, that the first appearance of Christ is, unto Faith;
The second is, unto Salvation; In the first he is made our sin; his second is
without sin; our fellowship with him in the first is called, Planting in the
likeness of his death; our fellowship with him in the latter is called,
Planting in the likeness of his resurrection. The first is called sufferings,
the sufferings of Christ, ver. 11. of that place in Peter; as if it contained
and were made up of nothing else; The other is called, the glory that should
follow. And in that chapter it may appear (at least it does so to me at
present) that the Christians then were chiefly acquainted with the promise and
expectation of it to come, when Peter wrote this; and indeed the glory of the
first appearance of Christ was yet very bright, for it was to have its time and
season; as it has, through all ages since and in this present age even with
those on whom his second appearance is dawned: But if you say. All these are
but external carracters and distinctions of those two appearrnces, but what is
the formal and intrinsecall difference between them? I shall give you my
apprehension thereof in brief thus.

The first appearance of Christ, is his appearance in flesh, without us,
bearing our sin, and fulfilling all legal righteousness, and thereby
becoming the object and means of faith to us, whereby to draw near to God
unto reconciliation; And faith acting upon this discovery of God in Christ,
apprehending his love through that ministration, was (I conceive) that that
brought in the supplies of all our hope and comfort from time to time, and
nourished all grace and holiness in our hearts, till the arising of this day
Star in us, becoming our spiritual righteousness, and sufficiency for all
things, the end of our faith, and our salvation it self in the spirit.

That which makes this the less known, and the more hard to be known, is
because there are degrees in it, and that which is affirmed of one degree of it
(suppose a higher degree) is not found in a lower degree, and so we know it not
when it is in us and among us, because we find it not in such an eminent
degree; As for example, we see not yet all enemies put under us; and that
glorious redemption of the body, we yet understand not, etc. for all these
things are but parts and appendices to the second appearance of Christ; but all
these wait only for the acknowledgement of this day, this second appearance,
Christ in us, the day Star risen in our hearts; for as the power and
privilege of becoming sons, followed upon the receiving and acknowledging
of his first appearance; so shall all the privileges annexed to his second
appearance, be made good to us upon the acknowledgement thereof, when it shall
be proclaimed within us, and when it shall discover it self upon us; and as
Christ says to the woman of Samaria, If thou knew the gift of God, and who
it is that says unto thee, give me water to drink, thou would have asked of
him, and he would have given thee living water: So when we shall be
acquainted what a mighty one dwells in us, we shall find our selves to be at
the end of our faith, and in the possession of all salvation: For He is the
resurrection and the life; He is redemption; and the Kingdom of God lies not
in, nor is brought on, by any outward circumstances; The kingdom of God is
within you; It comes not with observation; so that from the premises I am bold
to pronounce, that Christ being revealed in spirit, in many, The second
appearance of Christ is dawned upon the world, and it is amongst us though we
know it not, or scarcely know it; The redemption of the body is amongst us, and
all things begin to be new, and to have a new face and appearance to us, so
far forth as we are changed and spirituallized; Nor need this be strange, That
the second appearance should lurk and be a stranger in the world, a while,
any more then his first appearance, which was concealed for thirty years and
scarce taken notice off, save by Herod, when he murdered the Infants; Only you
may say, that this is more in glory! but consider, the glory is inward, and so
is the appearance, and therefore the less subject to the notice of others, and
yet it is proclaimed through the world, under the voice of Heresy, Blasphemy,
Antichrist, the great Antichrist, etc. Does not the spirit say. The day of the
Lord shall so come as a Theifi in the night? and is it not so come on most
Professors? insomuch that they on whom it is come, scarce know it, or receive
it; And shall that which is prophesied of, as a sign of it, become a siumbling
block in its way? Behol a I come as a Theife, says Christ; Christ is come as a
theife, and we say it is not He; He would be known of his coming if it were,
Ye fools and blind, ye know not the Scriptures, etc. This coming of his,
the primitive times had it (and especially some among them as Paul who was
called extraordinarily by Christ revealed in him; and John that was ravished in
spirit, and saw the Lords day) as Abraham, Isaac and Jacob had the promised
land they were sojourners in; but there, was a long bondage in Egypt to be
undergone by their seed ere they came to it, whereunto answers our long
captivity under Antichrist; but the time draws near, we shall shortly hear
that voice, Arise, shine, for thy light is come, the glory of the Lord is risen
upon thee; and this second appearance, this day star will make the stars of
the night to disappeare, or the glory of the first appearance to go down,
which is all that I shall say now to the second part of your inquiry; As this
increases, the other will decrease; no other period of it do I know; for we
are all brought forth first under the law, and so come to know Christ after the
flesh, and reap the fruit and comfort of his first appearance, ere we know him
in us as salvation and glory; but whether the Lord will always observe this
method, I cannot say, rather I think he will not, for it is said, we shall not
all dye, but shall be changed; we shall not all pass under forms, be trained
up under the law, but shall immediately be changed. Christ's appearance to us is
the rule of all walking and conversation; His appearance being known to us
only in the flesh, as a Reconciler, a Minister of circumcision, is the reason
of our walking in forms; when he appears to us nakedly in spirit, as being
all to us and in us himself immediately, and alone, then he delivers us into a
glorious liberty above all outward forms.

In that place in Peter that speaks of the fuflerings of Christ, and that
glory that should follow, I may seem strange to you to understand that
following glory of the body as I do, but bear with me therein, I do so
understand it of the glorious appearances of Christ in his in spirit; nor can I
give you my reasons for it now.

What you write of the difficulty of getting out of the flesh of Christ, and
the letter of Scripture: I wonder not at, seeing we never have gotten in,
without a divine power and life; and therefore to get through unto the holiest,
without the same Almighty power, is impossible.

It is no little advance after we are brought in, to look out further and
higher; till which time, the witnesses lie dead in us in the streets, and then
that voice has been heard, Come up hither; and we are ascending or ascended,
whilst we are making up in the Lord; There is the Lord in us ascending, who
came down, and none else can ascend but he.

As for that I wrote concerning the appearance of Christ and his coming spoken
off in Scripture, that I know no other coming of Christ to judgment, but his
spiritual appearance, or appearance in spirit (for as for the flesh, that has
done its work) and therefore is he said, to come in the glory of his Father,
and of his holy Angels; also in flaming fire with his mighty Angels, which is
spiritual. That his coming is nothing but his appearing; and that all flesh
is a veil upon him, from under which he is coming, and casting it off, making
his arm bare; That the bodies of all raised, shall be spiritual, like unto
his; which is also held forth in that expression of the Apostle, 2 Thess^ ^.
The Spirit of his mouth, and the brightness of his coming, which amounts to a
spiritual appearance and manifestation. That this coming, and judgment is
graduall, and has beenon foot from the beginning of the world, and still goes
on, and will be completed in due time. That the judgment Day which we expect,
is nothing else, but the perfect and universal Declaration of his
righteousness; his general and full manifestation unto all by his rising up in
all, who is the head and root of all, and making all spiritual; for the
Kingdom of God is within you: there rises up this judgment suddenly upon the
world, by which you might understand, how I take that place in the Corinths
Till he come; namely in spirit, when as said, I know no other appearance of his
to be but in spirit: That he is entered into spirit, and therefore we cannot
think he will be perfected in the flesh (for his Kingdom comes not by
observation): So I think, and speak, and write still: Though I have known
Christ after the flesh, yet hence forth know I him no more. God has manifested
his love and power in that man Christ, and in that flesh which he took, and
showed what he will do in all the Elect, by a spirit of power and love,
Redeem, Save, Kill, Quicken, Raise, Glorify; and this spirit and power of God
appearing in the Elect, is the appearing of Jesus Christ in them, both in his
weakness and in his power,; in his Cradle, Cross, Grave, and in heavenly
places, at the right hand of the Father in his full glory. This is the Kingdom
of God that comes not by observation: This is, Christ is us, the hops of glory;
who shall come by degrees and appear to be (the) glory: He is our life hid, and
he is dead in us, and we in him, who shall appear and bring us forth with him
in glory, being our Head, Root, the quickening Spirit, and which does not deny a
personal appearance of Jesus Christ the Son of man, consisting of soul and
body, to and with the Saints, when he is perfectly formed in them; and what can
this appearance be but spiritual, in the glory of the Father, and of the holy
Angels, according as the hodyes, the vile bodies of all the Saints shall be in
the resurrection, where it rises a spiritual body, though sown a natural
body; and then an end of flesh, and blood, and corruption; so far the
Scripture leads us, and we must not be intruders into these things, whilst
God opens not the door unto us: We are the Sons of God, but it does not
yet appear what we shall be; In that appearance shall be seen, the sutablenesse
of the Saints unto him: Lo I and the children whom God has given me! and then
shall be eternal union betwixt God and Christ, and Christ and the Saints, yet
with distinction and subordination: The head, the body, the root, and the
branches, the husband and the wife: Christ in God, and the Saints in Christ,
and so in the Father; one in another, and perfect in one. Thus I have given you
the brief, yet full copy of what is written in me, so far as I can read, in
way of answer to your queries; and if you shall put me to read it over again,
and show me any mistakes; you shall do me no displeasure. As God opens
himself in us, so we discover these things, and I shall be ready to discover
what is discovered, though I discover my mistakes with all: for we are very
unlearned in reading what the spirit has written in us, till it come in a
large letter, as it will do, that we may read it running.

This is all I have liberty to say at prefent,
Salute from me all our friends, with you.
2. Letter.
My dear friend,
IN whom I have rejoiced; I hold my self bound to acquaint you with the
wonderful dealings of my God with me: It is so, that I am called into
judgment, and the Books are opened, and the book of life is opened, and I am
judged according to all things which are written in the books: Yet neither of
these books is that Bible-book which we have hugged so long, as our only
happiness; I would not hoar now be mistaken: for I do not, say this;
judgment is not spoken off in the Bible, neither those bo^ks out of which I am
judged; for that they are, both of them: and yet I say, that the Bible in the
letter of it, as it is bound up there, is not the book: I would not for a world
take away any thing from the Bible, or any of the excellency of that which is
therein written; but I would have it set in the right place: I would not have
it taken for God himself, and yet God is in it, and the letter of it is a very
sweet manifestation of God, but it is not God; though God (I say) be manifested
in this flesh: But though we have known things after the flesh; yet
henceforth we will know them so no more: for indeed, except we come through
the flesh, which is the vail, we cannot enter into the holiest: for the outward
Court is given to the Gentiles, and it shall not be measured: we all desire
and strive to enter into rest, the Lord give us hearts therefore, that we fail
not, because of unbelief: But indeed our lives and also our spirits, are so
full of prejudicate opinions, that we are apt to think the worst of every
thing; whereas if we were the children of God, and like our Father; we then
should live in God, which is love: yea, we should then be made one with this
love. Certainly, we may fear, that those Children are basely begotten, that
do not in any way resemble their Father. Dear friend, such a like generation
have we begotten amongst us, for if we were like our Father, we then should
hope all things, believe all things; think no evil, not be lifted up in our
selves, but think of every one better then of our selves: But though the seed
of the Serpent be sown amongst us, yet I say again, I would not be mistaken
by you, for I am not against the use of the Bible, for I see a true sweet,
lovely spirit in the writings of it: though yet I would have you know, that I
dare not justify all things as they lie in the letter of it; not because the
truth is not in it, but because of the abuse of that truth by the false
translation of it: for every one when he translates a Copy, writes it as he
thinks fit, and so puts in and leaves out according to his conceptions; and we
all are not ignorant what hands these coppies have come through; I beseech you
therefore to wait upon that one spirit which is in you, he it is that shall
lead you into all truth, and I am sure that when God has written his own truth
within you; then you will be able (as well as the Apostles) to write a Bible or
any book else without you; I am very confident, did the Apostles live in our
days, they would be exceedingly grieved to see us appropriate the spirit only
to them, when indeed the spirit cannot be confined, for it is God himself; and
this God is in you, and with you, though you know it not so well as I could
wish you did; Let us therefore leave off all our appropriations and
distinctions, and then do you tell me, what you find but God; we have been
apt indeed to say, Lo, hear he is, and there he is; but this is a lie, for he
is every where, and he is not any where, as confined or distinct from himself:
I beseech you therefore in the bowels of mercy, that you be careful what you
do.

I have one thing to acquaint you with, which indeed was the cause of my
present writing, and its this: That seeing (as I have told you) the great day
of the Lord is come upon me; and every thing is brought into judgment. I
cannot but mind you of one thing which past betwixt us, and it was this; you
told me once of your visiting a maid, which said, that she lived in heaven, and
above the Bible, even in God, and by the Revelations of his own spirit, which
much stumbled both you and me: Now I am come to tell you that this maid is
risen in me, and that I know now what she meant, being by the wonderful goodness
of my God, taken in to the same life my self, and it is but lately accomplished
upon my soul: She meant therefore above the letter of that word in the Bible;
that indeed, was dead too her, but she lived, in the spirit and life of it,
which was, and is, in God himself: and this is the life which we all have
groaned after; and yet (when God comes to take us out of those graves of sin,
and self apropriations; and to loose those Chains and Bonds which we have (in
our darkness and ignorance) been brought into by distinctions) we are afraid
of him; and not only, like Mary, take him for the Gardner; but we are even
afraid, that it is Satan himself: transformed (as we call it) into an Angel of
light, when indeed, that is the very Satan that tells us so: though he sets
before us a seeming good; but we are not ignorant of his wiles: This was the
Apple which he deceived our Mother Eve withal, even this seeming good, and
has ever since caused us to surfeit with it: even to take things that are not,
for what they are in truth: therefore take notice by the way, that those things
are not, that seem to be; or visibly do appear to our sight, but the things
that are invisible, and cannot appear to our fleshly sight, those are the
things in truth: and therefore take notice of this, that all this outward frame
of things which does appear to our fleshly sight, is but a resemblance, or a
figure of him which is invisible, and cannot be seen but with a pure spiritual
sight; I speak all this, for your and others sakes; which yet stick in the
flesh of Christ: For I bless my God, I am got through it, even within the
veil; and I see him who is invisible with the eyes of my spirit; and
certainly, I had these visible eyes given me as a sign or a shadow of the
substance: Blessed therefore be the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which has
not suffered me to stick in any thing below himself; but has brought me
through all the wiles and cunning deceits of Satan, and has at length centured
me in himself, and has caused me to sit down and rest in his own bosom: Let
therefore our heavenly Father be glorified, for this his great goodness toward
the Sons of men

But I have here digressed, I come again therefore to tell you concerning this
thing, that when the great day of judgment was upon me; this was one thing and
a very great thing, for which I was judged of by the Lord, even that I had
judged or past sentence upon this precious soul before the time, for the Lord
of all men was at hand, and I should have left all judgment unto him, but I was
base and unworthy, and I judged those things which I knew not: Blessed be the
Lord which has not everlastingly cut me off for it; but has accepted a
ransom in his beloved Jesus; in Emanuel, God with us: that is, in himself,
even in the bowels of his own love, manifested through flesh: Now because it
has been (as I have told you, so heavy a thing upon me, I could not but
acquaint you) as a forewarning, least you also should come into the same
condition of torment by the like occasion; and also that I might take shame to
my self for my baseness and envy at Gods people: Now that which I say, is the
same with what I have already said; that this Saint with many others, are risen
and come into my soul, accompanying my Savior, and therefore if you see her,
I should desire you to acquaint her with it, and show her this paper that she
may see, how I have suffered for my persecuting of her: but let her know, that
now I am one in the body, with her; though I confess I have been exceeding
vile and base: and when any have been speaking of move light, or move
spiritual enjoyments then I had, I would bid them be careful and consider
what they did, and I would bring that maid for an example to them, that they
might see whereto she was come, even, said I, to destroy all; when indeed and
in truth (as far as I can see now) she was come to the enjoyment of all;
this was the persecuting spirit I was then of: nay dear friend I have not
wondered since at her expressions, which I heard you say she used; that was,
why are you (says she) come to persecute me; you know that we both laughed
at her and said, was this the spirit that was upon her; but since I have
considered it, and it was true enough; for flesh must needs persecute the
spirit, and we being flesh came indeed to persecure her; therefore, it was a
true spirit of revelation that was upon her; though she could not but believe
our words, when we profess to the contrary; but I confess, I did not see you
so apt to judge her as my self; and therefore it is just that I should suffer
in it, and you be forewarned from it, for I did as much as in me lay, strive
to behead her, and lay her dead in the affections of my friends, and all this
was even for the testimony that she bare of her Savior; and therefore I
cannot think that the sword must depart from my house, but that I must be
slain in others affectiors, even as others have been slain in mine: I cannot
pass by one thing considerable in it, and that was this, I do well remember
that even whilst I spoke against her, I was warned from within, that I should
take heed what I did; and I could never speak of her, but I should be smitten
for it, and yet I hearkened not, but rushed into sin, as the Horse into the
battle; and therefore I am willing now to take shame to my self, and have
thus largely written this to you, that you might communicate it to whom you
please, for indeed the goodness of the Lord has so overcome me, and the glory
of my God is so risen upon me, that I care not, if all the world know my
miscarriages, I did not think to write so large to you, but my God so fills me,
as I cannot tell how to leave; if you understand not my language, I pray let
Mr. G. C. help you, I question not but he may give you a sight in it, to whom
present my dear respects; also to all the rest of my dear friends, tell them I
am one in the spirit with them, and that I would have them careful of judging;
the good Lord reward you spiritual consolations, for all your labor of love
to me in (...).

I am your exceeding, loving, and as God shall make me, your faithful friend
to serve you.

3. Letter.
Christian friend,
OUr loving Father has comforted me by your Letter; I exceedingly rejoice in
your condition, I see his very great power magnified in you, to make you thus
willing to be at his dispose: Its no small matter for a soul to deny it self.
We have been a long time talking of self-denial, because the letter of the
Scriture has sweetly spoken of it; but truly we have not known what it is,
from the indwelling of truth in us: I am sure, thus much I find, that it must
be the death of the whole first man, that so the second man may be established
in righteousness; and truly, it is the mighty power of God must pass upon us, to
raise us up to live thus in himself. I could willingly open to you, how I was
brought (in that measure that I am) into this life: It was by the sight or
vision of God himself. For as I was one day carried forth by him to speak some
thing to another, as he spoke in me; I had this wonderful Vision that
confounded me, and threw me to the ground before it, for it was no less then
infiniteness it self that beheld me, and at last made me to behold it: but
this sight of God did so astonish me, it destroyed and wrought such an utter
death to my self, and to every thing below or besides him, (I mean things that
appear to be;) that truly I may say, I had no spirit of a man left in me; but I
sat before him as a mere passive appearance. Then I felt the spirit of life
from above enter into me again, and carried me forth to act where, when, and
how it pleased; Now came I to be what he would have me, and never before.

It was not long since, that I should have been much troubled, to be called
hither and thither, and to act the part of such or such a one; No, the
reasonable man indeed was not dead yet in me, but now the Lord so slew it, that
I cried out; Here am I Lord, send me, for I am no more my self now, nor to act
for my self, but for the Lord: And I wondered still, why the flesh in the
ordinary appearnce of it, did remain? I mean, this outward form or vessel, that
held the treasure; for indeed, I thought when the Apostle spoke of a change,
that it had been the changing of the outward form; but this day came upon me
unawars: However, I do not say, the outward form shall not be changed: let it
be as it pleases him, my glory lies within the Veil; I am not called so much
to talk or judge of things without, I am to judge of things within me. Those
things that I have tasted, seen and handled, I declare unto you; for the
dispensation of truth is upon me: and I would not now speak any thing, or do
any thing, but as he speaks in me, and does in me; for its no more I now, but
the Lord: I, indeed have been something in man's day, and I desired to be and to
speak; but that day is past, its come into judgment, weighed in the balance
of the Sanctuary, and found too light. The day of the Lord only is now upon
me; and here I desire to be perfected.

But I will yet go a little further, and show you the workings of God upon me,
and in me: It was so, that before God so wonderfully appeared to me; I had
exceeding working in my spirit, and drawing to come up and serve the Lord in a
more spiritual administration; and scriptures were still opened to me, in a
new and strange way; still tending to that spiritual enjoyment of God, which
then was in mine eye, and now have. At last there was an extraordinary
expectation begotten in me; and I waited for my establishment in the spirit;
though I did yet appear in the flesh: but against this, there were great
fightings between the two powers, both from within me, and also from friends
without: yet there was in me, even in the darkest time, a secret hope; even
beyond hope, that I should enjoy it, and my eye was unto him who has now saved
me: but here I was brought to lie down in his will, even without it; and though
I never should have felt it, yet in this belief, could I have laid down my
life, and have dyed. That there was such a time appointed for the people of
God; and that they should surely have such a glory, though they appeared and
lived upon earth; for the Lord has said, The tabernacle of God should be with
men; and he would reign for ever and ever. But the day before this glory came
unto me; I had this word very strongly set home upon me, We shall not all
sleep, but be changed: And truly as the time drew near, I had such strong
workings of spirit, that I could expect no other indeed; and I did expect it,
and withal looked with what body I should come; for I was thinking (as I told
you before) that this outward form must be done away, when God came to change
us; but when I saw it still remain, and I so wonderfully beheld God, I was
taken with admiration; yet did I still expect, that sure it would anon go a
way, for I thought it impossible, that I should look constantly upon this
glory, and yet remain upon the earth; for indeed though I expected much, yet
this sight was far beyond my expectation. Now I felt the fleshly part within
me fly a way at his presence, and Death and Hell were destroyed; I heard
sentence given against the enemy of all our peace, and he ran a way; I felt him
cast out, and in the morning I could sing a song over him: For his head I
found, was turned into the waters, yet still this outward body did not moulder
a way. At last it was given me from him that showed me these things to ask,
(for indeed, I was not able till it was given me) and I asked and said; O Lord
God, why have I flesh upon me, and see thee in this glorious manner? (for
Infiniteness it self looked upon me, and I looked upon it:) Can any man see
thee (I said) and live? It was answered me again: Thou art not alive; I have
slain thee: No man indeed can see me and live; but as a man thou art dead, and
never shall live more, as a man; but the son of God can see me: Thou shall
live as the son of God, and so thou shall see me: But I said; O Lord, Why am I
not presently dissolved by this Infinite glory that now so openly beholds me?
Why have I flesh upon me in the appearance of it? It was answered; Thou have
brethren in the flesh, therefore have thou flesh upon thee, because thou must
carry them a testimony of what thou have seen of me: but look for no glory in
the flesh, but sufferings and perseeutions for thy glory lies within all flesh,
and accordingly I accepted of it, because it was the fathers will, and for no
other cause. It was also manifested to me, that while they were persecuting me,
I should be inwardly filled with the glory of God, and triumph over all their
cruelty, though I might for this testimony suffer as Jesus Christ did upon the
Cross. I should be willing, in the will of God, to see your face; however this
I am sure, that when the Lord brings forth his own righteousness upon you, you
cannot be silent to your own bowels, and that indeed I am; for I am not as to
my own particular any longer, but am fallen into the Church, and there I see my
self to have a most glorious resurrection: I was afraid once indeed to loose my
life; but I never had so much glory as now I find in the body: Oh, how true is
that word; Every one that will save his life shall loose it, but he that
loses his life for my name sake shall find it: The Lord of heaven and earth
give men to see their glory in union, and then they will never stand so much as
they do upon distinctions; did they see their resurrection in the body, (and
knew what this body is, they could not so account of any particular
appearances; but they should see themselves always alive: and because he
lives, therefore they should live also; for if they would cease to live in
their own life, they should be perfected and live in the life of God: But the
truth is, the word ( Body) stumbles them, because they are not wholly yet
brought off from looking upon things as they appear; for, hence has flowen all
our imaginary worship: but when Christ is again formed in us, then he and we by
him, shall not judge according to the hearing of the ear, nor the sight of the
eye; but righteous judgment: Therefore the filth of the daughter of Sion (or
all those evils and mistakes which now possess us) is said to be purged away
by a spirit of judgment, as well as by a spirit of burning: For it must be
first judged before it can be burned; and truly I do in some measure see what
that Scripture speaks off.

After death comes judgment; for I am sure that since I had this death, and
since my soul was separated from my body, I have been judged for things done
in the body; that is, while I lived in the body; for I knew a time when I lived
in this body, and I know now what it is to live out of the body, and yet appear
in the body; for that is the great mistake: the body that appears to be, is not
the body: The scripture says, Its sown a natural, but raised a spiritual
body: and men not knowing what to make of this spiritual body, conceive it to
be so many distinct personal appearances as have deceased since the world
first began: but the Lord in his time will show them what this spiritual body
is, and then they will better judge of it: but I am sure we without them, or
they without us are not perfect; for though I have seen all these things
accomplished upon me, in this particular body; yet I see that it is but as in a
figure, which has reference to the whole; therefore am I weak with them that
are weak, and stong with those that are strong, and my glory lies still in the
body. Never do I look for perfection more in one particular appearance but to
be perfect in the whole: I am no more my own, but every ones, and every one is
mine.

Dear Soul, the Lord of all our mercy supply and keep you safe, under all those
storms which are now breaking in upon us; I humbly and heartily thank you for
your sweet counsel in looking for trial: it is that which my heavenly father
has warned me to look for. I leave you to his bowels and bosom, in whom I
rest;

I am, Your endeared friend to serve God in you.

4. Letter.
Dear Soul,
MY heart salutes thee, and every budding forth of God in the divine mystery:
Oh, my spirit sits enthroned, and glories in the top of every being, and though
all the buildings in the world shake, I shall not come down to save any of the
furniture of this dark Fabric. All images are with me ( my dearest) though
set in a frame of weakness, etc. The eye of eternity has enclosed them all,
and though its twinklings fold them up in night: and though the back-parts of
God obscures this earth, and is a veil between it and the high-noone of the
Godhead; yet this is but a shadow wherein Divinity hides it self, which shall
fly away, and disappeare, with the outward dress of this Creation: When all
deformed Shapes, Vizards and Pictures shall suffer loss; then the present
blackness (which is the habitation of Dogs and Devils) shall be chased into
outward darkness, but the comeliness (which all this while has lain disguised
under that beggarly appearance and loathsome outwardnesse) shall spring forth
in a glorious ray of that bright morning Star which shall visit us from on
high, bringing glad tidings upon its Angel-wing of life and immortal lity.

That the sweet Emmanuel born in the village of our own natures. I am commanded
to speak thus much unto thee ( my Dear breathing) though my spirit rejoices
to finde-thee already reeling with new wine; bathing in that brimfull unction
which yet cannot run over its boundless circle, and shall overflow all the
world besides; They shall all know God, and all be clothed with the divine
person of Christ: The water of life shall spring up in you all, and every
Creature heald of its disease, when righteousness shall spring forth of the
earth, and the heavens shall hear the voice of the earth, and drop down
fatness upon them. The Tree of Life shall have its root within us, sprouting
forth through its quiet Sap into its glorious figure and life; a Branch, a
Leaf thereof reducing every parcel of Corruption and clothing that upon with
spirit and immortallity which before was muffled up in sin and wrath, in
pain and darkness.

My dearest, I am taken off in haste and have only leisure to bless thee for
thy last, which administered so much glory to my spirit; live still happily my
dear self in the ripe Navell of Divinity and let me see thee every moment in
the divine Principle of glory whither the Lord Jesus is risen before and has
called up himself out of the flesh of,

F. M.
Salvation-Bulwarks in the eternal Sabbath with out the number of a man.
5. Letter.
Mine in the Lord
THE present disposings of God toward me are very sweet and precious, my soul
being subdued daily to the Lords will in all things: I see daily, that the
Fathers designs is to sweeten all conditions to me by the beams of his own
presence.

Truly in the Lord theirs nothing comes amiss to me, but I am able to welcome
every dispose of providence; death, sorrow and misery in the Lord, are so
familiar to me, that I know not how to be without them; my soul longs after
affliction, because now the sting of misery is gone, and it is my delight to
play with it; I think I should starve with hunger, but that my own wants daily
supply me; sweet soul, God is teaching me to see light in darkness, good in
evil, to eat upon the eater, and receive sweetness from the strong, to behold
a happy harmony in all contrarieties.

I shall shortly be with you, now I am not from you; but rest in thy bosom.

The Lord that spirit, in the flesh.
6. Letter.
Sweet and pure Spirit,
IN divine progress, I continually meet thee, with a heart drawn out: I
always salute thee, I can be no where, do nothing, but thou art still with
me; In thy life I live, in thy light I see, by thy power I stand; I am nothing
but in thee, and thou the same without me; my fullness is thy treasure, and
thy treasure is my fullness; all that I have, I receive from thee, and yet what
thou give me is nothing but my own, and so was from eternity. I was with thee
from the beginning, and thy beginning was in my eternity; I was with thee when
thou did inhabit darkness, thy darkness was my secret place, my secret
place was thy darkness; when the curs and enmity of the old creation lay upon
me, thy power upheld me, this power was mine own, for it was no robbery for me
to be equal with thee, my form veiled thy glory, yet it was my glory and thy
form. Thus thou for me, and I in thee have borne the sin and curse of of the
old world; (born it I say) into a land of forgetfulness, which have forgotten
and forgiven all transgression: and thus in a reconciled and sweet union, thou
remainest my fullness, and I rest thy happiness: Though in the flesh, I
subscribe my self distant by the name of --

From the Headquarters of Divine Majesty, this last Lord's Day, in the year of
Jubilee.
7. Letter.
Dear Friend,
SOme glimmerings presented, to the children of love, clothed with darkness,
bewildernessed in their spirits, passing through the fiery trial, or
crucifyings of flesh, or things of the first Creation, unto the the Canaan of
rest, or to a more higher, fuller, and excellent glory.

First considering the several dispensations of the eternal God: how he has
several ways and in diverse manners, made out himself to a creature, as
Genesis Chap. I. and 2. the law, or righteousness of the first creation, in
which God had communion with man, and man with God, yet rather with a Creator,
then with a Father, and that in the outward court, or first creation, not in
the inmost, or holiest; and Paradise it self being but an image, of the
excellency, of this first Creation.

Man being fallen, or deprived of this perfection, which was accomplished
through the temptation of the Serpent, or fleshly wisdom, or the espousals of
the woman, or weakness of this creation, there was the first law of
righteousness, presented in a new ministration of letter by Moses in tables of
stone from God; in which the first glory or perfection and excellency, was
ministered to man in his fallen and apostated condition, and because the law, or
first righteousness, was weak through the flesh, after the departing of the
power supporting, or unanswerablenesse, of the apostatised state, to the first
uprightness there was given (or God appearing to the refreshing and comforting
of the creature) an administratiou of Angels, by visions and dreams, as also a
Priesthood with Vrim and Thummim, Sacrifices, Ceremonies, Tabernacle, Temple,
and Prophets, speaking forth immediate revelations, etc. by which man might
have access to God and speak with him, but in the outward court, or through
the flesh, or of this creation, though he filled these with another glory, a
higher and more excellenter discovery of his love in the promised seed: the
substance and excellency of that, with all the former were but shadows.

There was another ministration added of war, and peace, and trials,
crucifyings, or baptismes in the flesh as flying before Pharaoh and following a
cloud of fire and blackness, through or betwixt the wales of b^llowing waves,
in terror and fear, the long marching through a wilderness, by the waters of
Meriba, and rock of strife, skirmishing with Amalekites, by the terror of
Mount Sinai, cutting their way through Ogg King of Bashan, and passing through
the dividings of Jordan into Canaan, another ministration was given of
Canaanites in the land, war with the Nations, captivity, destruction of the
Temple, Gods departing, the apostasy overspreading, or God gathering up that
glory which appeared in the Tabernacle and Temple, and that of Priest and
Prophet, ceasing; there then followed a night of darkness or an apostasy upon
all that administration, and when God no longer filled the Tabernacle with a
cloud, and the Temple with glory, they became a place of solitariness or
desolation, as all other ministrations (...), and places for the Satire and the
Scrich-Owle to dwell, and sing in, that is, for the Spirit of Apostasy or
Antichrist, or of Iniquity to possess, and act in.

Another ministration somewhat clearer and briter then that of the Law; and
that was of John, as in Matthew, A greater had not rissen, he was a burning and
shining light, as Luke 1. the Law and Prophets were till John, he was the
Prophet of the highest, in respect of what went before, and was sent to make
Christ manifest to Saints, by word and water, and this was a ministration in
order to one more spiritual, the one ministration was to decrease, the other
to increase, and that of fire or of spirit, was to burn up that of water or of
flesh, or that which consisted of things of this Creation.

Another and more glorious ministration was that appearance of Christ, or the
Gospel in flesh, or glad tidings manifested to sinners, or the apostatised
creation, Heb. 1. or God appearing in the (...) and familiarest relation of
this creation to man, even in flesh in which he taught, and did miracles, and
was circumcised, and baptized, and acted to fulfill all righteousness, in
which there was a clear draught of that ministration of gifts and ordinances,
which was as perfect as the first creation in its glory, and (...) higher and
nearer to God coming forth in nearer relation of an Emmanuel or God with us.
Another Administration also of Christ in the flesh of Saints, Col. 1. 27.
Christ in you the hope of glory, and that by graces, and operations, and fruits
of spirit, as of faith, repentance, love, selfe-denyall, humiliation,
meekness, also infallible gifts of spirit, viz. to speak with tongues,
workmiracles and act infallibly and administration, even the height of the
glorious Gospel, or God shining in the face of Jesus Christ: Now the spirit of
God foreseeing Gods purpose, to leave this ministration of Gospel glory to the
world, (or flesh, or Antichrist) and to bring a night of darkness upon all the
day and brightness of his Sun; prophesied of a departing first before the
man of sin, fleshly wisdom, or Antichrist, could be revealed, or Gods
departing from that Administration as he did from the Tabernacle and Temple,
and whilst Antichrist, or the power of the flesh, or the spirt of iniquity
reigns in the christian world, or amongst such as profess a Christ, all this
while the Lord of glory or Jesus Christ in spirit is crucified in spiritual
Sodom, Egypt, or Babylon, or the Kingdoms of the flesh, and the powers of
darkness; so that there is no mention of any restoration of the first ministry
of gifts and ordinances which was in the Apostles days: but is the state and
persecution of the Lord Jesus in spirit, and all those appearances of the Lord
Jesus in many glorious Saints in particular ages, was but the appearance of him
who is that faithful and true witness, or the prophesings of spirit in
sackcloth, against the power of the man of sin, and were but drops of the
Vials, sounding of the Trumpet, opening of the Seals before the battle of the
great day, when God shall appear in flames of spirit and glory against and to
confound Antichrist, or fleshly powers, or things of this creation. So that
there is not (as I know of at present) any word in all the Scriptures, that the
first ministry by gifts and ordinances, shall in any measure be continued or
restored, in whole or in part. As if that were the great work the Lord
intended, viz. to set up the former ministry, or the restoring some legal
ordinances, etc. as if all the glory of the last times should be the bringing
these, or recovering them out of the hands of Antichrist, that is, not my
present apprehensions: but that the next ministration will be the fiery trial,
or a state and power of God, put forth upon the several administrations that
Christians are under, in order to higher discoveries of God, which will produce
torment in the flesh (with blackness, and darkness, and tempest) or upon
fleshly wisdom, and powers, or things of this creation. viz. in some, in
passing from legal ministrations to a more evangelicall, of grace and love;
there will be torment and tempest upon that administration or self
righteousness in the consumption thereof.

In that more Gospel state of a Christian, whereby he injoyes God in graces,
gifts and contemplations, with sweet tastes and embraces of divine glory; there
will be a fiery trial, or the clouds of fire and darkness, or crucifyings in
the flesh and upon that ministration of gifts and graces, insomuch that there
will be a scorching up of the streams, or of Euphrates, and the pleasant
valleys turned into a parched wilderness, and all in order to a more higher,
fuller and excellenter glory; this is prophesied of in the Scripture, The Sun
shall be turned into darkness and the Moon into blood, before that great and
notable day of the Lord come; that is not only the Lord Jesus will be
darkness unto the world (which I deny not) but all that which was the glory,
and light of a Christian, and highway of communion with God, his Sun, Moon,
and Stars shall be darkened, etc. before that notable day or that more
excellent revelation of God in glory, and 1 Pet. 3. 10. The heavens shall pass
away with a great noise; and the Element shall melt with fervent heat, and the
earth with the works that are therein shall be burnt up: which is not only at
the last judgment, but upon particular administration, which is figured out in
the heavens, earth and elements; or those more, or less glorious
administrations: and the fire shall try every man's work, of what sort it is; 1
Cor. 3. 13. 15. And as Christ crucified all that glorious administration in the
flesh, in which he was, and it all dyed to a more glorious life: so every
Christian, is to take up his cross, or to bring his highest and chiefest
administrations to this cross, and to leave them all crucified, to more
higher, and excellenter discoveries: and this is the knowledge of Christ
crucified: now many Christians who are sadded, darkened, and in much
tribulation, as to the administration they are under; and in looking into the
wilderness, seeing nothing but mount Sinai, with blackness, and darkness, and
tempest: they take it for desertions, and withdrawings of God, when as indeed,
it is the presence of God, darkning, withering, and consuming such
administrations and the bringing in a more fuller and transcendent glory.

The next ministration will be the appearing of Christ in brightness and glory
of Spirit, destroying Antichrist with the spirit of his mouth, and brightness of
his coming; this shall be a glory without Sun, or Moon, or Star, or any such
low appearance, as gift or ordinance: but the Lord shall be there everlasting
light, and God the glory, and light shall cover the earth, as waters cover the
Sea, that is it shall not sparkle, or be in bright beams, as in a Gift or
Ordinance; but it shall slow out from the Lord swallowing up and overflowing
all earthly administrations, that expectation of him in external
administrations as Gifts or Ordinances, etc. is but to expect Christ in a
fleshly way or appearance, and not as he is in his own height, spirit, and
glory in himself, in his Saints, their fullness and hope of glory, Col. 1. 27.
And therefore this is that which is to be expected, an estate of spirit, love,
meeknes, self-denial, overcoming evil with good, conquering by receiving in
the wrath and enmity of the world, into which estate God will gather up his
people by times and degrees, from all worldy and fleshly interests and
engagements, wherein they shall be carried up into a more full enjoyment of
God, and conformity to Christ in all his sufferings, death, and resurrection,
where God will be to all his, s^ glorified, as broad rivers and streams, where
shall go no Ship with sails, nor Gally with Ores.

And then it shall be, as much apostasy, in the Saints to go back, to the first
ministry of the Gospel times, or first pattern which was the first discovery
of that mystery, hid from ages, as would have been in them in the Apostles
days to have gone back to the Jewish Tabernacle, Temple, and Priesthood, etc.
out of which God had departed, as he also has, out of these late
administrations.

Furnell.

8. Letter.
Loving Cozen,
DEarly and much beloved, there is some content in nature, that you abide in
the flesh with me, and are yet an appearance of God upon the Earth, for I
confess I have none so near my heart as you, of a fleshly being in the
world; therefore, I have been affected with the kindness of the Lord, that
has spared you, that I might not have sorrow upon sorrow; my sister being
removed, yet have I more sweet joy and content in understanding that you are in
the fellowship of the Spirit, growing forward through all the dark shadows of
seeming glory, into the substance which is real glory; for in that you say,
you see God is all, and does all: I question not, but you understand that all
things below him are but shaddows of him; yea, Christ himself in his fleshly
appearance was but a form of God which appeared to answer our distance from
God; for we being departed from him by experiencing the Tree of Knowledge, of
Good and Evil, of which food, I hope, we have our fill now, God condescending
to redeem us from this, by the way of Christ, who was appointed of God to bring
us unto God, not to himself as he was Christ, being but an appearance of God,
not the Father himself: Therefore if we should sit down with Christ (being come
to him) and proceed no further, we are not brought by him to the Father; And
the will of God is that we be co-heires and joint heirs together with him,
till we know that the Father and the Son are in one, and we one with the Father
as the Son. For I believe that God, even the Son of God, does dwell in us, even
the same that dwelt in Christ Jesus: and I am waiting when that heavenly Image
shall as plainly appear, as the Image of the earthly has appeared, for we shall
see his face, and his name shall be upon our foreheads.

Dear Cozen, since I received your letter, I have seen you in a Vision, and so
was it represented to me, that I understand, that you have or shall bring forth
the man Child even Christ to open veiw; for which you must die and be buried:
I mean you shall appear to some as one dead to truth and God, and alive to
error: and so you shall be as one dead and put into a grave of darkness and
silence; yet fear not, for I have proved that the day of death is better then
the day of Birth; And that by death, Christ brought to light life and
immortality: Remember also Christ was put to death in the flesh, and was alive
to God, his flesh was as pure and honorable as even ours was: yet by the
eternal Spirit within, it was offered a Spiritual Sacrifice to God, whilst
the dark apprehensions of men conclude that he suffered as a blasphemer:
therefore arm your self with the same mind always expecting we shall surely
rise with him, as we suffer together with him; for indeed we are but one in
life and death, And he is the resurrection and the life, even Christ in us, who
is rising in me, and either is or will rise in you. And when he does appear we
shall appear with him. I pray you, dear Cozen, as often as conveniently you
may, let me hear from you ( I would not burden you.)

9. Letter.
Dear Sister,
WITH the rest of my fellow heirs in the Sonship, in this unity of Truth and
Love I salute you; I thank you for appointing a friend to relate to me your
estate in the things of God, of whom I received information to much content,
having for a long time before had great desire to understand your condition,
and am now fully satisfied in it, as for the dealings of the Lord with me, I am
free to give you some account; I am indeed in the judgment of those to whom
the day of judgment is not yet come, accounted and termed an Heretic, but in
the light and truth of God, a Co-heire with Christ, being anointed with the
same oil of gladness, which is indeed joy to the spirit and as marrow to the
bones; and a perpetual light of truth in certainty and power, and in such
fullness already that he bears witness to himself in others that it is he;
and fullness of wisdom and might to answer all the occasions; that he is
pleased to present himself to me and magnify himself in me: as for the
Scripture it is much unsealed, and I have sweet sellow^sip in that one spirit
that throdgbout all ages declared the Father and the Son; as for the ministry
of Angels I know it, having for a long time been under it, but of late have
had knowing, understanding of it, and fellowship with understanding among them;
truly my dear companions, our God that saves us is perfect and so is his
salvation, which when we shall be by him circumcised in heart which is the
taking away the fleshly veil and the face of the covering that is spread over
all Nations, Isaiah 25. then shall we see and with joy possess together that
it is the same strong one that prepares us and judges darkness; I speak not
this as if darkness were contrary to this mighty God, for in his light it is
that he is at unity with all the works of wonder which he brings forth;
darkness is not so to him, for the darkness lo him is as clear as the
noonday; that is, he sees as fully and posseth as contentedly his will in
the darkness as in the light, and when we are taken into that eternal light,
we shall see our God is as rich and wonderful in the deeps of darkness as in
the clearest light, for in the unity of the spirit it is easily discerned, that
God is one in all, though different in coming forth; for as in a garden, the
several colors of flowers make the most glorious appearance, even so light
and darkness are the two general treasures of the Almighty, in both which he
is infinite and wonderful; and as he pleases to take us into either of
these, so it is to make himself known in his unsearchable greatness, as in
Isay he says, He will give unto us the hidden treasures of darkness, and
Malachi says, that the Sun of Righteousness shall arise upon us. Both which
Scriptures import to me, that God himself in his apperance to us is both the
treasures of darkness, and the Sun of Righteousness; and it is all one to
me whether he take me with him into the heights above or into the depths
beneath, for we are ever together, and I possess the fulfilling of that
Scripture, which says, where I am there shall my Servant be; so that when God
my excellency will appear in the external creation, which is a thick vail,
and the invisible one much hid in it, yet I have sweet discerning of him and
fellowship with him there; and when he takes me into the deeps of darkness, God
my glory is with me, and we either see us one or lie down in one: and when he
will ascend into the highest Heavens, he carries me up along with him. What is
all this? but the manifestation that his dwelling place is large and deep, and
that he himself is the one infiniteness. The fullness that fills all in
all things.

10. Letter.
Sir.
I Received yours, which brings me the state of affairs then in agitation,
between the Parliament and Army; you send me what they best approve of, and
what they dare not own: No wonder if some good men are upon this dilemma; many
I know are almost broken between those principles (they call) of Reason and
those of God: the first (acknowledging man to be compounded of two natures,
earth and heaven, light and darkness:) break the actions into several
streams, as if of two and not one person. It is our misery and the sadness of
our spirits that we are held in these chains of earth and darkness, that we
are fetterd in these prisons of mortality and are not free in all things to act
like our selves, as sprung from a divine Principle, as born of a nobler seed,
and putting forth the strength and power of the divine nature, in actions
purely and simply spiritual: But if this light shine^ not upon our spirits in
its Meridian-glory, let us wait till the Sun rises, let us not walk in the
paths of darkness, according to the principle and spirit of this world: There
is glorious light in the east already, the Mountain tops begin to discover
it. When I look upon the world and survay the actions of men; when I consider
the interests and principles of the most, the fleshly toylings and struglings
of the spirits of the worlds reformers; I cannot but see much weakness and
darkness, generating poor and spiritlesse designs, which rend, and tear,
and never bind up the breaches of a Kingdom. It Is true, the body politic (as
you write) was desperately sick, and a desperate disease must have a desperate
cure; but consider the nature of the disease, and then judge of the means to
cure it: All the properties of hell and darkness, all the superfluities of folly
and vanity, all the mists of error and superstition had formd themselves into
a body of corruption, and so assaulted and possessed the vital parts both of
Church and State, seizing the heart and spirits of government and religion; the
soul of both were fled, there remained little but a poor carcass, a painted
image, a spiritless form, without any motion, but artificial and violent: But
tell me what is the Physic to cure this Lethargy? Parliament and People,
Church and State, Soul and Body were languishing with this sickness: A spirit
of reformation begins to work: The faint breathings of the spirit of life,
puts some upon endeavors to undertake the cure: some (according to the spirit
that acted them) mixed ingredients, earthly and carnal (ignorant Empiricks, who
knew not the nature of the disease or cure) others ransacke the bowels of
nature and reason, study the practices and prescriptions of the old Hero's of
the world, the Heathen Conquerers and reformers of Nations; and yet never rise
so high, either in magnanimity or greatness of spirit, to do good in their
generations, and command themselves and others: Some search deeper and throw
into this composition, some grains of spirit, and quintessences, of a higher
extract, purified and sublimd into a nobler essence. But tell me is this
mixture like to restore life to a dying and languishing Nation, to a dark and
formal Church? Could we get the rarest drugs the world affords? Could we
search the earth to its center, and discover the occult qualities of all its
minerals and wonders? Can this reach the some and spirit of one man, much less
a whole kingdom? What though some grains of spirit are in one composition, is
it not loaded with thick clay, overcome by the predominancy of contrary
qualities? The distemper of this Nation springs from our living in another
world, then our own, in a corrupted air: a contagious climate; in vassalage
and slavery to these bodies of flesh, to this lower element of the world, to
the Prince of darkness: Men created in the Image of God, have unclothed
themselves of that glory, and now wander in the shapes of Wolves and Beasts of
prey; having their souls and spirits sprung from Heaven, they transform
themselves into the similitude of the elementary-creatures: What are wars,
confusions, and disorders, but the actings forth this brutish spirit in tearing
and devouring our fellow creatures? Fightings and divisions spring from the
jarring, discordant qualities in the minds of men, who have lost the spirit of
sweetness, union and peace, which breaths forth nothing but love and joy, and
keeps the whole body in an harmonious unity. Is this unity to be recovered by
divisions? It Is true, by such a division as this it is, by seperating truth from
error, light from darkness, the purer from the grosser parts: This is by a
spirit of burning and by a power above the strength of man. Who must be the
reformers of the world? who must build the Lord a Temple, a glorious Temple
both in Church and State? Not those who are staind with blood, and act by a
spirit of wrath and violence: The Lord tells David, 1 Chronicles. 22. 8. Thou have
shed blood abundantly, and have made great wars, thou shall not build an house
to my name, because thou have shed much blood upon the earth in my sight. Is
there no spirit and life in these words? Was not David permitted to build the
material Temple, a dark shadow and type of the spiritual? Was not he
suffered in that age, under those dark fleshly administrations, which held
forth no greater light and put no greater glory upon their spirits to subdue
the world, but by Sword and Bow, by force and violence: and is it probable that
the sweet, mild and gentle spirit of the Gospel, should need the force and
strength of men These do well that it is in their hearts to reform the world,
but they mistake the way; they act in the strength of the wrath of God, in the
spirit of this world; their poor earth will not conquer Hell and Devils, their
Sword and Gunnes will never change the natures of men: No, Solomon must build
this Temple, the Lord Jesus; it must be another spirit, another generation,
another way: These with David may fell the Cedars and hew the Stones of this
earthly building. Those ordained for this glorious work, their Swords must be
of another metal to wound and heal again, to destroy the flesh and
transform it into spirit; their spirits shall breath forth nothing but love
and sweetness; their Language shall be glory to God on high, on earth, peace,
goodwill toward men; they call not for fire from Heaven, they cast not into
Prisons and Dungeons, they Plunder not nor destroy, they are of other spirits,
more sweet, more amiable, forcing the world by a divine power of love to
confess they are overcome and vanquished: All the Kingdoms of the Earth, all
the Glory of the Creatures, all the Splendor, Magnificence and Pomp of the
world shall vanish as Smoke, and acknowledge it self a poor shadow, an empty
nothing. All that act in this spirit of violence and fury, are a rod in the
hand of God, the Executioners of vengeance: These are the Horns of the Beasts
that shall hate the Whore, and make her desolate, and naked, and shall eat her
flesh and burn her with fire, in the cup she has filled, these shall fill to
her double; these power out the Vials of wrath upon the seat of the Beasts,
they are the Fowls of Heaven to eat the flesh of Kings, and the flesh of
Captains, and Great-ones of the earth; they are to rend and tear the outward
garment of the worlds glory; they are an administration wherein God clothes
himself with fury and indignation. By this spirit of vengeance and wrath, all the worlds torme^tors have bin acted; this has bin a work of Assir^ans and
Babylonians, Romans, Turks and Sarazens; they have overco^e the whole face of
the earth with their Armies, they have trampled the Nations under their feet,
and trod their God in the mire of the streets. How do many in this age, glory
in these triumphs, set up their poor trophies, their triumphant Pillars, as if
the strength were their own, and the glory their own? Had they the spirits of
Christians, they needed not the swords of men; they are weak in the Spirit of
the Gospel, therefore they cloth themselves with the power of flesh, and will
enter into Canaan in the wrath of the Lord, destroying and devouring, not
converting: They glory in fleshly Conquests and Victo^ies, having not power in
the Spirit to conquer in the way of love, union and peace: with these Weapons
the Apostles bid defiance to the whole world, to Hell and Devils, they advanced
their Standards upon the proud walls of Rome it self. This fleshly strength
will prove weakness in this work; it will dye and vanish into air, when it
has done the work the Lord has appointed: God makes one spirit and property,
of darkness, afflict and torment another; the Nations of the world will
destroy themselves, every one by the Sword of his Brother: The flesh of the
Saints engaged in these contests and worldly quarrels, shall rend it self and
help to rend the world: But how are they Saints? Such who have some
glimmerings of the bright and morning-Starre, who by throwing of the external
veil of Antichristian darkness, fleshly forms servile dependency on the dark
spirits of blind men; I say, having thrown of these fetters they have some
liberty, and having removed these mists they see a light, the faint reflections
of a rising Sun, being let out of their cage of darkness, they fly and
flutter, and catch at every thing, but apprehend little as it is in God; but in
the light of their own spirits, moved by the call and drawing of the spirit of
God, and the concurrence of those beams of light scattered themselves every
where; these receive but glances and flashes, and cover it with much darkness,
confusion and ignorance: yet being raised above their former state they think
God speaks in them, and their knowledge is the knowledge of the spirit. The
good seem to give God the glory, and to make him their strength in Battle; and
considering how gloriously they have conquered, are strongly persuaded, that
the mighty power of God accompanied them; and where God assists and gives
victory, it must be for good, for the good of mankind and the world; and
therefore they will improve their victories, to attain that high end. Thus they
make their progress; if God assists in acts of blood by force and fightings,
he does the same in acts of force and violence upon the corrupt Governors of
the World, who are running back into Egypt, leaning upon the Pillars of the
World; setting up their empty, gilded Idols, corrupt forms, and dark
administrations, as the utmost end of all their endeavors, as the price of all
the blood shed in the Kingdoms.

Thus being persuaded of the presence of the Lord; and have in their own
spirits some height and strength to good, some will and desire to do good to
the world, they continue their begun motion, measuring the whole by themselves,
the spirits of others by their own, and so think their whole body of
assistants, fitly qualified for the government of a Kingdom: Never considering
what a spirit of darkness, pride, vainglory, Ambition, dwells and acts amongst
them, and how weak mere natural spirits are, being raised from the dust to sit
upon a throne, and to bear the temptations of Power, Honor, and worldly glory.
Consider actions purely and simply, according to their nature, and the
dispensations of the Gospel: This is a violent unnatural fleshly way* for the
reforming of the world; the small stone must be hewn out without hands. This
is the wind rending and tearing the rocks, before the soft and still voice was
heard: This is the fire and Earthquake to burn and shake this earthly fabric,
the corrupt world and its glory. Thus the Parliament have been executioners of
vengeance upon the Kings party; who for judgment, a fire of wrath kindled in
the bowels of the Kingdom, setting the properities of darkness at enmity
amongst themselves: A dark and formal Clergy, against a more dark and
formal; formality and hypocisie against looseness and profanesse; restrained
civilty against riot and luxury: The Ministers preach war, and the sword, and
fire from heaven; discovering their own weakness unable to act in the strength
of God; therefore they cry up the Cause of Religion, the Covenant, the
Ordinances: these (though under more light then the other) yet they stir up the
spirits of men, to afflict and torment their persecutors, King, Prelates,
Malignants, and to take away their revenues and honors. Far be it from me, to
blast the least appearance of God amongst them, or to spread a cloud upon those
faint glimmerings which shined in their spirits: It was their darkness, their
flesh, that made them thus excentrick; they acted in the spirit of the world,
and of nature; their light was lightnings from Mount Sinai, not the glorious
light of the Spirit. In this way, they will be like the billows and waves of
the Sea, one tossing and driving forward; the other, till they dash themselves
against the rocks.

The Parliament and their Armies have broken the Cavaliers; the Presbytery,
Episcopacy; the Independents have restrained the power of Presbytery, for their
pride and coveteousnes; giving them of the Cup, they gave others to drink. If
the Independents corrupt, there are those sprung out of their own bowels,
prepared for their executioners: these, if they aspire too high, will be
Levelled themselves, by their great Idol the People; or their principles will
raise a spirit dwelling in the confused rabble and multitude, to break and tear
all to pieces, to bring all into a huddle and confusion, without order, law, or
government. Thus the fury of the Lord breaks forth, like a burning fire,
against all corruption in the powers of the world, against tyranny and
oppression in all its forms and shapes; though its Woolvish spirit is clothed
with innocence and gentleness, the outward form will not change the nature;
Monarchy, Aristocracie, Democracie, will be much at one, unless the breath of
life from heaven quicken their dead and liveless carcasses. I fear in our
contests we have too much mixed earth with heaven; we have gone a dark
n^trodden obscure path; therefore the Lord may justly withdraw that spirit of
justice and righteousness; which has accompanied and acted even more worldly
States and Republikes. They acted in the flesh; we pretend to a higher
principle, we speak of spirit, and power, and divine light; their motions were
natural according to their natures, being of the earth, earthly: ours
irregular excentrick, unnatural, being we think our selves heavenly, live in
the air of the Gospel, in the light of the Spirit; which points us out a more
glorious way: therefore it is but just with God, if when we sow the wind, we
reap the whirl-winde. But what will be the end of all? when we have proved our
own strength to be weakness; when our overturning shall succeed another, that
glorious power shall manifest it, whose right it is alone to reign: when we
have passed through a wilderness, the Lord will bring us into the Land of
rest, so long breathed after and desired; the Lord will bring order out of
confusion, light out of darkness, peace out of war and troubles: This will as
surely be, as the spring now succeeds the winter, the day the night: who the
Lord may make most glorious, in this work, known alone to himself: It
magnifies his power and goodness, if he breaths life in those dead bones,
which we trample upon: if he quickens those which we have reprobated and
rejected, as withered branches, and vile excrements. He can make the first
last, and the last first; he can bring down the proud spirit of a
Nebuchadnezzar, and force him to glorify the God of Heaven. In the mean time,
let every man keep his own station; let the people of God shine like
themselves, that it may appear they are sent into the world to do good to the
world, and to reflect the image and glory of God. Those that are magistrates,
let them put forth the spirits of Christians, let their actions be convincing,
let not the world justly brand them for corrupt, unjust, self-advancers, and
raisers their families, rather then restorers of the ruins of a kingdom: if
the floods of darkness roars against them, and a deluge of confusion
overflows; if the flames of division break out again, let them be confident,
they are above the danger in, another Region, where no cloud can reach them, no
confusion disturb them: and if their earthlyes here, their bodies of dust; yet
they shall dwell securely in these burnings, and be at peace in the midst of
these flames. Thus Sir, I have given you my thoughts of the times; My earnest
desire is, that things may prove otherwise then I write in relation to those
now in power; the Lord if it be his will make their actions glorious, and
overule that spirit of perverseness and darkness, mingling it self with their
counsels: but if they fail, the Lord will do the work; let us build upon
this, as upon a rock, it is fixed and immovable. Sir, excuse me, I have been
too tedious, impute it to the subject I write, which affords matter for a
volume; I have this confidence in you, that nothing will be unwelcome to you,
from a friend, or a Christian, or him who really is,

Your kinsman and servant in every relation. H. B.

Letter 11. An Answer of a Letter written by a friend.
June 8. Oh friend!
SOme two nights ago, I saw a Bible, and found a desire to look into it; but
presently my spirit checked me, saying, within me; What should thou be
peeping into that which thou can not understand? Stay till the light of the
Lord shall lead thee, and then go whither it shall lead thee, till then every
motion, and desire cannot but be bitter, and the more it is hearkened unto, the
more bitter: Yet my spirit said again, within me; Why should I refuse this
motion, though grief and bitterness may attend it? may it not be good to see
how dark and ignorant I am become? In the midst of such reasonings, I opened
the Book; the first place I looked on, was very strange to me; thence I turned
from place to place, but thick darkness covered every place; even those which
formerly seemed very clear to me. At last, I lighted on a place, which did
somewhat affect me, then I took up the Book into a Chamber, thinking to suck a
little sweetness, or at least to vent a little of that load which had lain
exceeding heavy on me all the day; so I read some six Chapters at least,
together (though with much ado) they were the last Chapt. of Esaias: so soon as
I had done, I fell into a very grievous passion, to behold into what a state I
was cast, for I understood not one tittle, but confusion and darkness covered
and hid every thing from me: feign would I have fastened on somewhat to have
supported my spirit, to hope and wait for better days; but it would not be: I
could not conceive concerning whom those things were spoken, or what that Zion
is to whom they seem to be spoken. Indeed, I could not but weep outwardly, and
mourn inwardly to think on my present darkness, which is so thick, that on no
manner of light comes in at any crevis. The Book of the creatures, the book of
providence (as I was wont to call it) this book of the scriptures, which was
once unutterably sweet, and bright, and living; they are all become now dead,
dark; but yet powerful and peircing tormentors.

In the midst of these workings of mind, I fell (I know not how) to think of
your letter, and your desire to hear from me, wondering at both; both, why you
should write so to me, and why you should desire to hear from me, as if either
I could apprehend what you wrote, or tell how to speak, or write any thing to
you, in this state of darkness, and many particular passages of your letter came
into my mind, more increasing this my amazement. The first clause of your
letter did kindle in me a great desire to expostulate with you about it: I must
break off, I can proceed no further now.

Letter 12.
June 6. Oh friend!
I am heart-sick, what shall I do? I am sick unto death, and yet am miserable,
because I cannot dye; I find death as far removed from me as life. I thought
I had been dead and buried long ago, and had nothing to do for the future, but
to wait for a resurrection from death, and out of the grave; but I feel my
self much alive to torment; and yet why may I not be dead for all that?
spiritual death and a spiritual grave may have a kind of life in them, for
ought I know. I cannot go on with the relation about thy letter; shall I try if
I can open my breast, and give the a little glance of the misery and oppression
that it lies burdened with: I find three tormentors within me, and they are
continually ravening upon me, rending and tearing my head, my heart, my bowels.
The names that I best know them by are Love, Grief, fury: They commonly all
rush forth upon me at once, though some one of them still more predominantly
then the rest, feeding upon every object that is presented to me, and
heightning the disease and sickness of my spirit thereby.

Sometimes Love tyrannizes, and makes me pant immeasurably after some glimpse
of that my spirit is in love with; but what it is, or where it is, I know not;
when I hear the birds, or see any other creature in the heavens above, or in
the earth beneath: Oh think I, that I were behind thee, that I might discern
thy substance, and see whether that be my love or no: When I see their
tenderness toward their young ones, the employment they are busied with, the
delight they can suck in*: Oh where am I, what am I, how far laid below the
whole creation? who find no employment, no delight, none to look after me, no
bowels to answer the sounding of my bowels. Some what I love, but I know not
what, nor where to seek after, nor what name to enquire for it by. Shall I go
to the woods, among the wild Hindes? Alas, they are as unable to hear, as I
am to speak: shall I ask the common sort of men? They, poor creatures never
think of any such thing. Shall I ask Christians? Ah! they as insensible of my
condition, as any of the rest; and all the news I can hear of them is of
melancholy, and giving way to temptation, and wish me to use the means which is
as impossible to me; as to find out my love without them: Oh misery, misery!
to love one knows not what, or where; to have love kindled, and the beloved
quite lost; to have love flaming, and nothing for its flames to go forth upon,
but still to feed within upon the bosom wherein it breeds: I find this
sometimes make these earthly bowwels so yearn, as if they would immediately
melt and drop out of the body; wherein they are as yet contained.

When Love has wearied it self, then Grief (though it was not absent before)
supplies its place, in panting, in sighing, in mourning, in complaining, if it
can: Oh God! oh my God! oh living God! oh my beloved! (these expressions it
uses for forms sake, though it understands them not) What are thou? Where art
thou? Verily, thou art a God that hidest thy self; what no news of thec? Why
do thou open my bowels, when thou meanest to shut up thine own? What is
become of thee? Have not thou a discovering art, as well as an hiding art? When
will thou open thy self? I cannot find thee out, I cannot visit thee; will thou never bestow a visit on me, shall I never be remembered? Shall I never know
what God means more? A^ust I always be tormented among shadows, longing and
wandering after the substance, and never meet with it?

All this while it is pretty well, in comparison of what it is, when fury (...)
(...) my spirit boils within me, and rages; (...) is that makes my spirit so
violent and (...) ous, I can in no wise imagine, nor vent (...) cannot, it is
too big to come forth: ther^ no object without capacious enough to r^ceive it;
but within it lies, and feeds, and (...) presses so vehemently, that my spirit
is (...) forced to cry out day and night; there is (...) subsisting, no, there
is no subsisting und^^ it.

June 10.
NOw to return, if it may be to the thoughts and workings of my mind
concerning your letter. To what end should he write to me in this manner,
unless he could withal have sent me light to read by? I understand not one
line, not one tittle of all his letter. This day whilst my father and I was
together this letter became yours: What (...) the meaning of this? which way
shall I go (...) bout to find out the meaning of this: (...) he present, how
many questions might I (...) him before I could receive in any imagination*
(...) concerning the sense of these words? (...) I must ask him, who is his
father, what (...) father? I cannot so much as fancy what (...) should be: A
father is he that begets, his (...) is he that begat him. But who is that (...)
begat him, what is he? I am at a loss at (...) dash. But what means this,
Whilst my (...) and I was together, what is it to be (...) the father, to
have the father with one? here is a puzling phrase indeed; here my fancy is
quite puzzled, I know not how to frame any imagination about this; what it is to
be with the father. And whilst I was with the father, what is the meaning of
this whilst, is he sometimes with the father, and sometimes not with the
father? Whilst, I know not what to make of this whilst: Whilst I was with
the father, this letter became yours? how mine? I know not how it is mine: how
became it mine? Did his father, while he was with him bid him write this to me?
Here may be more in this then I am aware of.

I remember my mind did much muse on this, and my desire was great to have
satisfied my spirit concerning the sense of it, but it was and still is too
hard for me.

Then I thought on the next passage, That there is but one to remain on the
earth, and that is the Lord. But one, What is one? For my pa^^ I know neither
unity nor distinction, and tha^ is the Lord. The Lord, Oh what is the Lord ^
who is the Lord? I am forced to speak lik^ Pharaoh, I know not the Lord. I
cannot say know any thing, nay certainly (if any thing b^ certain to me) I
do not know any thing But of all things I have no knowledge at all o^ the
Lord, that is the thing indeed that is hi^ from me with perfect darkness. The
veil ^ so thick and my eye so weak (if I have an^ eye) that I have no manner
of discerning ^^ him. But one to remain on the earth, Wh^^ is this remaining?
when all things pass awa^ shall the earth it self abide any otherwi^^ then
other things abide also? how shall th^^ Lord remain on the earth?

Then I thought on that passage, Be not tro^bled. What voice is this? whence
came this Did his father bid him w^ite thus to me Who is it troubles me? To
this let me s^ two things. I cannot resist, alas what a vai^ thing is it for a
poor weak creature to thi^ to withstand such mighty powerful troubl^ as
comes rushing in upon me: I have ^ strength to resist any thing, there is
nothi^^ so weak as I, the strongest Engine is wea^ in my hand; but trouble
has grown strength as fast as I have decayed, How should I now resist it? how
should I now avoid being troubled: Besides, when at at any time ^ think to
keep trouble of, it presently over-beares me, I never find any mitigation of
^rouble (so far as I have observed) but when ^ lie down at its feet, opening
my bosom and letting it enter as deep as it will: What means this phrase,
whence came this speech, Be not troubled?

Then that passage came into my mind, If ^ou will but stand still you shall
see the salva^ion of the Lord, breaking forth upon the whole earth. I did not
find my spirit so enquiring into the particular sense of this Phrase, ^s
working thus. How spoke he this? Upon ^ general notion that the Lord will
appear ^re long, and so I among others shall see him, ^ea perhaps he may mean
though the body be laid in the dust first, yet I shall see him: or by a
particular present light from the father concerning me, whom he said was now
with him, and that while he was with him, this Let^er became mine.

Afterward I remembered another passage, Shall I come to you, or will you come
to me? What was his intent in this, that the body should move to him to
Westminster or send to him to move to the place where my body then was? Alas,
that were a poor coming on either hand, or to what end were any such coming?
and for any other coming either of me to any, or of any to me, I am not
acquainted with it.

At last I remembered that, When he appeared unto me my flesh died and was
crucified. Oh then I felt my spirit burn within me to know this appearing of
him, and the rather that it might kill me, that I might once ente^ into this
crucified state, oh this is a sweet way of dying, to dye by the appearing of
the Lord this is the very way I have desired to dye al^ this while. My torments
have been partly welcome through hope of death from them and I reasoned within
my self, though the Lord might slay me by his appearing, yet if ^^ were his
pleasure to kill me by his absence an^ several kinds of tormenting fires
which h^ should pick out to that purpose, yet at leng^^ death would be sweet,
and an entrance into my desired life. But this was it still perplex^^ me, I
could not dye, the flames wereliving fed me with life, as well as with tormen^
Then my Spirit would Sigh, Surely this wi^ never do it, after this rate, may I
be torment^ for ever, and yet still live unto that, to whi^^ I have still
desired to dye. But to be killed by the appearing of the Lord, oh how sweet
would this way be! and this would be a certain way too, me thinks I could
easily be persuaded to believe, that the creature cannot live any longer when
God once appears.

To these let me add one more, which came into my mind this morning. Come let
us be gone, why stay we here? our bed is green. Oh how feign would I be gone!
How do I loath staying here? I am manacled, I am shackled, I am fastened with
that which I loath, as well as withheld from that which I love, loosen me and
I will be gone: yet stay, I must be furnished with wings too, or I cannot
mount up; my wings are clipped, I cannot fly with them: Oh that I had the wings
of thy Dov^, then would I fly and be at rest! Why stay I here? but because I
am a Captive, held under misery in my enemies land, by force and power, and
there is none to rescue, I am used most barbarously, starved for want of food,
stripped not only of my ornaments, but of my very clothes, thrust our of
doors to lodge in what bed I can find; and I looked for one to pity, for one
to redeem and bring me back againeto my own country, among my own friends,
to the free enjoyment of my own inheritance, but woe is me, still the tears
of the oppressed abound, but there is no Comforter.

Our bed is green. Oh sure me thinks I can imagine that to be sweet. But my
bed is black, a mourning bed, a bed of great tribulation, a bed of widdowhood,
a bed of sorrows and death, full of trouble, torment and tears in the night,
a bed not fit to entertain my bedfellow in, a bed I can never expect any rest
in. Oh a bed of rest, a bed of enjoyment, a bed made fresh and green by the
presence of my Spouse, when shall my wearied spirit know where such a bed is,
that it may have recourse to it for some refreshments?

My friend, these (except the last) were the confused and unexpected workings
of my mind upon your Letter, which before I had refused to think of, or meddle
with, otherwise then I do with all things, in an overly slight manner, with
neither desire toward them, nor expectation from them. But then my desire was
somewhat quicker, either to have had you present, or to write those things unto
you while they were fresh in my thoughts, or to desire your coming down
hither, to see what satisfaction you could give to such demands as your self
had occasioned.

But sudainly were all these silenced and put out, To what end are these? what
if he were here? what if I might ask him all that is at present in my heart?
What can he say to me? How can I hear him? Is not this the old ginne to entice
thee to look after the creature for somewhat, though not for that thou mainly
desire? This is a new device to lead thee still to be acting and moving
without the light of the Lord. It will be better and more easy to be quiet,
when will thou cease from these kind of motions and wait entirely for him who
alone can satisfy thy restless spirit? After a while I found my desire quite
fall flat, and these things to vanish out of my mind, I never intending more
to look back upon them. But that day forementioned, in the afternoon, my
torment increasing upon me, and these things coming again into my mind, and
withal a pressing in me to write them, though my spirit disrellished the
motion, yet at length it assented, and went on then so far as it could, and
since as it found it self free, which way of acting by a present freedom,
though it declined, looking upon it as base and servile, yea a pe^ce of
bondage, yet it is at present forced back again unto it.

Thus at length you have a Letter, together with the occasion of it, which I
leave with you, and you to your rest, and for my self, would return if I
could with freedom and delight, to the embracing of my state of misery and
every particular pang of misery therein: And would subscribe my self if I knew
what I were, either in my self or in relation to thee. Or at least I would bid
thee farewell, if I could but speak it understandingly: But thou can do it
without my bidding thee. Do that and only that which thou art led to by
infallible light and pure power, and then thou treadest in the steps in which I
long to follow thee. But away with fancies, conceits and imaginations, though
fastened upon the word, or fancied to be flowing from the Spirit.

Truth, Truth, Truth, true Life, true Light, true Power, not a connterfeit
Image, but the thing it self, Oh where is it Walford? Do not deceive me, but
tell me whether thou have it or no? How joyful would it be to me were I
satisfied that it were upon the march, and had already taken possession of some
of my fellow Prisoners! But how foolish and vain am I! Sure it is time to
break off.

June 11.
NOW my present state contradicts this, for my pangs of grief are so extreme,
that they seem to exceed my pangs of fury, and my spirit as restless under
them, as it can be under the other, My spirit would feign say, O awake not my
love till he please, but the sharpness of grief will not suffer. Then my
Spirit burst forth into reasonings, This is but thy will to have thy beloved
present, it is his will to be absent, thou say thou would have thy will fall
and his only stand, Can this be so and yet thou so vehemently greive because
thy will is crossed and his fulfilled? Then grief gives my spirit such a nip
that it is glad to be rid of such thoughts. At last said my Spirit within me,
lie down under this grief, pass through grief as well as fury, let it
work, let it rend, let it tear. This is like an heap of stubble, turns
grief into such a flame that it torments more; that the poor wretch cannot
possibly lyestill, or stir, but still whenever it does, is worst

Me thinks I cannot but take notice what a grievous Lyarsence is, it will
still be judgeing and yet is unable to judge concerning the things of sense,
but now says this is bitter, and by and by contradicts it self. Now I am wise
and can observe the folly of sense, I look to be met with for this.

12. Letter.
Sir,
I Can cheerfully serve providence in writing to you, though I had rather do
it in silence, for I know that God does most when man does least. Yet since God
is pleased in some measure to come in with them, and the Spirit is drawn out to
desire them, I am the more willing to correspond with you in this kind, you do
well in eying God more then me in them, yet God will be most glorious, when
his dispensations will be so naked, as we can eye him in nothing but
himself. God will ere long let us see that means are but vailes, though in a
compliance with our weakness he has made use of them; while he appeared by
candlelight, and in darker discoveries he made use of Candlesticks, he gave
as Paul says, Ephesians. 4. Some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some
Pastors and Teachers, till we all come in the unity of the faith and the
knowledge of the Son of God to a perfect man, etc. And when that which is
perfect is come, that which is in part shall be done away. God has hitherto
(as Joseph did by his brethren) spoken to us by an interpreter, because he
would act at more distance, but when grace and love can contain no longer, God
will (as Joseph did) command all to go forth, and cry out I am he, and show
himself in uncovered clearness; this administration God has entered upon
already in some of his people, and they begin to get a glimpse of the face of
God, and are acquainted with immediate actings in their own hearts. I think
the last means that God will make use of, will be such as the creature will be
glad to be free from, I mean persecution, reproach, poverty, etc, and possibly
somewhat more terrible and contrary to wise and proud flesh, then all this; for
as for these means of preaching, praying, gathering, wherein the creature can
be active and hououred, and serve God and it self, and go half with him (as
I may say) in point of honor, the creature will with a great deal of
reluctance be drawn from them, for truly there is much credit comes into us by
such things, and usually those who openly hate us, do inwardly honor us for
them, besides the secret confidence and comfort that our selves and friends
have in them: But when God shall administer under such means as we shall be
more passive in, and such as will sift us to the very soul and spirit, and let
us know all that is in our hearts, such as will cause ^s to be suspected of our
selves, slighted by others, forsaken of our friends, and such too as have not
only been one flesh, but one spirit with us; when religion shall come to that
pass, that he that will profess Christ, must profess poverty, disgrace, etc.
then we shall be glad to be freed from the means, and to have God be all in
all, for in this way that Saints are in for present, they are so rich and
abounding, as I do not wonder, they are offended that God will strip the
creature naked, and be all himself. Verily its a terrible thing for one that
has thriven in the things of God, and grown rich in reputation, to be
administered in such a way as Professors themselves will think him an Apostate,
an Atheist, and those that are more charitable, a deluded or a mad man; well,
God in himself will make amends for God in the severest dispensations. And
there is that man-child ere long to be brought forth in us in spirit and truth;
(which we have hitherto been delivered of in flesh and dark appearances) and
when he comes, the wilderness and solitary place shall be glad for him, or as
Esaias in another place, We shall return to Sion with Songs and everlasting joy
upon our heads, and John carries it further yet, 1 John 3. 2. When he shall
appear we shall be like him, for we shall know him as he is.

Your loving etc.

13. Letter.
Sir.
I Lately received three Letters from you and some Books for which I thank you:
As for Mr. Sedgewicks book I am not to tell you at present what I think of it;
God will do great things by himself: the Army and all that they settle, must
be destroyed without hands; the Spirit will blow upon all flesh, and yet they
are to settle, because drawn out so to do; and their setting up is Gods work,
as well as his throwing down; he does the one by the creature, the other by
himself. I think the intentions of the Army are in their kind so righteous, as
man will not be able to dissolve them; but because all flesh is gr^sse, it must
wither, God will be great to the ends of the earth, and every thing shall be
restored into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God; the heavens shall no
longer con^^^^ him: The earth shall be filled with knowledge of God: the earth
shall be sanctified by the Word, by the manifestation of God upon it; things
shall not be morally but spiritually restored; the Serpent shall be shut out of
Paradise; the Tree of Life shall grow on both sides the River: Publicans and
Sinners shall rejoice, the wise and prudent shall mourn, all the beasts of the
field shall rejoice and feed on the Tree of Life; the Serpent shall be glutted
with dust, judgment shall dwell in the wilderness; the highway shall be
holiness; there shall be no more sin, for there shall be no more self, and
no more curse, but the fruit of the earth shall be beautiful and comely, for
death and hell shall be cast into the lake of fire: Thou art righteous oh Lord
which art, which wast, and shall be, because thou have judged thus: Let the
heavens be glad and the earth rejoice; Let the Sea roar, and the fulness
thereof; for he comes, for he comes to judge the earth, he shall judge the
world with righteousness, and the people with truth.

Yours in the Lord.

14. Letter.
Sir,
YOURS came to my hands, when your friends were with me, who all of them in
much freedom enjoy your bondage, till he that has the Keys of the
bottomless Pit shall release you. Its good being in Hell sometimes for
variety, and to be in the Sea, to see the wonders of God in the deep, I have
been lately my self in the bottom of it, where I found a Pearl, that is
richer then the earth, and I doubt not but providence will prepare you a table
in the wilderness too. It has been the Lot of all of us to be where you are,
and I think some of us stay behind on purpose to bear you company. The
bright day must be brought in by the darkest night, and the voice at midnight
will be, the Bridegroom is come. Since the flesh must dye, it were well it
were killed at once, yet since the execution is so terrible, its mercy we dye
by degrees, dye daily, and if we did not dye too, so as to perceive that we
dye, it would do us no good; however it is best you should be dispensed as you
are, because God will have it as it is, whose will is the rule of goodness,
and not our understanding.

I conceive the reason why you have not heard from those your friends all this
time, is, because they were not at home; they were absent from the Lord, sure
it will not be always thus; but so long as there is any thing of earth in us,
there will be Eclipses and absence: when we are caught up into the air we
shall be ever with the Lord.

Yours in the Lord.

15. Letter.
Loving Sister,
MY Love remembered to you, and to the rest of my Sisters, hoping that you are
in good health, as I am at this present; These lines are for to certify you
concerning the present dealings of God with me: He has been pleased to make
known much of himself, and does make me claim my ownes with himself, saying;
That all things are of himself, and that he has made out himself into so many
beeings as there are visible creatures; and that God is complete in all things
unto visible apprehension; but it is the great wisdom of God, for to complete
himself in that being, that the wisdom of the world cannot comprehend him, for
God now is accomplishing that great mystery which he has spoken off in the
Letter; I will work a work in your days, that ye would not believe, although
it be told unto you; for this is that great mystery of God which he is now
accomplishing; that none but himself, can know himself in his being; and this
is the dealings of God, to beget of himself, and when he has begotten at the
fullness of time, he does bring forth, and when he has brought forth then does
he make known himself, to himself; for there is none but himself, does know
himself in his being: I have much more to say, but not being acquainted with
your Spirit at present, I shall let it rest; leaving you unto him, who does
order all things of himself: I am for the present a prisoner, in the account of
reason, yet at liberty; and did never enjoy more of the fullness of God, then
I have since I came into that place; for I see that it is not prison doors,
that will keep God out from himself; but he will shine in with so much glory,
as will cause so much excellency to the apprehension of a creature, that will
make him to say, I am not only willing to be bound, but to die in the
enjoyment of my God; Thus desiring you to remember me to my loving friends, I
rest

Your Brother

Letter 16.
Sir,
AT present, I have no freedom to answer the Letter, but am glad to hear from
you: the main ground of my shattering, lies here: I am disappointed of that
which I had as certain an evidence of in my spirit, as any thing that ever
passed through me at any time, which sits so near me, as I think, it will
hasten my death; it was the only thing in the world my heart was set on; and I
used to say, there was nothing betwixt God and me, but it; in that, I am happy,
and at a great deal of ease, that I have lost every thing that my heart was
inordinate on, but the disappointment of that which came with so much certainty
into my soul, is the only thing that so much unsettles me. I have no thoughts
of going in a private or more plausible way to heaven; neither was I over much
under that temptation. I have no thoughts of carrying my reputation whole to
heaven; it is too much torn already, and I am glad it is so. I think no
temptation but one of this nature I mention, could possibly shake me as it
does: what you say, concerning the burning of the dross, that did accompany
these actings, I close with, and happily there is no more in it: I like well your
living in the light, and will of God; its a sweet being, and which for the
present, I am debarred of: I pray you let me hear as aft as you can; I love
your letters, not only for your sake, but their own; besides it will somewhat
diminish my solitude. I have no freedom to go to, -- though often sent for; but
to sit still and enjoy my own unquietnes,

I am yours,
Farewell.
Letter 17.
Sir,
I Use not after a free proposal of truth, to prosecute it in a carnal way,
either by answering the argument of others, or enforcing it with my own; truth
will do better without our tampering with it; and we cannot force our passage
to spiritual things by dint of discourse; but must wait for power from on high:
where as you are scrupled, that Christ was not often mentioned in my letter;
you know there may be much of Christ in effect, where there is but little in
appearance; and that has bin the great unhappines of the world, that we have
had so much of Christ in sound, and so little in substance.

For your jealousy; that what I said concerning the departure of Heaven and
earth, might be a delusion: I refer you to that proof in Esaias that accompanied
it; and if you think the scripture to be rather pretended, then really made use
of, in favor of what was writ: I confess I give so much to the dictates of
God in my heart, as to entertain them upon their own authority, and know God so
well, as I dare take his word without his hand: Neither do I think that only
to be the word of God which is written; the Apostle seems to extend it further,
Ephesians. 6. 17. where, the article (^) in the original refers to spirit, as if
he had said, which spirit is the word of God. See Jo. 6. 63. it is only the
word that is Spirit, that can do us good; for the letter of the word, can
only produce a literal evidence, and for that purpose I cited scripture in a
condescension to your weakness, til God would be pleased to set it on with the
inward as well as the outward word: whereas you think Satan will be exceedingly
advantaged by the denial of scripture, I think so too; but it will be by a
denial of the Spirit, and not the literal scripture; for we know it is the
bright appearances of Spirit in the Saints, that will make an end of him: And
in relation to this brightness of the coming of Christ, and this day star
arising in the heart; the scripture is called, a light shining in a dark place:
and soken of there as a letter light, that must give place to a greater: 2 Pet.
1. 19. For your resolution of waiting upon God in that light you have, you do
well; he that believes makes not have, and (as you say) its vision that must
convince you, and nothing else: Be of good comfort, the vision is for an
appointed time, but at the end it shall speak and not lie; though it tarry wait
for it, because it will surely come, it will not tarry, Hab. 2. 3.

Your loving friend, etc.

18. Letter.
Sir,
I DO a little depart from my self, in the endeavoring the satisfaction in
such a carnal way as this; my writing will not do that in a long time which
your waiting may do shortly; that which must do you good is not discourse but
vision, and that is for an appointed time; our seasons of refreshing are in the
hand of God, and silence is the earnest of comfort, and the satisfaction is
then nearest, when you are content it should be as far of as God would have
it. For your desire of being with me, I look on it not only as a
signification of the love, but as a smoking of the flax which will blaze ere
long notwithstanding all that water which I perceive has been cast upon it.
For the jealousy of your friends in returning to me, so far as it may relate
to your present exercise, I am well content you should be where you are, if
that work be of God, which ( I hope) is begun in you, they cannot frustrate
it, and if it be not, I cannot further it; besides I rather desire you should
be set in such circumstances as the work of God in you may have less
dependence on man and more upon God; and if in the midst of all oppositions,
truth shall make good its being in you, you must then needs cry out, that this
was the finger of God. Concerning that which scruples you about Christ and the
Scriptures, I shall only say this, if God will take them away in flesh and
restore them in Spirit, we have not lost but improved them, we have hitherto
had a very low and fleshly use of both. Your temptation herein seems to be the
same with the Disciples, who in that low and literal administration, could not
endure to hear of Christ's departure, when as by that means his presence was
improved, they who had him with them before, had him in them afterward, as we
have had likewise in our measure, in a dispensation of gifts and graces; out of
which if Christ shall withdraw, and return in a more immediate and naked
administration of himself upon us, as ( I believe) he is now beginning in the
spirits of many of his people; we have more of Christ then ever. I could draw
out this at large, in reference to your present scruple, but the carrier
hastens me, and I can but satisfy the flesh or reason, its the inward
anointing that must satisfy the Spirit, and lead you into all truth.

Your loving Friend,

19. Letter.
Dear Soul
I Received thy Letter, and am very sensible of thy condition being called of
God every moment into his worke-house, where I met with such employment, as
has drunk the well of peace and joy for ever, and I have no hope ever to see
those streams flow again but would be glad to be in the bottomless pit for
ever. If Gods presence did not always kindle such a fire, before which I
cannot stand; and I must say, Who can stand when he appears to famish all the
Gods of the earth, and to hide himself from himself, which condition makes
me reell to and frow like a drunken man, and often cry out in the bitterness of
spirit, I would I had never been borne, but whilst I am pouring of my
complaints into thy bosom, a noise of peace began to appear and said,
affliction is the Saints for a moment, but the worlds for ever; the Saints to
refine them, but the worlds consume them for ever: O how could I mourn over
the ungodlike men and women of the world, for who is so God-like as they that
can tell what a crucified Christ is in their own spirits that can show his
wounds, and say, he is dead in me, which the world cannot I am sure: but I
shall not long mourn for them, and for often I know the last groan is gone
forth of my breast that ever I must groan for them; but I must go forth in
judgment with my Father, and praise him for the victory which he will have
over them.

Son farewell, for a little season, while our all will bring us together again
in himself and place us in the still fountain of peace and, joy for ever.
Farewell.
20. Letter.
Sir,
I Must needs write, though happily 'twere better for you I did not, I am
sensible of your condition and cannot but in this fleshly way of counsel and
comfort correspond with you, when as if my mouth were shut, God would open his,
and speak that peace in a moment, which I know better how to darken then
declare, for I am clearer in nothing then this, that our tampering with the
means does veil God, though I confess while Saints were under an inferior
administration: our use of means might be of some service to us. I see now God
in his most glorious flowings upon our hearts, either uses no means, or such
as proud flesh would think fitter, to hinder then promote such an end; you
little think that the persecution (for it is no other) that you have undergone
of late, has done you much more service, then either my presence or Letters,
and it were best for you that persecution had had its perfect work and that I
had stood still, and not seconded you at all: I knew well, that when you were
at the lowest ebb, and confessing the work of God in you, to be nothing but a
delusion, that you were then traveling with a more excellent discovery, which
would arise with so much glory and evidence upon your Spirit, as it would
swallow up all opposition, and turn into such a disappointment of flesh and
blood, as would confound all that sought to captivate the appearances of God in
you, and to glory in the flesh: How unanswerable are the discoveries of God in
you, which when both your friends and self had disowned, you should yet
vindicate their own being, in the soul. For your desire of coming to me, if
it proceed from a weariness of your condition at Norwich, or a carnal
confidence in my presence, you will certainly be frustrated in the end, you
are best where God has set you, Read Esaias 28. 16. and 2 Cor. 12. 9, 10. and
let me add withal, if you desire to run that course that I think providence
will direct me in, you must resolve upon reproach, poverty, persecution, what
not, for I am persuaded that I shall undergo all this, therefore be well
advised and consider before hand what a compliance with me will cost. Truly
whiles Saints were in a mixed condition, though the world hated the Spirit in
them, yet they could close with what was flesh, and both met in that medium:
But when flesh shall be wholly swallowed up in Spirit the whole world almost
will hate us, there being nothing left that their approbation will take hold
of; when there shall be nothing but God within, there will be nothing but
enmity without: It Is enough that the love of God will make amends for the
hatred of all the world; and the less we have of God in the creature, the more
we have of God in himself. Those times make haste upon the world, wherein that
terrible Prophecy in the 21. of Luke will be fulfilled, though I conceive it
will be in spirit and not in flesh, and such a way as our reason has
imagined. I am astonished at the glory that will be revealed in the Saints,
when God has so shattered us out of all inferior actings, as the world will
count us Atheists, and not only the world, but even the Saints themselves so
far as they judge according to the outward appearance; the Son himself
must deliver up the Kingdom to his Father, which is an administration of gifts
and graces, before God can be all in all.

Be of good comfort, there is that mystery of godliness and glory to be
manifested in us, with which all the sufferings of this life, and whatever else
can betide us in our way to it, are not worthy to be compared; in the very
expectation whereof I am seized with more joy then my poor heart can hold.

Yours in all conditions.

Letter 21.
Sir,
I Purposed the last week to have saluted my friends, and see now the reason
why providence disappointed me, which I shall keep secret to my self. For your
Letter I should have been troubled at it, had not I learned to see God in every
thing, and been acquainted with those traverses of carnal reason and unbelief
in my own Spirit; you have done no more then what I have done my self,
concluding both with my self, and in the company of my friends, the same things
to be no better then delusions, and under that temptation of blasphemy against
the Spirit, have rested till a brighter appearance of God has broke through
all, and swallowed up that veil of death and darkness in so much victory; as I
must needs confess my self to have been more then a conqueror, though it has
cost me dear first. For the present I shall advise nothing, you are where
providence has disposed you, and 'twill be best for you to follow the tract of
God in your own Spirit, and stay here till an act of confidence and assurance
shall release you; for if you struggle or make have, you intend your bondage:
be you assured that the substance of what I said to you, will bear down heaven
and earth before it, and truly till then this old administration which God has
worn so long, he is now uncloathing himself of, be removed the presence of
Saints, and that glorious manifestation of the Sons of God, which has
entertained the expectation of the creature so long, cannot be as we have
plainly in Esaias 13. 12. 13. I will make a man more precious then fine gold yea,
a man then the golden wedge of Ophir; therefore I will shake the heavens and
the earth, etc. And in the 14. It shall be as a chased Roe, and as a Sheep,
that no man takes up, etc. one thing I will add more, because I see your
temptation grows with some confidence upon yon, since you seem to have
extinguished the smoking flax by powering water upon it, and repenting of what
you have done; let me thus far advise, pour on more water, do it the second
time, do it the third time; and observe if the smoking flax prevail not upon
it; and that spark lick it up; and the God that answers by fire, let him be
God. I could attempt such satisfaction in a carnal way; but truth is a more
immediate and naked thing, and works best without the activity and contribution
of the creature; neither will I humble God so far, as to prostitute truths of
that nature; its the patience of God they may yet be proposed to the world: I
doubt there will a quick providence pass upon it, and the word is like to be;
He that has ears to hear, let him hear; and he that is unjust let him be
unjust still; and he that, etc. Revel. 22. 11, 12. For behold, I come quickly,
and my reward is with me to give, etc. Every man's work shall be manifested by
fire, for the day shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire, and
as Paul has it, 1 Cor. 3. in a settled expectation, of which I possess my own
Spirit, and your present temptation in a great deal of patience and rest,

Yours.

Letter 22.
Sir,
MY good friend, I wish my occasions had been such, as would have given me
leave to have seen you suddenly, and to have come over as I promised. I desire
you would dispense with me till Michaelmass, and then I hope to have a
prosperous journey by the will of God to come to you, both to refresh and be
refreshed by you; I hope the Lord is a working that in England which will e're
long give his people solid cause of refreshment: we have already the experience
of that which a few days ago we did but expect, and scarce expected. I hope,
as the Lord removes impediments from without, and paves the way of out peace
with the pride and projects of our enemies; so he will take away all
impediments within: our enemies being not only those of our own kingdom, but
of our own hearts, there being the same principles of fleshly wisdom and
carnal reasoning against the kingdom of Christ within us, as there is in the
world without us. Doubtless the day of the Lord will be upon every thing that
exalts it self against the government of Jesus Christ in Spirit: shaddows of
all sorts, begin to fly, and day already discloses, and the openings of heaven
upon the Soul are very glorious; and that spiritual prediction of the Prophet
begins to receive its accomplishment. Esa. 25. 7. The Lord will destroy in this
mountain the face of the covering cast over al people. It concerns us quietly
to expect the outgoings of the Spirit in us, and the leadings forth from faith
to faith, from glory to glory, from flesh and form, and letter, to spirit, and
so to more spirit, at last into all spirit, till we have our selves in Jesus
Christ, and our God be all in all. I am sorry, Sir, I am cast into such a
strieght of time, as I must necessarily break off; otherwise I could with some
delight have entertained my self with this argument: I mean Gods administering
of us immediately in himself; but of this more when I see you,

Yours in the Lord Jesus.

Letter 23.
Dear friend,
THe Fathers love has of late been much manifested toward me, exceeding has
that glory been in which I have dwelt since last I saw you; my joy unspeakable,
my rest unutterable, my peace unconceiveable:

Having therefore received such large and plenteous fillings flowing from the
heart of the most High; I can do no less than acquaint you with some few
tastes and relishes of my late enjoyments, as in manner follows:

On Monday the 24th of this instant; I was in the Evening at a friends house in
Cambridge-shire, where, (being in a familiar conference with some of my
acquaintance) it pleased the Father so freely to unbosome himself in me by such
clear demonstrations of his presence as I never before beheld; insomuch that I
appeared to my self as one out of my self translated into the substantial
and pure enjoyment of that love and peace which I have usually before, either
but only heard, or at least darkly seen and beheld through the vails of
outward administrations.

That which was spoken by me under these workings, was faced with such an
eivdent appearance of spirit and power, as that it struck astonishment in the
hearts of those present; some thereat gushing out into tears, others possessed
with shaking and trembling; and one there was, who was so filled with joy, as
that he could not refrain singing and leaping; my heart was so overcharged with
the presence of the most High, that I desired a more retired being; and to that
end, withdrew to my Bed, where I thought, I might in my more singular addresses
expend my desires upon my received glory: I lay down in my Bed with
unexpressible comfort, being overcome with the beauty of holy delights; I
endeavored to cover this fire with silence; but it grew so hot within me, that
no longer I could retain it; but was forced to declare to my Bedfellow (a
friend of mine) how it was with me; I told him, I was overcome with love; I
was so replenished with divine rest and consolation, that I could not contain
my self: I began to sing and rejoice, being every minute apt to be carried out
of my Bed to dance and leap about the room; but this noise soonvanished away
by the power of that voice which commanded silence; saying, Rest and be still
in thine own Love: Hereat a deep silence possessed me, yet not a jot of my
glory diminished, but only brought under the power of a heavenly silence; yea,
there was silence in heaven.

My friend lying by me, was suddenly surprised with a miraculous power from
above, his body did shake and tremble in such a manner, as I never saw; who
declared the coming of the day of God in a language divine and powerful,
sometimes singing and rejoicing, in so much, that the people of the house being
thereat awakened, wondered what the matter should be.

All this while, my lovely silence constrained me, yet under unspeakable
enjoyments; my breath was by fits taken from me, and the divine life did so
overpower the natural, as that I expected a daily motion out of this form or
body: nay how willing was I to commit my body to the power of an eternal
sleep, and to enter into that immensity which was able to comprehend me?

We spent almost the whole night, under the power of these raptures, while at
last toward morning I felt a timely withdrawing of the rigor and vehemence of
this power, which I was made freely willing to part with at the Fathers
pleasure; for I have learned both how to want, and how to abound.

Yet notwithstanding to this day there remains a virulent and powerful
impression of the same upon my heart, which I hope shall never be raced out: I
then saw, and do still behold a perfect reconciliation brought forth in me, to
all that heretofore I have been at enmity with; Hell, Sin, Death, Devil,
are all in a league with me; I have fellowship with God in all these, I care
not who knows it: Sin has lost its strength, Hell its torment, Death its
victory, the Devil his enmity, we are all friends, Hallelujah, God omnipotent
reigns in all these. Good Lord! What a poor, low life is that which subsists
only in those things, that bring forth our advantage? I have now learned to
live upon the highest disadvantages that may be; I can fetch life out of death,
good out of evil, yea, enjoy light in darkness, peace in torment, Heaven in
Hell; I know nothing can hurt, nothing can destroy in this Mountain where I
live; Shall Sin? alas that is to weak, the Law which was its strength is
departed: it shall no more have dominion over me, for I am not under the Law, I
can pass through all imaginable evil in the light of divine righteousness,
and receive not the least damage; Shall Hell? O its a lake of comfortable
torment, I live in it joyfully, I love it dearly. I know the breath of God as
rivers of brimstone kindles hell in me, it burns, it scorches, and so let it
till the will of God be fulfilled; I can pass through these flames, yea lie
down amongst them, and not one hair of my head shall perish by them; I
glorify and rejoice in the very fires.

I shall now desire you to acquaint my Fre^nds with these dealings of God
toward me, if happily any thing may be given in upon their spirits about it.
All that I have (at present) is this: I look upon it as an evident sign of
some dreadful appearance of the Son of man; for these two things were given
in with much power upon my heart.

First, That the God of peace shall tread Satan under feet shortly.

Secondly, Lift up your head, your redemption draws nigh.

Read, Understand, Rejoice.
24. Letter.
A Letter written by a young man about 19. years of age, the Evening before he
dyed, being Saturday-night; he was well as was supposed about 11. of the
clock, and about 2. the next morning dyed, and left a Letter, of which this is
a Copy, with this Superscription.
To his dear Sisters, Mrs. Hester Langham Mrs. Sarah Brewer, Mrs. Thomason,
Fison, and others, the Saints of God, when deceased.
YE Saints and Spouse of the King of loves, the Lord Jesus, the delight of
delights himself, the Lord Jesus from everlasting with the Sons of men,
Love, our fountain with those lovely streams of divine and superna^urall
glory, who now dwells in us and we in him. Our Savior says, Yet a little, and
the world sees me no more, but ye see me (precious) for a small season, a
little while has this world seen me, but low they see me no more, but ye
shall see me, for I am gone to our fathers house, to lie in the everlasting
armos of eternal love, in the infinite embraces of eternal sweetness, to be
there where ye shall be all together with me, and all Saints to all
eternity. Rejoice now together for me, and if you love me you will rejoice,
because I go to the Father; for me indeed to live is Christ, but to dye is
gain. And sure I am, that Saint Paul's desire for a long time by a flame of
love, has been kindled in my soul, even to be dissolved and to be with
Christ, which is best of all: I now live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me;
Lo the the time comes when I dye, yet not I, but this old man which I carry
about with me: Oh precious Saints! How sweet? how pleasant are the thoughts of
death to me? Surely sorrow may be for a night, but joy comes in the morning:
Love is that bond of union, between me and my beloved, union is that
perfection of love, love thoroughly desir^s perfect communion: What now hinders
this but death? surely this must needs be pleasing unto me, being the means to
so lovely an end; I am here but as a wayfaring man which tarries but for a
night; and surely what are the pleasures of this night at the best? They are
but darkness in themselves, and in their greatest light but resemblances of
another which is far greater; But behold the night is past, the day appears,
and I am gone to my beloved, he that should come, is come, and has not
tarried, and oh blessed, yea thrice blessed is his coming to me, where I can
see him face to face, whom my soul so much longed for: The veil is rent, and
I now no longer see him, as in a glass, but in his own native beauty, and
supernatural glory: Blessed Saints, I leave you and go to my Father, surely
whether I go you know, and the way you know; think it not strange cone rning
this my fiery trial, by death and sep^^ation from you, for lo the time
comes, in which we shall be no more separated, but as we are one, so shall we
ever be, inseparable from our own beloved. Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord God of
Sabbath, a holy rest, a Sabbath of eternal rest, am I gone to celebrate; Oh
ye holy Saints, the voice of my Beloved, behold he comes leaping upon the
Hills, and skipping upon the Mountains, Lo he comes and that quickly, he
comes, and now quickly am I gone, of all Beloveds, none is like to mine, the
melodious voice sings sweetly in mine ear, even of Angels themselves, but that
new Song of love, the sweet lovely Song of Saints, gloriously glorified with
their Beloved, is harmonious indeed: What shall I now say of these things, I
cannot now fully apprehend them as it is, but am now comprehended of them,
therefore lie I down and rest with this persuasion and full conclusion, sealed
by the witness of the Spirit unto my Soul, that what my Beloved is, so shall
I be, and where be is, thither am I gone: Then dear Sisters and precious
Saints, make haste and tarry not, that are here on earth in imperfection, so
that now in heaven in perfection we may live and for ever enjoy Joys
unspeakable and full of glory. Farewell dear Saints, farewell, farewell,
though I now leave you and go away from you, yet I shall see you again, and
when I see you, so I rejoice eternally together with you; in this life I have
been yours, and here together with you; and surely death disjoynts not our
Spirits, though our Bodies; therefore in another life shall we be as members,
so Saints glorified in our glorious Jesus, and with him who is our delight, in
whom you are, to whom you are, to whom I go, and with whom we shall remain,
Priests and Kings to our God.

Dear Saints I rest, and the God of rest be with your spirits for ever, and
when you see this, think on him, who was here your fellow Disciple, but now,

Your glorified Brother, WILLIAM LANGHAM.

25. Letter.
The Copy of a Letter, as it was sent from Mrs. T. P. in behalf of Mrs. E. P.
To a Congregation of Saints in London, under the form of Baptism.
DEAR brethren in the bowels of love and meekness, I kindly salute you,
wishing you an increase of all faithfulness and true knowledge in the mystery
of Christ: The cause of my present writing is to acquaint you, that providence
has lately brought a letter to my hand, directed to my husband, concerning one
Mrs. P. once a member with you; which woman, say you, for scandalous evils, was
cast out: Now it being some years since it was done, I humbly desire a little
to reason with you about the grounds, why this still remains upon your spirits,
seeing Christ says, forgive ye one another, as I forgive you; and God is said
to remember our sins no more; this therefore is a note of forgiveness, not
to remember; and sure we should show our selves children of our heavenly
father; But further I desire before the Lord, that you examine your own hearts
in this thing, what your end is in it; if it be that you think, she is not
worthy to have a livelihood amongst men; then why do you not either by the
Civil Law (if that will take hold of the offense) or by some other way (if
nothing will satisfy you but her blood) take some present course that may put
an end to this great difference? but if you think this be too gross, or more
then the offense requires; then I beseech you, for the Lords sake, to consider
your own actings in this thing, whether you do not as much as in you lies,
carry on the same design (though more closly from the eyes of the world) which
sure before the Lord, can appear no other, but the hunting after her life; nay,
is it not more, then to take off one single life at once? for which is greater
cruelty, for a Tyrant to take a man's life at once? or by degrees? and then your
selves be judges, whether your proceedings toward her be not a killing all the
day long: for you cannot be ignorant that she has no livelihood amongst men,
but what she earnes by her hands: and your defaming her in this manner cannot,
in an ordinary way, but deprive her of that, and so at last bring her blood
upon you: If you say, you acquaint none but the Saints with it, it is evident
to the contrary; for your open publishing it in the Counsel of War, caused
the world to take notice of it, and yet your spirits rest not here; truly dear
friends, as the evil spirit wrought in her one way, when she was with you; so
consider whether the fame spirit, do not highly work in you at this time
another way; the Lord give you understanding in all things: But if her life be
not that which you aim at, then is it those divine discoveries of life and
light, which God makes out to the world by her? if it be so, then you are to
know, that he is too strong you strive withal; but about this I would a
little quere: first, whether do you think, that because such evils were
manifest in her, when with you; therefore it is impossible now that any good
should be brought forth by her? do you not hope to grow better and better?
But secondly, is it not Gods usual way to manifest himself there highest,
where in time past he was by the evil spirit kept lowest? yea, does he not
suffer himself for this very end many times, thus to die in appearance, and to
leave a soul to it self, that it may see what it is in it self, and learn
to die to it self, that so he may have the more glorious resurrection in that
soul? I beseech you for the Lords sake to consider these things: As for her
outward person, I conceive she cares as little for it as you can; therefore you
may take your fill of trampling on it; but I beseech you be careful how you
meddle with the spirit that breaths in her; for surely brethren, I know not what
spirit manifested it self in her while with you; I am sure (and I speak
nothing but the truth) that I have found a most divine spirit in her, as far
as I could discern, and that which comes to the spirit and life of things; and
in this me thinks you should rejoice, for truly, I have heard many professors,
and seen many professions, but to my knowledge, I never heard one come so
near the power as she does: I do not speak this as being affected with any
person, party, or opinion; I bless my God I am now (in his strength) delivered
from that, though some have falsely affirmed my being deluded by her; but I am
confident I can say with Paul, and that not only repeating the letter, but in
truth; that those things which I have received, have not been from man, nor
woman, nor any other thing, but by the mere revelation of Jesus Christ in me,
God manifesting himself in my own flesh: and therefore they much wrong both
her, and me, that affirm it; but especially they wrong or speak a lie of that
God that did it for me: and because I hear it so reported amongst you, I
thought good to write one word to clear it, that so whether you will hear, or
whether you will forbear, the word of truth might judge you; give not ear
therefore to all you hear, though from brethren, least you be brought into a
snare; for since the defection of the Churches, men, yea good men, have been
such lovers of themselves and their own opinions, that they will speak
largely, upon little ground, to keep up their own glory, God having not yet
undone them; for were they once undone men, they would willingly be what God
would have them, however the world accounts of them.

There is another thing which came to my care, that it should be given into the
Counsel by your two witnesses, that the said Mrs P. should say, that you cast
her out for difference in judgment; and when Collonell Rich and Collonell
Harison asked to whom she spoke it, they said to some of Abington: Now indeed
my husband said to you, that he thought such a thing; but when he came home
and saw so little ground for his thoughts, I think he had but little comfort
in telling you so; and then, brethren, if you upon such slender grounds should
act in this strange manner against her, affirming this thing so publicly, I
think you have cause to be humbled for it, and justly to repent of your
evil; I desire you to bear a little with me, for truly it appears to me,
rather to be your rage of spirit, then your true love, either to her, or
truth; for me thinks it would savor more of a true Christian spirit, if you
had first spoken with her, and have seen what change the Lord has wrought in
her, as knowing that Mary out of whom seven Devils had been formerly cast, was
made the first messenger of Christ's Resurrection; yea, and she must bring it to
the Apostles, and not the Apostles to her: You say, in your letter, that you
left her to the judgment of the great day; and I beseech you, brethren, do
you not, again take her into your own day? for truly I believe that day in
a measure has come upon her, and the Lord himself is at work with her;
therefore do not fear but the work will be well done; only we, as well as
she, must have patience in it, and surely this is the confidence that I have
concerning her, that she has seen evil in that estate she walked in with you;
and certainly, God is good to her in this, showing her what an abominable
spirit of wickedness may be hid under the greatest practices and professions
of externals; not that these are the cause of it; no, the gold and the silver
is mine, says the Lord; but we bestowing it upon our lovers, and making our
selves great with his ornaments, he is fain, in love to us, to take us from
them, or they from us, and so find out a more sprirituall administration to
perfect us in: Oh the infinite riches of our God! where does his bounty and?
sure his ways of love are unsearchable, e^d his paths of mercy, in which he
follows anore fallen man: and poor backsliding souls, are past finding out;
how narrow are our capacities? we judge as men; We may think as some did of
David, that there is no help for such things in God; but all things in truth
will be found possible with him, even where they are altogether past our
thoughts and conceptions, and become to us impossible; I beseech you therefore
be persuaded to bow down to him; I know you are conscious, that all judgment
is not committed unto you, and therefore it is possible you may not judge right
in this thing; for truly, brethren, we may conceive many things even by the
letter it self, and yet not living in that spirit that writ the letter, we may
err; I pray do not mistake me, as if I would any way speak slightly of the
letter, farther than it speaks of it self; no, I bless the Father for it, and
by sweet experience can say, that I was never so confirmed in it, now the Lord
has drawn me to him out of it, even in that spirit that wrote it; I am for the
conscionable use of it, but I would not abuse it; I am sure, those men that
would set it above the spirit, can hardly free themselves from that thing; I
hope, therefore you will not count it your excellency to walk in the letter,
but rather desire the Lord to perfect you in that spirit that writes the
letter, for then and never till then, shall we be able to walk by it aright,
and speak of the letter truly.

I have not yet acquainted my husband with your letter, I shall wait upon God
what answer to receive from you: for truly, dear brethren, upon serious
deliberation, I know not how to approve my self faithful in the eyes of God,
to my brethren here, if I should deliver it; for God having put it into my
hand, I must also see clearnes from him before I part with it: for though,
blessed be the father, we have a sweet hopeful people amongst us that wait
upon God, and have fellowship one with another; yet whether they may digest
such things as you write of, I really question; therefore it would be
unfaithfulnes in me, if I apprehending an evil to them, or any other, should
not as much as in me lies, prevent it; and this I shall do, by detaining the
Letter, till further manifestation from God what to do with it; Do not judge
me in this thing, I beseech you; I have one Judge, even the Lord, and he that
put it into my hand, will a^ length clear my integrity in it; I have nothing to
do for my self in it, the Lord knows, only to find out (if it may be) how I
may approve my self ^aithfull to men in the Lord and for the Lords ^ake.

Your desire I exceedingly like, that we may be kept from errors, and the Lord
keep us all from errors, but who must show us what error is, but the God of
truth himself? we have lived in error, and have sucked them in from our
cradles; and yet who will speak so much against error as we, stating our selves
still in the truth: My sweet friends, the day of truth is but now dawning upon
us, and how is it opposed, even by those that are children of truth, in their
measure? yet we have all looked for it, and prayed together for it a long
time; but truly now, we will not own our prayers, but turn away our face from
our Savior, because he comes not in such a garb as we imagined he would, when
we know its his prerogative to cloth himself with what flesh or garment he
pleases: brethren, what would you have? do you not know that a glorious day
has been spoken of ever since the Prophets, and the Apostles? Though the day
was dawned upon them, yet they bid their hearers not to be terrified, as if
that day were near; for says he, there must be a falling away first; and that
wicked one be revealed; notwithstanding Peter could them that he was a partaker
or that glory, that should be afterward revealed; However (says he, you have
a more sure word of Prophecy, to which ye do w^ll to take heed; as if he had
said: Brethren, we have been with the Lord in the mount, and have beheld that
excellent glory, but yet to you that have not so seen Christ, there is a more
sure word of Prophecy; for visions and revelations do most especially
confirm and strengthen those that have them; but here is a word that is spoken
to all, and is as a light shining in a dark place, therefore you do well to
take heed to it till the day dawn, and the day star arise in you own hearts,
and you be swallowed up with that glory, that now you expect and wait for;
only know this, that no private spirit can understand these Scriptures that
speak of that day, it must be the spirit of God alone; let us cease from our
own spirits therefore, for they are selfish and private, bound up to this and
that, and so would confine God also; but his Spirit is as large as himself; its
without bounds; its neither here nor there distinct, but it is individually
every where. But that which I desire you to consider from these Scriptures is,
that this day of falling away has been; and all the world has wondered after
the beast, since the Apostles time; therefore how near may we expect our glory;
we should not be troubling our selves therefore still with falling away, but
now look for a rising, for sure man has had his day, and now the Lord will
have his day: now seeing this day of the Lord must have a dawning, and some
Disciples may be taken up into the Mount, before other some; it should teach us
not to judge our brethren, that spcak of higher enjoyments then we have, for we
being behind should rather judge our selves, seeing we are more in the day of
man, and acknowledge our selves so to be, still looking for, and hastening to
the day of God, in which we may act self, or selfishly, no longer, but our God
may bring forth his own righteousness in us: and truly, brethren, you may be
satisfied in this, that we are very industrious to keep our selves from error,
but we know that in his strength we shall be perfected, and when himself comes
and speaks, then shall we know that it is he; and truly brethren, I would not
have you infidels but believing; this day has taken some unawares, and though
many may have it in notion, yet I am sure, that some have it in power.

I have one thing more to you concerning your letter, and truly I cannot but
wonder at it, that is, how you durst so peremptorily to judge the woman that
she brought a delusion for a vision of God, I beseech you consid er seriously
before the Lord, whether it was so or no, before you make it so public, and
send it forth with the authority of a Church: surely friends, you will much
abuse the authority of your Church, in affirming mere supposition for truth;
the Lord be pleased to open your eyes in this thing; it may be your father in
mercy desires, a little to plead with you by a weak instrument, and therefore
put the letter into my hand, that so he might put some stop to your furious
driving; and truly I can look upon it no other ways; therefore willingly meet
your God in this merciful act toward you; for if you do not, the dumb Ass
next time may reprove you; I confess, souls, I am the weakest of all, a poor
undone soul in my self; the Lord alone take all the glory, yet if I may be
useful, as being one of the body, in keeping you from doing greater evils, I
shall be willing and rejoice, though I go under never so great an odium my
self; for sure friends, account of me how you will, I am one of you and
tenderly affect you, and in this thing would have God truly exalted: For this
grace is given me to love truth under any appearance, though indeed, that may
sometimes appear to men to be truth which I cannot close with; but I mean any
appearance that my God comes in, and I hope shall be more and perfected in it;
and indeed it is sweet to me that he has given me, through mercy, to know his
voice from a stranger; It may be the world may judge me for it, because it
comes not in their form, but I shall rest in the Lord: well brethren, if you
see mercy to you in that which the Lord has spoken by me, receive it and
rejoice in him; it may be, I may prove to you as Abigail did to David, keep you
from shedding blood, and from avenging your selves with your own hand, the Lord
show us therefore what that scripture means, I will have mercy and not
sacrifice: there be many things in the letter of the scripture, which we
through weakness may think to be sacrifice as the Pharisees did, when God abhors
it, and will have none of it, in such a time as he calls for mercy; therefore he
bids us learn what that means: we may have it, and read it and speak it, but
to learn the inside of it, learn what it means, will be our comfort, and our
Crown; and truly my dear friends, I am persuaded, that this is a time, in
which, mercy is required of us toward our Sister, and not such sacrifice: If
you please to send me a word of answer, leave it with Mr. C. I do not think it
fit as yet, that you acquaint my husband with it, not for unlawfulness sake,
but inconveniency; for surely brethren, I am not willingly carried, to give you
or him, or any one offense; only as the Lord manifests it to be his will, and
then I must leave Father, and mother, and all, and cleave to him. Let me have
your answer as soon as you can: but I beseech you, do not answer me, but the
Lord, and then see how you can justify your selves; in him therefore shall I
wait for it, and dear souls, though I am nothing, and can do nothing in my
self; yet I beseech you do not reject any word of truth, love and sincerity
that God sends by my hand. Job says, He did not reject the cause of his Maid
servant, when it came before him, though the word says, they contended with
him: I can give you more satisfaction, if you please, how I came by the letter;
I am sure it was unexpected by me, only the Lord would have it so; and
therefore all your care must serve the Lords designs, to bring it to my hand
when my husband was not in town: do not therefore look upon me, but look to
the Lord, and use me as kindly as Job did his servant, reject not my cause, for
surely it is not mine: I leave you to the Lord, whom I desire rightly to guide
you in this thing, and am

Your sincere loving Sister and servant, from the greatest to the meanest of
you, T. P.
Abington, 26. March 1649.
26. Letter.
Dear Friend,
ENgagements from a true principle are not easily dislolved, and while we hold
the head, we cannot let go the members. I have considered you in the union of
life and truth; from whence flow my unfeigned respects to you, and wherein
consists the true enjoyment of your self: Vanity of vanity interposeth between
God and us, while we are below, and vexes our unquiet spirits; seeking
contentment in earthly relations, we wander too and fro, and return empty; but
when we close with the divine will, our distractions are composed, the
commotions of our distempred hearts are all sweetly silenced. Friend, when you
have (in the spirit) ascended far above all heavens, when you are above all,
even that God has made and (for a time) also ordained you to use, then may
you, and then will you be able to descend into the lowest parts of the earth,
and from thence again rise to the highest glory; Then will you have a true
sweet and comfortable use of the meanest condition in the world, out of which
you shall mount to the clearest enjoyment of the greatest happiness, and by a
continual intercourse between heaven and earth, you will at last come to
inherit the utmost, large and full extent of the Lords dominions. If you were
confined to that heaven only, as it has been received in the general notion
you would be straightened in your borders, and be deprived of part of your
portion and possession; for the earth as well as the heaven is filled with the
glory of God: from which if you were excluded, you must necessarily want that
piece of your right, whereof you were made an heiresse. When the ladder of our
eternal union is set between Heaven and Earth, between the divine and humane
nature, then may we both ascend and descend, one as freely as the other: our
heavenly state will not disdain our earthly, nor our earthly hinder our
heavenly; the true Angelical life has sweet communion with God in both.
Trouble, afflictions, and crosses in the world will administer consolation, and
be all your servants, helpers of your joy. God will be all, Union unto him
cannot be divided; the wings of the morning are not swift enough to outflie
him; the utmost parts of the earth, the farthest distance of sense, the broad
Sea, the greatest confusion of mind, the wide wilderness, the most solitary
sadness of heart cannot hide from his presence; Nay, if you go down into the
Hell of horror, your Ioule shall not be left there; his right hand of power,
and spirit of holiness, will raise you up again. I have endeavored to
discharge my respects to you, in these short and sudden lines, being now
hindered from enlarging by the courtesy and visites of my friends. My respects
of love presented --

I am, Your servant in Truth.
Aug. 20. 1649. Copi^ haec mut at ^^ mutandis typis mandetur.
27. Letter.
To I. I.
DEAR and loving Friend; whom I desire to own and to be one with and in the
fellowship of the Father, and the Son, in one eternal invisible and
ever-ruling Spirit, in and with which Spirit we are to walk, live and abide in,
after we are made one with it, which is and must be an inward, true and
invisible walking, and according to an inward, true and invisible rule, and not
after an outward and worldly manner, as the worldlings do; For my Kingdom is
not of this world, says Christ, my Kingdom is not of observation, and worldly
rudiments, for it is within you that consists not in any outward rule or
practice, all the true rules and directions of the Spirit is within, it is
visible, the truth of all things is within, the outward is not the truth, but
an Image of the truth, therefore to walk in outward forms, or ordinances, is
but to walk in an Image and not in the truth it self, but to walk in the
truth is to walk in the spirit, and if in the spirit then in God, for God is a
spirit, and he is the truth of the spirit and he that will be one with God
must be one with him in the spirit and in truth, as it is essential in God,
or else there can be no perfection, and then no true walking with God, to be
one with God, is to be nothing ones self, and to walk with God, is to walk
out of ones self: Enoch walked with God and was not, for God took him, he was
not; that is, he was not himself: No man can walk with God while he is
himself, a man as man cannot be said to walk with God; he may walk with man,
but not with God, nothing can be said to walk with God, but what is one, in
and with God, and therefore must be as God; for none can walk with God, but
God; No man has seen the Father, but the Son; he that ascended is the same
that descended, no man has nor never shall see the Father, but the Son: Then
none can be said to walk with God, but Jesus Christ who is God. And this
walking is invisible, that is, a communion of spirit in man; one man may have
communion with another as man, but none can have communion with God, but God;
light cannot have communion with darkness, nor darkness with light, but light
has communion with it self: Therefore that we are in the light, let us walk
as Children of the light, and not as the Children of darkness. But you will
say, Do we not walk with God in Ordinances? I answer, that ordinances are
not light, truth nor spirit, and therefore we cannot walk with God in them;
we cannot walk with God in any thing but in the light, in the truth, and in
the spirit, nor none can walk with God in these things, but the divine spirit,
or inward man, which is of God, and one with God; to walk with and in God, is
to walk in the truth and ordinances you cannot say are the truth, no more then
you can say the scripture is the truth, but if you will make it truth, you must
make it God, for there is but one truth, and that is God: One God and Father of
all, one Lord, one Faith and one Baptism, and all but one God and one truth.
God as he is in the word Christ Jesus, is the truth, and if we have heard of
him, and been taught by him as the truth is in Jesus; then shall we say, that
the scripture is not truth, but it tells us what is the truth; it says, It is
life eternal to know God, the true God, then to walk in the truth, is to know
the truth, and to know the truth is(...) know God only, and having known God,
w^^ know how to walk with God, and no man can know God, but God, no man can
know the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him. And
the Son has not truly revealed the Father to man, till man through Christ is
become the Son of God, and being the Son of God, he knows God, and is
known of God, and so is one with God, whereby he has acceptance to walk with
God. We should take it ill of them that tell us we know not God, but when we
come to know him indeed as God in his own eternal and essential being, we
shall then confess that we never knew him before, we have had many thoughts we
have known God, when alas we have known nothing of him, as he ought to be
known; to know God in any form, or ordinance, nay in any created excellency,
even the highest manifestation that ever we had of him among the creatures, is
but as an imagined or formal knowledge, which can be no perfect knowledge, it
is no true knowledge of God, to know him in any thing below himself, below the
divine and essential being of God; all things below himself are imperfect and
can give no true testimony of him, we receive tokens from men, and letters from
men by which we come to have some kind of knowledge of them, but if we never
see the person, we can have no true knowledge of him: the greatest
manifestation that ever we have of God, or the greatest knowledge we can have
of him, though it boby Angels if it be not by himself, it is not a true
knowledge, and can produce no true happiness, for they are all but as messengers
sent from him and is not himself, and till he comes himself in his own
substance that we see him as he is in himself, a God above and beyond all
gifts and graces which but as messengers were sent from him, we see him not
and then cannot know him as we ought. I am not the Christ, says John, I am but
sent before him, to prepare the way for him, and as be increases, I must
decrease, I must be nothing, that he may be all. Therefore while we see
ordinances any thing, gifts, graces, manifestations or any thing below God
himself to be any thing, so long we see not God to be all, and then know him
not as God, we may know him in all things after a manner, but it is an outward
external knowledge, and not a spiritual inward knowledge, and therefore no
true knowledge; yet this is the knowledge we have of him in ordinances, even
an eternal litterall knowledge, and according to this so we walk, and not
according to truth and perfection. But you will then say, Is it not the will of
God, that we should walk in ordinances. I answer that in way of permission, it
may be for a time, yet not for ever; but the will of God goes further* for this
is the will of God, even your sanctification, that all that are his should be
as himself, for be ye perfect, as he is perfect; perfection consists not in
ordinances, nor in any created excellence, but in God only, which is an
uncreated glory; therefore be ye perfect, as he is perfect, for that is the
will of your God, and ought to be the desire of all his, to be perfect, as he
is perfect, to walk as he walks, and to know as he knows, and in this we
shall be like unto God, that we may have fellowship with him, as the Apostle
says, walk in the light, as he is in the light; and then you shall have
fellowship with us, and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and the Son,
and this is a fellowship above all ordinances, and above all revealed things; a
man cannot have fellowship with God, and converse with him as God, till he is
separated from all relation. It is said in Prove. 18. 1. that through desire a
man having separated himself, seeks and entermidleth with all wisdom. That
is with God, a man cannot seek or intermeddle with the Creator till he is
separated from the creature. But you will say, are we not then to make use of
the creature, nor any created thing? I answer, in a temporal way you may; but
all that while, you will have but a temporal union with them, nor in them;
there can be no true union with God in the creature, no not in any created
glory whatsoever. For all is as grass, and as grass it withers, because the
spirit of the Lord blows upon it; and all the joy and comforts, that I have
thought, I have found in them, is but as a blast before the Almighty God, the
creature, nay, the excellencyes of creatures, or creature comforts were made
only for the body, and not for the soul, not as to find comfort in them; no,
nothing can be food to a soul, but the eternal invisible being of God; for
invisible things must be fed from invisible powers; and the soul is as
invisible as God; for it is God: it is and must be that dependence which we
have upon God, and this would fall if not fed by God and from God; therefore it
is one with God. The Rivers and streams, which is one with the Seas, would soon
fail, if not fed from the Sea. So would the soul of man, if it were not
continually* fed from its own natural principle from God, who is the sea and
fountain of Souls; and now an Ordinance or any other thing but God cannot
bring comfort to a soul: a man may take some delight in them, but it is but a
fancy or some natural or outward affection that he has to them, and not for
any spiritual comfort he finds in them: he may perhaps count it spiritual,
but the spirit cannot count so of it; the spirit cannot delight to be in any
thing, but in its own element, which is an element above all created things,
flesh and spirit cannot dwell together without interrupting one of another:
therefore to tie the spirit to have communion with God in an Ordinance, is to
keep him in bondage: the Church which is below, is in bondage with her
children; but the Church which is above in the spirit is sure, which is the
mother of us all; therefore to bind the spirit, to an Ordinance, or to any
thing below it self, which is below God, is to keep him in bondage: Men may
walk in Ordinances, or in Forms, or in the Image of things. But all this while
their communion is but an Image, an outward form or Image to the communion of
spirits, it is but a natural communion which typifies a Church in the spirit.
So that it is not our perfection to walk in Ordinances; because by them God is
veiled from us, and we see him not in his open manifest glory, and so are not
changed into the likeness of him, but remain still as strangers and Pilgrims.
Therefore let us with the Apostle, forget that which is behind, and press
forward to that which is before, which is to see God in his open manifest
glory, and not in the glory of an Ordinance, or any created thing for they are
but vailes which do eclipse and hide the glory of God from us, that we see him
not as we ought; whereby we might have communion with him: and therefore God
does rend that veil, and cast that away as moth eaten, as vain helpless
things; and now he shows himself with a new garment, with the robes of
righteousness and glory, with salvation in the midst of them; with a full
manifestation of all his attributes in one essential, invissible and eternal
glory for his Saints: and he that will now see God, to have sweet fellowship
and communion with him, must see him in all, in all this glory, without the
help of any Ordinance or created thing whatsoever; for that has been and is
still the cause of our ignorance of God, because we never look for him to come
in this open glory. But we lie still expecting of him to come in old apparel,
and not in new; in an ordinance, and not without, and so deceive our selves.
That when the Bridegroom comes, like foolish Virgins are found unprepared, with
our lamps neither oyled nor lighted, but barren and fruitless; and so are left
hopeless and comfortless: And with this, I shall take my leave at this time,
and shall with all commit you and the rest of our fellow members in Christ, to
the only fellowship of the Father and the Son together in one eternal and
invisible glory, in which fellowship I desire to own you, and to walk with you,
and to hear from you, and so fare you well.

R. C.

28. Letter.
Dear friend,
I Received yours of an old date; you are constant in loving, slow in
expressing and declaring; in which, though yet you are full; I do own your
love in all, both letter and token, and wish I had to make you a suitable return

Your trouble, is about Ordinances; You want them, and yet cannot use them, you
think you want them at least; but it is the anointing you want, not John, much
less his water; you have the anointing, and need not that any man teach you,
1 John 2. 21. It abides in you, it will appear, the box in which it is, will
be broken, and perfume the whole honse: The box is your heart, whilst you are
looking without: In that condition you are, the Poets Tantalus is your picture
and your motto. The Woolf by the ears, you neither dare hold nor let go; stay a
while, and your Candle will be lighted; The Lord is your light, the anointing
which you have received of him, abides in you, and the same teaches you all
things.

You say, Why you dare not use Ordinances, because you find them not in their
exactnes, according to the Primitive pattern. Do you think to be perfect in the
flesh? I know you do not: Why then do you expect exactnes here? All external
things will be matter of doubtful disputation, 1 Romans 14. and we shall not
come into rest, and out of dispute, till we come into the spirit, where is both
unity and rest; till circumcision and uncircumcision be nothing; and the new
creature and faith working by love, all, we shall not be established: He that
does it is God, who has also anointed us, and sealed us, and given the
earnest of the spirit in our hearts. 2 Cor. 1. Till we see and acknowledge God
not limited to make out himself by ordinance, if not to be gone out of them,
as to any manifestation of life, and power by them, we cannot be at rest.

God will take us out of all our childish work, before we have made any thing
of it; and are these better things then rudiments and elements in our childish
state? a bondage that the father is pleased his children (that are heirs of
all) should be in, till the time appointed by him; whilst we are Babes, we
have no trouble in them, only about our unworthiness; as we grow up, doubts
grow, and trouble and disputes about them, about their pure institution, and at
last we come to look into their worth, and set the sign and the spirit
distinct before us; and so come by degrees to be crucified to them, and they to
us; and are sensible of a bondage, and are making into the liberty of the
Spirit.

And whereas you mention, the Primitive pattern, as to these ordinances: There
is granted a pattern to Babes, or those that have to do with them; for these
outward things are the milk, and not the strong meat; and if the Apostles and
those anointed with the spirit, then, could have spoken to their converts,
other wise then as unto carnal, they would not have spoken earthly things; nor
dealt with them in those principles, from whence they are calling them, to make
forward to perfection, and blame them for their dullness, Hebr. 6.

The old administration, was weak, wearisome, and tyring, and therefore God
went out of it, Heb. 10. and so will he hence, when he has brought us to see
the weakness and feel wearines; he is calling such into the spirit, Come unto
(...) riod to ordinances, gospel as well as legal. He will once more shake
Heaven and Earth.

And is not he doing that in you? and till that comes that remains, surely we
are to worship at the door of the Tabernacle, and then will his remove appear
plainly; which by want of enjoyment in Ordinances is only suspected, or
conjectured. I consent unto you fully, that the want of enjoyments there, are
no rule safe enough to walk by.

You say, You have sound communion with God in Ordinances, and without; The
last more immediate and the sweetest: To this God calls you by some tastes, and
will settle you there in due time, the time appointed of the Father, the time
of the acknowledgement of the Son of God in you.

You say, that your thoughts work about Gods silence in Ordinances, as upon
this reason to humble us, as in the Isralites hunger, I consent to you, and so
to prepare us for bread from heaven that needs no sowing, threshing, winnowing,
nor shall be gathered by Homer, or measure.

You observe with trouble, the declining of some, who leave ordinances, to the
denial of Scripture.

Wonder not that when God calls some to himself in a more immediate enjoyment
without ordinances, that the Devil should be playing his part there, in
Jann^^s and Jambres.

Your dislike of the common pleading for ordinances, I wonder not at, because
it is done in opposition to the spirit, which they only serve to, and is the
life of them, and that tells me that that Heaven is foulding up as a garment,
and he coming forth that changes it not.

You say, there has been a glory in that administration, I grant it, and that
it yet is to some, yea many, and they do well to wait for glory there where
they find it appearing to them; I call off none from ordinances, I judge not
those that profess themselves called off; I know not where abouts I am,
surenot in vision, but sometimes I hope in dreams, the old man's state, and so
under the spirit.

The last thing you mention, is your seruples about Ordinances, which are tor^,
as an hedge of thorns set by the Lord in your way; to turn you back again
from those things which we have more or less idollized and set up in his place.

I have performed your desire, and you may look upon me as Lazarus quickened,
but bound hand and foot with grave clothes: what life and liberty I have, it
must be to serve the Saints, and therefore account me ever ready to serve you.

August 18. 1649.
Letter 29.
Dear and much esteemed,
MY Father has unbosomed such a glory to me, since I saw you last; that I
cannot but admire at it; it was as I was walking alone, the power of my Father
was seen in an exceeding glory, so that I could not tell how to contain it, my
veil was too narrow to receive it; I have had many discoveries of glory since,
and have been in many fires, and burnt very sweetly, and consumed very joyful:
I desire to live as well in Hell as in Heaven; and the greater Hell, the
greater Heaven: I rejoice exceedingly in the everlasting burnings: one breath
of my Father makes both Heaven and Hell; but this is that my Father has
written in my heart, that everlasting deliverance is at hand; but first, the
Lord will cover the Earth with darkness, and with gross darkness the people,
and such black clouds of darkness will our Father cloth himself with: that none
but those that see with the eye of the Lord, shall be able to see him in the
thick darkness: The smoke of the Beast ascends out of the bottomless pit, and
wrath from the Almighty is upon her; and I cannot but rejoice and sing
Hallelujah, Hallelujah, all praise be given to him that sits on the thron for
ever; and when you see these things done, then lift up your heads, the day of
your redemption is at hand; I see them performed, I see them finished and
brought forth into power, and I rejoice in the work of the Lord. I see the
restored estate of our bringing forth with mighty power; that we shall see all
things good, that the Saints shall know no evil; for my part I know no evil,
I see all things good; I know nothing but good in all the world; the Lord does
all things well, whether in Earth or in Heaven, and that that has swallowed us
up, we are now swallowing it up; I am swallowing Death, Hell, and the Grave up;
that now I am able to play with Satan; He is but a Reed in my hands. I have
been really clothed upon, and mortality swallowed up into life; and when this
glory comes forth, it will judge the world, and silence them; our glory is
their torment, and our Heaven is their Hell: Thus I have given you an account
of the present discoveries of my Father, and rest in your heart,

^. Clem.

FINIS.
A New Song.
1.
I Am that I am,
All that you hear and see;
I was, now is, and so shall be
All to Eternity.
2. Good is the Word, the Word is Good,
God and the Word are one;
The rule is true and even so
All that you look upon.
3. This Word is Good, this Good is God,
This Good is all you see;
If otherwise I should it own,
Where would the freedom be?
4. Now herein is the freedom just,
Thus knowing light to see,
That all is Good, this all is God,
This Good has made us free.
5. Then entertein this freedom just,
In pure love for to be;
Which pure love is the perfect Good
Unto Eternity.

