The meaning of the Title Page.
a. Dan shall be a Serpent by the way, an Adder in the path, that biteth the
horse heels, so that his rider shall fall backward I have waited for thy
Salvation o Lord, Genesis 49. 17,18 which prophecy has two parts; the first is a
threatening of the misery whereinto the Church of God was to fall. The other
contains a promise of deliverance out of the same. The misery threatened, fell
out not only in the time of Sampson, Judge. 13.1. but especially in that of
Jeroboam the son of Nebar, When he did set up the two golden calfes, the one
in Bethel near the lower end of Jordan, not far from Gilgal where the said
Jordan was dried up, the other in this Dan at the head of the said Jordan,
whereby the said Serpent by the way, both he, and ten of the Tribes of Israel
together with him were miserably seduced, and the heels of the So the woman
did sit upon a scarlet colored beast, Rev. 17. 3. called before, verse. 1.
waters, expounded after verse. 19 and 18.
horse whereupon he did sit, being thereby bitten as with an Adder in the path,
it came to pass that both the rider with his people, did not only revolt from
the house of David, but did also fall backward from the Lord their God, etc. 2
King. 17.7.21. Wherefore the Lord did reject them, and did afflict them sorely,
delivering them into the hands of spoilers, until he had cast them, and
removed them out of his sight, as an unclean people, and polluted by the said
Idolatry of Jeroboam, whose mothers name was Zaruah (signifying no less then
full of leprosy) wherewith being infected, he also infected the said Tribes,
making them to sin against God. The City whereof he was, was called Zereda
signifying perplexity, the which he brought upon that people, by the means of
the said great and continued Apostacy, wherefore they were also carried away
into captivity by Shalmanezer, 2 King. 17.5, etc. from which they are not yet
returned to this day. In all which things the said Jeroboam, with this
Apostolical Church, has been a true type, ringleader and first head, of the
great Apostacy, of that great Antichrist mentioned, Revel. ^. 15. 16. 17. and
13. ^ 12. 14. 16 and 17. ^
2 These 2.3. who has also been the cause, by the like means, of the great
tribulation and sore affliction mentioned, Matthew. 24. 21. and Revel. 7.14.

The second part of the foresaid prophecy contained in the 18. verse. concerns
the deliverance out of that perplexity or tribulation, promised to both these
Churches; which is to be accomplished by Christ, Romans 11. 15. 16. 21. 22. 25.
26. etc. whose Salvation both of them have now waited for very long; and whose
types herein, have been both Joshua in the drying up of this Jordan, Josh. 3.
7. 14. 16. and also Sampson, when he did avenge himself of the Lords of the
Philistines, of Dagon their God and of his house, for his two eyes, Judge. 16.
23, 24, etc. (Parallel to Revel. 11. 7. 8. 10. 11. 13. and 18. 7. 8) of whom it
was said, that he should but begin the deliverance of Israel, Judge. 13. 5. The
said promise was therefore renewed by Christ, in the institution of the Lords
Supper, after which, they Sung, says Matthew. 26. 30. the Psalms, vid. among
other the 114. in the 3. verse. both the read Sea, and the Jordan are remembered
to that very end: both of them therefore true types of this Euphrates, at the
banks whereof Israel has waited long with their harps, for the coming down of
the Angel not only to trouble the water (as Ioh. 5.4.) by that earthquake
mentioned. Revel. 1^.13. but also to dry it up altogether, as it is said,
Revel. 16.12.

b. This Serpent stands very fitly between these two heads or springs of this
National Hierarchy, with his head and tail toward the first of them: not
only to show unto us, that the Serpent (who first beguiled Eve, 2. Cor. 11. 3.
and who therefore is cursed, and goes winding (as a river, upon his belly, Genesis
3. 14.) And thus did the Serpent cast out of his mo^th the like ^^^nde of
water as a flood after the woman, Revel 12.15. These Kings were 31 in all.
Josh. 12.24.
is the first author of the Hierarchy: but also to show him by whom the chief
heads thereof have been likewise seduced, and among them, especially the first
and last of them, the one who laid the foundation thereof in blood, I mean
Austin that cruel and maledictin Monk (so termed in the Preface of the Parallel
of the Liturgy, with the Mass book) and the other (I mean the last of that
brood, the late cruel persecutor of the Saints and Servants of God) who has
ended it in the same.

c. In this place met together 24 Kings, to fight against Israel, Josh. 11.5.
answering to Revel. 16. 14. 16. and so have the Viceroys been gathered, first
in that Armageddon of the more Northern city in the Bourg of the Eden of the
Lord, as now they are in the no less Armageddon of the more Southern, the
heavenly Assembly of the Parliament, and to the same end: but see the issue,
Josh. 10. 8. 10, etc. and 11. 1. 6. etc. and believe.

d. Christ with his Disciples being upon this Sea in a small ship, there arose
a great tempest, in so much that the ship was covered with the waves, but he
was asleep, Matthew 8. 24. The more Southern Sea especially, has been very
troublesome for a great while to Christ and his true Disciples, but he is now
awaked, Revel. 16. 12. and 18. 8. 21. and is come in the fourth watch of the
night unto his Disciples, walking on this Sea, as Matthew. 14. 25 etc and Rev.
10. 2. 5. etc. And as at the word of Christ Peter who had toiled all night, and
had taken nothing, did let down again his net and enclosed a great multitude of
fishes, etc. Luke 5. 5. 6. etc. So Revel, 10.8. - 11. and 12. 19. and 15. 8.
compared with verse. 5.

e. Where the Jordan was deeper and broader, yea when it did overflow all his
banks, then was it dried up, Josh. 3. 15. 16. Revel. 18. 7. 8.

f. This Lake is a right type, first of that lake of fire and burning with
brimstone, whereinto the Dragon, the beast and the false prophet must be cast,
Rev. 19. 20. and 20. 10. secondly of the torment it self, thereby to be
endured, Rev. 14. 10 and last of all, of the sentence of excommunication,
(called by Christ Gehenna, Matt. 5. 22. And termed by the Apostle To be
delivered unto Satan, ^ Tim. 1. 20. for the destruction of the flesh 1. Cor. 5.
5.) the which in the name and with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, must be
denounced against the said false prophet. Amen.

A COMPLAINT OF THE FALSE PROPHETS MARINERS upon the drying up of their
Hierarchicall Euphrates. As it was preached publicly in the Island of Garnezey
before a set order of Ministers, (expounding in their successive turns the
Revelation of St John by John De la March, one of them



Jer 51. 35. 36. The violence done to me and to my flesh be upon Babylon shall
the inhabitants of Zion say; and my blood upon the inhabitants of Caldea shall
Jerusalem say. Therefore thus says the Lord behold I will plead thy cause and
take vengeance for thee and I will dry up her sea and make her springs dry.

Ezech. 27. 29. 32. All that handle the oar; the mariners and all the Pilotes
of the Sea shall come down from their ships they shall stand upon the land; -
And in their wailing they shall take up a lamentation for thee and lament over
thee saying what City ^^s ever like Tyrus like the destroyed in the midst of
the Sea

London Printed by Thomas Pain And are to be Sold by Humphry Blunden At the
Castle in Cornhill 1641.

Io: Dro^^h^^t sculp

TO THE HONORABLE THE KNIGHTS, CITIZENS, AND BVRGESSES, OF THE COMMONS HOUSE OF
PARLIAMENT.
MOst Noble, and Right worthy Senate; Moses tells us, that when God had
commanded him to make the Tabernacle and all the instruments thereof; according
to the pattern which he had showed him in the Mount, he bad him withal, to
speak unto the children of Israel, to bring for the building thereof, gold,
silver, brass, silk, purple, scarlet, fine linen, goats hair, rams
skins, etc. Of all whichthings, every one whose hearts moved them willingly,
brought presently a free offering to the Lord: All which materials were
delivered by Moses, to the workmen called by God, and by him appointed to do
the work. Who were Betsalcel, Aholiab, and all other wise-hearted men, in whom
God had put wisdom, to make all that he had commanded him. This Tabernacle;
and likewise the Temple by Solomon were but types of the new Jerusalem, which
comes down out of Heaven from God. About the building whereof, you, Worthies
of the Lord, being now employed, by the like calling and appointment, And
having to the very same end, printed of late and published, an order for all
peoples, nations, and tongues living under the Dominions of our Sovereign; by
which you gave them to understand, that you earnestly desired, and expected
that all ingenious persons in every Country of the Kingdom should be very
active to improve the present opportunity, by giving a true information of the
state and condition of all the Parishes in their several Counties, concerning
preaching Ministers, etc. In obedience to which I made all speed possible to
bring a small free will offering, which as I suppose may somewhat conduce and
serve for the furtherance and effecting of the said building. It is a parcel
of Gold, which though it be but in ore, yet is already judged, by the touch of
it, to the true stone of trial, the Scripture; to be purer then that anciently
so much renowned, of Ophir; or that overmuch now prised, of that new discovered
world. It was found of late, digging (under hard Taske-masters and detainers of
hire) with a company of hard laboring yoke-fellowes: who for the space of
these five and twenty years past, have night and day dug, at that goldenpit
of the Revelation of Saint John, to discover the most rich and glorious
mysteries hidden therein. A vein whereof, having but lately opened, it gave
presently great hope and assurance of most rich treasures, lying yet further
and deeper, which may now with some more labor be attained unto, (if the work
be continued, and necessary tools, with convenient furniture be supplied and
furnished for the same) for the furthering of the said spiritual building, the
perfect model whereof is therein most excellently set out and described. I
thought therefore that I was in most humble duty bound, this day being a day of
good tidings, to hold no longer my peace in concealing of the same, but that I
was to acquaint first of all your honors, as being they to whom it concerns
now most, in presenting herewith a proof thereof: the which though it be
wrapped up in a very course, yea borrowed cloth, yet contemn it not
therefore, no more then Christ did the two mites of the poor widow, it
proceeding also from a sincere heart. Your acceptance thereof will set many
more at work about the same pit, which will furnish work enough for all and
the best, with a bundance of most rich spiritualltrea sure, necessary for the
perfecting of the foresaid building. It will very much encourage my
forementioned (...) to follow hard the said work, when they shall see me
returning to them furnished with an authentical approbation and authorizing of
their said labor in the said work of the Lord, being with all furnished, by
your most equitable justice, and Parliamentarie authority with a lawful power
and necessary implements to work with them in my former station in the said
task, without any more fear or danger of interruption by any Sanballats or
Tobiahs. The which favor of yours shall oblige for ever

Your Honors and Worships most humble daily Orator I. D. L. M.

TO THE FAITHFVLL WITNESS OF CHRIST Mr. Henry Burton.
Worthy Sir,
THE first draught of this Treatise, was conveyed unto you (attired in a
borrowed garment) presently after, the matter therein contained had been
preached in our Monthly Propositions, and public meetings duly observed
amongst us, according to the order prescribed in our Discipline, not unknown
unto you. The reason was because of the great interest you had therein; not
only in regard of the spiritual brotherhood, and former acquaintance; but
especially in respect of the subject thereof. You being one of the eminent
witnesses of Christ, that had suffered for the testimony of his truth,
according to the Prophecy mentioned, Revel. 11 7. etc. yet then lying
unburied, in one of the public places of the great City, Castle Cornet in
Garnezey, (where some few years before two other Brethren (and the Author
also, for a whole week of months had been unjustly imp^oned, and unlawfully
detained, for the same testimony. (And though you were then overcome by the
beast of the bottomless pit, who had made war against you, and by her killed
with that most uncivil and unnatural death, I mean that close-confined
Prison: yet that faithful and true witness, the beginning of the creatures of
God, had bounded and determined it, having faithfully promised by the said
Prophet in the same chapter to raise you again, at the ending of the limited
time of three days and a half: whereof you were then, by the means of this
Treatise informed and assured, some five or six Months before it came to
pass. The application thereof unto you, being made as plain, (as if it had
been already effected,) by that perspective, the Table of the Parallel of the
42. journeys and months (of both the Jewish and Christian Churches) of their
wildernesses; set in view in the beginning of this book: And for the use of all
such as are desirous to follow the footsteps, and understand with the book of
the Revelation, likewise the true period of time in which the notable Accidents
of the Christian Church traveling through her said wilderness, came to pass.
And thus to observe her progress all along the same. That is first her entry
therein, or the means and degrees by which she came at length to fall into
that vast and dry wilderness of Idolatry, a right shadow of Death; and so
gross, that all the former Pagans, could not parallel it. Then secondly how
long she has continued under that blackness of darkness and ignorance,
thicker and obscurer then that of Egypt. And lastly the very time when God in
his mercy began to bring, and lead her out of the same, taking vengeance by
degrees, of all her persecutors. The said Treatise indeed at its first flight
did but intend your particular comfort, and encouragement in your most undanted
faith, Jonas-like during your said death. Whereof when you were risen, and
ascended up in a cloud, to the heavenly Armagedon or Parliament calling you; it
would needs take it self to its wings, being somewhat better feathered then
at first, and follow you over-sea, there to observe more of its contents.
Trusting by the former true events, to see a further accomplishment of many
more, wherein it has in nothing hitherto been deceived, having observed among
many other wonderful mercies of God, first the second tribe of the Christian
Israel, passing over, and treading under foot that proudly overflowed
Euphraticall Jordan. Secondly the Covenant of Circumcifi o^renewed in Gilgal,
(where I am sure that the twelve stones are set up for a monument to posterity
of the drying up of the said Jordan) about the revolution of the 1641 year
(being the first of the last tenth, of the last Month of the long tribulation,
and the first also of the raising of the Church, (agreeing with the particular
time of your forementioned raising, which was as is noted in the treatise, the
first day of the last month of your death;) And the beginning of the conquest
of the premices of the ten Kingdoms of the great City) or tenth part of them,
which was to be the first consecrated to God, and to be brought under the yoke
of the Lamb Jesus Christ. It observed immediately after this the celebrating of
the Christian Passover, the next Sabbath day following. Thirdly, the
compassing about of the City Jericho by the three several shouting Companies
(having with them the Ark of the Lord) with the downfall of her walls and the
sacking thereof. It admired especially observing, that by the command of Joshua,
Rahab the Harlot was to be put out of the camp, there to be (by the special
charge thereof committed to you) prepared, according to the law, and thereby
fitted, for to be shortly married to the Lamb, her promised husband: as soon
as she should be stripped of her whorish Babylonish garment, as soon as the
nails of the Courts of her scratching persecution should be cut off; and
finally as soon as all the Ceremonies borrowed hairs of her alluring and
enticing whoredoms should be shaved off. The most part of which perceiving to
be now effected, it could be contained no longer, but would needs escape out of
my hands to fly abroad. God grant it a favorable entertainment, that it may
return again with a safe conduct to its owner, to carry the good tidings of
Reformation, most necessary and wanting in the state both Civil and
Ecclesiastical of the Country of his aboade. The prosecuting and obtaining
whereof I desire, that it may be by you, to your powered, further, whereby you
shall oblige me to continue for ever

Yours in the Lord I. D. L. M.

TO THE REAER.
CHristian Reader, little did I dream, that these private meditations,
intended only for a particular Congregation, should be made thus public to
the view of the world: Sed homo proponit Deus disponit, man purposes, but God
disposes. Importunity wrung them from me, and present opportunity, caused me
to yield thereunto. And the rather, because I saw now in good part effected,
and very much advanced, by the wonderful mercy of Almighty God, that
(concerning the fall of the English Euphraticall Jordan or National Hierarchy,
of Prelates) which I did conceive then to be very near approaching: Being
induced thereunto, by the observation of the time appointed, and by God
limited, for the Christian Churches pilgrimage, through her most vast
wilderness; following her all along it, as it were step by step, from one
month to another, with the help and light of that true Type and right guide
the old Church of Israel, having the Lord going before them by day in the
pillar of a cloud to lead them the way, and by night in the pillar of fire to
give them light, that they might go both by day and by night, under the
conduct of Moses and Aaron. The want of which Typical guide, has been the
cause, in my opinion, that many (though very worthy men, and well deserving of
the Church of God, for their excellent labors in the exposition of the book
of the Revelation) have many times wandered along the said Desert, in seeking
the footsteps of the said Christian Church which they have often missed. It
being indeed as difficult to be found without the help of the foresaid
Typical guide, as I suppose, as any of those ways mentioned by Solomon, Prove.
30. 18. 19. but very easy having the said light going before. Therefore have I
already labored for a good while, and do purpose to continue still (if I be
not prevented by God, or by the labor of some other in that kind) to parallel
the travel of both the foresaid Churches, and their most notable accidents,
and to send it abroad. A taste whereof I profer unto thee in the mean while,
the which, if being relished by thee, it finds any good entertainment at thy
hands, though it be presented unto thee, in a very ill polished, because
borrowed, language, it will the more encourage me, to go on with
cheerfulness and alacrity, in my intended purpose, by the assistance of the
All, sufficient God and thy Christian prayers in my behalf, to him, who is no
respector of persons, and who does reveal his secrets, to all them that fear
him,

Amen.
Thine in the Lord Jesus I. D. L. M.

A COMPLAINT OF THE FALSE PROPHETS MARINERS, upon the drying up of their
Hierarchicall Euphrates.
As it was Preached in publik in the Month of February 1639, upon these words
of the Revelat. 18. 17.

And every Shipmaster, and all the Company in Ships, and Sailors, and as many
as trade by Sea, stood a far off.


THE rod of wickedness shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous, least the
righteous put forth their hands unto iniquity (says the Lord) Psalm 125. 3.
That of the Roman * Psalm, 125. 3.
beast has for a very long while, afflicted the Christian Church; yet her
lasting has been restrained, to two and forty Months of years: as it is
said by the Angel to John, when he forbad him to mete the Court which was
without the Temple, because says he, It was Revel. 11. (...).
given unto the Gentiles, who should tread the holy City under foot, two and
forty months. So likewise in the 13. of the Revel. v. 5. where it is said,
that power Idem. 1. 3. 5.
was given unto the beast, to do two and forty months: answering to the two
and forty journeyes of the ancient Israelites, traveling to their so long
before promised land of Canaan, recited by Moses, Numb. Numb. 33. 1. 3, etc.
33. 1. 2, etc. and amounting to the one thousand two hundred and threescore
That is years, a day for a year, according to that threatening mentioned,
Numb. 14. 34. alluding to the type thereof, mentioned Exodus 19. 4. Deuteronomy. 32. 10.
Prophetical days, of the wandering of the said Christian Church in the
wilderness of its Popish Ceremonies, Superstitions, and Idolatries, where she
had a place prepared of God, * Revel. 12. 6. and where she was to be nourished
i. e. One year, two years and half an year of days, amounting to the
forementioned time of 1260 days of years.
for a time and times, and half a time, v. 14. tending to the Canaan of her
true reformation; during all that space of time.

Into the which wilderness the said wom an was constrained to flee to avoid
the Dragon, being carried thither upon the two wings of the Spread Eagle of
the Roman Empire, in that time it was divided by the Emperor Theodosius the
great, between his two sons Arcadius and Honorius, viz. Cent. Magd. Cent. 4.
p. 861. l. 44. Helvicus Crounologie. Alsted. Chron. p. 76.
about the year of our Lord three hundred and ninety: In the which wilderness
she advanced, (passing along, and through that Sea of blood, Revel. 12. 15.
cast out of the mouth of the Serpent like a flood after the said woman. I
mean the Arian Goths and Vandalls) until she came to the very bottom as it
were of the wilderness of Idolatry, set up at the first, and established, as
another golden calfe, to be worshipped

A Table of the Parallel of the 42 (...) Desert to the land of (...) the rising
of the Beast
R. Menachem on Exo. 25.31. notes thus from ancient Rabbis, 42 particulars in
the Candlestick, viz. 11 knops. 22 bowls, and 9 flowers; which number he
would have observed as mystical, says Ainsworth on the said place. For th^s
one in Exodus, we have seven in the Revel. 1. 12. in the midst of which Christ
walks, chap. 2.1.

and adored in the Church, by the Roman High Priests or Popes, namely
Constantine the first, and his Successor Gregory the second in the The 42.
months did begin in the year of our Lord 390. every month containing 30
years counting one year for a day, according to the rule of God himself,
Numb. 1434. therefore this 11 month falls in the year 720. about which time
the Idols were set up and worshipped in the Churches, as was the golden calfe
in Sinai, where the 11. mansion of the Israelites abode in the wilderness, and
the first part of it did end. Numb. 33. 15.
eleventh month of the said Christian Churches pilgrimage, happening about the
year of our Lord seven hundred and twenty: in the which she continued, until
God did begin to take vengeance of the great whore Jezabel, casting her into a
bed, Revel. 2. 22. and pouring upon her the seven last plagues mentioned Revel.
16.
Revel. 16. for the fulfilling of his wrath upon her, and for the deliverance
of his said Church; the which began the three and thirtieth month of the said
pilgrimage, about the year one thousand three hundred and eighty of the Lord.
About which time and a little before, God did raise in England John Wickleff
began to oppose the primacie of the Pope, and the adoration of Idols, about the
year 1367. and continued till his death, which fell out about the year 1384.
John Wickliff, by whose heavenly doctrine, he began to lead the Church out
of that wilderness of Idolatry. And though the plagues powered upon the said
Beast, and her followers, by the Angels appointed to each Vial, were most
grievous, yet nevertheless, because she made no more account of the three
first, powered, the one upon her earth, the other upon her Sea, and the third
upon her Rivers; then Pharaoh and his people had done in former times, when God
did smite them at the first, by the means of the two or three first plagues:
therefore as he was then constrained, to smite him again and again, so was
he forced, by the impenitencie of that wicked Jezabel to power out the fourth
Vial upon her Sun, and after it the fifth upon her throne: by the
grievousnesse of which plagues, her men being Scorched therewith, and
constrained Revel. 16. 10. 11.
to gnaw their tongues for sorrow, yet for all that they did but blaspheme the
name of God for their pains, but without any repentance at all. But even as
the said Pharaoh, his Princes and his People, bestirred themselves indeed,
being very much afraid, when they saw that God had smitten in one night Exodus
12. 12.
all the first borne in the land of Egypt, both man and beast, and executed
Judgment upon all their Gods: In like manner were the dragon, * Revel. 16. 12.
the Beast and the false Prophet together with their three frogs, or
diabolical Spirits, issuing out of their unclean mouths, much astonished,
when they perceived their Euphrates to be dried up at the pouring out of the
sixth Vial, by the sixth Angel. Or as the Cananites were, at the drying up of
the waters of the river Jordan (this Euphrates prototype) before the children
of Israel, as we see Josh. 5. 1. And likewise the Princes and people of
Babylon, Josh. 5. 1.
when God took vengeance of her, in drying up her Sea and her springs, the
true type of the mystical Ier. 51. 29 30. compared with v. 36. of the said
Chapter.
Euphrates; which had been till then, in steed of a strong wall and bulwark,
or rather of a broad, and very deep ditch; for the fencing and maintaining of
her Romish Idols and Idolatries, with all her superstitious rites and
ceremonies: And thereby withholding also, or stopping the people of God (as we
shall see by and by) from going on, to the utter abolishing of them; as that
literal was a defense for old Babylon against Cyrus. Therefore upon the drying
up of the said mystical Euphrates, * Revel. 16. 14
the said Dragon, Beast, and false Prophet, had great reason to bestir
themselves in good earnest, and with an unanimous consent, This is now
effected, both by the Beast and false Prophet and all their Clergy laboring
tooth and nail by the means of their emissaries the Jesuits, Seminary
Priests and officers to stir up and provoke both the King of Spain and others
to fight against England, etc. laboring now to put all together down the
Hierarchy or powerful dominion of the Prelates.
to dispatch out of hand, each of them their messengers, or messages rather, (I
mean their mournful complaints and false accusations) to the Kings of the
Earth, and of the world, for aid (as the Kings of Canaan had done in former
times, when they saw the Jordan to be dried up before the children of Israel,
as we may see, not only in the fore alleged place of Joshua, but especially
in the tenth chap. of the said book, verse. 3. Josh. 10. 3. 11 1. etc.
where we read that We mnst look for a greater combination of the Kings and
Princes of Europe, than has been yet, to oppose the true reformation of
Religion, and hinder it, if it were possible, but all will be in vain, and to
their own confusion as we may clearly see by this Type.
therefore Adonizedek King of Jerusalem, sent unto Hoham King of Hebron, and
unto Piram King of Jarmuth, and unto Japhja King of Lachish, and unto Debir
King of Heglon, saying; come up unto me, and help me, etc. and again, Josh.
11. 1. where it is written that it came to pass, when Jabin King of Hazor had
heard those things, then he sent to Jobab King of Madon, and to all the other
Kings of Canaan, who upon that message came out, they and all their hosts with
them, much people, even as the sand that is upon the Seashore in multitude,
with horses and chariots very many. And all these met together, and pitched
together, at the waters of Merom to fight against Israel. But God delivered,
them all slain before Israel. And thus do the foresaid Beast and Prophet, send
their said three Spirits of Devils, whose message or complaint is summarily
recited, Revel. 16. 14. Where it is said, that they went forth unto the Kings
of the earth, and of the wholeworld, to gather them to the battle of that
great day of God Almighty: but more largely expressed in the first part of this
chapter.

This may be very easily gathered by that which is said, Revel. 17. 1. and 21.
9.
Wherein the Angel that had powered out the said sixth vial mentioned in the
said 16 chapter of the Revel. standing now, as it were upon the said Euphrates,
to observe the behavior and proceeding of the said Euphratian men, and filthy
fr^ggs; turns as it were himself toward the people of God, encamped at the
shore of it, and having already informed him in the beginning of this chapter,
of the near approaching fall of the great Babylon it self, and commanded them
therewith, to come out of her wilderness, in passing over the said Euphrates
(now to that very end dried up) that they might the more easily enter into it,
to make a full conquest thereof, in rewarding her even as she had rewarded
them. The said Angel I say does now further declare unto them, what should
also be the substance of the message of the said Emissaries, and moreover what
should be the issue or effect thereof. Namely, that they would go up (like
those ancient filthy froggs of Egypt in the time of Pharaoh) This is the right
practice of the Hirarchicall men both in Pulpits, printed books, public and
private conferences, and the best arguments they can allege to oppose the
excellent Church government of the reformed Churches beyond Seas.
to the said Kings beyond Euphrates yea enter into their houses, and into their
bed-chambers, and ascend as it were upon their beds, and be present at their
tables; to provoke them by their importunate croakings, filthy lies, and
diabolical detractions, opening their foul mouths against those new come
reformers; to persuade and entice the said Kings to oppose them, and with the
uttermost of their power to hinder their intended reformation, accusing them
thus, viz. that they under pretext of Religion sought nothing else, but the
utter overthrow of all Kingly power and authority; yea and of all decent order
and policy both in Church and commonwealth; to bring therein a great
confusion, and disorder in all things, and that their whole aim was nothing
else but in lieu of their most stately and glorious Hirarchicall government to
establish their consistorian Pope-like tyranny, whereunto they would subject,
yea the Kings themselves in dominering over them, if they should permit them
once to get over, or put down the said Hierarcichall Euphrates: And therefore
they would advise the Kings to look to it betimes, not permitting such new
upstart reformers, to trample under their feet, and quite overthrow so ancient
and excellent an Hierarchicall power as theirs was, ancient as the Apostles
themselves, being grounded upon the Scriptures, and founded upon the words of
our Savior himself; speaking to the first and chief of the Apostles St.
Peter, and saying unto him, Matthew. 16. 18. Tues Petrus, Thou art Peter, etc.
and besides all this, that it has been established in the very time of the
Primitive Church, by the laws of the Emperors from Constantine the great and
so forwards. Yea that since the reformation of Religion in those latter times,
it has been also renewed from time to time, and confirmed by Parliamentall
laws, by the Kings themselves, who also thereby become true Monarchs,
according to that true saying, No Bishop, no King. Thus do the proud and
wicked men of the world persuade themselves, that it is in their power to hind
er the proceedings of Gods judgments, and to stay his hand when he has begun
to execute Justice upon them, this was the cause of the builders of Babel, Genesis
11. 4. etc. and of Pharaob, Exodus 5. 2. and (...) 5. 9. and likewise of th^se
who think that the Kings of the earth shall be able to hinder the drying up of
this mystical Euphrates or to make it run as before, now it is dayed up. But
all such must know that there is^ neither understanding nor council to
withstand the Lord as says Solomon, Prove. 31. 30.
Therefore ought you, would they say again, in great wisdom to stop them in
their course, and most unlawful and rebellious-like proceedings, going against
them with all your puissance, that they may advance no further, but rather
constrain them to return back again to their own desert, from which they
come, there to be for ever confined, that so our glorious Euphrates may run
still in keeping its own course, and exercising its dominering power as
before, or else you are in danger, (if so be you do permit once that the most
clear and glorious springs thereof be dried up and extinguished) to have your
own Crowns taken from off your heads, by such new come Paritans.

This is in effect the message of those three Euphratian froggs here recited by
the Angel, from the ninth verse of this chapter to the twentieth thereof, thus
introducing the Vice-Royes themselves, with the Merchants and Mariners,
speaking in such manner to the foresaid Kings of the Earth: concerning which,
the said Angel does now exhort the said passengers, to whom he has thus
spoken, that they should no way fear them, nor all the croakings, and false
imputations of such filthy frogs and diabolical spirits; because thereby
they should not be able to do them any wrong, or to hinder them any whit from
passing ^r; and therefore that they should go on with courage and boldness
through the said Euphrates, now to that end dried up before them, by that war
like leader the heavenly Joshua, who being with you, and going before you, will
not fail nor forsake you: therefore go on I say with full assurance of a most
glorious and vnheardof victory, for though they should by such means as it is
very certain they will gain the said Kings, to combine themselves, and join
hand in hand against you; yet all their power (would yet say further, the said
Angel) shall not prevail, nor hinder the For with him is wisdom and
strength, he has counsel and understanding, it is he that breaks down, and
it cannot be built, that shuts a man up, and he cannot be loosed, he that
sends the waters to destroy the earth, and he again that withholdeth the
waters and they dry up, says Job 12. 13. etc.
Lord from the accomplishment of his faithful promises, concerning the final
overthrow, and utter ruin of all the enemies of his Church. Let then al those
Viceroys themselves, the Merchants also how rich soever they be, and all the
seafaring men do or say what they can or are able to do, yet all shall be in
vain, the work shall nevertheless be perfected and accomplished; for God,
who by his Almighty power, and most wise providence orders all things, has so
disposed of this, that for all their forementioned surmises, most unlawful
practices, and howsoever powerful oppositions, the foresaid Kings shall but be
Revel. 16. 16.
gathered together into the place called in the Hebrew tongue Armageddon, that
there he may deliver them into your hands, as said once the Lord unto Joshua,
as we read, cap 10. 8.

But to come to the words of the text it self, in the which as you see is set
down, the third and last complaint, or message uttered by the third and last
kind of the forementioned frogs, right Amphibies * Josh. 10. 8.
indeed or seafaring men: ^e Viceroys having before done their arrand, and
the Merchants likewise theirs, recited in the uerses before expounded by the
precedent brethren; now according to our order, must I speak of this last,
mentioned in this seventeenth verse, and the two following. In which are
contained thee chief points; the first whereof concerns the messengers
themselves: The second shows the cause of their complaint or message, and in
the third we have the message it self. The first is contained in the 17
verse, and the other two in the two next verses. As for the messengers, of whom
I shall only speak at this present, they are here described, first by their
function, in the former part of the verse: secondly, by their action or
behavior in the last words of it; their function is noted unto us, both by the
quality thereof, and by the quantity of the persons excercising it. The quality
is expressed by diverse both titles and orders, whereof some are superiors,
others inferiors. The superiors in order are the Ship-masters and their
Assessors, the inferiors are the Mariners and their assistants. Concerning
their quantity, they be not some few choice men of ^ach of these ranckes and
orders of officers, but all of all sorts, and every one of them; the business
being of such importance, that it concerns them all: all of them also ^earing
the common danger, that was like to entrap, and overwhelme them all: as it does
also clearly appear by their action and behavior, expressed in the last
words of this verse, where it is said, that they stood afar off.

But before we come to speak of these several offic^rs, we must first of all
show, what is meant by this Sea whereon, and by the Ships wherein, these
messengers did before exercise their offices and trade. As for the ^ea, we must
not imagine it to be the maine Ocean, which does as it were, girt the whole
Earth by its middle, though thereupon those great Such as were those of the
great Armado of Spain, called Invincible sent in 1588. to conquer England in
the time of Queen Elizabeth. Or of that other last, which was overthrown by
the Hollenders near Dover in 1639.
Spanish Gallions, and other tall Ships of the Christian Kings and Princes of
Europe, do navigate and commonly trade to the East and West Indies; from
whence they fetch those rich commodities, to which the Holy Ghost has only
made allusion in the former verses of this chapter, viz. 12. and 13. Neither is
it the Mediterranean sea, though thereon, the Pope of Rome does keep many good
ships and Galleys well furnished with men and munition; for the keeping of the
Coasts, and Sea towns of Saint Peter's patrimony, as they speak. Nor the
Tyber neither, watering in its course, that ancient and glorious City of Rome,
nor any other River whatsoever, though they be all of them called, by the title
of Seas in the Scripture, how navigable soever it be. This being no natural,
but a mystical sea, so called by allusion made to some of those natural seas.
All which are nothing else in Scripture language, but great Assemblies of
waters, gathered together in one place, and called from the beginning, by God
the Creator, by the name of Seas. Which Seas are different according to the
difference of those waters, whereof they are, as it were, compounded or made
up: who are therefore either Caelestiall, or Terrestrial: the Caelestiall
being above the firmament, and the Terrestrial under it, by the appointment of
God as we read Genesis 1. 7.
Genesis 1. 7. Where it is said by Moses, that God made the firmament, and divided
the waters which were under the firmament, from the waters which were above the
firmament. But the Terrestiall are those, that are gathered together, under the
said firmament, as it is there expressed: which are properly called Verse 10.
Seas. Now these natural Seas, do likewise differ both in quantity, the one
being greater then the other, as the Ocean is greater then the Rivers, and the
Rivers, are greater the one then the other, yea greater then the Lakes, and
Pooles of waters, though they also be called by the title of Sea in Scripture
phrase, as that great Vessel made by Solomon, for the service of the Temple,
was likewise called by the same title of 1 Cron. 4. 2.
Sea. They differ also in Quality, some of them being salt, the other brackish,
and the other fresh, these last being as it were distilled and purified in
their passage through the veins of the earth.

Moreover such waters thus gathered together to make up these diverse Seas, are
very powerful and unresistable, no earthly power being able to stay either the
ebbing or flowing of the Sea, or the most violent course or stream of any of
the least Rivers; much less to abate their overflowings. Now all these
properties and different qualities of these Natural Seas, and waters do very
fitly conduce to the Mystical Seas here intimated, which likewise are nothing
else, then great confluences or Assemblies of Mystical waters, that is, of
p^oples, or rather heads of Peoples; and that according to the exposition of
the Angel himself, Revel. 17. 15. who speaking to Saint John tells him there,
that the Revel. 17. 15.
waters which he had seen, whereon the Whore did sit, were peoples, and
multitudes, and nations, and tongues, which are gathered together into one
place, making up one entire body. And thus was it expounded by the Spirit of
God in the prophecy of Isay Chap. 8. verse. 7. above 700 years before Saint
John did write this Revelation, where speaking of the King of Ashur and of all
his g^lory, he says, behold the Lord brings up upon them, that is upon the
Israelites, the waters of the river, viz. of Euphrates mighty and great, even
the King of Ashur with all his glory. Which Mystical Seas being also as the
Natural, of great force and puissance, do accordingly in Scripture language
note great power and authority, as it is evident Psalm. 46. 4. where the Holy
Ghost speaking of the power and great rage, of the Earthly Kings and Kingdoms,
says that Though the waters of the sea, rage and be troubled, yea though
hemountaines should be shaken with the swelling thereof, yet etc. then
expounding the same, verse 6. following, he says that When the nations raged,
and the Kingdoms were moved, God thundered, etc. Again Pal. 93. verse 3. 4.
where the Prophet speaking of the mighty power of God in preserving his Church
against all the assaults of the world, says to this purpose, The floods have
lifted up O Lord the floods have lifted up their voice: the floods lift up
their waves. The waves of the sea are mavelous through the noise of many
waters, yet the Lord on high is more mighty. And Psalm. 124. verse 2. and 4. If
it had not been the Lord who was on our side, when men rose up against us --
then the waters had overwhelmed us, the stream had gone over our soul, says
the Church of God there, this is also manifest by the place now alleged of
Isay 8. 7. Now such powerful assemblies or seas of people are different,
according to the different quality of the waters or peoples whereof they are
as it were compounded or constituted, the one being Civil, the other
Ecclesiastical. Again the power of the Civil assemblies is either
Monarchical, or Aristocraticall or Democraticall, such as were those that are
mentioned by the Prophet, Jer. cap. 51. verse 42. where speaking of the
powerful armies of King Cyrus that were to come Ier. 51. 42.
against Babylon, thus he says The sea is come upon Babylon she is covered
with the multitude of the waves thereof. And Dan. 7. who speaking of the four
Empires that should be raised in the world, to sway the Empire thereof, he
says verse 3. Dan. 7. 3.
That four great beasts came up from the Sea, one diverse from another.

The Ecclesiastical power is that Hierarchicall, with is often mentioned in
this book of the Revelation, and so in this place, as it shall more clearly
appear by and by, to which power, applying now the former diff^rences of the
Natural seas and waters before spoken of, we say that they are accordingly,
either Caelestiall or Earthly. The Calestiall are those Revel. 4. 6. and
Glassie-pure-Crystall-like waters of life, or Assemblies of true Christian
professors of the holy and pure Religion of Christ, refreshed and filled with
the pure waters of the heavenly doctrine, 22. 1.
proceeding out of the throne of God, and of the Lamb Christ Jesus: Whom alone
they take for their head, acknowledging that he has been anointed by God King
Psalm. 2. 6.
Upon Sion his holy mountain. And that Luke 1. 32.
the Lord God has given him the throne of his father David, upon Esaias 22. 22.
and 9. 6.
whose shoulders also has been laid the key of the house of David; that is
the Government thereof, to reign over it, for ever: Cor. 15. 25.
for he must reign, till he has put all his enemies under his feet. This
Caelestiall Hierarchicall power then over the Church, is in Christ alone; who,
while he remained in the flesh, did immediately by himself administer it in
this his Kingdom of Grace: And now being gone to continue the same in that of
Glory he has appointed (according to that Luke 22. 29. and Mat. 16. 19.
compared with 18. v. 18.
power given unto him by his father, both in Heaven and in Earth,) the
administration of the keys thereof to his Church, the people whereof and its
holy congregations, do make up and constitute those glossie seas, or
assemblies of the true reformed Churches, as being filled with the foresaid
pure living waters, proceeding from the said Throne. The which Church, does
likewise administer this power by her 1 These. 5. 12. Heb. 13. 17.
Ministers and Governors, who are to exercise it, not as dominering Prelates
over Christ his heritage; but as his 1 Pet. 5. 3.
Ministers in 1 Cor. 4. 1. and 5. 4. Mat. 28. 18, 19, 20.
Christ his name, and by his power, as acknowledging no other Sovereign in
matters Ecclesiastical, but him alone, who is the true Psalm. 110. 4. Heb. 7.
21.
Melchisedech of his said Church.

The Earthly Hierarchicall powerful sea, is that which is represented unto us,
in this book of the Revelation by those Terrestiall seas, filled with earthly
doctrines, humane traditions and ordinances; to which the Holy Ghost makes
allusion, Revel. 16. The which are either Thus the Pope does attribute unto
himself an universal Hierarchicall power over all the Churches and Bishops of
the Christian worl^, which presumptuous title was at length granted unto him by
Phocas the Parricide or cruel murderer of Maurice the Emperor in the ve^^e
of our Lord 606, who thereby became the Popes midwife, Eodem ^nno Concilium
Roman^m celebrat^^ in quo idem Bonifacius pro mulgat privilegium Pho^^ (^^jus
parrici^i^^ approbaverat) de primatu Ecclesie Romanae, quem Patriar^hae
Constantinopolitani hacten^s impugnaverant For the punishment whereof, God
brought from the Southern part of the world, some 15. or 16 years after,
Mahomet with his false Alcoran, together with his troops of Locusts or
Sa^^asins, who did extremely vex the wo^ld causing the first woe, Re^^^.
(...). 5. 1^.
Universal answering to the maine Ocean, Thus are the National Dioceses or
Seas of Archbishops and Bishops called by the name of the chief Cities of
those Provinces, over which they do dominere and exercise their powerful
usurped authority, as the Diocese of Ca^ry, that of York, etc.
or National correspondent either to these particular seas, which take their
diverse denominations from the diverse Kingdoms they beat upon, as the Baltic
or Swedish sea, the German sea, the British sea, etc. which are thus
denominated, because such parts of the maine Ocean beat upon the coasts or
sh^res of those kingdoms of Sweathland, Germany, England, etc. Or rather to
those national rivers as I may call them, called also Seas in Scripture, as it
was showed before, which do water or run along or through whole Kingdoms or
Provinces, often distinguishing and separating the one from the other. The
Universal Hierarchical earthly sea, is that which is mentioned in the third ver.
of the said 16. chap. upon which the second Angel powered out his Uiall, which
thereby became not only as the blood of a dead man, but also it caused every
living thing to die therein: which was at last effected, and fully
accomplished, by those Vaiversall humane-earthly-hierarchicall assemblies of
peoples or heads of peoples, as is before noted, who making and acknowledging
the Pope for their supreme head: (under whose Sovereign power and absolute
authority they were gathered together) did settle and establish the same
(together with all that false Antichristian doctrine and humane traditions by
them, not only approved, but also preferred to the Scripture it self)
attributing and allowing then unto him, that full power to do, which though
long before he had begun to assume unto himself and to exercise the same:
even since the time of the pouring out of the second Vial under Boniface the
eight; who first instituted the The Iubiles were first instituted by Boniface
the eight, in the year of the Lord 1300. calling himself most blasphemously
the Portion of Heaven, as having the keys of it in his power, of whom it is
very well said, that Intravit ut ^ulpes regnavit ut Leo, mortuus est ut canis.
For the punishment whereof, God brought the Turks over the Hellespont, in
Europe under Ottoman their first Emperor in the year of Christ. 1320. In this
very time and in this Pope that Prophecy of Revel. 13. 11. was truly
accomplished, these two swords being the two horns there spoken of, signifying
the power, both of the Priesthood and of the Kingdom, therefore does he also
wear them in his Miter as true signs or marks hereof. Then indeed did this
Beast come out of the earth; for as the Kingdom of Christ is from Heaven, and
brings men thither; so the Popes kingdom is of the earth, and leads to
perdition; because it is begun and established by ambition, covetousness,
beastlines, theft, treason, and tyranny.
Jubiles. Anno Dom. 1300. appearing the first day of the said Jubilee in his
Popish ornaments, and the next in an Imperial attire or harness with anaked
sword carried before him, crying with a loud voice * Ecce duo gladij hic, Luke
22. 38.
behold, here are two swords: yet was it now brought to its full perfection,
namely, first in that This Council was held in the year of Christ 1414. under
Pope Martin the (...) whose Pantofle the Emperor Sigismond kissed very
devoutly kneeling.
Council of Constance, where three Popes (occupying at once the Papal Sea,
viz. Gregory the twelfth, Benedict the thirteenth, and John the three and
twentieth) were deposed, and Martin the fifth established: which schism had
continued more then any other before, viz. 50. years: in it was enacted that
damnable decree, Haereticis non esse servandam fidem, that it was lawful to
break the oath made to Heretics, by virtue whereof John Husse was there
burned: and then totally in that of Trent, It was begun in the year 1545. and
was as the very sincke of all herisies and false doctrines.
begun under Pope Paul the third, and ended eighteen years after, in the
time of Pius the fourth, and by him confirmed the next year following, whereby
all that Popish Sea of false humane* earthly doctrine, was altogether
corrupted, which caused, as the spiritual death of all those in that sea that
might have yet some remnant of living water in them, so that second woe
proceeding from the great slaughters of Christians executed by the Turks
Revel. 9. 17, 18.
Who killed, by the fire, and smoke, and Brimstone, coming out of the mouths
of the horses whereon they sat, the third part of men.

The National Hierarchicall powerful sea, proceeding from that forenamed
Universal, as the Rivers do come from the Ocean Eccles. 17. is represented
unto us, in this book of the Revel. either by Eccle. 1. 7.
those rivers and fountains of waters, upon which the third Angel powered out
his Vial, mentioned Rev. Revel. 16. 4.
16. 4. which also there by became blood: Or by that other, upon which the sixth
Angel powered out his, noted and
Revel. 16 12. called there, by the title of Euphrates, which is the name of
its Type, viz. that literal Euphrates verse 12.
of that old Babylon of the East, mentioned Jer. 51. 63. and intimated Esaias 44.
27. foretelling the drying up of it, by the means of Cyrus King of Ier. 51.
6^. (...) 44. 27.
Persia, some one hundred and twenty years before the accomplishment thereof;
which National mystical seas or rivers, are distinguished one from the other,
both inrespect of the different titles given unto them; as also in respect of
their different plagues, of the different effects thereof: the titles are
different, the first being called only by the general title of rivers and
fountains, upon which the third Angel powered out his Uiall; but the other
(which is, as it were, separated and somewhat distant from them, by the
interlacing of two other Vialls, viz. the fourth and the fifth) is called by the
particular name of Euphrates. As for their plagues they are different, not
only in that the said rivers and fountains are plagued by the third Vial of
the third Angel, For the third Vial was p^^^ed presently after the
forem^ntioned Counsels of (...) and T^, about which time A^ the T^ wast^d ^any
kingdoms in Eu^, and ^p^lt ^^ch Christian blood. The like did Mahomet the
seccond, and Bajazeth his successors, s^^ ^^^ls Turkish Hist. from the year of
Christ 1420. to 1600. etc.
a long while before the sixth Angel did power out the plague of his Vial upon
the said Euphrates; but because there is also a great difference between the
parties upon whom the said third Angel did power his said Vial, and those upon
whom the sixth did The sixth Vial was powered upon Euphrates about the year 1632
and so forwards, the effect whereof) viz, the drying up of it) appeared first
in Scotland, anno 1639 when the sentence of Excommunication was deceived
against the Hierarchy and the ministers thereof.
power his, as we shall show by and by. Finally they differ greatly in the
effect of their said plague; because the waters of the said rivers and
fountains, became blood by means of the third Vial powered out upon them: but
by this the waters of Euphrates are dried up: wherein allusion is made to that
litterall Euphrates of old Babylon forementioned. Now then we say that the
former of these Rivers and fountains do represent unto us the powerful,
national, Hierarchicall assemblies of Archbishops and Diocesan Bishops,
altogether Popish and corrupted, both in doctrine and discipline; challenging
and holding their said power and authority from the Pope, under whom they
exercise it, over their several National Dioceses; holding themselves
accountable for the administration of the said powerful Hierarchicall
Jurisdiction, to none other then to the said Pope; whom they do acknowledge
for their supreme head; as drawing from him the whole influence of their said
Antichristian Jurisdiction. But concerning this Euphrates, though we know, (as
it has been also avouched of late, and published both in the Pulpit, and in
print, by some of the chiefest creatures of that National sea) that both of
them have one and the same original source, (as flowing both from that
forementioned Universal Popish sea) and therefore does as the former signify a
like humane-earthly-nationall-hierarchicall-usurpedpower, over some National
Churches and people; yet it seems to be somewhat different from the former
rivers, if not in effect, yet in appearance or outward show and profession:
because the waters (especially of the doctrine where with the people living in
that sea, are as it were filled and nourished) are not all, nor altogether He
that was last the head of this National Hierarchy, had manifestly corrupted
all both doctrine and worship, had he not been betimes prevented by the
Parliament, as it appears both by his conference with the Jesuit, also by the
late Canons, and by his most tyrannical actions and cruel proceedings against
the Saints and faithful servants of God.
corrupted, as were those of the former Seas, both Universal and National.
They are not pure neither, as are the waters of that Sea mentioned, Revel. 4.
6. which was of glass like unto Crystal, nor like that pure river described
Revel. 22. 1. which was a water of life, clear as Crystal, proceeding out of
the throne of God, and of the Lamb. But it is a water of a mixed kind, between
pure and altogether corrupted, as there is a kind of mixed natural waters, as
was noted before, which are neither altogether fresh nor altogether salt, but
brackish, even so the waters of this Mystical sea are, I say, of a mixed kind
of water; as that s^a described Revel. 15. 2. which was as it were a sea of
glass mingled with fire, and not simply nor solely a sea of glass, but only
as it were, that is v seeming only to be so, neither pure nor clear, but
very obscure and intricate, not only because it was mingled with humane
doctrine and philosophy, drawn out of the Even as the woman described Revel.
17. 3. seems to differ much from that B^ast mentioned Revel. 13* 1* etc but
yet she sits upon the same beast with seven heads and ten bornes; but without
either ^it or bridle in her mouth to guide it: fignifying that this woman is
rather guided by the beast, having the like Natural properties of such a bru^t
beast, led with sensual^e, as speaks the Apostle Saint Peter 1. 2. 12. and
altogether as malicious, cruel, and abominable, if not more, because endued
with more reason and knowledge, altogether perverted and abused. And though the
said woman be also more gloriously arrayed, as you see verse 4. of the said 17
Chapter, then the beast, yet she is covered all over with names of blasphemy,
worse then the spotts of the said Panthere. And though she hold in her hand a
cup which seems to be of gold, yet it is but of some base metal, only guilt
over, and thereby but disguised, and howsoever, it is but full of abominable
doctrines, and of the filthiness of her fornication, whereby (as the false
Prophet Balaam) she seduces and deceives both the Kings of the Earth, and also
the servants of God to commi^ fornication with her. Thus it is with this
National Hierarchicall Euphrates which is the right Sea where upon this whore
sits, as it will appear by that which follows. u Therefore called the depth
of Satan, Revel. 2. 24. In which pit it was confined of old by the ancient
fathers with Pelagius the first author thereof in the Council of Carthage,
kept anno 422. who was an English man borne, once one of the chief Monks of
that famous Monastery of Bangor in Chester, as it appears by that verse of
Prosper, Pestifero vomuit coluber sermon Brita^^us, speaking of the said
Pelagius, compating him in respect of his false doctrine to a Serpent, a right
brood of the old Serpent, one of those that is represented by one of the rods
of the charmers of Pharaoh which were turned into serpents, but devoured by
that of Aaron, mentioned Exodus 7. 11, 12.
bottomless pit, Revel 17. 8. but with the fire of hot persecution also, which
is the Sea, whereof the Spirit of God speaks in this text: I mean the Sea of
Euphrates, upon which these seafaring men did exercise their trading, (for and
in the behalf of these forenamed Merchants) before it was dried up, as now it
is. Which is also the very cause why these sea-frogs are thus troubled, and so
much disquieted, as it appears by their forementioned message and complaint.
At the shore whereof the Kings of the East mentioned Revel. 16. 12. that is the
true reformed Christian Israel or Church of God, had now stood for a good
while, waiting for a fit and prosperous passage over it; being there at length
arrived, after a most tedious and troublesome journey, through that barren and
unfruitful desert of Idolatry and superstitious worship; having also by the
wonderful mercy of God, and gracious favor toward them, gotten the victory
of the beast, and of his image; and of his mark, and of the number of his
name, fitting and tuning in the mean while the harpes of God, that when they
should have passed over that broad, deep, overswolne, and fiery Euphrates
they might more freely, and joyfully Revel. 15. 3.
sing the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb. For then
should they have indeed greater occasion, then they yet had to say, as you see
Revel. 15. 3 great and mavelous are thy works Lord God Almighty, just and
true are thy ways, thou King of Saints: as it is effected by them being passed
over the s^id Euphrates: wherefore they having sung the Hallelujah there
mentioned, they allege for a reason these words following in the second ver.
of the 19. chap. of the said Revelation, for 19.
true say they, and righteous are thy ^udgements, for thou have judged the
great whore, which did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and have avenged
the blood of thy servants at her hand. As it was impossible for them to do
before, (no more then the Levites of old could, when those that had led them
captive to Babylon required of them to sing upon their harps Psalm. 137. 3.
one of the songs of Sion) being hindered there from by the said Hierarchicall
sea; stopping their course till then by her hot burning fiery waters of
persecution, and most intolerable tyrannical pride: by which she does yet
what she can by the means of her said Emissaries to keep the^ from passing
over it: but all in vain, being now dried up, and a very wide gate, yea a most
large and spacious way being opened and prepared, for the said Church and
children of God, to go now without danger over it, and to enter without any
great resistance in her Babylonish Church, to beat down their This ought to
be done by the Christian Israll as soon as they shall have rooted, out of the
Church of God, all the Hierarchicall power and authority of Archbishops and
Diocesan Bishops.
new erected Altars, to overthrow all their Idols and Crucifixes, and utterly
to abolish and cashire out all false self will worship and superstitious
ceremonies, and in stead thereof to settle and establish the true Kingdom of
Christ, to be governed by his most holy laws and heavenly ordinances: as Moses
commanded often the Israelites to do, when they should once be entered into the
land of Canaan after they had passed over the Jordan.

And because this Jordan, (with the drying of it, and passage over it, by the
said children of Israel, under the leading of Joshua, yea all their voyage
along the forementioned wilderness of Canaan) is a true prototype of this
mystical Euphrates, so often mentioned before, as it appears by that which
the Apostle in his 1 Cor. 10. 6. and 11. (speaking of the things that came to
the Israelites in the wilderness) says of them that the were types, (...) as it
expressed in the original, and that they are written, says he, to admonish
us, etc. Therefore that we may the better understand the mystery of this drying
up and passage over the said Euphrates, it is very requisite that we say first,
some what of the last Journeys of that Ancient people of Israel along their
said wilderness. All of them together are in number 42. as is before noted,
which may be divided in three general parts. The first whereof do comprehend
those that were made by them from Rameses in Egypt, till they came to Mount
Sinai, where they pitched Exodus 19. 1.
in the third month when they were gone forth out of the Land of Egypt, where
they had remained almost a whole year; as it is manifest by that which is said
by Moses, Number. 10. 11. In which mount God gave them his law, with his
ordinances and holy statutes, concerning his worship; and thereby did covenant
with them, that if they would observe and keep them, he would be their God,
and they should be his people. Yet nevertheless they presently brake it,
falling to Idolatry in worshipping of the Exodus 32. 1, 2, etc.
golden calfe made by Aaron the High Priest; the which first part comprehends
eleven Mansions or Journeyes.

The second part is from that Mount of Sinai, to that other of Hor, where
Aaron^ died; in which they did but wander up and down the said desert,
advancing never a whit toward the said promised land of Canaan, but recoiling
rather from it, in which wandering they continued for the space of almost 38.
years, and made, during all the said space of time, twice eleven Mansions,
which were thus doubled, because of those two great capital sins, committed
by them against the Lord: the first whereof was the foresaid Idolatry, and the
second their general rebellion and revolt, which happened at that place called
therefore Numb. 33. 19. see also Numb. 14. 1 etc.
Rimmon Perets, mentioned Numb. 33. 19. The third and last part is from the
time of their departure from that mountain of Hor, after their Numb. 20. 29.
thirty days mourning for the death of Aaron, a type also of the mourning
mentioned in this chap. begun (when Compare these places of the Revelat. which
are parallels, viz. Revel. 2. 22. 23. with Revel. 9. 18. 20. with chap. 11.
verse 13. and chap. 16. verse 3, 4, 6. and chap. 18. verse 9. 11. and 17. all
which well considered will give a great light for the right understanding of
these mysteries.
Jezabel was first cast into a bed) by the Kings of the earth, which had
committed fornication with her, cast also with her into great affliction, by
the means of the second plague inflicted upon her, by the pouring out of the
second Vial, as we will show presently: continued by the Merchants of the
earth, at the pouring out of the third Vial; and now termined by these
Mariners; both of them the right children of the whore Jezabel, That phrase
notes a double death, viz. both corporal and Spiritual, the like is noted,
Genesis 2. 17.
Revel. 2. 23.
killed togetherwith her, with death. That lastperiod I say, beginning at their
departure from that Mount Hor, continued till their first entry into the said
land of Canaan: when they encamped in Gilgal, Josh. 4. 19.
in the East side of Jericho; entering therefore into the said land at the East
part thereof, as our passengers over this mystical Euphrates, are called
mistically the Kings of the East, as it will appear by and by. This last
period contains nine journeyes, Answering to the 42. months of the Christian
Churches pilgrimage through the forenamed desert of Romish Idolatries and
superstitions.
in all forty two. At the last of which journeyes, viz. at the latter end of
the thirty ninth, and about the beginning of the fortieth, the said people
pitched at Habarim, standing there as it were in heaps, or companies of
peoples desirous and ready to pass over the said Jordan, being now so near
unto it. Thus was the Church of God in England, and else where in great hope of
a total and final deliverance, out of the said desart-like popish Religion,
when King Edward the sixth came to the Crown, but soon after frustrate thereof
by his untimely death, and therefore forced to stand at that glassie Sea, or
mystical Euphrates, mingled with fire etc. mentioned Revel. 15. 2. a place
parallel to this, being the right type of that.
But the time of their said passage being not fully accomplished, they were
therefore feign to stay yet a whilelonger in the wilderness, which is before Moab
toward the Sunrising, as it is said Numb. 21. 11. from whence being removed,
they advanced to Beer, that is (says Moses, Numb. 21. 16.) the well whereof
the Lord spoke unto Moses, gather the people together, and I will give them
water. Then Israel sangthis song, spring up O well, sing ye unto to it. A type
of the Parliament in King Edward the sixth, and in Queen Elizabeth's time.
The Princes dug the well, the Nobles of the people, dug it, by the
direction of the Law giver, with their staves. The message sent by Moses to the
Kings of the Amorites before the passage of the Jordan mentioned Numb. 21. 21.
etc. falls in the time, or has for its Antitype the time of the two Mary's
Queens, the one of England, and the other of Scotland, who would not permit
the true Reformed Religion to be established in their Kingdoms, but rather
opposed and persecuted it as much as they could, being the horne^ of the
Beast-like Hierarchy.
At which time they fought against Sihon King of the Amorites, Numb. 21. 24.
and 33.
and smote him with the edge of the sword, and possessed his land from Arnon
unto Jabok, etc. -- Then they turned and went up by the way of Bashan, and
fought against Og the King of Bashan, and smote him likewise, and his sons
and all his people. This Og was a mighty giant, Josh. 11. 12. etc.
Deuteronomy. 3. 11. The Viceroys of this Christian B^shan (but especially the last
of them, William Laud the remnant of the Giant Popes, was a mighty Giant though
of a little bodily stature) having for their ordinary bea^stead, a very
spacious Lambeth, which has proved very often a hot burning furnace of iron to
many of Gods faithful servants, when the High Commission Court was kept there,
W^^ only remained of the ^emnant of the Giants, whose bedstead was a bestead
of iron, of nine cubits long and forre broad, after the cubit of a man. He
says also, tha^ ^is land was a goodly soil, the pastures whereof nourished
strong and fat cattle, being watered by the foresaid Jordan, which does run
through that ancient land of Israel dividing Galile from Judea, having two
spring heads, viz. Dan and Jor, whence it took its name of Jordan; See Rob. f.
Herrey, Common places, first Table.
signifying the river of Judgment, or a caldron of Judgment, etc. It is to be
noted further, that in its course along that country, it makes two lakes or
Seas, whereof the one is greater then the other: the least is called waters of
Merom. By which all the Kings of Canaan, to the number of four and twenty,
assembled by Numb. 34. 11.
appointment to fight against Israel, with all their host, in multitude as the
sand that is upon the sea shore, with horses and chartes very many, etc. The
other which is a great deal bigger, is called in the old Testament the Luke 5.
1.
Sea of Chinnereth, and in the new, the Mat. 4. 18.
Lake of Genezareth, or the * Sea of Galile, from which having run a long way
of some forty miles, it falls in the dead sea of Sodom, of which it is, as
it were, swallowed up. Which Sea has no visible intercourse with the Ocean;
and is surnamed dead, because no living thing can endure its bituminous savor:
from abundance of which matter, it is also called Lacus Asphaltites, a right
type of Hell (once filled with the dead bodies of the Jews flying bebefore the
Romans, in that lamentable, and last destruction of Jerusalem, presuming (upon
a false ground) that it would dry it self, and give them passage as it had
done in former ages to their forefathers:) To which allusion is often made in
this book of the Revelation, as namely in the punishment of the chief enemies
of the Christian Church.

Moses having thus conquered these two forenamed Kingdoms of the Amorites, it
is said Deuteronomy. 3. 12. 13. that he gave the Cities thereof unto the Rubenites,
and to the Gadites. And the land of Gilead and all Bashan, being the Kingdom
of Og, he gave unto the half tribe of Mnassah, etc. But it was upon this
condition, that they themselves should not stay therein yet, but pass over the
Jordan armed before their brethren the children of Israel, all of them that
were meet for the war: until the Lord had given rest unto their brethren, as
well as unto them, etc. and then, as said Moses unto them, they should, after
that, return every man unto the possession which God had given them, and not
before. Then the people of Israel, went forward advancing to their last
Mansions or Journeys, viz. to the 41 and 42. and pitched all along the said
river Jordan, from Numb. 33. 49.
Beth-jesimoth, signifying the house of Desolation, to Abel. shittim,
signifying sorrow of thorns. As it happened indeed unto them, both for their
corporal and spiritual whoredom, the one, that is the corporal, committed
with the daughters of Moab, Numb. 31. 16.
and the spiritual whoredom (through the counsel of Balaam) committed in
trespassing against the Lord for worshipping of Peor, wherefore the plague came
among the congregation of the Lord. And there dyed in that plague, four and
twenty thousand: For which cause the Lord commanded Moses to Numb. 25. 9. and
Deuteronomy. 32. 50.
revenge the children of Israel of the Midianites, after which * he was
gathered unto his people; for neither he nor Aaron his brother (because they
were Ministers of the Law, who made nothing perfect, Heb. 7. 19.) could not
introduce the people of God into the land of Canaan; but Joshua (a true type of
the Kingly office of Christ and Eleazar another type also, in that the
Priesthood was renewed in his Person, but manifestly changed in Christ, which
was not Heb. 7. Verse 16.
made Priest after the Law of the carnal commandment, but after the power of
the endless life, after the order of Melchisedec.) By whose ministry the
said Jordan was dried up, that all the Israelites might go dry clean over
it, as it came to pass, Josh. 3. 13. ^5. and
as soon as the Priests that bare the Arc of the Covenant of the Lord of all
the world had taken it upon their shoulders, and had dipped their feet in the
brim of the water, (which was in the time of harvest at which time Jordan did
commonly overflow all his banks,) for even then Verse 16. and
the waters which came down from above, stood and rose up upon an heap, but
the waters that came down toward the sea of the wilderness, which is the
salt sea, or lake of Sodom, failed, and were cut off; and the people passed
over, right against Jericho: And the said Priests stood firm on dry ground in
the midst of Jordan, and all the Israelites passed over on dry ground, until
all the people were passed clean over Jordan. But note now that in passing
over the said Jordan, Verse 17.
the sons of Reuben, and the sons of Gad, and half the tribe of Manasses
went over before the children of Israel armed, as Moses had spoken unto and 4.
12.
them. It is also added concerning the time of their said passage, verse 19.
that it was Verse 19. 20.
the tenth day of the first month, and that then they encamped in Gilgall in
the East border of Jericho, where Joshua did pitch the twelve stones which they
had taken out of Jordan, that they might before a memorial unta their children
for ever. There also the Lord did say unto Joshua, Josh. 5. 2. and verse 4. etc.
that he should make some sharp knives, to circumcise again the children of
Israel the second time: because all the people that were come out of Egypt that
were males, even all the men of war, were dead in the wilderness by the way,
because they had not obeyed the voice of the Lord; wherefore the Lord had
sworn unto them, that he would not show them the Land which the Lord had
sworn unto their fathers, that he would give them. And when they had done
circumcising all the people, they abode in their places in the camp, till they
were whole. After And verse 9. 10. 11.
the Lord said unto Joshua, this day have I taken away the shame of Egypt from
you. There also they kept the Passover on the fourteenth day of the month at
even, in the plains of Jericho: And they did eat of the old corn of the
land, on the morrow after the Passover. And the Manna ceased, on the morrow
after they had eaten of the old corn of the land, neither had the children of
Israel Manna any more, but they did eat of the fruit of the land of Canaan
that year.

Having said thus much, of these last journeys of the Israelites, and of some
of the chief accidents which befell them about their passage over Jordan, fit
for the better understanding of the matter now in hand, concerning the drying
up, of our said Mystical Euphrates, and deliverance of the Christian Israel
out or their forementioned desert; we must now apply the same to our said
purpose, thereby to give also* (according to our former promise in the Epistle
to the Reader) some taste of the parallel there mentioned; very necessary, not
only for the clearing of many mysteries that are yet very obscure in the book
of the Revelation; but also that we may with greater admiration observe the
ways and wise proceedings of the Lord, in this reformation of his Church, now
by him taken in hand, and in some good measure by him already effected: as the
same was represented unto us in the old type of the old Testament, and foretold
both by him, and by many of his Apostles in the new: which will be also a most
sure guide to direct us, thereby to follow him, and to give him the glory due
unto him for all. And to this end we must know that about the latter end of the
forementioned third and last great period of time (whrein that Journey of the
42. Months of our said Christian Israel, through their said wilderness was
divided (which we showed to begin in the time of John Wickleff, in the year
1380. of Christ, when the said people began to issue out of it:) the said
Christian Church I say having sustained many strong oppositions, and most
cruel persecutions, during the space of some two hundred years, that she was
a passing through that hideous desert full of most cruel Numb. 21. 6.
fiery serpents (I mean the Henry the third was the first which caused
Christians to be burned in England at the instigation of Arundel then
Archbishop of Cant. about the year 1397.
fires of persecution which had been since that time kindled by the Pope in
all the Kingdoms of his dominion) the same were at last somewhat moderated,
especially in England, when Henry the eighth had banished the The time when the
Pope was banished out of England was in the year of Christ 1534 one year
after the birth of Queen Eliz. Paul the third being then Pope of Rome, a most
profane scoffer of Christ; He cursed the same King Henry, and gave his
Kingdom to whomsoever could get it.
Pope from thence: who though he continued the said persecution, yet was it not
so hot as before. But after his reign they were altogether extinguished in
Edward the sixth his time: and though they were kindled again by Marie, who
succeeded the said Edward, yet the great heat thereof was within few years
after so quenched in Queen Elizabeth's time, and by her means, that the Church
was then in great hope that it should have bin altogether delivered, and that
they might then without any great difficulty have come to the end of their so
much desired journey, for in the very beginning of her reign she (following
the example of her said brother Edward, who as another Moses had begun the said
reformation) with her Princes, Pears, and heads of Peoples assembled in
Parliament, abolishing all false Antichristian Idolatrous doctrine Numb. 21. 18.
dug with their staves of authority with the lawgiver, a well of clear
doctrine as it is noted before, whereby she did refresh as (with clear cool
water of life) her thirsty people, giving also by this means a fit opportunity
to prepare and tune the harpes of God; that they might be ready to sing the
song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb when they should
have bin passed over. And thereby did she in a very little space of time,
conquer unto Christ the whole Kingdom of England, a most glorious conquest
indeed, yea much greater then that of William surnamed the Conqueror. At which
change all Christendom stood amazed says the History, that it could so
easily be effect. Dartie.
ed without sedition, though it was not suddenly made, but by little and little
by degrees: for the Roman Religion says he, continued in the same state it
was first, a full month and more, after the death of Queen Mary. The seven
and twentieth of December, it was tolerated to have the Epistles and Gospels,
then the ten Commandments, the Symbol, the Letany, and the Lords Prayer, in
the vulgar tongue: The two and twentieth of March, the Parliament being
assembled; the Order of Edward the sixth was reestablished, and by the Act of
the same, the whole use of the Lords Supper was granted under both kinds. The
four and twentieth of June, in the year following, by the authority of that
which concerned the uniformity of public Prayers, and administration of the
Sacraments, the Sacrifice of the Mass was abolished, and the liturgy in the
English tongue, more and more established. In the month of July; the Oath of
Allegiance was proposed to the Bishops and other persons: and in August Images
were thrown out of the Temples and Churches, and broken, and burned. The like
being done also by her means and assistance, the very same year in Stotland.
Now as God had given the two forenamed Kingdoms of Sihon and Og to Israel, as
the first fruits of their inheritance, in like manner does he give these two
to his Christian Israel; and both of them were to be encouraged thereby
against the residue of their enemies beyond the river; so that, that which
Moses said then, to the one may truly be said to both; Deuteronomy. 3. ^4.
That they had seenewhat the Lord their God had done unto these two Kingdoms,
and the like should the Lord do, unto all the Kingdoms whether they should
pass, and that therefore they should not fear them, because ^ehovah their God
would fight for them, and do unto them ^^^e had done to those two and their
land: for which also both of them were to be thankful unto God, and to sing
his praises as it is said in the hundred thirty six Psalm Psalm. 136. 19, 20,
21, 22.
Confess ye to Jehovah for he is good, for his mercy endures for ever: Sihon
King of the Amorites, for his mercy endures for ever: And Og the King of
Basan, for his mercy endures for ever: and gave their land for an heritage;
even an heritage unto Israel his servant, for his mercy endures for ever.

Thus did that most triumphant like Queen conquer those two kingdoms in a
spiritual manner, putting the last hand to the stripping of the Popes
Authority in the said Kingdoms, Aarons ornaments of honor and glory were
many, viz. 12. in number, whereof he was not stripped all at once but piece by
piece, and one after another, leasurly, being loath to dye (before he entered
into the land of promise) as well as Moses, and both as unwilling, to be thus
separated the one from the other: The Pope was much more loath to be stripped
of any part of his power and glory, to be cast out of his earthly Canaan, and
therefore has he so much strugled with those the have at any time attempted
to strip him of any part thereof.
which was begun even from the time of the forementioned Wickleff, when he did
teach against the Supremacy of the Pope, and temporaltie of the Clergy,
Monks and pardons; affirming likewise that the Church of Rome was the Synagogue
of Hell, and his Clergy heretics: whose doctrine was even then, much favored
by King Edward the third, and many of his Nobles, who withstood with great
courage the exactions of Pope Clement the sixth. Neither could it be
extinguished ever since that time, in the said kingdom, though it was most
miserably persecuted, in the most part of the professors thereof, by the
Bishops there, even till Henry the eight, who banishing the Pope, as is already
said, out of the land, stripped him by this means, of his Hierarchichall*
power there; In which work his said son Edward the sixth continued during his
time; but Queen Mary seeking to reinvest him again in the same, she was cut
short by God, who then raised that Heroical Virago forenamed Queen Elizabeth,
in whose time and by whose means under God, the said Hierarchicall authority
of the Pope himself, dyed as it were, or fell there down to the ground. But
yet herein these worthy Princes did but in some manner even as Moses, when he
stripped Aaron the High Priest, of his Pontificiall ornaments, which presently
after he Numb. 20. 28. i If the Parliament now assembled should but clip the
superfluity of B. B. wings that they might not soar so high as they have done*
hitherto, they should then go no further in the reformation, then the said
Princes did which God for bid who looks for much more at their hands, and the
Christian Israel of God also in this glorious time of reformation
did put upon Eleazar his son: i And so did they when after the stripping of
the said Pope, they did invest the Bishops, his true right progeny (and that
by the authority of their Parliaments) of the said Hierarchicall power) which
has continued hitherto; and since become the right National Euphrates
forementioned, or glassie Sea mingled with fire. And though in the said time of
Queen Elizabeth the said renewed, or rather changed, and as it were, new
shifted Hierarchy, did assume but a little power, being but as in its infancy,
and daring not to show the horns of the Beast, whereupon this Hierarchicall
Harlot was most gloriously mounted, yet gathering strength by little and
little, as the rivers do commonly, (which though near their source or spring,
their streams be but small and weak,) yet in the continuance of their course
by the gathering together of many rivolets or small streams, they become at
length broad, deep, and strong, yea able to bear the greatest trading ships,
even as the Thames it self, or rather that literal Euphates; as we see it
described by the Holy Ghost in the Prophecy of Isa^as chap. 8. 7. in that
threatening of the people of Judah, saying unto them, that because they had
refused the waters of Shiloah which ran softly, etc. therefore the Lord would
bring up upon them, the waters of the river, mighty and great; meaning indeed,
the King of Ashur, as it is expounded in the very next words; but alluding to
the said Euphrates, which did water the land of Assyria, so has this mystical
done, to which also the same Spirit of God alludeth, speaking of it in this
book of the Rev. as it was showed before: so that, that which the Lord said
then, to the said people of Judah, may very fitly be applied to the people of
this land: That because they had refused, both in the time of King Edward the
sixth, and also of Queen Elizabeth, Revel. 22. 1*
that pure river of water of life, clear as Crystal, proceeding out of the
throne of God, and of the Lamb: I mean the the true Liturgy or worship of
God, together with the true discipline of Christ or Church government (both
proffered unto them, then, both by Martin Bucer and Peter Martyr) grounded and
drawn out of the doctrine of Christ, and of his holy Apostles, as we find it
expressly instituted by him, saying first, concerning the said Liturgy; Mat.
15. 8. (...).
that it is in vain to worship him, teaching for doctrine, men's precepts: And
that all such do only draw near unto him with their mouth, and honor him
with their lips, but their heart is far off from him. Yea, in so doing they
do * but worship that which they do not know, as he said to the woman of
Samaria, John 4. 22, 23, 24. for then was that time come of which he speaks
there, when the true worshippers were to worship the father in spirit and
truth, for then the father did require such to worship him. For God being a
Spirit, they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and truth. And
concerning the said Discipline, observe only these few places, viz. Mat. 5.
22. and 18. verse 15, 16, 17, 18. and chap. 20. verse 25, 26, 27, and 28. where
is set down the true pattern thereof, (I do but name them, because I intend
not to speak of this now.) renewed as it were, by him, after his Resurrection,
as S. Luke tells us, Acts 1. 3. where he shows that Christ was seen of his
Disciples, and heard too, as says Saint John in his first Epistle chap. 1.
verse 1. speaking of those things which did concern the true Government of his
Kingdom of Grace, and that by the space of forty days, as he had been with
Exodus 24. 18 and 25. 9. and 40.
Moses in the mountain under the Law, when he gave him the pattern of the
Tabernacle, and of all the instruments thereof; which were then to be employed
in his holy worship then instituted by him; wherein as Moses showed himself
very faithful in all the house of God, as the Apostle does testify Heb. 3. 5.
the same may we say of the Apostles, concerning the Govenment of this house of
Christ. But as the said Jews, I say, did then refuse such waters, so the said
people refusing both the said pure and simple worship of God and true Church
Discipline, and preferring to it, that vain, frothie, pompous-humane-will
worship or Liturgy of Rome, some what refined I confess, but yet the very
same in substance, therefore did the Lord bring upon them that proud
Prelaticall, Hierarchicall Church government, by the means of it. The which
has at length Isa. 8. 7. k As Doctor Leiton and M. Prtn, M. Burton, and D.
Bastwick, two couples of the worthy witnesses of Christ.
broken into England, especially, and has so overflowed and passed through it,
that it is come, not only to the neck, but even to the very top of the cheeks
and k ears of some of the best servants of God, some of them having had their
ears cut with the Knife made as it were of the glass of that ^evel 15. 2.
glassie sea and burnt with the fire thereof; yea it had so spread out its
wings, that it had covered the breadth of the land: becoming thereby
impassable, and like the raging sea, that cannot rest, whose waters cast up
mire and dirt, as says the Prophet Isa. 57. 20. as it proved (especially, when
the said Christian Israel of God, was ready to pass over it.) As the waters of
the forementioned Jordan, did then overflow and fill all his banks (as soon
as the feet of the Priests, that bare the Arc, were dipped in the brinke of
the waters thereof, thereby to prepare the may for the said children of Israel
to pass over it, after the drying thereof,) even so did, then especially, that
Hierarchicall powerful tyrannical sea (flowing * Josh. 3 15.
from that forementioned It is very considerable that as the river Jordan (the
prototype of this National Euphrates, as is noted before) has two springs or
chief sources, the one called Jor, and the other Dan: even so this mystical
Euphrates, hathtwo chief heads, viz. two Archbishops, see the emblem in the
frontispice of this treatise,
head thereof) raise to such a height of pride, and inhumane cruelty, that it
did overflow and run over all power and authority both divine and Humane; and
became thereby so intolerable, that no humane creature was able, to withstand,
restrain, or resist it: So that in a short time, it had easily (as another
deluge) overflowed and destroyed the whole land, and by its most deadly waters,
of Popish and Arminians false doctrines and superstitious ceremonies, killed
every soul living, yet in that tyrannical scalding sea; according to the
prophecy of Christ, therein truly accomplished, recited Mat. 24. 22. saying
that except those days (meaning the days of the great tribulation, mentioned
and described by him, in the next preceding words; which can be no other then
the thousand two thundered and sixty days of this christian Churches pilgrimage
through her said deseart, so called Revel. 7. 17.) except says he, they should
be shortened, there shall no flesh be saved: but for the elects sake those days
shall be shortened: As it is now manifestly come to pass, by the wonderful
mercy of God; who being a God Psalm. 65. 2.
that hears prayers (as the Prophet says) has at last Psalm. 102. 17 18, etc.
looked down from the highest of his sanct^any, and has from Heaven beheld
the earth; to hear the groanings of the prisoners, and to loose those that
were appointed to death, and has regarded the prayer of the destitute, and not
despised their request: as it is said in that Prophetical Psalm, that was
then written, for the generation to come, and for the people which was to be
created a new. For he is no idle spectator of the wrongs done unjustly to his
servants; but rather, such a one, as does usually 1 Pet. 5. 5.
resist the proud Hamans of the world, scattering them in the imagination of
their hearts, and putting down the mighty from their seats. As the most
blessed Virgin Mary does fing, Luke 1. 52. 53. and as we see it already begun
by the almighty power of God, who has taken in hand that proud Hierarchicall
whore even in the very time when in her overswelling pride Revel. 18. 7, 8.
she most glorified her self, saying in her heart, I sit a Queen and am no
widow, and shall see no sorrow: as she is brought boasting of her self,
Revel. 18. 7. 8. Whereupon the Angel denouncing her last sentence of
condemnation, says of her, in the next words. Therefore must her plagues come
in one day, death and mourning, and famine, and she shall be utterly burnt
with the fire of Excommunication, for strong is the Lord God who judges her;
Who therefore does now stir up those that, at first, had given their Ibid.
17. 16,
power and authority to the beast, to hate also this whore, to make her
desolate and naked, and to eat her flesh, and to burn her with the said fire.
Having to that very end, especially, gathered them together to fight this great
battle, of the great day of God Almighty, now happily begun, in the place
called in the Hebrew tongue, Armagedon, Revel. 16. 14. 16. I mean the
Parliament or Heavenly Assembly so called, Revel. 11. 12. and 19. 1. at this
time Assembled by the most wise before ordained-decree of God, mentioned in that
fore-alleadged place of Revel. 16. and by his most gracious mercy, toward his
poor afflicted Church and children, (who had for a very long while groaned
under an heavier burden, of ceremonions superstitions and Idolatries, then was
that of the Egyptian servitude) thus to fight the battles of the Lord, against
the said national whore which did corrupt the earth with her fornications, to
avenge by that means, the blood of his servants at her hands, Revel. 19. 2.
(making thus the tenth part of the great City: to fall in this conflict,
together with seven thousand men of name, Revel. 11. 13. (That the
forementioned way of the Kings of the East may be prepared to go against great
Babylon it self, to give unto her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of
Gods wrath. Revel. 16. 19.)

Therefore go on in the name of God, ye worthies of the Lord, in doing, with
boldness and courage, this wonderful work of his, now by him committed unto
you; and hear him speaking to you, by me his mean and unworthy servant, as
he spoke of old to that great leader of Israel Joshua, saying, Now therefore
arise, and go over Josh. 1. 2, 3. 4, etc.
this said Euphrares, you and all the people, unto the said Canaan of true
reformation, which he does give unto them even to his Christian Israel: Every
place that the sole of your foot shall tread upon, that has he given unto
you, from one end of the Roman Christian Empire even unto the other; that is
all the ten Kingdoms of the Beast, from the rising of the Sun to its going
down, shall be your coast. There shall not any man be able to stand before
you, all the days of your life: for as he was with Queen Elizabeth, and
before her with Edward the sixth that had worthily begun the said reformation,
so will he be with you. He will not fail you nor forsake you. Be strong and of
a good courage: for unto this people shall you divide for an inheritance, the
land which he swear unto their fathers to give them. Only be ye strong, and
very courageous, that you may observe to do according to all the words which
John his servant commanded you in his Name i^ the book of his Revelation,
turn not from it, to the right hand or to the left, that you may prosper
whethersoever you go. The said book should not depart out of your mouths,
but you should meditate there in day and night, that you may observe to do, to
that Hierarchicall National whore, and to all the popish Cananites, not
forgetting the proud Arminian Anakins, according to all that is written
therein. Revel. 18. 6.
Rewarding them all, even as they rewarded you, and giving double unto them
according to their works: in the cup which they have filled, fill to them
double: for then Josh. 1. 8. 9.
you shall make your way prosperous, and then you shall have good success.
Has not he commanded you? Be strong and of a good courage, be not afraid,
neither be ye dismayed: for the Lord your God is with you whether soever ye go,
going Revel. 14. 11.
before you, sitting upon a white horse, whom you must flollow as his heavenly
armies sitting also upon white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and and
14.
clean. And to that very end I am sure have you now (even as your most worthy
brethren the Scottish men have done before you) entered into a new Covenant with
the Lord, and caused all the people of the land to do the like. The covenant
made by both the nations of England and Scotland, etc. is typified by that
action of Joshua circumcising the people of Israel in Gilgal presently after
their passage over Jordan by the express commandment of God.
A most worthy Act of yours, wherein we are fully persuaded, that you have
been altogether guided by the spirit of God, and wisdom from above, as
having thereby performed that which was typified both of you and of all the
Kingdoms of the world, (that are to enter after you into the true Canaan,
wherein you are now entering, that is, that are ready to embrace after you: and
by your means also, as we will show by and by, the true reformation of
Religion you have now in hand) in thar action forementioned of Joshua, that
valiant leader of the ancient Israel, according to the commandment of God
given unto him to that end Josh. 5. 2 etc. to verse 12. parallel to Revel. 19.
4.
Josh 5. 2, etc. the first institution and ground whereof may be seen Genesis
17. from the first verse to the ninth of the said chapter, in which covenant
and promise thereunto annexed were comprehended as well the Gentiles as the
Jews; and the which God will now fully accomplish as well to the one as to the
other: (according to the ancient prophecies both of Dan. 7. 26. and 27.
parallel, to those of the Revel. chap. 10. 7. and 11. 15. 17. 18. to the very
time of the accomplishing whereof we are now come.) By the means of which
covenant (wherein you are thus entered with the Lord) may be applied to you
both, and to all them that shall e^ter in it, what the Lord said then of the
said people of Israel in the said 5. chap. verse 9. viz. Josh. 5. 9.
That in the day it was performed, the Lord did take away the shame of the
spiritual Egypt from you. Now therefore, O ye worthies of the Lord, be ye also
fully assured, for your greater encouragement, in the prosecuring of the
glorious work which the Lord and his anointed our gracious Sovereign the
King has entrusted you with all, that the seventh and last Angel does now
begin to blow the seventh and last Trumpet, at the blowing whereof, you know
that the mystery of God is to be accomplished as he had declared to his
servants the Prophets, in former times; as it is said Revel. 10. 7. Revel. 11.
18
even the time of the dead, that they should be judged, and the time when God
should give reward unto his servants the Prophets, and to the Saints, and to
them that fear his name, to small and great, and wherein he is to destroy
them which destroyed the earth; pouring upon them the seventh and last vial of
Gods wrath, which brings upon them the third and last woe: yea, the very time
wherein the words of God are to be fulfilled, mentioned Revel. 17. 17. for the
executing of the Judgment of God upon the whore spoken of in the next
preceding verse. To which end also, as that captain of the Lords host Josh.
5. 13. 14 15, parallel to Revel 19. 5 He will no less manifest his good will
more and more to ou^ great leader under him, concerning the reformation now in
hand.
appeared to Joshua, presently after the foresaid Covenant taken, as he was by
Je^^^ho, that he might put in his heart to fulfill therein his will, even so
will he put in your hearts to fulfill his. In which apparition you know he
commanded him to loose h^s shoe off his foot, because the place whereon he
stood was holy. Which was a ceremony used of old by that people, not only in
civil affairs, but also in ecclesiastical. In civil, both concerning the
resigning over of ones right in matter of inheritance to another, according to
the law, Deuteronomy. 25. 9. whereof we have an example in Ruths kinsman, Ruth 4. 7.
Also in time of affliction and grief, as it is to be seen in David (2 Samuel
15. 30.) fleeing from Jerusalem, when his son Absalon had conspired against
him; the same is also commanded to the Prophet Isa. to be performed by him as
a sign to the Israelites, Isa. 20. 2. 3. The same ceremony was also used by
the Priests when they entered into the Exodus 30* 19. 20. See Ainsworths Annot.
in locum.
Holy place to do the service there: which Ceremonies, though now abolished,
yet the morality thereof may be of use, and does concern us also, as it was a
sign first of shame, secondly of sorrow, and thirdly not only of purity,
according to Eccle. 5. 1. where we are advised to look to our feet, but also
of willingness and diligence in the service of the Lord, according to Psalm.
110. 3. where the people of God is said to be a willing people: and Jer. 48.
10. where he is cursed that does the work of the Lord negligently. Of all
which Joshua was now admonished by the Lord even as if he had said unto him:

My intent, O Joshua (whom I have called to be the leader of my people) by this
that I do command thee now to do, is, that thereby thou may be informed
both thou, and this great people that I have committed to thy charge,) that you
ought to consider seriously, the Covenant wherein you are now entered with me:
whereby, as on my part I have obliged my self to accompany you in the
conquest of this land of Canaan (thereby to perform and accomplish all the
promises concerning it, which I have made of old, both to your fathers, and to
your selves) so on the otherside, you also have obliged your selves thereby
upon your souls and consciences, that with shame and confusion of face, with
unfeigned sorrow and true penitent hearts you shall renounce all your former
Jdolatries, manifold murmurs, rebellions and abominations (whereby you have so
often provoked me to anger even as your fathers had done before; wherefore I
was constrained to ma^e their carcasses to fall in the wilderness, as I had
sworn unto them in my wrath) and besides that you will also obey and do all
my commandments and ordinances with all your hearts, and with all your souls,
in a good conscience and faith unfeigned: that you may possess this land for
ever, and live therein, you and your children after you. To the like effect do
we read in the 19. chap. of the Revel. that after that the four and twenty
Elders, and the four Beasts mentioned in the fourth verse of the said chapter
(representing the Christian Churches, and the heads of them now assembled or
met together in the presence of God in Parliament, passed over the mystical
Euphrates) had fallen down, and worshipped God that sat on the throne, saying
Amen, Hallelujah, that then a voice came out of the throne saying, praise our
God, all ye his servants, and ye that fear him, both small and great, by the
action of which Elders, etc. is noted the entering of the said people in the
said Covenant; the said action being parallel to that, as the words of the
third verse, and the action there mentioned, are also the true parallel, of
that first action performed by Joshua immediately before this, and presently
after the passage over Jordan, as soon as they were arrived in Gilgal, Io^^.
5. 9.
where Joshua did pitch the twelve stones taken in Jordan, for a memorial to
future ages of the drying up of the said waters of Jordan, and of their passage
over it, dry foot; the erecting of which stones in the type, does signify in
the Antitype the enacting, and registring of the sentence of the utter
overthrow and abolishment of the It should therefore have preceded the Covenant
because it was the cause of our separation and divorce from the Lord, therefore
that Jonas was first to be cast into the sea of Sodom, spare it not therefore,
or else you must be sure that the Sea will not cease her raging.
Hierarchicall prelaticall power of Archbishops and Bishops first in all our
Kings Dominions, and afterward in the whole Canaan or land of the Kingdom of
the Beast: it signifies also the sentence of Excommunication, by which it (viz.
the Beast) must be confined for ever to the bottomless pit whence it issued,
Revel. 17. 8. or cast into the The lake of Sodom a type first of the
Excommunicatition of the Church, called by Christ Gehenna of fire Mat. 5. 22.
by Saint Paul to be delivered unto Satan, 1 Cor. 5. 5. by Saint John Revel. 19.
10. and 20. 10. a lake of fire and brimstone; secondly, of hell it self.
lake of fire and brimstone, mentioned Revel. 19. 20. and 20. 10. typified by
the lake of Sodom, wherein the said Jordan was, as it were cast, when it was
dried up; being also therein a prototype of that sea mentioned Revel. 18. 21.
where it is said, that a mighty Angel took up a stone like a great millstone,
and cast it into the sea, saying, with such violence shall the great City
Babylon be cast, and shall be found no more alluding to that other type
mentioned I^^. 51. 63. 64. read and consider well the contents thereof.
Jer. 51. 63. 64. Even so the words uttered by that Revel. 19. 5. parallel to
Josh. 5. 13, 14, 15.
voice coming out of the throne and saying praise our God, etc. is the right
parallel of the said apparition to Joshua above mentioned; importing the very
same commandment which ought to be made to all the people of God both small
and great, as well those that are his domestical servants, as all the rest of
them that fear him, concerning the due consideration of the importance of the
said Covenant that this Christian Israel has now made with God, as it
appears, first by the place, whence the said voice came, which is the throne;
whereby allusion is made to the place where, and to the manner how, the Lord
was wont to Numb. 27. 18. 21. See Judge. 20. 27. 28. 1 Samuel 23. 9, 10, etc. and
chap. 28. 6. Ainsworth in Exodus 28. 30.
answer (from the Oracle) the Kings asking counsel at the Lord, by the Priests
bearing the Ephod, whose lips does preserve knowledge, and at whose mouth the
law is sought, Mal. 2. 7. And thus the true and faithful Ministers of the
Gospel having first consulted the true Oracles of God only, that is, his
sacred word ought to inform in the name of the Lord, the King and his Nobles
that they must praise and sanctify that God alone (according to his most holy
will and sacred ordinances, commanded in his said word) with whom they are now
entered in Covenant, and not only they, but also by their command, all the
servants of the Lord employed in the service of the Lord, in all the Churches
of his Majesty's Dominions, and likewise all his faithful subjects that do
fear the Lord, both small and great: And that they must therefore abhor and
detest all their former contrary Religion, doctrine, and worship; but chiefly
all kind of Popery, either in general or particular heads, even as they are
refuted and condemned, by the said word of God in all the true reformed
Churches; but in special that they must detest and reject all the usurped
authority of all Hierarchicall Archbishops and Diocesean Bishops upon the
Scriptures of God, upon the Church, upon the Civil Magistrate also, and
consciences of men, and all their tyrannous Canons and humane ordinances made
upon indifferent things, against their Christian liberty, as namely all their
rites, ceremonies and false doctrines added by them to the administration of
the Sacraments, as the Crossing in Baptism, the kneeling in the receiving of
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the standing of the Lords Table Altarwise,
with tapers, or Crucifixes over it, and bowing to it, or at the naming of
Jesus, and the observing of other (by them falsely called) holy days, besides
that holy sanctified day of the Lord, the which to the utmost of their power
they have labored to expu^ge out of the catalogue of the ten Commandments of
the law. And that hereafter they will adhere to the Lord, serving and
worshipping him alone, in all holiness and pureness of living, in submitting
themselves for that end, to an holy Church government or discipline, taught
and contained in the said word of God alone, and void of all humane inventions
and additions not grounded upon the same.

Now that this is the true intent of the Spirit of God in the words of this
fifth verse, it will yet further appear, very clearly, if you will consider
(besides the two former mentioned verses of the said 19. chapter) both the
first and second verses thereof also, in the first of which Saint John tells us
how he heard a great voice of a great multitude in Heaven, saying, Hallelujah,
etc. giving us to understand thereby, the great The joy of Joshua and of the
people of Israel passing over Jordan dry, testified by Psalm. 66. 6. parallel
to Revela^. 19. 1. expressing the joy of the Christan Israel for the assembling
of the Parliament: Preaching at the very beginning of it, liberty to the
captives, and to them that were bound by the Prelates, the opening of the
prison, Isa. 61. x.
joy that the many congregations of the true Christian Churches, especially, of
these three Kingdoms, should both conceive in their hearts, and also express
outwardly both in words and actions, of holy thankesgiving unto the Lord and
acknowledging of that salvation, and glory, and honor, and power that was to
be given unto him, because he had put in the heart of his anointed to do and
fulfill his most holy will, in calling together that most heavenly Assembly of
Parliament, to exec^ue and administer the true and righteous judgments of God,
The passage over Jordan mentioned Josh. 3. 9, 10, 11. and 16. parallel to the
proceeding in judgment or Arainnement of the Hierarchy in Parliament,
expressed Revel. 19. 2.
proceeding juridi^-ally to the condemnation of the great Hierarchicall whore
which had corrupted the earth with her fornications; thereby also to avenge the
blood of his servants shed by her hand, as of them that were already dead, by
the means of her most inhumane and barbarous like cruelties used against them,
so of those that were yet detained prisoners, in great distress, in her most
vile and base prisons, and especially those faithful witnesses of his truth;
who had been confined in those remote Islands beyond seas, viz. of Garnezey
Jarzey and Syllie, against whom she had made war, had overcome them and
killed them by a civil or rather a most uncivil death, whereby they were, in
a manner cast out of the land of the living, Esa. 53. 8. having their eyes shut
as it were, being barred and deprived of the sight and company Ezech. 24. 16.
of the delight of their said eyes; I mean their most dear wives and
children, and after them, of the greatest comfort of the world, their Psalm. 88.
4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
godly friends and acquaintance, having likewise their hands and feet bound
with bands having neither the liberty to visit their friends, or to be visited
of them, nor to write unto them (being forbidden to have either paper, pen or
ink.) And thus did their corpse lie unburied in such public places of the
great city, for the space of I have observed this concerning M. Burton who was
confined in the Castle Cornet in the Isle of Garnzey, in whom especially I
find this type verified to the full, for since the 14 of June, 1637. in which
day he, together with his two other fellow Martyrs, and right (...) were
condemned, etc. to his arrival in the said Island which was the 15. day of
December in the same year, are just six whole months, during which time he
was, as it were in a very dark night of affliction, hid as the spies sent by
Joshua to Jericho under stalks of flax upon the roof of a house: and from
that time decained close prisoner three whole years, viz. from the said 15.
day of De^ember 1637. to the 15. day of November 1640. being the Lords day, and
the first of the last month of the said third year, in which day he heard the
great voice of the Heavenly Parliament saying unto him, come up hither.
three days and a half only, (though their said enemies had confined them
there till death) at the latter end whereof, the spirit of life coming from
God, entered into them, and so revived them; so that they could then stand upon
their feet, being loosed of their said bands, having heard that great voice
coming from the These are the true members of the true Church called always
heaven in this Revelation opposed to the Hierarchicall, National earthly
Church of the Prelates.
heavenly Parliament then assembled in London; the voice whereof was so loud,
that it was heard of them, from those remotest places of the Kings Dominions,
saying unto them, Come up hither, and they obeying the same, did presently
ascend up to the said Heavenly Assembly, gathered in the foresaid City of
London, wherinto they entered in a most glorious cloud of witnesses, rejoicing
for their said deliverance, as it is said in the first verse of this said 19.
chap. which was on the contrary a most bitter and spiteful sight to their
enemies that might see them thus honored of God and men. The event of all
which most glorious works (thus begun and prosecuted, according to the
foreappointad decree of God, thus also revealed unto us by Saint John in these
two chapters of the Revel. 11. 12. 13. and chap. 19: 1, 2, 3. (...).
Revel. viz. the 11. forecited, and the ninteenth, compared together) does give
I am sure such a clear light to all the business, now in hand, ex ungue
leonem, that no body will no more doubt of it. But yet consider the next
following action, set down in the sixth and eight verses of the said 19. chap.
namely, that presently after the precedent voice which did proceed from the
throne, John heard another like a voice of a great multitude, and as the voice
of many waters, and as the voice of strong thundrings, saying Hallelujah: for
the Lord that God, that Almighty one has reigned, etc. In which words I say,
is summarily and mystically contained the history, related more fully in the
Josh. 6. from verse the 1. to the 22. is contained an History parallel to the
praediction in Revel. 19. ver. 6, 7, 8.
sixth chapter of Josh. concerning the falling down of the walls of Jericho
(which was the first City taken in the land of Canaan, being beyond Jordan, by
the blowing of the Seven trumpets of rams horns, borne by seven Priests before
the Arc, which was carried by them round about it once in a day for the space
of six days: but the seventh day, they were to compass the said city seven
times, and at the seventh time when they should hear the said Prists making a
long blast with the said rams horns, they were bidden to shout with a great
shout, because then the wall of the City should fall down flat, and the
people should ascend up every man straight before him. This conquest of
Jericho, as well as that of the rest of the land of Canaan, was corporal
(though this first was performed in a spiritual ext^^ordinary manner) there^
their (...) corporal (...).
In their march about this city, the whole congregation was divided in three
several squadrons or troops, keeping this order, first the armed men were to
march in the forefront of the Army going before the Priests that blew the
trumpets; who in the second place marched before the Arc, which was carried by
the Levites upon their shoulders, going in the midst of all the Armies: Then in
the last place the rereward came after the Ark of the Lord, the Priests going
on and blowing with the trumpets. All which company thus ranged in battle
array, and compassing the said City once a day for six days, and seven times
the seventh day, It came to pass at the seventh time when the Priests made a
long blast with the rams horns, that the people shouted with a great shout,
and then the wall fell down flat. Th^s is a spiritual conquest, whereby these
Christian Kingdoms are to be conquered to Christ, in slipping from off their
necks, or casting off the cruel and intolerable yoke of Antitichrists
usurped tyrannical power, to take in liew thereof the most easy yoke of
Christ, embracing the sincere profession of his truly reformed Religion, and
submitting to his holy Church Government and discipline: therefore the order
kept by these three troops in their march and uttering of their Hallelu* jah
after their said conqu^st is different from that of the type; because the
spirit of God has as it seems reference to the Spiritual warfare of the
Parliaments: where the honorable house of Commons representing the whole body
of the Kingdom, does as it were march in the forefront of the whole Army;
Then the Peers of the land, Princes of the Tribes of their fathers, and heads
under God and the King of the thousands of Israel, do^ follow after: then the
Priests or Ministers come in the rereward of the said Army, with the rams
horns of the powerful, though most despised preaching of the word of God and
servent prayer of a long blast; bearing upon their shoulders the ^^borious
Ministry thereof, whereby especially, the wall of this Jericho, (I mean
according to Prove. 18. 11. these rich Viceroys, Merchants, and Mariners
superfluous and ill acquired wealth, wages of unrighteousness so called, 2
Pet. 2. 15. which was as their strong city, and as an highwall in their own
conceit,) must be tumbled down: These come in the last place, because their
proper place is occupied by those who should be thrust out of it.
And thus the three several companies noted by S. John, having shouted with a
great shout their Hallelujah, the walls of the Spiritual Jericho falling
down flat, had great reason to say that then the Lord God omnipotent, did
begin to enter into his reign, and that therefore they should be glad and
rejoice, and give honor to him, because then was come the marriage of the
lamb, for as in the sacking of Jericho, Josh. 6. 22, etc.
Joshua had care of Rahab the harlot, and therefore commanded the By these
understand all the true witnesses of Christ, and among them especially they,
that have suffered for the truth, who are to inform and show by the word of
God how the Chuch ought to be reformed and purged of all false Popish and
Arminian doctrine and Idolatries of all the Popish garments, and superfluous
ornaments of that pompous will worship and Liturgy, and of all the rags and
superstitious days of feasts or fasts, all which ought to be abolished. See
the Law, Deuteronomy. 21. 12. verse 13. and the law for the clensing of the leprosy,
Levit. 14. 8. Numb. 5. 2. 3. and for the practice thereof, see Numb. ^2. 14.
15. and Ezech. 16. 52. 54. for the performance of this in the Antitype weigh.
Revel. 19. 7. 8. and 11. 13. the latter end.
two spies that had spyed out the Country, they should go into her house, to
bring her out thence, and all that she had, with all her kindred, to put them
without the camp of Israel, there to be purified according to the law, even
so Christ he is willing to save his Church, (which had played the Harlot, with
the great whore with whom she had polluted her self, having drunk very deep
of her abominations out of her own cup;) and to bring her now within the
covenant, the time granted unto her to make her self ready being passed:
wherein the spies forementioned were employed, not only to strip her (for her
greater shame) of all her polluted garments, and in stead of them to put on her
mourning weeds, but also to shave her head (to humble her the more) and to
pare her nails, that afterward she^might by arrayed in fine linen clean and
white, against the day of her marriage with the King him himself of the
Christian Israel.

And thus much shall suffice for the present for a taste of the Parallel, very
necessary as I judge not only for the better understanding of the place of the
Revel. the exposition whereof we have now undertaken, but also for the greater
encouragement of the said honorable Assembly now thus gathered together by the
Lord to judge the said whore in fighting the Lords battles against her. To
whom I will yet say further in the name of the Lord, that they should not faint
though, they find by experience this first City of Jericho, to be not only a
great one, and walled up to heaven, but also shut up very straightly: for
seeing you have such a Captain as that victorious warrior, the great Jehoshua
going as it is already said, before you; and his Priests with sounding trumpets
to cry alarm against the^, there with all to beat down their tallest and
strongest walls flat to the ground, you must be assured that though themselves
were as tall and strong, as were of old those Gyant-like Anakins, yet you shall
vanquish them and ransacke their City. But with all, permit me I pray, for the
discharge of mine own conscience to advise you, yet in all humility, of one
thing more, to which the said Parallel does yet further lead me, not to be
omitted, but which ought rather to be as I suppose duly considered. In respect
of which I am a continual Orator to God for you and his holy people, that he
may avert it from you, I will express it unto you better in the words of
Joshua himself, speaking to all the people, in the time of the compassing of
the said City of Jericho, saying to them as I do now to you; Josh. 6. 18, 19
In any wise keep your selves from the accursed thing, least ye make your
selves accursed, when ye take the accursed thing, and make the camp of Israel
a curse, and trouble it, for all the silver and gold, and vessels of brass and
iron, that are already consecrated unto the Lord, must come into thetreasurie
of the Lord. Take heed therefore I say, of the sin of Achan: who when he
saw among the Idem cap. 7. 21 wherefore all Israel was troubled: 36. of them
were Killed, and the rest fled before the men of Ai. verse. 4. 5.
spoils a goodly Babylonish garment, and two hundred shekels of silver, and a
wedge of gold of fifty shekels weight, he coveted them, and took them, and hid
them in the earth, in the midst of his Tent, and the silver under it. But let
none of this heavenly Army, already Revel. 19. 14
clothed in fine linen, white and clean, defile their said garments, in
coveting as did the said Prince (any of the spiritual revenewes or goods
whatsoever belonging to the Church,) neither permit that any should yet
continue to appropriate them to their earthly Revenewes or demeanes, or to
bring any of them into their houses. Remember what Moses the servant of the
Lord said of old to that ancient Israel, Deuteronomy. 7. 25. 26. Covet not says he,
the silver or gold that is upon their images, nor take it unto thee, least thou
be snared therewith: for it is an abomination to the Lord thy God: bring not
therefore an abomination into thy house, lest thou be a cursed thing like it:
but utterly abhor it, and count it most abominable, for it is accursed. Hear
what he says further to the same people in another place. Isa. 30. 22.
There shall cleave nothing, of the interdicted thing to thine hand, that the
Lord may turn from the fierceness of his wrath, and show thee mercy, and have
compassion upon thee, and multiply thee, as he has sworn unto thy fathers. O
let all such, consider rather and ponder it well in their hearts, what is
become of many of the houses and demeanes of a great number of the late
Impropriators, and of their Impropiations, and take it to heart, considering
that many of those who devoured that which was holy, have found it a most
dangerous snare as says Solomon, Prove. 20. 25. and have consulted shame to
their houses, as says Habackkuck 2. 10. and sinned against their soul. Foelix
quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum, it is a happy thing to learn wisdom by
the affliction or chastisement of another; let not also the least part thereof
be brought into the Kings Treasury. I say no more, because Deuteronomy. 13. 17.
I know that my Lord the King, with his Princes, is as an Angel of God to
discern good and bad; who as * 2 Samuel 14. 17.
another Jehoshaphat, desirous to bring his people back again to the Lord
their God, has called and assembled 2 Cron. 19. 4. 7, 8, 9, and 10.
you in this Jerusalem, for the judgment of the Lord, with this charge; To do
in the fear of the Lord, faithfully and with a perfect heart, so that what
cause soever shall come to you of your brethren that dwell in your Cities,
between blood and blood, between Law and Commandment, statutes and
judgments, that ye should even warn them, that they trespass not against the
Lord, thereby to bring his wrath upon you, and upon your brethren: therefore as
he said again to the very same a little before, so has likewise I am sure our
said Prince spoken unto you, saying; Take heed what ye do, for ye judge not
for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the judgment, wherefore now let
the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed, and do it, for there is no
iniquity with the Lord, nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts. In a
word, Mat. 22. 21. in restoring Church lands, impropriations, Church tithes,
etc. to whom they belong.
Render unto Caesar the things which are Cesars, and unto God the things that
are Gods, for dealing thus courageously the Lord shall be with the good.

Having now at last in the precedent discourse, found out, (as I am fully
persuaded) by the fav^^able assistance of the spirit of God, together with that
faithful and unfailing guide of his own appointment, the foresaid type of the
journeys of the children of Israel traveling from Egypt to Canaan, and at
length discovered the particular Country, through which runs, that
powerful mystical Euphrates, which has thus since the forementioned time of
the first Reformation of Religion, (till the drying up of it, now fulfilled, by
the pouring out of the said sixth Vial) hindered the perfecting of the said
Reformation. Having also showed, what are the mystical seas which it makes in
its course, or powerful dominion, established in the said Kingdom, thus
divided into two great Metropolitan Seas or Dioceses: As also, the very time of
the drying up of it; and spoken of some of the most admirable and wonderful
works of the Lord, that are already performed, by his most powerful
overruling hand, since the drying thereof, and that are yet in hand, and which
he will not now leave unperfect, nor desist any more from the full
accomplishment of them: because the time now begun and foretold by that Angel
which Saint John saw standing upon the sea, and upon the earth, or earthly sea;
whereof * Revel. 10. (...) 5. 6.
lifting up his hand to heaven, he swear then, by him that lives for ever and
ever, who created heaven and the things that therein are, and the earth, and
the things that therein are, and the sea, and the things which are therein,
there should be time no longer. Verse 7.
But that in the days of the voice of the seventh Angel, when he should
begin to sound, as he has now, as was showed before that then the mystery
of God should be finished as he had before declared to his servants the
Prophets. All these things I say having been thus premised, it is now
manifest, and very easy to be understood that the Ships that were traffiking
upon the forementioned Seas are nothing else, then the Hierarchicall Courts of
such Metropolitan Archbishops and of their other brethren the under Diocesan
Bishops: the diverse Officers whereof, are thus represented unto us in this text
by the Holy Ghost, by such names and titles as are ordinarily given to
seafaring men, which are diverse; having also diverse titles whereby they are
called, as was before noted in the Analysis of the text.

The first whereof are called by the ti^le of Ship-masters, which in the
Original are expressed by the word (...), signifying properly a Governor:
which Governors and Ship-Masters seem to be two distinct officers or
offices, bearing two distinct charges in Ships, both specified also by Saint
Luke Acts 27. 11. Where he says, that the Centurion believed rather the
Governor and the Master of the Ship, then etc. The first of which Officers is
here mentioned, being the very same title or word by which the Apostle S. Paul
does call those Church Officers of the Primitive Churches, which now, among
those that are truly called, by the title of the Reformed Churches beyond
Seas, are named Elders, and here Lay Elders by some, or ruling Elders by
others; which are those Romans 12. 8.
Helps in Government, or rather helping governors, whom elsewhere the Apostle
calls Presidents or Wise Rulers: as in the first to the These. chap. 5. verse
12. also when he says, We beseech you brethren, to know them which labor
among you, and are Rulers or Presidents over you, in all which places he uses
the very same word that is here employed by the Prophet speaking of these
Ship-officers. Which Rulers, Presidents, or Governors are of two sorts, the
one of them being Pastors and teachers, who labor especially in the word and
doctrine: the other are those that are only Ruling Elders, or Helping Elders,
because they are or should at least be Helps, to assist the Ministers in the
administration of the Church discipline, or in the Government of the said
Church, who are so distinctly specifi^d, or precisely distinguished by the
Apostle in his first to Tim. chap. 5. verse 17. when he says, let the Elders
that rule well, be counted worthy of double honor; especially they, who
labor in the word and doctrine: Which were also very well known in Origens
time, who lived about the year of Christ, 226. who did thus distinguish them,
when writing against Celsus he says, Origin. lib. 3. contra Celsum.
Non nulli praepositi sunt qui in vitam and mores eorum qui admittuntur
inquirant, etc. There are some ordained, to inquire into the life and manners
of such, as are admitted into the Church, that they may banish such from the
Public Assembly, that perpetrate scandalous acts: so likewise in S. Ambrose
his time, as it app^ares by that famous text of his, Ambros. in (...). (...)
Tim. 5. he lived about the year of the Lord. 37. 4.
Vnde and Synagoga and postea Ecclesia seniores habuit, quorum sine consil^o
nihil agebatur in Ecclesia, etc. There were Elders in the Church under the new
Testament, as well as under the Law in the Synagogues, (as it app^ares clearly
by these few places of the Old and New Test^ment, viz 1 Kings 6. 32. 2 Chronicles.
19. 8. 11. Jer. 26. 10. 11. Ezec. 7 26. which were in steed and ^^d represent
the whole Congregation as may be seen Exodus 12. 3. 21. and 19. 3. 7. see also
in the New, Mat. 27. 2. Mark 15. 1. Acts 4. 5. 6. etc.) without whose advise
and counsel nothing was done in the Church etc. says that father. Which
officers I mean both By which places it is m^st, th^^ b^ the m^s of (...)
Eld^^s, who were not ^nely aged m^n but teachers and govern^^s of the people,
things were orderly communicated with the multitude.
Pastors and Elders are also called guid^s o^ O^ersee^s by the Apistle, Heb.
13. 17. where he ch^r^es the Hebrews to Obey them that had the oversight of
them; or that were their Guides or Rulers. Of which the Assemblies of
Consistories, Colloques, and Synods, both Parishionall, Provincial and
National of the said Reformed Churches beyond seas, are composed; who have
also the managing and disposition of all Church affairs.

Concerning which Assemblies (it will not be amiss to say this by the way,)
that they have always for President or Moderator a Pastor or Minister, the
rest of the said Assemblies, both Ministers and Elders, being his Assessors to
vote and judge with him of 2 Cor. 19. 8.
what cause soever concerning the Lord, or any controversies which comes to
them of their brethren that dwell in their particular cities and congregations:
The said Moderator being as it were the mouth or Speaker in the said
Assemblies, both for the examining of the business treated or discussed among
them, the taking of the voices or opinions of the said Assessours and Judges,
and pronouncing of their opinion or sentence, concerning the said matters thus
agitated among them, and that according to the plurality of voices. Which
Moderator or Speaker is always chosen in the first session of the said
National Synod (lawfully convened from two to two, or from three to three
years) by the said Plurality of voices both of the said Ministers and Elders
there assembled, to be the President thereof, during the same. But in the
Colloques or Provincial Synods composed likewise of all the Ministers of the
said Province, and of one Elder at least of every particular Congregation of
the same, the Ministers in their successive turns from the eldest of them to
the youngest are the Moderators, continuing in the said office from one
Colloque to another; that is for the space of three Months, to see with the
Scribe, (who also is most commonly chosen from among the Ministers to keep the
Registers of the said Assemblies) the execution of the said matters therein
voted: Or (as it is observed amongst us from one Proposition to another) that
is for the space of one Month only, at the begi^ning whereof the said
Ministers use to meet, to hear one another, treating in the public
Congregation, in their successive turns, such a portion of Scripture, as is
appointed by them all, thereby to fit themselves for the function of the holy
Ministry (by the mutual brotherly private admonitions given by each of them
to him that in his said order has made the said exercise in public audience
of the Church) and also that they may in effect by that means see the
proficiencie of each other in the same. As for the Parishionall Consistory,
which is the In Mat. 5. 22 fore-alleaged, Christ does lay down the f^^st
platform o^ the Churchgovernement o^ discipline which he would have to b^
used in his Kingdom of grace under the N. T. according to that of the old
Synagogue to the end of the world: which he afterward does more fully
establish, M^t. 18. 15. 16, etc which two places are parall^lls expounding one
another: for the word (...) shows what is to be understood by that other,
(...), viz not the whole congregation promiscuously, but such Elders, chosen
out of it, whereof the smaller Syned^^^ms of every Synagogue or particular
Congregations among the ancient Jews, were composed, of whom we have spoken
before, out of Exodus 2. 3. 21. and 19. 3. 7. Again the word Eccl^sia does
l^kewise show that by the word Synedrtum we are to understand, not only civil
Magistrates, called also by the title of Elders very often in the Old
Testament, but likewise such Ecclesiastical Officers as we now do speak of,
being the same (...), who as the former are to be chosen from among the
godliest, wiser and dis^st of the said Congregation.
Senate of every particular Congregation composed of the Ministers of the same,
(if they are more then one) and of some competent number of Lay Elders, and
Deacons, according to the greatness or smalnesse of the same Congregations:
therein I say the said Minister or Ministers Successively, are moderators from
one Sabbath day to another. In which day, especially they do meet most
commonly all of them together, both Minister, Elders, and Deacons, in the
Church, after the Sermon in the afternoon, there to consult concerning the
scandalls or offenses committed by any members of the said Congregation, either
in public or more privately: and that either to reconcile parties that are at
variance, to warn them that are unruly, or to proceed in brotherly charity by
the censures of the Church against such as are rebellious, and that will not
be admonished: in a word, to set all things in order that may be amiss to the
glory of God, and better edification of the Church. The Deacons are there
present also whose peculiar Office concerns the poor of the Parish,
consisting in the gathering of Alms for them, when some extraordinary occasion
requires it so, or in receiving also at the issue out of the Church for to
supply the want of their poor brethren: finally, in distributing the said
Alms, faithfully, by the order and advice of the said Ministers and Elders,
for the relief of the more needy members of that congregatione specially,
whereof they themselves are members; of whom they are obliged, to have an
especial care every one of them according to his particular distinction, or
quarter assigned unto him, in visiting of them, especially in the time of their
affliction, and suffering none of them to go a begging. Of all which alms
both received and distributed, the said Deacons are obliged to keep, and to
render also a faithful account every Communion day, to the said Ministers and
Elders, and in the presence of the chief householders of the said Congregation,
who may assist at the giving of the said accounts, that they may see how their
Alms are distributed, and may know the better the estate of the said poor,
thereby to be the more excited to bountifulness. Now all these Offices do
acknowledge (I mean in spiritual matters only, which do concern the
administration of the keys of the Kingdom of Christ,) for otherwise they are
subject in all things unto the higher powers, which are ordained of God;) None
but Christ alone (who is the King of his said Church) for their Hierarchicall
and supreme head: Yet nevertheless in such a manner as that they confess
also that the said Churches Assemblies are subordinate one to another,
according to that Canon, 1 Pet. 5. 5. be subject all of you one to another,
etc. so that in difficult affairs, or incase of grievance (if it * Romans 12. 9.
falls out in any matter of Judgment or censure, either for doctrine or
manners) both officers and members of the same Congregations, preferring one
another in honor, Romans 12. 10. do accordingly appeal from the less Assembly
to a greater; as from the Consistory to the Colloque, or Provincial Synod,
and from this to the National, where the more difficult matters of doctrine
and manners are concluded and determined by the According to the practice of
the Apostles Acts 15. 3. 2. 4. 6. etc. there imitating the ancient practice of
the Jews appealing from the less Synedriu^s foreno^ed to the great Synedrium
at ^^rusalem as it ^s manifest out (...) 2 Cor. 19 8. (...) and 11.
word of God. The said Judges, or Church Governors, having no other rule to
govern the said Churches, committed to their charge, or to judge of any of the
said cases, but the Scriptures only, whereupon are grounded all the Canons or
Articles of their church discipline, which is the particular rule, whereby they
are also to decide and determine of all the said Ecclesiastical business, and
affairs. And though all the Ministers among them, be of equal authority and
power, and likewise all Elders and Deacons, none of them pretending to have a
greater authority then the other, or to be above one another: that is one
Minister above another; one Elder above another; or one Deacon above his fellow
officer: no more then any one Church or Congregation does not, nor ought to
assume to it self any power or authori^y over another, as the greater above
the less, or those of any great town over them of the Villages, being as they
believe, very well grounded therein, upon the word of Christ himself Mat. 20.
25, 26. and 27. Mar. 10. 42, 43. 44. and Luke 22. 25, 26. Yet there is no
confusion for all that, among the said Churches Orders or Officers, (as it is
ordinarily objected by the Adversaries of the said Church Government) but a
more convenient and very decent order is observed among them: The Ministers
being above the Elders in dignity of Office, place and honor, and the Elders
above the Deacons: And the more ancient Ministers having also the precedence of
the younger, which is likewise observed among the Elders and Deacons, according
to the Rule of the Ap^s^le, speaking to all such diverse Church officers, Romans
10. 12. and saying unto them, that they should preceede one anothor in honor:
(...) Pet. 5. 5.
1 Pet. The young submitting themselves unto the Elders; yea all of them,
being subject in a decent order one to another, and always clothed with
humility: because God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble, as
says Apostle Saint Peter in the fore alleged place, after the prohibition
given there to all dominiering Prelates, that they should not be Lords over
(...), Gods heritage.

All which Church Officers having since for many ages past, been altogether
cashiered out of the Church, and deprived of all that Church Government by the
Roman Hierarchicall earthly power, forementioned, of the Pope, together with
the said Consistories and Colloques: in stead whereof they have errected the
foresaid Hierarchicall Courts and Officers, the most part of them being but
lawyers, or laikes (to use their own term) no more then they esteem our
Church Elders to be: To all which they have given as new Offices of their own
moulding and humane invention, so likewise new names and titles of their own
fabrication also, none of them being Mat. 15. 13.
of the fathers planting as says Christ. And such are those of the first
forementioned rank, and order as their Suffragan Bishops, Chancellors,
Archdeacons, Deanes, Commissaries or Highcommissioners, which sit as Judges in
the said Courts, and to whom, that Hierarchicall power of the Pope,
Archbishops, etc. has committed the Administration of the keys, not of
Christ's Spiritual kingdom, (as Christ himself gave to Peter, and to the rest
of the Apostles representing then the whole Church) but of their earthly
Hierarchicall Kingdoms; having appointed them to be the sole Judges in
Ecclesiastical causes and matters. Then the next that follow, which are of the
second rank, as namely their Secretaries, Dataries, or Registers, Advocates,
and Procurors occupying Ships. Then follow in the last place, the third and
last sort of them, viz. their Promooters, Apparitors, Solicitorus; to which may
also be very well added all that table of Questmen, Sidemen, Inquisitors,
Church* wardens, Pursivants, etc. all which are right Aucupes Aulae, or flies
of the Inquisition, nay all I am sure both great and small, birds of a feather
and hatched all of one damme, I mean that whore of Babylon: All which do trade
on the Sea, or, word for word, as it is in the original (...) labor the Sea.
Whereby the Holy Ghost al^udeth manifestly to the work of Hu^bandry, and to
those that are occupied in that calling to labor the ground, breaking the
clods of it, and cutting it with the plow: A goodly metaphor indeed, very well
befitting, and clearly manifesting the right manner of the trading of these
Officers upon this seas: which is also used elsewhere to the same purpose, viz,
Psalm. 129. 2, 3. where the Church of God is represented complaining of her
E^emies and saying, Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth: and yet
they have not prevailed against me. The plowers plo^ed upon my b^^^e, they made
long their surrowes, by which Metaphorical speech the cruel afflictions of
the Church thus labored or plowed up, as it we^e, by her Enemies are mea^t.
Which dealing does very fi^ly agree to all the P^^aticall offices of those
Hierarchicall Courts; who plow thus ^he seas or peoples, over which they are
established, when once they do fill into their lurches, or are brought under
their ^yr ^^icall power: even as the plowman does the ground, but not as he,
thereby to fit it and prepare it the better, to receive the good seed, that it
may bring forth the more fruit to the owner; but rather as the hirelings use
todoe, hiring the ground, and wearing it with tilling, till they have sucked all
the fat thereof, and filled their own purses, to the great prejudice and
manifest damage of the owner.

And thus much for the meaning of the words of this present text. In the
exposition whereof, I have been constrained to insist thus long, because it
has been heretofore otherwise expounded and taken in another sense, by the
former interpreters, then I have done now, being led thereunto, first by the
exposition that the Angel himself does give to the waters or sea, whereupon
both the whore her self sits (as it has been showed out of See also Esa.
8, 7. and 18. 2.
Revel. 17. 15.) and these her Officers do trade: as also by the consideration
of the type of this Church mentioned before, the which I have followed from
journey to journey, or from one month to another, especially in the last of
the third great Period or part of her voayge through the wilderness, comparing
the estate, time and events of this christian Church, to those of that ancient
of Israel, whereupon I say I I have grounded this my exposition; the which
nevertheless I do willingly, and with all humility submit (as I did when I
first preached it in public) to the wise and charitable censure of the rest of
the most faithful and painful laborers, my fellowbrethren in the
Ministry, rowing hard with us in the true ship of Christ (being in the midst
of those Seas tossed with mighty waves in great jeopardie,) that they may bring
his true Disciples to the shore of heaven, in drawing them out of those
troublesome and dangerous hierarchicall seas: whom I desire not to cast it away
as a new Doctrine, though it might seem so at the first sight, but to ponder
it well before, though they find it clothed in a very course and homely
language and yet borrowed; in which having dared to walk thus far in
public, I will yet adventure a little further, observing out of this text thus
expounded some few points of Doctrine, the which I mean to handle as briefly
as I can to apply them to some use of Admonition and exhortation. And first in
general considering that all this Hierarchicall forementioned earthly power
represented by the said Euphraticall Jordan, and all the Officers which do
exercise or administer the same power, do proceed all of them (though some
more immediately and manifestly then the other) from that Universal Papal
Sea, the common Mother of all the other Revel. 17. 5.
Harlots, and abominations of the earth: and that all the said Officers are
thus represented unto us in this text, under those foresaid titles of Seafaring
men or Sailors in ships, whose offices and unlawful practices do all issue of
the same Source, this I say may yield this point, viz. that

The Beast of Rome together with the false Prophet, Doct.
have changed Christ's fishing Ship, or true Church, into a very Pirate Ship, or
den of thieves; who in stead of gaining souls to Christ do leese them, and
in liew of bringing them to Heaven, cause their passengers to make shipwreck,
both of soul and body in hell, as it appears not only by the words of our
Savior, speaking to the Scribes and Pharisees of his time, the right
predecessors of these, both of them having been the murders and persecutors
of Christ and his saints, and saying unto them Mat. 23. 15. Woe unto you
Scribes and Pharisees Hypocrites, for ye compass sea and land to make one
Proselyte, and when he is made, ye make him twofold more the child of hell. And
again speaking of them to his Disciples, he says Mat. 15. 14. Let them alone,
they be bl nde leaders of the blind. And if the blind lead the blind, both
shall fall into the ditch: this truth is likewise manifest by that which is
said in particular of their followers Revel. 1^. 8. That all the names of the
dwellers upon earth who should worship the Beast, were not wr^tten in the book
of the Lamb, sl^^ne from the foundation of the world. But especially it is
^l^^re by that which is written in the next chapter, viz. 14. verse 9 10. where
Saint John says that the third Angel following the two former, of whose
message he had spoken in the precedent verses, said that if any man should
worship the Beast and his Image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or in
his hand, the same should drink of the wine of the wrath of God* which is
powered out without mixture, into the cup of his indignation and he should be
tormented with fire and brimstone, in the presence of the holy Angels, and in
the presence of the lamb, etc And as for their profaning thus the said true
ship of Christ, namely his Church and Disciples; see likewise what Christ did
reproach to the foresaid Scribes and Pharisees, Mark 11. 17. Which may as well
be applied to these, as it is related by the Evangelist who said, that Christ
teaching, said unto them, is it not written? Mark. 11. 17.
My house shall be called of all Nations the house of prayer; but ye have made
it a den of thieves. And so in John 2. 13. etc. where it is said, that the
Jews Passover being at hand, Jesus went up to Jerusalem, and found in the
Temple, those that souldoxen and sheep, and doves, and the changers of money
sitting, true types, of all these, both Merchants and Saylors in their trading
ships. And when he had made a scourge of small cords, he drove them all out of
the Temple, and the sheep and the oxen, and powered out the changers money, and
overturned the Tables; and said unto them that sold doves. Take these things
hence, make not my fathers house, a house of merchandise. As I wish, and am in
very good hope that he is now making such another whip, in and by the means of
this ho^orable house of Parliament, called also (as it is reported) by some,
though in derision, it may be, or rather by fear, a whipping Parliament) to
scourge out of the ship or Church of Christ, with the same spirit of zeal as
he did, all such Pirat-officers, none excepted, whether of the first, second,
or third, forementioned rank or order; together with all the Simoniacall
Patrons) hucksters, abettors and sellors of Church-benefices, Ecclesiastical
censures and excommunication, yea sellers of bodies and Revel. 11. 13.
souls of men too, as it is said in the 13. verse of this chapter, who Pet. 5.
2.
for filthy lucre sake, trade for souls: who together with their chief owners
must not only be whipped out, but also should be cast over board, into the deep
pit of Perdition, but especially the false leaders and their Head.

First because he is a right Revel. 9. 11.
Apollyon both Actively Reason 1.
and Passively; Actively in that like a most cruel and foaming boar of the
wood he made great havoc of the most laborious and diligent husbandmen, to
whom Christ had let out his vine, which he and his said Officers have also most
miserably wasted; a very He has been by these means the chief cause of all
the corporal plagues wherewith God has so often visited this land, as may be
seen proved at large in Sione plea. And h^reby it appears also that the
plague of the second V^all is both corporal and spi^ituall, the spiritual
noted in these words, it became as the blood of a dead man, the s^irituall in
the following
destroyer, who (by the bitter poison of his false Arminian doctrine,
Idolatries, false ceremonies and superstitious service and human-like liturgy,
common-perjuries, which (by the means of that most unnatural and cruelly
torturing Oath ex Officio) he has caused: As also by the most ungodly
Profanation of the Saboths of the Lord,) has killed both corporally and
spiritually many of those fishes which might have been before, mooving at
least, if not truly living in that sea; His Courts also of Arches,
High Commission, etc. having been but, as so many Revel. 16. 3. 4, 5, 6.
seas of blood, like to the blood of a dead man. And all the Officers thereof
having been but as so many horseleaches or bloodsuckers, who have made
them-selves drunk with blood: Yea his sea having been a Sea mingled with fire
also, Revel. 15. 2. and therefore like hot scalding waters, as they have been
found by woeful experience by whomsoever has dared to touch them or come too
near them, or to meddle any way with them, either speaking, preaching, or
writing against their great goddess Diana, or Hierarchicall whore, or
discrying by any means whatsoever, their most sacrilegious craft or traficke.
He is no less the great Apollyon Passively as Judas, whose d As by the
forementioned witnesses of Christ, and many other besides.
very successor he is, whom Christ calls The son of Perdition John 17. 12.
and likewise the Apostle Saint Paul 2 These. 2. 3. as being a man devoted and
destined to perdition, both of body, Revel. 18. 2. and of soul, cap. 19. 20.
and meetest it should, whose original, as it has been showed, is from the
bottemlesse pit, his proper Element: as it appears manifestly by that which is
said, Revel. 17. 8. of this Beast by the Angel to S. John: The Beast says he
that thou have seen, was and is not, and shall ascend out of the bottomless
pit and shall go into perdition.

Secondly, he is also the man of Sin, so called 2 Reason.
in the fore alleged place of 2 These. 2. alluding (as it is very like) to
that so frequent name or tide, used in the Old Testament of In Hebrew
Belijragual, signifying without profit ^r without yoke, I lawless rebellious
and wicked, which name is given unto Satan or Antichrist, opposed unto Christ
in 2 Cor. 6. 15 befitting very wall this great Viceroy.
Asher bel^all, given some times to the sons Sam. 2. 12. See also Judge. 19.
22.
Eli, whose very brethren and successors both the Beast and the false Prophets
are, with all their train of Merchants and Mariners. It is also applied to
those two false witnesses, brought (by that Iezabel, wicked Achabs wife)
against poor * Naboth; to deprive him both of his life and vineyard, (as this
wicked Iezabel (so called likewise as being the right Antitype of that Revel 2.
20.) has often done by the means of her false and corrupted Judges or
shipmasters of hers) the history whereof you may read 1 Kings 21. 7. 8. etc.
which title is rendered in the said place of the 2 These. 2. 3. 8. forealledged
with an emphaticall demonstrative Article taken there (...), pointing out this
as if he were the chief Captain or ring leader amongst the sons of Beliall;
a primate no less then Superlative amongst them, though of very little Laud.
Which perhaps may have given occasion to some, to deem him no less then a
great devil incarnate. Saint Hierom speaking of the father, thus explicates
it, Homo in quo fons omnium peccatorum, est. A man who is the very sourse of
all evils, both spiritual and corporal as it is showed and proved at large in
Sions Plea. Aquinas thus Omnium hominum pessimus, ut Christus omnium optimus:
the worst of all men, contrary to Christ, who is the best of all. Ours thus, a
man whose very composition is of sinfulness, notoriously, peerelesly vicious;
not only in his own person, but as another King. 12. 30. etc.
Jeroboam, having made the people of God, from Dan to Beersheba, to sin. A
right Balaam, so like, that ovum ovo non similius, one egg being not more like
another, then he is; like that very type of his, that false Prophet; wherefore
that very name is given to him Rev. 2. 14. of whom it is said, that he taught
Balac to cast a stumbling block before the children of Israel, to eat things
sacrificed unto Idols, and to commit fornication, as we showed but now.
Wherefore as the wrath of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and a great
plague was Numb. 25. 3. and 31. 16.
sent among the congregation of the Lord; so is it come to pass also in this
Laodicean lukewarm late times, wherein so many have been killed both corporally
and spiritually, that to no other time, then this present, can be most justly
applied (as was noted before;) that saying of Christ Mat. 24. 22. that except
Christ in his most wonderful and unspeakeable mercy had not now, (as he has
to the great praise of his most holy Name,) shortened these days both of
spiritual temptations and provocations, yea and (more then in Balaams time) of
most violent injunctions and constraints to ea^e things sacrificed unto Idols,
no soul was like to be saved; so also of most horrible and ^bominable treasons
and conspiracies tending to the utter confusion, and in all likelihood final
and total overthrow both of Church and Commonwealth in these three Kingdoms
especially: so that there was no flesh like to be spared, especially of the
best professors, who were thereby like to parallel the desolation of that so
great and flourishing Empire of Germany; of that so long reformed Kingdom of
Bohemia, and of those so famous and purely reformed Churches of that so late
flourishing Principality of the Palatine, if not to excel them. If it had not
been the Lord, who has been on our side, when such monstrous and Giant like
Viceroys and Traitors were risen up against us: Psalm. 124. 1. 2. etc.
for then they had swallowed us up quick: their wrath being so vehemently
kindled against us, then their waters had overwhelmed us, the stream whereof
had gone over our souls. Then those proud Herarchicall waters had gone over
our souls. But blessed be the Lord, who has not given us a prey to their
teeth. Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the Snare of such foulers, the
snare is broken, and we are escaped. Our help is in the name of the Lord, who
made Heaven and Earth.

Thirdly and lastly, herein also may he be compared to that feigned Charon of
the Pagan Poets, who was the boatman of Hell, to carry over the black Styx,
in his most wide and capable ferrie boat, the souls of men: to whom may be
applied (in respect of what has has been already said of him, according to
his former practices) that vain, yea most blasphemous boasting power that is
read in the Decretals, which the Popes do attribute unto themselves, viz. That
if they carried with them, millions of souls to be tormented with the great
Devil in Hell, no man was to reprove them: so imperious was he, and so
absolute in all his Tyrannies both corporal and This is to be read in the
Popes own Decretals.
pirituall, that no power either temporal or spiritual, was able to resist or
restrain him, only, from his intended devilish plots and designs: but so
would go on, come what might come of it: yea let Church, State, King and all,
sink or swim, 'twas all one to him; so he might have brought to pass his
own ends, which were indeed no better then Hamans, as it is now manifest to
all the world: In whose shameful end may all impenitent traitors with their
devilish projects and conspiracies fall and finish: that the King, State, and
Church may for ever flourish and prosper: for if the wicked be once taken taken
away from before the King, his throne cannot but be established in
righteousness, says Solomon, Prove. 25. 5.

I will end this first point of Doctrine in a word or two of admonition to all
such as hitherto have worshipped the Beast, and his image, and have received
his mark in their forehead, or in their hand, and to all that with them have
drunk of the wine of the wrath of this whores fornications: to all
Recusant-Papists I mean, and Hierarchists whatsoever they be: beseeching them
to consider seriously with themselves the lamentable forementioned condition,
and woeful estate of all them that have heretofore, or do yet daily thus
hazard their poor souls, into such ships; either to trade among such Pirates,
or if they be but passengers with them, to take such blood-drunken guides for
Pilots, and such beast like Mariners for rowers, who in stead of bringing them
them to Heaven and Heavenly rest, as they profess and boast, do carry them
down into the Sea of the Euphratian Jordan; with a most violent and swift
current, to percipitate them in the end, together with themselves, in Prove. 25.
5.
that lake of fire and brimstone, there to be tormented day and night, forever
and ever. Hear this and tremble, for it is now high time, if ever, to Revel.
20. 10
flee from the wrath which is at hand, up therefore, Mat. 3. 3. 7.
get ye out of this Sodom. Do I say unto you, as once Lot spoke unto his
sons in law, for the Lord will presently destroy it. Genesis 19. 14.
Come out of Babylon say I again unto you as the Angel in the Revelation, *
Revel. 18. 4.
to the people of God, that ye be no more partakers of her sins, and that ye
receive not of her plagues: Get ye out of such ships, and forsake such wilful
blinded guides, else you shall assuredly Mat. 15. 14.
fall both into the ditch, as says our Savior. Stop no more your ears; Psalm.
58. 6.
like the deaf adder, which will not hearken to the voice of charmers,
charming never so wisely. And if he does yet grant you to day to hear his
voice, Heb. 3. 7. 8. etc.
harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, in the day of the last
temptation in the wilderness, whereour fathers have tempted him, proved him,
and seen his works, for the space not of forty years only as the ancient
Jews, but now of full a thousand two hundred fifty and upwards, least he
swear again in his wrath that ye shall not enter into his rest. Numb. 16. 26.
Depart therefore I pray you, from the tents of such wicked men, lest ye be
consumed in all their sins, and be swallowed up with them, and go down
alive into the pit of destruction: nay, hye ye, lest with the foolish Virgins
you tarry * Math, 25. 11
till the door of repentance be shut up against you, and it be too late for
you to cry Lord Lord open to us. And thus much shall suffice for this first
point.

In the second place, from this consideration, that these Mariners or
Court-officers of such Merchants, do make such a rich trade or gain upon this
Sea and of the people of God, in these Hierarchicall ships or Courts, observe
this other point of doctrine, viz. that 2. Doct.


The Ministers of the Beast and false Prophet, even as their head all of them I
say, make a trade both of souls, and of all other things spiritual; pilling
and spoy ling all those that sail with them, both of their temporal and
spiritual goods, behaving themselves therein, even as the false Prophets did of
old, of who^ the Lord does so often complain by his Prophets, as we may read
Esaias 56. 1^, etc. where speaking of them he says, The watchmen are blind: they
are all ignorant they are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark: sleeping lying
down, loving to slumber, yea they are greedy dogs, which can never have
enough, and they are shepherds that cannot understand: they all look to their
own way, everyone for his gain. And Jer. 6. 13. Ier. 6. 13.
From the least of them says he, even unto the greatest of them, everyone is
given to covetousness: and from the Prophet even unto the Priest, every one
deals falsely. And Ezech. 34. 2. 3. Son of man, says the Lord there
concerning all such false Prophets, prophecy against the shepherds of Israel,
prophecy and say unto them: Thus says the Lord unto the shepherds of Israel,
that do feed themselves, should not the shepherds feed the flocks? ye eat
the fat, and ye cloth you with the wool, ye kill them that are fed; but ye
feed not the flock, etc. And such were the false Apostles in the very time of
the Apostles of whom S. Paul speaks to Timothy, Tim 6. 5.
who made a gain of godliness, and who did Tit. 1* 11. Mat. 23. 14. Mar 12.
40. Luke 20. 47.
subvert whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, for filthy lucres
sake, as he says in his Epistle to Titus. And in his second to Timothy he did
foretell that * in the last days perilous times should come, because men 2 Timothy 3. 1. etc
should be lovers of their own selves, covetous, etc. whom Saint Peter in
that Prophetical Epi^^le of his compares to Balaam, saying that 2 Pet, 2. 15.
they should forsake the right way and go astray, follow^ng the way of Balaam
the son of Bozor, who loved the wages of unrighteousness: likewise Saint
Jude in that other Prophetical Epistle of his, where he denounces a woe unto
them saying that Jude 11.
they should go in the way of Cain, and should run greed^ly after the error of
Balaam for reward, and should perish in the gainesaying of Core.

The causes whereof are, first their impiety, testified in that they have (as
the Pharisees) in the time of Reason 1.
Christ Mat. 23. 4.
bound heavy burdens, and grievous to be borne, and laid them on men's
shoulders, but they themselves would not move them with one of their fingers:
as he speaks of them, Mat. 23. 4. Secondly* their intolerable pride,
manifested in that 2 These. 2. 4.
they have opposed and exalted themselves above all that is called Reason 2.
God, or that is worshipped: so that as God they have sitten in the Temple of
God, behaving themselves as if they were Gods, as says the Apostle of the man
of sin, 3. Reason.
2 These. 2. 4. And lastly, their insatiable cov^tuousnesse before proved. Use.


The use of which point may serve briefly to convince all such, that do
either tyrannise over the Lords heritage, as if they were Lords over it, though
it be 1 Pet* 5. 3.
forbidden them by him whose successors they affirm themselve to be: Or who
not only for lucre sake, but by pride, or by any other unlawful means, do
intrude themselves in the Ministerial function. None of which are true
Ministers of Christ, but rather of Antichrist, because they John 10. 1.
do not enter by the door into the sheep fold, but climb up, some other
way, who therefore are right thiefes and robbers, according to Christ's own
verdict.

Moreover observe (from this that God has left his Church standing thus long
at the shore of that Hierarchicall Euphrates, after so long and hard a voyage
through that huge wilderness of Jdolatrie fore spoken of) this other point of
doctrine.

That God has often delivered his Church into the hands of most cruel Tyrants
and Pirates both Exodus 1. 10. etc Judge. 3. 8. 12. and 31. Item. 4. 2. etc. and
6. 2. etc. and 10. 7. etc. and 13. 1. 2 King. 10. 32 etc. and 15. 19. and 17.
3, etc. and 24. 1. etc. Luke 2. 1, etc. Mat. 2. 12, etc* Luke 13. 1. Revel. 6.
10. Acts 2. 22. 23. and 4. 5. 6. and 20. 27. Revel. 11. 7. and 12. 17. and 13.
7. and 17. 14.
Civil and Eccl^siasticall: as he did of old, when 3. Doct.
he brought her under that most cruel servitude of the Egyptian Pharaos, and
likewise of the Amorites. Cananites, Moabites, Midianites, Ammonites,
Philistines, Assyrians, Syrians, Romans, Herod's, Pilates, and Pagan Emperors,
and false Prophets: as the Sacred Histories both of the Old and New Testament
do fully testify: and thus has he dealt with it, by the means of the
Highpriests, Scribes and Pharisees in the time of Christ, and in that also of
his Apostles, and since by the Popes, and all that table of Metropolitan
Prelates, Archbishops and Diocesan Bishops, even since the time of Constantine
the great: and by all their forespecified Officers and Mariners, all of them
Anticristian Pirates, as it is recorded in the books of the Martyrs, and in
many other humane stories. By all whose means, the said poor Church has
been always 2 Cor. 4. 8. 9.
sorely oppressed, yet not distressed, perplexed, yet not altogether without
help: persecuted, but not forsaken, cast down but not destroyed, always
bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus.

And that for these reasons, as first to exercise it: Deuteronomy. 8. 23.
Reas. 1.
to humble it also and to prove it, to know what is her heart, and whether the
members thereof will keep his Commandments: therefore has he humbled her
and suffered her to hunger; as it is said of the people 2 Reason.
of Israel during the time of their abode in the wilderness: yea to correct it
and to purge it more and more of her sins. As also for the greater confusion of
her 3 Reason.
enemies, who thereby fill up their measure, and hasten their own ruin and
utter destruction.

Which must serve, as for the instruction and Use.
comfort of the one, so also for the terror and conviction of the other; of
whom God will at length take vengeance, as he does now begin to do of these
Viceroys, Merchants and Mariners, in these most happy days wherein we live;
of which we may very well say, what Christ said once, of the time of his first
coming in the flesh, speaking to his Disciples, and saying, Mat. 13. 16. 17.
Blessed are your eyes, for they see, and your ears, for they hear, and
verily I say unto you, that many Prophets, and righteous men, have desired to
see those things which ye see, and have not seen them: and to hear those
things which ye hear, and have not heard them. And therefore oughtwe also even
now to begin to praise the Lord saying, Revel. 19. 1. 2
Alleujah: salvation, and honor, and power unto the Lord our God: for true and
righteous are his judgments, for he does now judge the great whore, which did
corrupt the earth, with her fornications, and does avenge the blood of his
servants at her hand: as it is commanded unto us, Revel. 19. 1. 2. and therein
follow the example of the ancient people of Israel, who as soon as they were
passed over the Jordan, and were but newly entered into the borders of Canaan,
as it is witnessed of them by the Prophet, Psalm. 66. where the people of God is
brought in praising him for his wonderful works, and saying, Psalm. 66. (...).
2. etc.
Make a joyful noise unto God all ye lands, sing forth the honor of his name:
make his praise glorious. Say unto God how terrible art thou in thy works?
through the greatness of thy power, shall thine enemies submit themselves unto
thee. All the earth shall worship thee, and shall sing unto thee, they
shallsing to thy name, Selah. Come and see the works of God. May we likewise
say with them; he is terrible in his doings, toward the children of men. He
turned the Sea into dry land, they went through the flood, as we do now, and
there they did rejoice in him, as we ought also to do. This may be gathered
also out of Josh. 5. 10. where it is said that after the Israelites were passed
over the Jordan, and after they had renewed the covenant of the Lord by the
Circumcision (as all the Christian Israel of God must likewise do) Josh. 5. 10.
they kept also presently after the Passover, in the celebration whereof they
were wont to sing the Psalm. 113. and 114, etc. Cor. 10. 6. and 11.
and so must we, for all those things happened unto them for types; and they
are written for our admonition, says the Apostle, upon whom the ends of the
world are come.

Before I end this text I must yet say a word or two concerning the behavior
of these Court-officers or Mariners, in this so manifest a danger: who are
therefore said in the last words of this 17 verse to stand a far off: and
that no doubt, for the very same cause, for which it was also said in the
former verses of this chapter, that both the Kings of the earth and the
Merchants stood likewise afar off, as we read verse 10. and 15. viz. for
fear of her torment, these being no less timorous then they, yea they are
rather more, being right Amphibies and very like frogs which are most timorous
Creatures, the least noise making them quickly to dive and hide themselves in
their puddle waters. But where will, or can these hide now themselves: their
Euphraticall Jordan being now dried up? sure they can but skip up and down,
yet for a very little while, (and that yet as the fish does in the frying pan,
from which it falls in the fire) to croake and do their message as it was
showed before, for they must all be caught and killed (unless they repent, to
give glory to the God of Heaven, as some shall assuredly do as it appears
Revel. 11. 13.) Besides by the drying up of their said Euphrates the terror of
the Lord is fallen upon them, as it fell upon that profane Balshazzar when he
saw Deuteronomy. 5. 5, 6.
the fingers of a man's hand writing over against the candlestick, etc. For then
as it is said there, the Kings countenance was changed, and his thoughts
troubled him, so that the joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote
one against another; but especially when Ier. 51. 31. (...)
one Post did run to meet another, and one messenger to meet another to tell
the King of Babylon that his Euphrates was dried up, and that Cyrus Gods
anointed had taken his City at one end, and that the men of war were afraid,
as it had been feretold by the prophet Jeremie. Even so these hearing and
seeing now their said Euphrates to be thus dried up, and having thereby their
conscience thoroughly awaked, accusing them of their barbarous cruelties, filthy
whoredoms, profane drunkenness and unsatiable covetuousnesse, this is I say
the cause why they do now for fear, thus stand a far off.

Besides their standing a far off, may in like manner note unto us, the true
quality of these Amphibies, and filthy frogs; who having but mouth and belly
only, (as resembling those false teachers mentioned by Saint Paul Phil. 3. 19.
whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is in
their shame, and who mind but earthly things. Or like the Cretians whom the
said Apostle affirms, upon the testimony of one of their own Prophets, to
have been Tit. 1. 12.
always liars, evil beasts, and slow bellies) who therefore can do nothing
but croake only, to incite and provoke, yea the Kings themselves, with their
Armies, to fight and shed the blood of their own best and faithfullest
subjects: while they in the mean time do feed and pamper their unsatiable
bellies; never sollicitous nor willing through fear of a bad success to enter
the lists of a fair combat) concerning the divine righ^ of their so stately
and pompous an Hierarch^call Government) there to have the matter tried by the
word of God, the infallible Iudg^ ^f all controversies and doubts, whether in
ma^^^ of Doct^^^e or Church disciplin^; judging it ^o bee^ s^^^r course for
them (...) play the Gibeonites ^ar^s (their right ^^^es) wi^ our Joshua Josh.
9. 4, etc.
and the Princes of the Congrega^ion which Gib^oni^^s having seen and heard
what had ^eene do^^ unto Jericho and to Al, as we read Josh. 9. 4. etc. They
did work, then wiltly (ev^^ as (...) Hierarchikes do, and went and made as if
they ^ad been ambassadors, and took old sackes upon their asses, and wine
bottells, old and rent, and bound up, even like the arguments and allegations
of these, pleading for their Prelaticall Supremacy, nothing but Antiquity, and
the most Ancient and gray haired, constitutions and Canons of fathers,
Counsels, and Synods, yea Statutes and laws of former wise learned and grave
Lawyers and Counselors, allowed, and approved by the Authority of the most
godly and puissant Emperors, Kings and Princes of Christendom even since the
time of Constantine the great, that most Religious Prince brought thereby to
avow and establish it by that (so much weather beaten, and overtyred) Canon of
that famous and first Orthodox Council of Nice, attributing the priority of
the Patriarchship Held Anno. 327.
(therein first enacted) to the Bishop of Rome, (as his successors at least
would have made the world believe,) by perverting the true sense, yea and
falsifying the very Canon it self, as it was at last found out and detected in
that of Carthage, held Held Anno 419. where Sezim^. falsifying the Nicene
Council was (...) hstood by Augustine thereupon it was at last decrece by the
fathers, Ne cuiquam vel Episco^o vel sacerdori ex Africa aut alijs provincijs
metropolitanos habentibus, ad Papam Romanum appelare liceat: sed sit, inquiunt,
prima cognitio causarum Ecliasticarum penes Episcopos and Metropolitanum,
secunda penes concilium provinciale, ultima penes Universal. Item, ne ullum
jus dein^eps Romano Papae super Africanas Eclesias concernatur. Alsted. 29.
Chron. council. page 206.
almost one hundred years after.) Herein behaving themselves altogether like
the foresaid Gibeonites, who came to Joshua unto the camp at Gilgal, with such
old shoes and clouted upon their feet, and old garments upon them, all the
bread of their provision being also dry and moldy, pretending thereby to be
come from a far country, as these would seem to be, though they come but
from Rome, being issued out of the Roman Hierarchicall, Idolatrous Sea, to
which they labored also tooth and nail to have reduced these Kingdoms:
different therein indeed, and therefore far worse then the Gibeonites; and
greater beguilers without comparison: of whom you ought therefore (O ye most
worthy Princes of the Congr^ga^ion) to take heed, lest you treat of any peace
with them, or make any league with them, to let them live any more in that
Hierarchicall sea of theirs: else they will beguile, yea rather betray Joshua
himself his Religion and state, to the gr^atest enemy thereof: be ye
therefore advised and take Josh. 9. 14.
counsel at the mouth of the Lord, in a business of so great importance, and
greater (I dare say with permission) then any that can be treated of, and
whereon depends the whole welfare of state King and Religion, or utter ruin
and downfall thereof, unless it be narrowly and speedily looked into and
wisely prevented with the assistance and favor of that Almighty God who has
hitherto so wonderfully continued and countenanced you in all these so weighty
affairs already by you performed, to the joy of all true English hearts and
terror of all our Enemies both at home and abroad; As you may very manifestly
perceive it already by the said behavior of all these Euphratian frogs, and
shall more and more, a mesure que leur dit Euphrates sassechera. This being the
sense of these words as we take it, and judge by the premises that it cannot
be taken otherwise, it may yield this point of Doctrine unto us, viz. that.

The vindicating Judgment of God, does most 4 Doct.
often terrify his most fierce and haughty enemies, overtaking them most
commonly at unawares, and when they think themselves to be cock sure, and
very far from it, as Saint Paul does testify saying of such that These. 5. 3.
When they shall say, peace and safety: then sudden destruction comes upon,
them as travail upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape. This may
be proved by many examples both in the Old and New Testament, as of Pharaoh,
when he was drowned with his army in the read sea: for when God Exodus 14. 25.
took off their chariot wheels, they were so astonished thereat, that they
said, let us flee from the face of Israel: for the Lord fights for them,
against the Egyptians. Thus was Nebuchadnezzar surprised, for Dan. 4. 30. etc.
as he was walking in the palace of the Kingdom of Babylon, saying is not this
great Babylon that I have built for the house of the Kingdom, etc. While the
word was in his mouth there fell a voice from heaven, (at the which no doubt
he was no less amazed, then was afterward Belshazzar his son at the hand
writing forementioned) saying, O King Nebuchad-nezzar, to thee it is spoken;
the Kingdom is departed from thee. Thus it fell out also to proud Haman, who
as soon as he heard the Queen Ester accusing him to be Eze. 7. 9. 10. etc.
the great adversary and wicked enemy, who had sold her and her people, (the
Israel of God being then in captivity, (as these had done, likewise the true
Christian Israel of the three Kingdoms, then in captivity and distress also,
not only) to be held for bondmen and bondwomen, but to be destroyed, to be
slain, and to perish, (as woeful experience had too soon proved it for us,
if God had not in his (but too little considered) wonderful mercy toward this
land, prevented it, in his good time by the means of the forementioned
Hollanders.) Then I say, at such a relation was the said Haman sore afraid,
seeing in the Kings face, that there was evil determined against him by the
King. We read also in this book of the Rev^lation that when Christ the Lamb
came to take vengeance of the persecuting Pagan Emperors, that then, The Kings
of the earth, and the Revel. 6. 15. 16, etc.
great men, and the rich men, and the chief captains, and the mighty men, and
every bondsman, and every free man, hid themselves in the dens and in the rocks
of the mountains, and said to the mountains and rocks; fall on us and hide us
from the face, of him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the
Lamb: for the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand.
And the like must of necessity fal^ out to this whore, her Merchants and
Mariners, whose Euphraticall Jordan shall then be dried up when she should
say in her heart, (sit a Queen, and am no Revel. 18. 7. 8.
widow, and shall see no sorrow: for therefore says the Angel shall her
plagues come in one day, for her greater terror and astonishment, death and
mourning and famine, and she shall be utterly burnt with the fire of
excommunication: for strong is the Lord God who judges her.

The reason whereof may be first, because they applaud, flatter, and bless
themselves in their Reas. 1.
hearts saying, Deuteronomy. 29. 19. 20.
that they shall have always peace, though they walk in the stubbornness of
their hearts to add drunkenness to thirst, as it is said Deuteronomy. 29. 19. and
therefore as it is further added in the said place, The Lord will not spare
them, but then the anger of the Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke against
them and all the curses that are written in this book, shall lie upon them,
etc.

Secondly, because the Lord takes them usually 2 Reason.
when they are soothing themselves in their naughtiness, and saying in their
h^ar^s as those profane ones in Zephan: that the Lord would do them neither
good nor evil: whom the Lord threatens there saying that Zeph. 1. 1^. 13. 14,
etc.
it shall come to pass at that time, that I will search says he, Jerusalem
with candles and punish the men that are thus settled on their lees, and
therefore their goods shall become a booty, and their houses a desolation:
then he adds in the next verse, that the great day of the Lord was near, it
is near says he, and hastes greatly, which is a day of wrath, a day of
trouble and distress, a day of wastnesse and desolation, etc.

Thirdly, because most commonly, the Judgments 3 Reason.
that God lays upon them are very grievous, and terrible, and then Deuteronomy. 28.
65. 66.
the Lord gives them trembling hearts, and failing of eyes, and sorrow of
mind, so that their lives hang in doubt before them, and they are in fear day
and night, having no assurance of their life, according to that threatening
mentioned in the Law. And our Savior testifies the same, speaking of the great
judgments, that should fall upon the world of the wicked in these latter
times, saying that Luke 21. 25.
then there should be signs in the Sun, and in the Moon, and in the stars,
and upon the earth distress of nations, with perplexity, the sea and the
waves roareing; yea saying that men's hearts should fail them for fear,
looking after those things which are coming on the earth.

Fourthly, God retaliates unto them, paying 4 Reason.
them in their own coin, as they have pressed down, and thereby endeavored
to terrify most of the best servants and children of God, with their most
heavy and tyrannical burdens, so does the Lord pursue them with heavy and
terrifying plagues, for it is a righteous things with God, says he Apostle to
2 These. 1. 6.
recompense tribulation to them that trouble you.

Fifthly, God in his justice will have his hand to be seen against those that
make war against him, and 5 Reason.
against his people: he will appear in his anger against such, and that must
needs be terrible unto them, for thus says the Lord himself by his Prophet,
Isa. 33. 10. 11, etc.
Now will I rise s^^th he: now will I be exalted, now will I lift up my self,
ye shall conceive chafe, ye shall bring forth st^ble, etc. Therefore says he
afterward, The sinners in Zion are afraid, fearfulness has surprised the
hypocrites: who therefore among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who
amongst us shall dwell with everlasting burnings.

Finally, another cause of their terror is the guiltiness of their own
consciences: they had imposed 6 Reason.
(during their idolatry, intolerable pride and and cruelty) upon the people
of God, heavy yokes, which while the world went well with them, they scarce
ever felt, but in the time of distress, they are made sensible thereof: as
Joseph's brethren who being fallen in great distress in Egypt, could then Gen:
42. 21.
remember, but never before, their most barbarous and inhumane cruelty, used
against their own brother, for then they could say one to another, we are
verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul,
when he besought us, and we would not hear: therefore is this distress come
upon us.

This doctrine does furnish matter of exhortation to all sorts of men, but
especially to them whom the Lord has constituted in authority over their
brethren in Church and Common wealth, who are to be admonished by it to fear
sin which brings after it, such sudden thunderclaps, and most fearful
judgments, though in the committing thereof it seems very pleasant and
delightful: which makes men to commit it even with greediness, it being but
a sport Prove. 10. 23.
to fools to do mischief says Solomon. Nay such men especially could not
sometimes sleep except they and
had done mischief, and their sleep were taken away, 4. 16.
unless they had caused some to fall. But they must also know on the other
side that there is a terrible woe denounced by God himself, against all those
that devise iniquity, and work evil upon their beds: Mica. 2. 1. 2.
to practice it as soon as it is day light, because it is in the power of
their hand: that do covet fields, and take them by violence, and houses and
take them away: So and
they oppress a man and his house, even a man and his heritage, as these
trading Vice Roys, Merchants and Mariners have done. To all whom the Lord
speaks by the same Prophet in the following chap. chap. 3 (...). etc.
saying, Hear I pray you O heads of Jacob, and ye Princes of the house of
Israel, for such have they reputed themselves to be, and such would they still
be taken for: Is it not for you to know judgment? who hate the good, and love
the evil who plucked off their skin from off them and their flesh of my
people, and flay their skin off them, and break their bones and chop them in
pieces, as for the pot, and as flesh within the cauldron. I herefore shall they
cry unto the Lord in the day of trouble, but he will not hear them: he will
even hide his face from them at that time. Be wise now therefore Per. 2. 10. 11.
O ye Kings, receive chastisement ye governors of the earth, serve now the
Lordwith fear and trembling, kiss the son lest he be angry and ye perish in
the way, when his anger shall burn suddenly; Act. 5. 9.
Take heed that ye be not found even to fight against God, as said once that
wise Councellor Gamaliell, speaking to them of the High Counsel at Jerusalem
the great enemies of Christ and of his Apostles: oppose no more his ordinances,
neither persecute his faithful servants and children. Hinder not by your
authority or favor the course of the preaching of the word, nor the
establishment and administration of an holy discipline or Church Government
grounded upon the Word, and practiced by the Apostles: Pervert not the right
ways of God in withstanding the true servants of God, laboring after a true
and holy reformation: and chap. 13. 10.
for know ye for certain, that this counsel and this work is not of men but
of God, which therefore you shall never be able to hinder or overthrow, Isa.
14. 24. 25. 26, etc.
The Lord of hosts has sworn it, saying; surely as I have thought so shall
it come to pass; and as I have proposed, so shall it stand, which is as true
in the Antitype as in the type it self, as it shall be made manifest yet a
little more presently: therefore may we safely apply this threatening to it: for
as he then said that he would break the Assyrian in his land, so may we say
of these western Babylonians: and that he will tread their Euphrates under the
feet of his servants, and then shall their yoke depart from off them, and their
burden depart from off their shoulders. This is the purpose, that is now
purposed upon the whole earth: and this is the hand that is now stretched out
upon all the nations, for the Lord of hosts has purposed, and who shall
disanull it? and his hand being stretched out, who shall turn it back? Now
for the conclusion of this treatise, I will add, to that which has been
already said, yet somewhat more for the conclusion of it, concerning the total
and final ruin of these enemies of the Church, which God had decreed and
appointed, even as soon as the dragon and his Angels had consulted and
resolved Revel. 12. 19.
(after they had been overcome and cast into the earth by Constantine the
great and his successors to Theodosius surnamed also the great, and termed by
the title of Michael and His Angels) to make after the woman flying from them
into the wilderness, to make war with the remnant of her seed; for even
then the same God, who knows the very thoughts and purposes of the wicked,
had provided against them four mighty Angels, having ready the four Cardinal
winds of the earth, to blow and scatter them all as dust, and all their
counsels and devices sal. 83. 3. and 13.
as stubble before the wind, and to drown them as Pharaoh in the Sea; who were
ready to do it all at once; but that he (who is slow to anger, and who had yet
some employment for them, to aflict his Church and chastise it, to humble it
and prove it during her said long voyage along that vast wilderness, thereby
also to fill up their measure) would not permit it. Because he had also
purposed in his mercy to free and exempt from those fierce judgments, which by
their blowing they were to bring upon the world of the wicked, that
forementioned remnant of the woman's seed, which were to be marked to that end
from time to time, during their said voyage: the first whereof (being one of
the last effects of the opening of the sixth seal) was performed, Revel. 6. 12.
etc. (as that of Egypt, the true type thereof,) immediately before the last
plague, or utter overthrow of the pagan Idolatries and Idols, by the foresaid
Theodosius. though afterward recited, viz. chap. 7. Besides God had likewise
appointed many other instruments of his Justice, to punish, with them, by
degrees, and at several times, his said enemies, whose forerunners and ushers
as it were these foresaid winds should be; as the seven Angels with seven
trumpets to denounce and proclaim the said judgments, and seven more with
seven Vials to power out the same one after another, and thereby to bring upon
that wicked world the three great woes mentioned R^ 8 13. And all and every one
of these to be disposed in order; and executed in their due time, by the most
wise and all ruling providence of God: both to aggravate the said judgments
upon them; as also to manifest thereby to the whole world the equity of his
justice; and that by such means also, he might make his name to be the better
known throughout all the earth, as he said in the like Exodus 9. 16.
case of Pharaoh.

The first movers then or isntrumental causes of all of them were these four
winds which were to blow from the four quarters of the world upon that of the
Roman Empire, viz. North, South, East, West, to bring it to its last and utter
destruction, which were to come up, as it were upon the theater with their
foresaid attendants in this order; and first, the first of them, with the four
first Trumpetters. After the second, and with him the fifth Trumpetter, making
as it were, the first Angel of the Vials to pour out the first plague, which
caused the first woe. The third wind was to follow this at the heels to stir
up, first the sixth Trumpeter, who by the sound of his Trumpet, did provoke
five of the Angels of the Vials, to power out each of them the several plagues
contained in them, one after another; which caused the second woe; which was no
sooner past, then behold the third and last woe comes quickly; caused by the
plague of the seventh and last Vial stirred up by the seventh and last
Trumpeter, moved by the fourth and last wind. Of all which four I will say in
as few words as I may possible, (because I shall more at large speak of each
of them in the forepromised Parallel, if God be pleased to grant me life and
means to perform the same,) first whence they were to blow, what should be
the judgments which they were to bring along with them: and lastly the time
both of their beginning, continuance, and ending.

For the first, it was as it is already said, the Northern wind; the which
blowing with a very strong and most boystrous gale, brought from that quarter
of the world, those barbarous people, which as so many great Revel. 12. 15
great floods of water cast out of the Serpents mouth, after the woman, did
presently overspread and almost overflow the whole Roman world; the said
serpent thinking thereby to drown the whole seed of the said woman, after
Exodus 14. 9. Revel. 8. 5. 7. 8. 11, etc.
which they sailed as fast as sails and tacklings could hold, as Pharaoh did
with his swift-winged* chariots after the children of Israel, the true type of
this first expedition against our Christian Israel, made by that Hear Ammian
Marcel. speaking of these stormy blustering winds lib. 26. cap. 31. Horrendi
tremores per omnem orbis ambitum. grassati sunt subit^, quales nec fabulae, nec
veridicae nobis antiquitates exponunt, etc. Item Hieron. in vita Hilar. Hoc
tempore velut per vniversum orbem Romanum canentibus b^^^^nis excitae gentes
saevi^^imae, limits sibi proximos per saltabant, Gallias, Rhetiasque, simul
Alemanni populabantur; Sarm^tae, Pannonias, and Quadi Picti, Saxones and Scoti,
and Attocotti Britannos, aerumnis vexavere continuis: Thra^ias diripiebant
piratorij globi Gothorum, etc. Am^ian. ibid. c. 10.
terrible and fatal storm of the said Northern Nations Goths, Sarmatians,
Almaines, Huns, Vandales, Quades, etc. all which brake upon the said Roman
world or Empire almost without intermission, harrying, burning, wasting and
destroying many Provinces of it; and therein made that great slaughter of men
of all sorts, represented unto us, Revel. 8. 7. by the burning up of the third
part of the trees and of all green grass; whereby also the said third part of
that Empire became as a sea of blood through which the Church of God was then
to pass, as the Israelites had done through the red sea, the true type of this
after which passage, the waters of the Christian doctrine, like those of Mara
once, were so embitered now by the false Arrian Heretical doctrine, drunk,
embraced, and maintained by these Northern peoples, and so eagerly pressed upon
the Christians, especially in Africa, by Genseric the Vandale and his
successors that it became as bitter as wormwood. Hieron. Epist 3. Ante annu^
400. viginti and eo amplius anni sunt quod inter Constantinopolin and Alps
Julias quotidie Romanus sanguis effunditur. Scythiam, Thraciam, Macedoniam,
Acia, Dardaniam, Thessalonicam, Achaiam, Epiros, Almatia^, cunctasque Pamonias:
Gothus, Sarmata, Qvadus, Alanus, Huna, Vandali; Marcomanui vastant, rapiunt,
Romans orbis ruit. Quid putas nunc anim habere Corinthios, Athenienses,
Lacedaemonios, Arcadas, cunctamque Graeciam, q^ibus imperant Barbari.
By all which bloody wars and persecution and by the blustering violence of
these so stormy blasts of wind and weather, the said Western part especially
of the Empire, was brought to such a miserable confused hurly burly, that at
length, the glory and Majesty thereof was very much abated, and finally
divided into ten Kingdoms, which presently after became the horns of the
seventh hea^ of the Roman Beast, which had together with (...) received her
power at the same hour. The b^^^nning of all which storms and miseries fell
out at the ending of the Revel. 8, 1.
half hour silence given to the Church to free her self from the Pagan
Idolatry, about the 405. year of our Lord, about which time Alsted. Chronol.
14. Regnorus veteru^, p. 91.
Radagisus King of the Goths entered into the said Empire with an Army of
200000. men; after whom succeeded Alaric who came against Rome it self, took
it and sacked it about the year 410 of our Lord, some say 15 About the same
time Genseric the Vandale with a great army of diverse of the forenamed
Northern Nations overranne France, Spain, and entered in Africa about the 428.
year where he seated himself. Then also the Saxons entered great Britain.
Attila that scourge of the world followed these at the heels with an Army of
some 500000. men of diverse Nations, about the year 450. wasting all the
Countries through which they passed, till at length he was vanquished by
Aetius, Valentianus, captain in the Catalian mountains. About 460. Paulus
diac. His. Misc. prout ex codice Palatino edidit Janus Graterus. Quatuordecim
interim dies secura^ and libera direptione omnibus opibus suis and miraculis
Roma vacuata est. In quibus erant Eclesiastica (...) tota ex auro and lapidibus
pretiosis ornata, and Vasa Hebraica quae Titus Vaspasiani filius post
captivitatem Hiero solymit anum Romamdetulerat; multaque millia captivorum. --
Cum Regina Eudoxia quae Gencericum ad hoc facinus invitaverat, duabusque e^us
filiabus, Carthaginem abducta sunt.
Genseric (being called by Eudoxia late wife of Valentinian the Emperor, then
married to Maximus, who had killed her said husband) came against Rome, and
entering therein without great opposition, sacked and spoiled it for the space
of 14 days. After whom followed Richimer the Goth, then Odoacer of Rugia, (by
whom and presently after by Theodoric the Goth, sent against the said Odoacer
by the Emperor Zenon) the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars of that third part
of the world (I mean Augustulus with all the luster and glory of the Western
Empire) were smitten and darkened by these forementioned Northern Nations, some
of which did settle themselves therein for a while, viz. the Goths and Lombards
in Italy: the Vandales in Africa: the Frankes and Burgundians in the Gauls:
the Swedes, Alans, Goths and Vandales in Spain: and the Saxons, Angles and
Danes in great Britain; even till the time of Justinian the Emperor of the
East, who by the valor of his two renowned captains Narsetes and Belisarius
did sub due many of these barbarous Nations, viz. that of the Vandales in
Africa after it had continued under the reign of six Kings, about an hundred
years, that is 428. to 530. And afterward that of the Goths in Italy which
was begun as it was noted before by Odacte about the year 476. and finished
it in 553. or thereabouts.

The first wind having thus made an end of his blowing, and being thus
becalmed; it fell out (some while after, that Phocas the murderer
forementioned of Maritus the Emperor, having succeeded him in the Empire) that
his murder being approved by Pope Boniface the third, (whom therefore he
created universal Bishops) this proud title being also approved by the
Council held at Rome under the said Pope, about the year 606 of our Lord.
Wherefore a little while after, the second of the four forementioned winds,
was loosed, the which began to blow, from a direct contrary plage of the world:
that is from the southern parts thereof, bringing along with it the The true
Type of this war against the Church of Christ in this time, is that of
Amaleck (Esaus son of whose posterity these Saracens are, though they pretend
to be descended of Sara) who was the first of the Nations, who warring against
Israel procured thereby their own utterdestruction, foretold Numb. 24. 20.
decreed Deuteronomy. 25. 19. and effected in part 1 Samuel 15. 2. 3. etc. and after in
Mordecais time, Est. 7. but spiritually accomplished by Christ. But for Isreal's
sin came this chastisement upon them; as the Jews themselves acknowledged,
saying; after they had passed through the Sea, they murmured for water: then
came against them the wicked Amaleck, who hated them for the first birthright
and blessing, which our Father Jacob had taken from Esau; and he came and
fought against Israel, because they had violated the word of the Law, etc.
Thargum on Song. 2. 1^. They fought but treacherously, Deuteronomy 25. 18. as the
Scorpions with their tails, Revel. 9. 10. laying weight for them in the way, 1 Samuel 15. 2.
Saracens, stirred up by the sound of the first trumpet, when that Rev 9. 1,
etc.
Star It is ordinary with the Spirit of God speaking in this book of any
statutes or Kingdoms of this world to make allusion to the frame of this
Universe, attributing to them an Heaven and with it a Sun, Moooe, and
Stars; likewise an Earth, Sea, and rivers etc. as you may observe Revel. 6.
12. etc. there speaking of the fall of the Roman Pagan Emperor: Also chap. 8.
verse 7, 8, etc. Speaking of the downfall of the Roman Christian Emperor. And
chap. 16. speaking of the plagues inflicted upon the Papal Emperor; according
to which Allusion Mahomet is here called a Star.
Mahomet about the year of the Lord 622. fell from Heaven unto the earth, to
whom was given the keys of the bottomless pit (when the said Saracens made him
their General about the year 630. at the opening whereof, came out of it
those Saracenicall Locusts, mentioned, Revel. 9 1, etc. who with their said
General that other Arch-heretick, with his smoke; false Doctrine of the
Alcoran, darkened the sun and the air, and with the (almost innumerable)
multitude of their Armies, did cover and pester both the whole Asian Empire,
and that of Africa: yea rushng and flying further they advanced very far in
Europe, invading Thracia, Sicilie, Sardinia, and afterward came as far as
Spain, about the year 714. and there settled themselves under the name of
Moors, possessing the said Mountain Kingdom for the space of 800 years,
from thence they rushed also very far in France, in which Kingdom they first
entered about the year of our Lord 726. and therein advanced as fare as Tours
upon the River Loire, having for their King Abidiram, with an Army of 375000
men; from whence they were chased by Charles Martel Duke of Brabant, that great
Captain, and by his Successor Pepin made afterward King of France, and
altogether rooted by Charles the Great, the said Pepins Son, created after
that Emperor of Germany, in the year 800 of the Lord.

Concerning which Saracenicall Locusts we say, that during the time they did
thus torment the Christian world, the first of the seven forementioned Plagues,
(which caused or brought upon the Inhabitants of the earth, the first of the
forenamed woes) was powered out of the first Vial by the first Angel: as it
appears very clearly by the analogy, or great correspondency, that is to be
seen, in comparing the effects of the said fifth Trumpet, mentioned Revel. 9.
with those of the said first Vial described Revel. 16. 2. and comparing
likewise, the said effects of both the said fifth Trumpet and of the said first
Plague, with the charge which was before given to the foresaid Winds in
general, in the forealledged seventh Chapter of this Revelat. where the said
Winds were restrained from hurting, (for some time only) either the earth, or
the sea, or any tree, as they would no doubt have done else. But that restraint
being now taken away; and the first of the said Winds, having already greatly
endammaged, Revel. 8. 7, 8, 9, etc.
both the earth and the sea, yea the Sun and the stars, as we have already
showed. This second being now loosed, he is also thereby permitted to hurt the
earth or earthly men of the Kingdom of the Roman beast: And only forbidden to
hurt, either the grass of the said earth, or any green thing, or any tree
bearing any good fruit, because they were marked, and thereby exempted. And
thus the first Angel of the seven Vials does likewise power out his Vial upon
the earth only.

Secondly, the said Locusts were permitted to hurt only the men which had not
the seal of God in their foreheads, chap. 9. verse. 4. even so the plague of
the first Vial, must no more be powered out upon those that were sealed, but
only upon the men which had the mark of the beast, and which worshipped his
image, Revel. 16. 2.

Thirdly, the plague of the Locusts was not mortal, they being commanded not
to kill them, Rev. 9. 5. but only to torment them with torment like unto the
The Ama^ekites are likewise compared to bees, Deuteronomy. 1 44. compared with Number. 14
45.
torment of a Scorpion, when he strikes a man. Neither was the plague of the
first Vial mortal, but such a one as thereby a very noisome and grievous sore
fell upon those men, Revel. 16. 2. So that the one as well as the other, caused
the first woe, proceeding from the plague of the said first Vial, brought by
the sounding of the said first Trumpet, stirred up also and moved by the
blowing of the foresaid second wind, all which joined as it were together,
made the men of those times so miserable, that though they sought death in
those days, yet could they not find it, because it did flee from them, as did
the said Locusts themselves (which caused these great torments) the which being
driven from one place or Kingdom, did as it were skip presently unto another,
continuing therein for the space of about five months of years, and
exercising their said tormenting power, upon those Christian men by name which
had not the seal of God in their foreheads, but the mark of the beast only.
And thus did they continue for many hundred years in Asta, Africa, and Europe.
But In the war against Amalek, mentioned Exodus 17. 8. etc. Israel sometimes
prevailed, sometimes Amalck, who though discom^ited for that present by Joshua,
vet his utter destruction is remitted till after the conquest of Cana in by the
said Joshua, denounced by God, verse. 14. and therefore registered: prophesied by
Basaam, Number. 24. 20 That of the Saracens and Turks must also follow that of the
Pope and of all his Canaanites, who must be conquered before the Turk can be.
though their said power was much abated in Europe by the foresaid Charles the
Great, (who condemned the adoration of Idols and opposed it, both by his
writings, as also in that Council by him assembled at Franckford in the year
794. wherein the second of Nice (where the said adoration of images and
intercession of Saints was approved) held in the year 787, was condemned) to
whom God gave many great victories over the said Sarracens; yet because, for
all his opposition, the said Idolatry did still continue, (being also approved
in the Council of Constantinople, held under Michael the third about the year
866.) therefore could they not be driven quite away: But now and then did they
much vex the said Christian world, with their tails or remnants, making many
incursions therein for the space of an hundred and fifty years more, about
which time Knoll. general Hist. of the Turk, (...). 4 5. Alsted. Chron. 25. p.
168. and 170.
Tangrolipix the Turk (upon the death of Mahomet the Persian Sultan) was made
King of Persia, whereby those Saracens were deprived of that Caliphat: and
soon after the said Tangrolipix got also from them that of Babylon. The Sultan
Saracen of Egypt was likewise deprived of his Caliphat 150. after by Knoll.
ibid. p. 57.
Saracon another Turk, viz. in the year 1166. He also invaded many of the
Emperor of Constantinoples Provinces. After whose death his Successors
continued the said Wars, and subdued all Media, with a great part of Armenia,
Capadocia, Pontus, and By thinia, and so a great part of the lesser Asia. But
let us now leave them thus continuing their said Wars one against another,
and the Greek Princes at variance amongst themselves; thereby giving great
advantage to the said Turks, still more and more to invade one part or other
of the said Empire; yea the holy Land it self, becoming thereby the very bane
and grave of many Christian O that they had been wise, and that they had
understood, that God was not among them, because they had turned away from the
Lord by their Idolatries, and that therefore they should fall by the sword of
those vile Mabumetan Saracens and Turk; as Moses said then unto the Israclites
in the like case, Number. 14. 20. etc. Speaking of those Amalekites, who caused
that Kadesh to become a right Horma, or Anathema to both of them.
Emperors, Kings, Princes and most valourous Captains and Soldiers, whose
carcasses have fallen by millions in those remote wildernesses (by reason of
their idolatrous and superstitious vows and pilgrimages to the said, by them
then, and by such means most profaned City and Sepulcher) answering very fitly
to the threatening denounced by GOD to that ancient Israel, Numb. 14. 28, 29. as
the right type thereof. By all which means the said Turkish Nations and
peoples were also the more provoked against the said Christians, to hate and
persecute them in their own Territories, and to be there a scourge unto them,
for the punishment of all their said Idolatries. These fell out not long after,
upon the blowing of the third of the four forementioned Winds, loosed by the
Angel ordained by God to restrain it till the time by him appointed was
accomplished; which coming from the East quarter of the world, brought along
with it about the year of the Lord Alsted. Chro. 25. p. 172, 173. Knoll. Turk.
Hist. p. 143. Mores Tab. p. 185.
1300, that other sect of Mahumetans called Turks, who not contented to have
taken from the Constantinopolitan Emperors, during the time of their
forementioned troublesome estate and decaying Empire, the most and best part of
their Provinces in Asia, passed over the strait of Hellespontus into Europe,
about the year 1320, wherein they conquered presently after the whole
Countries of Thracia, Mysia, and Macedonia, and afterward the whole Empire it
self, which was utterly overthrown by the taking of that famous City of
Constantinople by Mahomet the Great, first Emperor of the Turks; and the
seventh King from Ottoman the first, founder of that Empire; who was not of the
Selzuccian family (as were all the other Turks Sultans, the Successors of
Tangrolipix) but of the Oguzian Tribe, a family famous also amongst the said
Turks. The taking of which (once most glorious, but then most miserable City)
fell out in the year More Tab. 205. says it was in the year 1452. but
Alsted. and Knolls whom I have followed ascribe it tothe ensuing year: see
Alst. page 173. and Knol. page 349.
1453, the 29. day of May, Constantine Palaeologus being then Emperor, who
then ended there miserably his days, together with the said Greek Empire.
From thence they advanced further in Europe, wherein they conquered many
Kingdoms and Provinces, invading, infesting, and ravaging many peoples in the
said part of the World both by Sea and by Land, (and all this for the
punishment of their abominable idolatries and superstitions) in so great a
quantity and innumerable number, that the Holy Ghost (in that ninth Chapter of
the Revelat. (where this most inhumane barbarous and bloody war is described
from the 13. verse thereof to the end of it, with the true cause mentioned in
the 20 verse of the same) might very well say, that thereby the third part of
men were killed.

But for all that the rest of the men who had the mark of the beast, though
they did escape those plagues, yet did they not repent of the works of their
hands, but rather continued to worship their most devilish Idols, persecuting
most cruelly all those who refused to worship them, thereby shedding the blood
of the Saints and of the Prophets, because they refused to submit themselves
any more, to that proud Antichristian tyranny of the Pope, casting off his most
intolerable yoke, together with all his false doctrines and ordinances; which
then they began to see how they were altogether become as the blood of a dead
man, so that it was impossible for any living soul to live in such a deadly
and abominable Sea, or to drink without danger of most apparent spiritual
death, any of the waters or humane doctrines and superstitious Ceremonies
issuing from the said Popish Hierarchicall Sea; and therefore had rather suffer
the most exquisit torments, and most cruel corporal death (yea of the hot
burning fire (then the most common) that could be inflicted upon them, by their
bloody barbarous persecutors; then to return back again toward that most
deadly mystical Sea, from the which they did rather fly as of old the Deuteronomy.
2. 2.
Israelites from that of Ezion-Gaber, as soon as they had heard the voice of
the Lord, saying unto them, You have compassed this mountainous Country of the
Edomites, long enough; therefore turn ye Northward, viz. toward the Land of
Canaan again, standing Northward from Ezion-Gaber. Even so did the Christian
Israel as soon as they had heard that Revel. 14. 6, 7
Angel flying in the midst of Heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to preach
unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every Nation, and kindred, and
tongue, and people, saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him,
because the hour of his judgment is come, etc. Hastening toward the Northren
Countries of the Popish Roman world, in very good hope to enter then in the
promised Canaan of true reformation as it was noted before, but being
frustrated of their said conceived hope by the forementioned All these peoples
behaving themselves against Israel as false and unmercifull brethren, are a
true type of all the false Christian Papists, especially in their most cruel
fiery persecutions.
Edomites, they were constrained to make a very long circuit, to approach it,
and to enter thereinto by the East side of it. In which way as they were stung
with the fiery Serpents in the Desert of the foresaid Edom in the beginning of
their issuing out of their Desert, and by them very unkindly used; so at the
end of it they did find both Midianites and Moabites, with false Prophets, who
would by their wiles have hindered their entry into their said Canaan, but
chiefly that fiery Euphraticall Jordan forementioned, stopping altogether their
entrance thereinto.

All which most unkind, unmercifull hard dealings, and most cruel usage of the
said poor and sore afflicted Church of God, besides the forementioned
Idolatries of their detainers and persecutors, were the cause of the loosing of
the foresaid Easterly Wind, by which the sixth Angel was moved to sound with
such a long blast or Alarm, to excite the five Angels to power out the
forementioned plagues contained in each of their Vials upon the most notable
parts of that Antichristian Roman Empire, but especially upon its forementioned
Euphrates, both Universal and National; the inflicting of which brought upon
them the second terrible woe, because thereby The effect of the second and
third vials, beginning about the thirty-two Month of the voyage, etc.
God first gave them blood to drink, to avenge the blood of his Saints, which
they had (as it is already said) shed in great abundance. The effect of the
fourth yiall, beginning about the latter end of the thirty-fourth Month, and
so forward.
Secondly, He did also by the means of them scorch them with fire. Wherefore
they did blaspheme the name of God, because they had burned with fire his
Saints and most faithful servants, and had tortured them, thereby to compel
them to blaspheme. The effect of the fifth Vial beginning in the 41 month.
about the latter end thereof, all which continue as long as the second woe
caused by them.
Yea the said plagues were so grievous and painful, that for very pain they
were constrained to gnaw their own proper tongues, because they had cut the
tongues of his servants, thereby to hinder them to make open profession of
their most holy faith, to confess his name, and sing his most holy praises in
the midst of the flames, as else they would have done. And as the said
persecution instituted by Antichrist, began from the time of Wickliffe, and
has continued to these late years, even so have the foresaid plagues continued
since to this very present time.

But the last of the foresaid five Vials being powered Alsted. Chro. 28. p. 200.
upon a particular National Euphrates, as was showed before, has produced
also a more particular effect than the former, though being powered out upon a
particular member of the same mystical body, the whole cannot choose but by
sympathy, to have some feeling of it; as is manifest by the stirring of the
three forementioned Frogs, and by the complaints of all the Viceroys, Merchants
and Mariners, not only of the said National Sea, but also of the Universal.
The cause whereof proceeds from this, viz. that by the drying of the said
National Euphrates, the tenth part of the Kingdom of the Roman Beast or
Empire does fall altogether, or does quite separate it self from it, to be no
longer a member thereof; this part comprehending the Kingdoms of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, with all the Isles adjacent, and thereunto belonging. In
which part of the said Roman Empire, the said Hierarchicall power must now then
be utterly abolished, according to the foreappointed decree registered in that
forealledged place of Revel. 11. 13. and likewise 16. 12. it being the fifth and
last effect of the said sixth Trumpet: the acco^plishment whereof is the cause
of the Rev. 19. 1. 2
great voice of that great multitude in heaven, which was heard by John,
saying, Hallelujah, Salvation and glory and honor and power, be to the Lord our
God, because his judgments are true and righteous, because he has judged the
great whore which did corrupt the earth with her fornicatio^s, etc.

By which means also a very wide gate is opened, and the way prepared for the
people inhabiting the said 3 forementioned Kingdoms, which the said Euphrates
had but a little while before almost over flowed and quite drowned, h^d not the
Lord in mercy and in a most wonderful manner prevented it; by the pouring out
of the said sixth Vial upon it: in the very time of its most swelling, and all
overwhelming power: by which means, its intolerable pride is not only abated,
but the Euphrates it self is quite dried up; so that you (as the Premices of
the conquered and perfectly converted Kingdoms of the foresaid Roman Western
Empire) may now freely enter before the other nations in the Canaan of the true
reformation; the which having first settled and established among you, (having
quite rooted the said Hierarchy, and registered to eternal memory the utter
abolishing thereof) you may then presently enter in Covenant with the Lord, and
oblige your selves by vow, first to continue for ever after, faithful unto
him, so that you will in a holy zeal, defile the very coverings of the images
of silver and of gold, and take away all the high places; and cast away, as a
menstrous cloth, all relics and remnants of superstition and idolatries from
among you, and say unto them; Get ye hence, that God Isa. 30. 22
may see among you no unclean thing, that may cause him to turn away from
you, but that rather he may delight to dwell with you, and Deuteronomy. 23 14 Levit.
26.
to ^ Rev. 2. 1.
walk in the midst of your then bright shining golden Candlestick. even to
deliver you, and to give up all your enemies before you. And after that,
imitating herein the Rubenites Gadites, and half tribe of Manasseh, you may
go armed before the Lord to war, and go all of you armed over the
Euphraticall Jordan, before the Lord, until he has driven out all your
enemies, the Popish Hierarchicall Canaanites from before him, and subdued the
whole Land before the Lord, as said Moses to the said Rubenites, etc. in the
forealledged place of Number. 32. 21. And though you come from the more Westerly
parts of the Western Roman Empire, yet are you in a mystical sense (both in
respect of the type, those ancient Israelites, entering into Canaan, at the East
side of it; and also in respect of your profession) the right Kings of the
East, coming from the Sun rising, where the day spring, the true shining
Luke 1. 78.
light of the Gospel, from on high, has visited you; thus to go before his
face, to prepare his ways. And as the Israelites brought along with them the
Heb. 9. 4.
Arc of the Testament over laid round about with gold, wherein was the Golden
pot that had Manna, and Aarons rod that budded, and the Tables of the Covenant;
so do you bring along with you, to them, the Rev. 14. 6
everlasting Gospel Mat. 4. 23
of the Kingdom, with the powerful preaching thereof, the true food of the
Soul, together with an holy Church Government; at the bright shining light
whereof, all false Antichristian doctrines, of idolatries, superstitious
Ceremonies, will worship, and all other humane inventions shall fall as 1 Samuel
5. 3. 4.
Dagon before the Arc, yea, Luke 10. 18.
Satan himself shall fall from heaven. It will further cast down before you 2
Cor. 10 5.
all imaginations, and every high thing, that exalts it self against the
knowledge of God, and bring into captivity every thought to the obedience of
Christ. Which is the conquest here especially intended, and the weapons
wherewith it must be performed.

This is that mystery whereof the Angel that stood upon the sea and upon the
earth spoke, which God had declared before to his servants the Prophets (which
is now to be accomplished,) namely, among the rest to Daniel in the Dan. 7. 25,
26. is cleared being compared with John Revel. 11. 7. etc.
seventh of his prophecy, v. 25. speaking of the time of the finishing of the
Kingdom and tyranny of the little horn, which should then undermine (viz. by
her wiles as another Balaam) the Saints of the most High, which S. John Rev.
11. 7. ^pplyes to the time of the two witnesses finishing their testimony,
saying that the beast that ascends out of the bottomless pit should then
especially, make war against them, and should overcome them, and kill them;
which last words Daniel expresses thus, saying of the said Witnesses, that they
should be given into h^s hand, viz. of that little horn or powerful National
Hierarchicall Sea, but with all limiting the time of that victory, when he
adds in the next words, until a time, and times, and the dividing of time: in
these few words comprehending what S John more fully and clearly expresses in
the 8, 9, and 10. v. of the foresaid Chap. wherein he shows both their
condition, during their said death, and also distinctly, what we are to
understand by that indetermined time of Daniel, viz. three days and an half,
which we have already showed to be meant of the three years and an half of
the Witnesses Typified as is noted before.
mystical death or imprisonment. At the ending of which time, Daniel says,
that the judgment should sit, and they, viz that sit in the said judgment,
should take away his Dominion, to consume it and destroy it unto the end; which
is thus expressed by S John, first in the foresaid Chap. v. 11, 12, and 13.
saying, that after those three days and an half formentioned, the Spirit of
life etc. and afterward v. 13. And the same hour was there an earthquake,
and the tenth part of the City fell, etc. Item Chap. 16. 12. in these words,
And the sixth Angel powered out his vial upon the great river Euphrates, and
the water thereof was dried up. And then finally in the thankesgiving of that
great multitude assembled in Armageddon, sitting in the foresaid judgment,
Rev. 16. 16. saying, Rev. 19. 1. 2.
Allelujah, Salvation, and glory and honor and power be unto the Lord our God:
for true and righteous are his judgments; for he has judged the great whore
-- and has avenged the blood of his servants at her hand. All which places are
parallel. By the means of which judgment, the way of the Kings of the East
shall be prepared. And if it be now asked to what end, the answeris; That the
said Kings may go armed before their brethren, beyond the Seas to conquer to
Christ, The kingdom, says Dan. 7. 27 parallel also to Revel. 19. 11, 12, etc.
Daniel in the said ^ap. v. 27. and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom
under the whole heaven, which shall be given to the people of the Saints of the
most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominion shall
serve and obey him: because as was noted before the said Kingdoms are the Rev.
14. 4
premices of other, and as the first fruits of them unto God, and to the Lamb.
Thereby accomplishing the vow and promise made (concerning their said brethren)
in the forementioned covenant, which must not be forgotten. And therefore Right
Worthies of the Lord, permit me to reiterate the said promise in the words of
that Worthy Leader of Israel, reiterating it to the said three Tribes, and
saying unto them, Josh 1. 13, etc.
Remember the word which Moses the servant of the Lord, commanded you saying;
The Lord your God has given you rest, and has given you this Land: your
wives, your children, and your cattle shall remain in the land which Moses
gave you on this side Jordan; but you shall go over before your brethren
armed, all the mighty men of valor, and shall help them: until the Lord
has given your brethren rest, as he has given you, and they also have
possessed the Land which the lord your God gives them: then ye shall return
unto the Land of your possession, and enjoy it. The which they accordingly
performed, as the same Joshua testifies, speaking unto them after the conquest
of the said Land of Canaan, and and the division thereof among the other
Tribes, saying, Josh. 22. 2 3, etc.
Ye have kept all that Moses the servant of the Lord commanded you, and have
obeyed my voice in all that I commanded you. Ye have not left your brethren
these many days unto this day, but have kept the charge of the Commandment of
the Lord your God. And now the Lord your God has given rest unto your
brethren, as he promised them, therefore now return ye, and get ye unto your
tents, and unto the land of your possession. And when he sent them away, then
he blessed them, and spoke unto them, saying; return with much riches unto your
tents, and with very much cattle, with silver, and with gold and with brass,
and with iron, and with very much raime^t: divide the spoil of your enemies
with your brethren.

To the which prophecies, together with this so manifest a type, may yet be
added, that excellent promise made to this end to all these victorious Kings of
the East, in this Book of the Revelation, which may serve not only to
confirm this truth, but also to encourage the people of the said Kingdom, to
go on cheerfully to the performance of the said great work, now by them so
happily begun: to which purpose therefore let them consider first, that promise
is made to the Angel and Church of The same Church Leing the type of the
Church, representing summarily and in general her condition since the time of
her issuing out of the wilderness, as is noted before.
Thyatira (after the fall of Jezabel, and after the death of her children
mentioned Rev. 2. 22, 23. a place parallel to the forealledged, Rev 11 v. 13.
and 16. 12. and 19. 15, 16.) namely, that to those that should thus overcome,
and conquer the foresaid kingdoms and people in the forespo^en manner, and
should keep Gods works unto the end, he would give them power over nations, and
they should rule them with a rod of iron: as the vessels of a potter, should
they be broken to shivers: and that he would give them the morning star.
Consider likewise to this purpose that which is said presently after the
blowing of the seventh Trumpet, Rev. 11. 15. by those great voices in heaven,
which said, The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and
of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever. Wherefore they sing that
Hallelujah (at the falling down of the forementioned walls of Jericho*
mentioned Rev. 19. 6. because then the Lord God was entered into his kingdom.
Now then seeing that these things ought thus to be done by the foresaid Kings,
Princes, Nobles and people, suffer not the horns of your powerful authority
to be used any more against the author thereof, or against his most distressed
Church and Spouse, either in these kingdoms or in any other, as they have been
too too much heretofore, by that cruel Beast, and most proud whore Jezabel:
but rather, in a more sincere zeal to Gods glory, then that of Jehu, as she
is entered into the house of God by the window, so let her be cast out of it,
that she may be trodden under 2 King. 9. 33
the feet, not only of the horses and most base people, as she is already, but
of your selves: for it is prophesied, that you ought thus to hate her, and make
her desolate and naked yea that you ought to eat her flesh, and burn her with
the fire of Excommunication, that thereby you may at length fulfill the words
of God, Revel. 17. 16, 17.

And to conclude with a word of exhortation and encouragement also to my
fellow-brethren of the Ministry, that Number. 25 7, 8, and 31. 6. 8.
Phinees-like, having already showed a great zeal in the cause of the Lord
against Zimri and Cosbi, they may also like him go with the thousands of
Israel, with the instruments of the Sanctuary, and the Trumpets of alarm in
their hands, to execute the vengeance of the Lord against Midian, sparing none
of their Princes, not Balaam himself, nor any of the women neither, because
they have caused the children of Israel through Number. 31. 16. 17.
the counsel of Balaa^ to commit a great trespass against the Lord, in the
case of Peor, wherefore came the plague among the Congregation of the Lord. And
therefore like 1 King. 18. 40.
Elija, take all the Prophets of Baall, so that not a man of them do escape,
though they were seven thousand in number, for all of them must be slain, with
the spiritual sword of Excommunication, Rev. 19. 15
going out of the mouth of Jesus Christ. But above all be careful to commend
the rooting out to the very stumps, yea stumps and all of that Hierarchicall
Antichristian-like Church Government, with all the Officers thereof, to those
that are now fighting the battles of the Lord; and in lieu thereof, labor to
have the holy Church Discipline of Christ, stablished, countenanced, and
authentically authorized among us; seeing that no man usurp under what color
or title, how favorable and specious soever it be, any dominion over the Lords
inheritance: that Gods wrath may no more be provoked against us, who is as you
know a consuming fire, now more then ever zealous of his glory, and who to
manifest the same has taken in hand his vindicating power, to take vengeance
of Luke 19. 27.
all his enemies, who would not that he should rule over them, and who have bin
likewise the mortal enemies of his true Witnesses, and most faithful
servants, whom he has also armed, now especially, with such powerful
authority, that If any one does yet presume to hurt them, or oppose them in
this most blessed and most holy work of Reformation, Rev. 11. 5.
fire shall proceed out of their mouth to devour all their enemies; for if any
man will burt them, he must in this manner be killed. And they have also to
this end a two edged sword in their hands, to execute vengeance upon the
heathen, and corrections among the people, yea to bind their Kings in chains,
and their Nobles with fetters of iron, that they Psalm. 149. 6. 7. etc.
may execute upon them the judgment that is written: this honor shall be to
all his Saints. Praise ye the Lord.

FINIS.

