Thesaurus Remediorum.

A Treasury of choice MEDICINES Internal and External.

Exactly composed according to Art, peculiarly and properly fitted and
appointed against the infirmities of the principal parts of Man's body.

Their Virtues faithfully discovered, with plain and easy directions to use
them.

Justly proportioned and dosed, for all persons according to Strength, Sex, and
Age.

Neat and securely sealed up in small quantities and parcels commodious for
Use, Carriage and keeping, in long Journeys and Voyages, ready for emergent
occasions.

Prized very low, at set rates (for the public good) that inferior people may
procure the benefit: None of them exceeding Two Shillings price.

Very efficacious by often Experiments verified, against the Diseases and
Symptoms mentioned in the Catalogue of the sixth page.

By JULIUS DEGRAVERE, a learned Physician.

Whereunto is added, Diagnostic signs to know the Temperament and Constitution
of each Body; With a Physical Diet and select Counsels for each Complexion.

Also, Indicating Signs, advice and cautions for purging, vomiting, sweating,
and bleeding; with their proper effects and benefits, Aphoristically and
methodically digested.

The Second Impression, Revised, Corrected, and Enlarged, The Medicines
diligently viewed, sealed up, and duly ordered by the constant care and
appointment of E. M. Doctor in Physic.

London, printed by G. P. 1662.

Literato Lectori.
MEdicamenta in parvulo hoc opere sub nomine Julii Degraveri jam secundo edita,
omnibus his infra in calee libri enumeratis morbis, ad quorum medelam perite
accomodantur, propria experientia in praxi medica saepe numero probata,
per^tilia inveni. Nemo aegre ferat, nec cui sit mirum, si pauperum gratia,
public illa exiguis praetiis sine dolo venalia fore quidam curaverint; quippe
quod agyrtae and impostores quam plurimi, quique experimenta per mortes agunt,
sua pharmaca fraudulenta in vulgus perniciose spargunt. Haec in conspectu meo
fideliter dispensata, been praeparata and secundum artem diligenter composita,
merito laudanda, and in praetio habenda dico: porro ne quis temere in usum
cujusvis horum quamvis saluberimi inconsulte ruat; rectus ^ractandi modus, and
propria methodus medendi praeceptis observatu facilimis, dilucida brevitate
ordineque utili demonstrantur, ut cuique sanae mentis errare difficile puto.
Quibus igitur res est Angusta domi, aut quotidiano labor parce vitam trahunt,
quorum ^rumenae medicis honoraria nunquam emittunt aut argire possunt, eorum
solummodo g^atia thesaurus hic instituitur, eo tanquam ad Asylum morbis
laborantes confugiant, praeclara ubi auxilia suis cujusque malis valide
occurrendum parata esse invenient.

Vale lector benevole, and his laboribus cum opus fueris feliciter fruere, ut
amissam fanitatem quam maxim desideratam tibi tuisque restituas, sic ex animo
optat and precatur.

E. M. MEDICINAE DOCTOR.
E Mus^eo meo Londini, Pride. Calend. Maias. An. 1662.
THE PREFACE.
THe Abuses in Physic crept in by the man^ pretenders to knowledge, and
intruders neither qualified nor authorized in the faculty, is now the
Epidemical Disease of this Kingdom, destroying like the Plague, each Town and
Village affords variety of examples, how frequently people drop away by
dangerous Medicines, and sinister advice of illiterate and unskilful ^ersons,
is too obvious and apparent to the learned Physician, whose assistance now of
late is most frequently desired, to correct the errors and repair the breaches,
that unknowing persons have made, by their ignorant and bold experiments upon
the bodies of each other.

Many there are the plenty of whose fortunes may well procure the best
assistance and counsel the Art can afford; but such is their folly, rather then
part with a Fee to an able Physician, will spend much more by a lingering
sickness, and perhaps cost them their lives too, by using improper,
insufficient, or pernicious Medicines.

You will not trust a Garment to be made, but by an exact Tailor, educated and
trained up in that occupation, but your Body you dare venture with an
illiterate bold Empericke, or some honest Neighbor or Friend, who out of his
ignorant kindness and foolish friendship to you, gives you a Medicine, whose
future Effects perhaps will be worse then your present Disease, and if the
Doctor hears not of you now, he is sure to have you not long after, in a worse
condition; Si populus vult decipi, decipiatur. These I have scarce charity to
pity i^ their Miscarriages, through their sordid and foolish covetousness.

As for the meaner sort of people, and those of a scant and low Fortune, not
able to purchase Advice and Visits from the skilful Physician; that they may
not betake themselves to deceitful Refuges, and juggling Quacks, who will abuse
both their Bodies and Purses: here is a Storehouse and Treasury to resort to,
furnished with variety of choice Medicines, where at a very small charge, they
may receive the benefit of wholesome Medicines and good Advice, for their
several Maladies and Distempers.

Here is for most occasions you will need, Cordial, sweating, purging,
vomiting, roborating, restaurative, diuretical, discussing, opening and
astringent Medicines: and this I may boldly say, they are as good as the Art
appoints for these purposes; and for their Prices do you judge, whose Purses
bave paid for your experience and knowledge, if ever you took proper and
effectual physic for your purpose, at so cheap a Rate.

A course in physic here at Spring or Fall, will not cause you to complain,
how expensive your infirmities are; nor is here any large or loathsome Draughts
to cause you to abhor the remembrance of physic; but the benefit you received
from the last, with so little trouble and offense, will invite and encourage
you to take again, when occasion calls for it. Nor will you doubt
sophi^tication here, or careless and slovenly Composition, or ignorant and
undue preparation; having once exp^rimented the goodness of them, their
operation and effects will speak, when I am silent, and prove what they are by
evident demonstration, that you need not trust upon the credit of the Author
but themselves. Nor shall you fear their goodness and integrity in their
virtues, having kept them months, or quarters, besides you for emergent
occasions, according to their several times of duration set down and limited in
the 24.25, 26. Pages of this Book.

And for the better security, to prevent any casualty mistakes or abuses that
may happen by opening them, they are carefully sealed up, with a Coat of A^mes,
that no prejudice arise to defame the Medicines, and wrong the Author or
Patient.

Reject not any Medicine, if you be not cured with the first Dose. I do not
promise you Wonders (Mountebank-like) all are not curable, and those which are,
require time and repetition of Medicines, especially where the Disease is
great, or stubborn and contumacious, by long continuance, old age,
complication of Diseases, imbecility of Nature to cooperate: So far I dare
affirm what physic can do in opposing or eradicating a Disease, you may
expect from these (rightly and prudently used) being well acquainted with the
most and best Medicines now used in Europe.

Defame them not by your peevish impatience, or irational indulgence to your
own way and humor, by your mistakes and ignorance, in their taking or unfit
ordering of your self; by untimely, preposterous, or insufficient use of them;
by unfit Diet, in time, quantity or quality: by cold or any irregular course,
in or soon after physic, which brings discredit to the ablest Physicians, and
best Medicines in the world.

You see here following their Virtues declared and what they aim at in their
operation, which they have often performed with great applause and
satisfaction. Your own reason with those plain instructions may easily guide
you in the right use of them, to perform the like with you; that what others
have said of them, may be verified in you, and readily you may say also, they
are worthy to be famed and used.

Non satis est medicum suum fecisse officium, nisi suum quoque aegrotus, suum
astantes faciant sintque externa rite comparata. Aph. A CATALOGUE of the
Diseases and Symptoms for which the Medicines are proper and peculiarly
appointed: also the several Pages Figured, directing you to your Disease and
Cure.
Plague Page. 31 Poisons Page. 31 Measels Page. 31 Small Pox Page. 31
Intermitting Fevers called Ag^es Page. 45. 43 Vertigoes Page. 28, 29, 30.
Palsies Page. 28, 29, 30. Convulsions Page. 28, 29, 30. Catalepsie Page. 28 29,
30. Falling Sickness Page. 28, 29, 30. Distillations Page. 28, 30, 43.
Headache Page. 28, 39. Sore eyes Page. 30. Coughs Page. 33, 34. Consumption
Page. 33, 34. Short breath Page. 33. Faintings Page. 33. Palpitation of the
heart Page. 33. Bad Stomach Page. 34, 35. Worms Page. 38. Wind Page. 37, 33.
Hypochondriac Melancholy Page. 36, 33, 43. Obstructions in the Liver or Spleen
Page. 36, 43, 39. Scurvy Page. 37, 36. Costivenesse Page. 39. Cholic Page. 37,
39. Fluxes Page. 37, 43. Jaundice Page. 36, 43, 35 Dropsies Page. 36, 43. Stone
Page. 39. Gonorrhaea Page. 40. French Pox Page. 41. Women's Obstructions Page.
41, 43. them immoderate Page. 44. Fits of the Mother Page. 41, 30. Miscarrying
Page. 42, 40. Hard Labor Page. 41. Weak backs Page. 40, 39. Ringworms Page.
45, 43. Tettars Page. 45, 43. Scabs Page. 45, 43. Pushes Page. 45, 43. Pimples
Page. 45, 43. Freckles Page. 46. Morphew Page. 46. Spots Page. 46. Sunburning
Page. 46. Brown Skin Page. 46. Wrenches Page. 40. Strains Page. 40. Gout Page.
42, 45, 43. For Issues Page. 44.
Multae aegritudines sua natura sa^^biles aegri negligentia and errore,
consilia Medicorum saluberima respuentenis, fiunt incurabiles. Diagnostic
Signs.
WHereby every one may know their Constitution from thence, to order their Diet
and Customs suitable to the same, for the prolongation and continuance of
health: or reducing them from a distempered state, and Morbisic inclination, to
their Primitive Constitution and good temperament.

The diversity of Complexions or temperaments may be comprised under these four.

Sanguine, Flegmatic, Choleric, and Melancholy.

Sanguine Constitution.
THe Sanguine person is moderately hot and moist, has a lively pulse, vigorous
actions, the veins full and large, of color fresh and Rosy, for habit of body
soft, fleshy and moderately fat, of a pleasant mind and good disposition.

The Sanguine person being of the best Constitution is to be preserved in that
state and purity, from degeneration and depraved alteration; which is done by a
due observance and regular course, in diet, air, exercise and rest, sleeping
and watching, voiding and retaining of Excrements, passions of the mind.

In Diet observe the quallity, that it afford good Nutriment, and not hard of
Digestion: Avoid Onions, Leeks, Garlic, Mustard, very salt meats either Fish
or flesh, or what else has a manifest quallity in extreme. Beware of strong
Liquors, Spirits and Spices (except a little moderately for the stomachs sake)
which inflame the blood and alter the purity of it, making it adust and
choleric.

In quantity be sparing, feed not high to a bestial satietety and fullness,
intemperance vitiates and ruins the best tempered body, but rise with an
appetite, the spirits being alleviated not dulled or oppressed.

For times and manner of eating; observe you charge not the stomach again
until the former be concocted; nor with variety or diverse kinds at once, both
which are the parents of crudity.

Choose an Air temperate, serene and pure free from putrid vapors, arising
from marrish grounds, Lakes and stinking Ditches, Dung-hills, or Carrions.

Use exercise, not violently, nor so on after meat, sleep moderately and
seasonably, by going to bed soon and rising early.

Let no excrement of the first or second concoction be retained beyond its due
time for evacuation, whether by stool, urine, women's monthly purgations; and
use Venus moderately, and seasonably.

Let no passion disturb thy mind, but endeavor a sedate tranquillity and
cheerfulness, which is of great moment for presetvation of health. Sine animo
Corpus, nec sine corpore animus, been valere potest.

Flegmatic Constitution.
THe flegmatic person is cold and moist, to action more dull and heavy, not so
witty, sharp, and accute, for habit of body, more gross and fat, not hairy,
the veins small and hid, the hair white or flaxen, a soft, weak, and slow
pulse; not so prompt to Venus, prone to sleep and ease; by cold things
prejudiced, by hot things benifitted, incident to cold, and flegmatic
distempers, the appetite greater then the digestion.

Let the flegmaticks diet be warm meats, oftener roste then boiled.

Sugar and Honey, mustard, salt and spices are lawful: Butter and Oil is good
Physic.

Olives, Capers, Broom-buds, Sampier, are good sauce.

Abstain from raw fruits, Apples, Pears, Plumbs, Cucumbers, Melons, etc. as
hurtful.

Refrain green herbs and sallets, as Lettuce, Purslane, Sorrel, except Sage,
Rosemary, Time, Marjerom, and some hot herbs.

Refuse Fish, milk, and milk meats, they increase phlegm and beget obstructions.

Let thy drink be moderately strong; a cup of Sack sometimes is for thy health,
to concock crude and sl^gmatick humors.

Drink no Sider* Perry, Butter-milk or Whey, they are too cold and moist for a
crude raw stomach.

Indulge not thy self to sleep much, it is an enemy by increasing moisture and
dulling the spirits.

Seasonable exercise and moderate abstinence is physic, and great
preservatives of health.

Choose a warm air, and dry soil, remote from waters, the best place for thy
abode.

Hot baths are profitable, and Venus a friend. The former cherishes the
spirits, opens obstructions, and dryes up superfluous moisture. The latter
suscitates and stirs up the spirits, alleviates* and helps concoction.

Choleric Constitution.
THe Choleric person is hot and dry, eager and precipitate in his actions,
contentious, hasty and angry; of body lean, slender, and hairy: the Veins big,
a hard pulse and quick: of color pale or yellowish the hair crisp or curled.
Propense t^ waking, and short sleeps: subject to tertian fevers, choleric
pushes and breakings out upon the skin.

Let this Constitution have a cool and moistning diet: most frequently boiled
meats, rather then Roast or Baked, and fried meats never.

Use Brothes with cooling herbs: or Barley brothes with fruit.

Milk and milk meats are pleasant and not hurtful: Fresh fish is good diet.

Mustard, salt and spices exasperates Choler and makes it more fierce and
biting: Vinegar checks it.

Refuse the fat and brown of meat, also the crust of bread.

Butter and Oil is fuel to the fire; Sugar and Honey is like them, being soon
assimilated and converted into choler.

Stewed Prunes with Tamarinds are good to cool, humect, and keep the body
soluble; to restrain and bridle this active humor.

Prunella's have the like effect, but not solutive.

Eat Sallets of Lettuce, Purslane, Sorrel, Spinach and Violet-leaves; they are
medicamental aliment.

Delight thy self with Oranges, Lemmons, Citrons, Pomegranates, Apples, Quince
Peaches* Apricocks, Damasens, Respas, Currants, Barberies, Strawberries, they
are profitable to contemperate choler, cool and quench thirst, and very much
refresh the parched spirits.

Avoid Wine and strong Liquors; they agitate choler, and rowzeth up thy
sleeping enemy to disturb thee.

Buttermilk, Whey and Sider are good physic to extinguish and allay
preternatural heat, to check the eff^enation of raging choler, and are like
water to fire.

Fast not but satisfy thy stomach when it calls for it: biting choler must
have something to feed on, or it will prey upon thy body.

Cherish and indulge sleep, it cools and moistens.

Use little and moderate exercise: be not laborious but take thy ease.

Avoid violent motion, it fires thy spirits, and enrageth choler,

Fly Venus as a pernicious foe.

Gold Bathes is profitable and refreshes much, by cooling the blood, allaying
the Spirits and concentring them.

Banish anger, immoderate care, peevishness and fretting which discomposeth
the spirits, heats and wastes them, augments choler, dryes the body, and
hastens old age.

Refrain Tobacco as an injurious custom, it exasperates Choler, by heating,
drying, and evacuating phlegm which contemperates, bridles, and checks the fury
of acrid, sharp bilious humors.

Melancholy Complexion.
THe Melancholy person, naturally so from the first principles, is cold and
dry: but a Melancholy temperament, acquired by Education, Customs and
Accidents, by degeneration and admixture of other Humors adust, is hot and dry.
Which makes the signs and symptoms of Melancholy to be different and various,
and a difference is to be made in diet and customs.

If Phlegm be admixed and adust, they are stupid, dull and heavy: if from blood
adust, they are commonly of a high Ruddy Complexion, and incline to la^ghter,
wit, and mirth: if from Choler they are bold, fierce and angry: if from
Melancholy adust, they are sad, fearful, and solitary.

The common Symptoms are a Pale, Black, or high Sanguine color, lean body,
and hairy, a little Head, large Veins, given to be watchful, sad, solitary,
sudden laughter; a slow weak Pulse, t^oublesome sleeps and dreams.

Cold Melancholy has mild Symptoms: if hot and adust, the effects are more
churlish and furious.

For cold Melancholy, let the Diet be hot and moist; for the hot Melancholy
Person, let diet be cooling and moist: in both let their meats be of light
Digestion, affording good Nutriment; and not windy. As Mutton, Lamb, ^eale,
Capon, Chicken, Hen, Patridge, Phesant, etc.

Abstain from Venison, Hare, Goats flesh, Pigeon, Eeles, Salt Beef, salt fish,
Geese, Ducks; dried meats, fried or broyled; old Cheese, Beans, Pease,
Rye-bread.

Refuse Cabbage and Coleworts.

Potatoes and Parsnips good; Carrots and Turnips not hurtful, if the person be
consumptive, hot and dry.

Capers, Broom buds, and Sampier are good sauce, they open obstructions of the
Liver and Spleen.

Mustard and Vinegar bad, and all sour sauces, they make melancholy more
contumacious and fixed.

Spices not good, if the person be hot, they cause adustion.

Use Borrage, Buglosse, Endive, Succory, Baume, Fumiterry, Lettuce,
Marygold-flowers, Violets, Clove-gillyflowers, Saffron, they alter and
quallifie the humor, and cheer the spirits.

Use Barley Brothes with Prunes, Raisons and Currants.

If melancholy be adust, and your body hot and costive; eat apples, Cherries,
Plums, Strawberries, and such like fruits, to cool and moisten.

Drink W^ey, Sider and small white wines.

Refuse black wines and stale Beer.

Keep the body soluble, your head will be more free from fumes, pain, and
heavin^sse.

Cherish sleep it refreshes the spirits, pacifieth a troubled mind, and
banisheth cares.

Fly idleness, the nurse of melancholy: Exercise often, and follow business.

Walk in the green Fields, Orchards, Gardens, Parks, by Rivers, and variety of
plac^s.

Change of Air is very good.

Avoid solitariness and keep merry company.

Frequent Music, sports and games.

Recreate the spirits with sweet, fragrant, and delightful smells.

Moderate Venus good.

Banish all p^ssio^s as much as in you lies, fear Grief, Despair, Revenge,
desire, je^lousie, emulation, and such like. Opus est te animo valere, ut
corpore possis. Cicer.

Tobacco naught (especially if melancholy be adust and a hot body) it heats,
and exhausts humidity, makes melancholy more contumacious,

Give not your self to much study, nor night watchings, they both dry the body,
and make humors adust, two great enemies to a melancholy person.

Physiological and Diaeteticall Observations and Counsels.
IN the disquisition and diligent observation to know and find out your own
constitution by certain Characters, you must not expect all be signs before
mentioned in the particular complexions to meet in ^^e single person
demonstrating this or that temperament: For there (...) not to be found a
person so phlegmatic, without the admixture of ^holer; nor so choleric without
some phlegm; nor singley melancholy, without both; nor purely sanguine, but
participating of all. From ^hence it is, the signs in this or that person are
not all ho^^genious declaring one humor in particular, but mixed, as the
hu^^urs also are different and mixed: but by comparing them together, (...) may
easily discern, which do exceed in number and which are ^^ongest in
signification; from thence conclude such a humor to be ^^edominate* and that
to denominate the constitution; to which you ^ust have a constant eye, that it
grow not too luxuriant and abound^^g, from whence diseases will arise according
to the nature of that ^umour, if not rightly moderated, qualified, and kept
^^der.

Your temperament being thus rightly examined and found out; will be no small
advantage for the regulating all your actions and cu^^mes suitable thereto,
either to preserve it in that state, if tempe^^te; or reduce it from a
distempered condition and sickly inclination; which duly and rationally may be
performed if you follow the rules and presciptions in each particular
Constitution appointed in the preceding pages.

If your Constitution be Flegmatic, do what the choleric person is forbidden;
but if Choleric* cleave to that the Phlegmatic person must avoid; if Sanguine,
keep a mediocrity between both; if Melancholy; observe its proper remedies.

Change your diet according to the seasons of the year, the variation of your
temperament, and inclination to such or such a distemper. In Winter more meat,
and less drink: In Summer less meat, and more liquids: In hot weather a
cooling diet, in cold weather, that which is warm and heating.

Temperate bodies are preserved by temperate things, and their like;
distempered bodies are rectified and reduced by their contraries and
dissimilar: a hot and dry body, must have a cooling and moist diet; a cold and
moist body, a hot and dry diet.

The variety of humors in man's body, impugning one another with their contrary
quallities, are not easily kept in subjection, but by a diligent watch and
strict observance, in your daily customs and practice: for by a careless and
irregular course the equallity of opposition is broken, and some particular
humor grows predominate, which produces distempers according to its nature,
power, and height arrived at, and the condition of the subject or parts it
chiefly infests.

As the external color of the body is various and diverse, such are the humors
internal abounding.

The purity of the humors in man's body, render the mind more active, light,
cheerful and airy.

The grosnesse, feculency and impurity, makes a heavy indispose^ and depraved
mind, clogging the soul as with fetters.

Who so priseth the integrity and perfections of the mind* must have an
especial care for the preservation of the body; being bettered o^ made worse
by each others changes and affects; for the Actions and Passions of the mind
do very much follow and ar^ subj^ct^d, to the temperament, nature, and
quallity of the body.

Exceed not in any thing, but keep to a Mediocrity which is most Durable, and
agreeable to Natu^^ for its preservation.

Alter no custom suddenly, but by degrees, although from bad to better;
sudden changes are Dangerous and Injurious to Nature, which acts Gradually,
and by fit Mediums.

Think not your self secure in any ill Course or Custom (contrary to the
Rational Laws and Rule of Physic) because you are not immediately Chastised
with the Consequents and ill Effects thereof, concluding from thence all is
Well; but know though the Errors be but small in one single Act, yet often
repeated, Accumulate and Swell into great Distempers which manifest themselves
in that Season of the year, most suitable to their own^ Inclinations and
Disposition for such Productions. The Heates and Coldes taken in Summer* and
the Luxuriant feeding on the Fruits of that season, produce dangerous Diseases
in Autumn following. The intemperate, Erroneous practice of Winter discovers it
self, and Rebukes your Folly, by a sickly Spring. The change of the Air and
Constitution of the Seasons, makes Impression upon the Humors of the Body,
inclining to this or that Distemper, as they are predisposed and vitiated by
your own irregular Customs and Practice.

Contemn not small Changes and Alterations in the Body, they are the
Praeludiums, or warnings of greater to follow, but oppose them by a Rational
Practice and due Ordering of your self, in Eating and Drinking, Exercise and
Rest, Air, Sleeping, and Watching, Venus, and Possions of the mind;
refraining what may promote and aggravate your Morbific inclination, and
Accustoming to that which Suppresseth and Checks it: being persuaded of this
truth; the beginning of most Diseases are better cured by Regular Diet, and due
Order, then Physic.

Magna pars sanitatis been moratus venture. Signs indicating Purgation.
A Thick or muddy Urine, pale and thin, red and ill savoured, or often changing.

Lassitude and indisposition for motion or action.

Prickings or pain^^ in the skin or flesh, erratic or fixed.

The complexion altered: dulnes^ and unwonted heaviness: restless watchings:
disturbed and troublesome sleep: sweatings in the night: fullness or
distention of the belly and hypochonders: shortness of breath.

A looseness or flux of humors stimulating to expulsion: gripings in the belly.

Heaviness, pain, or weakness (without m^nifest cause) about the loins,
thighs, or knees.

These signs declare the body wants purging, Satius est morbo ingruenti
occurrere,
quam invalescenti cum periculo mederi.


Advice and Cautions in Purging.
IF your body be Costive, of a hot and dry constitution, prepare it some days
before purging, with cool and moistning Brothes, stewed Prunes, Whey, or the
like. Your physic will operate much better, with less gripings, and more
effectual. For a hot and dry body sucks in the Physic so strongly, that it
cannot work freely and kindly, as otherwise it would do. If the weather be
cold, correct i^ with a warm Chamber, and good fire: if very hot; take your
physic e^^ly at 5. of the clock, and keep little or no fire: in so doing, you
may take physic at any time of the year safely, and with success, if occasion
require.

Draw the Curtains before your Windows, and darken the Chamber, until your
Physic have done working.

If your stomach be very weak and nauseating; and not from repletion: or if you
be in a high and accute Fever, then use clysters.

In all violent pains, and inflammations of what part soever; in all
contumacious obstructions of the Guts, take no purging physic but by Clyster,
until the body be open, and the spirits allayed.

Retain no purging Clyster above an hour, but part with it.

Esteem not the goodness of your purge by the quantity and number of stools;
but by the quallity of them, and the effects afterward.

Covet not strong purges, to have many stools in a day (a common Error) which
offers violence to nature, and forcibly sweeping down both good and bad
together: but rather endeavor to attract the offending cause gently, by
degree^, intermitting a day or two, giving nature time for separation of
humors, you will find it much more beneficial, nature more kindly assisting,
and less weakened.

On the intermitting days, keep a good diet, with opening Broth and
spoon-meat, to keep your body fluid, and ready for the next days operation:
beware of cold that you obstruct not your body and occlude the passages and
ductures before laid open, which will cause your Physic to work with torsions
and gripings, and less effectual.

If the Morbific Cause lie in the stomach or bowels being in the passage, ready
and near the place of Evacuation: you will not need so strong physic, nor so
often purging, as when it is seated in parts more remote and at distance.

Delude not your self with one days purge, expecting great matters from it;
you must know, the first Dose stirs up more humors then it can evacuate, and
until they be carried away, you cannot expect your desired effect, which will
be after 3. or 4 days purging (time little enough to cleanse a foul body) but
let it be with intermission of a day or two.

Take your purging Pills, or Electuary, early in bed, lie an hour, after that
hour you may sleep, but not longer: when it begins to operate Sleep not, nor
lie down until your Physic have done working; except you be weak, and your
physic work, strongly; then toward the latter end, you may lie down to
refresh you, but not sleep except there be occasion to stay the working.

Drink a little thin Broth between your stools, made with a bit of Veale or
Mutton, a Crust of bread, a Fennel and Parcely Root: if you be opposite to
Broth, drink Posset drink of small Ale or Beer. But if you have a ho^ Costive
body, drink plain Whey, it is better then either, and your Physic will work
more freely and easily.

Eat your Dinner 5 or 6 hours after your Physic taken, abstain no longer.

All Pills are most easily swallowed with a little Beer or posset drink in a
spoon.

Signs for Vomiting.
Fullness or oppression at the Stomach nauseating, loathing or vomiting. Loss
of appetite and digestion, through soulenesse of the stomach.

Perturbation and trouble about the stomach and parts adjacent, by Humors
floating upwards, having a tendency that way for Evacuation.

Bitter, or Acide belchings into the mouth.

Heat, and breakings out in the mouth and lips.

Opprime dum nova sunt subiti mala semina morbi. Ovid. Advice and Cautions in
Vomiting.
TAke your Vomit early in the morning, your stomach will sooner nauseate and
discharge it self, and your Vomit work more freely and easily, when humors are
floating and active.

If you be strong take it fasting; if weak or hard to vomit, eat a Mess of
VVater-gruell with Butter in it, a little before.

Be very loose about your Stomach and Belly, that the Muscles may distend and
contract, without Compression and interruption of their motion.

Drink small Beer Posset Drink, or warm water between your Vomits; and the more
you d^ink the easier will you vomit, and sooner finish the operation.

Lie not down until your Vomit have done working, except you intend to check
the Operation: but if you be weak, and not well able to endure up longer; you
may safely, it will refresh you, but sleep not.

When it has done working, take two or three spoonfulls of Claret Wine boiled
with a little Mint and Cinnamon, and lie to sleep.

Where there is Youth, or fit Age, strength of Nature, Custom or Facility and
aptness for Vomiting; they may boldly and profitably use this way of
evacuation, and discharge Natures burden and oppression in the Spring, Summer,
or Autumn, when some of the foregoing signs do prompt and indicate the some.

But if there be decay in Nature, and great weakness, debility of stomach by
long sickness, or old Age; if with Child, or subject to fits of the Mother,
or Swooning; If the Head be weak and infirm, the Neck Long, Sl^nder, and
straight-brested; the Lungs and Vital parts weak, or consumptive, or difficult
and hard to vomit, or have a Rupture: let such persons avoid vomiting as
dangerous and hurtful, but rather choose to draw the offending Cause downwards
by Clyster, Pills, etc.

Advice and Cautions for Sweating, with its Effects and Benefits.
CHoleric and dry bodies, neither sweat easily, nor well endure it.

For Phlegmatic serous and Sanguine constitutions, sweating is more facile and
beneficial, and nature more prompt.

In cold, and moist Diseases, sweating profits much: as Palsies, Rheumes,
Gouts, Dropsy, etc.

For Swarthy and muddy Complexions, discolourations and spots upon the skin,
that arise from a foul Cachectic body; after due purgation, sweating
depurates, thinns and cleeres the skin.

In cold Constitutions, and where the blood is gross, thick and impure,
causing obstructions in the smaller vessels, or slow of motion; moderate
breathing sweats clarifies the blood, attenuates, rarefies, and helps
circulation.

All inflations by wind, or serous and watery humors that tumefie the skin,
sweating transpires, evaporates and breathes out.

In all Malignant, Contagious and Pestilentiall Fevers; as Plague, small Pox,
Measels, spotted Fever, and the like; sweating Cordials is your chiefest help.

In all Contusions and Bruises, tumors and collection of Humors; after
Phlebotomy and convenient purgation, by Glyster or otherwise, to retract the
confluence of humors resorting thither; sweating and Diaphoritick Medicines,
resolves, dissipates and scatters them, and relieves the part affected.

Wind and flatulent vapors in any Concave part engirt and kept in, by
inveterate obstructions of the Ductures and passages, sweating opens the Pores,
discusseth and by insensible transpiration sends them forth.

In all Defluxions and destillations to the Eyes, Lungs, Joints or other parts;
sweating moderates and abates the Antecedent Cause, diverts the course and
current of the humor, and is very profitable.

In degenerations of the blood, Crudity, Acidity, Coagulation, putrefaction,
etc. gentle breathing sweats procures fermentation, concoction, rarefaction,
depuration, and conduces much to its restitution.

Bodies subject to sweating in the night, either want purging, or else feed too
plentifully.

Take no sweating Medicine until you have first purged, unless the emergency
and present necessity of the occasion, does not permit such a delay; as in
Diseases of a Malignant, contagious, and venenate quallity.

First purge to cleanse and carry away the fi^th and grosser matter in the
stomach and bowels, the fittest for that way of evacuation (that you drive it
not into the habit of the body) then sweat to purify the blood and external
parts.

In the Venereal Disease, when the blood and spi^its is taint^d and vitiated
with a peculiar virulency and Malignity; to use proper and Specific
Diaphoretics and sweating Medicines, is the safest, and best way for cure.
Praemissis praemittenda.

Indications, Advice and Cautions for Bleeding, with its Eff^cts and Benefits.
IF your veins be full and distended, breath a vein, or be very temperate,
you are then subject to many distempers from plenitud^.

If you feell a heaviness or oppression of Spirits, a quick pulse and
shortness of breath; open a Vein for Ventilation, and you will find
alleviation and refreshment.

In peracute and burning Fevers, and all dangerous inflammations, as Plurifies,
Quinsies, Phrensies, etc. open a Vein speedily, by day or night,
notwithstanding any contrary indication to forbid it.

In all violent and sudden pains contusions, and hot tumors collecting, open a
Vein to prevent a Fever, and to retract the Current of humors reso^ting to
the part affected.

In all Diseases from plenitude, or conjunct with it, threatening suffocation
and sudden death; as Lethargies, Convulsion, Epilipsie, Suffocating Catarrhs,
Hysteriacll passions, Palpitations of the Heart, rising of the Lungs, and such
like, Blood-letting is very necessary, and beneficial.

In all Evacuations of blood imoderate, and hurtful, whether at the Nose, by
Stool, Urine, Vomiting, Spitting, Haemorrhoides, or monthly Purgations,
arising from Plenitude. Heat, Acrimony, or attenuation of the blood; open a
vein for revulsion to turn the course and current, take blood a little at
once, by a discreet Surgeon; it is proper, safe and beneficial.

In all Malignant and contagious Fevers, whether Plague, Small Pox, Spotted
Fever or the like: in the beginning, and before there be any appearance
outwardly upon the skin, if the Fever be intense and high, open a vein to
mitigate and abate vehement Symptoms: but afterward when Nature has
separated, protruded and brought forth the Malignity to the skin, opening a
vein, retracts and draws back again; weakens and discourageth Nature, and is
very dangerous and mortal.

To prevent Abortion in Women with child, subject to miscarry by reason of
plenitude and fullness of blood; breathing a vein at the Arm is very
necessary for her safety.

In all Fevers requiring Phlebotomy, let it be done in the beginning when
Nature is strong, and the Distemper less prevalent.

After long and wasting sickness, take heed of blood letting.

In Women and fatt bodies take blood sparingly; in men and lean bodies, and
those who have large veins, take more freely.

If the Mass of blood be wholly vitiated and naught, be sparing in Blood
letting; but purify it by gentle Purgation, Sweating, Medicamentall Aliment
and proper diet.

Before ten, and after sixty years age, let no Vein be opened but upon urgent
occasion.

If the Disease be great and urgent, requiring large Evacuation, and Nature
imbecile and weak; take blood at twice or thrice, itermitting 6 or 12 hours
distance, as the skilful Surgeon shall see cause.

When Phlebotomy and Purgation are both required, and the Dis^ase seated in the
Veins and habit of the body; first bleed then purge: but if otherwise, and
chi^fly in the stomach, bowels, and parts adjacent; first purge, then bleed.

If there be suppression of a wonted Evacuation, and Detrimentall, or
obstruction contrary to the Law of Nature; open a Vein to exonerate and
alleviate for the present, Nature will be betteer able to relieve it self for
the future.

In Symptomaticall translations of a turgid humor, aestuations and ebullitions
of the blood; causing a general perturbation, or erratic pains, restl^ssenesse
and unquiet watchings in the night; Breathing a Vein Refrigerates, Allayes,
and checks the effrenation of humors.

For Anniversary and imminent Diseases, arising from Plenitude, and Luxuriant
blood: opening a Vein anticipates and prevents them.

In vehement Distempers requiring Phlebotomy, look not upon the quallity of the
blood, but make detraction according to the quantity, having respect to the
strength of the Patient.

After Phlebotomy use a spare and good Diet, that you fill not your Veins with
crudities, and ill humors.

(...). Isiodor. (...). The Physicians ARMORY, wherein you may view A Magazine
of Rare Medicines, Classically distributed and digested: Specificly
appropriated; properly denominated; moderately prized; the full Doses in each
M^dicine numbered; the duration of each Medicine in its full virtue justly
limited.
Appropriation. Denomination. Doses Duration months. Price. shil. pence To the
Brain. Capital Pills, 2 18 1 8 Epileptick Powder. 3 24 1 6 Cephalic Electuary.
many 12 1 6 Catarrh Pills. 4 18 1 4 Epileptic Amulet. 1 12 2 0 Fuming Powder.
many 36 1 0 Eyes. Opthalmic Water. many 12 1 6 Heart. Bezoardic Antidote 3 24 1
8 Cordial Tincture. 3 24 1 6 Lungs Pectoral Electuary many 12 1 8 Asthmatic
Pills many 18 1 6 Hectio Confection. many 6 1 8 Stomach. Digestive Electuary.
many 9 1 6 Stomach Pills. 2 18 1 6 Great Elixir. many 24 1 8 Emetic Tincture. 1
12 1 0 Liver and Spleen Hydropic Powder. 2 18 1 6 Splenetic Pills. 2 18 1 6
Spleen Plaster. 1 12 1 8 Scorbute Tincture. many 24 1 8 Guts. Discussive
Powder. 3 18 1 6 Retentive Electuary 2 9 1 6 Tincture for worms. many 18 1 0
Pills for worms. 3 12 1 6 Clyster Electuary. 1 12 1 4 Reins and Bladder.
Nephritic pills. 6 18 1 8 Roborating pills. 5 18 1 6 Srengthning plaster. 1 12
1 6 Genital parts. Restringent powder. many 24 1 8 Antivenereall pills. 2 18 2
0 Expulsive powder. 1 12 2 0 Hysterical powder. 3 12 1 6 Feminine Pills. 2 18 1
8 Women's preservative 4 12 2 0 Joints Arthritic pills. 2 18 2 0 Miscellaneous
and General Medicines. Catholic Pills. 1 18 1 0 Aperitive Powder. 3 24 1 6
Sudorific Pills 1 18 1 0 Haematic Powder. 4 24 1 6 Purgative Electuary. 1 9 1 0
Is^ue Plasters. 4 24 1 0 Febrific Antidote. 3 12 1 8 Camphire Powder. many 24 1
6 Cosmetic water. many 12 2 0

General Instructions for the Doses, and Quantities, necessary to be observed
in the taking of any Medicine: and the right Manner of keeping and preserving
them from decay.
A Dose is the just and due quantity of a Medicine to be taken, or used at once.

The full Dose is for men and women of strength, but if they be weak and tender
bodies, or by experience have found, that less will operate with them then
other bodies require, let such take the Doses for the age 14 prescribed, I
mean chiefly in vomiting, or purging Medicines.

Observe the quantities prescribed for the several Ages, and rather offend
under then over, the next Dose you may amend by taking a little more, if the
first be too weak, there is no harm in that.

After the first Dose of any Medicine taken, your own reason and ability of
body, will easily direct you in the next, whether to keep to the same, to
augment, or diminish: for you must know the difference of bodies is such in
operation, that they require oftentimes a different quantity for their
proportion to produce the like effect, which cannot exactly be determined and
appointed, by the prescience of the most skillful Physician, until the first
Experiment and trial of their bodies.

Therefore slight not any Medicine if it answers not your expectation at the
first, but prove it farther, and alter the quantity, more or less, as you find
it requisite for your purpose and condition of body.

But let me Caution you this: In Chronic Diseases that are slow of Motion, and
gives you sufficient time for Cure, never desire strong Physic, but imitate
Nature which acts Gradually and gently, does nothing Hastily and Violently.
Physic can do nothing of it self, but as an Auxiliary and help to Nature;
and if Nature does not Cooperate, you must expect no benefit: therefore if you
go natures pace, you will have Nature assisting with the means: but if you be
hasty and put all your hopes in the strength of your Physic, and strive to do
as much in one day as is fit for three days work, you precipitate Nature,
defame good Medicines, and wrong your own body.

But when the Disease is vehement and accute, threatening sudden death, as
Apoplexy, Lethargy and the like; then use sharp and quick Medicines, because
the time for cure is but short, and will admit of no delay. Vehementi malo,
forti omnino auxilio opus est.

What Medicines you would keep for a long time, to serve for accidental
occasions; set them in dry places, not near the ground, or damp walls, nor in
the open air, and they will remain in their virtue and goodness according to
their several times prefixed, in the preceding Table of Medicines.

The Virtues, right Use, and Due Quantities of each Medicine particularly and
distinctly Declared.
For the Head;
THe Capital Pills purge and cleanse the Brain from all superfluous Humors,
that stupifie and dull the Rational Faculty, or obstruct and hinder the right
Operation of the Sensitive: they quicken the Memory, open the Ventricles of the
brain, and free the Nerves from obstructions; conducing much to the cure of all
infirmities seated in the Head and Nerves; as Convulsions, Falling Sickness,
Apoplexy, Palsies, Vertigoes, Rhumes, Headache, dull sight or hearing: by
taking away the Antecedent Cause that generates and produces them.

Take them 3 or 4 days with intermission of a day or two, observing the
directions for purging, in the 16, 17, 18 pages.

The full Dose is 5 Pills: for 14 years old 3 pills: for seven years, 2 pills.

The Epileptic Powder, is a specific Remedy against Convulsions, and Convulsive
motions in Children. In the fit, observe by laying your hand, if there be a
rising or working at the childs stomach, then put a Feather anointed with
Oil of sweet Olmonds into the throat, and cause the Child to vomit up that
suffocating phlegm and crude matter that oppresses; afterward give a Dose of
this Powder: but if there be no heaving at the stomach; apply a blistering
plaster between the shoulders, and give the powder: you will see a good effect.

The Dose for 7 years old is one paper: for 3 years half a paper: for a year
old, ten grains: for half a year, 6 grains, to be given in small Cinnamon water
or Sack, if the Child be two years old; if under, in black Ch^rry water or
Pae^ny.

For prevention, give it 2 or 3 mornings together, at the first quarter of the
Moon, and Full.

The Cephalic Electuary is a peculiar Medicine composed against infirmities of
the Head; it Roborates the Brain and Nerves exceedingly, Concocts and
Exsiccates abounding moisture, that produces d^fluxions of Rheum's,
Scrophulous tumors and swellings of the Uvula, or Almonds of the Ears,
confirms and restores the memory, acuates and sharpens the sight and hearing,
very proper and ben^ficiall for all persons that are Epileptic, Cataleptic,
Apoplectic, Paralytic, subject to Convulsions, trembling of the Nerves, that
has a weak brain and infirm head.

Take the quantity of a Nutmeg or more, fasting, upon a Knifes point, or in
Rosemary posset which is better.

You may eat an hour after, and follow your business.

The Catarrh Pills, stops thin Rhumes that distill from the Head into the
Breast, procures quiet sleep, incrassates the the Rhume, and prevents coughing
in the night; being intended only for such as are molested with coughing in
the night, but in the day use Pectoral Medicines hereafter mentioned, for the
Lungs.

Take them when you first lie down in bed two or three nights together, or
every other night: they purge not.

The full Dose is two pills, no more: for ten years old, one pill.

The Epileptic Amulet, is a good preservative against the Falling sickness,
Apoplexy, convlsions, Catalepsy, fits of the Mother, Incubus, or Night Mare,
and Vertigoes. Whose virtuall scent comforts the brain, dissipates and expells
all Noxious Vapors and Fumes that arise up to the head and afflict the brain
and Nerves with those Symptoms, prevents, retards, or abates them in their
return.

To be worn about the neck constantly next to the skin, by all persons so
diseased, young and old.

The Fuming Powder, is very proper and fit for all those that have a cold,
moist, or weak brain, it exsiccates and dryes up Rhumes, and all superfluous
moisture, that causes Distillations upon the Lungs, sore eyes, toothache and
such like, and also strengthens the head and Nerves much.

Use it morning and night, thus: strew a little upon hot Coals in a
Chaffing-dish, and hold your head clothes, or cap over the swoake, so put them
on warm.

For the Eyes.
THe Opthalmick Water, is excellent for sore Eyes, it restraines a Flux of
Humors that resorts thither, cooles any inflammation there, mitigates any sharp
Humor that causes itching, heat, or readness, clears the sight and strenthens
it.

Use it thus: Dip a fine cloth or feather in the water; and wash your eyes
night and morning in bed.

In the interim refuse no good means to take away the Antecedent cause, as
blood-letting and purging, where it is requisite.

For the Heart.
THe Bezoardic Antidote, is a most Sovereign Cordial against the Plague; it
powerfully expells poisons, removes oppressions at the heart, and any surfeit
or overcharging of the stomach, drives out all Putrid matter and Malignity,
whether received by infectious and unwholesome Airs, or otherwise generated in
the body: very effectual in the small Pox, Mesels, spotted Fever to bring
forth their Malignity to the skin, and to prevent returning inwards; of
excellent use in all sudden sicknesses in young or old, to d^fend the heart
and vitals, until the distemper manifest it self.

Take it on a knifes point, or in posset drink, or any Cordial water, and sweat
as often as occasion requires.

The full Dose is the third part of the Medicine: for 14 years a fourth part;
for 7 years old, a Dram; for 4 years half a dram, for 2 years 20 grains. This
great Composition is made as follows,

Antidotus Bezoard.
Rec. Rad. Contrayer, untias tres.

Scorzoner. gentian. Angel. histort. Petasit. Torment. Pimpinel. imperator.
Dictam. alb. Zedoar. Vincetox. ana Uncias duas. Troch. de Viper. Unciam unam
semis. C. Cer. philosoph. praep. Terrae Lem. boliarmen. ana unciam unam. Fol.
Scordii galeg. Card. bened. (...) ^cifae (...) Cret: ana drachmas sex. Baccar.
Junip. lauri, Cherm. sem. Citri. Acetos, thlaspios napi Oeymi poenioe. gran^
parad. ana semuncium. Flor. Calend. Tunicae. Croci macis Caryophill. lign.
Aloes. resinost. Myrrhae Castor. alexiter. Vegiteb. nostr. ossis de Cord. Cerui
ana drachmus tre^. Lap. Bezoard. oricut. and occident. Margaritar. praep.
Alexipharmac. Mineral. nostr. Cap^ur. Elixir. Bezoard nostr. opii. Praep. ana
drachmus du^r*
Sir. Cimon. q. s.

P. Elictuar u^. S. artem.

The Cardiall Tincture, is excellent for fainting fits, it chears the heart,
restores the Vital Spirits, and quickens decayed nature in feeble and weak
persons,; comforts and warmes a cold stomach, helps digestion, expells wind,
and melancholy vapors that affl^ct the heart; very good in Palpitations of the
heart, or oppression at stomach through Crudities and Indigestion.

To be taken at any time night or day, when any the aforesaid distempers
require it.

The full Dose is a spoonful and half: for 14 years one spoonful: for 7 years
old, half a spoonful, and so proportionably to younger.

For the Lungs.
THe Pectorall Electuary stays defluxions of sharp rheumes that fall upon the
Lungs, mittigates their acidity and saltness which endangers Corosion, eases
your Cough, strenthens and defends the Lungs, prevents a Consumption, and is
singular for these purposes worth your knowledge, and use.

To be taken at any time, the quantity of a Nutmeg or more, when your Cough
requires it, but chiefly at night and morning in bed.

The Asthmatic Pills, is a great preservative to weak and decayed Lungs, opens
Obructions and stoppings in the Breast, helps difficulty of breathing, old
Coughs and shortness of breath, concocts tough Phlegm and brings it up easily,
or prepares it to be purged downwards.

Take them in the morning fasting, and at 4 of clock afternoon; 2 or 3 pills at
a time; they purge not.

These Pills are very beneficial for cold, moist, and phlegmatic constitutions;
but if you have a Hectic Fever, or have a dry Cough, or it proceeds from a
sharp, hot, and thin rhume; then this medicine is not so proper as the
foregoing, and this that follows.

The Hectic Confection, i^ very well approved for Consumption coughs, and those
that have a hot and dry constitution, or a Hectic Fever; it cooles, moist^ns,
and restores the Radical moisture very much: eases the breast that is pained
with couging, and loosens the phlegm: it helps a dry Cough and procures
exp^ctoration; is very restorative for consumptive and lean persons.

Take the qu^ntity of a Nutmeg or Chestnut as often as you ^lease, and occasion
r^quires, but not soon after meat.

For the Stomach.
THe Digestive Electuary, helps Concoction, and closes the mouth of the
stomach; repr^ss^th Fumes and Vapors that rise up to the head after meat;
sh^rp^ns the Appetite, and is very pleasant and grateful to the stomach.

Take the quantity of a Nutmeg half an hour after Dinner and Supper.

The Stomach Pills ^ffectually cl^nseth the first Region of the body; carries
away all vicious Humors and indigested matter, that clogs the stomach, hinders
digestion, dulls the Appetite, and which corrup^s good Nutriment received:
prevents and cures Fluxes, Gripings and pains ih the Stomach and Bowels, from
sharp biting Choler, or flatulent Crudity: Attracts and draws away all viscous,
slime, and gross phlegm, that generates obstructions from whence many Diseases
arise.

Take them three or four times, Spring and Autumn, or at other temperate
seasons, if occasion require, observing the directions and cautions for purging
in the 16, 17, 18 pages.

The full dose is six pills; for 14. years, 4 pills, for ten years old, 3 pills.

The Great Elixir, strengthens a weak stomach very much, procures good
digestion and appetite; takes away crudities, nauseousness and sour belchings
from off a raw stomach, and fortifies it exceedingly, but if the stomach be
very foul, stuffed and clogged with gross flegmatic humors, or hot Choleric
humors fluctuating and broiling upon the stomach; then first cleanse downward
with the stomach pills; or upwards by vomit with the Emetic Tinctur^:
afterward strengthen with this Elixit, and you will find a great alteretion
both for Appetite and Concoction.

To be taken in a little Sack, or other Wine most agreeable to your stomach
(but not alone) in the morning, fasting an hour after; and at 4 of clock
afternoon.

The full Dose is 30 drops: but for young people and children so many drops as
they are years old.

Shake the Bottle when you use it.

The Emetic Tincture dichargeth the Stomach by Vomit, of all Superfluous, Crude
and Noxious Humors that fluctuate upon the Stomach, or lodge in the parts
adjacent; it takes away bitter and Acid Eructations and Belchings, Vellications
and Gripes in the Stomach from Bilious Humors, very proper and succesfull in
the cure of Agnes Obstructions of the Liver and Gall, which causes the Yellow
Jaundice: takes away immoderate thirst and heat of the Stomach, by Evacuating
Choler and Humors dust: Cleanses from all impurities, and makes the Stomach
fit for Reception of wholesome Food^; make it a little Warm and take it
according to the Directions for Vomiting, set down in the 18, 19. pages.

The full Dose is the whole Medicine, for Men and Women of strength: but for
tender bodies, and for the age 15, take but three parts of it.

Liver and Spleen.
THe Hydropic Powder, is a peculiar Medicine that attracts all serous and watery
humors from any part of the body and evacuates them; opens obstructions of the
Liver and Mesaraick veins, and is the most effectual purge for Dropsies that I
know.

Take it in a little Posset drink or white Wine warmed fasting, 2 or 3 mornings
in a week and keep house, eat not until noon; observe the directions for
purging in the 16, 17, 18 pages.

The full Dose is one paper; for the age 14. three parts of a p^per, or but
half if a weak or tender person; and so proportionably to younger.

The days you purge not, drink a good draught of Wormwood wine, and eat some
white Biscuit every morning, and at 4 of clock afternoon.

The Splenetic Pills, opens obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, eases their
pains, and carries away the obstructing humors, abates their tumors, and
distention of the Hypochonders and softens them: Very useful and proper in the
cure of the Jaundice both Black and Yellow, Hypochondriac Melancholy, the
Scurvy and such like seated in those parts, by purging away the feculent matter
that subside and obstruct the vessels.

Take them twice or thrice, observing the directions for purging in the 16, 17.
18 pages of this Book.

The full dose is six pills; for 14 years, 4 pills: for ten years old, 3 pills.

The Spleen Plaster, is excellent for Pains and tumors of the Liver and
Spleen, to disperse the Wind, and dissipate collected humors, and to soft^n
any scirrhus hardness in those parts.

Apply it to the pained place, the hollous fide inward, toward the belly, and
let it stick on a fortnight or three weeks. But with all remember the foregoing
Pills, to Evacuate and empty the vessels distended and obstructed with wind
and humors, and to clear the passages and Ductures, as the Plaster removes,
agitates and drives back the offending cause.

The Scorbute Tincture, is a specific and most certain Remedy against the
Scurvy, sufficiently experimented and approved.

To be taken (most exactly and properly) in Rhenish Wine and the juce of
Orange, every morning, fasting, Spring and Fall, for two or three weeks; also
at other time^ of the year if occasion require.

The full Dose is half a spoonful: for fourteen years a third part.

If the body be soul forget not to purge.

For the Guts.
THe Discussive powder, pen^trates, opens, discusseth and expels wind and all
flatulent Vapors that distend and puff up the Belly and Hypochonder^; helps
the Cholick, and iliac passion, and all distempers, pains, and gripes, from
wind or cold In the Guts and Stomach.

Take it in warm Posset drink, at any time when occasion requires: If you boil
a little Liquorice in the Posset drink, you add to the goodness of the Medicine,

The full Dose is one Paper: for 14 years old, half a Pap^r.

Also that a more free passage and vent for the wind may be given, take the
following Clyster, if your body be costive, or the occasion urgent and extreme.

The Retentive Electuary, stop^ all Fuxes of the belly, by attracting and
collecting the peccant humor only, that stimulates to expulsion, and by and
Evacuates and sends it forth, whether it be sharp, bilious, or acide serous
humors; a saline irritating phlegm, a stinking corrupt Colliquation, or Acride
and Adust Melancholy; having also an astringent Virtue to bind afterward,
and to roborate the Retentive faculty, the offending cause being removed; this
is the only way to expel the cause, stop the Flux, and prevent danger that
may ensue.

To be taken on a knifes point fasting three or four mornings together, more or
less as the greatness of the occasion requires, until the Cause be Eradicated,
the Flux stayed, and all Symptoms allayed: Women with child may safely take
it, or any person whatsoever.

The full Dose is half the Medicine: for 14 years, a third part: for 7 years
old a fourth part.

Keep house, for cold provokes the Flux; neither eat or drink of two hours
after the Medicine, and then Almond Milk or Wh^y is the best you can take;
which you may drink freely night or day, if you be griped in the belly.

The Tincture for Worms, is ex^ellent for young Children that cannot take the
following Pills, having the same effects, save only it purges not: therefore
give it in a little Syrup of Rubarb, or Roses, if that cannot be had, 2 or 3
mornings new Moon and full.

The Dose is 12 drops for six years old; 8 drops to 4 years; 4 drops to 2 years
old.

The Pills for Worms, both kills, and prevents their breeding, by carrying
away the putrid matter whereof they are generated, clensing the stomach and
bowels from filthy corrupt humors; restores the stomach and complexion thereby
decayed, amends the ill savor of the breath; and corrects many other Symptoms
which worms produce.

Take them two mornings together, new Moon and full; observing the general
directions for purging in the 16, 17, 18, pages of this book.

The Clyster Electuary, is very useful and of speedy help, in all pains and
gripings of the Belly, Cholic, Stone, Spleen, Costiveness, Feave^s, pains in
the head and upper parts, by drawing the off^nding Cause downwards and
evacuating it: very fit for those that can take no puring Physic but this way:
it attracts Choler, Phlegm and Melancholy. Use it thus.

Take a pint and half of Ale poss^t, half a handful of Fennel s^eds bruised
grossly, or Annise, boil these to a plat, strain it: in this liquor then
dissolve the Electuary, put it in your Clyster bag fitted, and give it warm,
then lie upon your back and retain it half an hour or 3 quarters if you can:
you may repeat it if occasion r^quire: you will find great ease, and sudden
he^p.

For children give but half, or a third part, more or less according to their
age.

For the Reins and Bladder:
THe Nephritic Pills, cleanses the Reins and Bladder of sand and gravel that
generates the stone, opens the Urinary passages and frees them from slimy, or
any gross matter that obstructs the Uriters, they provoke Urine, cool the
Reins, prevents the stone, helps the Strangury and suppression of Urine.

Take them 2 or 3 mornings in a week fasting, (at any time of the year, when
occasion requires) an hour after drink a good draught of White Wine and Ale,
then follow your business; they purge not by stool, but by Urine only.

The Dose is 5 pills: for 14 years 3 pills.

The Roborating Pills, are very good to strengthen a weak back in man or woman,
to stay the whites, helps the retentive faculty of the Bowels and natural
parts, strengthens the Old age and weak persons.

Take them two or three mornings in a week, in bed early, sleep after them,
when you rise drink a glass of Mulkadine, and follow your business.

The Dose is 5 pills: for 14 years, 3 pills.

The Strengthening Plaster is of excellent use in all strains and weakness of
the back, removes pain and Aches there, gives strength to the Spine bone, and
knits a loose back; it likewise helps all tumors, pain, and stiffnesse in any
part, by falls, blows, hard labor or cold; it helps all Weakness, Spraines,
and Wrenches of any joint, strengthens the Ligaments, comforts the Sinews, and
draws out superfluous moisture that relaxeth any part, or causes pain, and
defends it from a flux of humors.

Apply it to the grieved part, and let it stick on three or four weeks, it will
restore and help you of your infirmity.

For the Genitall Parts.
THe Restringent Powder, stays a Gonorrhaea or runnig of the Reins, so
called; mitigates and asswageth pain that proceeds from any sharp or hot humor
in the Privities of man or woman; heales any Exulceration there, takes away any
itching or troublesome heat, cooles much, and restraines effectually the
debility and weakness of the spermatick vessels.

Use it thus: take a pint of Plantane water, half a pint of White wine, one
paper of this powder, mix them well, by shaking it together in a bottle; then
with a Syringe inject it into the privy part morning and night, you will find
great help and ease.

But if the Gonorrhaea be virulent, and proceed from the Pox; then it is
requisite also that you take the following Pills to purge and cleanse your body
from that Malignity and virulency wherewith the humors are tainted and
vitiated. For if you stop the Gonorrhaea and do not also take away the impurity
of the Disease, you retain it in the body to your prejudice.

The Antivenereall Pills, are a specific Remedy against the French Pox to
cleanse and purify the body from any infection and putrid matter arising from
thence; they purge downward, all foulness of the body, and by a peculiar
propriety attract the venom of that Disease.

The full Dose is 4 pills: for tender and weak persons 3 pills is sufficient.

Take them 5 or six times every third or fourth day, according as you find the
ability of your body, and the operation, observing the directions for purging
in the 16, 17, 18, pages of this Book.

After the first Dose of Pills, if you be young and sanguine, or of a hot
constitution, or so acquired by this Disease, then let a a Vein be opened in
the arm, and take blood at the discretion of your Surgeon.

After purging you may sweat 3 or 4 times with the Sudorfiic Pills to purify
the blood, see page 43.

The Expulsive powder, is an approved help for the safe delivery of Women in
labor when all other means have failed, giving strength both to the Woman and
Child, and speedily procures the birth by Gods help.

Give it in a spoonful of Cinnamon water, at the due time for delivery, and no
time else.

The Dose is one paper.

The Hysterical Powder, is a specific remedy against fits of the Mother, very
soon abates their violence, disperseth the Vapors, shortens the fit, and
reduces the Patient to her sense and reason.

Give it once or twice that day you have them, in half a pint of Spring water
cold.

For prevention take it once in a fortnight or 3 weeks, in the morning fasting.

The Dose is one paper.

The Femenine Pills, cleanses and opens all obstructions of the Matrix, cures
the green Sickness, effectually, and restores the complexion, prevents fits of
the Mother, in those that are subject to it, and disperseth the vapors; brings
the terms into their right order according to the course of Nature, and
purges women excellently.

Take them 3 or 4 times observing directions for purging in the 16 17, 18 p^ges
of this book

The full Dose is 6 pills: for 15 years: 5 pills, or but 4, if she be a tender
body and easy to operate.

The Women's Preservative; is an excellent Powder, very successeful and of great
use to prevent miscarrying in Women with chi^de: also very Cordial and
strengthening for weak women.

Take it once or twice in a week fasting, in a glass of Mu^kadell; you may
forbear taking the last month of your time.

The Dose is one pap^r.

Bu^ beware of Dancing, stretching, leaping, carrying of any weighty thing,
riding, sudden motion, fear, or grief straight lacing, surfeiting and ill diet
which break out into Fluxes, and are very d^ngerous for woman in this condition.

For the Joints.
THe Arthritic P^lls are a peculiar approved Remedy for the Gout, in the Feet,
Knees, Hip, or Hands; whether fixed in one joint, or erratick from place to
place: they Attract the Peccant humor from the Joints, and Evacuates it by
seige; they also purge ou^ Phlegmatic, Serous, and Choleric humors, and clen^e
the body well.

The Dose is 4 pills for man or woman: tender and weak bodies may take 3:
observe the general directions for purging in the 16, 17 18 pages.

For prevention, take them 2 or 3 days in the middle of March, and at the
beginning of September; if blood abounds open a vein to abate it: but if the
pain has seized you already, and that violently, open a vein to prevent a
Fever, to retract the current of humors, and to abate the fierceness of it:
if pain be in the right Leg, open a vein in the right arm; if in the left Leg,
open a vein in the left arm; if pain be in the right arm, open a vein in the
left arm, and so the contrary: take blood according to age, strengh, plenitude,
and greatness of ye cause, as the skilful Chirurgions sees fit: In the inte^im
make use of the C^mphire powder to assuage pain, as it is directed in the 45
page. After bleeding, the day following take the pills, and the next night
after.

Miscellaneous and General Medicines.
THe Catholic Pil's purge Choler, Phlegm and Melancholy from all parts of the
body, car^i^s away all superfluous and putrid humors that seetle or fix in any
part to breed diseases: they prevent Fevers, Agues, Fluxes, breakings out upon
the skin, Itch, Imp^st^umes; takes away all filthy matter that engender worms,
and keeps the body cl^an and pure.

Take them 2 or 3 days Spring and Autumn, or at other temperate seasons if
occasion require; ob erving the dir^ctions for purging in the 16, 17, 18 pages
of this book.

The full Dose is 4 pills: for 14 years old, or tender bodies 3 pills: for 7
years 1 pill.

The Aperitive Powder very effectually opens all obstructions of the Liver,
Spleen, Guts, Panc^eas, Mesentery and Matr^x, and is very useful and necess^ry
in ^he cures of Hypo^hondriae Melancholy, Scurvy, Dropsies, Cholic, tumors or
p^in^s in the Liver and Spleen, the Gr^en-sickness especially, and all Dis^ases
arising from obstructions.

Take it fasting in Rhenish, wormwood, or plain White Wine, 2 or 3 mornings
together, before purging; and also the inte^mitting days between purging, and
stir about or use exercise after: it prepares and opens the body excellently,
wh^reby your purging Physic will operate more effectually for your purpose and
expedite your business.

The Dose is one paper: for 14 years 3 parts of a Paper.

The Sudorific Pills, procures sweat excellently and purifies the blood, dries
up rhumes and watery humors abounding; diverts distillations from the Lungs and
other parts; are a great preservative against the running gout, or fixed;
expels all putrid humors by transpiration; drives out all colds newly taken, or
old; helps old aches; prevents and cures agues, fevers, small pox, measels and
all Diseases generated of putrefaction, and is the most pleasant and easy
Medicine you can desire for sweating.

You may take them two or three mornings fasting in bed covered warm; a quarter
of an hour after, drink a good draught of Rosemary posset; or Lemmon posset if
you be Feverish, and sweat 2 hours; then take off clothes by degrees and cool
carefully, and beware of cold afterward, the Pores of the body being open.

The full Dose is 4 pills: for 14 year, 3 pills: for 9 years 2 pills.

The Haematic Powder, restraines immoderate flowing of the terms, and stays
all issues of blood, whether by Stool, Urine, Vomiting, or Spitting.

Take it in a draught of Veriuce posset cold, morning and evening, and if the
party be young or Sanguine, take away a little blood at the Arm, by a discreet
Surgeon to divert the course; it is safe and proper.

The full Dose is one Paper: for 15 years old, 3 parts of it.

The Purgative Electuary is a general purge that clean seth all parts, and
takes away both Choler, Phlegm, and Melancholy; very useful for those which
cannot take Pills, or have a costive and dry body.

Take it in the morning early, on a knifes point; or mix it with posset drink
and make a potion if you please; observing directions for purging in the 16,
17, 18, pages of this Book.

The full Dose is the whole Medicine: for 14 years old, 3 parts of it: for ten
years, half: for 7 years a third part.

The Issue Plasters, attracts and draws superfluous and corrupt humors from all
parts of the body to the place: causes your issue to run, and brings away
filthy matter, which produced and inclined you to many Diseases and distempers;
they keep your issue cool and prevent inflammation: very commodious in Journeyes
or Voyages, one of them will last a month in wearing; wipe it and turn the
otherside to the place every dressing, and lay a paper upon it.

The Febrifick Antidote, resist all Agues or intermitting Fevers, changes the
constitution and distemper of the blood, checks the Fermentation and Ebullition
of it, mitigates and abates the Rigor of the Fits, alters the course of the
Disease, and by degrees quite eradicates it.

Mix it with a little juce of Lemmon in a spoon, and take it every fit day, 2
hours before the fit comes, and go to bed presently; lie to sweat, and sleep if
it does so dispose you: Lemmon posset, you may drink in your hot fit freely.

The full dose is a third part of the Medicine: for 14 years a fourth part: for
8 years old a dram.

Moreover, because these Fitts are accommanied with impurity and foulness of
the Body, it is requisite there be some Evacuation made to cleanse the Stomach
and parts adjacent; else from thence there will be a continual supply of Crude
and Corrupt Nutriment sent into the Veins, whereby the Mass of blood shall
never be Depurated, and so remain under the same Distemper a long time, or
Degenerate into some other as bad or worse, when these Fitts of Febrific
Fermentation cease: therefore if you have a fullness at the stomach, nauseating
or inclination to Vomit in your fits, then forbear this Antidote once, and 2
hours before you expect the next Fit, take the Emetic Infusion to vomit,
observing the same Order as is directed in the 18, 19 pages of this book for
Vomiting.

Those days you have no Fit, to take a Clyster is very proper and beneficall,
to cleanse and carry away the Morbific Cause: the Clyster Electuary is for your
purpose, see page 39.

If you refuse Clysters, take the Catholic Pil's, page 43.

The Camphire Powder, cures all Tettars, Ringwormes, Scabs, Itch, Frettings and
Gallings of the Skin, Choleric Pushes and Pimples in any part of the Body: it
asswageth all Pains of the Gout in the Hands, Feet or Knees, is a good
preservative to defend the Joints from the Reception of any such Humor, by
knitting, binding, and strenthening them: it Repells a Flux of Humors
resorting to an infirm, depending or relax part: it cooles and abates all
outward inflammations, represseth tumors and mitigates their pain; it hardens
tender and sweating sent and makes them bold upon the stones; kills
chil-bla^es, and eases pains of the feet mol^st^d with sharp pricking humors,
is very good for old Ulcers and sores, by cooling, drying and healing.

To be used thus: Put the powder into a pint and half of Smiths water, and
boil it to a pint, and with this Liquor (milk warm) bath the places aff^cted
twice a day, morning and ^ight

But if you intend it for Pimples in the face, then boil it in White wine.

This Powder will be damp and moist sometimes, it is the nature of it, and not
the worse.

The Cosmetick Water is of an abstersive faculty to cleanse, purify, and thin
the skin, in a short time it alters a dull muddy complexion and makes it bright
and clear: it takes away Sun-burning, Morphew spots and Freckles, and puts a
lively color into the face, without any future prejudice to the skin, as
Mercurian waters and such like are wont.

Use it thus; shake the Bottle well, then wet a fine cloth in it and wipe your
face over (not your eyes) every morning: and at night when you go to bed, wipe
your face with a cloth dipped in milk, thus doing, you shall have the desired
effect.

FINIS.
LONDON, Prin^^d by (...) and are to be sold by Samuel Thomson Stationer, at
the Bishops head in St. Paul's Churchyard.

Robert Horn Stationer, at the Turks Head in Cornhill.

Thomas Basset Stationer, under St. Dunstons Church in Fleet Street.

George Joyce, at the sign of the Seal in Westminster Hall.

Where also you may have the Medicines.


