THE Parson's COUNSELOR, WITH THE LAW OF TITHES or TITHING. In Two BOOKS:

The First shows, the Order every Parson, Vicar, etc. ought to observe in
obtaining a Spiritual Preferment, and what Duties are incumbent upon him after
the taking the same, and many other things, necessary for every CLERGYMAN to
know and observe.

The Second shows in what manner all Sorts of Tithes, Offerings, Mortuaries and
other Church-Duties are to be paid, as well in LONDON as else where, and as
well by the Canon as Common and Statute Laws, and in what Courts and manner
they may be recovered, what Charges they are subject to, and many other things
concerning the same, necessary for CLERGYMEN and all others to know.

Written by Sir SIMON DEGGE Knight.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Twyford in Vine-Court Middle Temple. MDCLXXVI.

I do Allow the Printing of this Book

Fra. North.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND RIGHT REVEREND FATHER in GOD THOMAS, LORD BISHOP
OF Lichfield and Coventry.
My Lord,
I Thought to have sent this Trifle into the World without Patron, or Authors
Name to it, but it is well known, how scandalous it is to that Child, whose
Parent is ashamed to own it; I therefore resolved to run the Censure of a
Critical World, and then observing how ancient Dedications have been both by
Greek and Latin Authors, and that they are continued to this day throughout
all Christendom, I resolved not to be singular: and then considering, that this
little Undertaking was performed at the Request of some reverend Clergymen of
Your Lordships Diocese, and that it was nursed up to what it is now presented
to your Lordship there likewise, I conceived it could not challenge the
Patronage of any other more properly than of Your Lordship; and therefore such
as it is, I here humbly present it to Your Lordship: My Lord, at first I
designed no more but the Second Part of what it now is, but observing Your
Lordships diligent and great care at Your Lordships Primary Visitation at Derby
against Simony, Dilapidations and Nonresidence, the three great Pests in the
Church, I added three Chapters upon those Subjects, and after adding one thing
after another, it came to make a distinct Part of this Work alone. My Lord,
Your Lordship has had many Honorable and Worthy Predecessors, and I cannot
forbear to mention to Your Lordship, Your immediate Predecessor my Lord Bishop
Hacket, with what indefatigable Industry did he repair, or rather re-edifie the
Church at Lichfield, which he happily lived to finish, a Work could hardly have
been performed by any other; how circumspectly, prudently and diligently did he
govern his Church, never absenting himself, unless in his Majesty's and
Countrey's Service; how constantly did he visit and preach through his Diocese?
A Religious Pattern for all his Clergy, what great Insight had he both in the
Civil, Canon and Common Laws, that related to the Church Government? How often
did he sit in his Consistory to see Justice done? Nay, what did he neglect that
became a Worthy Prelate to do? and for his deep and profound Learning in his
Function certainly few exceeded him, if I have any Judgment. My Lord, I have
observed three things perpetuate men's memory to Posterity, Children, Learned
Writings and public and eminent Buildings, he was fortunate in them all; he
has left a Worthy Son to inherit his Name, Virtue, and Temporal Estate; he has
left many Learned Works for the benefit of Posterity, whereof some are already
made public, and he has made himself no less eminent by his public Buildings,
witness his Cathedral Church at Lichfield and Trinity College in Cambridge,
where he had his Education; besides many other Works of Piety and Charity in
those few years he was Bishop. My Lord, God has not yet blessed you with
Children, but may in good time to preserve Your Name, and I have heard Your
Lordship intends some eminent Works for the Public; and that Your Lordship
intends to go on, where Your Predecessor left, in Building a Palace for Your
self and Successors, I have great reason to believe, having heard Your Lordship
so often declare You would do it, and having laid Your hand to the Plow in
preparing some Materials toward it, I know You will not look back; Your
Lordship is a great Lover of Hospitality, Titus 1.8.
which can never be so splendid as in a Palace of Your own Building: And hereby
Your Lordship will make Your self as eminent in the next Age, as Your Worthy
Predecessor is in the present, than which nothing can be greater satisfaction
to all, but chiefly to

My Honored good Lord, Your Lordships most dutiful Son, and most obedient
Servant S. Degge.

To the Courteous Reader.
IT is observed in the second part of Sir Edward Cokes Reports in the Bishop of
Winchesters case, Co. 2.44. b.
that there were two great persecutions of the Christian Religion, the one
under Dioclesian, the other under Julian the Apostate. The first by murdering
the Priests that by their preaching advanced the Christian Religion, the latter
by spoiling the Church of its Revenues: the former, contrary to expectation
advanced, and not suppressed Religion: for it has proved in all Ages that
sanguis martyrum est semen Ecclesiae, for the patient suffering of so many
Martyrs of the Primitive Christians gave the World a sufficient Testimony that
those poor Christians had some extraordinary Divine assistance to undergo with
patience so much cruelty that no others durst put themselves to the trial of.
But the taking away the revenues of the Church Martyred the Priesthood it self,
and struck at the foundation; for when People saw there was nothing left but
persecutions, no sustenance for those that Ministered at the Altar, it
discouraged them to breed their Children up to a study that advanced them to
nothing but danger, which introduced great ignorance of the true Knowledge of
God and Religion, so that as one killed the Priests, the other destroyed the
very Priesthood it self. And though the Apostle St. 2 Cor. 11.9.
Paul got his Living by his labor, that he might not become burthensom to his
Proselytes; 2 Cor. 11, 12, 14, 16. Mat. 10.10. 1 Timothy 5.18.
yet the same Apostle tells us that the Labourer is worthy of his hire, and
that by the Law of Moses the Ox was not to be muzled that treads forth the
Corn; and by way of expostulation in another place says, 2 Cor. 9.7, 9, 10.
who goes on warfare at his own charge? who plants a Vineyard and eats not of
the fruit thereof? and who feeds a Flock and eats not of the milk thereof? for
he that ploweth should plow in hope, and he that thrasheth should be partaker
of his hope. And again, says he, is it a great thing that those that sow to you
Spiritual things should reap carnal? And do you not know (says the same
Apostle) that they that Minister about holy things live of the things of the
Temple, and that they that wait at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar; for
so has the Lord ordained, that they that preach the Gospel, should live of the
Gospel; what effect this Doctrine wrought amongst the Primitive Christians, you
may read in the fourth Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, where it is said,
that as many as were possessors of Houses or Lands sold them, and brought the
prices of things that were sold, and laid them down at the Apostles feet; and
distribution was made to every man according as he had need. But the Christians
of this present Age are so far from selling their Houses and Lands, and laying
the price at the Apostles feet, that they will rather detain that from the
Clergy, which by Law and right is due to them. But, certainly, had the
sincerity of the Primitive Christians continued, I should never have needed to
have set pen to the paper upon this subject I am now about, which is, the Law
of Tithes or Tithing; a duty established by the Laws of this, as of other
Nations, for the maintenance of the secular Clergy, and for their sake it is
that I have undertaken this work. There was a Tithing Table published many
years ago By a Bachelor of Laws; wherein he has learnedly set forth the manner
of Tithing by the Canon and Ecclesiastical Laws; but those Laws and the Common
Laws of this Realm differing in many things wherein the Common Law is to be
preferred; that Tithing Table has often led both Parson and Parishioners into
many errors, besides the several discharges from payment of Tithes, either
absolutely, or sub modo, of diverse Lands in England, by the Statutes or Common
Laws makes great alteration here from the Canon Laws, to rectify which, and,
as near as may be, to reconcile the Canon and Common Laws, I did by the
persuasion of some Reverend Divines first make some Animadversions upon that
Tithing Table, but when I had done that, considering there were many more
things in relation to Tithing, than I could conveniently apply to that Text
concerning Prescriptions, Customs, Compositions, and other privileges, besides
the Laws concerning Offerings, Mortuaries, and other Church duties fit for all
men to know, as well Lay as Clergy: I adventured upon this larger work, which I
the rather did because I do not find any other that has published any complete
work in this kind, or to reconcile the Common and Canon Laws, that kind of
learning lying dispersed in our Law Books, I have therefore in favor of the
Parsons and Vicars, taken up a former resolution, and adventured to expose my
self to the public censure. And though I cannot promise any perfection in this
work, yet I dare presume to say it is the most perfect work of this nature yet
extant; though I can pretend to nothing of it but the errors and mistakes,
which I will be thankful to any body that will friendly correct, that I may
make it more exact in a second Edition if I have encouragement. The hindrance
of conversing with the learned, by reason of my confinement to the Country, and
public Libraries, has hindered me of some helps I might have had thereby.
Perhaps it may not be so acceptable to those in whose favor I have writ it,
because it comes from the pen of one who professes himself a common Lawyer. But
in my Judgment, in this Nation, wherein the common Laws and customs of the
Country prevail against the Canon and Ecclesiastical Laws; this subject is not
altogether improper, if not most proper for a common Lawyer. And truly I have
through this discourse dealt with as impartial an hand as the matter would
admit. And though the Clergy may think it to their prejudice, that I have at
large set forth the several discharges by which lands are freed from the
payment of Tithes; yet in that I have given them a clear light, which lands
cannot be so privileged, and what Prescriptions and modus decimandi is not
good, being well assured that there are more Lands at this day escape payment
of Tithes upon pretense of some privilege, to which they have no Right, than
those that pay Tithes, and might legally be discharged; But when I have done my
best endeavor to serve the Reverend Clergy, I cannot give them Encouragement
to depend upon their own Judgments, grounded upon any thing here writ; for
though this may suffice to give them some light, what shall be due to them; yet
I cannot hope by any thing I can write, to make them complete Lawyers; for many
Quaere's will arise, that no foresight of mine could give an Answer to: but
this benefit I hope they will receive by my labors, that they may put their
Case, and make their doubts known more pertinently to the learned. I had no
sooner finished this little Tract concerning Tithes, but I considered there
were many other things almost as useful for a Clergyman to know, as the Law of
Tithes: And though Mr. Hughes of Graves-Inn many years since published a
learned Tract, which he entitled the Parson's Law; yet there are many more
things necessary for a Clergyman to know, that are there only briefly, or not
at all, touched upon, and of such force that they must either be performed and
observed to make a man a complete Parson, or to make him none, though never so
exactly instituted and inducted, if omitted. I have therefore in the first
place before I come to the Law of Tithes showed, what Simony is, and what
danger those run themselves into, that are guilty of it, what things every
Parson, Vicar, etc. is to do before, at, and after, his Institution and
Induction, to make him a complete Parson, etc. what Dilapidations are, and how
punishable, what privileges the Clergy have at this day by the Laws of
England, what charges and payments their Tithes and Church Livings are subject
unto, what Causes of Deprivation have been allowed of by the Laws of England,
what Leases they may take or set, and what Statutes they may fall in danger of;
and of pluralities, and who is qualified to have them, and in what manner to be
accepted, Non-residence and many other things necessary for every Clergyman to
know: I have divided the whole into Two Books, and them again into several
Chapters and Paragraphs, and added a short Table for the more ready finding of
any thing in either; I have likewise added a List or Catalogue of all the
Abbeys and Priories, that were valued in the Kings Books at 200 l. per annum,
or upwards, and which were dissolved by the Statute of 31 H. 8. the Lands of
which can only pretend to any privilege to be discharged of the payment of
Tithes; in which I have rather chosen to write after Mr. Dugdale, being a sure
Author, than Mr. Speed, in whom I have observed many Mistakes; I must beg the
Readers Patience to correct the Mistakes of the Printer (which are too many by
reason of my absence from the Press) by the Errata annexed, and for my own I
shall take it kindly from any body, that will in a friendly manner inform me of
them; for Humanum est errare, and though I may have cause to be ashamed of
them, yet I will never be ashamed to amend.

Vale.
The Contents.
The Contents of the several Chapters contained in the first part of this Book,
Entitled the Parsons Counselor.
CHAP. Who may be a Parson.
1. shows, who may, or may not be a complete Parson, Vicar, etc. Chap. How he
must proceed in taking a Living.
2. shows, how one that is a Person fitly qualified to be a Parson, Vicar,
etc. ought to proceed in the obtaining and accepting of the same. Chap. Jure
Patronatus.
3. shows, in what cases it is necessary for the Bishop to have a jure
patronatus, and how to proceed in the same, and what is the force and effect
thereof. Chap. Pluralities.
4. shows, how the Law stood concerning pluralities before the Stat. of 21 H.
8. who are qualified within that Law to have pluralities, and how they ought to
behave themselves in taking the second Livings, so that the first may not be
made void. Chap. Simony.
5. shows, what Simony is, and who shall be said to be guilty of it, and what
are the dangers ensuing thereupon. Chap. What he is to do, at before and after
institution and induction.
6. shows, what one is to do before and at institution, and after induction, to
make himself a complete Parson. Chap. Non-residence.
7. shows, what is required further of Parsons, etc. after induction, and what
non-residence is, and the dangers incurred thereby, and what matters will
excuse the same. Chap. 8. shows, Dilapidations.
what shall be said to be dilapidations, and how the same is remedied and
punished. Chap. 9. shows, for what cause a Parson, Deprivation.
Vicar, etc. may be deprived, according to the rules of the Common Laws. Chap.
10. shows, what Leases a Parson, Leases.
Vicar, etc. may make of his Glebe Tithes, and what Farms he may, or may not
take, Farms.
and within the danger of what other Statutes they may fall. Chap. 11. shows,
Privileges of the Clergy.
what Privileges are allowed to the Clergy in Holy Orders by the Statute and
Common Laws of this Realm.
The Contents of the several Chapters contained in the second part of this
Book, Entitled the Law of Tithes, or Tithing.
CHAP. 1. shows, what Tithes are, Quid, quot^ plex, and quo modo debet.
the several sorts and kinds thereof, and how the same become due. Chap. 2.
shows, By whom, and to whom due.
by whom and to whom Tithes ought to be paid. Chap. 3. shows, What things are
Tithable. Corn, Hay, etc.
of what things Tithes are due to be paid, and in what manner the Tithes of
Corn, Hay, etc. are to be paid. Chap. 4. shows, Wood.
where and in what cases the Tithes of wood ought to be paid. Chap. 5. shows,
Herbage.
where Tithes are due for Herbage or Agistment of Cattle, and who is to pay the
same. Chap. Calves, Milk, Cheese, Wool, Lambs, Pigs, etc. Seeds, Fruit, Mast,
Bees, Honey. things ferae naturae.
6. shows, where and in what manner the Tithes of Calves, Milk, Cheese, Wool,
Lambs, Pigs, etc. are payable. Chap. 7. shows, in what manner the Tithes of
Seeds, Fruit, Mast Bees, etc. are to be paid Chap. 8. shows, where and in what
manner the Tithes of Pigeons, Conyes, Fish, Deer, and other Birds and Beasts
ferae naturae, are Tithable. Chap. Mills.
9. shows, of what nature the Tithes of Mills are, and in what cases payable.
Chap. Personal Tithes.
10. Treats of the Tithes of Hawking, Hunting, Fishing, Fowling, etc. and other
personal Tithes. Chap. Domestic Birds.
11. Treats of the Tithes of Ducks, Geese, Swans, Turkeys, and other domestic
Fowls and Birds. Chap. Of what things Tithes are not payable.
12. shows, of what things Tithes are not due by the Common Laws of this Realm.
Chap. Customs.
13. shows, what force Customs have as well in the form and manner of Tithing,
as in the discharging the payment thereof, and the difference between Custom
and Prescription. Chap. Interest in the Lands.
14. shows, what Privileges the Parson, Vicar, etc. have in the Grounds where
the Tithes arise, for the drying, making, and carrying away the same. Chap. To
what charge subject.
15. shows, to what charges the Glebe and Tithes, are subject and liable. Chap.
Modus decimandi.
16. shows, how far Prescription will prevail in the manner of Tithing, and in
what Cases a modus decimandi will bind the Parson, etc. Chap. 17. shows, How to
be destroyed.
how a modus decimandi may be destroyed. Chap. 18. shows, by what conveyances,
How to be conveyed.
and by what names Tithes may be granted, demised, etc. and what Demises and
Leases made by Parsons, Vicars, and other Ecclesiastics, etc. are good. Of
Leases.
Chap. 19. shows, Barren Ground.
what barren Lands are freed from payment of Tithes within the Statute of 2 E.
6. Chap. 20. shows, Real Compositions.
what a Real composition is, and in what cases Lands shall be freed from the
payment of Tithes thereby. Chap. 21. shows, Monastery Lands.
what Monastery Lands are, or may be freed from the payment of Tithes. Chap.
22. shows, what personal Tithes are, Personal Tithes.
and in what cases due and payable. Chap. 23. shows, what Oblations, Offerings,
Oblations.
etc. are, and where due and payable. Chap. 24. shows, what Mortuaries are,
Mortuaries.
and in what cases they are due and payable. Chap. 25. shows, London.
how Tithes are to be paid in London, and several resolutions upon the Statute,
made for the payment thereof. Chap. 26. shows, in what Courts, How recovereble.
and in what manner Tithes may be sued for, and in what Cases Prohibitions lie
for the staying of Suits for Tithes in the Ecclesiastical Courts, and how to
proceed therein. Prohibitions.

Note that in my references to printed Books in this Treatise, Directions in
the Marginal references.
I for the most part refer to the page and part of the page where the matter is
to be found in this manner, if the matter be at the upper end of the page I
mark it with three pricks thus if in the middle thus.. if at the lower part
thus and where the Book is numbered by Fol. I add the A. or B. side, as it
happens.

THE TABLE.
A
ACceptance of Rent, where it shall affirm a Lease 117. not by Parson, Vicar or
Prebend 118. whereby the acceptance of Fealty by a Parson shall bind 118. a
Bishop accepts the rent upon a Lease for Life of Tithes 118. upon a Lease for
years of Tithes, ibid. Admission in what manner to be made 6. not to be done
hastily ibid. Atfermathes where Tithe is due of them, 155. Agistment vide
Herbage. Alternagium quid 145. Annates quoth. vide First Fruits.
B.
Barren Lands in what Cases free from the payment of Tithes, 221. Bees what
Tithe is due for them, 177. Bishop what time he has to examine a Clerk 5 and
6. admits a Clerk before the Church becomes litigious, 13. not bound by a
Verdict in a Jure Patronatus, 14. an Action of the Case lies against him, if he
admit against the verdict in a Jure patronatus 14. v. Dilapidations and
non-residence: Coparceners present severally, 17. Tenants in Common or
Joyntenants 18.
C.
Canons against Common Law void, 41. Calves, Wool, Lamb, Milk, Pigs, etc. how
to be paid 169. The Canon ibid. Wool and Lamb how to be paid 170, etc. Milk and
Cheese 173. sheep not kept thirty days 174. when Calves, etc. are to be paid
175. several men's sheep deposture together 176. of Wool, Locks, Beltings,
Neckings, and of sheep that die of the rot, 176. Charges to what Charges Tithes
and Glebe Lands are subject, and to what not, 195. Concubines allowed Priests
and other religious Persons, and in what, manner. 124. vid. Incontinenc.
Confirmation of Bishops Leases, where necessary, 103. where he has two
Chapters, where good, ibid. Lease confirmed before sealing, 104. after the
death of the Bishop, ibid. makes several concurrent Leases, and last first
confirmed 104. grant all confirmed before the Inrollment 104. who is to confirm
Leases, where requisite 105, etc. Lease Parson confirmed by the Bishop being
Patron alone 106. Lease before Induction confirmed, it is void 106.
Confirmation for part of the Lands, or term and how, ibid. Parsons Lease is
confirmed and then deprived, 107. the Bishop and Husband of the Patroness
confirms quod operatur, 107. Tenant in tail Patron confirms ibid. Usurper
confirms 107. Patron grants the next avoidance, and then confirms 107. Parson
Leases to his Patron, Bishop confirms and Patron assigns, 107. a Bishop Patron
confirms without Dean and Chapter, quoth operatur 108. a Parson Leases before 13
Eliz. confirmed after 108. a Prebend leases and recites that it is done by the
Consent of the Bishop, who is witness 108. Lessee grants a rentcharge, which
is confirmed 116. a verdict and judgment will not confirm such Grant, where the
Bishop is prayed, made, 116. Composition v. Real Composition. Conveyances, by
what Conveyances Tithes may be past, 219. Corn the Tithes thereof how to be
paid 154. of Rakings 155. of green Corn cut for the Beasts of the Plow, 156.
Custom of what force in Tithing 185.189. of not Tithing, where good 186. to
make things not Tithable to be Tithable 187. the difference between it and
Prescription, ibid. how far the Canonists allows of Custom 188.
D.
Deprivation and Deposition quid 83. where determinable ibid. cause of
Deprivation by Waste or Dilapidation 84. for Simony ibid. for nonconformity
84. for not reading the Common Prayers within two months after Induction 85. to
maintain any Doctrine against the 39 Articles is cause of Depr. 85. for what
Crimes, Ecclesiastical or Civil, ibid. for unworthiness 86. for disobedience to
the Ordinary 86. for taking a second Living 86. for a Priest to marry was Cause
86. Deprivation ipso facto quid 87. Debt sur 2 E. 6. by whom, and against whom,
it lies 295. the Form of the Declaration 295. what Pleas lie in it 297. what
Evidence is good 298. what Verdict 301. what Judge shall begiven therein 301.
Dignities quoth. 53. Dilapidations quoth 74. a Canon against them 75, what relief
against them 75. cause of Deprivation in a Bishop, Parson, etc. 77. a
Prohibition to forbid them 77. an Act of Parliament against fraudulent
Conveyances to avoid the Remedy 78. an Action of the Case lies at Law for them
by the Custom of England 79. and the form ibid. Damages recovered how to be
bestowed 80. Trees in Churchyards not to be cut 80.
E.
Evesque vid. Bishop. Exchequer has Jurisdiction of Tithes 302.
F.
Farms not to be taken by Spiritual men 119. but in particular cases ibid. may
not Farm another Parsonage ibid. nor keep a Tan-house or Brew house 119. Ferae
naturae where Tithes shall be paid of birds and beasts ferae naturae 178. Fees
what for Institution and Induction by the Canon Law 58. First fruits quoth 195.
why Vicarages are higher charged than Parsonages 198. Fishing vid. Ferae
naturae. Fowl domestic what Tithes shall be paid. 183. Fowling vid. Hawking.
Fruit vid. Seeds,
H.
Hay how to be paid 155. in Orchards, 156. of Fodder in the Fens, ibid. Grass
cut in Meadows for beasts of the Plow 156. of Head. lands, Balks, etc. 155.
Herbage the Canon 165. who shall pay it 166. not for Saddle Horses ibid. nor of
beasts bred for the Plow or Pail. ibid. nor for beasts ferae naturae 167. a
Pasture eaten with mixed cattle ibid. with Beasts of the Plow ibid. of what
cattle herbage is due. 168. Hunting, hawking, fishing fowling 182.
I.
Incontinence vid. Concubines, how punishable in the Clergy 121 and 126.
Indicavit lay at Common Law, and in what cases 288. in what cases it lies at
this day 289. not till after Libel 289. the Form of the Writ altered ibid. it
lies of offerings 290. by whom ibid. the manner of Proceeding therein 291.
Induction how to be made 6. who may make it ibid. what is to be done after
Induction 7. vid. Fees. Institution in what manner made 6. may be made out of
the Diocese, ibid. what is effected thereby 7. Jure Patronatus where necessary
11. whether the Bishop be bound to sue it at his peril 12. it lies though the
Church be not litigious 13. the manner of Proceeding therein 14.15. how the
Verdict is to be taken 16. the force thereof 17. the Jury refuses to give a
verdict quoth fieri 17. who may hold it 15. the Bishop himself may 18. if the
Commissioners neglect their duty quoth fieri 18. verdict in it does not bind ibid.
at whose Gosts to be sued 12. Jurisdiction vide Recovery of the Spiritual Court
in Simony 56. in Deprivation 83. Deposition and Resignation 87.
K.
King, if a Simonist dies possessed, if he lose the Presentation 54. may present
upon a Simoniacal Contract, though he cannot be guilty of it 54.
L
Lambs vide Calves. Lapse incurs and Patron presents 8. if the Bishop may let
the Church lapse, where it is litigious 12. where it shall lapse by the taking
of a second living 21. from what time the 6 months shall commence 7. and how
accounted ibid. Leases what leases may be made by Clergymen 89. at common Law
90. by the Stat of 32 H. 8. ib. what qualities such leases must have 92. they
must be in Writing indented 92. must commence from the making ibid. the old
lease must expire within a year 92. there must not be a double lease ibid. what
things may be leased ibid. 96, not an Advowson 116. lands usually let 92. the
usual rent must be reserved 93. must not be without Impeachment of waste 93.
Parsons and Vicars excepted in 32 H. 8.94. lease for 99 years, if three lives
live so long, good ibid. Bishops are restrained by 1 Eliz. 94. where such
leases shall be only voidable 95.1 Eliz. is a private Act 96. concurrent leases
by Bishops 96. but not for life, or on a lease for life 104. in what cases
Deans, Prehends, etc. are restrained by 13 Eliz. 97. Parsons and Vicars
restrained by it 98. where upon a concurrent lease the former must determine
within three years 98, but not so for Bishops 99. where a Parsons lease shall
be void by non residence 99, 100, 110 whether void against himself ibid. houses
in Corporations how to be leased 100. not in reversion 101. what by Bishops and
Archbishops 103. by Deans, Prebends and Colleges where good 105. from what
time leases must commence 105. a Parson leases and resigns 112 Parson leases
which is confirmed, and then becomes non-resident 112. Bonds and Covenants for
leases where void 99. and Promises 101, 113. of Colleges and Hospitals where
good 114. where a lease shall be good a former in being 115. Surrender, enter,
sealing and delivery ibid.
L.
Litigious where a Church shall be said to be so, 11. where by a Jure
patronatus 12. where after a Jure patronatus. 12. The Bishop may admit either
Clerk without a Jure patronatus at his peril. 14. London, How Tithes are to be
paid. 256.
M.
Marriage of Priests forbid by Canons presented, and by whom, and how 122. Jo.
de Lerma. who prosecuted it taken in bed with a whore. 123. how forbidden by
the Apost. Canons. 123. made Felony to use their Wives or company. 127. after
mitigated. ibid. to affirm a Priest might Marry, made Heresy, and Treason.
128. all Laws against their Marriage repealed, and their Children legitimated.
128. that Act repealed, and after revived. ibid. Mast, vide Seed. Milk, vide
Calves. Modus vide Prescription. Monastery Lands, where freed of Tithes. 230.
how many ways they may be discharged. 231. what orders were free from payment
of Tithes. 233. in what Cases the lesser Abbeys may be free. 235. not of Lands
purchased after 1215.237. Mortuaries, what, and how and where due 251.
N.
Notice of Resignation, Deprivation, where requisite, and how to be given. 9.
10.
O.
Oblations and Offerings, what, and in what Cases due. 247. Ordinary vide
Bishops
P.
Parliament. 22. Pardon of Simony, the effect. 54. Parson, what he is to do,
at, before, and after Institution and Induction. 159. he must be a Priest ibid.
he must subscribe, and have a Certificate ibid. he must read the 39. Articles,
and how. 60. he must declare his assent and the form 60. the danger of failing
in any of these 61. they must be repeated upon taking a new Living 61. good
advice to the Parsons ibid. what age a Parson must be 64. of a Living of 30.
pounds per annum who may be 64. he must be conformable 65. when and how often he
must use the Common Prayer 65. before every Lecture 66. the penalty for using
other Forms 66. he must maintain no Doctrine Repugnant to the 39. Articles 67.
who may be a Parson. 1. 2. 3. Personal Tithes quid. and where due. 243. Piggs
vide Calves. Pluralities quid. 19. Canons against them 19. the mischief of them
20. acceptance of a second Living makes the first void 21. as to the Patron
without sentence ibid. but not as to lapse ibid. Act of Parliament against it
22. which shall be said a Living of 8 pounds per annum, etc. 23. a Parson not
qualified may have a plurality 24. who are qualified by service to have them
24. who by birth 25. who by degree ibid. he that takes a plurality must have a
Testimonial 26. how to proceed in the taking of them 27. the first void by
institution into the second 27. which Chaplains, where above the number is
retained 28. the Master dies before preferment 28. the Mistress Marries before
29. becomes a Widow again ibid. Marries under her degree ibid. what Livings and
preferments do not make a plurality 22. none has a double capacity to qualify
cap. 30. Chaplains retain per filium in vita prioris: 30. Master discharges
Chaplain after he is preferred, 30. retains a greater number than he ought,
which shall be qualified, 30. is instituted before a dispensation, 31. the King
cannot dispense with this Law 31. inducted in a second Living and does not read
the 39. Articles, and 31. a Clerk qualified is made a Bishop, his qualification
ceases, 31. plurality by union, 32. a Vicar is made Parson of the same Church.
32. two Rectories in one Church but one Curate, 32. the effect of taking the
power of dispensation from the Pope, and putting it in the Nobility, 33. the
prejudice introduced, 19. how many qualifications there are in England, 33. in
Margin of what Livings at first ibid. Pope, several Acts of Parliament to
restrain his usurpations, 21. and 22. a damnable Custom alleged to be in his
Court of Rome to exact undue Fees. 22. Priests, who may be, and at what age,
64. Prescription and modus decimandi. quoth. and why Ecclesiastical Courts reject
customs and modus decimandi, 203. how they differ from customs, and justified
by reason, 204. confirmed by Parliament, 204. who may prescribe in non
decimando, 206. who in modo decimandi, 208. a modus to do two things, and one
fails, 209. for Houses, 209. which Prescriptions de modo decimandi are good
210. for Wool and Lamb ibid. for Corn, 211. for Wood, 212. for Calves and Milk
ibid. Eggs ibid. for Lands in lieu of Tithes, 213. for Head lands, Balks, etc.
213. Bees 214. Herbage ibid. for fuel, 215. for Parks ibid. to the Vicar for
Parsons Tithes 216. how it may be lost, 218. from what time 232, etc.
Presentation the form thereof, 4. how to proceed upon it, 5. what time the
Patron has to present, 8. and 9. where his Clerk is refused for just cause,
ibid. Privileges, what the Clergy have at this day in England; may not be
compelled to serve temporal Offices; 129. 133. not to appear at the Sheriffs
turn, 132. not to be arrested, in what cases upon a Statute 131. not to be
disturbed, 130. pay no toll, 132. nor pontage, murage, etc. ibid. sue in the
Spiritual Court for battery, 133. Collector of Tenthes may not disturb them
133. in criminal causes, 133. freed from purveyance 134. amerced for their
Church livings: no execution on the Goods of the Church ibid. confirmed by
several Acts of Parliament 135. Procurations quoth. where due, and how, 201.
Prohibitions granted sur modus decimandi, 279. to try the bounds 279. for
Monastery Lands ibid. quia suit for Tithes of things not Tithable 28. quia
matter triable at Law ibid. because they proceed against Law or reason 280 must
present a Copy of the libel 281. where the suggestion must be drawn up 281.
where peremtory 282. how to be prosecuted and defended 283. where grantable
after Consultation 284, 286. Consultation special ibid. must prove the
suggestion within six months 281. how they must be accounted 285. the benefit
and damage by them 287.
R.
Real Composition quoth and the effect 226. Recovery in what Courts anciently 263.
where the Spiritual Court may determine the right of Tithes 264. and where not
266. in what cases the Temporal Courts may 278. and where not 265. the
Spiritual Jurisdiction confirmed by Acts of Parliament 267, 268, 276. the
remedy where the Spiritual Court is not obeyed before Sentence 269. where after
Sentence 271. 2 E. 6. extends only to predial Tithes 275. Residence jure divino
20.68. non residence of 700 years not dispensed with in the Western Church 68.
an Act of Parliament against it 69. the end of that Law 70. who may be
nonresident 71. a Pluralist Master dies, he may not be non resident 72. Bishop
how to be compelled to residence 73. where it shall avoid the Parsons Lease 99.
where he may demise and be non resident 100. the penalty for non-residence, and
how to be recovered 102.
S.
Seeds, fruit, mast, bees, how to be Tithed 177. Scire facias in what cases the
right of Tithes is determinable therein, and how taken away 291. Simony quoth 35.
Canons against 36. the little effect of them, and the reason 37. distinction
inter Simoniace and Simoniacus ibid. Act of Parliament against 38. the Penalty
of the corrupt Patron 41. where he shall lose his Presentment 42. where the
Clerk not privy shall be disabled 42. what Contracts shall amount to Simony 45.
bonds for resignation 47. examinable in the Spiritual Court 56. etc. advise
against such bonds 51. what covenants and agreements amount to Simony 51. who
may take advantage of it 53. in giving above the Fees for Institution 55. for
resignations and exchanges 56. by corrupt giving Orders or License to preach
57. how the forfeitures are to be recovered 58. Pardon inde quoth valet 54.
Synodals, what and where due, and to whom. 202.
T.
Tenths, what, where, and to whom due, 200. and what remedy for the Successor
for arrears incurred in the time of his Predecessor. 207. Tithes quoth. and
quotuplex, 141, etc. Majores quoth. 144. Minores quoth. ibid. quo jure debito. 145.
to whom due, 146. the parochial right, when, and how it commenced, 147. who is
capable of them in pernancy, 149. due to the Rector prima facie, 150.
extra-parochial to whom due, 151. Portions in another Parish, 151. to whom due
in particular cases. 152. in the vacation, 153. if Vicars and Parsons shall pay
to each other, 153. may belong to a Chapel, 153. of what things due, 154. of
what things not due, 184. what privilege in the Lands where, etc. 191.
V.
Voidance, when a Church shall be said void by taking or giving above the usual
Fees for admittance. 55.
W.
Wood, Canon for it, 157. complaints against the Canons in Parliament ibid.
limited by Statute 158. declaration of the Common Law ibid. questioned if an
Act, and answered 159. Silva caedua quoth. 160. what shall be said great Wood,
160. of what Tithe shall be paid 161. Nurseries ibid. Toppings ibid. 162. Bark
ibid. Dotards ibid. great and small Wood mixed 163. by whom to be paid ibid.
Prescription in not Tithing where good ibid. how to be paid 164.
THE Parson's COUNSELOR.
CHAP. I. The First Chapter shows, Who may, or may not, be a Parson, Vicar, etc.
HAVING taken upon me to show how to make a complete Parson, Vicar, etc. Who
may be a Parson, or Vicar.
It will be necessary in the first place to show, who is capable of being so.
And in the first place, He that is to be a Parson must regularly be of free
Condition, competently learned, skilled in the Language the People speak or
understand, where he is to be Parson, Vicar, etc. Next he must be twenty four
years of Age, conformable to the Government and Doctrine of the Church of
England, and not criminous, outlawed, excommunicate, 5 H. 7.20. a. Co. 5.58.
a^. Lindwood c. ^os qui de non, etc. Ibid. 14 H. 7.28. b.
Jew, or miscreant, and must be free from Symony. And a man that is a Bastard
is not capable to be a Priest, nor by Consequence a Parson; but in this Case
Dispensations are frequently granted.

So a man that is not of free Condition, but a Villain, or a Miscreant, that
believes not the Truth, an Infidel, that resists the Truth, a Jew, Schismatic
or Heretic, that do not believe aright, cannot be Parsons, etc.

So if a man be criminous, Dyer 293. p 3. 38 E. 3.2. a..
that is, guilty of murder, manslaughter, perjury, forgery, or other foul
Crime, that is malum in se, cap. Imprimis and infra Lindwood.
is not capable to be a Priest, Parson, Vicar, etc. And the Bishop may refuse
to accept such Parson, if presented to a Living: and it matters not whether the
Party be convict of this Crime or not; So that the Ordinary have certain
knowledge of the truth thereof.

But for a man to be guilty of haunting of Alehouses or Taverns, Co. 5.58 a
or a player at unlawful Games, which are only malum prohibitum, and not malum
in se; it is no Impediment to his being a Parson, Vicar, etc.

So if a Man be illiterate, Dyer 293. b. p. 1, 2, 3. 254. b. p. 2. Albany verse.
Evesque Lich. M. 26, and 27 Eliz. C B. 10.20 ^3. Lucas verse. Evesque Bath. p.
3. El. C. B. per Bendloes. Stat. 14 Car. 2. cap. 14.
and cannot speak a Language his Parishioners understand, he ought not to be
admitted to be Parson of such Parish, but may be rejected by the Bishop, etc.
For it is all one not to be able to instruct his Parishioners in the truth by
reason of Ignorance, as not to be understood; for when the blind leads the
blind, both fall into the ditch.

At this day no man may be a Parson, before he be a Priest in Orders; nor can
he Stat. 13. El. cap. 12.
be a Priest before he is twenty four years of age: and so by consequence no
man can be a Parson regularly, till he be past twenty four years of Age.

And for this reason a Bishop, etc. 1 Leonard. 130.
may refuse a Clerk, because he is not in orders; but he cannot refuse him,
because he wants a Testimonial.

Neither can any man be Parson of that Church, Vide postea cap. 5.
for the obtaining whereof he has been guilty of Symony, as shall be showed
more at large in the Chapter of Symony.

And regularly all things that are causes of Deprivation, are just causes to
make a man incapable of a Living, and for which the Bishop, etc. may refuse to
admit such Clerk.

And note, Lindwood c. cum a jure inhibitum, etc.
the Son is made incapable to succeed his Father by several Canons.

CHAP. II. The Second Chapter shows, how one that is fitly qualified to be a
Parson, ought to behave himself in obtaining a Living.
A Person so qualified, as the Law requires, must, without any corrupt or
Symoniacal Contract, obtain a Presentation from the right and undoubted Patron
of the Church, whereof he designs to be Parson; which may be in this Form.

Reverendo in Christ^ patri and domino T. The Form of a Presentation.
divina permissione L. and C. Episcopo, ejusve Vicario in spiritualibus
generali, A.B. Armiger, indubitatus Patronus Ecclesiae parochialis de C. in
Comitatu D. salutem in domino sempiternam. Ad Ecclesiam de C. praedictam
vestrae diocesios, modo per mortem (if void by the death of the last
Incumbent;) but if it be by resignation, then you must say (modo per
resignationem) but if the Church be void, by the last Incumbent's being made
Bishop, or by taking a second Living, not being qualified, then you may say
(per Cessionem) or as the special matter is, or if by deprivation, then you
must say (per deprivationem) and then proceed E.F. ultimi incumbentis ibidem
jam vacantem, and ad meam donationem pleno jure spectantem, dilectum mihi in
Christo G.H. Clericum in Artibus magistrum paternitati vestrae praesento
humiliter supplicans, quatenus praefatum G. H. ad dictam Ecclesiam admittere,
cumque Rectorem ejusdem Ecclesiae instituere cum suis juribus and pertinentiis
universis, caeteraque expedire and peragere, quae vestro in hac part incumbunt
officio pastorali, dignemini cum favore. In cujus rei Testimonium his
praesentibus sigillum meum apposui: Datum primo die M. anno regni domini nostri
Caroli Secundi Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae, Regis,
fidei defensoris, etc. vicesimo octavo, Annoque domini 1675.

As soon as a Clerk has obtained such Presentation, How to proceed upon the
Presentation.
it behooves him with all convenient speed, and within six months after the
Church became void by Death, 22 H. 6.29. b
Creation or Cession of the last Incumbent, of which avoidances the Patron is
at his peril to take notice, Doct. and Student. l 2. c. 31. Dyer 327. p. 7.
Roll. 2. 364. etc.
or within six months after notice legally given to the Patron by the Ordinary
of the Church becoming void by Deprivation or Resignation tender his
Presentation to the Bishop of that Diocese within which the Church is, or to
his Vicar general, or in the vacation, What time the Bishop may take to examine
a Clerk. Li^dwood chap. Cum secundum Apostolum.
when there is no Bishop of such Diocese, to the Guardians of the
Spiritualties, to whom the Law allows a reasonable time to examine the
abilities of the Clerk; for the Ordinary is not bound as soon as a Clerk
tenders his Presentation to dispatch his business Hob 317.. 15 H. 7.7. b.. The
Canon Law allows two months; but the Common Law, which in all these Cases is
to be preferred, allows only convenient time. Admission and Institution. Co.
4.79. a; 32 H. 6.28. b.. 33 H. 6.24. a 38 H. 6.15. a.. Knowls verse. Dobbyns
Pri. Jac. C. B. Carter verse. Crofts 27 El. C.B. Who may make Induction.
; but if he be busy about the affairs of his Church, he may make the Clerk to
stay till he has done, or may appoint him a convenient time to attend him for
his approbation.

Then if the Ordinary, etc. upon the examination of the Clerk, find him fit in
all points, as above in the first Chapter is directed, then he admits him in
these words, Admitto te habilem, etc. And thereupon the Ordinary institutes him
in these words, Instituo te Rectorem Ecclesiae parochialis de C, and habere
curam animarum, and accipe curam tuam and meam. And this the Bishop may do as
well out of his Diocese as within it; for as to this matter it is not local,
but follows the Person of the Bishop withersoever he goes. When the Bishop has
instituted the Clerk, the Ordinary or, etc. makes a mandate under Seal to the
Archdeacon of the place, Callis verse. Launt. Parson Dennye's Case. H. 6. Jac.
to. 190. BR. Plow. 528. b. How Induction is to be made. Lindley verse. Dodson M.
9. Jac. C. B.
or to such other Clergy men as he pleases, to induct the Clerk. And it may be
made by the Dean and Chapter, but not by the Patron: for though by the
Institution the Church is full against all persons save the King, yet he is not
complete Parson till Induction; for by the Institution he is admitted ad
officium to pray and preach, yet he is not entitled ad beneficium, until he be
formally inducted, which may be done by the delivering of the Ring of the
Church door, or latch of the Church gate, or by delivery of a Clod or Turf, and
Twigg of the Glebe, but the most common and usual way is, and therefore the
safest, Lindwood c. Item quia Archi-diaconi, etc.
by delivery of the Bell-rope to the new instituted Clerk, and he tolling the
Bell: And the Archdeacon, if he do it, is to take but 40 d. for doing of it.

Now note, that the six Months, Yelv. 100. Co. 6.61. b. 62 a.
within which the Patron is to present, is to be accounted by 192 days, and not
by 28 days to the month.

And note, What Is to be done after Induction.
that the Clerk is to do many things more at the time of his Institution, and
after his Induction, to secure himself in his Living, which he will find in the
sixth Chapter following, to which I refer him, and wherein very great care is
to be taken, that all things be duly performed and observed.

There has been some Dispute, From what time the six months shall commence.
whether the six months shall commence from the time of the death of the last
Incumbent, or other avoidance, or from such time as the Patron could reasonably
have notice, considering the distance of place; and more particularly, where
the Patron or Incumbent should happen to be beyond the Seas at the time of the
avoidance.

And there has been a Canon, Roll. 2.363. q.
quod tempus semestre non incipit versus patronos, nisi a tempore scientiae
mortis personae.

But by the Common Law of England, I conceive the Patron is bound to take
notice of the Death, Creation or Cession, as aforesaid.

And this is proved by the Register, Regist. Orig. 42.
where in a prohibition it is said, Quia secundum legem and consuetudinem Regni
nostri Angliae Episcopi, etc. beneficia vacantia per lapsum temporis ante sex
menses vacationum eorundem transactos confer non debent, nec confer
consueverunt, aliquibus temporibus retroactis. So that it appears by this Writ,
What time the Patron is to present.
that the time of the six months to collate by lapse commence from the vacancy,
and not from the notice: but this must be intended of such avoidances, whereof
the Patron is bound to take notice, as aforesaid.

And it is also to be observed, Kelw. 50. b; 14 H. 7.21. a Dyer 227. p. 7.
that if the Patron do present his Clerk, which is refused by the Ordinary,
because he is illiterate, criminous, etc. there the Patron shall have no longer
time to present but six months from the time of the avoidance, where the Patron
is bound to take notice of it, The Patron presents after Lapse incurred.
and six months from the time of notice, where the Ordinary is bound to give
notice of the Avoidance.

But note, 13 E. 4. 3. b; 11 H. 4.80. a; Hutton 24;
that in all Cases, if a Church lapse to the Bishop or Archbishop, and the
Patron present his Clerk before the Bishop or Archbishop have collated, the
Bishop, etc. Lindwood Si aliquo evincente, etc. verba injuria.
is bound to admit the Clerk of the true Patron, and cannot take advantage of
the lapse. But the Canonist contra.

But if the Bishop collate, Dyer 270. p. 56.
and the Patron present before Induction, he comes too late.

But the great question is, Quaere.
if the Church lapse to the King, and the Patron presents before the King take
advantage of the lapse; Whether this shall avoid the Kings Title by Lapse, Dyer
277. p. 55. Hob 152.. Hut. 24.
is made a Quaere by Dyer: but Hobart seems to be clear in it, that the King
shall not have the benefit of the lapse; but diverse Cro. Eliz. 119 Cro. Jac.
216. a Owen. 3, and 5.
Authorities are against them, Ideo quaere, Rolls. 2. 368. b. 27 E. 3. 84. b.
Co. 7.28. Doct. and Stud. lib. 2. cap. 31.

There has been some opinions amongst the Canonists, What time the Patron has
to present. Screne Regiam majestatem 10. b. chap. Quoniam v^rbum devolvatur.
that a Lay-Patron should have but four months to present; but an
Ecclesiastical person should have six months, and so it is said is the Law of
Scotland; but the Common Law, which rules the point here and with more reason,
gives the Patrons in both Cases six months.

In the Cases of Deprivation and Resignation, where the Patron is to have
notice, before the Church can lapse the Patron is not bound to take notice from
any body but the Bishop himself, Doct. and Stud. ubi supra.
or other Ordinary; which must be given personally to the Patron, Co. 6.29. b;
Cro. El. 119. Dyer 328. a;
if he live in the same County; but if the Patron live in a foreign County,
then the notice may be published in the Parish Church, and affixed on the
Church door: but such notice must express in certain the Cause of the
Deprivation, etc. Dyer 346. a.. Co. 6.29. b; Dyer 346. b; Harp. 3 and 4 El.
Dyer 237. p. 29 255. p. 5.
and it must be vere, proprie, personaliter, and non ficte by the
Ecclesiastical Laws. There is several other ways, that a Church may become
void, of which the Patron is at his peril to take notice, as union, not payment
of the Tenths, etc.

CHAP. III. The third Chapter shows, in what Case it is necessary that the
Bishop have a Jure Patronatus, and how the same is to be proceeded in, and what
is the effect and fruit of the same.
IF two Patrons present to one and the same Church by several Titles, In what
casesa Church shall be said litigious.
the Church is become litigious; because the Bishop knows not which has the
very true and rightful Title to the same, and by Consequence knows not which
Clerk to admit: And I take it the Church is not less litigious, though they
both present the same person; because when the Bishop admits him as the Clerk
of the one, he puts the other out of possession, and consequently to his
action; and the Bishop becomes a Disturber, if he who is put out of possession
prove to have the better Title.

Now the Bishop in this Case, Where a Jure Patronatus is necessary, and how to
be proceeded in.
to secure himself, ought to award a Jure Patronatus to inquire of the right;
which is merely an Inquest of Office in nature of a Writ de proprietate
probanda, and does not at all 34 H. 6.38. b;
bind the Title or Right of the Party.

But it seems a question in our Books, 35 H. 6.18. b. 19. a; 34 H. 6.12. a;
Hob. 317 34 H. 6.38. 5 H. 7.22. a. it is made a Quaere.
whether the Bishop is bound to sue the Jure Patronatus at his own cost and
peril, or only at the prayer and at the cost of the Party that prays it, or of
both Parties; but the better opinion seems to be, and so is the practice, that
the same is sued at the prayer, and at the cost of the one, or both the Parties
if they join.

Now whereas the Church may become litigious by double or plural Presentations,
so it may become more litigeous by the Jure Patronatus; for if two Patrons
present, and each of them prays a Jure Patronatus by himself (as they may) and
the one Jury gives a Verdict for the ones Title, and the other for the others
Title, here the Bishop receives no Direction at all, but the Church still
remains litigious.

But here arises another great question, whether the Bishop in this Case may
let the Church Lapse, and collate; or whether he be not bound to admit one of
the Clerks at his Election, or at his peril. Mr. Sergeant Callis in his reading
was of opinion, Callis Read. 3. 21 H. 6.44. a Quaere.
he might refuse both Clerks in this Case, and suffer the Church to Lapse: and
so is the Book in 21 H. 6. by Newton and Paston. tamen inde quaere.

And as a Church may become litigious by a Jure Patronatus: 41 H. 6.45. a
so it may become litigious after a Jure Patronatus, and a Verdict given for
one of the Parties; for if a Jure Patronatus be awarded, and a Verdict given
for one of the Parties, and before the Patron presents, for whom the Verdict
was given, and prays admittance of his Clerk (as ought to do, before the Bishop
is bound to admit his Clerk) another presents here; the Church is become
litigious de novo, and the Bishop in this Case, as it seems, may award a new
Jure Patronatus to determine the right of Patronage between the new and the old
Patron, for whom the Title was found in the former.

But some have thought, 21 H. 6.44. Callis Reading. 29. Hob. 319;
that though the Church be not litigious by double or plural Presentations, yet
the Bishop, if he doubt of the Patrons Title that presents, may award a Jure
Patronatus, and inquire of such Patron's Title, and by that means prevent the
surprise, that may happen to other pretenders by sudden admission of the Clerk,
and in case the right of Patronage be found for a 34 H. 6.40. a
stranger, the Bishop may admit his Clerk.

But it seems, Hob. 317..
that if the Bishop admit the Clerk, that is presented before the Church
becomes litigious by a second Presentation, that the Bishop acquits himself
thereby from being a Disturber; but by this means the Bishop may do great wrong
in surprising other Patrons that have right: And the Law does not so hasten the
Bishop's proceeding, but that, as has been said, he may take convenirnt time to
examine the Clerk, that other pretenders may take notice of the vacancy.

But though the Church by any of the means abovesaid be become litigious, yet I
think there is no doubt but that the Bishop may admit either Clerk without a
Jure Patronatus, Hob. 317..
but then he does it at a double peril; for if the Patron, whose Clerk he
admits, have not a good Title, or having a good Title do not make it out in a
quare impedit, or other Action brought for the Church, the Bishop will be made
a disturber.

And it seems likewise, How far the Bishop is bound by a Verdict in Jure patron.
that the Bishop is not so bound by the Verdict in a Jure Patronatus, but that
he may admit the contrary Clerk, if he see cause, or be satisfied he has the
better Title; but this seems to be against Justice and the true intent of the
Law. 34 H. 6 11. b Hob. 318


And Sir Henry Hobart was of opinion, that an action of the case lies against
the Bishop by the Patron that is so disturbed, if in a quare Impedit he prove
to have the better Title, and recover his damages by reason of the delay and
trouble the Bishop has thereby put the Patron to; but then the Bishop must not
be made a Defendant in the Quare Impedit: Quaere.
but of this quaere.

Now the manner and form of proceeding in a Jure Patronatus is thus: The manner
of proceeding in a Jure Patronatus.
The Bishop issues forth a Commission under his Seal to his Chancellor, or some
other persons, whom he pleases, that are expert in the Canon and Ecclesiastical
Laws: in which Commission (since the Title of Patronages is determinable at the
Common Law) it were not amiss to join some Common Lawyer of eminent Learning
and Integrity; and these Commissioners are by him authorized to summon a Jure
Patronatus, and proceed to the Determination thereof; and then the Commissioner
or Commissioners so authorized issue out a Mandate to some Officer of their own
to summon a Jury, which must be one half Clerks, 22 H. 6.29. b..
and the other half Laymen; and if they refuse being duly summoned to appear,
the Commissioners may proceed against the Clergymen by Sequestration, and the
Laymen by Ecclesiastical Censures to compel an appearance.

When a full Jury of Clergymen and Laics appear, which must be six of each at
least, the Commissioners are to swear first a Clergyman, and then a Layman
till twelve be sworn at least of the Jury: But the Commissioners may swear a
greater number than twelve of the Jury, if they please or see cause, so always
that there be an equal number of Laymen, and Clergymen sworn in the whole.

The points inquirable by this Commission are five. Callis Reading 29.


1. The points inquirable in a Jure Patron.
Si Ecclesia vacat, and quomodo vacavit?

2. Quis Patronus ultimo presentavit?

3. Quis est verus and indubitatus Patronus?

4. Quis praesentare debet ad Ecclesiam nunc vacantem?

5. De Indonitate persona praesentatae.

But the main and chief points are the third and fourth, the last resting
wholly in the Judgment of the Bishop.

After the Jury is sworn and charged, 21 H. 6.45. a..
the Counsel and Advocates of both Parties are to show their respective Clients
Titles, and produce their Evidences to prove the same. And after the Evidence
is given on both sides, and Counsel fully heard, the Jury may give their
Verdicts forthwith, or the Commissioners may give them time to consider of
their Evidence, and may assign them another time and place for the giving their
Verdict as in other Inquests of Office; 22 H. 6.29. b..
but I like much better (to avoid being tampered with) that they give their
Verdicts forthwith before the Party, unless new Evidence be expected.

The effect of this Suit is no more but for the Bishop's security, The effect
of a jure patronatus.
that he may avoid being a Disturber; for the verdict of this Jury is a
sufficient warrant for the Bishop to admit and institute his Clerk, for whose
title the verdict is given, and the Bishop for so doing shall never be made a
Disturber, though the other Patron against whom the verdict is given shall
after recover in a Quare Imp. or other action.

But suppose the Jury will not agree of their verdict, What Is to be d^ne, if
the Jury will not give a verdict. 3^ H. 6.18. b etc.
and the one half be for the one Patron, and the other half for the other
Patron; or, that they refuse to give any verdict at all; or if they find a
special verdict, as I suppose they may; the Bishop in all these cases is left
to proceed at his peril, as though no jure patronatus had issued at all; or
perhaps in this case he may discharge the Jury, 34 H. 6.12. a Callis Read. 29.
What Is to be done where Coperceners, Joynt-tenants, or Tenants in Common,
present severally. 21 H. 6.45. a per Ascur. 34 H. 6.40. 5 H. 7.8. 11 H. 4.58.
33 H. 6.32. 1 Inst. 186. b..
and summon a new jure patronatus.

And it is to be observed, that after a verdict found in a jure patronatus for
the Patron, the patron must again request the Bishop to admit his Clerk;
otherwise, if the Church lapse after six Months, the Bishop may Collate.

But if two Coperceners present several Clerks by the same Title, this does not
make the Church litigious; but the Bishop is bound to admit the Clerk of the
elder fister: but this is to be intended where the eldest sister presents
alone, and not jointly with any other of the Coheirs.

But if two joyn-Tenants or Tenants in Common present several Clerks, Doct. and
Stud. 115. b.. Kite verse. Evesque Bristow P. 7. Jac. C.B. 1 Inst. 186.b 6 E.
4.10. b; 34 H. 6.40. b; Vbi supra.
that makes not the Church litigious; for the Bishop may admit the Clerk of
which he pleases: or if they do not agree and join in presenting a Clerk within
the sixth Month, the Bishop may collate.

And note that the Bishop needs not to make Commissioners to inquire De jure
patronatus; but he may, if he pleases, do the same himself: If the
Commissioners neglect their duties. 22 H. 6.30. a;
and therefore, if his Commissioners neglect to do their duties, it shall not
excuse him, because it was his folly to name such Commissioners. But the
opinion of the Civilians seems otherwise: for they say that the party shall
name the Commissioners; and if they neglect their duties, it shall be at the
peradventure of the party that names them. And though they make a false return,
or no return at all, it shall excuse the Bishop; and the party grieved is left
to his accord against the Commissioners.

And, Verdict does not bind. 21 H. 6.45. a..
as has been said, the verdict in a jure patronatus does not bind the adverse
partie's Title, though it may be some evidence for him whose Title is found to
be the best. 34 H. 6.38. b..


CHAP. IV. Shows how the Law stood concerning pluralities before the Statute of
21 H. 8. cap. 13. Who are qualified within that Law to have pluralities, and
how qualified persons ought to behave themselves in taking the second livings,
so that the former may not be void.
A Plurality is where one and the same person obtains two or more spiritual
preferments with cure of Souls: What a Plurality is.
against which there have been several Canons, and they have been always
discountenanced at the Common Law, Co. 4.90. b; Co mag. chapter 626 vide the
Records there cited.
and several Complaints have been made against them in Parliament; yet the Pope
held them up by his dispensations. How agreeable these dispensations were to
God's service; nay how prejudicial they have been to the advance of the
Christian-Religion, and are, I leave others to judge; it being no part of my
undertaking. Hob. 149.. Council. tom. 4.221. cap. 29.
And though I find a great Judge of this Nation defending of them, yet I find a
Canon in the general Council of Lateran against them, in the Year 1215. in
these words, Canon against Pluralities.
Statutum est quod, quicunque receperit aliquod beneficium habens curam
animarum anexam, si prius tale beneficium obtinebat, eo sit jure ipso privatus,
and si forte illud retinere contenderit, alio etiam spolietur, Is quoque, ad
quem prioris speciat donatio, illud post receptionem alterius conferat cui
merito viderit conferendum.

And now let me tell you the fruits of Pluralities out of another Counsel, Tom.
5.368. cap. 64.
which is delivered in these words. Res ipsa loquitur, The effect of Plural.
plura beneficia, potissimum quibus cura animarum submissa est, non sine gravi
Ecclesiarum damno ab uno obtineri; cum unus in pluribus Ecclesiis rite officia
persolvere, aut rebus earum necessariam curam impendere, nequeat.

I might enlarge much more upon this Subject; but it being collateral to what I
design, this last shall serve. And if any body desire further satisfaction upon
this Subject, Confil. Trident. 496.
I commend him to the History of the Council of Trent; where he will find that
by the greater and better opinion of that Council, Residence by him that has a
preferment in the Church with cure of Souls is of Divine right; and that
therefore the Pope had no power to dispense with non-Residence, the consequence
of which is, that it is against Divine right for any to take more Benefices
than one with cure of Souls, because the same person cannot be resident in two
places at one and the same time.

But as the Pope by stratagem made the endeavors of all the good men in that
Council ineffectual, so by his frequent dispensations to take Pluralities
without number or measure He made the Canons of the Church of no other effect
than to increase his own Revenue by dispensations. More 119.


But it should seem the Council of Lateran was received and approved (as to
that point) in this Kingdom, Acceptance of a second Living makes the first void.
and the Law was always taken, that he that had one Living with cure of Souls,
and without dispensation accepted another with cure of Souls, made the first
void: So that the Patron of the first Church might present a new Clerk, and
needed not to stay till the former Clerk should be legally deprived. But in
this case the Church does not lapse till the the end of six Months, to be
accounted from the time the Patron had legal notice of the vacancy from the
Bishop; but after induction the Patron, as it should seem, Co. 4.95. b. 44 E
3.22. a. 9 E. 3.22. a. 10 E. 3.1. 14 H. 7 28. b. 14 H. 8.17. a. F N B. 34. L.
15 E. 3.9. 11 H. 4.37. Cro. Car. 357. Several acts to restrain the Pope.
is bound to take notice at his peril: And as to all others but the Patron, the
Church remained full till induction into the second Living; and so are all the
Books, that seem prima facie to differ, reconciled.

But the Parliament of England, that in all Ages made bold with his Holiness,
and to restrain the exorbitances of the Pope and Court of Rome (as the Reader
may see, 27 E. 3. cap. 1. 3 R. 2. cap. 3. 7 R. 2. cap. 12. 2 H. 4 cap. 4. 38 E.
3. cap. 1. 16 R. 2. cap. 5. 6 H. 4. cap. 1. 25 E. 3. and Provisoes and 27 E. 3.
cap. 1.
if he pleases to satisfy himself by the several Acts of Parliament mentioned
in the margent against Provisions suing at Rome, impeaching judgments given at
the Common Law, Aliens being beneficed within this Realm, priviledging
religious orders from payment of Tithes, and many other things; and I cannot
forbear to observe to the Reader the boldness of the Parliament in the sixth
Year of H. 4. with his Holiness, where they restrain the giving of exorbitant
and just fees for the investures of Bishops. The act begins thus: Whereas
thereis a damnable custom in the Court of Rome to take more for the investure
of Bishops, etc. Certainly these brave Parliamenteers never expected his
Holinesse's indulgence or Pardon, this seeming a sin as high as that against
the Holy Ghost to charge the Holy Father with a damnable custom in his Court,
The Act against Pluralities. 21 H. 8. cap. 13. Co. 4.79. b..
to use extortion and symony.) I say the Parliament, to prevent the mischiefs
of these dispensations, made a Law in the twenty first Year of H. 8. That if
any Person or Persons, having (that is being instituted) one Benefice with cure
of Souls being of the yearly value of eight pounds or above, shall accept and
take any other with cure of Souls, and be instituted and inducted into the
possession of the same, that then, immediately after such possession had
thereof, the first Benefit should be void.

And that it should be lawful to every Patron having the advowson thereof to
present another, and the Presentee to have the benefit of the same, as though
the Incumbent bad died or resigned, and that any license union or other
dispensation contrary to that act should be void.

If this act had gone no further, it had been an excellent Law: But there is so
many qualifications in this Law that wholly defeat the benefit of it, since the
Nobility are grown so numerous as they are at this day; so that the grievance
is now become almost, if not altogether, as great as ever, and deserves a new
and stricter reformation; for almost all the greatest and best Livings of the
Kingdom are now held by pluralists, and served by mean Curates.

But now let me return to the Act, and let me observe.

That this Act has only provided a Remedy where the first Living is of the
Yearly value of eight pounds or above, Cro. cap. 456 Pig. Jac. C.B: Evesque
Durham verse. Evesque Peterburrough.
which must be understood according to the valuation taken in the twenty ninth
Year of King E. 1. till the twenty sixth of H. 8. And after that time according
to the valuation then returned into the Exchequer, Dyer 237. p. 29. Cro. Eliz.
853. Quaere.
and now made use of in the first fruits office. But many former Opinions and
Books have been, that the valuation ought to be according to the true value.
Ideo quaere.

But in case the first Living be under the yearly value of eight pounds, or a
sine cura, then the party may accept a second, as he might have done before
this act, with a dispensation, which he needs not now go to Rome for, although
he be not qualified within this Law.

But by this good Act there are several persons qualified to have and retain
Pluralities; Who are qualified to have Pluralities.
and those are of three sorts: 1. by Service, 2. by their Birth, and the 3. by
Dignities. And first of those that are qualified by service.

1.

2. Eight Chaplains of every Archbishop.

3. Six Chaplains of every Duke.

4. Five Chaplains of every Marquess and Earl.

5. Six Chaplains of every Bishop.

6. Four Chaplains of every Viscount.

7. Three Chaplains of the Lord Chancellor, and of every Knight of the Garter
and Baron.

8. Two Chaplains of every Duchess, Marchioness, Countess and Baroness, being
Widows.

9. Two Chaplains of the Treasurer and Controller of the King's House; the
King's Secretary, the King's Almner, Clerk of the Closet, and Master of the
Rolls.

10. One Chaplain of the Chief Justice of the King's Bench, and Warden of the
Cinque Ports for the time being.

All these in respect of their Services may purchase license, or dispensations,
and take, receive, and keep two Parsonages or Benefices with cure of Souls,
notwithstanding this Act.

But those of the King's Chaplains, that are sworn of the King's Council, may
purchase license or dispensations, and take, receive, and keep three
Parsonages, or, etc. with Cure of Souls.

2. The second qualification is by Birth; Qualification by Birth.
that is, the Brothers and Sons of all Temporal Lords, and of Knights, born in
Wedlock, may purchase license or dispensations, and take, receive, and keep,
two Parsonages, etc. with cure of Souls; in which qualification it is to be
observed, that no provision is made for Bastards, nor for the Sons of Bishops,
Abbots, Priors, etc. and note, in this case the Sons and Brothers of Knights
have greater privilege than the Sons and Brothers of Baronets.

3. Qualification by dignity.
The third qualification is of certain persons dignified in the Universities;
and of that sort are all Doctors and Batchelors of Divinity, Doctors and
Batchelors of the Common Laws, which shall be admitted to any of those degrees
by any of the Universities of this Realm, and not by grace only; all which may
purchase licenses or dispensations, and take, receive, and keep two Parsonages,
etc. with cure of Souls.

And in this act there is a negative proviso to this effect, Proviso, that
above the number shall not be advanced.
That no person or persons to whom any number of Chaplains, or any Chaplain by
the provisions aforesaid is limited, shall in any wise by color of the same
provisions advance any Spiritual person or persons above the number to them
appointed, to receive, or keep any more Benefices with cure of Souls, than is
above limited.

There is another Proviso, Proviso, that they must have Testimonials.
that the Chaplains so purchasing, taking, receiving, and keeping Benefices
with cure of Souls, as aforesaid, shall be bound to have and exhibit, where
need shall be, Letters under the sign and Seal of the King, or other their Lord
or Master, testifying whose Chaplains they be, Boy verse. Saveacre. T. 28 El. C.
B. to. 1130. Hughes p. 41. Boy verse. Evesque Lincoln and alios T 31 El. to.
725. C. B.
or else not to enjoy any plurality of Benefice by being such Chaplains. Upon
this clause some question has been made, whether a Chaplain can be retained
within the meaning of this Law by parol; and it seems he may, so that they have
such Testimonial, when they pray their dispensation: but the safest way is to
have it in writing, and it must be under Hand and Seal.

Now having showed what persons are qualified within this Statute, I will in
the next place show how the Clerk, that would have the benefit of his
qualification within this Law, ought to proceed in the taking a second Living,
so that the first may not be void, which is in this manner.

The Person that falls within any of the qualifications within this Law which
makes him capable of a plurality, How to proceed in the taking of a second
Living.
and having obtained a presentation to a second Living, must carry his
Testimonial or retainer under the Hand and Seal of his Lord or Master to the
Master of the faculties, who is to make out his dispensation or License to
accept the second Benefice; which being obtained, he must next have it
confirmed under the great Seal of England; and after he has thus obtained his
dispensation, and has it confirmed under the great Seal, then, Stat. 25 H. 8.
cap. 21.
and not before, he is to apply himself to the Bishop of the Diocese where the
Living lies for his admission and institution: for though by the Letter of the
Act the first Living is not void until induction into the second Living, First
Living void by institution into the Second.
the words whereof are as follows (If the party be instituted and inducted in
possession of the second Living that then the first shall be void.) Yet to
avoid the great inconvenience that otherwise would ensue, it has been held that
the first Living is void upon the bare institution into the second Living; Co.
4.79. b. Hob. 166;
and so it should seem the Law was before the making of this Act, where the
party had no dispensation.

And it is to be observed upon this Law, Which Chapl^ins shall be qualified,
where above the number is retained. More 561. Co. 4.90. a B. verse. Evesque
Glouc. and Saveacre. Anderson.
that in case any Lord or other Person, whose Chaplains are qualified within
this Law to have two or more Livings incompatible, do retain his full number of
Chaplains, and after one or more above his number; that in that case the
Supernumerary Chaplains, that were retained after such Lord or other Person had
retained his full number allowed by the Statute, are not qualified by this Law
to have pluralities of Livings, although the supernumerary Chaplains be
preferred before the other that were first retained: but if a Chaplain
qualified within this Law be legally inducted into a second Living with a
dispensation as he ought, Dyer 312. p. 88.
although his Master be attainted, degraded, or removed from his Office, yet he
shall retain his Plurality during his life.

But if one be retained Chaplain to any Lord or other Person, The Master dies,
etc. before preserment. Co. 4 17 b.
whose Chaplains are qualified within this Law, and his Master dies, is
attaint, degraded or displaced before his Chaplain be preferred to a second
Living; or if such Lord or other Person discharge such a Chaplain (as he may);
in all these cases the Chaplain loses his qualification to have plurality of
Livings incompatible.

But if a Duchess, Marchioness, Co. 4.118. B. The Mrs. marries.
Countess or Baroness do retain a Chaplain, and after marries, this shall not
take away the qualification of such a Chaplain, but that he may have plurality
of Livings incompatible within this Law as he might have done before.

And if such Duchess, etc. Cc: 4.119. a..
retains Chaplains, and after marries, and after becomes a Widow again; yet
the first retainer stands good, and was not Countermanded by the Marriage or
death of the Husband.

And note that there is a Proviso in this Act, that though a Duchess,
Marchioness, Countess, or Baroness, do Marry a Husband under the degree of a
Noble Man or Baron, that yet nevertheless she may retain two Chaplains which
shall be qualified within this Law.

And it is declared by this Act, What preferments are not within this Law.
that Deanaries, Arch Deaconrics, Chancellorships, Treasurerships,
Chaunterships or Praebendaries in any Cathedral or Collegiate Church, or any
Parsonage that has a Vicar endowed, or any Benefice perpetually impropriated,
are not to be esteemed Benefices with cure of Souls within this Act.

And if any Duke, Lord, or other Person, whose Chaplains are qualified within
this Law, shall have a double capacy to qualify his Chaplains; as if a Duke,
etc. be made Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, Co. 4.118. a.
or a Baron; Master of the Rolls, Knight of the Garter; or, etc. in all these
cases such Duke, Baron, etc. can but qualify his number of Chaplains according
to his best qualification only.

And if the Eldest Son of a Duke, Chapl. returned in the life of the Father.
Co. 4.902
Marquess, etc. retain Chaplains in the Life time of his Father, who after
dies, and the honor descends upon such Son; yet this retainer will not
qualify his Chaplains to have pluralities within this Statute, because at the
time of the retainer he was not capable to qualify them. Et quod ab initio non
valet, tractu temporis non convalescit.

If a Duke, Lord discharges Chaplains after they are preferred. Co 4.90. a
Marquess, etc. retain his full number of Chaplains which are advanced, and
then discharge them; yet he cannot during their Lives qualify any other within
this Statute.

But if a Duke, A greater number of Chapl. retained together. Co. 490 a Dyer
312. p. 88.
Marquess, etc. that has power within this Act to qualify Chaplains, at one
instance of time retain double his number of Chaplains, or any supernumerary
Chaplains in that case; those only shall have the benefit of qualification that
are first preferred. Quia in equali jure melius est conditio possidentis.

If one that is qualified within this Statute take a second Living
incompatible, Co. 4 79. B. Dyer 312. p. 88.
and be instituted or inducted into the same before he have obtained a
dispensation, the first is void; though Dyer makes a quaere of it.

And note that it has been resolved, This Law is not dispensable. Dyer 351. B
Co. 4.90. B.; Dyer 377. B. Co. 5. 102. B; Hob. 168. Apluralist neglects to read
the 39. Art. the first Living is not void. Hob. 157
that the King himself cannot dispense with this Law.

But if one that is not qualified within this Law to have two Livings
incompatible shall obtain a second Living, and be inducted into the same, and
after neglects to read the Articles of Religion within the time limited; or
does any other Act that makes the latter void ab initio; in such case the first
Living shall not be void within this Law.

And if a Parson, etc. that is qualified within this Statute to have plurality
of Livings incompatible, be made a Bishop, his qualification ceases, so that
after he cannot take two Benefices incompatible by force of such qualification;
but if he had two Livings before he was made Bishop by qualification and
dispensation within this Statute, he may retain them by Commendam: and although
he were the King's Chaplain, it alters not the case; for by the acceptance of a
Bishopric he ceases to be the King's Chaplain within this Law.

And if a Parson have one Living incompatible, Parson's Law l. 2.14 and 15.
Uniting a Living is a Plurality.
he cannot obtain another with Cure to be united, unless he be qualified and
have a Dispensation, but that the first will be void.

Mr. Parson and Vic. of the same Church si, etc.
Hughes in his Parsons Law puts two Cases, which he is of opinion are out of
danger of this Law. The first is, where there is a Parsonage and Vicarage
endowed, and the Parson without Dispensation or Qualification accepts the
Vicarage: and he conceives, that notwithstanding that these are two several
Advowsons and Benefices, and that several Quare Impedits may be brought of
them, and that several actions are maintainable by the Parson and Vicar
concerning their possessions; that yet nevertheless the presenting of one
person to both is no Plurality within this Statute or the Canon: because the
Parson and Vicar have both but one Cure of Souls; besides there is a Proviso in
the Act, that no Parsonage with a Vicarage endowed shall be accounted a
Benefice with cure of Souls within that Act.

But his other Case seems more doubtful; 2. Rectories in one Church.
and it is put where a Church has two Rectories, and each has cure of Souls per
se, and are incompatible, and one person obtains both these Livings without
qualificaton or dispensation. This Case he conceives to be both out of the
danger of this Act and the Canon. 1. Because it is not in pluribus Ecclesiis.
2. When there is several Advowsons in one Church, neither Parson has the whole
cure of Souls, and the words of the Statute are, having one Benefice with cure
of Souls of the value of eight pounds takes and accepts another benefice with
cure of Souls, etc. But here the Church is one and the same, and the cure of
Souls the same; and therefore as he conceives neither within the danger of the
Statute or Canon: but in a private report that I have, this very point came in
question in the latter end of the Queen's time, and the Reporter says, Cooper
verse. Beauchampe. P. 37. El. C.B.
that Walmesly and Beaumont were of opinion, that this Case was within the
Stat. but Anderson doubted, and seemed to incline to the contrary. Ideo quaere
inde.

By the Resolutions of the several Cases before mentioned it is worth
Observation, There is now a 1000 qualififications at least in England by
Service, besides the Chaplains of the King, Queen, Princes of the blood, and
Dowagers, and probably as many more by birth and dignities; and there is about
4300 Livings in England of 10 pound per annnm in the King's books and upwards,
and it is not the least Livings the Pluralists catch at, though at first they
crept into the Church, where Livings were so small they were not able to
maintain a Minister, and if the 41 Canon of King James was observed, many
mischiefs in this Case might be prevented.
how the Judges of the Common Law have endeavored to advance this Law, and
restrain the qualifications: And yet when all is done this Law produces little
more effect, than the transferring the power of Dispensations in this case from
the Pope, and scattering it amongst the Nobility and others; and how many
Pluralists is there in England, that hardly see either of their Livings in a
year? so that generally the best Livings in the Kingdom are served with poor
Curates, and no hospitality kept: A thing worth the Consideration of a
Parliament.

CHAP. V. The fifth Chapter shows what Symony is, and who shall be said to be
guilty of it, and what are the dangers ensuing thereupon.
HAving showed my Clerk how to obtain a Benefice, and likewise those which are
qualified how to take a second Living; It rests that I should show them, what
is to be done after Induction to confirm them in their benefices: But because
Symony is not only scandalous to the Clerk that is guilty of it, but also very
dangerous; and I told my Clerk in the second Chapter, that he must obtain his
Presentation without any corrupt or Symoniacal Contract; I thought it fit by
the way to let my Clerk know not only what Symony is, but likewise the danger
that attends it: What Symony is. Papormit, c. Nemo extra eo, etc. Tho. Aq. 2o.
2ae q. 100. Art. 1. Cro. El. 789. Tho. Aq. 2o. 2ae. q. 100 Art. 4o.
Symony by the Canonist and Schoolmen is defined to be Studiosa voluntas
emendi vel vendendi aliquid spirituale aut spirituali annexum epere subsecuto.
And Thomas Aquinas says, Quod Simonia dioi videtur a Simone Mago, qui donum
Spiritus sancti emere voluit, ut ex venditione Signorum quae per eum fierent
multiplicatam pecuniam lueraretur; and sic illi qui spiritualia vendunt,
conformantur Simoni Mago in intention, in actu vero illi qui emere volunt:
Illi autem qui vendunt in aciu imitantur Giezi discipulum Helisaei, de quo
legitur 4 Reg. cap. 5. quod accepit pecuniam a leproso mundato, unde venditores
Spiritualium possunt dici, non solum Simonaici, sed etiam Giezitae. And St.
Gregory says, In Registro hab. 1. q. 10. Canon, Quicunque.
Quicunque sacros ordines vendunt aut emunt, Sacerdotes esse non possunt, ut
scriptum est, Anathema danti, Anathema accipienti haec est Simonaica haeresis:
Quomodo ergo, si anathematicati sunt, and sancii non sunt, sanctificare alios
possunt? Et cum in Christi corpore non sunt, quomodo Christi corpus tradere vel
accipere possunt? qui maledicius, benedicere quomodo potest? And the same Holy
Father farther says, Ibid. Canon Presbyter.
Si Presbyter per pecuniam Ecclesiam obtinuerit, non solum Ecclesiam privetur,
sed etiam Sacerdotii honor spolietur. And it appears clearly, that the very
intention to buy Spiritual gifts or preferments carries with it the guilt of
Simony as well as the act it self; And therefore the Holy Apostle said to Simon
Magus, Act. Apost. c. 8. v.
Cor enim tuum non est rectum coram Deo; poenitentiam itaque age ab hac
nequitiatua, and roga Deum si forte remittatur tibi haec cogitatio cordis tui:
But this is in foro conscientiae only, and not punishable by any humane Laws,
unless it proceed to the Act.

Symony by the Canonist is distinguished into Simoniace and Simoniacus:
Division. Canons against Symony.
The first is where the Clerk comes in by Symony, whereunto he is not party or
privy: Simonaicus is he which obtains a spiritual preferment by a corrupt and
Symoniacal Contract, to which he is party or privy, and consenting.

Against this Corruption in the Church many Canons have been made, amongst
which I shall instance only two, and those provincial ones of our own Nation.
The first was made in the year of our Lord 1229 in the time of Richard
Wethershead Archbishop of Canterbury, and is as follows. Lindwood c. Nal^i
liceat Ecclesiam, etc.


Nulli liceat Ecclesiam nomine dotalitatis ad aliquem transfer, vel pro
praesentatione alicujus personae pecuniam vel aliquid aliud emolumentum pacio
interveniente recipere: quod si quis fecerit, and in jure convictus vel
confessus fuerit ipsam tam Regia quam nostra freti authoritate patronatu
ejusdem Ecclesiae imperpetuum privari statuimus: but it was not sufficient by a
Canon to deprive a man of his Freehold or inheritance, be the word imperpetuum
taken for life, or for ever, as it imports; neither was this Canon ever put in
execution or attempted so to be, that I find.

The other Canon I made mention of, I find amongst the Canons of Othobonus, the
Popes Legate here in England, which is to this effect.

Quia plerumque evenire didicimus, quod, Chap. Quia plerumque.
cum ad vacantem Ecclesiam fuit praesentatio facienda, is qui praesentandus est
prius cum patrono de certa Summa de bonis Ecclesiae sibi annuatim solvenda
pasciscitur, and sic pactus ad Ecclesiam praesentatur.. Nos huic actui tam
Simoniae vitium quam Ecclesiae dispendium ingerenti occurrere intendentes,
universas promissiones and pactiones hujusmodi penitus revocamus, and eas
imposterum fieri districtius inhibemus: Et si factae fuerint, vires aliquas
decernimus non habere.

But this Canon was of as little effect as the other, as to the making the
Contracts void, which were only determinable at the Common Law, where this
Canon could not be pleaded in Bar. I have mentioned these two Canons not for
the validity or use so much as to satisfy the Reader, what Provincial Canons
we have against Symony, and to how little effect they were before the Statute
of 31. Cro. El. 788, 789; Per Warburton.
Eliz. But there were some general Canons of the Church of greater force,
whereby Simoniace is punished by Deprivation, and Simoniacus by Deprivation and
perpetual disability Per Bullam Sixtinam privatur ipso facto de omnibus
dignitatibus, beneficiis, officiis, and efficitur inhabilis ad omnia. 3 Inst.
1654 Tho. Aqu. 2o. 2ae. q. ^00. art. 1 Sect. 2 St. Aust. de h^eresibus in
principio. St. Greg. in Reg. hab 1. q. 1. etc. d. l. Stat. 31. Eliz. cap. 6.
Stat. Against Symony.
, not only as to the Church he was presented to upon a Symoniacal Contract, but
also to all others: and being malum in se, it is not dispensable either by the
King or any other.

And it has been held by some of the Fathers to be a Heresy, if not the Sin
against the holy Ghost: but neither the greatness of the sin nor the severity
of the Canons were sufficient to restrain this evil in the Church, till the
Parliament of England took it into their Care, and in the 31. Eliz. it was
inacted.

1. That if any person or persons for any Sum of money, reward, gift, profit or
benesit directly or indirectly, or for or by reason of any promise, agreement,
grant, bond, Covenant, or other Assurance for any Sum of Money, reward, gift,
profit, or benefit whatsoever directly or indirectly shall Relates to Patrons.
present, or This to Bishops.
collate any person to any Benefice with Cure of Souls, Dignity, Prehend, or
Living Ecclesiastical, etc. or Donatives.
give or bestow the same for or in respect of any such corrupt couse or
consideration, that then every such Presentation, Collation, gift and
bestowing, and every admission, investure and induction thereupon shall be
utterly void, etc.

And that the Queen, her Heirs and Successors to present, collate, etc. for
that one Turn only.

And that every Person, etc. Penalty.
that shall give or take any such Sum of Money, etc. or that shall take or make
any such Promise, etc. shall forfeit and lose the double value of one years
profit of every such Benefice. And the person so corruptly taking any such
Benefice shall thereupon and from thenceforth be adjudged a disabled person in
Law to have and enjoy the same Benefice, etc.

2. And further, Against Precipitate admission or Institution, etc.
that if any Person shall for any sum of money, reward, etc. (ut supra)
directly or indirectly (other than for small and lawful fees) or for or by
reason of any promise, etc. admit, institute, install, induct, invest, or place
any Person in or to any Benefice with cure, etc. That then every Person so
offending shall forfeit and lose the double value of one years profit of such
Benefice, etc. and that the said Benefice, etc. shall be eft soon void, etc.
And that the Patron, or person to whom the advowson, etc. shall and may by
virtue of this Act present, or collate, etc. as if the person were naturally
dead; but no lapse hereby to incur till six Months after notice.

3. Against corrupt resignations and Exchanges.
And if any Incumbent of any Benefice with cure of Souls do or shall corruptly
resign or exchange the same; or corruptly take for or in respect of the
resigning or exchanging of the the same, directly or indirectly, any pension,
sum of Money, or benefit whatsoever; that then the giver and taker of any such
sum, etc. corruptly shall lose double the value of the sum so given taken or
had; the one half to the Queen, etc. and the other Moiety to him that will sue
for the same, etc. in any of her Majesty's Courts of Record, in which no
essoine, etc.

4. Ecclesiastical Censuressaved.
Provided, that this Act shall not restrain any censures Ecclesiastical, etc.

5. Symony in ordaining and giving Orders to preach.
And further it is provided, that if any Person shall receive, or take any
Money, Fee, reward, or any other profit directly or indirectly; or shall take
any promise, agreement, Covenant, Bond or other assurance, to receive or have
any Money, Fee, etc. direcily or indirectly, to him or themselves, or any other
of their, etc. Friends (all lawful and ordinary Fees excepted) for or to
procure the ordaining, or making of any Minister, etc. giving any Order and
License to preach, shall lose forty pounds; and the Minister so made ten
pounds. And that if such Minister within seven years next after such corrupt
entering into the Ministry, etc. shall accept or take any Benefice, Living, or
promotion Ecclesiastical, the same Living after induction, etc. to be void. And
that the Patron may present, etc. as if the party so inducted were naturally
dead; the one half of the said forfeitures to be to the Queen, etc. and the
other half to the Informer to be recovered (ut supra.)

And I do not observe that the corrupt Patrons were in danger to suffer by any
Law or Canon before this Law was made; Canons against Law.
for, as I said before, his right could not be taken away by a mere Canon not
confirmed by Parliament: and before this Law was made the Incumbent that came
in by Symony held the Living which he obtained by Symony until he was legally
and judicially deprived by Sentence Ecclesiastical, wherein he often escaped
for want of such proof as the Spiritual Laws required; but this Statute strikes
at the root, and makes as well the presentation, as the admission institution
and induction void: So that if this Statute had not given the presentation to
the Queen, the true Patron might have presented a new Clerk; or in his default
the Church would have lapsed. But by this Act the corrupt Patron does not only
lose the presentation to the King pro hac vice; but also two years value of the
Church, 3 Inst. 154;
not according to the valuation in the King's Books in the the first-fruit
Office; but according to the true and utmost value of the Church.

But if one that has no right to present shall by means of a corrupt and
Symoniacal agreement present a Clerk, 3 Inst. 153
who is by his presentation admitted instituted and inducted into a Church; yet
this shall not entitle the King to present: for the Act of Parliament makes all
void; but a Usurper cannot forfeit the right of another in whom there is no
fault.

Note that the Patron shall lose his presentation within this Law, Co. 12.74;
although the Clerk be not privy to the corrupt Contract.

And it should seem by the penning of this Act, that the forfeiture of the
double value of the Church is incurred by the corrupt contract only; but the
presentation is not forfeited to the King, unless the Clerk be de facto
presented or collated upon such corrupt Contract.

And it matters not whether the Incumbent that comes in by a Symoniacal
contract were privy thereunto or not, Clerk not Privy to the Symony.
as to making the Church void; but the great question is, whether the Clerk
that is presented upon a Symoniacal contract, to which he is neither party nor
privy, be disabled for that turn to be presented by the King to that Church.

I have seen the Report of a Case in the latter end of the Reign of King James,
Fowler verse. Lapthorn P. 17. Jac. B. R.
where it was adjudged, that if a Clerk were presented upon a Symoniacal
Contract to which he was not party or privy, that yet notwithstanding it was a
perpetual disability upon that Clerk as to that Living.

And in the Case of Baker and Rogers, Cro. El. 788.
M. 42, and 43 El. B.R. The case was, Baker agreed, the Church being void, to
give the Patron 180 l. for the Presentation, who presented his Brother, who
knew nothing of the corrupt Contract till after Induction: and though it was
clear, that the grant of the Presentation during the vacancy was merely void,
and that Baker presented as an Usurper; that yet notwithstanding the Clerk was
in by the corrupt Contract; because it was not to be intended, that the Patron
would have suffered the Usurpation, had it not been forth corrupt Contract:
and there it should seem by Mr. Justice Warburton, that the Clerk was disabled
quoad hanc.

And in a Cause between the King and the Bishop of Norwich Cole and Sair, Cro.
Jac. 385. Bulst. 3.92.
Sir George Crook, who was a Counsel in the Cause, reports, that Sir Edward
Cook affirmed it had been adjudged, that if a Church be void, and a stranger
contracts for a Sum of Money to present one who is not privy to the agreement,
that notwithstanding the Incumbent coming in by the Symoniacal Contract, is a
person disabled to enjoy that Benefice, although he obtain a new Presentation
from the King; for the Statute, as to that Living, has disabled him during Life.

I must acknowledge, if the Law be so taken, it is very severe; but let us hear
Sir Edward Cook himself speak, 3 Inst. 154;
and he in his Comment upon this Statute says, that it was adjudged in the
before mentioned Case of Baker and Rogers, that where the Presentee is not
privy nor consenting to any such corrupt Contract, as is forbidden by this
Statute (because it is no Symony in him) there the Presentee shall not be
adjudged a disabled person within this act; for the words of the Statute are
(And the person so corruptly giving): So as he shall not be disabled, unless he
be privy to the Contract; and so says he there it was resolved. M. 13. Jac.

And Sir Edward Cook in that Book, Co. 12.101.
that goes under the name of his twelfth Report, and without doubt was his own,
reports, that it was so adjudged in the case of Doctor Hutchinson Parson of
Kenne in Devonshire by the whole Court, that if a Clerk be presented upon a
corrupt contract within this Statute, although the Clerk be not privy
thereunto; yet the presentation admisson and induction are all void within the
Letter of the Statute: for the Law intended to inflict punishment upon the
Patron, being the Author of this corruption, by the loss of his presentation;
and upon the Incumbent, who came in by such a corrupt Patron, by the loss of
his Living, although he never knew of the corrupt Contract; but if the
Presentee were not cognizant of the corruption, then he is not within the clause
of disability within the same Statute; and so (says he) was the opinion of all
the Judges of Sarjeant-Inn in Fleet Street. Mich. 8. Jac.

And it seems to me upon the penning of the Statute, that this opinion is more
rational than the former, for the words of the Statute are; That the Person so
corruptly taking procuring seeking or accepting shall, etc. from thenceforth be
adjuged a disabled Person in Law to have or enjoy, etc. And though the
Incumbent in this case take and accept the Benefice upon the corrupt contract,
yet as to him it is not corrupt. But this being a point thus controverted,
Quaere.
I shall not take upon me to determine, but leave it to the Judgment of the
more learned.

I shall in the next place show what Contracts have been held Simoniacal within
the meaning of this Law. What Contracts shall be said Symonical.


In a Cause between Doctor Grant and one Bowden, Hill. 16. Jac. to. 667. C. B.
it was held (upon an Evidence to a Jury) that where two Parsons agreed to
change their Livings, and the one promised his Patron, that if he would present
the other with whom he was to exchange, that he should make the Patron a Lease
of his Tithes at such a Rent; and this was held Symony, although the other was
not privy to the Contract, he making the the Lease after.

The Father in the presence of his Son being a Clerk purchased the next
advowson of a Church, More 916. Cro. El. 685. Smith verse. Shelburne.
the present Incumbent of the Church being sick, and not likely to live, who
soon after died, and he presented his Son: and this was held Symony within this
Statute; but if this had been done in the absence of his Son, it had not been
Symony, because the Father is bound to provide for his Son. quaere of the
difference.

And by Hutton it was held Symony to purchase the next Advowson, Winch 63.
Sheldon verse. Brett. Hob. 165.
the Incumbent being sick.

In the case of one Winchcombe against the Bishop of Winchester and Puleston
the case was, one Say bargained with the Patron (the Incumbent being sick) for
ninety pounds to present him when the Church should be void, and for the better
assurance take a Grant of the next avoidance to Friends in trust; the Incumbent
died, Say was presenred, and this was held Symony within this Law.

There is of late time a practice introduced by corrupt Patrons, that, Bonds
for Resignation.
if not nipt early in the budding, will make this good Law of no effect; I mean
the taking Bonds for resignation. And this practice took its rise from two
cases in Sir George Crook's Reports.

The first was between Jones and Laurence, 8. Jac. The Case was thus: Cro. Jac.
248.274.
Jones had a Son which he intended to be a Clergy Man, and having obtained a
Presentation from Queen Eliz. for the Church of Streetham agreed with the
Defendant that he should be presented, so that he would resign when Jones his
Son was qualified for the Living; whereupon the Defendant entered into a Bond of
a thousand Marks penalty to the Plaintiff upon this condition (having first
recited the agreement) that if the Defendant within three Months after request
should absolutely resign his said Benefice, that then etc. And in an action of
debt brought upon this Bond the Defendant pleaded non requisivit, which was
found against him; and in arrest of Judgment it was moved, that this Bond was
made for the performance of a Symoniacal contract, and therefore void; but
notwithstanding the Court gave Judgment for the Plaintiff, and two reasons are
given for the Judgment; the first was because there was no averment of the
Symony, second that it was not material as to the Bond, because that Statute
did not make the Bond or Contracts void, but only the presentation, etc. for
this I clearly infer from the conclusion of the case. But I confess the sense
of the Court was, that in truth if a man be preparing a Son for the Clergy, and
have a Living in his disposal which falls void before his Son be ready, he may
lawfully take a bond of such person as he shall present to resign, when his Son
is become capable of such Living; and I have nothing to say against that
opinion, but it is very just and reasonable, nature obliging that every one
should take care for his posterity: but if a Patron take a Bond absolutely to
resign upon request without any such cause as the preferment of a Son, or to
avoid pluralities, or non-residence, or such reasonable cause, but only to a
corrupt end and purpose to exact Money by this Bond from the Incumbent, or
attempt it, though perhaps the Bond may be good against the Person that entered
into it; yet I am clear of opinion for my own part, that the said Bond makes
the Church void, and gives the presentation to the King; and it should seem in
Jones and Laurence's case, that if Symony had been averred, it would have been
left to a Jury to have adjudged what the intention of the corrupt Patron was.

The other Case upon which these subtle Simonists build, Cro. Car. 180. Hur. in
Jones 220.
was between Babbington and Wood, 5 Car. 1. B. R. where the Case was likewise
in debt upon an Obligation with a Condition, that whereas the Plaintiff
intended to present the Defendant to such a Living, that if the Defendant upon
request after his admission should resign, that then the Bond to be void, etc.
Upon Oyer of this Bond and Condition, the Defendant demurred, and Judgment was
given for the Plaintiff: But all the Court conceived, that if the Defendant had
averred, that the Obligation had been made with intent to exact money, make a
Lease, etc. which in it self had been Simony; then upon such a Plea
peradventure it might have appeared to have been Simony, and then it might have
been a question, whether the Bond had been good or no; but upon this Demur it
did not appear there was any Simoniacal Contract, and such a Bond might be made
upon a good and lawful design, as the preferment of a Son, as in Jone's and
Laurence's Case before, to avoid non-Residence, Pluralities, etc. So that it
appears by both these Cases, that Bonds taken upon prudent and just ends to
resign are non-Simoniacal; but where such Bonds are taken upon corrupt designs,
and it be made appear by any subsequent practice or action, it is clearly
Simony, as if the Bond had been expressly to pay money; for what difference is
there between a Bond expressly to pay money, and a Bond to resign (which is to
pay money, if the Patron say, either pay me so much or resign when all the
world knows in such a Case the Parson must pay the money, or resign) and be
undone? And the world shall never persuade me, that those reverend Judges that
gave these Judgments ever intended further: and I hope that those reverend
Judges, that now supply their places, will discountenance and discourage such
practices that tend so much to the ruin of the Church and Religion; for I know
no Law that tends more to the advancement of learned and religious men than
this Law does, and therefore ought to have a benign construction to the end it
was designed.

I find a Case reported, Noy. 22. T. 15 Jac. to. 2051. C. B.
I cannot say that is by an Authentic hand, but such as it is I will give it
the Reader: it was between Sir John Pascall and one Clerk in the 15 year of
King James; upon evidence to a Jury it was held, that such a Bond was
Simoniacal, but the Circumstances not appearing in the book, the Case can be of
no great Authority.

But before I shake hands with these Bonds for Resignation, it will be
convenient I give my young Clergyman some cautions against them; for it is an
old saying, the Resetter is worse than the Thief, for without Resetters there
would be sew thieves.

And 1. Advice against Bonds for Resignation.
I hold it a great disreputation for any Clergyman to give any such bond,
which may have the least tincture of Simony; nor do I believe any man of worth
will do it, unless it be upon such reasons as aforesaid.

2. If such Bond carry with it a Simonaical corrupt design, it makes the Clerk
no less guilty of Simony than the corrupt Patron; and then the Clerk not only
loses his Living by this Statute, and is for ever incapacitated to have it by
any suture Presentation, and by the Canon Law is to be degraded and
incapacitated to all other.

Lastly, if he do not resign upon request, 3 Inst. 153. Margin Noy 72.
he is subject to the whole penalty of the bond; for Simoniacal Bonds,
Contracts, etc. are not made void by this Act, but only the Presentment, etc.
And so you may observe a difference between malum in se, and malum prohibitum
by the Statute, or by the Canon Law, whereof the Judges at Common Law take no
notice.

It is now to be considered, What Covenants and agreements are within this Law.
what Covenants or Agreements shall be said to be Simoniacal within this Law.

If a Father-in-Law upon the marriage of his Daughter covenant with his
Sonin-Law without any consideration, Cro. ^ar. 425.
but voluntarily, that when such a Church falls void, which is in his gift,
that he will present him to it, this is no Simony within this Law; but it
should seem, that such Covenant in consideration of marriage, or any other
consideration, had made it Simoniacal.

So where the Patron took a bond from the Presentee to pay 10 l. Noy 142. Baker
verse. Mountford.
yearly toward maintenance of his Predecessor's Son, whilst he remained in
the University unpreferred, was held no Simony: And in that Case it was said by
Foster Justice, that it was adjudged in the Earl of Sussex's case, where the
Patron took a Bond of the Incumbent to pay 5 l. per annum to the Widow of his
Predecessor, it was not Simony; these were good charitable Resolutions; sed
quaere rationem inde; and Foster said, that notwithstanding great opposition in
that Case, the Parson enjoyed the Living at that time.

In the next place it will be fit to consider, what Church-preferments are
within this Law; the Statute only names Benefices with Cure of Souls, Dignities
in the Church, Prebends and Livings Ecclesiastical. The word Benefices with
Cure of Souls seems chiefly aimed at Parsons and Vicars in Churches parochial:
Dignities comprehend Archbishops, 3 Inst. 155
Bishops, Archdeacons, Deans, Chauncellors, Treasurers, Chaunters, Presenters,
etc. For Dignities Ecclesiastical are defined by the Civilians to be
Administratio cum Jurisdictione aliqua conjuncta; Duarynos de sacris Eccles.
ministr. and beneficiis. lib. 2. c. 6. Fletcher verse. Machaller T. 7 Car. 1.
B.R.
Prebends are particularly named and Livings Ecclesiastical are words of a
large extent, and draw in Donatives within the penalty of this Law, as has
been adjudged, though they have no cure of Souls.

Having held the Reader something long in my Discourse upon the matters
relating to the first paragraph of this Statute, I shall after some general
Observations upon it draw to a conclusion.

And first it is to be observed, Who may take advantage of Simony, quod nota.
that where any Clerk is in by Simony, or any other dignified person, every
stranger as well as the King may take advantage of it: and therefore if the
Parson, Vicar, or other dignified person shall bring any action for the Tithes
or other things belonging to his Church; Sir John Bowse verse. Wright. P. 17.
Jac. Hob. 167, 168, 177. Contract not executed.
the Defendant may avoid the action by proving that the Plaintiff obtained his
preferment by a Simoniacal Contract.

And note, that a Simoniacal Contract, where the Party is not presented in
pursuance of it, is not within the penalty of this Law; but it should seem,
that if one that has no right present a Clerk upon a Simoniacal Contract, Hob.
167.
he is within the penalty though an Usurper, but not, as has been said, to
give the King the Presentation.

It has been a question, Simonist dies Possessed, if the K. lose the turn.
Hob. 166
if the Clerk which comes in by Simony dye in possession of the Church, whether
the King should lose his Presentation: but it has been resolved that he shall
not; for the Statute makes the Presentation, admission, institution, and all
void; so that the Church was never full of an Incumbent, and nullum tempus
occurrit Regi.

And note, Simony and Patron and Clerk free. Bath verse. Potter p. 17. Jac. B.R.
there may be Simony, and neither Patron nor Clerk consent or be privy to it;
and yet the Church for that turn is by Statute given to the King: if the Clerk
be presented by the means of such corrupt Contract, though neither Patron nor
Clerk were privy or consenting to it; so the King, though he himself cannot be
guilty of Simony, may present upon a Simoniacal Contract between others, and
such Presentation is void by this Act.

Suppose a Clerk be presented upon a Simoniacal Contract, Pardon of Simony the
effect.
and then the King or Parliament, that is the King in Parliament with the
Assent of his Lords and Commons, pardons all Simony by express or general
words, Hob. 167
though this may pardon the penalties, yet the Church remains void.

I shall now conclude this Paragraph with a saying of a holy Father of the
Church, De ministeriis and hab.
viz. St. Ambrose upon this Subject: Cum ordinaretur Episcopus quid dedit?
Canen cum ordinar.
aurum fuit: quid perdidit? animam suam. Cum alium ordinaret quid accepit?
aurum fuit: quid dedit? Leprafuit.

I am now come to the second Paragraph of this Statute, 3 Inst. 155 The reason
of the Paragraph against precipitate Admiss.
which Sir Edward Cook (who was a member of this Parliament) tells us was added
to avoid hasty and precipitate admissions, institutions and inductions, etc. to
the prejudice of those that have right to present, and thereby putting them to
their actions to recover their rights, and there is seldom bribes (as I may
say) in this Case given, where the Patron has a good and sure Title.

The taking or giving above the usual Fees in this Case is as well dangerous to
the Clerk as the Officer: for the Church shall be void, so that the Patron,
that has right to present must present again; and the Usurper and Officer, that
takes more than his Fees for such expedition, forfeits double the value of the
Benefice for a year, not according to the rate in the first fruit Office, but
according to the very true value: but upon this Clause no disability rests upon
the Incumbent, but that he may by the true Patron be presented again; nor
lapse, till after six months from the time of notice given by the Bishop, etc.

And observe the penning of this clause: When the Church shall be void.
it is not that the Church shall be ipso facto void, or that the Institution,
etc. should be void; but that it shall be eft soon void, and that the Patron
shall present, as if the person were naturally dead: so that it should seem the
Church is once full by this institution and induction; and hence there may some
doubts arise, whether the Church shall be void ipso facto, or whether it must
be avoided by Ecclesiastical Sentence of Deprivation: but it seems to me, that
the Patron may present immediately without any Sentence Ecclesiastical.

3. Resignation and Exchanges Simoniacal.
The third Paragraph of this Statute is made against such as shall corruptly
for money, pension, or other benefit, resign or exchange their Livings with any
other: in that case as well the giver as the taker forfeits double the Sum of
money, etc. given and received; but this clause works no advoidance or
disability in the person that is guilty.

The fourth Paragraph preserves the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, The
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction saved.
that they may proceed judicially to censure the Parties for their corruption
in buying and selling Church-preferments: wherein as should seem the
Ecclesiastical Laws in some circumstances are more severe than this Statute;
for by that Law, as I take it, he that is convicted of Simony, Cro. El. 788,
789.
is after incapacitated not only to that Living, but to all other Church
preferments; but of this be informed by the Canonist. But I know no reason, why
those corrupt Patrons, that take bonds for resignation without any reasonable
cause apparent, may not be called to an account before the Ordinary, and
punished by Ecclesiastical censures, if it appear, they were taken to any
corrupt end, or if afterward he shall endeavor to exact money by color of
any such bonds.

I am now come to the last Paragraph of this Statute, Corrupt giving Orders and
licenses to preach.
which is also a two-edged Sword, that punishes as well the giver as taker of
greater fee or reward than the ordinary and just fees for, or for procuring,
any person to be ordained or made a minister, or giving any order or license to
preach, etc. but is more severe upon the Clergyman than the Officer; for the
Officer only forfeits forty shillings, but the Clergy forfeits ten pounds, and
all the Livings he shall take within seven years, are made void by this Law
after Induction; so that for seven years an Incapacity lies upon the Clerk; how
careful ought Clergymen to be, what Fees they give for their Orders? And note
the manner of the penning of this paragraph, that the Church shall not be void
till after Induction. The first Paragraph makes the presentation, institution
and induction, and all void: So that the Church in that case is never full. The
second Paragraph makes it void, not till after the corrupt admission,
institution, installation, induction, investure or placing; and this not till
after induction, by which means the Grantee of the next avoidance that presents
such Clerks, cannot present again: and so it is where the Patrons present by
turn, Co. 8.102.a
the presenting such a Clerk will satisfy a turn, if inducted.

Lastly, How the forf. are to be recovered.
observe all pecuniary forfeitures and penalties within this Statute are given
to the King and Informer, and are to be recovered by Bill, Plaint, Action of
Debt or Information in any of his Majesty's Courts of Record; that is, the
Chauncery, King's Bench, Commonpleas, and Exchequer at Westminster; but not in
any inferior Court of Record, and no essoin privilege, protection or wager of
Law is to be allowed; but I conceive the privilege or protection of Parliament
are not intended in these general words, but the common protections and
privilege of Officers and Courts. Quaere.
Ideo quaere inde.

It is not proper for this discourse to examine by what Authority any thing at
all is taken for giving Orders, See a Canon against it, and what F^es shall be
taken by the Clerks. Lindwood c. saeva and miseratis. Mat. 10. v. 8.
Admissions, Institutions, etc. Since our Savior says, Gratis accepistis,
gratis date: But he that has a mind to satisfy himself therein, let him read
that most excellent History of the Council of Trent, Page 492, 493, 494, etc.
which is faithfully translated by Sir Nathaniel Brent, where this point is
excellently discussed Pro. and Con. where I will leave my Reader and conclude
this Chapter, and in the next place show my Parson, Vicar, etc. what he is to
do before, at, and after, his Admission, Institution, and Induction.

CHAP. VI. The Sixth Chapter shows, what a Clerk is to do before, at, and
after, his admission, institution and induction, to make him a complete Parson.
NO Man at this day is capable to be Parson, Vicar, etc. Every Parson and Vicar
must be a Priest.
before he is a Priest in Orders, which he cannot be before he is four and
twenty years of Age, as has been said; and if any Person shall be admitted,
instituted and inducted into any Living before he is in Holy Orders, his
admission, institution and induction are void by the late Act of Uniformity:
Stat. 14. Car. 2. cap. 4. Subscription and Certificate.
Secondly, he must make his Subscription according to the said Act, and have a
Certificate from the Bishop or, etc. under his Hand and Seal that he has so
done; and then within two Months after he is inducted, he must upon some
Sunday, or Lord's Day, during Divine Service (that is, Read Prayers.
after some part of the Divine Service of the Church for that day appointed is
read, Read the Articles.
and before the whole is finished) read the nine and thirty Articles of
Religion in the Parish Church, etc. Stat. Supra.
into which he shall be inducted, and declare his unfeigned assent and consent
to all that is therein contained; and he must likewise within two Months after
actual possession of such Benefice, etc. (which is intended within two Months
after induction, or installation, etc.) read the Book of Common Prayer (that
is, the whole Service of the Church appointed for that day, as it is there
appointed) and likewise declare his assent and consent to all the matters and
things therein contained in these words. St. t. supra.
I. A. B. do declare my unfeigned assent and consent to all and every thing
contained and prescribed in and by the Book entitled, Declaration.
The Book of Common Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments, and other
Rites and Ceremonies of the Church, according to the use of the Church of
England, together with the Psalter or Psalms of David, pointed as they are to
be sung or said in Churches, and the form or manner of making, Ordaining, and
Consecrating of Bishops, Priests and Deacons.

And if any Parson, Vicar, etc. fail in the doing of any of these things
beforementioned, or any of these things be neglected, the Church becomes void;
and the Clerk that makes such failure, in case he shall sue for his Tithes, or
any other Church duty, or other thing belonging to his Church; if the Defendant
insist upon it, must prove the doing of all these things: But usually the
Judges in favor of the Clergy, after they have been in possession of their
Livings ten or twenty Years, or any considerable time, will presume all these
things regularly done, and will not put the Parsons, etc. to the precise proof
of them.

And it is to be observed that the Parsons, Vicars, etc. must upon the
acceptance of every new Living or Ecclesiastical preferment within this Law
repeat all these things; for the performance of all these things upon the
taking of one Living will not satisfy for any other.

I shall give my reverent Clergy Men therefore this caution, Advice to the
Clergy.
that if any of them have accepted any Ecclesiastical preferments, and have
negligently omitted any of these things, and that thereby may be lapsed to the
King, that they obtain presentations from the King ad Corroborandum; and that
thereupon they perfect all their former neglects.

And for the future I advise them, that they first have some credible Witnesses
present, when they make their Subscriptions before the Bishop; and that they
attest the Bishop's Certificate; and that they get two Books of Articles; and
that when they read the thirty nine Articles they give one of those Books of
Articles to some credible Parishioners to read with them, and then attest the
Book, that they were present, and heard the Clerk read the said thirty nine
Articles during the time of Common Prayer, and declared his unfeigned assent
and consent to all the matters and things therein contained, by subscribing
their names thereunto; and that the Clergy Man keep safely the said Book of
Articles with this attestation.

And I advise, that when he reads the Book of Common Prayer, which must (as
above is said) be read Morning and Evening, in all things which is prescribed
therein, within two Months after induction; that he likewise make some
intelligent Parishioners to read with him, and give them a Copy of the
Declaration aforesaid, and at the foot of it take an attestation under their
hands of his reading the said Book of Common Prayer and Declaration, which may
be done in this form.

First, in a fair legible hand write the Declaration aforesaid, then write
under to this effect, (...) Memorand. That upon Sunday the (...) Day of (...)
in the Year of our Lord. (...) A. B. Parson of D. in the County of D. read
Common Prayers in the Parish Church of D. aforesaid, both in the forenoon and
afternoon of the same day, according to the Form and Order prescribed and
directed by the Book entitled, The Book of Common Prayer, and Administration
of the Sacraments, and other Rights and Ceremonies of the Church, according to
the use of the Church of England, together with the Psalter or Psalms of David,
pointed as they are to be sung or said in Churches, the Form or manner of
making, Ordaining, and Consecrating of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons; and
immediately after the reading the same, made a Declaration of his unfeigned
assent and consent, to all the matters and things therein contained in the Form
and words above written: And then let the Witnesses hereunto subscribe the same
Certificate; which the Clerk is to keep carefully with his Institution,
induction, and Certificate, with the Book of Articles attested, as is above
directed. And in these things I advise all Clergy Men to be very tender and
careful.

There was an Act made in the thirteenth Year of Queen Elizabeth, 13 El. cap.
12. What age a Parson ought to be.
That none should be admitted to any Benefice, unless he were three and twenty
Years of age, and a Deacon at least, and should subscribe the thirty nine
Articles before he should be admitted; and that none should be admitted to
Preach or Administer the Sacraments, unless such Persons were 24 Years of Age
at least: But this Law is in part altered by the beforementioned new Statute of
Uniformity; for now none can be admitted to any Living till he is a Priest in
Holy Orders, which he cannot be by this Statute till he is four and twenty
Tears of age.

And by the same Statute it is enacted, Who may be admitted to a Benefice of 30
l. per annum in the King's books.
that none should be admitted to any Benefice with cure of Souls of the value
of thirty pounds or upward in the King's Books, unless he be a Bachelor of
Divinity at least, or a Preacher licensed by some Bishop, or one of the
Universities of this Kingdom; and if not so qualified his Institution to be
void.

CHAP. VII. The Seventh Chapter shows the duty of the Parson, Vicar, etc. after
Induction, and the former Ceremonies performed; and treats of non-residence,
and the penalties thereof, and for what reasons the same may be excused.
HE that has orderly, as aforesaid, Parsons, etc. must be conformable. Stat. 1.
Eliz. cap. 2.
obtained an Ecclesiastical preferment in the Church of England, must be
conformable to the Government and Orders thereof, and must not use any other
public Form of Prayer, than what is prescribed by the Book of Common Prayer
before mentioned, neither must he administer the Sacraments of Baptism, and the
Lord's Supper in any other manner or form, than what is therein and thereby
directed and prescribed.

And if any Incumbent be resident upon his Living (as he ought to be) and keep
a Curate, Stat. 14. Cat. 2. cap. 14. When, and how often he must read the Common
Prayers.
he is bound by the Act of Uniformity once every month at least to read the
Common Prayers of the Church, according as they are directed by the book of
Common Prayer, in his Parish Church in his own person, or he forfeits 5 l. for
every time he fails therein. See the Statute how he is to be convicted, and the
penalty to be levied.

And the Common Prayer by that Statute is to be read before every Lecture:
Before every Lecture.
and it is not sufficient to read a piece here, and a piece there, where the
Party pleases; but they must read the whole appointed for the day orderly, as
it is appointed with all the Circumstances and Ceremonies of kneeling and
standing, as is prescribed, otherwise it is no reading of Common Prayers within
this Law; quod nota.

And note, Stat. 14. Car. 2. cap. 4.
that by the late Statute of Uniformity, the former Statutes for Uniformity and
Penalties therein are extended to this Book of Common Prayer now lately
established.

And by the Stat. Stat. 1. Eliz. cap 2.
of 1 Eliz. It is inacted, That if any Minister, that ought or should sing or
say Common Prayer, etc. refuse to use the same Common Prayers, or to administer
the Sacraments, The penalty for using other Forms of Prayer, etc.
etc. in such order and form as they are mentioned and set forth in the Common
Prayer Book, or shall wilfully or obstinately standing in the same use any
other Rite, Ceremony. Order, Form or Manner of Celebrating the Lords Supper, or
other open Prayers, or shall preach, declare, or speak any thing in derogation
or depraving of the same Book, or any thing therein contained. etc. upon
Conviction the Party guilty of any of these offenses forfeits the profits of
all his Livings and Spiritual Promotions for a year, and is to suffer
Imprisonment for six months without bail or mainprise; and upon a second
Conviction for the like offense he is to suffer imprisonment for a whole year,
and be deprived ipso facto of all his spiritual promotions; and upon a third
Conviction for the like offense shall be imprisoned during life, and lose all
his Spiritual promotions, if he have any: And if such person have no spiritual
promotions, then for the first offense he is to be imprisoned for a year, for
the second during life without bayl or mainprise.

I have been the briefer in these matters upon the Statutes of Uniformity,
because they are printed at large before the book of Common Prayer, to which I
refer the Reader for his fuller satisfaction; and they are so plain and full,
that they need no Comment, but to advise all Clergymen to read and observe
them cautiously.

I shall only give the Reader this further caution, that if any Parson, Vicar,
13 Eliz. c. ^2.
etc. shall maintain any Doctrine, contrary to the thirty nine Articles of
Religion, it is cause of Deprivation; or if he administers the Sacraments in
any other Form than is prescribed by the Book of Common Prayer, he forfeits 100
l. by a Statute made in the 13 year of Queen El. And by the new Statute of
Uniformity this penalty is extended to such as do it contrary to the present
book of Common Prayer now used.

The next Duty Incumbent upon the Parsons, Vicars, etc. is, that they be
resident upon their Cures, a Duty Incumbent upon every one, that has the cure
of Souls in the Church of Christ; Page 217. in the English Translation.
for, as Padre Paulo in his most excellent History of the Council of Trent
observes, that in the first 700 years after Christ, Non-Residence when it came
into the Church.
there was not any such thing known in the Western Church, that any man should
have an Office or Title in the Church, and not do the duty; and many Canons and
Decrees have been made against non-Residence: And in the Council of Trent it
was held by much the greater and better number of the Prelates and Fathers in
that Council, The same hist. p. 217. etc. 486, etc. 509, etc. 496 Residence
Jure divino.
that Residence was Jure divino, and undoubtedly had been so decreed, if the
Pope had not used all his old stratagems against it; but whilst the Pope had
power to dispense with residence, all the Canons and Decrees of that Church
were of little greater effect than to fill his Coffers with money; for in this
Kingdom, how many Bishoprics, Abbeys, Priories, etc. were enjoyed (I mean the
profits of them) by Forraigners, that never saw them, or took any care of their
duties? I should be glad it were much better now.

But the Parliament of England, which has ever been the best Guardian of the
Church, made bold with his Holiness, and in 21 year of King H. 8. made an Act
of Parliament to this effect.

That as well every Spiritual Person then being promoted to any Arch-deaconry,
21 H. 8. cap. 13. Act against non-Residence.
Deanery or Dignity in any Monastery, or Cathedral, or other Church conventual,
or Collegiate, or being benefieed with any Parsonage or Vicarage; as all and
every spiritual Persons, which then after should be promoted to any of the said
Dignities or Benefices with any Parsonage or Vicarage from the Feast of St.
Michael then next following, should be personally resident and abiding in, at,
or upon, his said Dignity, Prebend, or Benefice, or one of them at the least;
and that if any such person wilfully absented himself from his said Benefice,
etc. by the space of a Month at one time, or two Months at several times in any
one year to be accounted at several times, that such Person so absenting should
forfeit ten pounds for every such default, the one half to the King, the other
half to the Informer to be recovered, as is expressed in the Act.

And by the same Act, there is a Proviso worth mentioning, though now out of
date, to this effect.

That if any Person should procure any Dispensation from Rome or elsewhere to
be non-resident, the Party guilty should forfeit twenty pounds. By this and
other Statutes mentioned in this book it is evident, that the Parliaments of
England, even when the Pope was in full power, often made bold with his
Holiness to correct his, and his Court's corruption.

Certainly this was an excellent Law, if there had been no more in it but the
dispensing with such persons as by the same Law are qualified to have two
Livings; and the persons capable to qualify Chaplains to have pluralities had
not been grown so numerous, that there is but few of the best Livings but they
are held by Pluralists, and they either by color of attending their Lords,
their Deanries, or Prebends, find an excuse to be non-Resident, which has made
this Law of little effect. The ends of this Law To do their duties.


This good Law principally aimed at three ends or effects:

1. That every Clergyman might attend his duty in reading the public prayers
of the Church, administering the Sacraments, preaching, inspecting the behavior
of his flock, and performing all sacred and divine Offices, like a good and
faithful Shepherd: and I do wonder with what Conscience any Clergyman can
expect his dues from his Parishioner, that does not perform his duty in the
first place.

2. The second end of this good Law, to avoid Dilapidations.
is to avoid Dilapidations in the Buildings belonging to their Livings: for you
shall seldom see a Non-resident, but he is also a Dilapidator; and it is no
wonder that he that neglects the Flock, lets the Sheepfold go to ruin.

3. To maintain hospitality. Stat. 15. B. 2. cap. 6. and 4 H. 4 cap. 12.
The third end of this good Law was to maintain hospitality: and I would wish
every Clergyman to remember that the poor have a share in the Tithes with him.

And to this end the Statute enjoins the Clergyman to be resident in and upon
his Living, that is his Parsonage or Vicarage House if he have any, and not at
any other House in the Parish; Co. 6.21.b
but Imprisonment without fraud, or removing for health without fraud, or not
having a House upon his glebe, excuses his residence for the time; for the
words of the Statute are (That he that wilfully absents himself,) So if any
Parson, Vicar, etc. shall be in the King's service beyond Sea, or in any
Pilgrimage, or shall without fraud abide in any University within this Realm to
study, Who may be non-Residents.
or is a Chaplain qualified within this Stat. to have Plurality of Benefices,
25 H. 8. cap. 16.
or the Chaplains of any of the Judges of the King's Bench, or Common Pleas,
Chancellor or chief Baron of the Exchequer, of the King's Attorney and
Solicitor, and the Chaplains of the Chancellor, of the Duchy of Lancaster, 33
H. 8. cap. 28.
of the Augmentations, First-fruit and Tenths; of the Master of the Wards, the
Surveyer general, of the Treasurer of the Chamber, and Augmentations, and
Groom of the Stool, whilst such Chaplains abide, and are attendant in the
Households of their Masters; and the Master of the Rolls, 21 H. 8. cap. 13.
the Dean of the Archer, and the Chancellor, and Commissaries of Archbishops,
and Bishops, and the twelve Masters of the Chancery so long as they shall
continue in their places; may be non-resident: but the Chaplains of the
Chancellor of the Duchy, Augmentations, 33 H. 8. cap. 28.
First Fruits, Master of the Wards, Surveyer General, Treasurer of the Chamber,
and Augmentations, and Groom of the Stool, 9 E. 2. cap. 8.
are to be resident twice in a year at least, eight days at each time: And the
King may give License to any of his own Chaplains to be non-resident: 21 H. 8.
cap. 13.
And any Ecclesiastical Person to attend any Suit in the Chancery or
Star Chamber without fraud may be non-resident for so long time, etc. Masters
die, etc. Co. 4.119. a;


But if a Chaplain be qualified in respect of his Service to have a plurality,
and his Lord or Master die, be attaint of Treason, Felony, or removed from his
place, it will not serve the Chaplain's turn to be resident upon one of his
Livings without the King's special License with a non obstante.

But Bishops, and Archbishops are not within this Law, but not exempt from
this duty; there being several Canons that require it: Bishops residence
requirable.
and Bishops may be compelled hereunto by Ecclesiastical censures by their
Superiors; and the King may compel them by seizing their temporalites: a
notable precedent whereof we have in the the time of H. 3. 1 Inst. 25
When Popery was at highest, and the King not looked upon as head of the Church;
yet that King sent his Writ Mandatory to the Bishop of Hereford to be attendant
upon his Bishopric, otherwise he would seize of all his Temporalties.

And now I have done with non-residence one of the Pests of the Church: I will
in the next place show what Dilapidations are; and the several ways the same
are punishable, this being often the effect and fruit of Non-residence.

CHAP. VIII. Shows what Dilapidation is, and in what manner punishable, and
what remedies the Successor has.
A Dilapidation is the pulling down or destroying in any manner any of the
Houses or Buildings belonging to a Spiritual Living, Dilapidations what.
or the Chauncel, or suffering them to run into ruin or decay; or wasting, and
destroying the Woods of the Church; or committing, or suffering any wilful
waste in or upon the inheritance of the Church. And certainly there can be
nothing worse becoming the dignity of a Clergyman than non-residence and
dilapidations, which for the most part go hand in hand. I wish our Church had
not too much reason to complain of both. There has been diverse Canons of the
Church made against this crime, as I may justly call it; but as in others, so
in this, I shall confine my self to our own Provincials: and I find in a
Provintial Council or Synod held under Edmund Archbishop of Canterbury, in the
Year of our Lord 1234. which was as I take it, about the 18th Year of H. 3. a
Canon to this effect.

Si Rector alicujus Ecclesiae decedens domus Ecclesiae deliquerit dirutas,
Canon against Dilapidation. Lindwood. Chap. Si Rector alieujus Ecclesiae.
de bonis suis Ecclesiasticis tanta portio deducatur, quae sufficiat ad
reparandum haec, and alios defectus Ecclesiae supplendos. Idem statuimus circa
illos Vicarios, qui solvendo modicam pensionem omnes Ecclesiae habent
proventus: nam cum ad praemissa teneatur talis portio deducta satis poterit and
debet inter debita computari; Semper tamen rationabilis consideratio sit
habenda ad facultates Ecclesiae, cum haec portio fuerit habenda.

Now if it be demanded what Houses are meant within this Canon, the Gloss tells
you, ut puta mansum Rectoriae vicariae and alia Edificia quaecunque, quorum
Edificatio sive reparatio spectat ad ipsum Rectorem.

By the Letter of this Canon the Rector is to repair the whole Church; Co. 5 6
7. Cro. Eliz. 659. Not to repair the Church but Chauncel.
but by the Custom of England the Owners of the Houses and Lands in every
Parish are bound to repair the Body of the Church, and the Rector only the
Chauncel; unless by particular custom it has been otherwise: And in this point
the Common Law is kinder to the Parsons, Vicars, etc. than the Canon Law: and
the Common Law being here to be preferred annuls that part of the Canon: 2
Inst. 653
and the Gloss upon the words defec^' Ecclesiae add, A Canon for relief against
Dilapidatient.
Haec litera potestintelligi de defectibus Ecclesiae, quae pertinent ad curatum
ipsius Ecclesiae in solidum sic, quod non pertineant ad alios, ut puta, in
Cancella, and aliis ad onus Rectoris de jure vel consuetudine spectantibus.

But this Canon seems only to affect the Ecclesiastical goods: Verbo
Ecclesiasticis.
and what those might be deserves the judgment of the Gloss; which tells you
they are such as jure and nomine Ecclesiae obvenientibus; talia enim bona sunt
per viam tacitae hypothecae ad reparationem hujusmodi faciendam obligata.

And if the goods of the Church shall not suffice, then the Gloss tells us, Si
Rector bona Ecclesiastica expenderit in meliorationem patrimonii sui, vel si
propter nimiam diligentiam propriorum negotiorum neglexerit negotia Ecclesiae
procurare, Et sic Ecclesia sit dampnum passa; tenetur satisfacerc de bonis suis
patronalibus, si quae habuerit. But there has been made a further question,
whether satisfaction for dilapidations should be preferred in payment before
Debts and Legacies: And as the Common Law prefers the payment of Debts before
damage for Dilapidations; So the Ecclesiastical Law prefers the damage for
Dilapidations before the payment of Legacies; to which hear what the Gloss
says: Si Legatarii tanquam Creditores petant legata sibi relicta, and Praelatus
petat sumptus reparationis Edificiorum Ecclesiae; talis Praelatus debet
praeferre caeteris Legatariis: and gives this reason. Nam Legata solvi non
debent nisi prius deducto aere alieno. So that the Ecclesiastical Law agrees
with the Common Law in this, that Debts are to be preferred before Legacies.

The next thing considerable is, Verbo reparand. haec.
what repairs are requirable in this case, which is answered by the Gloss. Et
intellige hanc reparationem fieri debere secundum exigentiam and qualitatem rei
reparandae, etc.

Thus far I have followed the Canon and Gloss thereupon: Now in the next place
we will show you what we have relating to this matter amongst the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm.

And first, Waste by Bishops.
I find that at a Parliament at Carlisle in the 35th Year of Edward the first a
great complaint was made against Anthony, then Bishop of Durham, Co 11.49.2
for waste and destruction of the woods belonging to his Bishopric by gift
sale and otherwise, Cause of deprivation.
and for erecting forges of Iron and Lead, and making Charcoals of the Wood to
be spent in their Iron and Lead works, to the disinheritance and impoverishing
of his Church, and in prejudice of the King and his Crown, and of the Chapter
of Durham. To which the answer is, Inhibetur per Breve de Cancellaria Episcopo
and ministris suis, ne faciant vastum de contentis in petitione.

By which it appears, M. 23. Ei inter adjudicat coram Rege Huntsf. 83.
that if a Bishop or any other Clergyman do waste upon the Woods or Lands of
his Church, that a prohibition may be sued in Chancery to prohibit him: for
Ecclesia est infra aetatem and in custodia Domini Regis, qui tenetur jura and
haereditates ejusdem manu tenere and defendere.

And the Archbishop of Dublyn was fined 300. Rot. Patrum 14 H. 3. m. 8.
Marks for the disaforresting a Forest belonging to his Archbishopric.

And it seems by several Books of the Common Law, that in case a Bishop, Abbot,
Prior, etc. waste the Lands, Woods, or Houses of his Church, he may be deposed
or deprived by his Superior: so that it appears clearly, 20 H. 6.46. a 2 H.
4.3. b; Co. 11.94 b; 29 E 3.16. a.. 9 E. 4.34. a
that the fault in this case lies heavy upon those that have the Visitation and
Superiority, that they do not take care against the wasting and destruction of
the Buildings, Houses, Woods, etc. of the Church; and that the Successors
should not be put to seek remedy against Executors and Administrators, who are
too active in finding shifts to avoid their actions, to avoid which there is a
good Law made in the thirteenth Year of Queen Elizabeth to this effect.

That if any Parson, Statute against fraudulent Conveyances. Stat. 13 Eliz.
cap. 2.
Vicar, etc. shall make any conveyance of his goods to defraud his Successor of
his remedy, the like Suit is given in the Spiritual Court against the Grantee,
as the Successor should have had against the Executors or Administrators of the
Predecessors.

But this Act gives no remedy at Common Law, Stat. 13. El. c. 5.
because by another Act made at the same Parliament all such Grants to defraud
any Person or Persons of their just actions are made void.

So that the Plaintiff has equal remedy in both cases: Suits for Dilapidations
are most properly and naturally to be sued in the Spiritual Courts; and if any
prohibition should be granted, Fitz. N.B. 51. f.
the same ought to be superseded by a consultation; but this is intended where
the Suit is grounded upon the Canon Law.

But the Successor may upon the Custom of England have a special action upon
the case against the Dilapidator, Action upon the Case at Law for
Dilapidations. T. 8. H. 7.10. 69. B.R. T. 18. H. 7. to. 69. C.B. P. 12 and 13
H. 8. rot. 126. C.B. H. 15 H. 8. to. 306 C. B. in 12 H. 8. to. 730. C. B. H.
15. Jac. 10.474, etc. The Custom upon which the Action is grounded.
his Executors or Administrators, whereof there are multitudes of precedents
even in the time of Popery, whereof the Reader has a taste in the margent: By
all which it appears, that by the Custom of England, which is the Common Law;
omnes and singuli Praebendarii, Rectores, Vicarii, Regni Angliae pro tempore
existentes, omnes and singulas domos and Edificia Praebendorum, Rectoriorum and
Vicariarum suorum reparare and sustentare, and ea Successoribus suis reparata
and sustentata dimittere teneantur. Et si hujusmodi Praebendarii, Rectores and
Vicarii domus and Edificia hujusmodi Successoribus suis Sic, ut praemittatur,
reparata and sustentata non dimiserunt and deliquerunt; sed ea irreparata and
dilapidata permiserunt, Executores sive Administratores bonorum and catallorum
talium Praebendariorum, Rectorum and Vicariorum, post eorum mortem de bonis and
catallis decedentium Successoribus talium Praebendariorum, Rectorum and
Vicariorum, tantam pecuniae summam quantam pro necessaria reparatione and
edificatione hujusmodi domorum and Edificiorum expendi aut solvi sufficient,
satisfacere teneantur.

And upon this Custom actions of the case have been frequently brought, both
anciently, and of later times, and damages recovered.

And note, Stat. 14. El. c. 11.
that by a Statute made in the fourteenth Year of Queen Elizabeth it is
expressly enacted, that all the Moneys and Damages that shall be recovered for
Dilapidations are to be expended and laid out, in, and about the repair of the
Houses, etc. dilapidated, wherein the Visitors of those Churches ought to take
care.

It will not be altogether improper to conclude this Chapter with the Stat. 35
E. 1.
of 35 Eliz. entitled, Ne Rectores prosternant arbores in Coemiterio; whereby
it is inacted, or rather the Common Law declared to be in these words.

We do prohibit the Persons of the Church, Against cutting the trees in the
Churchyard.
that they do not presume to fell them (viz. the trees in the Churchyard) down
unadvisely, but when the Chauncel of the Church wants necessary Reparations:
neither shall they be converted to any other use, unless the body of the Church
do want repair; in which Case the Parsons of their Charity shall do well to
relieve the Parishioners with bestowing upon them the same trees, which we will
not command to be done, but we will commend it when it is done.

By this Law it appears, that the Churchyard and the soil thereof is in the
Parson, and by consequence the trees are in the Parson or Rector, that grow
therein. But because the Trees that grow there are for the most part planted
there for the shelter and ornament of the Church from Tempests and Storms;
therefore the Parliament has granted a Prohibition in this Case against the
Rectors and Parsons of Churches, that they should not cut down these trees for
any other use, but the necessary repairs of the Church and Chauncel, which in
truth was no more than what the Common Law enjoined: for if the Rector had gone
about to have cut them down for any other use, the Patron might have had a
Prohibition; but now I conceive the Rector or Impropriator, that cuts down any
Trees growing in the Churchyard for any other cause than for the repair of the
Church or Chauncel, may be indicted and fined upon this Statute at the Common
Law.

If the Bishops and Archdeacons in their Visitations would take care, these
Dilapidations might easily be avoided, which is a great dishonor to the
Clergy, and cannot be pleasing to God Almighty or good men: And the Canon
enjoins the Archdeacons and other Officials, ut in visitationibus Ecclesiarum
faciendis diligentem exhibeant considerationem ad fabricam Ecclesiae and maxim
cancell', Cap. Archidiaconi and infra.
si forte indigeant reparatione, and si quos invenerint defectus hujusmodi,
certum sub poena praefigant terminum infra quem emendentur vel suppleantur, etc.

CHAP. IX. The ninth Chapter shows for what Causes a Parson, Vicar, etc. may be
deprived by any Statute Law; and what matters are allowed for good causes of
Deprivation at the Common Law.
DEprivation or Deposition is, Deprivation and Deposition quid.
where a man by any Statute Law, or by any judicial Sentence Ecclesiastical,
that has proper Jurisdiction, is made incapable to hold or enjoy his
Parsonage, Vicarage, or other spiritual promotion, or dignity: and the causes
of such Deprivation or Deposition are properly and naturally determinable by
the Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm. Where determinable.
But because generally there are Estates of Freehold dependant upon these
promotions and dignities, and annexed to them inseparably, which rest at the
sole determination of the Common Law; the Courts of Common Law do sometimes
inspect and regulate the proceedings of the Ecclesiastical Courts; and where
they proceed against the Rules of common Law, they frequently prohibit them: I
have therefore thought fit to show what causes of Deprivation or Deposition
have been allowed and approved of by the Judges and Courts of the Common Law,
or by any of the Statutes of this Realm. But there are many more causes of
Deprivation by the Canons and Laws Ecclesiastical, which being out of my
profession I shall not presume to discourse of.

1. Co. 11.49. b; Waste and Dilapidation cause of Deprivation, etc.
The Dilapidating and wasting the woods and houses and other buildings of the
Church is held a good Cause of Deprivation or Deposition, as appears in the
precedent Chapter and the Books there vouched in the margent.

2. Simony cause of Deprivation.
The Clerk that obtains any preferment in the Church by any Simoniacal Contract
or agreement may be deprived by his Ordinary, etc. as appears at large in the
fifth Chapter here before upon that Subject.

3. 1 El. cap. 2. Stat. 14. Car. 2.4. To use other Forms of Prayer, the second
offense.
That if any Parson, etc. shall refuse to use the book of Common Prayer or
administer the Sacraments in the order there prescribed, or shall wilfully and
obstinately standing in the same use any other Rite or Ceremony order form or
manner of Celebrating the Lord's Supper, or other open Prayers, or shall preach
declare or speak any thing in derogation thereof or depraving the same, or any
thing therein contained, and having formerly been convicted for the like
offense, shall upon his second Conviction be deprived ipso facto.

4. If any Parson, Vicar, etc. Stat. 14. Car. 2. cap. 4. Neglecting to read
Prayers within two months after Induction.
shall not within two months next after Induction upon some Lord's day openly
publicly and solemnly read the Morning and Evening Prayers appointed to be
read the same day according to the Book of Common Prayer, and after such
reading shall not openly and publicly before the Congregation there assembled
declare his unfeigned assent and consent to the use of all the things therein
contained in such manner as is directed before here in the seventh Chapter; and
if there be any lawful Impediment, then if he do not do the same within one
Month after the impediment removed; such Parson, Vicar, etc. shall be deprived
ipso facto. 13 El. cap. 12. To maintain any doctrine against the 39. Art. of
Religion. 5 B. 2. tit. Trial 54. Misereant, Infidels, Schismatics and
Heretics Depriv. f. 3.


5. If any person, which shall have any Ecclesiastical preferment, shall
advisely maintain or affirm directly any Doctrine contrary or repugnant to the
39 Articles of Religion, and being convented before the Bishop of the Diocese
or Ordinary or before the high Commissioners shall persist therein and not
revoke his Error, or after such Revocation shall eftsoon affirm such untrue
Doctrine, he may be deprived.

6. If any person shall obtain a preferment in the Church, which is a a
Misboliever.
Miscreant an Atheist, etc. 38 E. 3.2. b. Dyer 8 and 9 p. 254. Co. 558. a Dyer.
293. p. 1, and 2.
, Infidel, Schismatic or Heretic, he may be deprived.

7. So if one be made a Parson, Vicar, etc. that is not of free Condition, but
a Villain, or that is illiterate and not able to perform his duty, Slave,
Villain, illiterate and criminous person may be deprived.
or that is guilty of any heinous Crime, as Murder, Manslaughter, Perjury,
Forgery, or that is mere Laicus and not in holy Orders, he may be deprived.

8. Allen verse. Nash. P. 13. Car. 1. B R. Disobedience to his Ordinary cause of
Depriv. Cro. Jac. 37. Nonconformity. Quod nota.
A Parson, Vicar, etc. may be deprived for being disobedient and incorrigible
to their Ordinary, etc.

9. And it was resolved by all the Judges of England 2 Jacob. That
nonconformity was a good Cause of Deprivation, and it was declared by them all,
that in case any Canons were made by the Clergy for the good Government of the
Church, and approved and confitmed by the King (as they ought) that the
obstinate disobeying of them was a just cause of Deprivation.

10. 2 H. 4.37. Tuking a second Benefice:
If any Parson, Vicar, etc. have one Benefice with Cure of Souls, and take
another incompatible without a faculty and dispensation, it is a just cause of
Deprivation.

11. Dyer 133. p. i. Priest to marry was cause of Deprivation.
In the time of Popery it was cause of Deprivation for a Priest to marry, but
not to have two or three Concubines, as they called them, but more of this
hereafter.

12. Co. 11.98. b 2 H. 4.3. 9 E. 4.34. 20 H. 6.36. 29 E. 3.16.
Dilapidation, Destruction of woods, etc. or Alienation of Land belonging to
the Church by any Bishop, Abbot, Prior, Parson, Vicar, etc. have been held and
adjudged good Causes of Deprivation, and it is very fit it were practiced,
Dilapidation, Waste, Alienation of the Lands cause of Deprivation. Deprivation
ipso facto.
where after monition there is not Reformation.

There may be a question started, what shall be intended by the words deprived
ipso facto; whether by those words the Church immediately shall become void by
the fact done, or not till Conviction or Sentence declaratory. The words ipso
facto are of late time crept into acts of Parliament, as that for striking with
a weapon in a Churchyard, the Party shall ipso facto be excommunicate: Dyer
275. b. p. 48.
and in that Case it is made a quere in Dyer; and having not met with any
Resolution in the point, I shall not presume to give my opinion in the Case,
but leave it to the determination of the learned: But in that Case by the
Canonist requiritur Sententia declaratoria. Quaere.


I must consess, Lindwood c: quia incontinentiae vitium verb. ipso facto.
in this Chapter I may seem to transgress upon the Canonists and Civilians as
well as in some other, but I have gone no further upon this Subject, than what
I have met with in our own Books, and I must agree, that the Ecclesiastical
Courts have the sole Jurisdiction in all Causes of Deprivation, Depositions
Resignations, etc. And yet the Judges of the Common Law have power to correct
their proceedings, if they shall proceed against the Rules of the Common Law,
which is the reason we meet with these things in our Books, and it may be some
advantage to the Civilians to know, how far the Common Law approves of their
proceedings: and having said what I have to say upon this Subject, I shall
proceed next to show, what Leases Parsons, Vicars and other Ecclesiastics may
make at this day of the Glebes, Tithes, Farms, etc. and within the danger of
what Statutes they may fall.

CHAP. X. The Tenth Chapter shows, what Leases Parsons, Vicars and other
Ecclesiastical Persons may make of their Glebe, Tithes, Farms, etc. and what
Farms they may take, and within the danger of what Statutes they may fall.
HAving undertaken this Work chiefly in favor of the Parsons and Vicars, What
Leases Clergymen may make.
I designed to have meddled with no other Orders of the Church but those only;
but having in many other things been enforced to intermingle the concerns of
other Orders with those of the Parsons and Vicars, I shall beg the Readers
pardon, that in this Chapter, where I am to treat of the Leases which may be
made by Parsons and Vicars, I likewise take in all other Orders of the Church
with the Colleges; the Learning concerning Leases being of use and necessary
for all people to know, and which I shall in this Chapter put into as good a
method as the subject matter will permit.

And because the Learning of these Leases will depend upon several Statutes, it
will not be amiss first to examine what Leases or Alienations the several
persons we have to do with in this Chapter might have made at Common Law before
the Statutes, and then to consider where, or in what manner, the several
Statutes have enlarged, abridged or restrained their power at Common Law.

And first, At Common Law. 1 Inst. 45. a;
at the Common Law no Bishop, Abbot, Prior, Dean, Prebend, or other single
Corporation, could make any Alienation or Lease to bind their Successors
without the confirmation of their Chapter, Covent, etc.

The first Statute that made any alteration in these cases was the Stat. The
enabling Act of 32. H. 8. c. 28.
of 32 H. 8. which is commonly called the enabling Statute, whereby it is
enacted,

That all Leases then after to be made of any Manors, Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments, by writing under Hand and Seal for term of years, or for term of
the life, by any Person or Persons of the full age of 21 years, having any
estate of Inheritance either in Fee-simple, or Fee-tail, in their own rights,
or in the right of their Churches, etc. shall be good and effectual in the Law
against the Leasors, their Wives, Heirs, and Successors.

Provided that Act should not extend to any Lease of any Manors, etc. Where
any old Lease should be in being, unless the same expire be surrendered or ended
within one year after the making of such new Lease, nor shall extend to any
Grant to be made of any Reversion of any Manors, etc. nor to any Lease of any
Manors, etc. which have not most commonly been letten to Farm or occupied by
the Farmers thereof by the space of twenty years next before such Lease thereof
made, nor to any Lease to be made without impeachment of waste, or to any Lease
to be made above the number of three Lives or twenty years at the most from the
day of the making thereof, and that upon the making of every such Lease there
be reserved yearly during the said Lease due and payable to the said Leasors
their Heirs and Successors, to whom the reversion shall appertain etc. so much
yearly Farm or Rent or more, as has most accustomably been yielden and paid
for the said Manors, etc. so to be letten within twenty years next before the
Lease thereof made, etc.

Provided this Act should not extend to give any Liberty or power to any
Parson, Vicar, etc. to make any Lease or Grant of any of their Messuages,
Lands, Tithes, etc. or in any other manner than they should or might have done
before the making of the said Act.

So now, where before the making of this Act no Archbishop, Bishop,
Archdeacon, Dean or Prebend could have made any Lease to have bound his
Successors without the confirmation and consent of their Chapters, etc. as
aforesaid: Now by this Act they are enabled to make leases for three Lives or
one and twenty years without any confirmation at all with these qualifications.
What qualities such Leases must have. Must be in writing indented.


1. Such Lease must be made by writing Indented, and not by parol or deed poll.

2. Must begin from the making or day of making. Old Lease must expire with a
year. Co. 5.2. b;
It must be made to begin from the making or day of the making of such Lease.

3. If there be any old Lease in being at the time of the making of such Lease,
it must expire, be surrendered or ended within a Year after the making of such
new Lease, and such surrender must be absolute and not upon condition.

4. Must not be a double Lease.
Fourthly, there must not be a double Lease in being at one and the same time,
the one for Years, and the other for Lives.

5. Of what things such Lease may be. Co. 5.3. a. More 778
Such Lease must be of Lands manurable or corporeal, which are necessary to be
letten, and out of which a Rent may be reserved, and not of things that lie
merely in Grant; as Fairs, Markets, Tithes, Tolls, Franchises, Advowsons, etc.

6. Of Lands usually letten.
Such Lease must be of Lands, etc. which have most commonly been letten to
Farm, or occupied by the Farmers thereof for the more part of twenty years
before the making of such Lease: So if they have been so let for eleven years
within the twenty years next before the making of the new Lease, it suffices:
Co. 6.37. b
and a letting to Farm by Copy of Court-Roll is a sufficient letting to Farm
within this Statute to enable the making of such new Lease.

7. The accustomed Rent must be reserved.
There must be reserved upon every such Lease, and payable during the
continuance thereof to the Leasor his Successors, etc. so much Farm or Rent as
has most accustomably been yielded and paid for the Land so demised within
twenty years next before such Lease made: so that it sufficieth, Co. 6.37. b
if the yearly Rent or Farm be reserved, though Herriots and other casual
services be omitted; Ibid.
so if a greater Rent than formerly be reserved, it suffices. But if Lands
usually letten be demised with any other Lands, etc. though a Rent be reserved
that exceeds the value of those Lands and the old Rent; Co. 5.5. b;
yet such Lease is not good against the Successor within this Law. But if the
Rent were formerly reserved to be paid at four several days, and by the new
Lease be reserved to be paid all at one, Co. 5.37 b..
so the whole Rent be reserved yearly, it is well enough.

8. Lastly, Such Lease must not be without Impeachment of Waste.
such Lease must not be without impeachment of waste, and therefore a Lease to
one for life, remainder to another for life, remainder to a third for life is
not good against the Successor, though but for three Lives, because the
remainders make the present Tenants dispunishable for waste for the time.

But Parsons and Vicars being excepted in this enabling Law are left as they
were at the Common Law; Farsons and Viears excepted.
so that they could make no Lease to bind the Successor without the
confirmation of the Bishop and Patron, till the Stat. of 13. Eliz. which we
shall speak of hereafter.

And note that it has been held, Co. 8 70. b. Lease for years determinable
upon Lives.
that a Lease for ninety nine years, if one two or three Lives so long live,
has been held good within this Statute.

But this Act, as appears by what has been said, conferred a new power upon
single Corporations; but did not in any thing restrain their ancient power in
making long Leases and Alienations of their very Scites, Demesns, etc. with
confirmations as aforesaid, which was a great prejudice to the Church in
general, a means of Dilapidations, and a great hindrance of hospitality: and
therefore,

In the first Year of Queen Eliz. 1 Eliz. c 19. More 107. Bishops restraned.
it was enacted, that all Gifts Grants Feoffments Fines and other Conveyances
and Estates from the first day of that present Parliament to be had made done
or suffered by any Archbishop or Bishop of any Honors Castles Manors Lands
Tenements or other Hereditaments, being part of the possessions of his
Archbishopric or Bishopric, or united appertaining or belonging to any the
same Arch-Bishopricks or Bishoprics, to any Person or Persons bodies politic
or incorporate (other than the Queens Majesty her Heirs and Successors) whereby
any Estate or Estates should or might pass from the said Archbishops or
Bishops or any of them, other than for the term of twenty one years or three
Lives from any such time as any such Lease Grant or assurance shall begin, and
whereupon the old accustomed yearly Rent or more shall be reserved and payable
yearly during the said term of twenty one years or three Lives, shall be
utterly void and of no effect to all intents constructions and purposes, any
Law eustom or usage to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

Note, the exception, 1 Jacobi c. 3.
which gives or rather reserves the power to grant, etc. to the Queen, etc. was
made void by a Statute made 1 Jac.

And note also, Leases in other Forms not void but voidable. Small wood and
Sale verse. le Evesq. Lich. and alios P^ 31. El. to. 21 65. Co. 3.59.
that though this Statute enacts, that all Leases made in any other form shall
be void and of none effect to all intents and purposes; yet it has been
adjudged, that is only to be intended as against the Successors, and that
Leases made in other forms shall be good notwithstanding against the party
himself that makes them, Cro. Jac. 95.
and may be affirmed by the Successor by the receipt of the Rent reserved
thereupon.

And note, 1 Eliz. A private Act. Co. 4.76. Co. 5.2. b; Cro. El. 874.
this is a private Act of Parliament, that must in all cases be pleaded, and
cannot be given in evidence.

And note also, that though this Statute do not restrain demising of any Lands
not formerly demised, yet it does it by implication; for the accustomable Rent
must be reserved, and unless accustomable let, there cannot be an accustomable
Rent; and Leases within this Statute must have all the restrictions in that of
32. H. 8. beforementioned.

And it must be of things manurable, Of what things such Leases may be made. Co
5.3 a.
as has been said, out of which a Rent may be reserved: but some are of
opinion that Tithes or things not manurable may be demised for twenty one
years, because an Action of debt will lie upon the Contract: More 778. Sir
Timothy Tourneur, Sergeant le Roy.
and so it was adjudged, as a learned Sergeant at Law informed me, in the case
of the Precentor of Paul's about 17. Jacobi; and that the Successor shall have
an Action of debt upon this Contract by the Stat. of 21 H. 8. cap. 28.

Upon this Statute and the former it has been held, 1 Inst. 45. a; Concurrent
Leases.
that Archbishops and Bishops may with confirmation of the Dean and Chapter
make concurrent Leases, that is, notwithstanding there be a Lease in being for
twenty one years, they may make a new Lease of the same Lands to another for
twenty one years from the making thereof; and this being confirmed as aforesaid
shall bind the Successor, the other things being observed in it.

And Sir Edward Cook is of opinion, 1 Inst. 45. a;
that like concurrent Leases may be made by Deans Prebends, etc. with
confirmation: but some learned men are not satisfied herein, because by these
concurrent Leases the Successor loses his remedy for his Rent by distress
during the former term, and the Tenant may be insolvent as to an Action of debt.

The next restrictive Law is that of 13. 13 El. cap. 10. The Restrictive Law
against Leases of Deans, Prebends, etc.
Eliz. whereby it is enacted, That from thenceforth all Leases Gifts Grants
Feoffments Conveyances or Estates to be made had done or suffered by the
Masters and Fellows of any College, Dean and Chapter of any Cathedral or
Collegiate Church, Master or Guardian of any Hospital Parson, Vicar or any
other having a Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Living, or any Houses Lands Tithes
Tenements or other Hereditaments being any part of the possessions of any such
College, etc. or any wise appertaining or belonging to the same or any of
them, to any Person or Persons Bodies, etc. (other than for the term of twenty
one Years or three Lives from the time as any such Lease or Grant shall be made
or granted, whereupon the accustomed yearly Rent or more shall be reserved and
payable during the said term) shall be utterly void, etc.

The penning of this Act, Co. 5.14. b;.
and that of 1 Eliz. beforementioned being in effect the same in substance, the
construction is the same in effect; but in this Act there was no saving of
Grants to the King, and therefore this Act being for the public good had
restrained other Grants to him not warranted by this Stat. though 1 Jac. cap.
3. had never been made.

And here note, Parsons and Vicars restrained by this Law.
that as the Parsons and Vicars had not their power any wise enlarged by the
Stat. of 32 H. 8. So they had no restriction upon them till this act; but from
henceforth they are restrained from making any Lease or Grants other then for
twenty one years or three Lives with the qualifications above mentioned in the
Statutes, and such Leases must be confirmed by the Patron and Ordinary, because
excepted in the inabling Statute of 32 H. 8. before.

And whereas after the making of this Statute, Heads of Colleges, Deans,
Prebends, etc. might have made concurrent Leases, as well as Bishops might;
there is a Proviso in the Statute of 18 Eliz. 18 Eliz. c. 11. No concurrent
Lease, but within three years before the former ends.


That all Leases then after to be made by any the aforesaid Ecclesiastical
Spiritual or Collegiate Persons or others of any of their Ecclesiastical, etc.
Lands, etc. whereof any former Lease for years is in being, and not expired,
surrendered or ended within three years next after the making of any such new
Lease, should be utterly void frustrate and of none effect, any Law, etc.

By this Proviso, it should seem, the Parliament was of opinion, that
concurrent Leases might be made; but has by this Proviso so restrained them,
that they cannot be made but within three years before the Determination of the
former.

But Bishops are conceived not to be comprehended within this Proviso; Bishops
not in this Act.
for though the words are general enough, yet the particulars mentioned before
the general words being of an inferior rank, the general words cannot draw in
the more worthy.

And there is a Provision in this Act of 18 Eliz. Which Bonds and Covenants
shall be void.
That all Bonds and Covenants then after made for the making or renewing of any
Lease contrary to the intent of that Statute, or of the Statute of 13 Eliz cap.
10. should be utterly void.

By a Statute made in the 13th. 13 Eliz. c. 20 Leases of Parsons to be void by
non-Residence.
Year of Queen Elizabeth there is an Act of Parliament made, whereby it is
enacted, That no Lease made after the 15th day of May following of any Benefice
or Ecclesiastical Promotion with Cure, or any part thereof, and not being
impropriated, should endure any longer, than while the Leasor should be
ordinarily resident and serving the Cure of such Benefice without absence above
fourscore days in any one year; These wordt within the [] are repealed by 14
El. c. 11.
but that every such Lease [so soon as it or any part thereof should come to
any possession above forbidden or] immediately upon such absence shall cease
and be void, and the Incumbent so offending shall, etc. lose one years profit
of his said Benefice to be distributed by the Ordinary to the poor of the
Parish.

And by the same Statute, Charging Parsonages void.
it is further enacted, That all charging of such Benefices with Cure then
after with any pension, or with any profit out of the same to be yielded or
taken, other than Rents reserved upon Leases, should be void.

But where any Person should be qualified to have two Livings, Where a Parson
may devise, and be non-resident.
he may devise the one of them, where he is not ordinarily resident, to his
Curate only, that shall there serve the Cure. And such Lease shall endure no
longer than during such Curate's residence without absence above forty days in
any one year.

And by the 14. 14 El. cap. 11. Leases, Bonds, and Covenants to be void.
of Eliz. it is enacted, That all Leases, Bonds, Promises and Covenants of and
concerning Benefices and Ecclesiastical Livings with Cure to be made by any
Curate shall be of no other or better force, validity or continuance, than if
the same had been made by the beneficed person himself, that shall demise the
same to such Curate.

And by the same Statute it is enacted, Houses Incorporations, etc. how to he
leased.
That the restrictive Statute of 13 Eliz. cap. 10. before shall not extend to
any Grant, Assurance or Lease of any houses belonging to any the persons, etc.
( in the said Stat. of 13.) nor to any grounds to any such houses appertaining,
etc. in any City, Borough, Town Corporate or Market Town, or the Suburbs of
any of them; but that all such houses and grounds may be granted, demised and
assured, as they might have been before the making of the said Act, so always
as such house being not the Capital, or dwelling house used for the Habitation
of the Parsons, etc. nor have above ten Acres to the same.

Provided, Not to lease in reversion.
That no Lease be made by virtue of this Act in reversion, nor without
reserving the accustomed yearly Rent at least, nor for a longer term than for
forty years at most, charging the Leasee with repairs, and no alienation in
Fee, unless lands of as good yearly value be settled, etc. in lieu thereof.

There is likewise another Proviso in this act, that all Bonds, Conrracts,
Bonds, Contracts, Covenants, Promises, where to be void.
Promises and Covenants to be made for the suffering or permitting any person
to enjoy any Benefice or Ecclesiastical Promotion with Cure, or to take the
profits or fruits thereof, other than such Bonds and Covenants as shall he made
for assurance of any Lease heretofore made, shall be of no other force than
Leases made by the same person.

And by another Statute made in the 18th year of the same Queen Eliz. 18 Eliz.
c. 11.
It is enacted, That after complaint made to the Ordinary, and Sentence given
upon any offense committed by the Incumbent against the Statute of 13 Eliz.
cap. 20. whereby he shall or ought to lose a years profit of his Benefice, etc.
That then the Ordinary within two months after such Sentence, and request made
by the Churchwardens of the Parish, where, etc. or one of them, shall grant the
Sequestration of such profits to such Inhabitant or Inhabitants within the same
Parish, etc. as to him shall seem meet, etc.

And that upon default of the Ordinary, it shall be lawful for every
Parishioner, Every Parishioner may take advantage.
etc. to retain, etc. his Tithes, and for the Churchwardens to enter upon the
Glebeland Rents and Duties of every such Benenefice to be employed to the use
of the poor, etc. until such time as Sequestration shall be committed by the
Ordinary; and then the Churchwardens and Parishioners to account to such to
whom the Sequestration shall be committed, who is to employ the whole profits
according to the act, upon pain to forfeit the double value of the profits
withheld, to be recovered in the Ecclesiastical Court by the poor of the
Parish.

Having thus briefly for the Readers satisfaction given him a brief Abstract of
all the Statutes concerning the Leases of Ecclesiastics of all kinds, I shall
briefly sum them all up, and proceed to take a view of such other Statutes as
the Parsons, Vicars, etc. are in any manner in danger of.

Upon the whole matter it appears, What Leases may be made by Bishops and
Archbishops.
that Archbishops and Bishops may make Leases for twenty one years, or for one
two or three Lives, with the qualifications before mentioned without any
Confirmations at all: and they may make concurrent Leases for twnety one years
upon Leases for tweny one years from the making with confirmation of the Dean
and Chapter with such qualifications as is aforesaid, though there be above
three years in being of the old Lease at the time of the making the new, and
where the Bishop has two Chapters, there the concurrent Lease must be confirmed
by both Chapters; unless it be as it was in the Bishop of Waterford's Case,
which was thus. The Bishop of Waterford had long ago the Bishopric of
Lismore, and the Chapter united to that of Waterford; And in all Grants made of
the Lands belonging to Lismore that Chapter only confirmed, and all Grants made
of the Lands anciently belonging to the Bishopric of Waterford the Chapter of
Waterford only confirmed: Co. 12.71. a b;
and because the Union was not extant, all the Judges held the confirmation of
the one in the manner aforesaid was good, for it shall be intended, that it was
so provided for upon the consolidation; but otherwise all the Judges held, Dyer
282. p. 26.
that both Chapters ought to have confirmed.

But if a Bishop had two Chapters, Ibid.
and one of them surrender is suspended or dissolved, the confirmation of the
other suffices.

There is a Case in Mr. Justice Harpur's Reports, M. 14 and 15 El.
where the Case is put, That a Bishop made a Lease ^. die Maii confirmed the
third day, and sealed the fourth day of May, and held good Lease and well
confirmed.

But a Confirmation by the Dean and Chapter after the death of the Bishop comes
too late by Catlyne, Har^ur Rep. m. 14 and 15 El.
Southcoate and Windham against Wray.

But if a Bishop make several concurrent Leases, T. 6. El. More 66.
and the latter is first confirmed, and after the first is confirmed; in this
Case the first Lease shall be preferred, because nothing passes by the
Confirmation in point of Interest but a mere Consent.

If a Bishop make a Grant to the King, T. 8. Jac. S. Sir Edw. Dimock's Case.
Rolls 1.477. h. 7. Crok El. 141. More 253.
which is confirmed by the Dean and Chapter before the Grant is enrolled, this
is well enough.

But note, that a Bishop cannot make a concurrent Lease for life, though upon a
precedent Lease for Years; nor a concurrent Lease for years, where there is a
Lease for life in being.

Deans Prebendaries Heads of Colleges Masters of Hospitals and other
Ecclesiastical Persons mentioned in the Stat. of 13. Leases by Deans, Prebends,
Colleges, etc.
Eliz. cap. 10. may make Leases for 21 Years, or any lesser number of Years, or
for one two or three Lives in possession, according to the qualifications
abovementioned; and they may make concurrent Leases as Bishops may with
confirmations; 18 Eliz. c. ^^.
but they must be within three Years of the determination of the former term by
expiration surrender or otherwise: so that in this point the Bishop has the
advantage.

And though the enabling Stat. of 32 H. 8. gives power to make Leases to hold
from the making, or day of the making; yet the Restrictive Stat. of 13 El.
makes them void, 13 El. c. 10.
if they be not made to hold from the making, and not from the day of the
making; quod nota: But the Leases of Bishops and Archbishops are not within
that Act, but the Act of primo of the Queens; which is, that all Leases should
be void, other than for 21 Years or three Lives from the time of the
commencement: Concurrent Leases, and who is to confirm Lases. Rolls 1.481. p.
q. r. Dyer 221 p. 18.357 p 42. Plow. 528. Dyer 61. p. 30. Co. 5 81. a..
Note the different pennings.

And for as much as all concurrent Leases of any Bishop Dean Prebend and
Archdeacon are to be confirmed, it is convenient to let the Reader know who is
to confirm the same; therefore for the Reader's satisfaction he is to know that
the Leases of Bishops and Archbishops are to be confirmed by the Dean and
Chapter or Deans and Chapters, if there be several Chapters: Grants made by a
Prebend are to be confirmed by the Bishop Dean and Chapter: the Grants made by
Deans are to be confirmed by the Bishop and Chapter: the Grants made by the
Archdeacon, by the Bishop Dean and Chapter: the Grants of Parsons and Vicars,
with their Patrons and Ordinaries: and Grants by the Incumbent of a Donative,
by the Patron alone.

But if a Parson make a Lease, which is confirmed by the Bishop only, who is
Patron, without the Dean and Chapter which ought to have joined; it shall bind
the Successor during the Lives of the Bishop and Incumbent, although the Bishop
be translated.

But Grants by Parsons Vicars Prebends, etc. before induction or installation,
etc. although confirmed, are not binding to the Successor.

But if the King be Patron of a Prebend, then the King and Dean and Chapter,
and not the Bishop, ought to confirm the Grant.

A Lease made by a Prebendary Parson Vicar, etc. may be confirmed for part of
the term, Co. 5.81. ^ Dyer 52 a.b. Cto. El. 472.
if it be for Years, that is, confirm the Land to the Leasee for so many Years
of the Term; but if the Term be confirmed for part of the Term, it were absurd
and repugnant, and should be good for the whole term: and as such Lease may be
confirmed for part of the term, so it may be for part of the Land.

If a Parson, etc. make a Grant, Rolls 1. 476. f. 1.2.
which is confirmed by the Patron and Ordinary, and after be deprived; yet the
Grant is good. Rolls 1.479. n. 1.
A Husband seized in the right of his Wife of an Advowson, the Parson makes a
Lease warranted by the Statutes before mentioned, and the Bishop and Husband
confirm it; this shall not bind the right of the Wife but during the Husband's
life, but that the Successor after his death will avoid it, that comes in by
the presentation of the Wife. Rolls 1.480. n. 2.
So if Tenant in tail being Patron confirm the Grant of the Parson with the
Bishop, this shall not bind the Incumbent of the issue in tail. Rolls 1.480. n.
4.


If a Usurper present, and confirm the Lease of his Incumbent with the Bishop,
and after is removed by quare Impedit, etc; this shall not bind the Clerk of
the true Patron.

If the true Patron grant the next avoidance, Cro. Car. 582.
and then confirm the grant of the Parson, who after dies; the Incumbent
presented by him that had the next avoidance shall avoid the Lease, Rolls 1.480.
n. 5. Cro. El. 430
and his very entry upon the Leasee avoids the Lease for ever.

If the Parson make a Lease to the Patron, which is confirmed by the Bishop,
this is not good; but if the Patron grants it over, Co. 5.15. a
it amounts to a confirmation.

If a Prebend Parson or Vicar make a Lease, Rolls 1.481. p. 1.
and the Bishop being Patron confirms it without the Dean and Chapter; yet this
shall bind the Bishop and all the Prebends Parsons, etc. which he shall Collate.

If a Parson had made a Lease for above 21 Years before the Statutes of 13.
Cro. El. 18.
and 14 Eliz. which had been confirmed after, this had been good, and not
within the restriction of those Laws.

If a Parson Leases where there is two Patrons, 1 Leon. 233. Quaere.
both ought to confirm as should seem.

If the Patron and a succeeding Bishop confirm the Lease of the Parson, Cro.
Car. 38.
it is good enough.

A Prebend made a Lease, Dyer 106. p. 24. Quaere.
reciting that it was with the consent of the Bishop, who signed and sealed the
Lease to the Leasee, but was no party to the Deed, quaere if good.

And having said thus much of confirmations, let us see, what Leases a Parson
or Vicar may make at this day, considering all the beforementioned Statutes.

And first, Leases by Parsons and Vicars.
it is to be observed, that at and by the Common Law a Parson or Vicar might
have granted or charged his Glebe in Fee-simple with the confirmation of the
Patron and Bishop; but being excepted out of the inabling Statute of 32 H. 8.
32 H. 8. c. 28.
he could never make any Lease or Grant to bind their Successors, without such
confirmation; then by the Statute of 13 Eliz. Parsons and Vicars are
restrained: 13 El. cap. 10.
So that they cannot grant but for 21 Years or three Lives from the making of
such Lease, and not from the day of the making, as is before observed; and
these Leases and Grants must be with the confirmation of the Patron and
Ordinary with all the qualifications expressed in the beginning of this Chapter.

And it should seem, they may make concurrent Leases, as Deans Prebends, etc.
may do, within three Years of the end of the former Leases.

It has been a question whether a Parson or Vicar at this day can make any
Lease at all to bind his Successor: for by the Statute of 13 Eliz. Chap. 20. 13
El. cap. 20.
it is enacted, that Leases of Parsons Vicars, etc. that have Cure of Souls
shall endure no longer, than they shall be ordinarily resident and serve the
Cure; and that if such Parson, etc. shall be absent from their Cure above 80
days in one Year, that then such Lease shall cease and be void. Now when a
Parson dies, and 80 days incurs, and this being a Law for the advancement of
Religion and Hospitality, to avoid Dilapidations, shall have an equitable
construction for the preferring of these ends: therefore some have held that
the death of the Parson Vicar, etc. after 80 days have incurred from their
deaths, shall make all their Leases and Grants void, though never so
sufficiently confirmed; and rely very much upon the preamble of the Statute,
which begins, Parson's Leases which is confirmed, and dies.
That the Livings appointed for Ecclesiastical Ministers may not by corrupt and
indirect dealings be transferred to others uses, Be it enacied, etc. But by
these Leases it is apparent the profits are converted to other uses, etc. But
others have held the contrary Opinion; because such absence is not voluntary
but by the Act of God, and regularly these cannot be said absent that are not
in esse: Cro. El. 123.
and though Crook report Mott and Hale's Case adjudged in point that their
Leases are void by death; More 270.
Yet More reporting the same case says, As to the matter in Law the Judges were
divided two against two, and that the Judgment was given upon a misrecital of
the Statute. Bayley verse. Murnes T. 24. Car. 2. B R.
And this point as I am informed, came lately in question in the King's Bench,
and was adjudged that death does not avoid such Leases. Quaere.
Ideo quaere inde. Dyer 372. p. 2. When Parson's Leases shall be void by
nonresidence.


There is a quaere in Dyer whether such Leases shall be void upon 80 days
absence ab initio, or but from the time of absence by 80 days; but it seems to
me with some clearness that it shall only be void from 80 days absence, and not
ab initio; For first, the words of the Statute are, that such Lease shall
endure no longer than the Leasor shall be ordinarily resident, etc. So that
till then it is to endure: and the Statute closes, that upon such absence the
term shall cease, which it could not do, Quaere.
if had not a being before; for a thing cannot cease to be, that has not been.

But another quaere may be startled in this Case upon the reason in Lincoln
College Case, Whether void against the Parson himself. Co. 3.59. b 60. a;
whether such Lease shall be void against the present Incumbent that made it,
or only against his Successors; but it seems to me with some clearness that the
intent of the makers of this Act was to make such Lease void against the Leasor
himself upon such absence: for, as before is said, the Statute says it shall
endure no longer, which is a term of limitation, and that immediately upon such
absence the Lease shall cease and be void; and it cannot cease immediately upon
the absence, and yet be good during the life of the Incumbent. But in the Case
of Revel verse. Heart H. 43. Eliz. B. R. Dyer 372. p. 11. Quaere.
the Court held the contrary as my Reporter says. Ideo. quaere.

If any Parson Vicar, etc. Dobbins verse. Gerrard P. 39. El. B. R.
be suspended inhibited or disabled to serve the Cure by the space of 80 days
in a Year, this shall not make such Lease void; for the not serving the Cure
must be voluntary: And it has been held that if a Parson be resident and do not
serve the Cure, or serve the Cure and be absent by 80 days, that in both these
Cases it will make such Lease void.

Though this Statute upon 80 days absence makes such Lease void made by Parsons
and Vicars, and says nothing of confirmation; yet a confirmation of the Patron
and Ordinary in this case seems not to amend the matter, for if the Lease be
void, the confirmation is of no avail.

At the Common Law, Stat. 28. H. 8. cap. 13. Parson leases and resigns.
if a Parson Vicar, etc. had made a Lease and resigned, the next Incumbent
might have entered immediately upon the Leasee; but by a Statute made in the
28th Year of H. 8. the Leasee may hold on his term for six years, if the Parson
that made his Lease so long live, and the term were made for so long time; but
upon such Lease there must be so much Rent reserved within forty shillings as
such Benefice is valued at in the King's Books.

And by the same Statute, if a Parson make a Lease and resigns and dies, the
Tenant shall hold out his Lease for the Year that was commenced at the time of
his death, if the Term were to have had so long continuance, if the Parson had
not died: but this seems only of such Lands as are plowed, for the succeeding
Parson is to have the Parsonage House and Glebe which is not sowed within a
month after he is inducted, allowing a reasonable deduction for the Rent
reserved upon such Lease.

But in both Cases the Lessee must pay the reserved Rent to the succeeding
Incumbent, who is enabled to sue or distrain for the same.

And such Lease must be in writing under hand and seal and not by parol.

But it should seem the Statute of 13 El. 13. El. cap. 20.
before has made this Law of no effect.

And having now done with these Statutes, as to Leases, let us next consider
what Bonds, Covenants, Promises, etc. 18 El. c. 11.
are void within the Statute of 18 Eliz. beforementioned.

Covenants, Bonds, etc. Hob. 269; Covenants, Bonds, which good.
made for the enjoying houses within Cities, Corporations, etc. are not void
within this Law; for this Law makes no Bonds, Covenants, etc. void, which are
not against the intent of this Statute, and the Statute of 13 El. cap. 10. but
Leases of Houses and Lands in Cities, etc. by the Stat. of 14 El. c. 11. are
exempted out of 13 El. cap. 10. and are not within the Stat. of 18 El. before.

A Parson made a Bond to resign upon request, More 641
and afterward a Lease to his Patron of part of the Glebe for twenty one
years: in an Action brought upon this bond, the Incumbent pleaded the Statute
of 18 Eliz; and averred that this Bond was made to secure this Lease, and to
compel the Incumbent to reside, and adjudged a good Plea, and an apt averment.

A Parson made a Lease, Cro. El. 489. Noy 66.
and in the Lease covenanted not to be absent by the space of 80 days in any
one year, and gave Bond for the performance, and after became non-resident by
80 days, and resolved that the Bonds and Covenants were both void.

A Parson made a Lease, Olivers Case M 4. Jacob. B. R.
and covenanted neither to do or suffer to be done any matter, whereby the
Lease should become void, and after became non-resident by the space of 80 days
in a year, and this was held a good Covenant, and a Covenant that the Parson
should be resident was held not to be against this Law by Popham, Tanfield, and
Clencb against Williams. Quaere. Leases of Coll. Hospitals.
Ideo quaere.

And having now done with Leases to be made by Ecclesiastics of every kind,
and having therein exceeded my bounds beyond Parsons and Vicars to all other
Ecclesiastics, since the Leases of Colleges and Hospitals come in my way, I
will give the Reader what satisfaction I can concerning them: And as to them,

It is to be observed, that they are not comprehended in the inabling Statute
of 32 H. 8. nor in no other Statute that I find till the restrictive Statute of
13 El. 13 El. cap. 10.
whereby amongst the rest, the Masters and Fellows of Colleges, and the
Masters and Guardians are disabled to make any Grants or Conveyances of any of
their possessions, other than for twenty one years, or three Livings from the
making of such Lease, and not from the day of the date, or from the date, as
has been said: and this must be of Lands usually demised, and the accustomed
Rent, or more, must be reserved with all the other qualifications mentioned in
the beginning of this Chapter.

And by the Statute of 18 Eliz. 18 El. c. 11.
they are restrained to make any concurrent Leases till within three years of
the end of the former Terms that are in being.

I shall now show the Reader, what things are demisable within these several
Statutes, and what Reservations are good, and in what cases the Acceptance of
Rent by the Successor will make a Lease good, that was voidable within these
Laws, and the several qualifications mentioned in the beginning of this
Chapter. What Leases shall be good. Smalls Case. M. 4. Jac. B. R. Former in
being.


One Small being possessed of the manor of Padington by a Lease from a Bishop
for a Term of years, the Bishop made a Lease to another for three Lives, and
before Livery the Tenant surrendered his former Term, and it was held that the
Surrender was made in due time, and the second Lease good.

A Prebend had usually been leased (excepting the Crab-trees) and the
Prebendary made a new Lease without excepting the Crab-trees, Cro. Jac. 458. 3
Bulst. 290. More in the new Leases than the old.
reserving the ancient Rent, with other due Circumstances, and this Lease was
held void against the Successor by reason of the adding of the Crabtrees.

It has been adjudged, Co. 5.15. a; Next Avoidance not demisable.
That a Bishop, Dean, etc. cannot grant the next avoidance of an Advowson, nor
any Rentcharge out of the possessions of the Church, but the same is void
within the restrictive Acts beforementioned, though these cannot be said any
of the possessions of their Churches.

It was also resolved, Co. 5.15. a; Charges void.
that where an Archdeacon made a Lease for three Lives warranted by the
Statutes before mentioned, and the Lessee granted a Rentcharge for a hundred
years, which was confirmed by the Bishop, Dean and Chapter, that
notwithstanding the same was void against the Successor within the Stat. of 13
Eliz. cap. 10.

If a Writ of Annuity should be brought against a Parson, Co. 5.14.b
etc. pretending the same due by Prescription, and although the Parson pray in
aid of the Patron and Ordinary, and upon a Plea pleaded by them the Plaintiff
obtains a Verdict and Judgment, and all this by practice and fraud to charge
the Glebe, it is void against the Successor; for these Statutes being made for
the benefit of the Church, advance of Religion and Hospitality, and to avoid
Dilapidations, 19 Ass. p. 9.
shall always have a favorable Construction.

It is regularly true, Acceptance of Rent, where it shall bind.
that where the Wife issues in tail, or Successor accepts the Rent after the
death of the husband, Tenant in tail or Predecessor upon a void Lease made by
the Husband, Tenant in tail or Predecessor, that such Acceptance will not
affirm the Lease: but this Rule must be understood of such a Lease as is void
ipso facto without entry or any other Ceremony; and therefore if a Parson,
Vicar or Prebend, etc. make a Lease not warrantable by the Statutes for twenty
one years, rendering of Rent, and dies, Co. 3 65. a.. 37 H. 6. 3 and 4. 11 E. 3.
Fitz. Abbot 9. 8 H. 519.
here no Acceptance of Rent by the Successor, etc. will affirm this Lease,
because the same was void without Entry or other Ceremony; but if a Parson,
Vicar or Prebend make a lease not warrantable within the before mentioned
Statutes for life or lives, reserving Rent, and dye, and the Successor before
Entry acccept the Rent; this Lease shall bind him for the time, for this being
an Estate of Freehold could not be void before entry.

But if a Bishop Abbot or Prior, Dyer 239. pl. 42 F. N. B. c.
which have the inheritance in Fee-simple in them, make a Lease for lives or
years not warranted by the Statutes before mentioned, not being absolute void
by their deaths, but only voidable by the entry of the Successor, if the
Successor accept the Rent before Entry, be it for lives or years, Rollsi. 476.
d.
he affirms the lease for his Life.

If a Bishop make a Lease not warranted by the Statutes rendering Rent, and die,
and his Successor appoints his Bailiff to collect his Rents of that Manor, who
amongst the rest receives the Rent reserved upon this Demise, and accounts to
the Bishop's Successor for it, this is a good Acceptance, and shall bind the
Bishop for his time. 11 E. 3. F. Abbot. 9. Dyer 139. p. 42.


So if a Parson lease for life not warranted nor confirmed, reserving Rent, if
his Successor receive Fealty of this Tenant upon this lease, he has thereby
affirmed the lease for his time: 2 H. 4.2. a.
the like it will be, if the Successor bring an Action of waste.

But if a Bishop make a lease of Tithes or other things not manurable for life
or lives, Cro. Jac. 1.73.
rendering Rent, and dies, and his Successor accepts this Rent, it will not
affirm the lease.

But whether such acceptance upon a lease for years of Tithes, etc. will bind
the Successor, Quaere.
I must leave it a Quaere, not finding that point any where resolved.

I having now held the Reader long upon this subject, shall now leave them and
proceed to examine, what Leases or Farms they may with safety take or not take.

By a Statute made in the twenty first year of King H. 8. Stat. 21 H. 8. cap.
13. Parsons, etc. must not take Farms.
It is amongst other things enacted, That no Spiritual Person shall in his own
name, or in the name of any other, take to farm any Manors, Lands, Tenements
or Hereditaments, upon the penalty of ten pounds for every Month that he holds
the same; nor by himself nor any other shall buy Cattle, Corn, Lead, Tynn,
Hydes, Leather, Tallow, Fish, Wool, Wood, or any manner of Victuals or
Merchandises, upon pain to forfeit the treble value of things so bought.

But a Spiritual Parson may buy such things for his own use, Where he may.
and if they do not fit him, he may sell the same again; and so where he has
not sufficient Glebe, he may take grounds for the maintenance of his Family.

And it is further enacted by the same Statute, Shall not farm another
Parsonage, etc.
That no spiritual Person beneficed with Cure of Souls shall farm the Parsonage
or Vicarage of another to take any Rent or Profit out of such Farm, upon the
penalty of forty shillings a week, and ten times the value of the Rent or
Profit he shall take out of such Farm.

And it is further enacted by the same Statute, Must not keep a Tan-house or
Brew House.
That no spiritual Person shall have or keep by himself, or any other, any
Tanhouse, or Brew House, other than for his own Family, upon pain to forfeit
ten pounds per mensem.

All which Penalties are given to the King and Informer to be recovered in any
of his Majesty's Courts of Record at Westminster by Action of debt, Penalties
how to be recovered.
Bill Plaint or Information, wherein no essoine, protection or wager of Law is
to be admitted, 5 Eliz. cap. 5. Where he may license the cating of flesh.
etc.

By the Stat. of 5 Eliz. there is authority given to the Bishop of the Diocese,
Parson, Vicar or Curate of the Parish to license any sick person to eat flesh
during his sickness, and if his Sickness continue above eight days after the
granting of such license, than the same is to be registered in the Church-book,
etc. and that license to endure during the sickness and no longer.

And if any Parson, Penalty if needless.
Vicar or Curate grant any License to any person or persons, other than such as
evidently appears to have need thereof by reason of sickness, the Parson, Vicar
or Curate that granted such license shall forfeit five Marks for every such
License, 25 H. 8. cap.
and the License to be void.

In the 25 year of H. Sheep.
8. There was a Statute made against the excessive number of sheep, wherein
there is a Proviso, that it might be lawful to all spiritual Persons, and every
of them, to keep such and so many sheep upon their own Lands, and after such
form and manner, and not otherwise, as they might have done before the making
of the said Act.

There is several Acts of Parliament for punishing incontinent Priests,
Incontinence.
which though since the blessed Reformation (I do not mean the last pretended
reformation, but that in the time of E. 6. and Queen Elizabeth) are become
absolute and useless: yet since I have promised them all the Statutes they may
fall in the danger of, these are not to be omitted; but before I come to those
particular Laws, I will beg the Reader's pardon for giving him a short
Historical account of the Restriction of the Marriage of Priests, which gave
the occasion of these Laws.

Bellarmine in his disputations endeavors to make the single life of Priests
to be Jure Divino; but if not so, De Clerici^ cap.
yet he goes about to prove that it has been enjoined by Canons as high as the
Apostles time: and to that purpose vouches the Canons of the Apostles (which
though they may be ancient, yet no rational Man that peruses them will believe
they were made by the Apostles or very near their time) in which I must confess
I find a Canon that by implication forbids Priests to Marry, but not Married
Men to be Priests; and it is to this effect, Canon 25.
Ex his qui coelibes in clerum pervenerunt jubemus, ut Lectores tantum and
cantores (si velint) nuptias contrahant. Canon 5. Canons against the marriage
of Priests.
But if he had looked a little back in those Canons he would have found another
manner of Prohibition in these words; Episcopus aut Presbyter aut Diaconus
uxorem suam praetextu Religionis non abjicito: si abjicit se gregator a
Communione, si perseverat deponitor. But however it cannot be denied, but there
were Ancient Canons against the Marriage of Priests, but never received or put
in practice in England, though practiced in Italy France, etc. but the Priests
here Married, till Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury a Burgundian, a powerful
and busy Praelate in a Synod or National Council held at Westminster made a
severe Canon against it; Hollingshed 30. b. 10.
but he meeting with an obstinate Clergy, that were unwilling to change their
Wives for Concubines (to speak in the softest word) were not obedient:
whereupon (as my Author tells me) he called a second Council in the ninth Year
of that King, where he made more severe Canons against the Married Clergy in
the presence of the King and Nobility, Hollingshed 34. b. 10.
to give them greater Authority, which he prosecuted with great zeal, but did
not live to effect what he desired. I do not find that his Successor Rodolphus
troubled himself much in this concern of the eight Years that he Governed the
Church of Canterbury: but his Successor William Corbet followed the steps of
Anselm, who for this and his other good works was Canonized a Saint at Rome:
and in the Year 1126 called a Council or Convocation at Westminster against the
Married Priests, wherein one John de Crema the Pope's Legate sent to manage
this business, being a learned Man, made an Eloquent Oration in commendation of
Chastity and a single life, and inveighed violently against the Married Clergy;
H. Huntingd. l. 7. Hoveden in H. 5. Speed 461. a. etc. Bish Goodwins Catalo. of
Bish. 83.
and as diverse Authors of good credit affirm, the great Orator was the same
night taken in bed with a Woman, which made him to return with shame enough;
howsoever, as Bishop Goodwyn tells us, that in that Convocation the Canons were
renewed against the Married Clergy; but the Archbishop finding himself too
weak to deal with so stubborn a Clergy, commendeded the care of this business
to the King, who taking advantage of the Canons squeezed some Money out of the
Married Clergy by way of Commutation. I find no more of this matter, till after
the death both of this Archbishop and H. 1. But I find there was a Convocation
held at London December. 13. 1138. Good win 84. Fullers Eccl. Hist. 27
by the Command of Albert Cardinal Bishop of Hostia, where this matter was
again violently prosecuted: and I find no more after of it till in a
Convocation or Council held under Rich. Wethershead Archbishop of Canterbury
1229. in which it is decreed, Lindw Si qui Clerici.
Qui autem in Subdiaconatu vel supra ad matrimonium convolaverint, mulieres
renitentes and invitas relinquant. But it should seem, notwithstanding all this
persecution, that for some Years after some Married Men held their Livings: for
in a Synod or Council held by Otho the Pope's Legate at Saint Paul's in London
in the Year 1237. Cap. de uxoratis a beneficiis amovendis.
there is a Canon to this effect, Innotuit nobis, pluribus referentibus fide
dignis, quod multi propriae salutis immemores, Matrimoniis contraciis,
claudestine retinere cum uxoribus Ecclesias, and Ecclesiastica Beneficia
adipisci de novo, and promoveri ad sacros ordines contra statuta sacrorum
Canonum, non formidant, etc. and then proceeds Quod si repertum fuerit aliquos
taliter contraxisse, ab Ecclesiis and Ecclesiasticis Beneficiis (quibus tam eos
quam quoslibet alios uxoratos fore decernimus ipso jure privatos) removeantur
omnino, etc.

This nail being thus at length driven to the head, the secular Clergy lay
about 300 Years under this Bondage, and though if they would be at the cost
they might have dispensations to keep Concubines, yet for the credit of
holiness there was great care taken they should not do it publicly, or
scandalously: to which purpose there is a Canon in the same Council I last
mentioned to this effect, Statuimus, and statuendo praecipimus, Cap. de
Concubinis Clerieorum removendis. * Nota. Canons against Concubines.
ut ubi Clerici, and maxim in sacris ordinibus constituti, qui in demibus suis
and alienis detinent public Concubinas, eas a se prorsus removeant infra
mensem, and illas vel alias de caetero nullatenus detenturi, etc.

There was another Canon much like this made in another Council held under
Stephen Langton Archbishop of Canterbury at Oxford not long before, in the
Year 1222. to this effect, Cap. Clericalis Ordinis. * Nota.
Quod Clerici Beneficiati aut in sacris ordinibus constituti in Hospitiis suis
public tenere Concubinas non audeant, nec etiam alibi cum scandalo accessum
publicum non habeant ad eas.

So that it appears clearly by these Canons that Clerks were not in those days
positively and absolutely forbidden to keep Concubines; but it must not be done
public nec cum scandalo, nor must they have publicum accessum.

And it appears by the centum gravamina that were presented to the Pope about
the Year 1521. Dispensations for Concubinage. Hist. H. 8. by my Lord Cherbery.
p. 131. art. 74. Art. 91.
by the German Princes, that it was one of the grievances of that Nation, that
the Pope permitted Clerks Religious and secular Persons to live publicly with
their Harlots and get Children; and that in most places the Bishops and their
Officials not only tolerated Concubinage upon paying Money in the more
dissolute sort of Monks, but also exacted it of the most continent saying, it
was then at their choice whether they would have them or no.

So upon the whole matter it seems it was no offense in a Clergyman that had a
dispensation to keep a Concubine St. Calvin's Inst. lib. 4. c. 12. Sect. 23.
privately in a nooke without scandal, and go to her in the dark; but to keep a
Wife of his own was a sin against the Holy Ghost, Dyer 133. p. 1. 2 H 4.16. a;
Cap. de uxoratisa beneficiis amovendis, ubi supra.
he must be deprived, he must be deposed. And therefore I cannot blame the
German and French Laity that they were so solicitous in the Council of Trent to
have their Priests Married, being loath, as should seem, to trust their Wives
and Daughters at confession with Priests that had not Wives of their own. And
it was no less a Religious than prudent expression of Pope Pius the Second,
that though there was many weighty reasons why Priests should be restrained
from Marriage, yet the reasons for restoring them their Wives were the more
weighty.

Having given the Reader this Historical account concerning the restraint of
the Marriage of Priests, and the success of it, I will in the next place show
what Acts of Parliament have been made relating to this matter, and which are
in force at this day.

In the first Tear of H. 1 H 7. cap 4. Statute that the Bishops should imprison
Priests for Incontinence.
7. there was an Act made, that it should be Lawful to all Archbishops and
Bishops and other Ordinaries having Episcopal Jurisdiction to punish and
chastise such Priests and Clerks and Religious Men being within the bounds of
their Jurisdiction, that should be convicted before them by examination and
other Lawful proofs requisite by the Law of the Church, of Advowtry Fornication
and Incest, or any other fleshly incontinency, by committing them to Ward and
Prison, there to abide for such time as shall be thought to their discretions
convenient for the quality and quantity of their trespass. And that none of the
said Archbishops, etc. be thereof chargeable, of, to, It seems a Canon would
not justify an Imprisonment.
or upon any Action of false or wrongful Imprisonment, but that they be utterly
thereof discharged in any of the cases aforesaid by virtue of this Act.

This Law for ought I know stands still in force, 31 H. 8. c. 14. made Felony
to use their own Wives.
but there was a severe Law made in the 31 H. 8. whereby it was made Felony for
a Priest carnally to use a Woman to whom he had been Married or contracted; or
if he kept company or familiarity with her, or if any Priest kept a Concubine,
as by paying for her board, maintaining her with Money or other gifts or means
to the evil example of others, he should forfeit all his Goods Cattels and
Spiritual promotions, and be put in Prison for the first offense, and the
second offense to be Felony.

But this seeming too severe was the next Year repealed, and it was enacted, 32
H. 8. c. 10. mitigated.
That such Offender should for the first offense lose all his Goods Chattels
and Debts, and lose the profits of all his Ecclesiastical promotions; but one
for his life, for the second offense to forfeit his Goods Cattle and Debts, and
the profits of all his Lands and of all his Spiritual Benefices Promotions and
Dignities for his life. And for the third offense should make the like
forfeiture and be Imprisoned during life.

By an Act of Parliament made in the 31 of H. 31 H. 8. c. 14. The 6 Articles
makes the marriage of Priests Heresy.
8. which is commonly called the Act of the six bloody Articles, by the third
Article it was declared, that Priests after they have received Orders might not
Marry, and to affirm the contrary thereof was made Heresy and Treason by that
Act: but this bloody Act was repealed by 1 E. 6. cap. 12.

By the Statute of 2 and 3 E. All Laws against marriage of Priests made void.
6. cap. 21. all Laws Statutes Canons and Ordinances and Constitutions made
against the Marriage of Priests are made null and void.

And by another Statute made the fifth and sixth of E. Children legitimate.
6. cap. 12. It is adjudged and declared, that the Marriage of Priests is
Lawful, and legitimates their Children, and makes them capable to endow their
Wives, and to be Tenants by the Courtesy. But these Laws were repealed by the
Stat. of 1 Mariae cap. 1.

However it came to pass I know not, 1 Jacob. c. 25.
but for ought I can find, these Acts lay repealed all Queen Elizabeth's time
till 1 Jac. then the latter Act was revived and made perpetual, and their
Children made ligitimate.

So that upon the whole matter all acts of Parliament, Canons, Constitutions,
etc. that restrain the Marriage of Priests, or the Illigitimation of their
Children, are made null and void; but the Canons and Acts of Parliament that
punish their Incontinency stand in force. Next let us see what Privilege the
Clergy have right to at this day.

CHAP. XI. The Eleventh Chapter shows, what Privileges belong to the Clergy at
this day by the Common and Statute Laws of this Realm.
THE Laws of this Realm have allowed the Clergy in holy Orders many great
Privileges: First, The Privilege of the Clergy. 2 Inst. 3 625.. 4 May not be
Officers temporal. 5 E. 3. c. 5.. 1 R. 2. c. 15 Must not be arrested in Church
or Churchyard.
in their Persons, they are not compellable to serve in any Temporal Office, as
Sheriff, Constable, Overseer of the Poor, etc. Neither can they be pressed to
serve in the Wars: neither may they be arrested in the Church, or Churchyard,
when they are attendant on divine Service, upon pain of Imprisonment, and
ransom at the Kings pleasure, and likewise to make agreement with the Party.

And by a Statute made i. 1 Mariae Sess. 2. cap. 3. Most not be distarbed
praying or preaching.
Mariae. It is enacted,

That if any Parson, etc. of their own Power and Authority at any time, etc.
shall or do willingly or of purpose by open and overt word, fact, act or deed
maliciously or contemptuously molest, let, disturb, vex or trouble, or by any
other unlawful way or means disquiet or misuse any Preacher or Preachers, etc.
licensed, allowed or authorized to preach by the Queen, or by any Archbishop
or Bishop of this Realm, or by any other lawful Ordinary, or by either of the
Universities, etc. or otherwise lawfully authorized or charged by reason of his
or their Cure, Benefice or other Spiritual Promotion, or Charge, in any of his
or their Sermon or Collation in any Church, Chapel, or Churchyard, or in other
place appointed to be preached in,

Or if any Person, etc. shall maliciously, willingly or of purpose molest,
let, disturb, vex, disquiet, or otherwise trouble any Parson, Vicar,
Parish Priest or Curate, etc. saying, doing, singing, ministering, or
celebrating mass, or other divine Service, Sacraments, etc. that at any time
then after shall be allowed, set forth or authorized by the Queen's Majesty.

That the Offender upon Conviction before two Justices of the Peace shall by
them be committed to the Goal without bail or mainprise for three months, and
after to the next Quarter Sessions: where if he repent and be reconciled, then
to be discharged of his Imprisonment, finding sureties for his good behavior;
and if he fail therein to be continued till the next Quarter Sessions, etc.

This Act though made in the time of Popery is still in force, and may be
executed upon such as disturb the present Ministers, Parsons, Vicars and
Curates, etc. And though it refer to such Church Service as then after should
be settled by the Queen, yet I conceive it extends to her Successors; and a
settlement by Act of Parliament is a settlement by the King in the most
superlative manner; and the late Act for Uniformity declares and enacts, 14
Car. 2. c. 4.
that all former Acts for Uniformity of Common Prayer shall be of force, and
extend to the Book of Common Prayer.

The Bodies of Clergymen cannot be arrested upon any Capias sued forth upon
any Statute-Staple or Statute-Merchant; Must not be arrested.
for the Process are made out conditionally Si Laicus fuerit: and if the
Sheriff or any other Officer arrest a Clergyman upon any such Conditional
Process, I conceive an Action of false Imprisonment lies against him that does
it, or he may have a special Supersedeas out of the Chancery. Regist. 147.
(that is the Cursitors Office.) Privilege in their goods. Regist. 260. a..
Free from Tolls.


And every Parson, Vicar, etc. is by the Common Laws of England free from the
payment of any tolls in all Fairs and Markets, not only for all the Goods and
Merchandises gotten upon their Church Livings, but also for all Goods and
Merchandises by them bought to be spent upon their Rectories and Church Livings.

And they are quit of Pontage Murage and other like charges; Pontage, Murage.
and if they be distrained for any of these, they may have a Writ out of the
Chancery, as aforesaid, made of Course without petition or motion, made under
the great Seal of England, directed to the party that distrains or disturbs
them for any of these things, commanding them to desist: and if such Writ be
not obayed the Cursitor of Course will make out an alias and pluries; and if
none of those will be obeyed, an Attachment to arrest the party and detain him
till he obey: Regist. 260. a.. Fn. b. 227. f.
and this Writ is called a Writ De essendi quietum de Toloneo, which you may
see in the Register or in the natura brevium.

They are not bound to appear or do suit at the Sheriff's Turn or any Leet or
Law day; Not bound to appear at Leets and Sheriffs Turns. Regist. Or. 175. a..
Fn. b. 160. C.
and if they shall be distrained so to do, they may have a Writ of Course in
the Chancery directed to the Lord of the Leet, commanding him to forbear
distraining them for any such Cause with like process as in the last for his
contempt.

And by the Statute of circumspecte Agatis it is enacted, Stat. 13. E. 2 Inst.
491, 492, 493.
De violenta etiam manuum injectione in clericum, and in causa defamationis
placitum tenebitur in Curia Christianitatis, dummodo ad correctionem peccati
agatur; and non petatur pecunia.

And if a Clergyman have Lands, Regist. or. 187. b.. Fn. b. 175. b. Not to be
Bailiffs, Reaves, etc.
by the tenure of which he is subject to be Bailiff Reave or Beadle, and be
chosen into any such Office by reason thereof, he has a Cursitory writ out of
the Chancery to discharge himself. Beg. or. 188. a; F.n. b. 176. a. Must not be
disturbed by C^llector of Tenths.


So if the Sheriff or Collector of the Tenths or Fifteens will disturb them in
the Lands belonging to their Churches, etc. they may have the like Writ for
their discharge, and like Process for disobeying of it, ut supra.

Anciently if a Clergyman had been convicted of any Murder Robery Burglary,
etc. The Privilege of Clergy in criminal Cases.
he was upon the demand of his Ordinary to be delivered over to him, where he
was to make his Purgation according to the Rules of the Ecclesiastical Laws;
and if he cleared himself, he was acquit Lindwood cap. Clerici pro suis
criminibus detent. gloss. verb. pro convictis. West. 1 c. 2. Marleb. c. 27. 25
E. 3. cap. 4, and 5. 4 H. 4. c. 3.
without any regard to his Conviction at Common Law; but if they adjudged him
guilty, then he was to be degraded and kept in Prison: and this was confirmed
to them by several Acts of Parliament. But this privilege was never allowed to
them in this Kingdom in Treason petit, Treason or Sacriledg.

And a Delinquent might have had his Clergy ad infinitum till the Stat. 4 H. 7.
cap. 13.
of 4 H. 7. And though this privilege of the Clergy be taken totally away in
many Cases by several Statutes, and in other Cases Lay men have it in Common
with the Clergy, if they can read as a Clergyman; and though the delivery of
them over to the Ordinary be totally abolished; yet the Clergy that are in Holy
Orders at this day retain some of their ancient privileges, which the Laymen
are not capable of.

For if a Clerk in Holy Orders be convicted (that is found guilty by the Petit
Jury) of a Crime for which the benefit of the Clergy is allowable; at this day
he shall not upon the allowance thereof be burned in the hand (as a Layman
shall) upon the producing of his Orders; and if he have not them with him, the
Court may ex gratia give him time to produce them till any other Assise or
Sessions.

And a Clerk in Holy Orders at this day shall have his Clergy ad infinitum from
time to time, which no Layman can have above once.

The goods of Clergymen were by several Statutes exempted and freed from the
King's purveyance; St. 3 E. 3. c. 1. 14 E. 3. c. 1. 18 E. 3. c. 4. 1 B. 2. c. 3.
but his Majesty having by Act of Parliament graciously released this Duty,
Purveyance.
the Laity has the same privilege.

A Clergyman shall not be amerced the higher in respect of his Church Living
or Benefice. 2 Inst. 627. Not amercied for the Churchland. Regist. ov. 289.
F.N.B. 29. No Execution upon the goods of the Church.


Nor shall any execution be executed upon the goods of his Church, nor any
distress taken in the ancient Fee thereof; but otherwise it is of Lands of late
purchase: and if he fear any such thing he may have a Protection in Chancery
cum clausula (Quia nolumus.)

If an Action of Trespass Debt Account, 2 Inst. 4.. No Capias against a Clerk.
or other Action, wherein Process of Capias lies, be brought against a Clerk in
Holy Orders, and the Sheriff upon the Original return that the Defendant is
Clerious Beneficiatus nullam habens Laicum feodum ubi summoniri potest; in this
Case the Plaintiff cannot have a Capias to arrest his body, but a Writ to the
Bishop to compel him to appear.

And note that all the Privileges of the Church of England are confirmed by
the Ancient and good Statute of Magna Charta: Privilege of the Clergy
confirmed by several Parliaments.
And so they were for the most part at the opening of every other Parliament
after till the beginning of the Reign of H. 5. How it began then to be
discontinued by the negligence of the Clergy, or for what other cause, I know
not.

And so having thus briefly mentioned many of the privileges of the Clergy,
Conclusion.
whereof the Common Law takes notice, and to which they have right at this day
by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, I shall not only conclude this Chapter,
but the first Part of this Discourse with

Gloria Deo Omnipotenti, Amen.
FINIS.
THE Second Part: BEING THE LAW OF TITHES or TITHING.

Showing in what manner all manner of Tithes Offerings Mortuaries and all other
Church Duties are to be paid, and in what Courts and manner they may be
recovered, and to what charges they are Subject;

With many other things fit for all People, but especially all Clergymen, to
know.

Written by Sir SIMON DEGGE Knight.

LONDON, Printed Anno Domini MDCLXXVI.

To his Worthy and Reverend Son in Law Mr. Anthony Trollop, Rector of Norbury
in Derbyshire.
Dear Son,
IT is now above thirty years, since the Tithing Table published many years
ago came to my hand; and upon perusal thereof finding that the Common Laws and
Canon-Laws differed in many things, I thought it would be a Work grateful to
the Clergy, and useful to others, to publish something in order to the
reconciling of them: To which end I had gathered together some materials; but
the War coming immediately on, and after that the Ecclesiastical Courts being
laid aside, and other Courses found out for the Recovery of Tithes, I desisted
the further Prosecution of that design, until it was revived at your Request,
seconded by some other Reverend Divines; whereupon looking up my old Notes, and
adding such Judgments and Resolutions, that I have since come to the knowledge
of, the whole is reduced to the form I here present it to you; you have most
Right to it, and I heartily wish it may be of as great Service and advantage to
you, and all the Reverend Clergy, as is desired by him that is

Your affectionate loving Father S. D.

THE LAW OF TITHES or TITHING.
CHAP. I. The First Chapter shows, what Tithes are, the several sorts and kinds
thereof, and in what manner due.
HAving in the former part of this discourse showed the worthy and Reverend
Clergymen in what manner they may lawfully and justifiably attain to such
preferments in the Church as they are capable of, and in what manner they may
avoid all the perils and dangers that attend the Beneficed Clergymen; it rests
now that I show him what profits they may justly challenge to belong to their
Church-preferments, and in what manner to be paid, and how to be recovered if
need require. And first of Tithes, which the Canonists define to be Definition.


A tenth part or portion of increase commanded to be paid to the Sons of Levi
for their Ministry, wherein they served in the Tabernacle.

Or, as some others define them, they are

Omnium bonorum licite quaesitorum quotae pars Deo Divina institutione debita.

But the Common Lawyers define them to be

An Ecclesiastical Inheritance Collateral to the Estate of the Land, Co. 11.13.
b..
and of their own proper Nature due only to an Ecclesiastical Person by the
Ecclesiastical Laws.

And for that reason no unity of possession can extinct or suspend them; but
they, notwithstanding any such unity, remain in esse, and may be demised or
granted notwithstanding any such unity: but may more properly in my judgment be
defined to be

A tenth part or some other thing in lieu thereof, of all the Increase yearly
arising forth of the profits of the Lands and Stock, or raised by the Industry
of the Parishioner, and properly due to the Clergy that have the Cure of the
Souls in the Parish where they arise.

And by some Canonists Tithes have been divided only into two kinds, that is,
Division.
Predial and Personal: and in this manner of division they comprehend all
manner of Tithes, that arise either immediately or mediately from the Land,
under the name of Predial Tithes: Doct. and Stud. l. c. 55. p. 168. b. Lindwood
c. Quoniam prepter verbis divid end. est decima.
which they again distinguish in Predial mediate and immediate; under which
they comprehend the Tithes of Corn Hay Wood Herbs and all other things, that
either come from the ground by manurance, or of its own Nature; and under the
name of Tithes Predial mediate is comprehended the Tithes of all manner of
Cattle and other things that receive their nourishment from the ground.

But Tithes by the Common Lawyers, 2 Inst. 649. Roll 1.635. a.
(and which division I shall observe in my discourse) are divided into Predial
Mixed and Personal: and according to this division all Tithes that arise from
the ground, as before is said, immediately, Lindwood c. Quoniam propter verbis
talibus decimis.
are only accounted to be Predial; and those that arise from Cattle and other
things, that receive their nourishment immediately from the ground, they call
Mixed; and those that arise from the Labor and Industry of Man alone Personal.

Tithes again both by the Common Lawyers and Canonists are divided again into
great Tithes, in Latin majores seu grossae decimae; and into small Tithes, in
Latin minores or minutae decimae. And in this division Corn Hay and Wood are
all accounted gross or great Tithes. But there has been some question whether
Tithe Wood should be accounted a great or minute Tithe, and resolved, that if a
Vicar be only endowed with the small Tithes, Rolls 1. 643. v. 2. 2 Bulst. 27.
and have by reason thereof always had Tithe Wood, that in such Case it shall
be accounted a small Tithe, otherwise it is to be accounted amongst the great
Tithes.

But all manner of Tithes of Gardens Herbs Roots Fruit Saffron Woad, Cro. El.
467. Hutton 77. Cro. Car. 28. Rolls 1. 643. v. 3.
whether sowed in Fields or Gardens, Flax Hemp Hops Rape and all other Predial
Personal and Mixed Tithes are accounted inter minutas decimas; but in Vdal's and
Tyndal's Case Hutton 77. in some Cases Hops Woad, etc. may be great Tithes in
places where they are much sowed.

And herein the Custom of England is kind to the poor Vicars, Lindwood c.
Quoniam propter verb. talibus decimis.
making many things to be allowed for Minute Tithes that are not so in others.

I have been the longer in this division of Tithes between great Tithes and
small Tithes, because many Vicarages are endowed with the small Tithes only,
and in some old Indowments you will find the word Altera omnia, Spelm. Gloss.
28 Cro. El. 578. Hetley 135.
which by Custom may as well comprehend the small Tithes, as such profits as
arise from the Altar.

Now perhaps it may be expected, Quo Jure debet.
I should say something to satisfy the Reader by what Law Tithes became due
under the Gospel. But in that point I find so great a difference between the
Canonist Schoolmen and Divines, that it would be a great presumption in me to
take upon me to determine the point, the rather because I am informed by a
reverend learned and grave Divine, Helyns Hist. of Presbytery 391. Seld. Hist.
decim. cap. 5. Sect. 4. cap. 7. And in the end of the Epistle to the Reader.
that the learned Seldom retracted his opinion therein; and what it was, you
may see in the places noted in the Margent: But so far as I have observed, they
all agree in this, That Tithes quoad sustentationem Cleri vel ministrorum Dei
are jure divino; So that the sole question amongst all these learned men is
about the quantity, The Question;
or quota pars. But be they due jure divino, jure Ecclesiastico, or jure
humano, I conceive the difference cannot be great, since, as it must
necessarily be confessed, they have been given and consecrated Deo and sanctae
Ecclesiae; and so being dedicated to God and his Service (in my poor Judgment)
the taking them away from the proper use and end cannot be less sacrilegious,
Doct. and Stud. l. 2. cap. 55. f. 164. b 65 a;
than if they were without dispute jure divino. I shall not therefore stuff
this present Discourse with the Arguments of any side; but shall leave the
learned to their own Conceits, it serving my purpose that they be due by any
Law, divine, humane, or Ecclesiastical. My next examination shall be to whom
they are due.

CHAP. II. The second Chapter shows to whom Tithes are due, and by whom to be
paid.
HAving showed in the former Chapter what Tithes are, To whom Tithes are due to
be paid.
and the several kinds thereof, I shall in the next place show to whom the same
are due to be paid.

That there were Infeudations of Tithes, before the parochial Rights were
settled, both in this and other Countries is without dispute both here in
England and in other Christian Kingdoms and Commonwealths: Seldens hist. decim.
178, etc. Tho. Aq. Sum. 20. 2ae. q. 88. art. 3. concluisione.
in which particular the curious may satisfy themselves in Mr. Selden's
History of Tithes, and other Authors. And it is more clear, that before the
time that the parochial Rights of Tithes were settled, that the Owners of Lands
might grant their Tithes to any Ecclesiastical or Religious persons (a
multitude of Precedents whereof the Reader for his satisfaction may find in the
Monasticon Anglicanum of Mr. Dugdale): so that by this means the whole Tithes
of some Parishes, and diverse great portions out of other Parishes were granted
to Abbots, Priors, etc. and some to the Parsons and Rectors of other Parishes;
which is the reason, that at this day there is several portions of Tithes held
from the Parish Churches by Impropriators and the Rectors of other Parish
Churches.

When the parochial Right of Tithes was first settled, When the Parochial Right
of Tithes first begun.
there has been (as should seem) a vulgar Error: for it is frequently said in
our Common Law Books, that before the general Council of Lateran, 10 H. 7.18.
a.. 43 E. 3.5; Doct. and Stud. l. c. 55. Co. 2. 44. b. Dyer 84, etc.
which was held 1179. That every one was at liberty to give his Tithes to what
Spiritual Ecclesiastical or religious Person he pleased; but that by that
Council the parochial Right of them was settled. Neither was this an Error of
the Common Lawyers only; for Mr. Lindwood a learned Doctor of the Civil and
Canon Laws, that lived in the time of H. 5. about two hundred and fifty years
ago, tells us, that

Been potuerunt Laici decimas infeudum retinere, Lind wood c. locat. and
conduct. verb. portion.
and eas alteri Ecclesiae dare ante concilium Latarenense, non tamen post, etc.

But there is no Canon in that Council to be found, whereby the parochial right
of Tithes was settled, nor was the parochial Right of Tithes settled till the
year 1200; and then not by any Canon, but by a decretal Epistle of Pope
Innocent the third, Seldom hist. Decun. 231. 2 Inst. 641.
a Brief of which Epistle here follows, as I find it in Mr. Seldens History of
Tithes, and in Sir Edward Cooks Institutes.

Pervenit ad audientiam nostram, Innocent. 3. Epist. decret. l. 2. p 457. Edit.
colen.
quod multi in Diocesi tua Decimas suas integras vel duas parts ipsarum non
illis Ecclesus, in quarum Parochiis babitant, vel ubi praedia habent, and a
quibus Ecclesiastica percipiunt Sacramenta, persolvunt; sed eas aliis pro sua
distribuunt voluntate: Cum igitur inconveniens esse videatur and a ratione
dissimile, ut Ecclesiae, quae Spiritualia seminant, metere non debeant a suis
Parochianis temporalia, and habere, Fraternitati tuae (being directed to the
Archbishop of Canterbury) authoritate praesentium indulgemus, ut liceat tibi
super hoc, non obstante contradictione vel appellatione cujuslibet seu
consuetudine hactenus observata, quod canonicum fuerit ordinare, and facere
quod statueris per Censuram Ecclesiasticam firmiter observari: Nulli ergo, etc.
Confirmationis, etc. Datum Lateran. 2 Nonas Julii.

I must acknowledge I give the Reader this a little imperfect for want of the
Original: and it was Sir Edward Cooks Case also; for I perceive the borrowed
his from Mr. Seldom.

But some have fancied (and perhaps not without reason; for this seems not to
be a general Decree, but a particular Instruction to the Archbishop of
Canterbury) that the parochial Right of Tithes was not generally settled of
long after, that is, by a Canon made in the Council of Lions, which was in the
year of our Lord 1274. in which Council there is a Canon for the settling the
parochial Right of Tithes. But whether that were the Original, or a
Confirmation of some other Decree or Council, I dare not take upon me to judge:
but certain it is, that about this Century the parochial Right of Tithes was
settled in general. But though this decretal Epistle of Pope Innocent the third
be not general, yet it was obligatory as to the Province of Canterbury; so that
in that Province the parochial Right of Tithes may take its date from the time
of that decretal Epistle, which was, as above is said, in the year 1200.

But after the Parochial Right of Tithes was settled, it is clear, that no
Layman was capable of Tithes in pernancy but in particular Cases, till the
Statutes, Seldom. hist. decim. 398. and in his Review. 478;
by which the Monasteries and religious Houses were dissolved, enabled them;
but in some special Cases, Laymen were capable of Tithes in pernancy, Co.
2.44. a.. Laymen capable of Tithes in Pernancy. Co. 2.45. a
as in the Case of Pigot and Heron cited in the Bishop of Winchester's Case:
where the Case is put, that the Lord of a Manor, and all those whose Estate he
had in the Manor time out of mind, had paid to the Parson of D. (in which
Parish the Manor lay) for the time being for the maintenance of Divine
Service in contentation of all Tithes arising within the said Manor, and that
in consideration thereof he and all those whose Estates he had in the said
Manor by the time aforesaid had and enjoyed all the Tithes arising in the said
Manor: and in this Case it was adjudged, that the Lord of the Manor might
have these Tithes in pernancy, and sue for the same in the Spiritual Court; but
a man cannot claim Tithes generally as part of, or belonging to, a Manor.

But since the several Statutes made for the dissolution of Monasteries,
Laymen capable of Tithes in Pernancy by the Statutes of the dissolution of
Abbeys.
those Tithes which were appropriated to the religious houses so dissolved are
become Lay-Fee, and any Layman by the Laws of this Realm are capable of them
in pernancy, and may sue for the same in the Spiritual Courts.

But since the parochial Right of Tithes was settled prima facie, All Tithes
belong to the Rector prima facie. Portions by Prescription.
All Tithes not appropriated belong to the Rector of the Parish Church wherein
they arise; yet notwithstanding the Parson of one Parish may prescribe to have
a Portion of Tithes in the Parish of another; 14 H. 4.17. a 44 Ass. p. 25. Roll
1.657. o.
and so might Abbot, Priors, and other religious persons prescribe to have
portions of Tithes in Parishes, How Prescriptiont are to be proved. Seld. hist.
decim. 364 290
whereof they had not the Advowsons; and by consequence the Patentees from the
Crown, and the Impropriators may claim the same by prescriptions in the Abbots,
Priors, etc. and the usage since the dissolution will serve to prove the
prescription and usage in the Abbots, etc. that they held the same so time out
of mind.

As for extra-parochial Tithes, Extra-parechial Tithes. 7 E. 3.
there has been some differing Opinions. Sir William Herle was of opinion, that
they belonged to the Bishop of the Diocese, as general Parson of his whole
Diocese, grounding his opinion, as it should seem, Seld. hist. decim. 108.
upon the Canon Law: But there was never any such Canon received or approved in
this Kingdom.

But it has been resolved both in Parliament, 21 Ass. 75. 2 Inst. 647; Roll
1.657. o. p. Seld hist. decim. 365.
and by several Judgments at Common Law, that all extra-parochial Tithes belong
to the King, who is a mixed Person, and capable of Tithes at the Common Law in
pernancy.

Now having showed in general who are capable of Tithes in pernancy at this
day, In Particular Cases to whom Tithes are due.
and to whom of Common right they belong, I shall proceed to show to whom they
are due in some particular Cases.

If a Parson Lease his Glebe-Lands, Cro. El. 161. Against the Parsons own
Lease. Portman verse. Hind in 31, and 32 El. B. R. Co. 11.13. b Dyer 43. p. 22
est Quaere.
and do not also grant the Tithes thereof, the Tenant shall pay the Parson
Tithes: nay though the Parson Lease his Lands cum omnibus proficuis and
commoditatibus eidem spectantibus, rendering Rent pro omnibus exactionibus and
demandis quibuscunque Yet notwithstanding the Tenant shall pay the Parson the
Tithes arising upon these Lands.

The like Law it is, if an Impropriator, Vicar, etc. make such Lease, etc.

And as the Parson shall have Tithe of his own Tenant, Against his Feoffment.
Co. 1.111. a Co. 11.13. b
so he shall have of his Feoffee. And if a Parson have Lands in the same Parish
whereof he is Parson, and demises his Tithes, he shall pay Tithes to his Farmer.

If a Parson sow his ground, Dyer 43. p. 21. Moyle ver. Ewre. Hill. 1 Jac. B.
R. Roll 655. k. 2. Lease. Roll 655. k. 1.
and then sell the emblements, (I mean the Corn growing upon the ground) the
buyer of the Corn shall pay the Tithe of it to the Parson that sowed and sold
the Corn.

So if a Parson sow his Glebe-Land, and then Lease the Land, the Tenant shall
pay his Parson Landlord Tithe of this Corn.

There has been some opinions, Co. 10.88. b 21 H. 6.30. a..
that if the Parishioner sow his Lands, and before severance the Parson die,
that in this case the Parson's Executors, Uphaven ver. Humfries 40 El. per
Poph. and Gaudy verse. Fenner.
and not his Successor, should have the Tithes.

And there has been some Opinions, that if the Parson sow his Glebe, and die
before severance, that his Executors should not pay Tithes of this Corn.

But both these Cases, To whom the Tithes in the Vacation belong. St. 28. H. 8.
c. 11.
if they had been Law, are put out of doubt by the Stat. of 28 H. 8. which has
given all the Tithes and other profits belonging to the Rectory to the
Successor from the death of the last Incumbent, which has taken away all
pretense the Executors could have in such Cases. But notwithstanding this
Statute, I take the Law to be clear, that the Executor of the Parson shall have
the Corn sown by his Testator in his life time, Rolls 655. k. 3.
as the Executors of other Tenants for life have by the Law.

It has been held, Whether the Vicar and Parson shall pay to each other.
Crompt. Case P. 7. Car. 1. B. R. Cro. El. 578.
that the Vicar upon a general indowment shall not pay Tithes of his Glebe to
the Parson, or the fruits that arise from the same, Quia decimas Ecclesia
Ecclesiae reddere non debet.

So if a Vicar be endowed of all the small Tithes arising within the Parish,
yet he shall not have the small Tithes arising upon the Glebe-Lands of the
Parson. Tithes may belong to a Chapel. 13 Ass. p. 2. Dyer 87.


Tithes by prescription may be appendant to an ancient Chapel.

CHAP. III. The third Chapter shows of what things Tithes are due, and in what
manner the Tithes of Hay and Corn are to be paid.
Tithes Regularly are to be paid of all things annually arising from the gound,
Of what things Tithes are to be paid. Co. 11.160. F. N. B 53 E.
either of themselves, or by the Culture and Industry of the Parishioner
without any deduction of Averg. in their proper kinds, as soon as the same may
be separated and divided from the nine parts in Sheaves Garbs or Heaps. Lind
wood c. Quoniam propter verb. non deductis expensis.
But the manner and form of the payment of Tithes is for the most part governed
by the Custom of the place: and therefore if by Custom the tenth part, How
Tithes of Corn are to be paid.
of Corn or Hay has been measured forth growing upon the Lands, as it is in
some parts of Lincolnshire, this manner of Tithing is to be observed; for in
what manner soever the Tithe has been paid time out of mind, St. 27 II 8. c.
20. 32 II. 8. cap. 7.
in such manner it still ought to be paid; and therefore where Tithe Corn has
used to be paid time out mind in Sheaves or Garbs bound up, it is no good
payment to leave it in bonds unbound, as I have known some contentious
Parishioners do.

So for the Tithe of Hay, How the Tithe of Hay is to be paid.
if the Parishioner have used to make it into Hay-cocks before they have set
forth their Tithes, they must do so still; Roll 1.644. y. 1256.
but where there is no such Custom, they may set it forth in Grass-cocks.

The same order ought to be observed in all other things arising from the
Ground as Rape Saffron Apples, etc. and other fruit.

But no Tithes are to be paid for the Rakings of Corn, Rakings. 2 Inst. 652;
Cro El. 660. More 278. Crok. Jac. 42: Yelver. 86. Hetley 133. Rolls 1.645. z.
11, 12, and 13. Aftermaths.
unless the Parishioner fraudulently scatter his Corn to cozen the Parson of
his Tithes.

Neither are Tithes to be paid of the aftermaths of Meadows, nor of balks in
Corn Fields, or of the stubble of Corn: But if the Meadowing be so rich, that
there is two crops of Hay got in one Year, or two crops of Woad, etc. there the
Parson shall have Tithe as well of the later as of the former Crop.

If a Man gather green pease to spend in his House, Rolls 1.647. a. 11, 12.
Green Pease.
and there spend them in his Family, no Tithes shall be paid for the same; but
if he gather them to fell or to feed Hogs, there Tithes shall be paid for them.

Neither shall Tith Hay be paid for the Grass growing upon head-Lands,
Headlands. Roll 1.646. z. 19.
which are only large enough for the turning of the plow.

But Tithe shall be paid of the Hay and Corn growing in Orchards, 2 Inst. 652;
Orchards.
though the Tith of the fruit growing in them were paid the same Year, be it
Apples Pears Cherries, etc.

There has been some question about fodder gotten in the feen Lands in
Cambridgshire and elsewhere, More 683.. Cro Jac. 47 Fodder.
and spent upon beasts of the Plow and Pail, whether it should pay Tithes or
no; but it has been resolved, that Tithes shall as well be paid of this
Fodder, as of other Hay spent upon the Beasts of the Plow and Pail.

But it has been resolved, Grass out in Meadows for Beasts of the Plow. Wells
verse. Crawly. T. 1. Car. 1. B.R. Tares Vetches cut green. Cro. Car. 393. Jones
357
that for Grass cut in Meadows to feed the Beasts of the Plow, and not made
into Hay, that Tithes should not be paid thereof.

It has been resolved, that Tares Vetches, etc. cut green for the feeding
Beasts of the Plow, by Custom may be freed from the payment of Tithes, but not
without Custom.

CHAP. IV. The Fourth Chapter sets forth where, and in what Cases, and in what
manner, the Tithes of Wood are to be paid.
IN the time of Stratford Archbishop of Canterbury, How and where Tithe Wood
is to be paid.
in or about the 17th Year of the Reign of E. 3. 1343. there was a Provincial
Canon or Declaration made to this effect.

Declaramus provisione concilii sylvam coeduam illam fore, Canon. Lindwood c.
Quanquam ex solventibus, etc.
quae cujuscunque existens generis arborum in hoc habetur ut caedatur, and quae
etiam succisa rursus exstirpibus aut radicibus renascatur; ac ex ea decimam ut
pote realem and praedialem parochialibus seu matricibus Ecclesiis persolvendam,
nec non Sylvarum possessores hujusmodi ad praestationem decimarum Liguorum
ipsorum Excisorum in eis sicut faeni and bladorum omni censura Ecclesiastica
fore Canonice compellendos.

But in or about the same Year there was a Petition in Parliament, Exact
Abridgment p. 40. nu. 51. and ibid. 80. number. 37.
that no Man should be impleaded in Court Christian for the Tithes of Woods or
under-Woods, but in places accustomed, which was answered; As heretofore, the
same shall be.

The like Petition was in the 25th Year of E. 3. and other Parliaments, till at
the length in the 45th Year of the same King an Act of Parliament was made to
this effect reciting,

That whereas they sell their great Wood of the age of twenty years or of
greater age to Merchants to their own profit, St. 45. E. 3. c. 3. Statute not
to be paid of great Wood.
and in aid of the King in his Wars, Parsons and Vicars of Holy Church do
implead and draw the said Merchants in Suit in the Spiritual Court for the
Tithes of the said Wood by the Name of Sylva caedua, whereby they cannot sell
their Woods to the very value, to the great damage of them and the Realm. It
is therefore by that Law ordained and established, that a Prohibition in this
case shall be granted, and upon the same an Attachment, as has been used
before this time.

By which it appears, that this Act of Parliament was but a Declaration of
the Common Law, Prohibitions and Attachments thereupon in such case having been
formerly used, 9 H. 6.56. a; T. 27 E. ^0.28. a. Prohibition in Point. 50 E.
3.10.a
and so was Paston's opinion. 9 H. 6.

This Act of Parliament was after questioned by the Clergy pretending it did
not pass as an Act of Parliament, but only as an Ordinance and so not binding.
And thereupon the Commons in the next Parliament petitioned, Exact Abridg. 118
nu. 21.
that it might be enacted, that for Wood above twenty Years growth no Tithes
should be due, and that in all such cases a Prohibition might be granted. To
which was answered, that such Prohibition should be granted as then before had
been used.

But Sir Edward Cook in his Commentary upon Magna Charta does sufficiently
prove it was an Act of Parliament.

1. Because it is entered upon the Parliament Roll amongst other Acts of
Parliament. 2. 2 Inst. 643 644;
It is under the Title in that Roll of Statutes of E. 3. Anno regni sui 45. 3.
It was proclaimed with the rest of the Acts of that Parliament. 4. It is penned
in the form of an Act of Parliament, viz. (it is ordained and established.) 5.
It has the consent of the Lords and Commons. 6. There has been infinite
Prohibitions upon it. To which let me add, that in the Parliament of 8 R. 2. 8
R. 2. Exact Abridgment of Records nu. 21.
It was owned for an Act of Parliament, in which Parliament it is like many of
the Persons were present that were at the making of the said Act.

And in 9 H. 6. 9 H. 6.56. a;
Exception was taken to the Prohibition, because it was not grounded upon this
Statute.

And in the 11 H. 4. 11 H. 4.9. a..
it was affirmed by Thirming to be an Act of Parliament and in force. Seld.
hist. decim. 236. 2 Inst. 643 644; Roll 1.637 638, 639.


But whosoever desires more satisfaction in this point, I refer them to Mr.
Selden's History of Tithes, and the other places mentioned in the margent.

Notwithstanding this Act, many questions were startled what was Sylva caedua,
and many Petitions in Parliament to have it declared; to which I find no
positive answers, but sometimes referred to usage, and sometimes the King took
time to advise.

But Belknap a learned Judge, Sylva caedua quid. 50 E. 3.10. b;
50 E. 3. declares, that Sylva caedua is to be intended every manner of Wood
that may be cut and will grow again: which all manner of Wood will do, as he
there says, if it be preserved from Cattle; and therefore the Defendant in the
Prohibition in that case was put to Traverse, that he sued not in the Spiritual
Court for the Tithes of gross Woods.

So that the question at this day chiefly is, what shall be said gross Woods?
To which question

The Judges of the Common Law have resolved, 2 Inst. 643; What shall be said
great Wood. Contra Rolls 1.640. q Plo. 470. a.b.
that all sort of Wood that is usually employed for the building of Houses,
Mils, etc. are gross Woods, and within this Statute: of which sort are Oak Ash
Elm Beech Horse-beech and Horn-bean against the opinion in Molyn's case: Contra
Rolls 640 q. 7. Hob. 288. Rolls 640. q. 6, 7, 8. Hob. 219 Noy 30 Cro. Jac 199
Asp is likewise esteemed a gross Wood, being sometimes used for Timber; but
for Willows Hasels Hollies Maples Birch Alders Thorns, etc. of what age or
bigness soever they be, they are regularly to pay Tithes.

But if they be cut for fencing of grounds, Cro. El. 499 609 2 Inst. 652; Cro.
Car. 113.. More 683.. Roll 1.644. z. 1, 2, 3.
or for fuel to be spent in the Houses of the owner within the same Parish, no
Tithes shall be paid of them.

But if by Custom Tithes have been paid of such Wood, the Custom is to be
observed.

So if a man cut Wood for the burning of Bricks, Of what Wood Tithe shall not
be paid. Roll 1.645. z. 8, 9. Burning Bricks. Roll 1.645. z. 10.
which are employed for the repair of houses and buildings of the owner within
the same Parish, no Tithes shall be paid for it; but if he make Bricks to sell,
or for making of houses of pleasure, or other than for necessary Habitation, he
shall pay Tithe for the Wood spent therein, if Tithable.

If a man convert his Land into a Nursery for fruit trees or other trees,
Nurseries, Roll 1.637. E. 6. Cro. Car. 526. Jones. 416.
and sell them for profit to such as transplant them into other Parishes he
shall pay Tithes of them.

If a man cut his Coppice Wood, Grubbed Wood, Roll 1.637. E. 7.
and pay Tithe of them, and soon after grub up the roots to cleanse the ground,
he shall not pay Tithes of them.

Upon the whole matter it is left a little uncertain, which shall be accounted
gross Wood; because in some Countries almost the meanest sort of Wood are used
for building, and the Judgments in our books vary, some allowing one thing for
Timber, which another contradicts; but the proper and undeniable Wood for
Timber are Elm, Ash and Oak, which are used for Timber in all Countries and
Places as Timber: It rests now to show in what Cases such Wood as are accounted
gross Wood shall pay Tithes.

If Oak, Ash, Elm, etc. which are esteemed Timber in the Countries where they
grow, be cut under one and twenty years growth, they are accounted Sylva caedua
and ought to pay Tithe.

But the Loppings of great Oaks, Loppings of trees. 2 Inst. 643 Cro. Jac. 100
More 762; Plow. 470. b. Roll 1.640. q. 13.4. Co. 11.48. b
Ashes, etc. though the Lops be under twenty years growth, shall not pay
Tithes; for they are privileged by the bodies, neither shall Tithes be paid of
the shoots and under-wood, which grows from the roots and stocks of such
Timber Trees, and trees above the growth of twenty years, which have been
felled.

Nor shall Tithes be paid of the Bark of such Trees as are Timber Trees, Bark.
2 Inst. 643.. Co. 11.49.a;
and privileged from the payment of Tithes.

But Tithes shall be paid of the mast, acorns, etc. of Timber Trees, because
the same is of annual increase. 2 Inst. 643.. Dotards 2 Inst. 643; Cro. El.
477. Roll 1.640. q. 2. Co. 11.49. a; Rolls 1.640. q. 1.


Neither shall Tithes be paid of Timber Trees, which become dotard, and are
become arida, sicca, and non portans folia in aestate nec existens maheremium.

If one lopp Oaks, Ash, etc. under twenty years of age, and after let them grow
above twenty years of age, no Tithes shall be paid of them or their Lops. Wood
mint with great and Underwoods. Parsons Law 99. T. 19. Jac. B. R. Buckhurst
verse. Newman Parson of Staplehurst. T. 36. El. B. R. per Henden.


It has been held, that if a Wood ground be mixed with Woods tithable, and
Woods not tithable, and the greater part be such as are not tithable, it shall
privilege the rest and pay no Tithe; but if the greater part be tithable it
shall pay Tithe of such part as is tithable; for where the greater part is
great Wood, the whole shall be called grand Wood a majore.

It has been a question amongst the Canonists, Who shall pay the Tithe of
Wood. Lindwood c. Quanquam ex silventibus and verb. Sylvarum pos. and cap. Quia
quidam maledictionis verb. asportan.
who shall pay the Tithes of Wood tithable, the buyer or the seller, Mr.
Lindwood in his Gloss upon the Canon before recited, seems to be of opinion,
that the buyer shall pay the Tithes, Quia verum enim est quod decima sequitur
fructus, and cum onere decimae transferuntur fructus in alterum, and this
opinion of his seems reasonable, where the Owner of the wood sells the whole
wood together, or parcels it out, and the buyers cut it; but if the Owner of
the Wood cut it himself, and then sells it by parcels, there it seems
reasonable, that the Owner of the Wood should pay the Tithe; Roll 1.656. l. 1.
but by the Common Law the Parson may sue the one or the other at his Election.

And it is to be observed, Roll 1. 637, f.
that a whole Province, County or Hundred may prescribe in non decimando of
Woods, Prescription of not Tithing of Wood.
as in the Wilds of Kent and Sussex and other places; and therefore the Commons
in the 18 El. upon the making of the aforesaid Canon moved in Parliament, that
no man should be drawn in Plea in the Court Christian for the Tithes of Wood or
Underwood, except in such places where such Tithes have been used to be paid;
Roll 1. 637. f.
for by the strict Letter of this Canon, Tithes were to have been paid of all
manner of Wood great and small in all places, to which the Answer is recorded,
Let it be done in this also, as has been done before time.

The manner of the payment of Tithe wood must either be by the measure of the
ground by Poles, The manner of paying Tithe Wood.
Pearches, etc. as it is in some parts of Lincolnshire, or every tenth Faggot,
Billet, etc. as it is paid of Corn and other things, but in this, as in all
other Cases, the Custom of the place is to be observed.

But no Tithe shall be paid of Wood cut for Hop Poles to be used in the same
Parish, White verse. Arch. M. 15. Jac. C. B.
where the Parson has the Tithe of the Hops.

CHAP. V. The Fifth Chapter shows where, and in what Cases, Tithe is due for
the herbage or agistment and Pasturage of Cattle, and who is to pay the same.
I Am now come to speak of the Tithe of herbage, In what Cases Tithe Herbage is
due.
agistment or depasturing of Cattle, for which I find no Canon, save a Clause
of a Provincial Canon of Robert Winchelsey, dated 1305. in these words.

De Pasturis autem and pascuis tam non communibus quam communibus statuimus,
The Canon.
quod decimae fideliter persolvantur, and hoc per numerum animalium and dierum,
ut expedit Ecclesiae.

The Tithe of the Herbage or Agistment of Cattle is due, where the Owner or
Farmer of any Lands, Depastures the same with barren Cattle, that yield no
profit at all to the Parson, which is a Tenth Part of the yearly value of the
ground so eaten, but commonly a twentieth part is accepted, but in this, as in
all other Tithes the Custom and Usage of the place is to be observed.

If the Owner of the Land agist it with Forrainers Cattle, Cro. Car. 237.559.
Jones 254. Who shall pay it.
then the Owner of the Land shall pay the Herbage Tithe; but if he let the
ground to a Tenant, then the Tenant is to pay it.

But no Herbage Tithe shall be paid for the Agistment of Beasts bred for the
Plow and Payle, Cro El. 365. 2 Inst. 651 Cro. Car. 237. 559. Roll 1.647. a. 9,
10. Roll 1.643. R. 4. Bulst. 1.171. Poph. 126.142. Wild verse. Lampton. T. 15.
Jac. B. R. per 3 Inst. in Houghton. Saddle horses. Roll 1.646. a. 4, 5. Beasts
bred for the Plow and Pail.
and so employed in the same Parish; nor for Beasts fed and spent in the Owners
house in the same Parish.

So if a man eat a ground with his own Saddle Horses, he shall pay no Tithes
for the same; but if an Innkeeper eat up a ground with Guest horses, he shall
pay Tithes for the herbage of them.

If a Forrainer that lives in another Parish depastures a ground with Cattle
bred for the Plow and Pail, to be employed in a Foreign Parish, he shall pay
Tithe for the agistment of such Cattle.

And there is no difference between the Case of a Parishioner and a Forrainer,
where the ground is eaten with unprofitable Cattle, and not bred for the plow
and pail, Saddle horses and fatting Cattle, as aforesaid to be spent in the
Parishioners house; but that the Parishioner, as well as the stranger, shall
pay Tithe; but for the breeding of Cattle for the plow and pail, etc. conduces
to the profit of the Parson in his other Tithes.

No Tithe is due to the Parson for the herbage of beasts ferae naturae, as
Deer, 2 Inst. 651 Herbage of Beast ferae naturae. F.N.B. 53. g.
Conys, etc. without a special Custom.

Fitzherbert in his natura brevium seems to be of opinion, that there is no
Tithe due for the herbage or agistment of Cattle, and adds this reason, because
they pay Tithe of the Cattle there depastured, which proves his meaning to be,
that there is no Tithe herbage due, where the ground is depastured with
profitable Cattle.

If a ground be eaten with profitable Cattle, as milch Cows, Yews, Pasture
eaten with mixed Cattle.
Lambs and Cattle bred for plow and pail, etc. and also with barren and
unprofitable Cattle, and the profitable Cattle exceed in number, it should seem
the greater part being profitable should free the rest, Roll 1641. q. 20.
Quaere.
tamen inde quaere.

No Tithe Herbage is to be paid of the Agistment of Oxen, Roll 1.646. a. 6, 7.
Beasts of the Flow.
Horses or Beasts of the plow employed and used in the same Parish, for they
are profitable Cattle to the Parson.

If a ground be eaten with barren and unprofitable Cattle, Ground eaten with
mixed Cattle.
and profitable Cattle together, and the profitable Cattle are the less in
number; I conceive there is no doubt but the Land holder must pay Tithe in kind
for the profitable Cattle, and Tithe of the herbage for the rest, and not
herbage for the whole.

If there be a Custom in a Country to sow Tares, Yares and Vetches eaten green.
Roll 1.646. a. 6, 7
Vetches, etc. and to eat them green upon the ground before they are ripe, with
Horses and Beasts of the Plow, no Tithes shall be paid for the same.

If a Stranger or a Parishioner buy barren Cattle, Roll 1.647. a. 8. and 16. Of
what Cattle herbage is due.
and depasture and feed them for sale, he shall pay Tithe for the herbage of
them.

If a Man buy Oxen, Roll 1.647. a. 13.
Steers or Horses, and depastures and after sells them, and does not without
fraud employ them in the Plow, he shall pay Tithes for their agistment: and if
he work them fraudulently to defeat the Parson of his Tithes, it will not serve
his turn.

So if a man buys or rears young Cattle, Roll 1.647. a. 15.
and depastures them in a Parish, and do not employ them there for the Plow or
Pail without fraud, as has been said, he shall pay Tithe for the herbage of
them.

But for the Grass of Fallows no Herbage shall be paid, P. 7. Jac. C.B. Parsons
Law.
because it is for the bettering of the Parson's Tithes in the Year following.

CHAP. VI. The Sixth Chapter shows where, and in what manner, the Tithes of
Calves, Milk, Cheese, Wool, Lambs, Piggs, etc. are payable.
IN the payment of these sort of Tithes I do not observe that the Common Law
crosses the Canon in any thing material, How the Tithes of Calves, milk, wool,
Lambs, etc. are to be paid.
and therefore I shall recite you the Provincial Canon made by Robert
Winchelsey. And his Clergy Anno Dom. 1305. which is to this effect.

De nutrimentis autem animalium, The Canon. Lindwood c. Quoniam propter.
scilicet de agnis, statuimus, quod pro sex agnis and infra, sex oboli dentur
pro decima; si septem sint agni in numero septimus Agnus detur pro decima
Rectori: ita tamen quod Rector Ecclesiae qui septimum Agnum recipit, tres
obolos in recompensationem solvat parochiano a quo decimam recipit: Qui octavum
recepit, det denarium: Qui vero nonum, det obolum parochiano, vel expectet
Rector usque ad alium annum, donec plenarie decimum agnum possit recipere si
maluerit; and qui ita expeciat semper exigat secundum Agnum meliorem vel
tertium ad minus de agnis secundi Anni, Et hoc pro expectatione primi anni. Et
ita intelligendum est de decima lanae: Sed si oves alibi in Hyeme and alibi in
Aestate nutriuntur, dividenda est decima; similiter si quis medio tempore
emerit vel vendiderit oves and certum sit a qua parochia illae oves venerint,
earundem dividenda est decima, sicut de re quae sequitur duo domicilia: si
autem incertum fuerit, habeat illa Ecclesia totam decimam, infra cujus limits
tempore tonsionis inveniuntur. De lacte vero volumus quod decima solvatur dum
durat, videlicet de caseo tempore suo, and de lacte autumno and Hyeme, nisi
parochiani velint pro talibus facere competentem redemptionem and hoc ad
valorem decimae and commodum Ecclesiae.

By this Canon the payment of the Tithes of Wool and Lambs is settled in this
manner, How Wool and Lamb is to be paid.
that if the Parishioner have under seven Lambs or Fleeces he shall pay a half
penny for every Lamb and Fleece, and if there be seven Lambs or Fleeces, and
under ten, then the Parson or etc. is to allow a half penny for every one that
is wanting; but where this Canon gives the Rector election to take his Tithe in
this manner, or let them run on till a Lamb or Fleece be due in the ensuing
Year; that is not allowed by our Law, P. 14. El. Harpurs Rep.
for Tithes must be paid annually; where Sheep are kept in one Parish in
Summer, and another in Winter, the Tithes are to be divided: So if one buy in
Sheep out of another Parish, the Tithe is to be divided; that is, to each
Rector, etc. his proportion for the time they were respectively kept in the
respective Parishes; but if it be not known from whence Sheep so bought in,
came, then the whole Tithe is to be paid, where the Lambs fall, and the Sheep
are shorn.

By the Canon the Tithe of Milk is to be paid in Cheese whilst the Parishioner
makes Cheese; but in Autumn and Winter, it is to be paid in kind: but this part
of the Canon is generally overruled by the Custom of the place; for in many
places they pay the Milk in kind all the year, in some places they pay only
Cheese, and in some neither Cheese nor Milk, but some small rate for it: and in
some Countries they prescribe to pay no Tithe of their Milk at all; and the
Custom of the place in this, as in all other Tithing, is to be observed
notwithstanding the Canon: but for the better explanation of the meaning of
this Canon there was a second Canon made, but the date thereof I cannot attain
to, the tenor whereof follows.

Quoniam, ut audivimus, Lindwood c. Quoniam audivimus. Canon where Sheep, etc.
shift their Pasture from one Parish to another.
super decimis and nutrimentis animalium inter Ecclesiarum Rectores propter
amotiones pecorum ad diversarum parochiarum pasturas diversis anni temporibus
contentiones multimodae oriuntur: Nos viam pacis praeparare volentes statuendo
desinimus and definiendo statuimus quod ad Ecclesias in quarum parochiis oves a
tempore concionis usque ad festum sancti Martini in Hyeme continue pascuntur
and cubant, Decima lanae lactis and casei ejusdem temporis licet postea amotae
fuerint ab illa parochia and alibi tondeantur, integre per solvatur, and ne
fraus fiat in casu praedicto praecipimus, quod antequam oves amoveantur a
pasturis vel etiam distrahantur, Ecclesiarum Rectoribus sufficienter de
solvenda decima caveatur. Quod si infra praedictum tempus ad diversarum
parochiarum pasturam transferantur, quaelibet Ecclesia pro rata temporis
portione decimam percipiet earundem minori triginta dierum spatio in rata
temporis minime computando. Si vero per totum tempus praedictum cubant in una
parochia and pascantur continue in alia, inter ipsas Ecclesias decima
dividatur. Quod si post festum sancti Martini ducantur ad pascua aliena, and
usque ad tempus tonsionis in una vel diversis parochiis sive in propriis
pasturis dominorum suorum sive alterius cujuscunque pascantur, babita ratione
ad numerum ovium pascua aestimentur and secundum aestimationem pascuorum ab
eorum dominis exigantur decimae: Decima vero lactis and casei de vaccis and
capris proveniens ubi cubant and pascuntur, ibi solvatur. Alioquin si cubant in
una parochia and pascuntur in alia parochia, decima inter Rectores dividatur
omnino. Agni vero, vituli, pulli Equini and alii faetus decimales habita
ratione ad loca diversa ubi gignuntur, oriuntur and nutriuntur, and ad moram
quam traxerint in eisdem, particulariter decimentur. Quid vero pro decima
debeatur ubi lac propter paucitatem vaccarum vel ovium ad caseum faciendum non
sufficit; Et quid pro agnis, Milk and Cheese.
vitulis, pullis equinis, velleribus, aucis, aut aliis hujusmodi, de quibus
propter eorum modicitatem decima certa dari non potest, consuetudini locorum
duximus relinquendum. Item praecipimus quod si quis post festum sancti Martini
oves occiderit, vel si oves quovis casu fortuito moriantur; Decimam legitimam
parochiali Ecclesiae solvere non postponunt. Et si oves extraneae in alicujus
parochia tondeantur, Decima ibidem tradetur Rectori Ecclesiae, nisi
sufficienter doceri posset quod pro decima alibi satisfactum ut solutionem
ibidem faciendam modo legitimo valeat impedire.

There may some question be made upon the first Paragraph of this Canon, Verbo
integre.
whether the Rector where the Sheep are kept from sheering till Martlemas
should have the whole Tithe of the Sheep for the whole Year: but Mr. Lindwood
in his Gloss conceives it is intended the whole Tithe that arises during that
time, which for Sheep will be nothing at all; but certainly it were very
unreasonable that the Rector of the Parish where Cattle are kept but for half
the Year, should have the whole Tithes, and it cannot be intended to be any
more than the proportion for the time they are so kept.

But by this Canon, Sheep kept less than thirty days.
if Sheep be kept less than thirty days in any Parish, no rate is to be allowed
to the Rector of that Parish where they are kept so small a time.

If Sheep be bought in a little before share day, and it is not known that they
answer the Tithes elsewhere, the whole is to be delivered to the Rector of the
Parish where they are shorn.

Where the Milk is so little that it will not make Chief, or the Calves,
Lambs, Fleeces, Colts, Geese, etc. are so few in number that there will none
fall to the Parson, the Canon gives no rule of Tithing in that case, but refers
it to the Custom of the place: but the Canonists generally hold, that Custom to
pay less then a tenth part is not binding; for says Lindwood, Quod laici minus
solvant quam decimam, Custom to pay less than the value of the Tithe. Verb.
Consuet. loc.
non potest consuetudine introduei quia esset contra jus divinum plus tamen
potest deberi ex consuetudine. And concludes, Quod autem hic loquitur de
consuetudine locorum, intelligas de tali consuetudine quae non excludit
solutionem decimae, sed de tali quae limitat ipsius decimae solutionem ad
commodum Ecclesiae, scilicet ad verum valorem vel amplius; herein I perceive
the Canonists and Common Lawyers agree, that a Custom to be free from payment
of any Tithe, or a rate for it, is not good, except it extend to a whole
Country, County, etc. and that where there is competent livelihood for the
Minister beside; but the Common Law allows of Customs and Prescriptions, where
money or some other thing is paid in lieu of Tithes, though not to the full
value, as shall hereafter be made appear in it is proper place.

By this Canon it is provided, that where Cows feed in one Parish, and lodge in
another, that the Tithes shall be divided.

For the Tithes of Lambs, Calves, Colts, etc. the Tithe of them by this Canon
is to be apportioned with respect to the places where they were engendered,
brought forth and nourished.

If a man's Sheep dye or be killed after Martlemas, a proportionable Tithe must
be paid for them.

The time of the payment of Lambs, The time when Calves, Lambs, Piggs, etc. are
to be paid.
Kids, Calves, Pigs, etc. is regularly when they are so old, that they may be
weaned and live without the Dam, unless the Custom of the place confine the
payment to any certain time or age, and Wool is to be paid at Sheerday.

If several men's Sheep depasture together in one flock, or under one Shepherd,
Lindwood c. Quoniam prop. ter verb. lanae.
yet this shall not make them to be tithed together, but every Owner shall pay
his Tithe of them by himself, but if the head of a Family have his flock mixed
with his Childrens Sheep which are under his tuition, Several men's Sheep
depasture together.
and he takes the profit of them to his own use in that case they shall be
tithed together.

It has been resolved that where Tithe Fleeces of Wool are paid, Cro. El. 363.
T Wool locks.
there shall be no Tithe paid of the locks and belts

There is a Custom in some Countries to sheer their Sheep about the necks at
Michaelmas, Roll 1.645. z. 14, 15, 16. Bulstrode. l. 3. 242. Neckings.
that the Wool may not in Winter be pulled off with Briars, and for this sort
of Wool without fraud, it has been held that no Tithe shall be paid, and so of
the birling of Sheep without fraud, Roll 1.646. z. 17.
no Tithe is to be paid.

If a Man's Sheep dye of the Rot or other disease, Roll 1.646. z. 18. Sheep dye
of the Rot.
or if the owner kill or sell them as has been said, he must pay Tithe for the
Wool ratably.

Though the Canon direct one at seven to be paid only for Wool and Lambs, yet
in most places the same order by Custom is observed for Calves, Colts, Pigs,
Geese, etc. which Custom I presume took its rise and beginning from this Canon.

And note that where Tithe-Milk is paid in kind, Lindw. cap. Quoniam Propter
verbis de Casco.
there no Tithe Cheese is due, and so where Tithe Cheese is paid for so long,
no Tithe Milk is to be paid.

Lastly, note, Stat. 2. E. 6. ^. 13.
that where any Person has Cattle Tithable going in a Ground or Common whereof
the Parish is not known, the Tithe is to be paid in the Parish or place where
the party lives that owns the Cattle.

CHAP. VII. The Seventh Chapter shows where, and in what manner, the Tithes of
Seeds, Fruit, Mast, Bees, etc. is to be paid.
TIthes are to be paid of the fruits arising in Orchards and Gardens in their
proper kinds when gathered, How the Tithe of Seed, Fruit, Mast, Bees, etc. is
to be paid.
unless there be some modus or rate Tithe paid in lieu thereof, and so of the
Seed of flax, hemp, etc. is to be paid when dressed up; the Tithe of Crabs, Mast,
etc. is likewise to be paid, when the same are gathered, Roll 1.640. q. 10.
Cro. Car. 559. Jones 447.. An. b 51. g. Roll 1. 635. c. 1. Cap. Quoniam propter.
or satisfaction is to be given if eaten with swine on the ground, and the
Tithe of Bees is to be paid by the tenth part of the Honey and Wax, the Canon
is that

De Apibus sicut de omnibus aliis bonis just acquisitis quae renovantur per
annum statuimus, quod decimae solvantur and exigantur debito mode.

CHAP. VIII. The Eight Chapter shows where, and in what manner, Tithes of
Pigeons, Coneys, Fish, Deer and other Beasts and Birds ferae naturae, are
Tithable.
BY the Common Laws of England there is no Tithe due for Birds or Beasts that
are ferae naturae, Whether Tithe be due of beasts and birds ferae naturae. Cro.
Car. 264.. 339; Roll 1.635. c. 4.6, 7. Noy 108. St. 2 E. 6. c. 13.
and therefore it has been resolved, that no Tithe shall be paid for fish
taken out of the Sea or River, unless by Custom as in Wales, Ireland, Yarmouth,
etc. neither, for the same reason, is any Tithe due of Deer, Coneys, etc. but
if due by Custom it must be paid.

And if a man keep Pheasants, Roll 1.635. c. 3.
or other wild Fowl within limits by clipping their wings, yet no Tithes shall
be paid of their Eggs or Young not being reclaimed, Roll 1.636. c. 5. Hetley 147
for as much as if their wings were not cut they would fly away.

But of young Pigeons in Dovecoats or in Pigeon-holes about a man's house, Tithe
shall be paid, if they be sold; but if they be spent in the Family, no Tithe
shall be paid for them.

It is said in Hughton and Princes Case in More's Reports, More 599;
that no Tithes shall be paid of tame Turkeys, Pheasants or Partridges, nor
their Eggs, quia ferae naturae, but I believe the Book is misprinted, for after
they are reclaimed, they cannot be said to be ferae naturae.

CHAP. IX. The Ninth Chapter shows, what Tithes are to be paid for Mills, and
what kind and nature they be of.
THe Canon is, Whether Tithes are to be paid of mills, and how.
De proventibus autem molendinorum volumus quod decimae fideliter and integre
solvantur.

And Articuli Cleri cap. 5. is to this purpose.

Si quis in fundo suo molendinum erexit de novo, and postea a Rectore loci
exigatur decima de eodem, exhibetur Regia prohibitio sub hac forma. Quia de
tali molendino hactenus non fuerunt solutae, prohibemus, etc. Et sententiam
excommunicationis, si quam hac occasion promulgaveritis, revocetis omnino.
Responsio: In tali casu nunquam exivit Regia Prohibitio de principis voluntate,
qui and decernit talem perpetuo non exire.

It is made a question first, 2 Inst. 622;
whether any Tithes are due for Mills or not, which Sir Edward Coke in his
second Institutes says, was never judicially determined that he knows of, and
it was held in the Case of a Fulling Mill no Tithe was due; for of profits that
come only by the labor and industry of man no Tithe is to be paid, Cro. Car.
523 524;
and the same reason holds for Corn-Mills.

The next question is, admitting, that Tithes are due for mills, whether the
same be predial or personal.

Sir Edward Coke is of opinion, that in Case any Tithe be due, it is only a
personal Tithe, being acquired by the labor and industry of the miller, and
takes no Increase from the ground to make it predial: And the Statute of 2 E.
6. is, that every person shall justly set forth, yield and pay all predial
Tithes in their proper kinds, as they arise and happen, which cannot be applied
to the Millers taking of the Toll dish, nor to Fulling Mills, Iron Mills, Paper
Mills, etc. which are all comprehended under the word mill; and no Tithe can be
paid in specie, for if the Parson should have every tenth Toll dish, then it
would often happen, that he should have twice Tithe of the same Corn, which is
against the Law, and such Tithe as the Tenth Toll dish has never been paid in
any place, that I have known or heard of.

And if it be a personal Tithe, as there is great reason that it can be no
other, then it must be paid with the deduction of the expenses and charges, and
is not payable but in such places, where personal Tithes are payable by Custom:
See more thereof in the twenty second Chapter.

But the Canonists hold, That the tenth Toll dish shall be paid as a predial
Tithe without deduction of expenses.

CHAP. X. The Tenth Chapter shows, whether Tithes ought to be paid of Hawking,
Hunting, Fishing, Fowling, etc.
THese are all comprehended under personal Tithes, Tithe of Hawking, Hunting,
Fishing, Fowling if due.
for that these things being obtained by the labor and industry of the Party,
and the things obtained are ferae naturae, and not of their own nature tithable
in their proper kind, unless the particular Custom of the place require it, and
therefore I shall refer these to the twenty second Chapter, where I shall speak
of Personal Tithes.

CHAP. XI. The Eleventh Chapter is concerning the Tithes of Ducks, Geese, Hens,
Swans, and other domestic Fowls and Birds.
THE Tithe of all tame and domestic Fowl is to be paid in their Eggs, or Young
in their proper kind, Of the Tithe of domestic Birds and Fowl.
according to the Custom of the place: Geese, Ducks and Swans are usually paid
in their kind, but of Hens and Turkeys, commonly in Eggs, but therein the
Custom of the place is to be observed; but note, that where they pay Tithe of
the Eggs, there is no Tithe of the Young, nor e converso Tithe Eggs paid, where
they have the Tithe of the Young.

CHAP. XII. The Twelfth Chapter shows, of what things Tithe shall not be paid.
TIthes regularly are not due of dwelling houses, Of what things Tithes shall
not be paid. Co. 11.16. a.. Hob. 11;
and yet a modus may be due for a house as well as for land, and it shall be
intended, that it was a modus for the land before the house was built.

No Tithes shall be paid for Hounds, Things of pleasure. 12 H. 8.4.b 2 Inst.
651. Things that increase not. Roll 1. 636. d. 1. Doct. and Stud. 174.
Apes, Popinjayes, and similia, because they are things only of pleasure.

Neither shall any Tithes be paid of those things, which do not increase from
year to year, and therefore no Tithes shall be paid for stone got out of
Quarries, Pit-coals, Turfs, Slates, Bricks, Quarrels, Tyles, earthen Pots, nor
of any thing made of the earth, nor of marle or lime, got for the Improvement
of the ground, Cro. El. 277. More 908. 2 Inst. 651 Roll 1. 637. Et Doct. and
Stud. 174. Baxter verse. Hope. H. 8. Jac. C.B. 10.1109. St. 2. E. 6. c. 13.
nor of Tynn, Lead, Copper or other Metal gotten out of the ground, but by
Custom Tithes of such things may be due and payable.

Servants in Husbandry shall not pay personal Tithes, neither shall any Tithes
be paid of marriage goods.

No Tithes shall be paid of aftermaths, Stubbles or Rakings of Corn without
fraud. Rolls 1.640. q. 12, 13, 16, 17.


No Tithes shall be paid of birds, or beasts, that are ferae naturae, etc.

CHAP. XIII. The Thirteenth Chapter shows, what Force Custom has as well in the
form and manner of Tithing as in the discharge of the payment thereof, and
wherein Custom and Prescription differ.
BY the Statute of 2 E. 6. it is enacted, Stat. 2 E 6. c. 13. What force Custom
has in the manner of Tithing.
that every of the King's Subjects should from thenceforth truly and justly,
without fraud or guile divide, set out, yield and pay all manner of their
predial Tithes in their proper kinds, as they should arise and happen in such
manner and form as had been of right yielded and paid within forty Years next
before the making of the said Act, or which of right or of custom ought to have
been paid.

In this Act there are three qualifications. 1. It enjoins the payment of such
Tithes as had for forty Years then past been of right yielded and paid. 2. such
as of right ought to have been paid. 3. such as by Custom ought to have been
paid.

Tithes due by Custom are of two kinds. 1. where there is a modus decimandi,
and by Custom Money or some other thing is paid in lieu of the Tithes. 2. where
Tithe has by Custom been paid of things not Tithable, as of Lead in
Derbyshire, Tynn in Devonshire and Cornwall, fishing in the Sea, And this is
confirmed by the Stat. of E. 6. cap. 13
as in Southwales where the Custom is, that if the Parishioner of one Parish
land his fish in another, the Tithes are divided between the Parson of the
Parish where the fisher lives, and the other where he landed his fish; but if
the Parishioner land his fish in the Parish where he himself dwells, then the
Rector of that Parish has the whole Tithes.

And I have heard that in some Countries they pay Tithe Ale, Tithe-Ale. Roll 1.
642.
and Tithe of Limekilns, etc. which in their own natures are not Tithable.

And as by custom things may be made Tithable which in their own natures are
not so: or one thing may by custom, be paid in satisfaction or discharge of
another; so custom has a great influence upon the form and manner of Tithing,
for the direction of the time, place, and order of payment of Tithes.

And as custom may make things Tithable, Custom of not Tything where good.
which of their own nature are not Tithable, so a Custom of a Province, County
or Hundred may discharge the payment of Tithe, of a thing in its own nature
Tithable, so there be a competency for the maintenance of the Ministry beside.

And therefore in the wilds of Kent and Sussex they do pretend by Custom to be
free from payment of Tithe Wood, Hob. 266 Bulst. 2. 285. Doct. and Stud. cap.
ult. Roll 1. 642. b. 1. and p. 5, 6, 8. Co. 11.16. a Custom to pay Tithes of
things not Tithable.
or any thing in lieu of it, and so in several Countries they pay no Tithe of
their Milk.

And as Custom may prevail in not Tithing, so it may, as has been said, make
things Tithable which in their own natures are not Tithable, as the Rents of
Houses, Pigeons eaten in the House, Wood spent in the House, and by Custom
Tithe may be paid of Salt, Brick, Lime, Ale, Chickens and other things not
Tithable.

Now the difference between a Custom and a prescription is this, Difference
between Custom and Prescription.
every Custom must have dimension and alleged to be within some certain
Province, County, City, Hundred, etc. for if it be a general Custom of England,
it is Common Law, and such Custom must be common to all within such limits; but
if it be confined to one certain Person, House, Land, or other thing, there it
becomes a prescription which is a younger daughter to Custom; and therefore
when a Man comes to plead a Custom, the manner of pleading is to alledg, that
within such a County, Hundred or Town, there is, and from the time whereof in
the memory of Man is not to the contrary: there has been such a Custom used
and approved in the same, that is to say, that, etc. alleging the Custom as it
is.

But when you come to plead a prescription you only alledg that you and all
those whose Estate you have in such Lands have time out of mind paid so much
annually to the Parson of D. How to plead a Prescription.
in full satisfaction and exoncration of all the Tithes arising upon the said
Lands, etc.

So that Custom and prescription differ in these things, Wherein Custom and
Prescription differ.
that Custom must be limited and confined to some certain place; prescription
is at large, Custom is common to all the Persons and Lands within the limits
wherein it is alleged, but Prescription is confined to certain Persons or
things; but in this they agree, that they must be constant without
interruption, and perpetual from the time whereof the memory of Man is not to
the contrary: for if there have been frequent interruptions, there can be no
Custom or Prescription obtained, but after a Custom or Prescription is once
duly obtained, a disturbance for ten or twenty Years shall not destroy it; 1
Inst. 114. b. 2 Inst. 653 2 Inst. 654;
for Multiplex interruptio non tollit praescriptionem semel obtentam.

But I must here observe to the Reader, How the Ecclesiastical Laws look upon
Customs and Prescriptions.
that though the Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws do in some cases take notice of
Custom and Prescription, yet in this they differ from the Common Law, In what
they differ from the Common Law in this matter.
that they allow a usage for forty Years to be a good proof of a Custom or
Prescription, grounding their judgments upon a decretal Epistle of Pope
Alexander the third Anno Domini 1180. But this Kingdom never allowed of that
Epistle, or yielded any obedience thereunto, so that as well in Spiritual as
Temporal Prescriptions and Customs if they come to be tried at Common Law, as
all Prescriptions concerning Tithes must be, they must be proved to have been
used beyond the memory of any Man to the contrary: for if any Man living, or
any authentic Record, or other evidence prove it was otherwise at any time
since the first Year of Richard the first, which was Anno Domini 1189. 2 Inst.
653..
the Custom or Prescription fails.

And the Influence, Custom, What Influence Custom and Prescription have in the
manner of Tithing. 27 H. 8. c. 20.
and Prescription have in the Manner of Tithing is confirmed by three several
Acts of Parliament.

First, by the Stat. of 27 H. 8. whereby it is enacted, that every Subject of
England, etc. according to the Ecclesiastical Laws and Ordinances of the Church
of England, and after the laudable Vsages and Customs of the Parish or other
place where he dwells, or occupies, shall yield and pay his Tithes,
Offerings, and other duties of Holy Church, etc.

By this Statute the Ecclesiastical Laws and Canons are affirmed for the
payment of Tithes; but in such cases as they are contrary to the Common Law, or
Customs of the place, they do not bind.

Next this Act confirms and allows all Usages and Customs of the place where
the Tithes arise, which are to be preferred before all Canons and constitutions
in the manner of Tithing.

The next Statute is that of 32 H. 32 H. 8. c. 7.
8. whereby it is enacted, That every Person, etc. shall fully, truly, and
effectually, set out, yield or pay all and singular Tithes and offerings
aforesaid, according to the Lawful Customs and usages of the Parishes and
places where such Tithes or duties should grow, arise, come, or be due.

This Act seems only to extend to customary Tithes, and so does the Statute of
2 E. 6. which is,

That every of the King's Subjects should from thenceforth, 2 E. 6. c. 13.
truly and justly, without fraud or guile, divide, set out, yield and pay all
manner of their predial Tithes in their proper kind as they arise and happen,
in such manner and form as has been of right yielded and paid within forty
Years next before the making of the said Act, or of right or Custom ought to
have been paid.

But more of these Statutes in their proper place. I shall now proceed to show
what liberty and privilege the Parson, Vicar, etc. has in the grounds where
the Tithes arise, for the drying, ordering, and carrying away their Tithes.

CHAP. XIV. The Fourteenth Chapter shows, what Privilege and Liberty the
Parson, Vicar, etc. has in the ground, where the Tithes arise, for the drying,
making, ordering and carrying away the same.
BY the Stat. of 2 E. 6. It is enacted, 2 E. 6. cap. 13. What Friviledg the
Parson, etc. has in the Lands where the Tithes grow.
that at the Tithing time of Predial Tithes, it should be lawful for every
party to whom any Tithes ought to be paid, or his Deputy, or Servant, to see
the said Tithes to be set forth and severed from the nine parts, and the same
quietly to take and carry away.

This Statute as to the taking and carrying away, seems only declarative of the
Common Law, but as to comeing upon the Lands to see the Tithes set forth, seems
to me to be a new Authority given by this Law, for the owners of the Land are
de jure, bound to set forth their Tithes duly and rightly; and if they fail
therein, the Parson, Vicar, etc. have their remedies, and if the Parishioner do
justly and truly set forth his Tithes, although the Parson, Vicar, etc. be not
present, or had no notice given him to be present, yet this had been a good
setting forth before this Statute: but it is a fair and just way to do it in
the presence of the Parson, Vicar, etc. And note, this Act is warily penned in
the singular number, tha^ ^he party himself, his Agent or Servant may come to
see the Tithes set forth, but must not come with a greater number.

And note, that the Parson, Vicar, Impropriator or Farmer cannot come himself
and set forth the Tithes without the License and consent of the owner of the
Corn, Hay, etc. for if the Parson, Vicar, etc. shall of his own head Tithe the
Corn, Hay, etc. of any Landholder within his Parish, etc. and carry it away, he
is a Trespassor, and an Action will lie against him for it.

But a Parson, Vicar, etc. may de communi jure, after the Tithes are set forth
come himself, or his Servants, and spread abroad, dry and stack his Corn, Hay,
etc. in any convenient place or places upon the ground where the same grew,
till the same be sufficiently weathered and fit to be carried into the Barn,
etc. but the Parson, Vicar, etc. must not take a longer time for the doing
thereof than what is convenient and necessary, and what shall be said a
convenient and necessary time, the Law does not, nor can define for the
quantity of Hay, 1 z E. 4.6. a. Roll 1.643. x. 2.
Corn, etc. and the weather in this case is to be considered, and what shall in
this, and all other cases of like nature be said, a reasonable and convenient
time is to be determined by the Jury, if the point come in issue triable by a
Jury; but if it come to be determined upon a demurrer, or other matter of Law,
the Judges of the Court where the Cause depends are to resolve the same.

And if the Parson, Vicar, etc. shall exceed a convenient and necessary time in
the drying, ordering, and carrying away their Tithes; Hughes Rep. 329. Styles
342.
and the Parishioner shall receive damage thereby, an Action of the Case will
lie against them for their negligence in this behalf.

But no Action will lie against the Parson, Vicar, etc. in such a case, Styles
342. Lampen verse. Woodnet P. 8. Car. 1. B.R. per Latch.
unless the Parishioner have duly set forth his Tithe and given notice thereof
to the Parson, Vicar, etc.

And the Parson, Vicar, etc. Halsey verse. Halsey. H. 6. Car. 1. B. R. Roll
1.643. ^. 3.
may carry his Tithes from the ground where they grew, either by the Common way
or any such way as the owner of the Land uses to carry away his nine parts.

But if the owner of the Soil, after he has duly set forth his Tithes will stop
up the ways, and not suffer the Parson, Vicar, etc. to carry away his Tithes,
or to spread, dry and stack them upon the Land, this is no good setting forth
of his Tithes without fraud, within the Statute of 2 E. 6. but that the Parson,
Vicar, etc. or other Owner or Farmer may have an action upon the said Statute,
and may recover the treble value, or may have an Action of the Case for such
disturbance, Bulst. 1.108.
as I conceive, or he may, if he will, break open the Gate fence, etc. which
hinders him, and carry away his Tithes, but in that he must be cautious that he
commit no Riot, nor break any Gate, Rails, Lock, Hedges more than necessarily
he must for his passage.

And note, that the Parson, Vicar, etc. when he comes with his Carts, Teams or
other Carriages to carry away his Tithes, must not suffer his Horses, Oxen,
etc. to eat and depasture the Grass growing in the grounds, where the Tithes
arise, much less the Corn there growing or cut, but if his Cattle (as cannot be
avoided) do in their passage against the Will of the Drivers here and there
snatch some of the Grass, etc. in their passage, this is excusable.

CHAP. XV. The Fifteenth Chapter shows, to what Charges the Glebe lands
belonging to a Rectory, the Tithes are Subject.
SIR Edward Coke tells us, a Inst. 641.. What Charges Tithes and Churchlands
are subject to.
Quod nullus pro decimis quae sunt Spirituales de aliqua reparatione pontis,
seu aliquibus oneribus temporalibus onerari debet.

That Tithes being Spiritual were not subject to temporal Charges at the Common
Law.

And upon a doubt of Mr. P. 5. Car. 1.
Justice Yelverton, who was Justice of Assise in the Bishopric of Durham, as
Sir Nicholas Hyde, heretofore Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, has reported,
it was resolved by all the Judges of England, that Tithes are at this day
chargeable with all charges imposed by any Act of Parliament, wherein they are
not excepted, as upon the Statute of 43 Eliz. to the poor, and to maimed
Soldiers, Kings Bench, Marshalsey, Bridges, etc. But they are not Subject to
any Charges Temporal at, or by, the Common Law.

But Tithes at this day are Subject to pay first fruits or Annates, First
Fruits.
in Latin Primitiae, which are the first years profits of every spiritual
Benefice at a new Incumbents Entry into his Living; they were anciently exacted
by the Popes of Rome, when they had small revenues to support the public
charge of his place: And Polydore Virgil tells us, Polid Virgil. De Inventione
rerum. l. 1. c. 2. p. 498.
Caeterum nullum inventum majores Romano Pontifici cumulavit opes quam annatum
quas vocant usus qui omnino multo antiquior est quam recentiores quidam
Scriptores suspicantur: Et Annates more suo appellant primos fructus unius anni
Sacerdotii vacantis aut dimidiam eorum partem.

And Polydore Virgil tells us, that Pope Boniface the Ninth first introduced
them, though others ascribe them to John the 22th.

These were often complained of, as a great oppression upon the Clergy, as
Henricus Hostiensis, who lived in the time of Pope Alexander the Fourth,
witnesses; but however upon the abolishing of the Popes Usurpations here in
England, the poor Clergy were not acquit of this exaction, but the same was by
the Stat. of 26 H. St. 26 H. 8. c. 3.
8. settled upon the then King and his Successors.

The first fruits are not here in England rated at the full and utmost value of
the Living they are to be paid for, but according to valuation taken and made
in the said 26 year of King H. 8. and now used in the first fruits Office.

And these first fruits are by a Statute made 1 Eliz. not to be paid all at
once, 1 El. cap. 4.
but one quarter of them is to be paid at the end of six months from the time
of the Induction, Collation, etc. another fourth Part at the end of twelve
months, another fourth part at the end of eighteen months, and the last quarter
part thereof at the end of two years.

And by a Statute made 1 Eliz. all Vicarages not exceeding ten pounds, 1 Eliz
cap. 4.
and all Parsonages not exceeding ten Marks according to the valuation in the
first fruits Office are discharged from the payment of first fruits.

And if an Incumbent die, or be legally removed out of his Living without
fraud, then after such death or removal, the remaining half yearly payments of
the first fruits, which were not become due, are discharged by the said Statute
of 1. Eliz.

And by that Statute the Dean and Canons of Windsor are discharged of the
payment of first fruits.

And by the Statute made in the 26th. St 26 H. 8. c. 3. When the first Fruits
are to be paid.
year of H. 8. before mentioned, It is enacted, That every Archbishop, Bishop,
Dean, Prebendary, Archdeacon, Parson, Vicar, etc. before he have any actual or
real possession, or meddling with the profits of his Living (this must be
between Institution, Collation and Induction) must pay or compound for, or give
security for the payment of his first fruits, in the first fruits Office: And
that an Obligation taken for the same should be of the force of a Statute of
the Staple, and that if any such presume to enter into his Living before such
payment or security given, or composition made, he is to forfeit double the
value.

But his Majesty and his Royal Predecessors have not been severe in this Case
to take the penalty, but upon faileur their Officers of the Exchequer have sent
our Process to the Sheriff, to put the negligent Parsons, Vicars, etc. in mind
of this duty, and upon coming in and paying the charge of the Process, and
paying or giving security for the first fruits, they are discharged.

But the Parsons, Vicars, etc. must be careful to pay in their half yearly
payments, as the same become due, and take up their bonds, or else new Process
will issue to the increase of their charge.

Perhaps some may be so curious, Why Vicarages are charged higher in the first
fruits Office than Parsonages.
and desire to know why Vicarages not exceeding ten pound should be freed of
this charge, and Parsonages of ten marks should pay them, now the reason of
that was, that the Vicarages in time of Popery, and when the Valuation was
taken, had a great income by voluntary Offerings, which falling to little or
nothing upon the dissolution of Monasteries, this favor was afforded them in
their first fruits.

The next charge Parsons and Vicars are subject to, are the Tenths, Tenths.
that is a tenth part of the yearly value of all their Church Livings; this
payment was first exacted from the Clergy by the Pope about the twentieth year
of E. 1. 2 Inst. 628;
and a Valuation was then made by his authority of all Church Livings, at which
rate the Pope was answered his Tenths, but he never had any Tenths of such Land
as was given to the Church after that time; these payments (as appears by our
Histories) the Popes of Rome sometimes granted to Kings of England, when the
Kings pleased him, or rather when he seared their power; but upon the
abolishing the Popes power, which was in the 25th. Stat. 25. H. 8. cap.
year of H. 8. these Tenths were given to the King the year following, by the
aforesaid Statute of 26. H. 8. Stat. 26 H. 8. cap. 3.
and to be paid at Christmas yearly, and the Bishop of the Diocese is to
collect them, and they are to be paid according to the valuation taken the same
year, and now in the first fruits Office, and are not paid that year the first
fruits are paid, but are allowed out of them, because it is intended that the
King has the whole years profit.

But immediately upon the Reformation many Clergy men scrupled, and denied to
pay these Tenths to the King, being a duty properly due to the Pope, and
therefore the refusal or neglect to pay them to the King, being certified by
the Bishop that had the Collection of them, is made a Cause of Deprivation not
only of the Living, St. 26. H. 8. c. 3.
for which they refused to pay their Tenths, but also of all their spiritual
Preferments.

But by the Stat. St. 2 and 3 E. 6. c. 20.
of 2 and 3 E. 6. that severity was moderated, so that now the refusal or
neglect to pay them, and so certified by the Bishop makes only that Living
void, for which the Tenths shall be so refused. But his Majesty and his Royal
Predecessors have rarely put the severity of this Law in Execution, but make
out Process in the Exchequer to compel the payment, however since the penalty
is so great, every Clergy man ought to be very careful to avoid the danger.

There is a Provision made by an Act of Parliament in the 27 Year of H. St. 27
H. 8. c. 8. The remedy where the Successor pays Tenths due by his Predecessor.
8. for those Incumbents that shall be forced to pay the Tenthes due in the
time of their Predecessors, that they may levy the same upon any Goods they can
find of their Predecessors upon the Church Living; and if they be not redeemed
within twelve days after, they shall be distrained; that then the same shall be
praised by two or three indifferent Persons to be sworn, and so many of them
sold as will satisfy the arrear with cost; and if no such Goods can be found,
then the Successor to take his remedy against his Predecessor, his Executors or
Administrators, or others to whom his Goods shall come by hill in Chancery, or
an Action of Debt at Common Law.

There is another charge, Procreation^^
to which the Parsons, Vicars, etc. are subject for their Church Livings, Sir
John Davies. Rep. 1, 2, 3.
which is called Procreations or Proxies, and these are duties due and payable
to the Bishops and Archdeacons, at the time of their visitations, which are
not paid by any certain Rule, but by some ancient Taxation, for anciently the
Religious Houses and Clergymen at their own charge entertained the Bishops and
Archdeacons in their visitations, See more of this matter Lind. cap. ut
singula Ecclesiastica, That by a Canon made by Steph. Langton about 1222 the
Archdeacons were to bring but seven horses in their Trains, and stay but one
day, and to invite no body.
but at length their attendants were so many, and their trains so great, that
the Clergy and Religious Houses were horribly oppressed with entertaining of
them, to avoid which, the Clergy and Religious Houses came to this composition,
every one to pay such a proportion to their visitors to be freed of that great
oppession, and therefore the Canonists define them to be, Exhibitio sumptuum
necessariorum facta praelatis qui Diocaeses peragrando Ecclesias subjectas
visitant, and this payment is continued to this day, not only of those Livings
which are still enjoyed by the Clergy, but also of the impropriations, as I
take it.

Synodals is another charge upon the Parsons, Synodals.
Vicars, etc. and is likewise paid to the Archdeacon, not by any certain rule,
but by some ancient Taxation; so that some pay more, and some less.

I must confess I cannot find how this payment first became due, but by the
name it should seem to be a contribution to the Arch-Deacon's charge in the
Synods, they being anciently elected by the Deacons themselves as their
representative.

But it should seem, Dugdales Warw. 126.b;
that the Archdeacons claim these Synodals for their Easter visitation: and
the Bishops have laid some claim to them, but, as my Author conceives, without
any just reason, the Archdeacon and his Officers performing the Labor, and
undergoing the Charge.

All these charges the secular Clergy undergo, which takes away a considerable
part of their Revenues.

CHAP. XVI. The Sixteenth Chapt. shows, how far prescription will prevail in
the manner of Tithing, and in what cases the Parson, Vicar, etc. shall be bound
by a modus decimandi.
THe Canonists and those that are of opinion that Tithes are due jure divino,
The force of a modus decimandi in Tithing. Lind wood cap. Quoniam propter verbo
redemptionem.
decry all Customs and Prescriptions that either diminish the tenth part, or
acquit the whole: for in truth, no Custom or Prescription can be good which is
positively against the Law of God.

And that is the reason why it is frequently said in our Law Books, Co. select
cases. 46
that the Ecclesiastical Courts will not allow a modus decimandi.

But the Common Lawyers allow Tithes to be due, Common Law and Canon differ
Concerning Customs, etc.
Jure Divino secundum quid that is, quoad sustentationem cleri, but not quoad
decimam aut aliquam aliam certam partem, and therefore they allow of a manner
of Tithing which diminishes the quantum, or a Custom of not Tithing for this
or that particular thing, so there be a sufficient maintenance for the Clergy
besides: and of the same opinion are some of the most eminent School Men, Tho
Aq. Sum. 2. 2ae.
and in this, Tho. Aq. Sum. 2. 2ae. q. 87.1.0.
as in all other things where the Common Law, and Canon, or Ecclesiastical Laws
differ, the Common Law is to be preferred.

The difference between Custom and Prescription I have showed before in the
thirteenth Chapter. The difference between Custom and Prescription.


But before I proceed upon this Subject I must beg leave of the Reader to say
something more in vindication of the Common Law, The Common Law vindicated.
which in this point I conceive does not differ materially from the
Ecclesiastical and civil Law, for if I do not very much mistake the Canonists
and Civilians, Lindwood c. Quoniam propter verb. Redemptionem.
they do at this day allow of real compositions in discharge of Tithes, that
is, where the Parson, Patron and Ordinary do by deed agree to accept of a
certain sum of Money yearly, or so much Land, or other profit, though not to
the full yearly value, in discharge of the Tithes growing and arising upon such
Lands as they agree for, now what is this but a modus decimandi, and a
prescription to maintain this modus is no more than a supply to prove a real
composition which was made beyond all memory and lost, and it were against all
Justice and reason that if a Man should be plundered of, or lose his Deeds, that
he should thereby lose his Estate. And it must necessarily be intended, Seld.
hist. Decim. 408.
that every modus decimandi that has continued time out of mind must have a
reasonable and legal commencement, and must be intended, that it began by a
real composition.

A Rent charge cannot be created but by Deed, and yet it may be claimed by
prescription supposing a Deed preceded, the like Law is of all Canons, etc.

And St. German in the Doctor and Student puts this case, Lib. 2. cap. 55. f.
67. a
that if it were ordained for a Law, that all payment of Tithes from
thenceforth should cease, and that every Curate should have a certain Portion
of Land assigned to him, or a Rent or Annuity which should be sufficient for
his maintenance and those that served under him, or that every Householder
should give a certain sum to that use, that this were a good Law, and grounded
his opinion upon this saying of Doctor Gerson a great Doctor in Divinity,
Solutio decimarum sacerdotibus est de Jure Divino quatenus inde sustententur
sed quoad tam hanc vel illam assignare, aut alios in alios redditus commutare
positivi juris existit.

And this commuting Tithes into annual Salaries is frequently practiced in the
Protestant Churches beyond Sea, as I have been informed.

And these prescriptions de modo decimandi, Prescriptions are confirmed by
Parliament.
are not only allowed by the ancient Common Laws of this Realm, but confirmed
by Act of Parliament.

For by the Stat. Stat. 2. E. 6. cap. 13.
of 2 E. 6. it is enacted, that no Person shall be sued or otherwise compelled
to yield, give or pay any manner of Tithes, for any Manors, Lands, Tenements,
etc. which by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, or by any Privilege or
Prescription are not chargeable with the payment of any such Tithes, or that be
discharged by any composition real, and having said thus much in vindication of
the Common Law, I shall proceed to show what Prescriptions and Customs, de modo
decimandi vel de non decimando are good and allowed at Common Law.

First, who may not prescribe in non decimando. Seld. Hist. decin. 409; Rolls
1.653. H.
no Layman can prescribe in non decimando that is, to be discharged absolutely
of the payment of Tithes, and to pay nothing in lieu thereof, unless he begin
his prescription, in a Religious or Ecclesiastical Person, and derive a Title
to it by Act of Parliament.

But all Spiritual and Religious Persons, who may prescribe in non decimando.
as Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Deans, Prebends, Parsons, Vicars, etc. may
prescribe in non decimando, and their Farmers may make use of such
prescriptions to free themselves from the payment of Tithes.

And hence it is, that the Parson or Vicar of one Parish, that has part of his
Glebe lying in another Parish, may prescribe in non decimando for it, Rols
1.653. H. 3.
that is, as has been said, to be free from the payment of any manner of Tithe
for it.

But Church Wardens who have Land belonging to their Churches cannot prescribe
in non decimando because they are neither Religious nor Spiritual Persons.
Rolls 1.653. H. 6. Church Wardens not.


It has been held that a Bishop may prescribe that he and his Tenants for
Life, Rolls 1.653. H. 7. A Clergy Man may prescribe for himself and Tenants.
Years, and Will, and his Copyholders have been free from the payment of
Tithes, the reason alleged is, because it might commence by a real composition
for the whole Manor, Rolls 1.653. H. 4. Co. 2.45. a;
and in all cases where a Spiritual Person prescribes in non decimando his
Tenants and Farmers shall take the benefit thereof.

But if any of the Abbots, Priors, etc. Stat. 27. H. 8. cap.
that came to the Crown by the Statute of 27 H. 8. were discharged of the
payment of Tithes by prescription de non decimando, Rolls 1.654.1. 1. contra.
Hob. 309
yet the Patentees of these Lands shall not have the benefit of such
prescriptions, but shall pay Tithes.

Neither can the Kings Patentee be freed from the payment of Tithes of those
Lands which the King whilst he had them in his own hands prescribed to be freed
from the payment of Tithes, Rolls 1.655.1.2. Patenter del Roy.
because it is a Personal discharge in the King, for the question arising upon
Lands disafforrested, there might be several reasons why he paid no Tithes,
first, because the grounds were depastured with Beasts ferae naturae for which
no Tithes were due, Cro. Car. Dubitatur, Ideo quaere.
or for that the King was not bound by the decretal Epistle of Pope Innocent
the third, who settled the Parochial right of Tithes, or by reason the King
being a mixed Person might prescribe in non decimando.

But the King's Patentees of those Abbey Lands that came to the Crown by the
Statute of 31. H. 8. may take advantage of a prescription de non decimando in
the Abbot, Prior, or other Religious Person by the force of that Statute, and
the enjoyment of the Lands since the dissolution freed from the payment of
Tithes during memory is a good proof a posterior, A Country may prescribe in
non decimando. Lib. Inst. tit. prohibit. Co. 2.44 b. Doct. and St. l. 2. c. 55.
f. 166, 167. b.. 174. b; Roll 1.653. H. 10, 11, 12, 13. Who may prescribe de
modo decimandi Co. 2.44. a b Cro. El. 599.758.784.
that the Abbots, Priors, etc. held the same discharged from the payment of
Tithes.

The inhabitants of a County, Hundred, or Country, as the wilds of Kent and
Sussex may prescribe not to pay Tithes of Wood, Milk, or any other particular
thing, so there be a competent Livelihood for the Clergy besides.

But every Lay Man may prescribe, de modo decimandi, That is, that such a Man
being Lord of such a Manor, and all those whose Estate he has in the said
Manor, have from the time whereof the memory of Man is not to the contrary,
have had and enjoyed to his and their own uses all the Tithes arising, etc. Co.
2.44. a b; Cro. El. 599.758.784.
within the said Manor, paying so much yearly to the Parson of D.

And a Lord of a Manor may prescribe for himself, and his Copyholders, Cro.
El. 784. Noy. 132.
for they are part of the Demesns of the Manor or the Copyholder may prescribe
in the name of his Lord.

If a modus decimandi be to pay two things, as two shillings for a Park, Hob.
43; A modus to pay two things and one fails.
and a shoulder of every Buck killed in the Park, and all the Deer die or are
killed up, yet notwithstanding the Prescription holds good for the two shillings.

But every Prescription and modus must have a Continuance, Hob. 43;
Prescriptions must not sleep.
for it cannot be good at one time, and asleep at another, neither can a wilful
denial destroy a modus decimandi: And it is taken for a Rule in Dr. Leyfield
and Tisdale's Case, Hob. 11; Modus for houses.
that where no Tithes are regularly and legally due, as for a house, etc. there
can be no modus decimandi alleged.

And yet it has been held, Co. 11.162.. Hob. 11; Quaere. Roll 1.640, b. 5.
Hob. 107.. Roll 1.651. d. 16, 17, 18, 19. Cro El. 446.. Co. S^lect Cases 45
More 454.
that a Tithe by prescription may be paid for a house, because it might be due
for the land before the house was built. Ideo quaere.

A modus to pay Tithes without the view of the Parson is not good, because it
conduces to fraud, and is now against an Act of Parliament.

So a modus that you have paid your Tithe of your Cows, you have been freed of
the Tithes of Oxen, Steers, Heyfers, etc. is not good, That is, to pay your
Tithes in kind of one thing, thereby to free another Tithe.

And it has been held a void prescription to pay a Load of Hay yearly in
discharge of all his Tithe Hay, Cumberland per Roll. P. 13. Jac. B.R. What
Prescriptions de modo decimandi. 2 Leo 70. are good.
that is to pay a part in discharge of the whole.

So for a Parishioner to prescribe that he, etc. has time out of mind repaired
the Church, and by reason thereof has been discharged of the payment of
Tithes, is no good Prescription, for the Parson not being bound to repair the
Church has no recompense, but if it had been, that he had repaired the
Chauncel, Roll 1.649. d. 8, 9.
and in consideration thereof had been freed of the payment of Tithes, that had
been a good modus, ratio patet.

It has been held a good Prescription, Wool and Lamb. Roll 1.648. c. 1.649. d.
7.
that the Parishioner has time out of mind paid the Tithe Wool of all the
Sheep he has shorn, though never so lately bought in, and in consideration
thereof has been freed of the payment of the Tithes of those he has sold
before Sheerday.

It has been held a good Prescription, Roll 1.648. c. 4.
to have paid the Tenth Fleece or Pound of Wool, so there were any allowance
for the odd Fleeces or odd weight.

It has been adjudged a good modus, Roll 1.649 d. 5.
that in consideration the Parishioner has shorn and wound the Wool to be free
of paying Tithes of the neckings and birlings without fraud.

It is a good prescription, Roll 1.652. g. 1.
that the Parishioner has time out of mind paid a half penny for every Lamb
sold before Mayday, but if the Parishioner sell his Lambs fraudulently a few
days before Mayday on purpose to defraud the Parson, etc. it is no good
discharge.

A Prescription to pay wool in kind, Marsh 79
if kept till Clipping day, but if sold before, to pay a half penny a fleece,
as Mr. Marsh reports, was held no good Prescription, tamen quaere.

It has been held a good modus, For Corn. More 454.
that in consideration that the Parishioner has mowed, reaped and shockt the
Corn, and paid his Tithe in the shock, that he has been freed of the payment
of any Tithes of the Rakings, but as Sir Edward Coke says, there needs no modus
as to Rakings without fraud.

To prescribe to have paid the Tenth sheaf or shock, Roll 1.648. b. 6.
as it falls out is no good Prescription to free the Parishioner of any other
Tithe, it being no more than is due.

A modus that in consideration, Roll 1.649. d. 4.
that the Parishioner has sowed, reapt, bound and set up the Corn one year to
be free from the payment of herbage the next year of the same Land was held
good, tamen quaere inde.

But it is no good consideration, Roll 1.650. d. 11.
that in consideration the Parishioner has plowed, sowed, mowed, cockt and set
out the Tithes of part, that therefore he should be freed of paying Tithes of a
small parcel left standing.

A man may prescribe to pay the Tenth Acre or Rood of wood standing, Wood. Roll
1.648. H. 7.
and the Parson, etc. cut it himself as is used in some parts of Lincolnshire.

It has been held a good modus to pay one Calf at seven, Calves and milk.
and if under a half penny a piece, and if he sell any Calf to pay the tenth
part of the price, and it has been held a good modus to pay Tithe Cheese from
Mayday till Michaelmas to be discharged of the whole Tithe of the Cows, Roll
1.651. d. 19. Cro. El. 609.786.
and no Tithe is due for Cheese but by Custom, and the labor of milking and
making into Cheese is added, whereas nothing but the Tithe of milk is due by
Law.

But it is no good modus to pay for every milch Cow 2 d. Roll 1.651. d. 17.
and for every Calf 1 d. in discharge of the Tithes of all other Cattle, but it
is a good modus for the Calves and milk only; so a modus to pay a Tithe-Calf in
satisfaction of the Tithe of all manner of Cattle is not good. Roll 1.651: d.
18. Eggs. Roll 1.648. c. 3.


A modus to pay thirty Eggs in Lent in satisfaction of all the Tithe of Eggs
has been hold a good modus.

It is a good modus that the Parson time out of mind has had so much, Land in
lieu of Tithes. Roll 1.649. d. 6. Cro. El. 587. 8 E. 4.14. a;
or such a parcel of meadow or Land in satisfaction and discharge of all the
Tithes of Hay, etc. arising upon such Land.

It is no good modus to be free from the payment of Tithe Hay, Headlands,
Balks, etc. and Hay. Roll 650. d. 10. Noy contra 15.
arising upon Hades, Balks, Greenslips, or Doals eaten by Beasts of the Plow,
in regard the Parishioner has sowed, mown, reapt, shockt and prepared the
Corn, etc. but the contrary has been held, ideo quaere.

But in consideration, Herley 147.
that the Parishioner has made the Grass growing in such a Close, and then
paid the Tithe of it, he has been free of the payment of the Tithes of the
balks and hades, has been held good.

It is not a good modus, Roll 1.650. d. 3.
that the Parishioner having spent all his Hay upon the Beasts of the plow,
that therefore he should be free from payment of Tithe Hay.

But a modus that in consideration the Parishioner has cut, Roll 650. d. 13.
dried and shockt the Corn, he has been freed from the payment of Tithe Hay,
has been held a good Prescription.

A modus That the Parishioner has time out of mind got Rushes and strewed the
Church, Noy 31.
and in consideration thereof has been discharged of the payment of Tithe Hay,
Cro. El. 276.
has been adjudged no good modus, but if it had been to strew the Parsons Seat,
or to deliver straw to the Parson to strew the Church had been a good modus.

And it has been held a good modus, Roll 1.647. b. 1, 2, 3, 4. 648. d. 1, 2.
649. d. 3. Hetley 133. Hob. 250 More 910. Cro. El. 660.
that in consideration the Parishioner has made the Hay into Grass Cock, that
therefore he has been discharged of the Tithe of the aftermath; but Sir Edward
Coke declares for Law, that there needs no modus to be alleged, but that
aftermath is of it self freed from the payment of Tithes, 2 Inst. 652.
and so I take it the Law is held at this day.

A modus to pay the tenth part of all the honey and wax of Bees killed, Bees.
Roll 1.651. d. 15.
has been held a good modus for the Tithe of Bees.

But there have been some opinions, that there is no Tithe due by the Law for
Bees, because they are ferae naturae. But nevertheless by Custom they may be
Tithable, and so they are in most places.

A Custom or Prescription to pay no Tithe for the Herbage of Beasts bred up for
the Plow and Payl has been allowed to be a good Custom, Herbage. Bulst. 2.
Price verse. Mascal. More 909.
but of this see more before in the fifth Chapter.

It is no good modus that the Owner of the Land has paid all his Tithe for his
Cattle there depastured, Guest Horses. Roll 1.650. d. 14.
therefore to be free of the Tithe Herbage for guest Horses.

It has been held that no Tithes shall be paid for the fuel spent in the
dwelling Houses in the same Parish it grew, Fuel. More 909.
without alleging any modus at all.

But it should seem that in this last Case there needs no modus at all to be
alleged, Cro. Car. 113. Norton verse. Farmer T 4. Car. 1. C. B.
but that for the fuel spent in the Owners House in the same Parish, there is
no Tithe due of Common right. Ideo quaere.

If a man prescribe to pay six shillings and eight pence, Parks. Roll 1.651. E.
1. and 4. Mascal verse. Price. P. 13. Jac. B. R. Hob. 39 Hutton 58.
for all the Tithes arising and happening in such a Park, and the Park is
disparkt and turned to tillage, the Prescription is gone.

But if in this Case he had made his Prescription, that in consideration of six
shillings and eight pence yearly paid to the Parson, etc. he had been freed of
all the Tithes arising upon six hundred Acres of Land called a D. Park, this
had been a good Prescription, and should have freed the Park.

So if the Prescription of a Park have been to pay six shillings and eight
pence, Roll 1.652. E. 5.
and a shoulder of every Buck killed in the Park, in discharge of all Tithes
arising within the same in this case, though the Park be disparked, and no Deer
left, Booth^y verse. Reynells. m. 20. Jac. B. R. m. 10. Jac. to. 641. B. R.
Hutton 57. Noy 146.
yet the modus remains, and shall discharge the whole Tithes.

And it has been held a good modus to give a Buck and a Do yearly to the
Rector, etc. in discharge of all the Tithes arising within the Park, although
they be ferae naturae.

If a Parson, Modus for Land. Hutton 58.
etc. have had an Acre or piece of Meadow ground, time out of mind, in
discharge of all the Tithe Hay arising upon such a Farm, this shall only
discharge the Hay upon the ancient Meadowing, and not the Hay of Ground
converted from Pasture or Tillage to Meadowing.

But if one have a modus for all the demesne of his Manor, Roll 1.651. E. 1. 2
Inst. 490.
and erect a new Mill this shall be comprehended within the modus and shall not
pay any Tithe.

But if a Man have a modus for all the Hay and Grass upon twenty Acres of Land,
Roll 1.651. E. 2.
and converts the same to Tillage, or into a Hop Yard, he shall pay Tithes
thereof: Where a modus to the Vicar shall discharge against the Parson, and e
converso. More 907. Cokes Select Cases 45.1. Cro. El. 137. Hutton 57 m. 10.
Jac. r. 641. Modus to pay a rate to the Vicar for Tithes due to the Parson.
So it appears a great difference where the modus goes to all manner of Tithes
in general, and where to particular Tithes.

Where a modus is alleged to pay a certain Sum to the Vicar in discharge of
any Tithes due the Parson, this being a dispute of the right between two Clergy
Men ought to be determined in the Ecclesiastical Court, but it seems to be a
good modus as to the Parishioner, and so it was held in the case of Pool and
Reynels in the Kings Bench. Mich. 10. Jac. But Mr. Ware reports a case to be
adjudged H. 18. Jac. B. R. that it was no good modus, and that Henden vouched
one Banks Case to be adjudged accordingly. Ideo quaere. But it seems to me a
good modus, for this being Originally a modus between the Parson and
Parishioner, the Vicar might be endowed with the modus; but this must be
intended also where the indowment is time out of mind, and not to be produced,
or where the Vicar has it specially in his indowment.

But to pay a rate to the Parish Clerk is no good discharge of Tithes against
the Parson or Vicar, Leonard 1.94. Croke El. 71. Bulst. 1.220. Wintel verse.
Child m. 14. Jac. B. R.
unless the Parson be bound by Custom to find the Parish Clerk, nor is a modus
to the Parson a good discharge against the Vicar.

And so having showed what Prescriptions de modo decimandi, and de non
decimando are good and allowable at the Common Law, in the next place I shall
show how a modus decimandi or Prescription may be destroyed or lost.

CHAP. XVII. The Seventeenth Chapter shows how a modus decimandi or
Prescription may be lost or destroyed.
IF a Man have a modus for a Mill which is removed of necessity to a new place
because the water invito has changed its course, Roll 1.652. f. 2. What matter
will destroy a Modus.
here though the Mill be removed the modus remains.

But if the Owner of such a Mill shall of his own accord, and without any cause
of necessity remove his Mill to a new place, in this case he shall lose his
modus.

If a Man have a modus decimandi for two Messuages and two Mills to pay twenty
shillings per annum, Roll 1.652. f. 2.
and he erects a new Mill in one of the Messuages the modus shall not extend to
free the new Mill.

There have been Opinions that Unity of Possession, Stepney verse. Warren P. 41.
El. B. R.
that is, to have fee-simple in the Rectory, and likewise in the Land to which
the modus is annexed, should destroy a Prescription or modus decimandi.

But if a Man have four Water Corn Mills for which he has time out of mind
paid a modus of four shillings per annum, Sir John Hollys Case. T. 9. Jac. B. R.
and pulls down one of them, yet the modus remains, and he shall still pay the
four shillings.

CHAP. XVIII. The Eighteenth Chapter shows, by what Conveyances, and by what
names, Tithes may be granted, conveyed, demised, etc. and what Demises Parsons
and Vicars may make of their Glebe and Tithes.
REgularly Tithes at this day cannot be granted or demised but by Deed in
Writing under Hand and Seal, Styles 261. By what Conveyances Tithes will pass*
Hungerford verse. Haml. T. 36. El. to. 506. per Owen. Cro. El. 814.
or by matter of a higher nature, as Fines, Recoveries, etc. But in such cases
as they are become Lay-see they may be devised by will in writing as Lands may,
but they cannot be granted by Copy of Court Roll, because they cannot be parcel
of a Manor.

But Tithes cannot be conveyed or demised by any paroll agreement, Brettyman
verse. Woodward. P. 31. Eliz. 10.17. B. R. B. Noy. 89. Hetley 3. Hughes 373.
Bellamy verse. Bapthorp in 2 Car. 10.179. B. R. Co. 4.35 a
unless it be to the Owner of the Land for one year by way of retainer.

Tithes impropriate are at this day by the several Statutes of dissolution
become Lay-fee, and will pass by the name of Hereditaments, but by the grant of
a portion of Tithes, the Tithes belonging to a Rectory will not pass.

Tithes impropriate may be past from one to another by Deeds of Bargain and
Sale, St. 32 H. 8. cap. 7.
enrolled according to the Statute of 27 H. 8. they may be transferred in use
upon good consideration by Deeds of Covenant to stand seized, or by Fines or
common Recoveries, and may be sued for by Writs of Assise of novel disseisine,
Writs of Entry, Writs of Right or other real Actions, or by ejectione firmae.

But upon a Lease for Lives of Tithes, no Rent can be reserved to be recovered
at, or by the Common Law, for no Action of debt will lie, or distress can be
taken, and ubi non est remedium, ibi non est jus.

But upon a demise of Tithes for Years, a Rent may be reserved, because an
Action of debt will lie upon such Lease upon the Contract.

CHAP. XIX. The Nineteenth Chapter shows, what barren Lands are free from the
payment of Tithes within the Statute of 2 E. 6. cap. 13.
IN the Statute of 2 E. 6. 2 E. 6. cap. 13.
there is a Proviso to this effect.

That all such barren Heath or wast Ground, other than such as be discharged
from the payment of Tithes by Act of Parliament, which before this time have
lain barren and paid no Tithes by reason of the same barrenness, and now be, or
hereafter shall be improved and converted into arable ground or meadow, shall
from henceforth after the end and term of seven years next after such
Improvement fully ended and determined, pay Tithe of Corn and Hay growing upon
the same, any thing in this Act to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

This Clause was added for the Encouragement of Tillage and Improvement of
lands by water or otherwise, and therefore though here be no words of discharge
of the payment of Tithes, during the first seven years, yet by a reasonable
intendment, 2 Inst. 656 Dyer 170. b P. 5. Plow. 204. a. 396. b..
the same shall be discharged from the payment of Corn and Hay, for the first
seven years after the Improvement, and that is proved by the subsequent Clause,
whereby it is provided.

That if any such barren waste or heath ground has before this time been
charged with the payment of any Tithes, and that the same be hereafter improved
and converted into arable or Meadow, that then the owner or owners thereof
shall during the seven years next following from and after the same Improvement
pay such kind of Tithe as was paid for the same before the said Improvement,
any thing in this Act etc.

So that it appears plainly by this Proviso, that it was the intent of the
makers of this Law only to free these improved Lands from the payment of such
Tithes as were produced by the improvement which must be Hay or Corn and no
other.

Next, suppose a Man have barren Lands within this Law which are free from the
payment of Tithes by prescription, real composition, etc. It should seem by the
penning of the aforesaid Proviso, that he should pay Tithes for the same after
the seven years, this Proviso only providing for such Lands as are freed by Act
of Parliament.

But that doubt seems cleared by the next precedent Proviso in this very Act,
whereby it is provided.

That no Person shall be sued or otherwise compelled to yield, give or pay any
manner of Tithes for any Manors, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, which by
the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, or by any Privilege or Prescription are
not chargeable with the payment of any such Tithes, or that be discharged by
any composition real.

So that this Proviso preserves all former legal discharges.

But the great question upon this Law is, what shall be said to be barren Heath
or wast Ground within this Law: And Sir Edward Coke defines barren Land in
these words,

Terra sterilis est terra infoecunda nullum ferens fructum. 2 Inst. 655
But that definition will not hold in this Case, for it does appear by the
second Proviso that such barren Lands are intended that are barren quoad
Agriculturam, that is, Dyer 170. p. 5. Co. Ent. 462.463.
such barren Heath or wast Ground that of its own nature, without improvement
by Lime, Marle, Manure, etc. will not bring forth Corn or Hay. 6 E. 6. per
Bendloes. 2 Inst. 656;. Hill. 9. Jac. C. B. ex motione Houghton.


But if Ground be not fit for Tillage, yet if it be not suapte natura barren,
it is not within this Law. As if a Wood be stubbed and grub'd up, and made fit
for the Plow, and reduced to Tillage, it shall pay Tithes presently for Wood,
Ground is Terra fertilis and Faecunda.

So if Marish, 2 Inst. 656; More 969.
Meadow or other Land by neglecting to scowr the Trenches or Sewers, or by
sudden inundation be drowned, or if by ill husbandry or negligence fertile Land
be overrun with goss, whynns, broom, fern, bushes, briars, etc. yet they shall
not have the benefit of this Proviso, because of their own natures they are
fertile and apt for Tillage, and the Parson, Vicar, etc. shall not lose his
Tithe by the ill husbandry of the Parishioner.

If Lands were barren, Heath or wast Ground at the time of the making of this,
and were improved, and had, or might have had the benefit of this Law, and
after return to their barrenness, Co. 10.86. b Co. 6.18. a
the Owner of such Lands shall not have the benefit of this Law a second time
upon a second improvement: but I take the Law to be otherwise, if the Lands had
been improved before the time of the making of this Law, and were then become
barren again, for there I take it, upon a new improvement the Owner of such
Land shall have the benefit of this Law.

Marsh Lands new gained from the Seas, More. 430. Bulft. 165. 2 Inst. 656;
and fenn Lands gained from the fresh waters by draining, banking, etc. are not
within the meaning of this Law to be freed from the payment of Tithes, during
the first seven years after the gaining.

But the Determination of this point, which is or which is not barren Land
within this Statute? commonly falls out to be determined by common Jurors,
which notwithstanding the Direction of the Judge are seldom so favorable to
the Church as they ought.

This Proviso only charges the payment of Corn and Hay after the seven years,
and the second Proviso provides only for the payment of such like Tithes as
were formerly paid before the improvement, for the first seven years after the
improvement, 27 H. 8. c. 20. 32 H. 8. c. 7. confirmed by the St. of 2 E. 6.
Canons provincial. cap. Quia quid maledictionis. cap. Erroris damnabilis. cap.
Quoniam propter. cap. Quoniam ut audivimus, etc.
and makes no provision for the payment of other Tithes, save Corn and Hay,
after the seven years: So that it may seem to imply a discharge of all Tithes,
but Corn and Hay after the seven years; but to this I answer, that there being
several Laws both Statute and Canon made formerly for the due payment of
Tithes, and no negative words in this act, it shall not abrogate those Laws to
the prejudice of the Church by implication.

CHAP. XX. The Twentieth Chapter shows, what a real Composition is, and in what
Cases Lands shall be freed of the payment of Tithes by such Composition real.
THat which we call a real Composition is, Where Tithes shall be discharged by
a real Composition, and what it is.
where the present Incumbent of any Church, together with his Patron and
Ordinary do agree by Deed under their hands and seals, or by fine in the Kings
Court, that such Lands shall be freed and discharged of the payment of all
manner of Tithes for ever, paying some annual payment, or doing some other
thing to the ease, profit or advantage of the Parson or Vicar, etc. to whom the
Tithes did belong: Co. 4.44. a 2 Inst. 655 Doct. and Stud. l. 2. cap. 55. f.
ult.
And these real Compositions have ever been held and allowed here in England to
be a good Discharge of the payment of Tithes: And from these real Compositions
it is intended, all Prescriptions de modo decimandi first took their rise and
beginning, though I doubt most at this day have grown up from the negligence
and carelessness of the Clergy themselves.

And such Compositions may be made by the Parishioner alone without the Patron
and Ordinary, Vide Lindw. cap. Quoniam propter verbo Redemptionem Upon this
matter.
but it then binds only for the Life of the Incumbent, and will be avoided by
his Resignation, Deprivation, or being absent eighty days in a year from his
Cure, if he have Cure of Souls.

But it seems some of the Canonists and Civilians are of opinion, that all
Compositions between the Lay and Clergy to be discharged wholely of payment of
Tithes, or to pay less in recompense than the full value are invalid, but
otherwise between Clergymen, but by the common Law which must govern here,
there is no such difference allowed, but all real Compositions made as
aforesaid are good and valid.

But note, Hob. 176
that no Composition made by parol or word of mouth only, and not reduced into
writing under hand and seal, is binding at all, unless it be upon Record as by
Fine, etc.

But I conceive at this day no real Composition can be made to bind the
Successor of the Parson or Vicar that makes the same, for they are now
restrained by the Stat. of 13 El. 13 El. cap. 10.
to make any Grants other than for twenty one years, or for three Lives with
the other qualifications mentioned in the said Act.

So that it seems clear to me, that Parsons and Vicars at this day,
notwithstanding the confirmation of the Patron and Ordinary, cannot charge
their Benefices or any thing belonging to them, other than for twenty one
years, or three Lives as aforesaid, and that only by Leases confirmed by Patron
and Ordinary of things usually demised; whereupon the accustomed yearly Rent or
more is reserved.

So that what has been said concerning real Compositions is only to be intended
of such as were made before that and other later Statutes, for I take it a real
Composition at this day will only bind the Parson himself, whilst he is Parson
Resident, and serving the Cure, quod nota.

CHAP. XXI. The One and Twentieth Chapter shows, what Monastery Lands are, or
may be, free from the Payment of Tithes.
IT is without Dispute, Jones 373 188; Stat. 27 H. 8. cap. 28. What Monastery
Lands shall be freed from payment of Tithes.
that none of the Abbey Priory Lands, that came to the Crown by the Statute of
27 H. 8. or before, are freed or discharged of the payment of Tithes by the
Statute of 31 H. 8. c. 8. or by any other Law or Act of Parliament.

But in the Statute of 27 H. 8. there was a Proviso, that notwithstanding that
Act the King might by his Letters Patents under the great Seal of England
continue any of the said Monasteries, and that Proviso is left out of all the
modern Prints, only Rastal in his abridging of that Statute makes some mention
of it.

Now the Reader must observe once for all, that all Monasteries under two
hundred pounds per annum were to have been dissolved by the Statute of 27 H. 8.
and are therefore usually called the smaller Abbeys, and those of two hundred
pounds a year and upwards were not dissolved till the 31 year of H. 8. and are
commonly called the great Abbeys.

And upon these two Statutes this Case lately happened in the Exchequer Chamber
between Walklate Farmer of the Rectory of Vttoxater in the County of Staff. to
the Dean of Windsor, and Wilshau Owner of a Farm in that Parish, that was
parcel of the possessions of the Abbey of Croxden in the same County, which was
one of the small Abbeys, and of the Cistertian Order, which was freed of the
payment of Tithes, as shall be showed hereafter, and this Abbey was discovered
by the Defendant Wilshau to be continued by Letters Patents under the great
Seal of England, 31 H. 8. c. 13.
and so not dissolved till the Statute of 31 H. 8. whereupon the Defendant was
dismissed, and discharged of payment of Tithes by the Stat. of 31 H. I mention
this Case at large for the singularity not for any nicety in the Learning of it.

By the Statute of 31 H. 31 H. 8. c. 8.
8. before mentioned, there is a Clause to this effect.

That the King and his Patentees, The Clause of 31 H. 8. that frees Abbey Lands.
which then had, or then after should have, any Monasteries, Abbathies,
Priories, Nunneries, Colleges, Hospitals, Houses of Friars, etc. or any
Manors, Lands, etc. which did belong to them, should have, hold, retain, keep
and enjoy the said Manors, etc. according to their Estates and Titles
discharged and acquitted of the payment of Tithes as freely, and in as large
and ample manner as the said Abbots, etc. or any of them had held, occupied,
possessed, used, retained, or enjoyed the same, or any part thereof at the days
of their dissolution.

And the Reader is to observe, that the Abbots, etc. at the time of their
dissolution held their Lands discharged four manner of legal and regular ways,
which were allowed by the Laws of this Realm, to wit.

1. By the Bulls of Popes. 2. By real Compositions with the Parson etc. Patron
and Ordinary. 3. By Prescription: And 4. By Order.

But there is another sort of discharge, though not a Legal one, has been
allowed in this Case to make a 5. sort of discharge, and that is perpetual
unity, where the Abbot has had the Rectory of any Church and Lands in the same
Parish time out of mind, which have been held free from the payment of Tithes
by all the time of memory, and of these several discharges I will speak in
order.

And first of discharges by the Popes Bulls: it is to be understood, Bulls.
that when the Pope usurped a power over the Clergy here in England, he did at
his pleasure grant Exemptions to this or that Abbey, or to whom else he pleased
to be freed from the payment of Tithes, which was allowed as a good discharge
against the Parsons and Vicars, who in many places suffer by these Bulls to
this day, these Bulls being turned into Prescriptions, etc.

The second sort of discharges was by real Compositions between the Parson or
Vicar, Real Compositions.
and the Abbots, Priors, etc. confirmed by the Patron and Ordinary; of these we
have spoken at large before in the twentieth Chapter, and therefore shall not
repeat it, but pass to the third sort of discharges.

The third sort of Discharges is by Prescription, of which we have likewise
spoken at large before in the sixteenth Chapter, to which I shall refer the
Reader.

I shall only observe to the Reader again in this place, That the Abbots,
Priors and other religious persons might prescribe generally to be free from
the payment, or to be discharged of the payment of Tithes without any
recompense to the Parson, etc. but a Layman could not prescribe absolutely to
be free from payment of Tithes, but sub modo that is paying or doing something
to, or for, the Parson, Vicar, etc. in recompense and satisfaction of the
Tithes as you may at large see in the Chapter here before.

And it is to be observed, that no Abbot, Prior, etc. could make any such
Prescription by the Common Law, that was not founded before the time of memory,
that is before the first year of R. 1. which is the time of the limitation of
all Prescriptions at the Common Law, 2 Inst. 653..
which rejects the practice of the Civil Law, which as should seem allows the
limitation of a prescription or custom to forty years.

It may reasonably be demanded, how this manner of discharge can be made out at
this day, since there is now no Person living, that can prove how the Abbots
held and enjoyed their Lands; to which I answer, that what was done before the
dissolution of Abbeys must now be proved by what has been done since; for if
Monastery Lands have been held all the time of memory since the dissolution,
freed from the payment of Tithes, it shall be intended, that they were so held
before, and therefore they have not paid or been questioned since.

The fourth sort of discharge is by order, Discharge by Order.
and this discharge also for the most part depends upon Popes Bulls or grants,
who at pleasure granted exemption to what orders they pleased.

About the Year of our Lord 1150. 2 Inst 652 Seld. Hist. decim. 120.
the most Religious orders then in being were discharged of the payment of
Tithes; but about that time Pope Adrian the fourth reduced them to Cistertians,
Hospitaliers and Templers, and about the Year 1215. Seld. de decim. 406.
Pope Innocent the third added the Praemonstratenses. But the Privileges
granted to these orders extended only to the Lands, Dyer 277, 278.
these orders held in their own manurance, and not to any which was held by
their Tenants or Farmers.

But about the beginning of the Reign of H. 4. the Cistertians attempted to
have enlarged their privilege to their Tenants and Farmers, which tending to
the ruin of many poor Parsons and Vicars that had cure of Souls was complained
of in a Parliament held in the second Year of H. 4. whereupon it was enacted,
that not only the Cistertians but all other orders that put any Bulls in
execution for the discharging any of their Lands from the payment of Tithes in
the Lands of their Tenants and Farmers, shall incur a Praemunire, that is,
forfeit all their Goods and the profits of their Lands during life, and be
likewise imprisoned during the offenders life, which gave such a check to that
proceeding, that I do not find any thing of that nature after attempted.

The Templers after in the Council of Vienna, The Templers. 2 Inst. 432;
which was held in the Year of our Lord 1311. and in the fourth Year of E. 2.
were condemned for Heresy. And all their possessions by Act of Parliament made
in the seventeenth Year of the same King, were transferred to the Hospitaliers
or Knights of St. Stat. 17. E. 2. c.
John of Jerusalem who enjoyed them till the thirty second Year of the Reign of
King H. 8. at which time by Act of Parliament they were settled upon the Crown.
32 H. 8. c. 24.


But where it is said in Kelway that the Templers were condemned of heresy in
the eight Year E. 2. and their Lands given the same year to the Hospitaliers,
it is a great error; for it is clear that the Council of Vienna was held in the
fourth year of that King, and chiefly called against the Templers; and it is as
clear that their Lands were not here in England settled upon the Hospitaliers
till the seventeenth of the same King.

And though the Lands of the lesser Monasteries be not within the benefit of
the Statute of 31 H. 8. Where the lesser Abbeys may be freed of Tithes.
to be freed of the payment of Tithes, yet they ought to enjoy all such
privileges as are annexed to the Land, and therefore such Lands in whose hands
soever they come shall be freed of the payment of Tithes, yet they ought to
enjoy all such privileges as are annexed to the Land, and therefore such Lands
in whose hands soever they come, shall be freed of the payment of Tithes by
real compositions and prescriptions de modo decimandi, Jones 3.
but not by prescriptions de non decimando, unity of possession, order or Bulls
of Popes, but in all the cases the Parsons and Vicars have the advantage by the
dissolution of all those Abbeys that were dissolved by the Statute of twenty
seven H. 8. and the Parsons and Vicars shall in such case be restored to their
Tithes again, which in all Justice they ought in all other cases if the
Parliament had not seen reason to the contrary.

The lesser Monasteries, that is, which were under 200 l. per annum of the
orders of Cistertians and Praemonstratenses were, as has been said, dissolved
by the Statute of 27 H. 8. have lost the privilege of being discharged of the
payment of Tithes, unless they were continued as the Abbey of Crouden was, but
those Monasteries of those orders that came to the Crown by the Statute of 31.
H. 8. retain the privilege of those orders in not paying Tithes, but this is to
be understood only for such time as the Owners hold them in their own
manurance, for if they let them out to Tenants they shall have no more
privilege than the Tenants of those orders of the Cistertians and
Praemonstratenses had, which was none at all.

But note, Jones 2, 3, etc. Cro. Jac 6^7. Hob. 6^8. Lands of the lesser Abbeys
granted to the bieger not freed.
that if the King after the dissolution of the lesser Monasteries (which had
been of any of the orders that were discharged of the payment of Tithes) had
granted any of their Lands to any of the greater Monasteries which were not
dissolved till the Statute of 31 H. 8. yet those shall not retain the
privileges the Abbots had at the time of the former dissolution; the right
immediately reverting by the dissolution to the Parsons and Vicars to whom the
Tithes of right did belong, the greater Abbyes could not hold them legally
discharged at the time of the second dissolution: So that there is a manifest
difference between this and the case of Walkelate and Wilshaw before remembered,
for in that case the Monastery was continued and not dissolved till the Statute
of 31 H. 8.

And it is to be observed that no Lands acquired by any of the Monasteries of
those orders which were so freed from payment of Tithes after the Council of
Lateran, Lands purchased after the Friviledges granted, not freed.
which was in the Year of our Lord 1215. and by consequence none that were
founded after that Council are discharged of the payment of Tithes either in
their own, Seldens hist. of Tithes 121..
or their Tenants hands, for by that Council the Privilege was limited to such
Lands as these orders had at the time of that Council.

And although any Abbey Lands of the great Abbeys which were of the Cistertian
and Praemonstratensian orders were in the hands of Tenants for years at the
time of the dissolution, Dyer 277.b p. 60. Cro. Jac. 559..
yet the King and his Patentees after the Leases determined shall hold them
discharged, whilst the Patentees and Owners hold them in their own hands, but
the Kings Tenants shall hold them discharged because of the Royal Prerogative
of his Person not being intended fit for Husbandry.

Having now said thus much of the four legal manner of discharges
beforementioned, 5 Perpetual unity. Co. 1.47. b etc. Co. 11.14. b. Dyer 349. p.
16. More 528. Hob. 311 306.298; 300; 2 Inst. 655; More 46, 47. Cro. Jac. 608.
I shall proceed to that of perpetual unity, which cannot be said to be a legal
discharge of the payment of Tithes: Yet because the Abbots, Priors, etc. at the
time of the dissolution held the Lands discharged of the payment of Tithes,
though not legally discharged of Tithes, it has been resolved by many
Judgments and settled, that this is a good discharge within the meaning of the
aforesaid clause of 31 H. 8. Now that which we call a perpetual unity is, as
has been said, where an Abbot, Definition.
Prior, etc. time out of mind have been seized of the Lands out of which the
Tithes arise, and the Rectory within which Parish the Lands lie.

And it is to be observed that every perpetual unity that shall discharge the
Lands from the payment of Tithes, must have these four qualities.

First, Co. 11.44. b Hob. 300
it must be justa, that is, by good and lawful Titles.

Secondly, It must be perpetual, that is, the Abbey must be founded and endowed
with the Land and Rectory before the time of memory, which by the rules of the
Common Law, as has been said, must be before the first Year of R. 1. for if by
any Records, Deeds, or other legal and good evidence it can be made appear that
either the Land or Rectory came to the Abbey since the said first Year of R. 1.
the union is not perpetual, and yet if the appropriation be ancient, as in the
time of E. 4. or before, though the Lands cannot be discharged upon the score
of perpetual unity, yet they may by prescription, if in truth the Lands were
held discharged of the payment of Tithes.

Thirdly, such unity as shall discharge Lands of the payment of Tithes within
this Law must be aequalis, That is, the Abbots, Priors, etc. must be seized in
fee-simple as well of the Lands upon which, etc. as of the Rectory.

Lastly, such unity must be libera, that is, free from the payment of any
manner of Tithes; for if their Farmers at will, years, etc. have paid any
manner of Tithes to the Abbots, Priors, etc. Cro. Jac. 454, and 482..
or their Farmers of the Rectories, the perpetual unity will not serve. And
therefore where such perpetual unity is pleaded in discharge of Tithes, the
adverse party may reply that the Tenants or Farmers before the dissolution paid
some sort of Tithes, and so avoid the perpetual unity.

Having first given the Reader satisfaction that all the Lands that came to the
Crown by the Statute of 27 H. 8. and before, can have no benefit of the
discharge given by the Statute of 31 H. 8. and having also showed how many ways
Lands may be discharged from payment of Tithes that came to the Crown by the
said Statute of 31 H. 8. It rests now that I should say something of those
Lands that have since come to the Crown by the Statutes of 32 H. 8. cap. 24. 37
H. 8. cap. 4. and 1 E. Co. 2.47. a.. How other Lands stand that came not to the
Crown by 31 H 8.
6. cap. 14.

It is a Rule taken in the Archbishop of Canterburies Case, that neither the
Letter, nor the meaning of the Statute of 31 H. 8. extended to free or
discharge any Lands from the payment of Tithes, save those that came to the
Crown by that Act; for as that Book says it is absurd that the branch of the
Statute of 31 H. 8. concerning Tithes, should be extended to a future Act, that
the makers of the Statute of 31 H. 8. without the Spirit of Prophesy, could not
have the prescience of.

And as to those that came to the Crown by the Statute of 32 H. More 913. Cro.
Jac 57. Hill 2 Jac.
8. cap. 24. It was adjudged in the case of Spurling and Quarles, that they are
not discharged of the payment of Tithes. Jones 182, etc. Latch. 89. Hughes 392.
Bridgm. 32.


But there is a later Judgment that seems to oppose these former resolutions,
it was between one Witton and Sir Richard Weston, that was after Lord
Treasurer. Trin. 4. Car. 1. B. R. and the question was, whether those Lands of
the Hospitaliers that came to the Crown by the Statute of 3 H. cap. 24. were
discharged of the payment of Tithes by that Statute of 32 H. 8. or by the
former Statute of 31. and in that case Dodridg and Jones Justices, held that
they were discharged within the Statute of 31 H. 8. and they did in effect deny
the Books before cited to be Law, the chief Justice Hide was of opinion that
they were not discharged by the Statute of 31 H. 8. but by that of 32. So that
by their three opinions the defendant Sir Richard Weston had judgment; but
Whitlock was of opinion that those Lands were not discharged of the payment of
Tithes by the one Statute or the other: now upon the whole matter I shall
submit to the Judicious Readers Judgment whether this later resolution be of
any weight to shake the former resolutions, since in this case though there
were three for giving Judgment for the Defendant, yet to the point controverted
upon the Statute of 31 H. 8. they were two against two, and that they were not
discharged by the Statute of 32. there were three against the chief Justice
Hide. So that I conceive the Law remains according to the former resolutions,
that there are no Lands freed from the payment of Tithes by any Statute, but
those that came to the Crown by the Statute of 31 H. 8.

I must confess I have met with no Judgments upon those Lands which came to the
Crown by the Statute of 37 H. 8. but those being the same with those that came
to the Crown by the Statute of 1 E. 6. cap. 14. I conceive neither those that
came to the Crown by either of those later Statutes have any privilege at all,
and it is agreed in that very case of Witton and Weston that those Lands that
came to the Crown by 1 E. Jones 185.. Cro. 2.470.. Co. 2.47. a..
6. could not have any benefit by the clause of discharge in the Statute of 31
H. 8.

So that I shall conclude that there is no Land can have any privilege at this
day to be discharged of Tithes that belonged to the Abbots, Priors, etc. but
such only as came to the Crown by the Statute of 31 H. 8. cap. 13.

CHAP. XXII. The Two and Twentieth Chapter shows, what Personal Tithes are, and
in what manner they are payable.
THE Canonists define personal Tithes thus. Lindwood cap. Quoniam propter verb.
decimae personales. What personal Tithes are, and where payable.


Decimae personales sic dictae quia potius in respectu personae solvuntur quam
rei, ut puta de artificio, negotiatione and militia. And by the Canon.

Decimae personales solvantur de artificibus and mercatoribus, The Canon.
scilicet de lucro negotiationis, similiter de carpentariis, fabris,
caementariis, Textoribus, pandoxatricibus, and omnibus aliis operariis,
stipendiariis, ut videlicet dent decimas de stipendiis suis, nisi stipendiarii
ipsi aliquid certum velint dare ad opus vel ad lumen Ecclesiae, si Rectori
ipsius Ecclesiae placuerit. And Mr. Verbo negotiationis.
Linwood in his Gloss adds,

Et scias quod in istis decimis mere personalibus quae considerantur ex solo
lucro deducuntur expensae tam in re quam circae rem and extra rem factae. Et
nota quod de solo lucro debetur haec decima, unde si emens mercem eam non
vendat sed donet vel sibi retineat, non tenetur decimare quia non lucratur.

So that it appears by the Canon Law, that every one ought to pay for a
personal Tithe, a tenth part of all his clear gains, deducting all his charges
and expenses for a personal Tithe; but if a man buy Merchandises, and do not
sell them to profit, or give them, or make use of them himself, no Tithe is to
be paid, because there is no gain made of them.

Now let us see, 2 E. 6. c. 13.
what the Statute of 2 E. 6. says to us, concerning personal Tithes; and by
that Stat. it is enacted.

That every Person exercising, The Statute for personal Tithes.
merchandising, bargaining and selling, clothing, handicraft, or other art or
faculty, being such kind of persons, as then before within forty years had
accustomably used to pay such personal Tithes, or of right ought to pay (other
than such as be common day Laborers) shall yearly pay for his personal Tithes
the tenth part of his clear gains, his charges deducted.

And where handycraft men have used to pay their Tithes within this forty
years, the same Custom of Tithes is to be observed; and if any Person refuse to
pay his personal Tithes, etc. It shall be lawful to the Ordinary of the same
Diocese to call the same Party before him, and by his discretion to examine him
by all lawful and reasonable means, other than by the Parties own corporal Oath
concerning the true payment of the said Tithes.

This Act of Parliament restrains the Canon Law in two things; first, where the
Canon was general, that all persons in all places should pay their personal
Tithes, the Act restrains it to such kind of persons only, as have accustomably
used to pay the same, within forty years before the making of the Act.
Secondly, Whereas by the Ecclesiastical Laws they might before this Act have
examined the Party upon his Oath concerning his gain; this Act restrains that
course, so that the Party cannot be examined upon Oath; and by this Act the day
labourer is freed of the payment of his personal Tithes.

It cannot be intended upon this Act, that if such Tithes have been sometimes
paid within forty years, that they are therefore due, but they must have been
accustomably, that is constantly, paid for forty years next before the Act.

And if it be demanded how such payment must now be proved forty years before
the making of the said Act, I answer, as in other like Cases a posteriore by
what has been done all the time of memory since the Act.

There has been some question amongst the Schoolmen and Canonists, whether
personal Tithes ought to be paid of unlawful gain, to which you shall hear what
a great Schoolman and Doctor says.

Quod si aliqua male acquiruntur dupliciter uno modo, Tho. Aqu. Sum. 2. 2ae. q.
87. art. 20. Whether due of ill gotten profit.
quia ipsa acquisitio est injusta, puta quae acquiruntur per rapinam, furtum
seu usuram, quae homo tenetur restituere, non autem de eis decimam dare, tamen
si aliquis ager sit emptus de usura, de fructu ejus tenetur usurarius decimas
dare, quia fructus illi non sunt de usura, sed ex Dei munere: quaedam vero
dicuntur male acquisitae, quia acquiruntur ex turpi causa sicut de meretricio
and histrionatu, and aliis hujusmodi, quae non tenentur restituere unde de
talibus tenentur decimas dare, secundum modum aliarum personalium decimarum,
tamen Ecclesia non debet eas recipere, quamdiu sunt in peccato, ne videatur
eorum peccatis communicare, sed postquam poenituerint possunt ab eis de his
recipi decimae.

So that by this great Doctors opinion, it seems, that of ill gotten gain, of
which restitution ought to be made, no personal Tithe is due, and yet if by ill
gotten gain, a field be purchased, Tithe ought to be paid of the fruits
thereof, but of ill gotten gain, where no Restitution is to be made, there
Tithes ought to be paid, but not received by the Church, till the sinner have
repented him of the evil, and after such repentance the Church may receive them.

These personal Tithes are accounted amongst the offerings, of which we are to
speak next, and ought by the Parishioner to be offered to the Church where due;
but I am of the opinion of him, that said.

Hae decimae personales magis difficultate and subtilitate quam utilitate
existunt.

It has been resolved, Roll 1.646. a. 1.
that Servants in Husbandry shall not pay any personal Tithe.

CHAP. XXIII. The Twenty Third Chapter shows, what Oblations, Offerings, etc.
are, and where due.
OFferings are defined by the Canonists to be, Oblations and Offerings what and
where due.


Quaecunque a piis, fidelibus Christianis offeruntur Deo and Sanctae Ecclesiae,
sive res soli, sive mobiles sint, nec refert an legantur Testamento, aut aliter
donentur.

It should seem, that in the time of Popery, there was an expectation, that
every one present at Mass should offer something; for St. Gregory tells us,
Greg. 78. habetur de Consecrat. div. 1.
Quod omnis Christianus procuret ad missarum solennia aliquid Deo offerre.

But Becanus a learned Jesuit is more moderate; Becan. Sum. Theo. l. 3. q. 86.
for he tells us, Quod nemo tenetur ad illas Oblationes, nisi vel necessariae
sint ad sustentationem ministrorum, vel consuetudo ad eas alicubi obliget.

And these Offerings belonged properly to the Priest or Minister of the Church
or Place where they were made; for so is the Canon of Pope Damasus.

Quod Oblationes quae intra sanctam Ecclesiam offeruntur, Can. Damas. Pap. Et
habetur 10. q. 1.
tantummodo Sacerdotibus qui quotidie servire videntur, licet comedere and
habere, etc.

But it should seem, that private Chapels carried away many of the offerings
belonging to the Mother Churches, to avoid which Othobon the Popes Legate here
made a Canon to remedy that mischief to this purpose,

Quod Capellani ministrantes in Capellis hujusmodi, Cap. De Oblationibus.
quae salvo jure matricis Ecclesiae sunt concessae, universas Oblationes and
caetera quae ipsis non recipientibus ad Ecclesiam matricem provenire deberent,
ipsius Ecclesiae Rectori sine difficultate restituant, cum illud tanquam
alienum just nequeant retinere. Si quis autem restituere contempserit,
suspensionis vinculo quousque restituerit se noverit innodatum.

So that it seems by this Canon, that Chapels that had parochial Rights, the
Chaplains of them might retain the offerings, but where the parochial Rights
were saved to the Mother Church, the Chaplains of such Chapels were to account
to the Rector of the mother Church: for the offerings made at such Chapels.

There was another Canon made by Simon Mepham Archbishop of Canterbury, and his
Clergy in the year of our Lord 1328. reciting.

Quia quidam maledictionis filii in nubentium solenniis, Cap. Quia quidam
maledictionis, etc.
purificationibus mulierum, mortuorum exequiis, and aliis, in quibus ipse
dominus in ministrorum suorum personis solebat oblationum libamine populariter
honorari, ad unius Denarii, vel alterius modicae quantitatis oblationem, populi
devotionem restringere sunt moliti, residuum oblationis fidelium suis, pro
libito, vel alienis usibus multoties applicantes. Praesentis declaratione
Consilii declaramus and pronunciamus, omnes and singulos in praemissis, vel
eorum aliquos imposterum delinquentes, vinculo majoris excommunicationit
involvi.

So that upon the whole matter it appears, there were some offerings free and
voluntary, which the Parishioners or others were not bound to perform, but ad
libitum. There were others by Custom certain and obligatory, as those for
Marriages, Christnings, Churching of Women, Burials, etc. and that these were
all due, and belonged to the Parish Priest or Minister, that officiated at the
Mother Church or Chapels, that had parochial Rights, the other Chapels that
had not parochial Rights were to account to the Rector for the Parish Church:
now let us see, what the Statute of 2 E. 6. says, by which it is enacted.

That all and every Person or Persons which by the Laws and Custom of this
Realm ought to make or pay their offerings, 2 E. 6. c. 13. The Statute for
Offerings.
shall yearly from thenceforth, well and truly content and pay, his or their
offerings to the Parson, etc. of the Parish, or Parish where it shall fortune
or happen, him or them, to dwell or abide, etc.

Those offerings which were free and voluntary are now vanished, and are not
comprehended within this Law; but those that were customary and certain, as for
Communicants, Marriages, Christenings, Churching of Women and Burials, are
confirmed to the Parish Priest, Vicars and Curates of the Parishes where the
parties live that ought to pay the same, and they are only recoverable in the
Spiritual Court, or an Action I conceive may be formed upon this Statute at
Common Law.

CHAP. XXIV. The Twenty Fourth Chapter shows, what Mortuaries are, and in what
Cases they are due at this day, and how much is to be paid for the same.
BY a Provincial Canon made by Simon Laugham Archbishop of Canterbury and his
Clergy, Where, and what is due for Mortuaries.
in the Year of our Lord 1378. It was decreed.

Quod si decedens tria vel plura cujuscunque generis in bonis suis habuerit
animalia, Cap. Statutum and infra, etc. The Canon.
optimo cui debitum de jure fuerit reservato; Ecclesiae suae, a qua Sacramenta
recepit, dum viveret, sine dolo, fraud seu contradictione qualibet pro
recompensatione subtractionis decimarum personalium, nec non and oblationum
secundum melius animal reservetur post obitum pro salute animae suae Ecclesiae
suae bujusmodi liberandum: quod si duo tantum in bonis decedentis extiterint
animalia, de mansuetudine Ecclesiae exactio quaelibet nomine mortuarii
remittatur; quodque si Mulier viro superstite obierit, ad solutionem mortuarii
minime coerceatur. Sed si post obitum mariti, in domo cum familiae regimine
vidua per annum supervixerit, juxta formam superius scriptam, ad mortuarium
obligetur: Hac autem interpretatione, consuetudini laudabili super mortuariis
in nostra provincia aliter observare nolumus, praejudicium generari; quin si
decedens numerum hujusmodi animalium habuerit seu non habuerit, virve aut uxor
prius vel post decesserit, super praestatione Mortuarii consuetudo
Ecclesiastica observetur: ad solutionem autem debiti de jure vel consuetudine
mortuarii renuentes, volumus per ordinarios locorum censura Ecclesiastica
coarctari.

How far this Canon was obeyed in England I can give no account, but I have not
found the English willing to have their Estates taken from them by Canons, nor
have found that any prohibitions have been granted in case of Mortuaries; nor
have I observed any complaints in Parliament against them (save that 2 R. 2. It
is prayed that Parsons and Vicars might not require Mortuaries of the Armor of
any Man, but that it might remain to their Executors) till the 21 H. 8. and
then they were settled by Statute as follows. Stat. 21 H. 8. cap. 6. The Statute
for Mortuaries.


1. That no Man should pay a Mortuary unless he died possessed of Goods to the
value of ten Marks, that is, six pounds thirteen shillings and four pence.

2. That no Mortuary should be paid or demanded, but in such places where they
have used to be paid or given.

3. That they should be paid but in one place, and that at the partie's most
usual dwelling and habitation, and there but one Mortuary, and that after the
rate following, that is to say.

4. That if the decedent at the time of his death, had in moveable Goods to the
value of ten Marks clearly, his debts first paid and under the sum of thirty
pounds, then he should pay three shillings and four pence and no more, and this
must be in movables, and not in Chattels as Leases for Years, etc.

5. That if the decedent died possessed of movables of the value of thirty
pounds, and under the value of forty pounds, to pay six shillings and eight
pence for a Mortuary.

6. If the Decedents Goods be of the value of forty pounds or upwards, then to
pay ten shillings for a Mortuary.

7. That no married Woman, Child, or Person not keeping House should pay any
mortuary, nor a wayfaring Man, or other that was not resident where he died,
but those to pay where they were last resident.

8. The Parson or Vicar are not by this Act barred of any Legacy given, or
offering to be made to them.

9. No Mortuary to be paid in Wales, Callis or Barwick, or in the Marches of
Wales, but where accustomed.

10. It is provided that the four Welsh Bishops, and the Archdeacon of Chester
may, notwithstanding this Act, take their accustomed Mortuaries.

11. That where less has accustomably been taken for Mortuaries than is
limited by the Act, there no more than is due by the Custom shall be taken.

Sir Edward Coke is of opinion that there were no Mortuaries due before this
Act, 2 Inst. 491; Mortuaries due only by Custom.
by any Law, but by Custom only; by reason of the words in the Statute of
Circumspecte Agatis which are, ubi mortuarium dari consuevit, etc.

This duty was formerly only suable for in the Court Christian, but now I
conceive an Action of debt will lie at Common Law upon this Statute, for though
this Statute is only negative, that they shall not take above such rates, yet
it implies affirmative, as the Statute of 2 E. 6. for barren Grounds, and the
Statute for the Sheriff's Fees, and dues, other Statutes.

For those Mortuaries that Prelates anciently paid to the Kings of this Realm,
Mortuaries to the King by Bishops.
I shall not trouble the Reader with, but refer those that are curious to
inform themselves, to Sir Edward Coke's Commentary upon Magna Charta. 2 Inst.
491..


In the Tenth of H. 4. 10 H. 4. 1. b
A Vicar claimed a Mortuary by Custom, and not by the Canon, or any other Law,
quod nota.

These Mortuaries are in some places called coarse presents, Their names.
or coarse presentees, as Doctor Cowel says, because where due, they used to
pay before the Coarse was buried, when it was brought to be buried.

The Bishop of Chester claimed by Custom upon the death of any Priest, Cro.
Car. 237, 238. Bishop of Chester his demand as Archdeacon of Chester.
dying within the Archdeaconry of Chester for a Mortuary, his best Horse or
Mare, Saddle, Bridle and Spurs, his best Gown, a Cloak, his upper Garment, next
it his best Hat, his Tipper, his best Signet or Ring, and this Custom was
denied by the Plaintiff in a Prohibition, but what the Success was I have not
heard, but the Mortuaries due to the ARchdeacon of Chester are excepted: And
the Bishop of Chester holds that Archdeaconry, as I have been informed, in the
nature of a Commendam, and executes it by a Deputy.

CHAP. XXV. The Five and Twentieth Chapter shows, how Tithes are to be paid in
London.
THE Livelihood of the Clergy in London, Tithes in London, how to be paid.
I mean the secular Clergy, consisted heretofore chiefly in voluntary offerings
and Personal Tithes, which little differ from voluntary offerings. For though a
great Doctor tells us that,

In praecipuis festivitatibus tenetur quis offerre, Hostiensis c. Omnis
Christianus.
and cogi potest, maxim cum sit quasi generalis consuetudo ubique terrarum,
etc.

And if you ask him which are those Feasts at which the People are bound to
offer, Idem de Paroc. Sect. In quibus, etc.
he tells you, Dies dominicos, and dies festivos.

But there being no Canon or Law that prescribes any certainty in the quantity,
value, or things to be offered. I can give them no properer name than voluntary
or free will offerings. But no sooner was Popery abolished in this Nation, but
these voluntary offerings and personal Tithes soon came to little. And
notwithstanding it was enacted by the Statute of 2 E. 6. That all that by Law
or Custom were bound to make their offerings should thenceforth pay them to the
Parson, etc. yet that did not much amend the matter, so that the maintenance
of the secular Clergy in London was brought to a very low ebb, there being no
Tithe as has been said, chargeable upon houses, unless by way of a modus
decimandi, whereupon the Clergy of London in the 37th. Stat. 37 H. 8. c. 12.
year of the Reign of King H. 8. made their application to the Parliament, and
obtained an Act of Parliament for the confirming a Decree made by the
Archbishop of Canterbury and diverse other great Lords of the Kingdom, to settle
the matter, the effect whereof follows, which is printed amongst the other Acts
of Parliament.

1. The Decree.
That the Citizens of London from thenceforth for ever, should pay yearly
without fraud or guil to their Parsons, etc. for the time being; for every ten
shillings rent of all houses, shops, warehouses, cellars and stables within the
said City of London, and the Liberties of the same 16 d. ob. and for every 20
s. rent, 2 s. 9 d. and so ascending for every ten shillings rent.

2. That if any dwelling houses, shops, etc. should be leased by fraud or
covin, reserving less Rent than has been accustomed; or shall by reason of
Fine, or by fraud or covin, make any Lease without reserving any Rent, then the
Farmer or Tenant shall pay after the same Rate, the said house, etc. was last
let for without Covin; but note, that if the house, etc. be let at as great a
Rent as the same was set at, at the time of the making of the said Statute,
then no fraud can be averred, although a Fine or In-come was given for the said
Lease.

3. 2 Inst. 659..
That if a house, etc. be leased, and no Rent at all reserved, then such house,
etc. shall pay such rate as the same was let for at the time of the making of
the said Statute; but where greater Rent is reserved, it is to pay according to
the best improved value.

But where Houses had been always held by the Owners, 2 Inst. 660;
and, by consequence, no Rent paid, that is casus omissus in this Statute, and
such houses will be freed of payment of Tithes by this Law.

But if it were a house, that yielded Rent at the time of the making of the
Decree, and be now let without Rent, it shall pay Tithe according to the Rate
it was set for at the making of the Decree, although no Fine at all were paid
for such Lease.

5. The Tithes upon this Decree cannot be sued for in the Ecclesiastical Court,
because the Act it self declares how they shall be recovered.

6. That if the Owners held the houses themselves, then they shall pay Tithe
after the rate the same were set for at the time of the Decree.

7. That if any person take any house, etc. by Lease, and he and his Executors,
etc. live in part of it, and set out part, the principal Farmer or Taker, his
Executors, etc. shall pay their Tithes for his and their Parts after the rate
aforesaid, and of such part as is farmed out according to the rate it is set
at. And in the same manner Tithes are to be paid, where one takes a Lease of
several houses, and lets out part, and holds any part himself.

8. That if any Farmer, or his Assigns shall farm all the houses, etc. so
farmed to one or diverse Tenants, the Tenants shall pay Tithes according to the
Rent reserved.

9. That if dwelling houses shall be converted into Warehouses, or e converso,
yet they shall pay Tithe according to the Rate aforesaid.

10. That if a Dye-house or Brew House be let with the Implements, then a third
penny of the Tithes after the rate abovesaid to be abated.

11. That where a mansion house with shops, stables, wharfs, with Cranes,
Timberyard or Gardens belonging to the same, and occupied together shall
afterward be severed, or were severed within 8 years before the Decree, that
then the Farmers of the shops, stables, etc. shall pay Tithes according to the
rate abovesaid.

12. That these Tithes shall be paid quarterly at Easter, Midsummer, Michaelmas
and Christmas.

13. That any Householder, that holds a house of 10 s. Rent, or above, shall be
acquit of his Offerings; but his Wife, Children, and Servants shall pay 2 d.
yearly for their four Offering days, receiving at Easter.

14. That if any house of 10 s. Rent or above, shall be let by parcels under 10
s. Rent, then the Owner, if he live in any part of the house, or the chief
Tenant, shall pay the Tithe after the rate as the same house was accustomably
letten before such Division, and the Sub-Tenants, that hold less than 10 s. per
annum, without fraud or covin shall pay 2 d. yearly for their Offerings.

15. That no Tithes shall be paid for any Gardens belonging to any Mansion
house, and which are held for pleasure; but if such Garden contain half an Acre
of ground or more, and shall make any yearly profit by Sale, then the same to
be paid for, according to the rate abovesaid.

16. This Act is not to extend to the houses of Noblemen or Noblewomen whilst
they are kept in their own hands, and not let for Rent, and which formerly
paid no Tithe, so long as the same continue unletten, nor to the Halls of any
Craft or Companies so long as the same are unletten, and in times past paid no
Tithes.

17. That Shedds, Stables, Cellars, Timber-yards and Tenter-yards, which were
never parcel of, or belonging to any dwelling House, and which has not been
used to pay Tithes, shall be acquit of the payment of Tithes, as has been
accustomed.

18. But if by Custom any lesser rate have been paid than after the rate of two
shillings and nine pence in the pound, then the accustomed rate only to be paid.

19. The Lord Major of the City of London, by the advice of Council is
Authorized by the said Act, to hear and determine all differences arising upon
this Decree, and give costs according to the intent thereof.

20. That if the Major do not make an end of such differences within two Months
after complaint; or if any Person find himself agrieved by his Decree, then the
Lord Chancellor within three Months after complaint to him made, shall make on
end of the differences with costs, etc.

21. That if Rents fall by reason of decay or burning, to less than they were
accustomably letten, that then the Tithes during such Term, shall be paid
according to the Rent reserved.

This is a short abstract of that great Decree which I have inserted here for
the use of the Clergy of that City, I shall only add some other resolutions
upon this Decree, and conclude this Chapter.

In a Case between Dr. Noy. 130. Where Suits for Tithes in London shall be
determined.
Meadhouse and Dr. Tailor, it was resolved, that Suits for Tithes upon this
Decree should be before the Mayor in writing, and not by Parol.

2. That a Reservation by a Leasor for life upon a Lease by him made for years,
shall not bind him in reversion to pay Tithes according to that rate.

3. That a Rent for half a year, and after for another half year is a yearly
Rent within this Decree.

It has been resolved, Cro. El. 276.
that Abbey Lands within the City of London, and the liberties thereof are not
freed from the payment of Tithes within the Statute of 31 H. 8. because the
Statute and Decree for the payment of Tithes within the City and Liberties of
London was made after the Statute of 31 H. 8. and their Privileges are not
reserved.

And it has been resolved, 2 Inst. 660..
that if any Suit be brought in the Ecclesiastical Court, or any other Court
than is directed by the Act, a Prohibition lies.

Lastly, 2 Inst. 690;
where the Decree says (where no Rent is reserved by reason of any fine or
income paid before hand) that is put only for Example, for if no Rent be
reserved for this, or any other cause or consideration, it is within the
meaning of this Clause.

CHAP. XXVI. The Twenty Sixth Chapter shows, in what Courts the Right of Tithes
is determinable, and how, and in what manner to be recovered, and in what Cases
Prohibitions are usually granted, and how prosecuted and defended.
THat Tithes were anciently determinable in the County and Hundred Courts, 2
Inst. 661; Seld. hist. decim. 412; Lamb. Saxon Laws 45.
is asserted both by Sir Edward Coke and Mr. Seldom: And the same appears by
the Laws of King Ethelstan long before the conquest; and Mr. Seldom is of
opinion, that the Bishops consistory here in England was not settled till the
time of William the Conqueror, who by his Charter commands, Seld. 414.
ut nullus Episcopus vel Archidiaconus de legibus Episcopalibus amplius in
Hundredo placita teneant, nec causam quae ad regimen animarum pertinet ad
judicium secularium hominum adducant, sed quicunque secundum leges Episcopales
de quacunque causa vel culpa interpellatus fuerit, ad locum, quem ad hoc
Episcopus elegerit and nominaverit, veniat, ibique de causa sua respondeat, and
non secundum Hundret. sed secundum Canones and Leges Episcopales rectum Deo and
Episcopo suo faciat. And closes thus, Hoc etiam defendo, ut nullus Laicus homo
de legibus, quae ad Episcopum pertinent se intromittat; yet notwithstanding as
Mr. Seldom observes, Seld. 414. etc.
the Jurisdiction of Tithes was not so settled in the Bishop and Ecclesiastical
Courts, but there were Suits for Tithes as well in the Temporal as
Ecclesiastical Courts, whereof he gives some Instances. And amongst the Laws of
King H. Leg. H. 1. c. 11. Lamb. 182.
1. I find this Clause, Si quis rectam decimam superteneat, vadat praepositus
Regis and Episcopi and terrae domini cum presbytero, and ingratis auferant; and
Ecclesiae eui pertinebit, reddant, and novam paertem relinquant ei qui decimam
dari noluerit.

But the Law has been now long settled that the Ecclesiastical Courts have in
some cases the power to determine the right of Tithes, and in all cases to hold
plea for the subtraction and withholding of Tithes, and confirmed by several
Acts of Parliament. 35 H. 6.39. 38 H. 6.22. per Fortescue. Where the Spiritual
Court may determine the Right of Tithes.


To the first, if a dispute happen between two Parsons, to which of them the
Tithes belong, whether to the one by parochial right, or the other as a portion
belonging to his Rectory by prescription, and both Parsons claim by
presentation under the same Title, so that the right of Patronage comes not in
dispute, the right of these Tithes shall be determined in the Ecclesiastical
Court, and no Prohibition or Judicavit shall hinder it, and this suit in the
Ecclesiastical Court is called a spoliation.

And this Jurisdiction is so peculiar and annexed to the Spiritual Courts, 38
H. 6.21. 5 H. 5.40. 14 H. 4.17. a. b. Where the Temporal Courts have not
Jurisdiction of Tithes.
That if the one Parson should bring an Action of Trespass at Common Law
against the other Parson, for the taking and carrying away Corn or other things
set out for Tithe, the Defendant may by way of plea show, that the Goods in
question were Tithes set forth and severed from the nine parts, and that he is
Parson of Dale, and that he and all his predecessors time out of mind have had
these Tithes as a portion which belonged to his Church, and that the Plaintiff
being Rector of the Parish where they grew, claims them as his Tithes, and
demand Judgment, if the Kings Court will hold plea, by such plea the Kings
Court shall be ousted of Jurisdiction, 5 H. 6.10. 50 E. 3.20. 38 E. 3.6. 39 E.
3.23. 5 H. 5.10. 1 H. 6.5. 44 E. 3.39. 20 H. 6.17. 2 H. 4.15. 31 H. 6.11. 2 E.
4.15.
but if the dispute in such Action fall out in pleading to be about the bounds
of the Parishes, then the King's Court shall not be ousted of Jurisdiction.

And so it is if the question be between the Farmer, Bailey, or Servant of the
one Parson, and the Farmer, Bailey, etc. of the other, or the other Person
himself in such cases, though the dispute does appear to be concerning the
right of Tithes between the Persons yet the Court shall not be ousted of the
Jurisdiction because they are not both Clergy Men.

But in all these cases where the right of Tithes is in dispute between one
Parson and another, in whose names soever the Suit is in the Spiritual Court, I
conceive no prohibition lies, if both Parsons come in by the same Title of
patronage, so that the right of patronage come not in dispute.

And I take the Law to be the same where the question arises between the Parson
who is patron, 40 E. 3.28. 35 H. 6.39.
and the Vicar: whether Tithes belong to the Parson or Vicar?

But where the right of Tithes is controverted between two Clergy Men which
come into their Churches by several patrons, West. 2. c. 5. Circumspecte
Agatis, Articuli Cleri: cap. 2. Where the Spiritual Court cannot determine the
right of Tithes.
there in that cave the Spiritual Court has not Jurisdiction to determine the
right of the Tithes, if they amount to the fourth part of the yearly value of
the Church; but the Title is to be determined by writ of right, of Advowson of
Tithes as shall be showed more at large, when I shall come to show in what
cases the right of Tithes is determinable in the Kings Court. But in that case
if the Tithes in question do not amount to the fourth part of the value of the
Church, the Ecclesiastical Court may determine the right in a spoliation.
F.N.B. 37. E.


But the Jurisdiction of the Ecclesiastical Courts to hold plea for the
subtraction and withholding of Tithes, Spiritual Jurisdiction confirmed by
several Acts of Parliament.
as the same has been very ancient, so it has been confirmed by several Acts
of Parliament as I shall show, the first of which is that of circumspecte
agatis, made in the ninth Year of E. 1. by which it is enacted, That, By the
Statute de circumspecte Agatis.
Si Rector petat versus parochianos oblationes and decimas debitas and
consuetas; vel si Rector petat versus Rectorem de decimis majoribus vel
minoribus, dummodo non petatur quarta pars valoris Ecclesiae; Item si Rector
petat mortuarium in partibus ubi mortuarium dari consuevit; Item si praelatus
alicujus Ecclesiae vel advocatus petat a Rectore pensionem sibi debitam, omnes
hujusmodi petitiones sunt faciendae in Foro Ecclesiastico, etc. and concludes,
In omnibus praedictis casibus habet Judex Ecclesiasticus cognoscere, Regia
prohibitione non obstante.

There has been some question made whether this were an Act of Parliament or
not, That it is an Act of Parliament. 2 Inst. 487 Seld. hist. decim 424.
but it is proved by Sir Edward Coke by many unanswerable reasons to be an Act
of Parliament, and so agreed by Mr. Seldom, and almost all others.

Secondly, And extends to all England.
admitting it to be an Act of Parliament, it has been doubted whether it
extended further than to the Diocese of Norwich, it seeming to be appropriated
by the penning to that Diocese alone; 2 Inst. 487
but by the general opinion of the learned it extends to all other Diocesses,
and Norwich is only put by way of example.

And the prudent penning of this Law by our Ancestors deserves the Reader's
observation, Observations in the penning of it.
how careful they were to preserve their own rights and avoid the encroachments
of the Clergy, who were in those days very powerful, for first, they would not
give way to the Canons to destroy their Customs and Prescriptions allowed by
the Common Law, and therefore give the Spiritual Judge Jurisdiction of Tithes
and Oblations (debitas and consuetas) only.

2. They would not expose their rights of Patronage to the determination of the
Spiritual Judge, and therefore this condition is annexed, Dummodo non petatur
quarta pars valoris Ecclesiae.

Lastly, they would not subject themselves to pay Mortuaries according to the
Canon Law, but ubi dari consuevit, so that if any Suit were sued for Tithes,
Offerings, Mortuaries, not due as well by Custom as Common Law, a Prohibition
lay, and does lie at this day.

The second Statute concerning the Jurisdiction of the Spiritual Courts in
cases of Tithes, is the Statute of Articuli Cleri, but I shall pass it by here
till I come to speak of the Writ of Judicavit.

The next Statute I meet with that concerns this matter, 18 E. 3 c. 7.
is the Statute of 18 E. 3. cap. 7. which I shall pass by also till I come to
speak of the determination of the right of Tithes by scire facias.

There was another Statute made 1 R. 2. 1 R. 2. c. 13.
it is Cap. 13. for the punishing of such as indicted those that sued in the
Spiritual Courts for substraction of Tithes, or compelled them to desist by
Bonds or otherwise, but that Law being now become obsolete, and besides my
purpose, I shall proceed to the Statute of 27 H. 8. by which it is enacted,

That every Subject of England, 27 H. 8. c. 20.
Ireland, Wales, Callais, and the Marches of the same, should according to the
Ecclesiastical Laws and Ordinances of the Church of England, and after the
laudable Vsages and Customs of the Parishes or other places where he dwells or
occupies, shall yield and pay his Tithes and offerings, and other duties of
holy Church: And that for subtraction of such Tithes, etc. may by due process
of the King's Ecclesiastical Laws consent the Person, etc. so offending, before
his Ordinary or other competent Judge, etc. having Authority to hear and
determine the right, Tithes, etc. And to compel the pa^^^ offending to do and
yield their duties in that behalf. And in case the Ordinary, etc. for any
contempt, contumacy, disobedience or other misdemeanour of the Party Defendant,
shall make information to any of the Kings most Honorable Council, or to the
Justices of the Peace of the Shire where the Offender dwell^ to assist and aid
the Ordinary, etc. and to order and reform any such Person, in any Cause before
rehearsed, that then be of the Kings Council, or such two Justices of the
Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum, to whom such information or request
shall be made, shall have power to attach, or cause to be attached the Person,
or, etc. against whom such information shall he made, and to commit the same
Persons to Ward, there to remain without Bail or Mainprise until he, etc.
shall have found sufficient Surety to be bound by Recognisance or otherwise,
before the Kings Counselor, or, etc. or any other like Counselors, or
Justices, etc. to the use of the King, to give due obedience to the Process and
Proceedings, Decrees and Sentences of the Ecclesiastical Court wherein such
Suit, etc. shall depend or be. And further gives power to the said Counselor,
or to two Justices of the Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum, to take,
receive, and Record such Recognizance and Bonds.

There is a Proviso in this Act, that it shall not extend to London.

And another Proviso that the Party sued may have all legal Defenses, Appeals
and Prohibitions.

And it is to be observed that this Law extends to all sort of Tithes,
Observations upon this Law.
mixed and Personal, as well as Predial.

Next, he that will have the benefit of this Law must sue for the single value,
and not for the double value upon the Statute of 2 E. 6.

Thirdly, the Plaintiff in the Ecclesiastical Court may proceed upon this Act
for contempt, contumacy, or misdemeanour, as well before as after Sentence.

Fourthly, The security upon this Act, may as well be by Bond as Recognizance.

Lastly, observe the wary penning of this Act, they must pay their Tithes and
other Church Duties, according to the Ecclesiastical Laws and laudable Customs
and usages of the place, next, if it be demanded before whom Suit upon this
Statute shall be made, it is answered by the Statute it self, it must be before
such Judge as has Jurisdiction of the Cause, so that it creates or enlarges no
Jurisdiction.

The next Act of Parliament concerning this matter, is the Statute of 32 H. 8.
32 H. 8 c. 7.
by which it is enacted, that all and singular persons, etc. shall fully, truly
and effectually divide, set out, yield or pay all and singular Tithes and
Offerings, according to the lawful Customs and Vsages of the Parishes and
Places where, etc. and in case any person, etc. to detain or withold any of
the said Tithes or Offerings, or any part or parcel thereof, that then the
person lay or, etc. shall and may convent the person or, etc. before the
Ordinary, etc. according to the Ecclesiastical Laws, etc. and so proceed to
Sentence according to the Process and course of the Ecclesiastical Laws.

And that if any Party appeal against the Judges Sentence, he shall then assess
the Costs of his Suit therein before expended, and shall compel the Appellant
to pay the said costs by the compulsory Process and Censures of the said Laws,
taking security of the said Party, to whom the said costs shall be paid, to
repay the same if the Appeal be adjudged against him.

And if any Person after sentence definitive given against him, shall
obstinately and wilfully refuse to pay their Tithes, or the sum adjudged, that
then two Justices of the Peace, whereof one shall be of the Quorum, shall, etc.
upon Information, Certificate, or complaint to them made by writing by the said
Ecclesiastical Judge, etc. cause the party refusing to be attached and committed
to the next Goal, there to remain till he, etc. have found sufficient sureties
to be bound by Recognizance. or otherwise before the same Justices to the use
of the King to perform the said definitive sentence.

Provided that no Person or, etc. to be sued or otherwise compelled, to yield,
give or pay any manner of Tithes for any Manor, Lands, etc. which by the Laws
or Statutes of this Realm are discharged, or not chargeable with, etc. Tithes.

Provided that this Act shall not extend, or be expounded to give any remedy,
cause of Action, or Suit in the Courts Temperal against any Person, etc. which
shall refuse or deny to set out his or their Tithes, or which shall detain,
withold or refuse to pay his Tithes or Offerings, or any parcel thereof; but
that in all such Cases the person or persons, being Ecclesiastical or Lay
Persons, having cause to demand or have the said tihes or Offerings, or thereby
wronged or grieved shall take and have their remedy for their said Tithes and
Offerings in every such Case in the Spiritual Courts, according to the
Ordinance in the former Part of the said Act mentioned, and not otherwise, any
thing, etc.

1. Observations upon this Statute.
It appears by the Preamble of this Law, that this Act was particularly
designed for the relief of Impropriators, who before this Act were not
capacitated to sue in the Spiritual Courts for the subtraction of Tithes, and
were hard put to it to find any other relief.

2. Where by the former Act the Party for Contumacy, etc. might be compelled to
give security before Sentence, in this Case of the Lay Impropriators, the Party
cannot be compelled to give security till after definitive Sentence.

3. Upon this Law there must be two Sureties at least, upon the former one
sufficed.

4. The security in this, as the former, may be by Bond or Recognizance.

5. Whosoever will have the benefit of this Act must sue particularly upon this
Law, for the single value, and not for the double value upon the Stat. of 2 E.
6.

6. This Law extends as the former did to all manner of Tithes and Offerings.

7. London is excepted out of this Act as it was in the former.

8. This Law only extends to customary Tithes, and not for Tithes due by Canon
and Ecclesiastical Laws.

9. This Act only extends to such as shall obstinately and wilfully refuse to
perform the Sentence of the Ecclesiastical Judge, and for no other contempt or
neglect.

10. Lastly, this Act restrains the Suit to the Ecclesiastical Court upon this
Statute, otherwise an Action, as should seem, might have been brought at Common
Law upon this statute for not setting forth, etc. of their Tithes.

But diverse defects appearing in this Law, especially to the Lay
Impropriators, they obtained a more effectual Law for their purpose in the 2 E.
6. by which it is enacted.

That if any Person carry away his Corn or Hay, Stat. 2. E. 6. cap. 13.
or other predial Tithes before the Tithe thereof be set forth, or willingly
withdraw his Tithes of the same, etc. that then upon due proof thereof made
before the Spiritual Judge, or any other Judge to whom heretofore he might have
made complaint, the Party so carrying away, withdrawing, letting or stopping,
shall pay double the value of the Tenth or Tithe so taken, lost, withdrawn or
carried away, over and besides the costs, charges and expenses of the Suit in
the same, the same to be recovered before the Ecclesiastical Judge according to
the Ecclesiastical Laws.

There is a Proviso in this Act, that gives occasion of many Prohibitions to
this effect.

That no person shall be sued, or otherwise compelled to yield, give or pay any
manner of Tithes for any Manors, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, which by
the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, or by any Privilege or Prescription are
not chargeable with the payment of such Tithes, or that be discharged by any
Composition real. Extends only to Predial Tithes.


This Paragraph of this statute as to the double value, extends only to predial
Tithes; as Corn, Hay, Wood, Flax, Hemp, Fruit, etc. but for mixed and personal
Tithes, there is a Provision after in this Act.

There is also another Proviso in this Statute as in the former, Sole
Jurisdiction to the Spiritual Courts.
which restrains all Suits for Subtraction of Tithes to be sued in the
Ecclesiastical Court, and that it shall not be lawful to sue any with-holder of
Tithes, obventions, etc. in any other Court; and that if the Ecclesiastical
Judge shall give Sentence, no Prohibition or Appeal depending, and the Party
condemned do not obey the Sentence, that then such Judge may excommunicate the
Party, and if he wilfully stand excommunicated by the space of forty days next
after publication thereof in the Parish Church, or the Place or Parish,
Excommunicato capiendo given.
where the Party excommunicated is dwelling or most abiding, then the Judge
Ecclesiastical may certify the King in Chancery, and require Process of
Excommunicato capiendo.

This Clause extends to all manner of Tithes, Offerings, etc. but this gives no
double damages for them, as the former Clause does for Predial Tithes.

There is another Clause in this Act, that gives ground likewise for many
Prohibitions, which is to this effect, That the aforesaid Clause shall not
extend to give any Judge Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to hold Plea of any
matter, cause or thing repugnant to, or against, the effect, intent or meaning
of the Stat. of Westminster. the second cap. 5. the Stat. of Articuli Cleri.
circumspecte Agatis. sylvae coeduae, the Treatise de Regia Prohibitione Stat.
1. E. 3. cap. 10. or any of them, or to hold Plea in any matter, wherein the
Kings Court ought to have Jurisdiction, any thing therein, etc.

Note, that by these three Statutes before mentioned the Jurisdiction of Tithes
is confirmed and restrained to the Ecclesiastical Courts.

That by the Stat. of 27 H. 8. Observations upon all the Statutes.
Process for contempt is given before Sentence.

By that of 32 H. 8. Process for contempt is given after Sentence definitive,
but observe the different penning.

And by this last statute a Writ of Excommunicato capiendo is given, if the
Party continue obstinate by the space of forty days, after an Excommunication
published against him, so that a man would think here were as good remedies
provided for the Recovery of Tithes in the Ecclesiastical Court as could be
imagined: but the Interruptions that are frequently given by Prohibitions, as
shall be showed hereafter in due place, very much frustrate the effect of the
proceedings in those Courts.

And note, 2 Inst. 490;
that a modus decimandi is properly to be sued for in the Ecclesiastical Courts.

And so having said so much concerning the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction for the
determining the right of Tithes, and relief against subtraction of Tithes, I
shall in the next place show, in what Courts, in what Cases and in what manner
they are determinable in the Temporal Courts.

Mr. Seldom 422. In what Cases the Temporal Courts have, and may, determine the
Right of Tithes.
Seldom in his History of Tithes reckons up five manner of ways, whereby the
Right of Tithes may be determined in the Temporal Courts. 1. In Prohibitions,
whereby the Spiritual Courts, are forbidden to hold Plea, where matters happen
which are only triable in the Kings Court, or where those Courts proceed
against any statute or the Common Law, etc. 2. By Writs of Right of Advowson,
whereunto may be annexed the Writ of Judicavit. 3. By Scire facias. 4. By
Process mandatory to command the payment of Tithes. 5. By Suits and Actions
upon the before mentioned Statute of 27 H. 8. 32 H. 8. and of 2 E. 6. to which
may be added the Trials at Common Law by Actions of Trespass, Assise, etc. And
of these in order.

And first of Prohibitions, In what Cases, Prohibitions use to be granted.
which are frequently obtained out of the Courts at Westminster, Courts of
great Sessions in Wales, and the County Palatines, etc. upon these grounds
following.

First upon a modus decimandi, Hob. 286.. 42; 247 2 Inst. 610 Co. Entr. 459. d.
460. b. Co. 2.44. Dyer 74. p 49. Modus decimandi.
where the Defendant in the Spiritual Court suggests, that he and all those
whose Estate he has in the Lands, etc. in which, etc. have time out of mind
paid so much yearly in money, or giving some other recompense in satisfaction
of all the Tithes arising upon the Lands, or of all the Tithe Hay or Corn, etc.
this manner of Tithing being by Prescription, which is only and properly
tryable at Common Law, if pleaded in the spiritual Court or not pleaded, or
allowed or not allowed as a good Plea, there is a ground of a Prohibition; and
what Prescriptions and modus decimandi are in this Case approved of by the
Common Law, I must refer the Reader to the proper Chapter before. Cap. 16.
antea.


2. Bounds of the Parish. Co. 7.44. b Roll 2 29^ l. etc. Cro. El. 228
If the Bounds of a Parish come in dispute, whether the place where the Tithes
arise be in this, or that Parish, this is a matter tryable by Jury, and
therefore upon the suggestion of this matter a Prohibition will be granted.

3. Monastery -- Lands discharged of Tithes. Co. Ent 450. C. 453. d. Porter
verse. Rechester. m. 6. Jac. C.B.
If Lands be pretended to be discharged of Tiches by the Statute of 31 H. 8. or
any other Statute, a Prohibition lies because it properly belongs to the Judges
of the Common Law to expound all Statutes, etc. so if the suggestion be
grounded upon the Stat. of 2 E. 6. for barren grounds, etc.

4. Roll 2.307. v. 13. Suits for things not Tithable.
If one sues in the spiritual Courts for the Tithes of things not Tithable by
the Common Law, for which see cap. 12. before, or for the Tithes of great Woods
above twenty years growth, it is a ground for a Prohibition.

5. Roll 2.286. f. 4. For matters determinable at Common Law.
If a Suit be brought in the Spiritual Court for the taking and carrying away
of Tithes, after the Tithes are set forth and divided from the nine parts by
the Parishioner, unless the Suit be between two Ecclesiastical Persons in their
proper Rights, a Prohibition lies, because it is matter triable at Common Law.

6. Cro. El. 228.642. Rolls 2.302. q. 19. 23, 24. v. 16. For irregular
Proceeding of the Spiritual Courts.
If the Spiritual Court will not admit a Legal defense, as a Release, an accord
with satisfaction, an award, etc. or if the Spiritual Judge refuse to admit the
Defendant to traverse the Plaintiffs Title, that he is not Parson, Vicar, etc.
a Prohibition will be granted, but if the Defendant in the Spiritual Court
alledg such matter against the Plaintiff there, which is properly triable in
that Court, as Simony, etc. in such Case no Prohibition will be granted.

7. Cro. El. 666. Roll 2.300. q. 6 8, 9.301. q. (...) 15. (...) proof (...)
witness.
If the Spiritual Court shall disallow the proof of the setting forth of the
Tithes by one witness, Prohibitions have been granted. Contra Co. 12.65 Ideo
quaere.

There are many more Cases, wherein Prohibitions have been granted, but these
are the most frequent, and may serve for a taste. And indeed Prohibitions are
granted in all Cases, where they exceed their Jurisdiction.

By the Statute of 2 E. 6. It is enacted, 2 E. 6. cap. 13. Must produce a Copy
of the Libel.
that no Prohibition shall be granted in matters of Tithes in any of the Kings
Courts, unless the Party that requires the same bring and deliver to some of
the Court, where he prays such Prohibition, a true Copy of the Libel subscribed
by the hand of the Party, and the suggestion underwritten, and that if he do
not prove that suggestion by two honest, substantial witnesses in the same
Court within six Months after the Prohibition granted and awarded, then the
Party delayed shall have a Consultation without delay, Must prove the
Suggestion within six Months.
and double Costs to be assessed by the Court, wh^re the Consultation is so
granted, to be recovered in an Action of Debt, etc. wherein no essoine, etc.
shall be allowed.

This clause of this Statute seems to give the Parson, Vicar, etc. Observations
upon this Clause. Hoskins verse. Stroade. T. 5. Car. 10. 988 B. R. Cockeram
verse. Davyes. Hill. 22. Jac. Pop. 159. Jones 231. Cro. Car. 308.
a double remedy where the suggestion is not proved within six Months, that is
a consultation, and secondly, double costs; but in both these they are in some
measure frustrated in their expectations, for as to the first, after such
consultation a new prohibition may be obtained, and besides, there are several
cases wherein the party cannot, or needs not prove his succession
notwithstanding this Statute, 2 Inst. 662..
as where the suggestion is in the negative, which regularly cannot be proved:
secondly, if the suggestion be grounded upon any matter of Law, as in case the
Suit be for things not Tithable, great Wood, things ferae naturae, 2 Inst. 662
etc. this appearing in the libel a prohibition lies, and there needs no proof
of the suggestion.

To the second here is double costs to be awarded for want of proving the
suggestion, and no execution given but an Action of debt to recover it, which
is but a bad remedy in this case when the party shall only recover the costs,
and have no costs allowed him in the second Suit.

So upon the whole matter here is a plausible clause in an Act of Parliament,
and little benefit by it.

It is to be observed that some prohibitions are in themselves peremptory; In
what Case Prohibitions are Peremptory in themselves.
as where there is a Suit in the Spiritual Court for things not Tithable, and
appearing so in the Libel, in which cases a consultation shall never be
granted; and so it is if the Suit be for carrying away Tithes after they are
set forth, unless it be between Clergy Men in their own rights, and so it is
where the matter is determinable at Common Law, and the same appearing in the
Libel.

But where a modus decimandi, Where ex post facto.
a Custom of not Tithing, a privilege within the Statute of 31 H. 8. for Abbey
Lands, and in such other cases where the suggestion is grounded upon matter of
fact, which is doubtful to the Court, those prohibitions are not peren ptory
till the matter of fact be tried and found true by verdict.

The manner of proceeding in the obtaining, How to prosecute and defend
Prohibitions.
prosecuting and defending of prohibitions is in this manner.

The party that is sued in the Spiritual Court and desires a prohibition, moves
the Court, and for the most part makes his suggestion ore tenus at Bar, if the
suggestion be such upon which a prohibition cannot be denied, the Court usually
gives rule that the party shall at a certain day come to show cause why a
prohibition should not be granted, and that in the interim proceedings in the
Spiritual Court should be staid upon serving this rule in due time, and oath
made of it if the Plaintiff in the Spiritual Court do not appear at the day and
show good cause to the contrary, the prohibition is awarded, and the rule made
peremptory; but if the Court be doubtful whether the matter be sufficient to
ground a prohibition or no, then, or at the prayer of the Defendant the Court
will order the Plaintiff to draw up his suggestion into form, and then the
Court will consider of the matter, or the Defendant may demur to it and the
matter argued by learned Counsel, and then the Court as they see cause, will
either award the prohibition, or discharge the rule. But if the matter
suggested be a good ground for a prohibition, but is in it self false or
doubtful, the Defendant in the prohibition may demand a declaration of the
Plaintiffs Attorney which is grounded upon a supposed attachment for not obeying
the prohibition, to which the Defendant may plead as Council shall advise him,
and Traverse, and put in issue the matter of the said suggestion or such other
matter as Council shall advise which is to be tried by a Jury of the Country;
if it pass with the Plaintiff, then is the prohibition become peremptory; but
if the Verdict pass for the Defendant regularly a consultation is awarded, that
is, a Writ directed to the Judge of the Spiritual Court; authorizing him to
proceed notwithstanding the prohibition.

Now by a Statute made in the 50 E. Stat. 50 E. 3. cap. 4. Where a Prohibition
was be had after Consultation.
3. it is enacted, That where a consultation is once duly granted upon a
prohibition made to the Judge of Holy Church, that the same Judge may proceed in
the Cause by virtue of the same consultation notwithstanding any other
prohibition thereupon to be delivered; provided always that the matter in the
Libel of the said Cause be not engrossed, enlarged otherwise changed.

But this Statute has been several times held to extend to such Causes only
where consultations are judicially granted upon examination of the Cause, Jones
231. Cro. Car. 208. Poph. 159, etc.
and not where they pass of course as for want of proof of a suggestion, or
upon non suit for want of prosecution or such like.

Sometimes the Court grants a consultation sub modo, Co. 5.68. a; Co. 12. Rep.
44; Consultations sub modo.
as where the matter of the Libel is in the disjunctive, and as to one part the
Court has Jurisdiction, and to the other not, there the Court may grant a
consultation as to that part that the Spiritual Court has Jurisdiction of, and
let the prohibition stand as to the other.

Or a consultation may be granted, Summers verse. Sir Rich. Bulkeley. T. 32 El.
B.R. Poph. 58. Hob. 179. How the sin Months to prove a Suggestion is to be
accounted. Co 5.68. a; Where no Consultation shall be granted upon a Verdict
for the Defendant. Hob 300
so that the Spiritual Court allow such plea, or such proof.

Note that the six Months for the proof of the suggestion is according to the
Calendar, and not twenty eight days to the Month.

And note in the cases before put the prohibition shall be general and the
consultation special, quoad, etc.

And it is taken for a rule in Sir Henry Hobarts reports, that if a prohibition
be faulty, yet the Defendant shall never have a consultation, if it appear to
the Court that the suit in the Ecclesiastical Court was not well grounded.

And therefore where one sued for the Tithe Corn of sixty Acres of Land, Dyer
171. p. 5, 6.
and the Defendant suggested, it was barren Ground, and paid no Tithe, and
prayed and had a prohibition, and the Jury found that thirty Acres of it were
so, and that the other thirty were barren, but had paid Tithe, Wool, and Lamb,
and a consultation denied because it appeared the Plaintiff had no cause to sue
for Tithe Corn.

So in a prohibition it was suggested, More 911 Austen verse. Pigot Cro. El. 736.
that the Person had twenty Acres of Land, and ten Acres of Wood in discharge
of all Tithes, and the proof was that he had twenty Acres of Land only, and a
consultation denied, because it appeared he had no cause of suit.

Regularly a prohibition ought not to be granted after sentence, Prohibition
after Sentence. Hob. 97.. Noy 70. Winch 8. Cro. El 595.
unless it appear the sentence were obtained in the vacation, or by surprise,
so that the party had not time to pray it sooner, or upon matter arising after
the sentence, Hob. 67;
and the granting or not granting rests much in the discretion of the Court.

And so sometimes upon new matter arising after a consultation a prohibition
may be granted, After Consultation.
notwithstanding the aforesaid Statute of 50 E. 3. as where the Spiritual Court
after consultation proceeds to try matter determinable only at Law, Hob. 286
or if after a consultation the Spiritual Court will make an unjust decree as
to award treble damages; Hughes 245. Hill. 11. Jac. C.B. Baldum verse. Geery.
and so in all cases if the Spiritual Judge will proceed illegally, and against
the Common Law, after consultation a new prohibition may thereupon be obtained,
but not upon any matter alleged in the Libel.

Prohibitions of themselves are excellent things, The virtue and vices of
Prohibitions.
where they are used upon just, legal, and true grounds, and have often avoided
the usurpations of the Popes and Spiritual Courts: but by the corruption of
these later times they are grown very grievous to the Clergy, being too often
granted upon feigned and untrue suggestions, which it is impossible the Judges
should foresee without the Spirit of Prophecy. And I think I may presume to say
that where one was granted before Queen Elizabeth's time, there have been a
hundred granted in this last Age; and they are a very great delay and charge to
the Clergy; and it were well, in my poor Judgment, if the Reverend Judges would
think of some way to restrain them, or to make them pay well for their delay by
making the Plaintiff enter into recognizance, to pay such costs as the Court
out of which they issue, should award, in case they should not prove their
suggestion in convenient time, or some such other course as they in their great
wisdom shall think just and meet.

And so having done with the first manner of determining the right of Tithes at
the Common Law. I shall proceed to the second, which is by Writ of Right of
Advowson, to which likewise belongs the Writ of Judicavit, which in it self is
no other but a mere prohibition to the Ecclesiastical Judge, and first of the
Judicavit.

There have been some opinions that the Writ of Judicavit is grounded upon the
Statute of Circumspecte Agatis, Judicavit at Common Law.
and Articuli Cleri. cap. 2. But it is very clear this Writ lay at Common Law;
and it appears in our Books that it was the opinion of some learned Judges that
it lay in all cases where the right of Patronage might come in dispute, 38 H
6.20. a. per mode. 4 E. 3.27. b. per Markham. 2 Inst. 364.. Lay for any Tithes.
Bracton l. 5. c. 4.402. b
and of this opinion Sir Edward Coke seems to be.

And Bracton a Learned Judge who wrote in the time of H. 3. has the very Writ
in his Book, which was long before the Statutes abovementioned; and he fays
that this Writ lies si contentio fuerit inter Rectores de aliquibus decimis;
quae estimari possunt usque ad quartam, quintam vel sextam partem advocationis.
Et ultra quam partem non extenditur prohibitio, For a Sixth Part.
prout sibi videtur.

But whatsoever the Common Law was, it is now settled by the Statute of
Circumspecte Agatis, and Articuli Cleri. cap. 2. That unless at least the
Tithes in demand be of the fourth part of the value of the Church, this Writ
lies not, the Statute of Articuli Cleri. cap. 2. is, Articuli Cleri c. 2.
si sit contentio de jure decimarum originem habens de jure patronatus, and
earundem decimarum quantitas ascendat ad quartam partem bonorum Ecclesiae,
locum habeat Regia prohibitio, that is to say a Writ of Judicavit.

And this Writ lies as has been said where one Parson demands Tithes against
another Parson to the fourth part of the value of the Church or more, 2 Inst.
491 ^ Where the Judicavit lies.
which come into their Churches by several Patrons, for if the Incumbents come
in both by one Patron the right of the Advowson cannot come in question, and by
consequence this Writ lies not.

And it is to be observed that this Writ does not lie before Libel, F. N. B.
45. b. c. 12 E. 4.13. When.
nor after definitive sentence, for the party that prays this Writ must show a
Copy of the Libel in the Court of Chancery before he can have it.

And though the Law be restrained at this day to a fourth part of the value of
the Church, 2 Inst. 3.64.. The Form of the Writ not altered by the Statutes.
where before it was at large. Yet the form of the Writ remains, and if the
thing in demand be under the fourth part of the value, it must be showed in
pleading by the other side.

And this Writ lies as well for offerings, F. N. B. 45. b. Lies of Offerings.
as for Tithes: When such Writ is sued and served, and the proceeding in the
Spiritual Court stopped, then the Plaintiff there is to sue his Writ of right of
Advowson of such a portion of Tithes as the case requires, and this is given by
the Statute of West. 2. cap. Westminster. 2. c. 5.
5. in these words, Et cum per breve de Judicavit impeditur Rector alicujus
Ecclesiae ad petendas decimas invicina parochia, habeat patronus Rectorisic
impedito breve ad petendam advocationem decimarum petitarum: but this must be
intended where the Patron has the Fee-simple of the Advowson. And the Judicavit
is to be brought in the name of the Patron and his Clerk against the other
Incumbent that sues in the Ecclesiastical Court and his Patron; By whom.
F.N.B. 45. b. But where the same Person is Patron and Incumbent, su. solemn. 12
E. 4 13. b. 7.
but the Writ of right of Advowson is to be sued by the one Patron against the
other, and the Patron demandant shall alledg examples taken by his Incumbent of
great and small Tithes.

But if the Patron against whom the Judicavit is sued, F.N.B. 30. b. The relief
of Tenant in tail, Purveyance, etc. 2 Inst. 364
be but Tenant in Tail, Tenant for Life or Years, then he cannot maintain a
Writ of right, but must demand and appear to a Declaration, upon an attachment,
and plead his Title, which must be proceeded in, as in other prohibitions; and
when the Title of the Patronage is determined at Common Law, then the cause
must be remitted to the Ecclesiastical Court, where Sentence must be given
according as the Law has determined the Right, and this appears by the Form of
the Judicavit, The Proceeding remitted.
which is special, Vobis praecipimus ne placitum illud teneatis, Regist. 36. a;
35. b
donec discussum fuerit in Curia nostra ad quem illorum pertineat ejusdem
Ecclesiae advocatio.

And there is a note in the Register, that this Writ lies of a Vicarage,
Prebend. and aliis similibus as well as of a Rectory, and the Form of the Writ
is thus, Praecipe A. quod reddat B. advocationem decimarum quartae partis vel
medietatis Ecclesiae, F.N.B. 30. E.
etc.

But these Writs as well as other real Actions, are grown obsolete and seldom
put in practice, and therefore thus much shall suffice of the nature and
proceeding in them.

The third manner of proceeding for the determining the Right of Tithes at
Common Law was by Scire facias, Scire facia^. 18 E. 3. c 7.
which was grounded either upon Letters Patents, Fines, or other Judicial
Records, Seldens hist. decim. 439. etc. Co. Inst. 2.640. 2 Inst. 640, etc.
Writs mandatory.
of which Mr. Seldom instances several Presidents; but this manner of Trial
being taken away by the Stat. of 18 E. 3. c. 7. I shall say no more of it.

The fourth sort of determining the Right of Tithes at Common Law, mentioned by
Mr. Seldom, is Writs Mandatory, commanding the payment thereof, whereof he
gives some few Instances, but these having never been frequent, and for long
time discontinued and grown out of use, I will not trouble the Reader with
them, but refer the curious Reader to Mr. Seldom 444. etc.
Seldens History of Tithes, and proceed to the fifth manner of determining the
Right of Tithes at the Common Law, which is grounded upon the late Statutes.

For the Statute of 27 H. 8. there has been sufficient said already; for that
of 32 H. 8. that concerns the Temporal Jurisdiction I shall leave till the
last, and proceed to show what Authority is given to the Temporal Courts by the
Statute of 2 E. 6. cap. 13. being the first Law that ever gave the Temporal
Courts Jurisdiction for the Parson against the Parishioners for Subtraction of
Tithes, in which there is a Clause to this effect. 2 E. 6. c. 13.


And it is enacted by that Statute after it has confirmed the former Statutes
of 27 H. Treble Value.
8. c. 20. and 32 H. 8. c. 7. That every of the Kings Subjects should from
thenceforth truly and justly without fraud or guile set out, yield and pay all
manner of their predial Tithes in their proper kinds, as they arise and happen
in such manner and form as has been of Right yielded and paid within forty
years next before, etc. or of Right or Custom ought to have been paid, and that
no person thenceforth should take or carry away such or like Tithes, which had
been yielded or paid within the said forty years, or of right ought to have
been paid in the place or places Tithable of the same, before he has justly
divided or set forth for the Tithes thereof, the tenth part of the same, or
otherwise agreed for the same Tithes with the Parson, etc. under the pain of
the forfeiture of the treble value of the Tithes so taken and carried away.

This Clause being compared with the former Clause, almost penned in the same
words for the double value, would make a man at a stand what the meaning of the
Parliament was, and it was forty years (when almost all that were at the making
of this Act were dead) before it was found out, 2 Inst. 650;
that an Action of Debt lay upon this Clause at Common Law for the treble
damages: To wit Pasch. 29. Eliz. In the Exchequer in an Information by the
Queens Attorney against one Wood for the treble value, as forfeited to the
Queen. In which Cause it was resolved, that an Action of Debt lay at the Common
Law for the treble damage, for not setting forth of Tithes; for wheresoever an
Act of Parliament gives a forfeiture against him, that does dispossess, etc.
the Owner of his property, as here he does of his Tithes, there the forfeiture
is given to the Party grieved or dispossessed, since which resolution Actions
of Debt have been frequently brought in all the Courts of Westminster by
Parsons, Vicars, Propriators, Owners and Farmers of Tithes, as well Lay as
Spiritual upon this Statute, but being so long before it was found out, that an
Action lay at Common Law upon this Statute, the Plaintiffs in the recital of
the Statute alleged it to be made the fourth of February 2 E. 6. whereas in
truth the Parliament begun the 1 of E. 6. and was held by Prorogation the
fourth of February 2 E. 6. And this being discovered in an Action between
Oliver and Colier. P. 6. Jac. B. R. brought upon this Statute, wherein the
Statute was misrecited as aforesaid, and exception taken to it in arrest of
Judgment, 1 Brownlow. 100. Yelver. 126. Dyer 171. p. 6. Style 122.
the Court upon good advisement overruled the exception by reason of the
multitude of Presidents, and affirmed the Rule that multitudo errantium parit
errori Patrocinium.

Now considering, that this is become a very frequent Action in use, I conceive
it will not be improper to the present occasion to communicate to the Reader,
what I have observed and learned in this kind of Actions, not only concerning
the Forms of Declarations, Pleadings, Verdicts and Judgments, but likewise what
evidence is necessary upon the general Issues of non culpa and nil debet, for
the Plaintiff and Defendant, and in the first Case consider in what Cases, and
by whom, and against whom this Action may be brought.

If two be Joint Tenants, Hutton 121 122; By whom, and against whom, Actions
lie in this Statute.
and they enter and occupy jointly, the Action must be brought against them
jointly, but if one only enter and occupy them, the Action must be brought
against him, that only occupies alone.

But if there be two Tenants in Common, and one of them sets out his Tithe, and
the other carries it all away, there the Action shall be brought against him,
that carries it all away alone.

If the Husband and Wife in the right of the Wife be entitled to Tithes, Noy
3.136. 1 Brown. 86. Yelv. 63. Cro. Jac. 68.
they shall join in this Action, because the damage is to survive, but a Parson
and a Vicar cannot join, but if they join in a Lease to a third person, their
Farmer may sue for all in one Action; but in the first Case, I see no reason
but that the Husband may bring the Action alone, and so I have known it often
done.

In an Action brought upon this Statute, The Form of the Declar. Bellet verse.
Henworth P. 1657 B. R.
the Severance was alleged before the sowing, and exception taken after
Verdict; but the Exception was disallowed, because the showing of the sowing
was superfluous, and so aided by the Verdict.

The taking was alleged after the Plaintiffs Term was ended, Cro. Car. 324.
and yet held good.

M. More 911.
40, and 41 Eliz. A Judgment was arrested, because the Suit was brought ad
respondend. tam Domino Regi quam Parti; but this Case I very much doubt, for
being against a Statute Law it is a contempt finable, though the Plaintiff have
the forfeit, as upon the Statute of Huy and Cry, Hetley 121.
etc. And I take the Case inter Luvered and Owen. M. 4. Jac. C. B. for the
better Law, where it was held good.

Upon an Action brought by two upon this Statute, Cro. El. 170.
who made their Title by a Lease from a Patentee of the King, and exception was
taken, because they did not show the Patent, but disallowed. 1. Because the
Letters Patents did not belong to the Plaintiffs. 2. Because the Plaintiffs did
not demand the Tithes themselves, but damages for a tort; another Exception was
taken to the Declaration, because the Plaintiff alleged the Defendant did not
agree with them, and did not say, or either of them, but held good by
Intendment.

And it has been adjudged, 2 Bulst. 65.228.183. 1 Brown. 86. Noy 3. Yelv. 63.
Cro. Jac. 68.361.
that in this Action, the Plaintiff needs not to show his Title especially, but
it is enough for him to alledg that he is Propriator, Farmer or Rector,
generally without showing how.

And it has been held good, 2 Brown. 70, 71.
though the Plaintiff in his Declaration do not express the quantities or loads
of the Corn or Hay carried away. 2 Inst. 650.


And so it is, though you do not express in your Declaration, the kinds of the
Grain carried away.

Where a man alleged, Coke verse. Smith H. 7. Car. 1.10 587. B. R. per Lat.
that he was Farmer of all the Tithe Corn arising, etc. upon sixty Acres of
Land in D. and did not alledg which they were in certain, and yet allowed for
good. 2. The Plaintiff alleged the Defendants Occupiers, but did not say,
whether jointly or in common, and yet held good. 3. The Plaintiff had alleged
no time of the carrying away, but having alleged the time of the severance,
and the carrying away, coming in with a Conjunction Copulative it was held well
enough.

In an Action brought upon this Statute, Cto. Jac. 324. 2 Bulst. 114.
the Plaintiff averred in his Declaration, that he was subditus dictii Domini
Regis, having recited the Statute, and it was held naught, because it must
necessarily be intended E. 6. and not of the present King.

In an Action upon this Stat. Pleas in this Action. Porter verse. Rochester
Hill. 9 Jac. B. R.
the Defendant pleaded a Recovery in the Ecclesiastical Court; but it was held
no good Plea at Common Law, but I conceive it would be a good evidence upon nil
debet pleaded, otherwise the Parishioner were in an ill Condition.

In this Action non culpa and nil debet have been both held good Issues,
Wortley verse. Empringham. P. 42. El. B. R. Hob. 218. Cro. El. 766. Cro. Jac.
361.
but it is no good Plea to plead, that the Plaintiff sowed the Corn, and sold
it to the Defendant, because this matter will not excuse the payment of Tithes.

Now having brought the cause to issue upon nil debet or non culpa. we will
show in the next place what will be good and material evidence, as well for the
Plaintiff as Defendant.

First, What Evidence is necessary in this Action. ex part quere.
If the Plaintiff be a Parson, Vicar or other Ecclesiastic, and have not been
some considerable time in possession of his Living, in which I have not
observed any constant rule amongst the Judges in their practice, but ten years
quiet possession for the most part is allowed by the Judges for an evidence of
the Plaintiffs Title, unless some material objection be made against it to draw
it into question, but if the Plaintiff have been but for some short time in
possession, or the possession litigious, then the Judges usually put the
Plaintiff to prove his institution and induction, and now he must prove that he
was in Episcopal Orders at the time of his institution, otherwise his
institution is void by the late Act of Uniformity, he must produce a
Certificate under the Hand and Seal of the Bishop, etc. that instituted him,
that he subscribed the declaration mentioned in the Act of Uniformity, and must
prove he subscribed the same in the presence of the Bishop, or, etc. and he
must prove that within two Months after he was inducted, upon some Sunday or
Lords day during Divine Service, he read the thirty nine Articles of Religion
in the Parish Church into which he was inducted, and that he did declare his
unfeigned assent and consent to all things therein contained, and he must
likewise prove that within two Months after actual possession of his Living he
read Morning and Evening Prayer in his Church upon some Lords day, and openly
and publicly before the congregation declared his assent and consent to the
use of all things therein contained and prescribed in these words, I A. B. do
here declare my unfeigned assent and consent, to all and every thing contaiend
and prescribed in and by the Book Entitled the Book of Common Prayer and
Administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church,
according to the use of the Church of England, together with the Psalter or
Psalms of David, pointed as they are to be sung or said in Churches, and the
form or manner of making, or Ordaining, and Consecrating Bishops, Priests and
Deacons.

The Parson, Vicar, etc. having thus made himself a Title, must proceed to
prove the taking and carrying away the Corn, Hay, etc. and the value; and if
need be that the Land lies within the Parish, etc. but this the Judges put them
to prove, first of all commonly.

But if the Plaintiff be a Farmer or Patentee under the Crown he must prove his
Title, but if he have been any considerable time in possession, and the Title
not controverted, the Judges seldom put the Plaintiff to show any more Title
but his bare possession and enjoyment, and that others pay him Tithes.

And so having showed what is necessary the Plaintiff should be prepared to
prove, I will proceed to show what defense the Defendant may make.

The Defendant upon the general issue of not guilty, Ex Part Defendentis.
Brown. 1. 34.
etc. may prove that he duly set forth his Tithes, but if he afterward carried
them away it will not serve his turn; so if he sell his Corn privately to
another, and after he has sold it privately, 2 Inst. 649
cuts and carries it away; the Action lies against the first Owner; the same
Law is, where the Owner of the land privately sells his Corn to another who
privately cuts and carries it away.

And the Defendant may prove that another has a better Title to whom he has
paid his Tithes, or compounded with him for them.

Or he may prove that the Parson came in by Simony, or any other matter that
makes his presentation, institution, or induction void, or any other defect in
not reading the Articles, etc.

Or he may prove that he set forth his Tithes, and a Stranger carried them
away, or may give in evidence, a Lease or Grant from the Plaintiff himself, or
any other to whom he can make a good Title, but such Leases and Grants must be
in writing unless for one year only, to the Owner of the Land, which has been
held good by way of retainer.

The Jury, if they find for the Plaintiff, Verdict.
are to find how much of the debt demanded by the declaration is due to the
Plaintiff, which they are to do by trebling the value of the Tithe subtracted
wherein they are usually assisted by the Court.

The judgment is always given for the debt found by the Jury without costs,
Judgment.
because this Action is grounded upon a penal Law, where no Action lay at
Common Law, neither shall the Defendant have any costs, if the Verdict pass for
him; but if judgment be given for the Plaintiff in an Action brought upon this
Statute by nihil dicit, non sum informatus, Cro. Jac. 361, 362.
or demurrer, the Plaintiff shall have Judgment for the whole debt demanded by
his declaration. And if an Action upon this Statute be brought against two or
more, and Verdict only pass against one, or part of the Defendants, the
Plaintiff shall have Judgment against those against whom the Verdict passes,
Styles 317, 318.
though the others be acquitted, quod nota.

Note that this Statute as to the treble value and double value extends only to
Predial Tithes, Nota.
and not to Personal; mixed, or other Church duties.

The Exchequer likewise by English bill holds plea for the single value,
Jurisdiction of the Exchequer.
for subtraction of all manner of Tithes, Oblations, etc. of which great use
has been made since the late Wars, and there they decree the single value with
costs, and the future payment, which is of great advantage to the Plaintiffs,
and these suits are not interrupted with prohibitions; but these suits are
often very costly too, for if a modus decimandi, or the bounds of the Parish
come in question, and the proof not very clear, they are frequently sent to
Trials at Law, which gives delay and increases the charges very much, this
Jurisdiction I take it is much fortified since Tenths and first fruits were
annexed to the Crown, but Suits of this nature were early brought in this Court
before the War, however there are some ancient Books prove that this Court on
the Law side has assumed Jurisdiction of Tithes, 38 Ass. p. 20. 44 E. 3.43, 44.
but the reporter reports it with a quod mirum.

Lastly, 50 E. 3.20. 2 H. 4.15. 20 H. 6.17. 1 H. 6.5. 2 E. 4, 5. 44 Ass. p. 25.
it is evident in our Books of Law, that the rights of Tithes were frequently
determined at Common Law in Actions of Trespass for taking away of Tithes,
unless both parties were Clergymen; and sometimes Assizes have been brought at
Common Law for Tithes between lay Persons. And it is held in the 25 H. 8. 25 H.
8. Br. Jurisdiction 95.
that where the Lord of a Manor claimed Tithes in consideration of finding a
Chaplain at such a Chapel, and the Parishioners claimed them likewise upon the
same consideration, that the right of these Tithes being between Lay Persons
was triable at Common Law only.

And by the Statute of 32 H. 8. Stat. 32. H. 8. cap. 7.
it is enacted, that in all cases where any Person, etc. which then had, or
then after should have any Estate of Inheritance, Freehold, etc. in or to any
Parsonage, Vicarage, Portion, Pension, Tithes, Oblations, and which then were,
or then after should be made Temporal, or admitted to be, abide, and go to, or
in temporal hands, and Lay uses, and profits by the Law, etc. should then after
fortune to be disseised, deforced, wronged, or otherwise kept or put out from
their Lawful Inheritance, Estate, Seisine, Possession, Occupation, Term, Right
or Interest, of, in, or to the same, or, etc. by any other Person, or, etc.
claiming or pretending to have Interest or Title to the same, that then, and in
every such case, etc. the Person, etc. so disseised, etc. the Heirs, Wives,
etc. shall and may have their remedy in the Kings Temporal Courts, or other
Temporal Courts as the Case shall require for the recovering, etc. such
inheritance, etc. by Writs Original of quod ei deferat praecipe quod reddat,
Assise, etc. as the Case shall require, etc. So that since this Statute the
Case is put out of all doubt, that for such Tithes, etc. which are become
Layfee, the right, Title and possession is become determinable at the Common
Law, and all manner of real Actions, Ejectments and other personal Actions are
brought of them, as the Case requires daily.

And now having showed in how many Courts, Conclusion.
and how many ways Tithes may be recovered, it calls to my mind the Fable of
the Fox and the Cat who had but one way to shift for her self when the Hunts
men came, but that one proved better and more secure than all the shifts the
Fox had boasted of; for upon the whole matter it were much better for the
Reverend Clergy if they had one ready way to recover single damages with their
costs of Suits at Common Law where they might not be interrupted by
Prohibitions, and clashing of Jurisdictions, and tossed from one Court to
another, than all these ways I have mentioned. And it is a wonder to me that
there being hardly a Lord in Parliament, nor many of the House of Commons that
have not some part of their Estates in impropriations, though they had no
kindness to the Church, yet for their own interest and concerns have not to
that purpose preferred some Law in Parliament before this time which might be
done in a few lines by giving an Action of the Case at Common Law for the
subtraction of Tithes with costs, or if the Parliament should think fit the
smaller sort of Tithes might be determined in a Summary way by the Justices of
Peace with an appeal to the Judges of Assise, but this I humbly submit as I do
all the rest to better Judgments.

I have now finished this small Tract whereby I wish the Reverend Clergy may
receive as much satisfaction as I desire, The conclusion of the whole.
or they can expect. And I shall now conclude all with a List of those
Monasteries, the Lands of which are only capable to be discharged of the
payment of Tithes, by Order, Bull, Prescription, real composition or otherwise,
that every Clergy man may satisfy himself without further enquiry whether such
Monastery Lands as shall happen to be in his Parish, etc. may have the benefit
of the Statute of 31 H. 8. to be freed of the payment of Tithes, and in the
List following I have set down the times of the foundations of the several
Monasteries, that being material to know, for if they were founded since the
first year of R. 1. they cannot prescribe in non decimando. I have also for the
most part set down what order the Houses were of, that the Reader may satisfy
himself whether they were of any of those Orders that were privileged from the
payment of Tithes for the valuations I have followed Mr. Dugdale, as being a
sure Author, having observed many Errors in that of Mr. Speed.

In the perusal of this Catalogue you will find how many Foundations were made
of Monasteries in the first Century after the Conquest, and till the Reign of
King John, that if they had continued at that rate, the greatest part, if not
all the Land in England, had by this day been Monastery Land, but in King
John's time they begun to slack, and in the ninth of H. Magna Charta.
3. the Statute of Mortmain was made, after which you will find but few
Religious Houses (as they were called) founded.

The Cistertian order came into England about the year of our Lord 1128. and in
the ensuing Table, you may see how well they prospered, that in so short a time
there should be so many of the greater Abbeys of that order.

The black Canons regular of St. Stows Survey of London. 930
Augustine first came into England as Mr. Stow says in the Year 1108. and were
first placed in Trinity Church within Algate London, but I rather think he is
mistaken in the time, for I find some Monasteries of that order before that
time, however the ensuing Catalogue will inform you of their increase.

And it is without dispute that the increase of Monasteries, especially those
of privileged Orders, tended very much to the prejudice of the Secular Clergy
that had the Cure of Souls; for beside the orders that were privileged they
appropriated all the Churches, they could obtain, and how ill they were served
a Man may in some measure observe that peruses the Statute of 15 R. 2. and 4 H.
4. for it appears by them that they endowed no Vicarage at all upon the
appropriating Churches, or so meanly, Endowment of Vicarages.
that the Vicars could not live upon them, and not at all Hospitality
practiced. And therefore the Parliament of England which has always put a stop
to the usurpations and exorbitances of Rome, and to prevent the Religious
Houses, destroying the Church in the 15. Year of the Reign of King Richard the
second made a Law, 15 R. 2. cap. 6.
that the Diocesan of the place where any Church was to be appropriated, should
take care the Vicarage should be well and sufficiently endowed besides a
Portion to the poor. But this Act not having the effect was desired and
expected, the Bishops of those times being overawed by his Holinesses mandates,
or participating too much of his qualities, a second good Act was made in the
14. Year of King H. 4 H. 4. cap. 12.
4. whereby it was enacted, that all those appropriations that were made since
the former Statute without such endowments, were declared to he void. And that
no Religious Person (that is, Monks and Friars) should be made Vicar in any
Church appropriated, or to be appropriated by any means in time to come, and
that no Vicarage should be appropriated by these Statutes, and diverse other
Statutes cited in this work upon several occasions. It is easy to guess what
opinion they had, even in the times of Popery, of these People called Religious
Men.

I have now made too long a digression. And will therefore proceed to the
Catalogue I promised the Reader.

Here follows a Catalogue of the several Monasteries, that upon the general
Survey taken in the 26th. year of H. 8. were returned to be of the annual value
of 200 l. per an. and upwards within England and Wales, and by consequence
dissolved by the Statute of 31 H. 8. cap. and by that means are capable of
being discharged of the payment of Tithes, with the date of their Foundations,
as near as I can compute, with what Orders they were of; In which observe, that
A. stands for Abbey, P. for Priory, Ben. for Benedictins, Cist. for
Cistertians, Praem. for Praemonstratenses, Car. for Carthusians, C. S. A. for
Canons of St. Austin, F. for Founded, T. for Tempore, and in the valuations I
have rejected all ob. and q.
Berks. l. s. d. REading Ben. F. T. H. 1. 1938 14 3 Buslesham A. C. S A. F. 13
E. 3. 0285 0 0 Abington A. Ben. F. 720. 1876 10 9 Bedford. Newnham P. C. S. A.
T. H. 1. 0293 5 11 Elmestow A. Ben. F. T. W. Conquest. 0284 12 11 Wardon A.
Cist. F. 4. Steph. 1138. 0389 16 6 Chicksand P. White C. Gibertines F. T. W.
Ruf. 0212 3 5 Dunstable A. C. S. A. F. T. H. 1. 0344 13 3 Wooburn A. Cist. F.
T. Johannis Regis 0391 18 2 Bucks. Ashrugge Coll. C. S. A. F. T. E. 1. 0416 16
4 Noteley A. C. S. A. F. T. H. 1.1112. 0437 6 8 Missenden A. Ben. F. 1293: 0261
14 6 Cantabr. Thorney A. Ben. F. 972. 0411 12 11 Barnwel P. C. S. A. F. T. H.
1. 1092. 0256 11 10 Cestr. S. Werburge A. Ben. F. 1095. 1003 5 11 Combermeeve
A. Cist. F, 1134. 0225 9 7 Cornub. Bodnim P. C. S. A. F. 936. 0270 0 11
Launceston A. C. S. A. T. W. Conquest. 0354 0 11 St. Germans A. C. S. A. F. T.
Ethelstani Regis. 0243 8 0 Cumbr. Carlisle P. C. S. A. F. T. W. Ruf. 0418 3 4
Holmcoltrom A. Cist. F. 1135. 0427 19 3 Derb. Darley A. C. S. A. F. T. H. 2.
0258 14 5 Devon. Ford A. Cist. F. 1133. 0374 10 6 Newham A. Cist. F. circa
1246. 0227 7 8 Dinkeswel A. Cist. F. 1201. 0294 18 6 Hertland A. C. S. A. F. T.
H. 2. 0306 3 2 Torre A. Prem. F. T. R. 1. 0396 0 11 Buckfast A. Cist. F. T. H.
2. 0466 11 2 Plimpton A. Cist. F. T. E. 1. 0241 17 9 Tavestock A. Ben. F. 961.
0902 5 7 Exon P. Cluna F. T. H. 1. 0502 12 9 Dorset. Abbotsbury Ben. F. circa
1016. 0390 19 2 Midleton A. Ben. F. per R. Ethelstan 0578 13 11 Tarrent A.
Cist. F. per H. 3. 0214 7 9 Shafton A. Ben. F. 941 1166 8 9 Cerne A. Ben. F. T.
R. Edgari 0515 17 10 Sherborne A. Ben. F. circa 370 0682 14 7 Dunelm. St.
Cuthbert A. Ben. F. circa 842 1366 10 9 Tinmouth P. Ben. F. 0397 11 5 Essex.
Berking A. Ben. F. 680. 0862 12 5 Stratford Langthorne A. Cist. F. 1135. 0511
16 3 Waltham A. C. S. A. F. circa 1060. 0900 4 3 Walden A. Ben. F. 1136. 0372
18 1 St. Oswith A. C. S. A. F. 1120. 0677 1 2 Colchester A. C. S. A. T. H. 1.
0523 17 0 Glouc. Bristol A. C. S. A. F. circa T. H. 1. 0670 13 11 Hayles A.
Cist. F. 1246. 0357 7 8 Winchcomb A. Ben. F. 787. 0759 11 9 Tewesbury A. Ben.
F. 715. 1598 1 3 Cirencester A. C. S. A. F. T. H. 1. 1051 7 1 Kingswood A.
Cist. F. 1139. 0244 11 2 Gloucester A. Ben. F. 680 1946 5 9 Lanthony P. juxta
Glouc. C. S. A. F. 1136. 0648 19 11 Hants. St. Swithins Winton A. Ben. F. 634
1507 17 2 Hyde Abb. Ben. F. per Regem Elfred. 0865 18 0 Wherwel A. Ben. F. T.
Edgari Reg. 0339 8 7 Romsey moniales Ben. F. 907. 0393 10 10 Twinham P. C. S.
A. F. ante 1042. 0312 7 0 Bello loco A. Cist. F. 1204. 0326 13 2 Southwick P.
C. S. A. F. T. H. 1. 0257 4 4 Tichfeild A. Praem. F. T. H. 3. 0249 16 1
Hertford. St. Albans A. Ben. F. 755. 2102 7 1 Hunts. St. Neots A. Ben. F. circa
T. H. 1. 0241 11 4 Ramsey A. Ben. F. 969. 1716 12 4 Kanc. St. Austins prope
Cant. A. Ben. F. 605. 1413 4 11 Ledis P. C. S. A. F. 1119. 0362 7 7 Feversham
A. Clun. F. 1147. per R. Steph. 0286 12 6 Boxley A. Cist. F. 1144. 0204 4 11
Roffen A. Ben. F. 600. 0486 11 5 Mallinge A. Ben. per Regem Edm. 0218 4 2
Dertford A. C. S. A. F. 46 E. 3. per ips. R. 0380 0 0 Lanc. Whalley A. Cist. F.
1172. 0321 9 1 Leic. Leicestr. Ab. C. S. A. F. 1143. 0951 14 5 Croxden A.
Praem. F. ci. ca T. R. 1. Reg. 0385 0 10 Launda A. C. S. A. F. T. W. Ruf. 0399
3 3 Lincoln. Lincoln St. Cath. P. Gilbert F. T. H. 2. 0202 5 0 Kirksteed A.
Cist. F. 1139. 0286 2 7 Revesly A. Cist. F. 1142. 0287 2 4 Thornton A. C. S. A.
F. 1139. 0594 17 10 Bardney A. Ben. F. 712. 0366 6 1 Croyland A. Ben. T. Reg.
Ethelred. 716. 1803 15 10 Spalding. A. Ben. F. 1052. 0761 8 11 Sempringham A.
Gilbert f. 1148. 14. Steph. 0317 4 1 Epworth moniales Carthus. 10. R. 2.
fundat. 0237 15 2 Land. and Midd. St. John Jerusal. P. F. T. H. 1.1100. 2385 12
8 St. Barthol. Smithfield C. S. A. f. 1102. 0653 15 0 St. Mary Bishopsgate Pr.
f. 1187.9 R. 1. 0478 6 6 Clerkenwel P. Ben. F. T. Reg. Steph. 0262 19 0 London
Minors Ben. T. F. E. 1. 0318 8 5 Westminster A. Ben. F. T. Reg. Edgari 3471 0 2
Sion A. C. S. A. F. per Reg. H. 5. 1731 8 4 London domus Cart. fundat. T. E. 3.
Reg. 0642 0 4 S. Clare extra Algate monial. F. 1292. 0418 8 5 S. Mary
Charter House Carth. f. 1371. 0736 2 7 S. John's Holywell monial. nigr. f. 1318.
0347 1 3 S. Mary East-Smithfield. A. Cist. F. 34. E. 3. 0602 11 10 Northfol.
Thetford Ab. Clun. F. 1103. 0312 14 4 Wymundham A. Ben. f. 1139. 0211 16 6
Hulmo A. Ben. F. per Canutum Reg. 0583 17 0 Westdreham A. Prem. F. T. H. 2.
0228 0 0 Walsingham A. C. S. A. F. circa T. Steph. R. 0391 11 7 Castle Acre A.
Clun. F. 1090. 0306 11 4 Westacre A. Clun. F. T. W. Kuf. 0260 13 7 Northon.
Burgi S. Petri A. Ben. F. per to. fere R. Mer. 1721 14 0 Pipewell A. Cist. F.
1143. 0286 11 8 S. Andreas P. Clun. F. 1067. 0263 7 1 Sulby A. Praem. F. T.
Steph. Reg. 0258 8 5 Notts. Lenton P. Clun. fund. T. H. 1. 0329 5 10 Thurgarton
P. C. S. A. F. T. H. 1. 0259 9 4 Welbeck A. C. S. A. F. T. Reg. Steph. 0249 6 3
Warsop P. C. S. A. fundat. 0239 10 5 Bella Valla Pri. Carth. F. circa. 16 E. 3.
0227 8 0 Newsteed P. C. S. A. F. T. E. 3. 0219 18 8 These two last are under
value in Mr. Dugdale, but thus per Speed. Northumbr. Tinmouth a Cell to St.
Albans a Nunnery. 0511 4 1 Oxon. Godstow A. Ben. F. T. Step. Reg. 0274 5 10
Eynesham A. Ben. F. T. Etheldred Reg. 0441 12 2 Osney A. C. S. A. F. T. H. 1.
0654 10 2 Thama A. Cist. F. T. H. 1. per Speed. 0256 13 11 Oxford P. per Speed
fund. ante Conq. 0224 4 8 Dorchester per eundem A. C. S. A. F. 635. 0219 12 0
Salop. Haghmond A. C. S. A. F. 1100. 0259 13 7 Lillefhul A. C. S. A. F. per
Adelfleda R. Merciae. 0229 3 1 Wigmore A. C. S. A. F. 1172. per Speed. 0267 2
10 Wenlock P. clun. F. 1181. vel antea. 0401 0 7 Salop A. C. S. A. F. 1081. per
Speed. 0615 4 3 Hales Owen A. Prem. fund. T. R. Joh. 0337 15 6 Somerset.
Glassenbury A. Ben. circa 300 F. 3311 7 4 Brewton A. C. S. A. F. T. Conquest.
0439 6 8 Henton P. Carth. F. T. H. 3. 0248 19 2 Witham P. Cart. F. per H. 2.
0215 15 0 Taunton P. C. S. A. T. H. 1. 0286 8 10 Bathon A. Ben. fund. T. H. 3.
0617 2 3 Keynesham A. C. S. A. F. T. H. 1. 0419 14 3 Michelney A. Ben. F. 740.
0447 4 11 Buckland P. Cift. F. T. E. i. 0223 7 4 Staff. De la cres A. Cister.
F. 1153. 0227 5 0 Burton sup. Trent. A. Ben. F. T. EadrediR. 0161 14 3 Croxden
A. Cist. cont. Fundat. Suffolk. S. Edmundi Bury. A. Ben. F. 1020. 1659 13 11
Butley A. C. S. A. F. 1171. 0318 17 2 Sibeton A. Cist. F. 1150. 0250 15 7
Ixworth P. C. S. A. F. T. Conq. 0280 9 5 Surry. Merton P. C. S. A. F. 1121. T.
H. 1. 0957 19 5 Shene P. Carth. F. 1414. 0777 12 0 Chertsey A. Ben. F. 666.
0659 15 8 Newark P. 0258 11 11 S. Mary's Overs. A. C. S. A. F. 7 H. 1. 0624 6 6
Bermundsey A. C. S. A. F. 7. H. 1. 0474 14 4 Warw. Comb A. Cist. F. T. Steph.
R. 0311 15 1 Kenelworth A. C. S. A. F. T. H. 1. 0538 19 0 Meryval A. Cist. F.
1148. 0254 1 8 Nuneaton monial. Ben. F. T. H. 2. 0253 14 5 Wilts. Malmesbury A.
Ben. F. circa 670. 0803 17 7 Bradenstock P. C. S. A. F. T. Conq. 0212 19 3
Edington P. C. S. A. F. 1352. 0442 9 7 Ambresbury A. Ben. F. 1177. 0494 15 2
Wilton A. Ben. F. T. Ethelwolphi R. 0601 1 1 Fareley a Cell to Jews per Speed
f. 1125. clun. 0217 0 4 Lacok A. C. S. A. F. 1232. per Speed. 0203 12 3 Wigorn.
Malverne A. Ben. F. 1083. 0308 1 5 Evesham A. Ben. T. Offae. 1183 12 9 Pershore
A. Cist. F. 1138. 0643 4 5 Halesowen A. Praem. F. T. Joh. Reg. 0282 13 4
Bordesly A. Cist. F. 1138. 0388 9 10 Eborum. St. Mary Eborum A. Ben. F. 2. W.
Ruf 1550 7 0 Selby A. Ben. F. T. Conq. 0729 12 10 Kirkstall A. Cist. F. 1147.
0329 2 11 De Rupe A. Cist. F. 1147. 0224 2 5 Monks Burton A. Clun. F. circa
1186. 0239 3 6 Nostell A. C. S. A. F. T. H. 1. 0492 18 2 Pomfrait A. Clun.. F.
T. Conq. 0337 14 8 Gisborne A. C. S. A. F. T. Steph. R. 0628 3 4 Whithy A. Ben.
F. T. Conq. 0437 2 9 Montegratiae A. Carth. F. circa 1396. 0323 2 10 Newburge
P. C. S. A. F. 1145. 0367 8 3 Belland A. Cist. F. 1134. 0238 9 4 Kirkham A. C.
S. A. F. T. H. 1. 0269 5 9 Melsa A. Cist. F. 1136. 0299 6 4 Brilington C. S. A.
F. T. H. 1. 0547 6 11 Walton A. Gilbertines F. T. Steph. Reg. 0360 16 10 Bolton
in Craven P. C. S. A. F. T. H. 1. 0212 3 4 Rival A. Cist. F. 1132. 0278 10 2
Jerval A. Cist. F. T. Steph. Reg. 0234 18 5 Furnes A. Cist. F. 1127. 0805 16 5
De Fontibus Cist. F. 1132. 0998 6 8 Warter P. C. S. A. F. T. H. 1. 0221 3 10
Rithal per Speed. 0351 14 6 Old Maulton. A. F. T. Steph. R. per Speed. 0257 7 0
St. Michael juxta Hull Carth. F. 1377. 0231 17 3 Wallia. Valle de Sancta Cruce
Com. Denbigh. Cist. F. T. E. 1. 0214 3 5 Strata Florida Cardigansh. Cist. or
Clun. F. T. Conq. 1226 6 0

Gloria Deo Patri, Deo Filio and Spiritui Sancto. Amen.
FINIS hujus Operis.
Books Printed for Henry Twyford.
ANderson's Reports in 2 Vol. fol. Bendlows Reports fol. Bulstrods Reports fol.
Bridgmans Reports fol. Lord Cokes 12th. and 13th. Reports fol. Herns Pleader
fol. Huttons Reports fol. Lanes Reports fol. Latches Reports fol. Ryleys
Records of the Tower fol. Shepards Grand Abridgm. fol. Shepard of Affurances
fol. Shepards Practical Counselor fol. Shepards Law of Pleadings fol. Styles
Reports fol. Townesends Tables fol. Wingates Maxims of Law fol. Manley on
Cowels Interpreter fol. Owens Reports fol. Dukes Law of Charitable uses. Astons
Placita Latina Rediviva. Brownlows Declarations. Brownlows Judicial Writs.
Brownlows Reports, first and second part. Complete Clerk. Gregory's Moote Book
English.
(...)
