The Lord Mayor and Court Of Aldermen.



THE PRESENT STATE OF London: OR, Memorials COMPREHENDING A Full and Succinct
Account Of the Ancient and Modern State thereof.

By THO. DE-LAVNE, Gent.

Civitates ab initio Vtilitatis causa constitutae sunt.

Aristot. 1. Polit. LONDON: Printed by George Larkin, for Enoch Prosser and
John How, at the Rose and Crown, and Seven Stars, in Sweethings-Alley, near the
Royal Exchange in Cornhil. 1681.

To the Right Honorable Sir Patience Ward, Knight, LORD MAYOR OF THE City of
LONDON.
My Lord,
THese Memorials, respecting the Ancient and Modern State of this great and
Renowned City, of which (under His Majesty) Your Lordship enjoys the Supreme
Magistracy, cannot find a more Proper, or more Honorable Patron than Your
Lordship; considering the High Place You hold in that Meridian for which This
Discourse is Calculated.

The General Grief expressed by all Loyal English Protestants, for Your
Lordships late Indisposition, and the General Rejoicing amongst them, for Your
Happy Recovery, as a Mercy to this City, (of both which, the Presenter of this
Address was in part a Witness and Partaker) are Evidences both of Your
Lordships Good Administration in so Eminent a Dignity, and the Universal
Satisfaction of this Famous Metropolis in Your Government.

Your Prudent, Zealous, and Courageous Conduct in these Perilous and Menacing
Times, suitable to those Never-to-be-forgotten Speeches, delivered by Your
Lordship, and Your Eminent and Worthy Predecessor, Sir Robert Clayton, at the
Time of Your Election to this August Magistracy, has engaged all True Patriots,
and Abhorrers of Foreign and Domestic Vassalage, (a thing attempted to be
Introduced by those Execrable Mediums of Assassinating the Sacred Person of His
Royal Majesty, and Everting His Government) to give Your Lordship an Eminent
Place in their Esteem, and Justly Obliges this Great City to Honor Your
Lordship in a Degree suitable to so High a Merit.

My Lord,

I hope You will vouchsafe me Your Pardon for my Presumption in Publishing this
small Product of my Recess and Solitude, under the Patronage of Your Honorable
Name, for which, and the Famous City You Govern, I have so High a Veneration,
that it Obliges me to be

Your Lordships most humble Servant, Thomas De-Laune.
London, June 24. 1681.
To the Reader.
THis Abstract is partly collected from the best Authors I could meet with, as
the Chronicles and Statutes of England, Antiquaries, Modern Writers, etc.

I have endeavored to avoid Prolixity, and to omit no Remarkables, as far as
my designed Brevity would admit; intending rather a Compendium, than a
Voluminous History.

What lay scatered in diverse Volumes, are reduced (in a method wholly new)
under their proper Heads, briefly, yet (I hope) not obscurely. I have intermixed
many new things, which fell within my own observation (or my Friends)
respecting the Present State of this City, never to my knowledge (I am sure
never in this Method) Published. It is said, That Omne tulit punctum, qui
miscuit utile Dulci:

If that be not done here, yet it is an Essay of that kind, being a mixture
wherein with great variety, things highly useful are interwoven with
delightsom. And if there be any mistakes or imperfections, which all men are
liable to, upon any Information, (which shall be thankfully resented) it may be
capable of Rectifying hereafter.

I do not pretend to give a full account of all things worthy to be known, in
this great City, or of its famous Citizens, for that would make an huge Volume,
but only of the most Eminent which have occurred to my Reading or Observation.

As to the Method and particulars treated of, you are referred to the Synopsis,
or Table of Contents following; by which you may easily find out any thing in
the Book.

If the City thinks this worth entertainment, it will engage me to proceed in
perfecting other Materials I have by me, and offer it in another work, which I
trust will be useful to all. I have an high Honor for this Illustrious City,
and the worthy Inhabitants thereof, as an Instance of which, this Essay is
offered to the perusal of the Candid Reader, by

Thomas D^-lau^^

To his Friend, Mr. Thomas De-Laune, An Acrostick on The Present State of
LONDON:
This is that City which the Papal Crew
Have by their Damned Devices overthrew
Erected on her old Foundations, New.
Pourtrayed once by Stow, and now again
Rebuilt, and Re-reviv'd by thee, De-laune;
Extracted Phoenix-like, whose splendour shows
She triumphs over the Ruin of her Foes.
Excellent Architect, that in few Sheets
New builds a City of Five hundred Streets.
Temples, Courts, Churches, Monuments and Halls.
Shores, Towers, Gates, Inns, Citadels, and Walls.
The Grandeur of this famed Metropolis,
Arts, Laws and Customs, thou have shown in this:
This Little Volume comprehends the Great
European-Empory, the Royal Seat
Of English Monarchs, whose Succession runs
From Royal Fathers, Lineally to Sons.
London, the Author fully lets Thee see
Orders and Customs of Antiquity;
Names, Honors, Titles, Companies drawn forth,
Displayed in Banners, Badges of thy Worth:
Of all the Cities on the Continent,
No better Governors nor Government.
R. S.
To his Friend the Author, UPON THE Present State of LONDON.
REader, Survey DE-LAVNE, and his Survey,
Who LONDON's Glories lively does display
In Her immediate State; whose Stately Pile
Exceeds all Structures on the British Isle:
Look through this Little Book, as through a Glass,
You may behold what now She Is, and Was.
View between Sixty Six, and Eighty One;
Can you not see Great Alteration?
In Sky-Invading-Flames three days She burns,
Which all her Glories into Ashes turns:
But stop not there; Look nearer yet by Ten;
Does She not mount to greater Glory then
Before? Look nigher yet by Five, for this
Her Present State a Pleasant Prospect is.
This Glass ( Brave City) he presents to Thee,
That Thou Thy Self, Thy Self may better see.
This Thy Remote and Distant Friends will move
To Admiration, and Uniting Love.
When they peruse those Gallant Laws whereby
You Are Ruled, and Rulest by Just Policy.
Thy Piety, Thy Splendid Trade, by which
Thou art become so Great, so Good, so Rich.
Those worthy Characters which he has writ,
Exalts Thy Greatness, Justifies his Wit.
It Is not my Task Thy Splendour to Commend,
It is Exalted by DE-LAVNE Thy Friend.
My Muse would fain Attempt his Commendation,
But is constrained to rest in Admiration.
D. E. Philopolis.
The CONTENTS.
CHap. 1, Of the Antiquity, Original, and Name of London. Page 1. Chap. 2. Of
the Situation of London. P. 3. Chap. 3. Of its Increase, Magnitude, Public
Structures, and number of Inhabitants, p. 5, 292. Sect. 1. Of its Walls,
Towers, Gates, etc. p. 9. Of the Tower, and Ancient Castles, p. 13, 17. Sect.
2. Of its Churches and Monuments, p. 19 Of Paul's Church, and Westminster-Abby,
p. 20 The Ancient State of all the Churches in London Alphabetically, with
their monuments, etc. p 27. The Monument of Mr. Fox, Martyrologist, p. 69. Of
Mr. Speed the Famous Historian, p. 73. Sect. 3. Of Hospitals, viz. Christ's
Hospital, and St. Thomas his Hospital, etc. p. 81. Of the Charter House, or
Sutton's Hospital, p. 90 Of Old and New Bedlam, p. 97. Sect. 4. Of its Palaces,
viz. Whitehall, or the Kings Court, etc. p. 99. Of St. James's Palace, and the
Park, p. 122 Of Westminster Hall, and the Courts there, viz. Common Pleas,
King's Bench, Chancery, and Exchequer, p. 126. Of Dooms-day-Book. p, 135. A full
Account of the High-Court of Parliament, etc. p. 193. Of Somerset House, p.
156. Sect. 5. Of the Royal Exchange, etc. p. 159. Sect. 6. Of Colleges and
Inns of Court, viz. Gresham-Colledge, Sion-Colledge, Physitians-Colledge,
Doctors Commons, College of Heralds, etc. and Inns of Court and Chancery, p.
162, 179. Sect. 7. Of London Bridge, p. 191. Of the River of Thames, and Lord
Mayors Jurisdiction there. p. 195. Of the New River, p. 209. Chap. 4. Of the
Government of London, Ecclesiastical, Temporal, and Military, etc. p. 213. to
288. Of the Charters, Bylaws, and Courts in London, p. 263. to 277. Chap. 5.
Of the Trade of London, its Merchants, the Original of Money; an Account of the
several Corporations, and their Coats of Arms blazoned. p. 269. The Oath of a
Freeman, p. 331. Of Guild Hall, Leaden Hall, Blackwel-hall, and the
Custom-house, p. 333, to 336. Of Docks, Porters, etc. p. 340. Of the Markets
for Coals, Corn, and Fish, p. 342. Of the Navy-Office and Post Office, p. 343,
345. Of the Penny-Post. p. 350. The Rates of Coachmen, p. 359. An Alphabetical
Account of the Carriers, Waggoners, and Stage-Coaches, that come to the
respective Inns in London, from all parts of England and Wales, with the days
of their Coming in, and Going out. p. 383. The Rates of Carmen and Watermen. p.
436, 442. An Historical Account of the Wars, Tumults, Fires, Epidemical
Diseases, Rarities and Accidents, that have happened in the City of London:
Briefly abstracted from Ancient and Modern Writers, p. 443. An Appendix
containing the Names of the present Aldermen, and the respective Wards they
Govern; With a List of the present Officers of the Lord Mayors House, and the
Officers belonging to the Two Counters.
THE PRESENT STATE OF LONDON.
CHAP. I.
Of its Antiquity and Original.
OUr Famous Antiquaries generally agree that the Britains, whose Posterity now
inhabit the Dominion of Wales, and are called Welsh, ^e^e the Founders of the
Renowned City of LONDON: They were in old times known by the Name of
Aborigines, because they first inhabited the Country.

Some derive the name London (which is the greatest probablity) from the
British word Llhong, which signifies a Ship, and Dinan, a Town, that is, a Town
of Ships, this City being in all Ages, since its foundation, very renowned for
Shipping and Navigation. (2.) Others from Llhwindian, because (as Caesar in his
Commentaries, and Strabo mention) the Ancient Britains called their fortified
Woods Llhwn, which is equivalent to a fenced Town, and that, where S. Paul's
Church now stands, there was in old times a Wood, where a Temple was built for
Diana, it being the custom of those Pagan Times to build their Fanes or Temples
to Diana in Woods or Groves, and so it signifies Dianas Town. (3.) Some derive
it from Llhandian, the Britains still calling Llan a Church, and so may
signify Dianas-Church or Temple, for there have been frequently dug up
Oxens Heads and Bones, which have been offered as Victims or Sacrifices there,
viz. in Camera Dianae. So that this word came in tract of time to be pronounced
London. Caesar ( Comment. lib. 5.) calls it Civitas Trinobantum, viz. The City
of the Trinobants (some would have it translated the state of Trinobants) for
Trosa Nova, or Troy Novant, New Troy; Which appellation was in old times by
many ascribed to London; as Geoffery of Monmouth the Welsh Historian affirms.

It is said by the same Author, that King Lud repaired this City, and much
augmented it with fair buildings, calling it Caire Lud, that is, Lud's Town,
and from him Ludgate takes its Name.

This City was built 2789 years ago, that is 1108 years before the birth of
Christ, (and, by the exactest computation) in the time of Samuel the Prophet,
and 350 years before the building of Rome. Of all Historians Cornelius Tacitus,
who first called it Londinum; says, that it was in his time (which is about
1655 years ago) Copia Negotiatorum and Commeatu valde celebre; that is, very
famous for multitude of Merchants and Traffic, (or Commerce.) Herodian in the
Life of the Emperor Severus, says it was Vrbs magna and opulenta, that is, a
Great and Rich City. Marcelinus says, That in his time (which is 1200 and odd
years ago) it was Vetustum oppidum, an ancient Town. Fitz-Stephens tells us,
That haec Civitas Vrbe Roma, secundum Chronicorum fidem, satis Antiquior est,
etc. Viz. This City, according to the credit of Chronologers, is far more
ancient then Rome.

In the flourishing Estate of London, it was called Augusta, a Name denoting
Dignity and Majesty; for the Great Octavian, Successor to Julius Caesar, took
to himself the Name of Augustus, as a Title most Sacred and Honorable. This
Marcellinus witnesses, in his 27 and 28 Books, calling it Augusta, and that in
old times it was called London. It was very famous by that Appellation under
the Emperor Valentinian. And in Constantine's time there was a Mint appointed
there, and Money stamped with this Impression, P. Lon. S. that is, Pecunia
Londino Signata, Money stamped in London: And the Overseer or Master of the
Mint was called Praepositus Thesaurorum Augustensium; that is, Provost of the
Treasures of Augusta in Britain.

CHAP. II.
Of the Situation of London.
THe Wisdom of our Ancestors is very Eminent and Remarkable in the Excellent
Situation of this famous City, which we shall show, 1. With respect to Air, 2.
Its conveniences of being supplied with all sorts of Provisions by Sea and
Land.

1. With respect to Air, This City being situate on the North side of the
River, in the Latitude of 51 Degrees 30 Minutes, and so far distant from the
Sea, that it is not annoyed with the boistrous Winds, or unwholsom Vapors of
it; and yet so near, that it enjoys the mild salubrious Breezes of the Eastern,
Southern, and Western Seas, with the wholesome gusts and fresh Air of the Country
round about; it must needs therefore have an Excellent Air. And it is by
Experience found to be as healthy a City (considering its greatness and Number
of Inhabitants; with the prodigions quantity of Coals burnt yearly in it,) as
any in the known World.

2. The Soil is rich and fertile, abounding with plenty of all things useful
for the life of Man. The Country round about it, being very well Inhabited,
supplying it with plenty of all Sorts of Provision, and the Respective
Manufactories of England, to furnish not only the Inhabitants, but for
Transportation to the several parts of the World, where its Merchants Trade:
For which it has the advantage of large, strait and fair Highways for
Carriages and Passengers by Land; and a Navigable River for the Conveyance of
heavy Commodities, as Fuel, etc. So that it may be called the Grand Mart of
England. And for Navigation and For^eign Commerce (in which no Emporium in the
World can Challenge precedence and by which a considerable share of the Riches
of other Nations is imported) the Reader is referred to the Chapters where we
shall Treat of Trade. The River Thames, upon w^i^h it is seated, and by it in
the form of a Crescent, each part of the City enjoying the benefit of the
River, and yet not far distant from each other. This City is so far from the
Sea, that it needs not fear a Foreign Surprise, and yet in 12 hours by the
help of the Tide, it is capable to receive the greatest Ships that Traverse the
Ocean.

CHAP. III.
Of its Increase, Magnitude, Inhabitants, Public Structures, etc.
AS it was said of the People of Rome, that e parva origin, from a small
beginning they grew to a vast greatness, so we may truly say of this Famous
City (the Metropolis of our Monarchy) which even in Neroes days was Renowned
for Concourse of Merchants, and provision of all things, (as Speed informs us,)
and must Consequently be Great and Populous. That it has received an accession
and increase in the Respective Ages, is certain; and in our Memory, we have
seen it to multiply exceedingly in beautiful Structures and number of
Inhabitants. So that it is at present of vast extent, being from Lime-House to
the end of Tuttle-steet, from East to West, above 7500 Geometrical paces, that
is, above seven Miles and ahalf; And from the further end of Blackman-street in
Southwark, to the end of St. Leonard-Shore-Ditch is 2500 paces, that is two
Miles and a half.

The Principal Streets, Lanes, and Alleys, in this great City, are above 500 in
number, and yet some of them above half a measured Mile in length. Before the
dreadful Conflagration in 1666, there were computed within the Walls above
15000 Houses, which is but one fifth of the whole City, as appears by the
Weekly Bills of Mortality, so that the Total of Houses may be 75000, which are
mightily increased since the Rebuilding of the City, enlarging it self every
way, especially, about St. James's and Sohoe-Fields, where it has received such
Additions of beautiful Buildings, as by themselves would make a brave City. So
that now London for fair and stately Edifices, uniform and Regular buildings,
and other public Structures, does not only excel its former State, but (all
things considered) may outvie the most Magnificent Cities of the Universe, as
shall be Demonstrated more particularly.

As to the number of Inhabitants when London was by more than a fourth part
less than it is now, there were computed to be eaten 67500 Beefs yearly there,
ten times as many Sheep, that is 675000, besides abundance of Calves, Lamb,
Swine, all sorts of Poultry, Foul, Fish, Roots, Milk, etc. And that every year
to supply the City with Coals, there is brought into the River about 300000
Chaldrons, every Chaldron being 36 Bushels.

The Bills of Mortality in times of no Infection, do yearly amount to 20000 and
odd, which is three times more than Amsterdam; and equal to, if not beyond
Paris, as by the Bills themselves may be seen.

In the year 1667. when the greatest part of the City lay in Ashes within the
Walls, and much without, and consequently many of the Inhabitants forced to
retire into the Country for Habitation, according to exact computation there
were brewed that year in London 452563 Barrels of Beer, 580421 Barrels of Ale,
and 489797 Barrels of Table-Beer, (or Small Beer.) The Strong Beer 36 gallons
to the Barrel, sold at 12 s. 6 d. the Small Beer also 36 gallons to the Barrel,
sold at 6 s. 6 d. the Ale 32 gallons to the Barrel, sold at 16 s. But now there
is a vast greater quantity (besides abundance of Spanish, French, and Rhenish
Wines, Cider, and other Liquors) consumed. The Excise of Beer and Ale, though
very moderate, is (or has lately been) Farmed of the King at above 120000 l. a
year.

Parish Churches, besides Chapels, there are in all 132, which is twice more
then any City in Christendom has; which leads us to take a View of the Public
Structures, which for methods sake shall be described in this order.

NEWGATE.

LUD-GATE.

CRIPPLE-GATE.

ALDERS-GATE

WESTMINSTER ABBEY 25 PARLIAMENT HOVS^

THE MON VMENT

St MARY OVERIE^S* CHVRCH

BOW STEEPLE

BISHOPS-GATE.

MOORE-GATE.

THE TOWER.

ALD-GATE.



1. The Walls, Towers, Gates, etc. 2. Churches and Monuments. 3. Hospitals and
Workhouses. 4. Palaces, and the Houses of the Nobility. 5. Exchanges and
Public Halls. 6. College and Inns of Court. 7. Bridges, and the New River. 8.
Markets.
SECT. I.
Of its Walls, Gates, Towers, etc.
SIm^on of Durham, the Ancient Writer, tells us, That London was first
encompassed with Walls by Constantine the Great, at the Request of his Mother
Helena, about the year 399. or according to Stow, 306. Which Wall being of
rough Stone and British Brick, was in compass three miles, enclosing the Model
of the City almost in the form of a Bow on the Land-side, (except Denting in
betwixt Cripplegate and Aldersgate) but on the South Side it was as the String
of a Bow, furnished with Towers and Bulwarks at due distances. The City is of
greater length from East to West, then from North to South: That part of the
Wall which stood on the Thames side, is by the continual flowing and washing of
the River, fallen down and decayed; yet there appeared some remains thereof in
Henry the Second's time: Fitz-Stephens, who then lived, says, That London was
ab Austro-mura^a^ and Turrita, that is, Walled and Towered on the South, but
that in Tract of Time the River Thames destroyed it.

Mr. Stow in his Survey tells us, That the City being destroyed by the Danes,
Anno 839. was repaired by Alfred King of the West Saxons, Anno 886. after it
had lain waste 47 years,

Anno 1215. the sixth of King John, the Barons entered the City by Aldgate,
plundered the Jews, repaired the Walls with the Stones of their Houses. Anno
1257. Henry the Third caused the decayed Walls to be repaired at the common
charge of the City. Anno 1282. Edward the First giving License to enlarge the
Black Friars Church, and to break down a part of the Wall between Ludgate and
the River Thames, he gave certain Customs to the Mayor and Citizens to build a
Wall from Ludgate West, to Fleet-Bridge, and so behind the Houses by the
Fleet-Water (now the New-Channel) to the River. In the year 1310. Edward the
Second commanded the Citizens to finish the Wall already begun, and the Tower
at the end of it, within the Water of the River Thames near BlackFryars. Anno
1322. being the second of Edward the Third, the Walls were again repaired. It
was also granted by King Richard the Second in the tenth year of his Reign,
That a Toll should be taken of the Wares sold by Land or Water for ten years,
toward the repairing of the Walls and cleansing the Ditch about London. In the
sixteenth of Edward the Fourth, ( viz. Anno 1476.) the Mayor of London (Sir
Ralph Joceline) caused the part of the Wall betwixt Aldgate and Aldersgate to
be repaired; the Skinners repairing from Aldgate to Burys-marks toward
Bishopsgate, as may appear by their Arms in three places fixed there. The Mayor
with his Company of Erapers, repaired from Bishops-gate to Allhallows-Church in
the same Wall, and from Allhallows toward the Postern called Moor-gate. A
great part of the same Wall was repaired by the Executors of Sir John Crosby
Alderman, as may appear by his Arms in two places fixed there; and other
Companys repaired the rest of the Wall to the Postern of Cripple-gate.
Bishops-gate was new built by the Merchants Almains of the Still-yard. The
Goldsmiths Repaired from Cripple-gate toward Alders-gate, and there the work
ceased, which was a great Service for one Year.

The Circuit of the Wall on the Land side from the Tower to Aldgate in the East
is 82 perches; from thence to Bishops-gate 86 perches. From Bishopsgate in the
North to the Postern of Cripple-gate 162 perches. From Cripple-gate to
Alders-gate 75 perches. From Alders-gate to Newgate 66 perches. From Newgate
in the West to Ludgate 42 perches. From thence to the Fleet-Dyke West 60
perches. From thence to the River Thames about 70. In all 643 perches, every
perch being 5 Yards and a half, contains 3536 Yards and a half, which is 10608
foot, or two Miles and a half, and 608 foot over, to which if you add from
Black friars to the Tower, it will be found, that the whole Circuit of the
Walls was above three English Miles.

The Principal Gates of this Noble City are seven, viz. on the West, Ludgate of
King Lud, it being built by him, as Geoffry of Monmouth says, about the Year of
Christ 66. Though some (as Leland) conjecture, it may be called, Lud-gate for
Fludgate, from a little Flud running beneath it. It was made a Free Prison Anno
1379. Sir Nicholas Bremer being Mayor, which was confirmed in the Year 1382. By
a Common Counsel in the Guild Hall* by which it was Ordained, That all Freemen
(...) this City should for Debt, Trespasses, Accounts, and Contempts, be
imprisoned in Lud-gate, where at first they paid nothing for Lodging and Water.
This, Gate was Repaired in the 28 of Q. Elizabeth, Anno 1586 at the Common
charges of the City, amounting to above 1500 l. In the 3 d of Edw. 4. Sir
Matthew Philips being Mayor, Dame Agnes Foster, Relict of Sir Stephen Foster
Fishmonger, (who was also Mayor in the one and thirtyeth Year of King Hen. 6.)
for the Comfort and Relief of all the poor Prisoners, procured an Establishment
of certain Articles in a Common Council, viz. That the New Works then lately
Edified by the same D^me Agnes, for the enlarging of the Prison of Lud-gate,
from thenceforth should be had and taken as a part and parcel of the said
Prison of Lud-gate, so that both the old and new Work aforesaid to be one
Prison, Goal, keeping and charge for evermore.

The Quadrant built by the said Sir Stephen Foster and his Lady, contained a
large walking place by ground of 38 Foot and a half in Length, besides the
thickness of the Walls, which were 6 Foot in all 44 Foot and a half, the
Breadth within the Walls was 29 Foot and a half, which with the thickness of
the Walls makes it 35 Foot and an half broad. The like Room there was over it
for Lodgings, and over that fair Leads to walk upon, well imbattelled for fresh
Air and refreshment of Prisoners.

2. Newgate which was so called for its Newness, as being erected later than
the rest, viz. about the Reign of Henry the first, or of King Stephen: This was
the fairest of all the Gates, and was Rebuilt after its being destroyed in the
dreadful Conflagration in 1666 more stately than ever, (of which we will give a
particular account hereafter, as also of the Revival of London, from those
Ruinous heaps in which the Hellish Malice of ^^cked Incendiaries had buried
it.) This Gate being a Sumptuous and Capacious Fabric, is the Public Goal or
Prison for Criminals, and also for Court-Actions, for the County of Middlesex,
and has been so for many Ages, as appears by Records in King John's time.

There have been many Benefactors to this place, who gave something Yearly
toward the Relief of Prisoners, as Sir John Poultney, who gave 4 Marks per
annum, Anno 1237. and many others since. Anno 1312. It was re-edified by the
Executors of Sir Rechard Whittington.

3. Alders-gate is said to Derive its name of Elder-^rees which grew about it,
others from its Antiquity, ( viz. Olders-gate,) and some Derive it from Aldrich
a Saxon. This also is (and indeed all the Gates that have been consumed in the
great fire, are) now built more Magnificently than ever they were.

4. Cripple-Gate so called of a Spittle of Cripples sometimes adjoining thereto,
that were wont to beg at the said Gate. It has been formerly a Prison, where
Persons were Committed, as now to the Compters. It was Re-edified by the
Brewers of London, in the Year 1244. And by the Executors of Edmund Shaw
Goldsmith, Mayor, Anno 1491.

5. Moor-Gate, so called from a Moorish ground hard by, but now turned into
very pleasant and delightful walks, called Moor-fields. This Gate was built by
Thomas Falconer Lord Mayor, in the 2 H. 5. Anno 1414.

6. Bishops-Gate, so called of a Bishop the Benefactor, which the Dutch
Merchants, or Hans of the Still-Yard, were bound by Covenant to repair and
defend at all times of Danger and extremity.

7. Aldgate, on the East, so named from the oldness, or Elbe-Gate, this is one
of the Principal Gates, and of the 7 double Gates mentioned by Fitz-Stephens.
It is Rebuilt at the Charge of the City.

Besides these, in ancient times there stood two Gates on that part of the City
next the River whilst the Wall stood, namely Billings-Gate, now a Wha^f or a
Key; and Doure-Gate, or the Watergate commonly called Dow-Gate.

There are some Posterns also, which may go for Gates, as that out of
Christ-Church and Hospital, to pass from thence to the Hospital of St.
Ba^tholomews^ in Smithfield, to make which, License was given to the Lord Mayor
and Aldermen, in the 6. of E. 6. Sir Richard Dobbs Lord Mayor. There is also
another that leads to Moor-fields. And that near the Tower, by the Remains,
seems to have been a fair and strong Arched Gate of much trust there having
formerly been always a Person of Quality as Custas* or Keeper of it. In the 2
R. 1. Ann. 1190. William Longshamp Bishop of Ely, Lord Chancellor of England,
caused a part of the C^ty Wall; to wit, from the said Gate (toward the River)
to the White Tower, to be broken down for the enlarging the said Tower, which
he encompassed with the outer Wall and broad Ditch, but coming too near the
foundation of the aforesaid Gate, it was much loosned and weakened, so that 200
and odd^ years after, viz. Anno 1440. 18 H. 6. It fell down and was never since
re-edified.

There were several other Water-Gates, which were purchased by private Men, as
at Black-frier-stairs a free landing place: Puddle-Wharf: Pauls-Wharf, a free
landing place: Broken-wharf: Queen-Hith: a place called Woolf-Gate, in the
Parish of A^l^allows, after called Woolf-lane, but the lower part being built
on by the Earl of Shre^s^ury; and the upper part by the Chamberlain of London;
it was grown out of use. There was also a Gate called Ebgate, now the Old Swan.
There was also a small Gate called Oyster-Gate, because Oysters were sold
there, and other Shell Fish.

Bridg-gate so called of London-Bridg, was reckoned by Fitz-Seephens, one of
the Principal Gates of the City. Next Buttolph-gate, so called of St.
Buttolphs-Church adjoining. Of Billingsgate we have spoke already. There was a
Watergate by the Custom-House, at the South end of Water-lan^, and another
Watergate by the Tower.

Of the Tower of London.
THe Wall of the City was furnished round about with Towers and Bulworks at due
and Regular distances. Of which (where the Wall ended toward the River on the
East Side) the most eminent was that which we call the To^^r of London, Built
by William the Conqueror, about the Year 1078. (Some say that Caesar built the
White-Tower, but that is not so: nor does he mention it in his Commentary,
though an exact Recorder of his own Actions) Gundulph Bishop of Rochester,
being Principal Surveyor and Overseer of the Work. This was the great Square
Tower now called the White-Tower, which has been much enlarged by several
Buildings since adjoined at diverse times, and encompassed with a Wall. And
Anno 1190 in the 2 R. 1. (as was said,) the Bishop of Ely Chancellor of
England, incl^sed it with a thick and strong outward Wall of stone Embattailed,
and caused a Broad and Deep Ditch to be cast about the same, thinking to have
Environed it with the River of Thames, so that it is a most Famous Goodly
Citadel, resembling a big Town. Edward the 4 th. fortified this Tower,
enclosing a certain piece of Ground taken from Tower Hill, on the West, which
is now called the Bulwark. Near West-gate opening to the South, there is a
strong Postern for passengers, by the Ward-House, over a Drawbridg let down for
that purpose. On the South side toward the East, is a large Watergate, for
the Receipt of small Vessels, under a store Bridge from the River Thames; beyond
it (...) a small P^stern with a Draw-bridg, seldom let down but to receive
great Persons that are Prisoners. The Lyon-Tower was built by Edward the 4 th.
This is not only a Fort or Citadel to Defend and Command both City and River,
but al^o a Royal Palace, where our Kings with their Courts have Lodged some
times. It Is furnished with an Armory and Royal Arsenaf of Arms, and Ammunition
for 60000 Men. Here are kept the Tre^sury for the Jewels and Ornaments of the
English Crown, the only Mint now for Coining Silver and Gold in England. And
the most Ancient Records of the King's Courts of Justice at Westminster. This
is the Chief Prison for the safe Custody of Great Persons that are Criminals.
It is out of any County or Parish, yet a great part of it is within the liberty
of the City. For it was the Judges opinion that those that were to be Tried for
the Murder of Sir Thomas Overbury, must be Tried in the City, the Fact being
done there.

The Office of his Majesty's Records is of venerable Antiquity. And as the
Chapel of the Rolls in Chancery Lane, and Petty Bag-Office, does fill with
Records out of other Offices, they are transmitted into the Tower after some
years, for preservation and security. These Records contain the Foundations and
Dissolutions of Abbeys, Donation of Land, etc.

These Records at the Rolls being joined to those in the Tower, will make a
perfect continuance of all the Ancient Rights of England, as,

1. The Leagues and Treaties of Foreign Princes.

2. The Warlike Atchievments of the English in France and other Parts.

3. The Original of all the Laws Enacted and Recorded till the Reign of Richard
the 3.

4. The Homage and Dependancy of Scotland upon England. The Establishment of
Ireland in Laws and Dominions.

5. The Dominion of the British Seas excluding both French and Dutch from
Fishing there without the Kings License, proved by Records before the Conquest.

6. The Title of the Realm of France, and how obtained.

7. And all that the Kings or Princes of this Land have until that time done
abroad, on granted, or confirmed unto their Subjects, at home or abroad.

8. Tenures of all Lands, extents of Surveys of Manors and Land, Inquisitions
post mortem.

9. Libertys and Privileges Granted to Citys, Towns, or private Men.

10. Several Writs Bleadings, Proceedings, etc. in Courts of Chancery, Common
Law, Exchequer, etc.

11. Inspeximus's and Inrollments of Charters and Deeds before the Conquest.

12. Metes and Bounds of all Forests, with the respective Rights of the
Inhabitants to common pasture; besides many other things too tedious to be
repeated, and are in the Petition of the Commons of England in Parliament. Anno
46. E. 3. Number. 43. Said to be the perpetual Evidence of every Man's Right, and
the Records of this Nation, without which no Story of the Nation can be written
or proved.

They are reposited in Wakefield-Tower, adjoining to the Blood-Tower near
Traytors-gate. It is to be kept open and constantly attended, for all Resorters
thereto, from 7. to 11. of the Clock in the Morning, and from 1. till 5. in the
Afternoon every Day of the week; but in December, January, and February, from
8. in the Morning to 4. in the Afternoon, except Holy Days, etc.

The Governor is called the Lieutenant of the Tower, who ought to be a Person
of Worth and Fidelity, and by Virtue of his Office, is to be a Justice of Peace
in Kent, Surrey, and Middlesex; he is High Steward of a Court there held, has
a Deputy, may refuse an Habeas Corpus, and may give Protection to all Debtors
belonging to the Tower, all England over. He can take two Gallons and a Pint of
all. Wine-Ships that come. His Sallary is 200 l. per annum. His usual Fee for
every Prisoner sent to the Tower, who are commonly Men of Estates, is 20 l. and
3. l. a week of an Esquire 5. l. for a Knight; for a Baron or above 5. l. at
Entrance, to whom the King weekly allows 10 l. whereof two parts to the
Prisoner, the third to the Lieutenant for Lodging and Diet, and 50 l. to the
Lieutenant, upon the Prisoners discharge.

The Gentleman Tailor is put in by the Lieutenant of the Tower, and his Fee is
41 s. of a Gentleman, and 5 l. of a Knight. There are 40 Warders of the Tower,
accounted the King's Domestic Servants, and sworn by the Lord Chamberlain of
His Majesty's Household, or by the Clerk of the Check.

In this Tower is kept the Office of His Majesty's Ordnance, the standing and
grand Magazine of the principal Preparatives, Habiliments, Utensils, and
Instruments of War by Sea and Land. It is under the Government in chief of the
Master of the Ordnance, by whom it is committed to principal Officers, as a
Lieutenant, who, in the absence of the Master of the Ordnance, imparts all
Orders and Warrants directed to the Office, and is to see them duly executed,
and to give Order for the discharging great Ordnance when required, at
Triumphs, Festivals, etc. As also to see the Train of Artillery, and all its
Equipage, fitted for motion upon any occasion.

The Surveyor is to survey all the Stores and Ordnance; to allow Bills of Debt,
and see that all Provision be good, etc.

The Clerk of the Ordnance Records all Orders and Instructions for the
Government of the Office, and Patents, Grants, Names of Officers, etc. Draw
Estimates of Provision and supplys, Letters, Contracts, etc. Make all Bills of
Impressed and Debentures; Keep Journals and Liegers of Receipts, and Returns of
Stores. The Store-keeper takes into his charge the Munitions and Stores, and is
to look that the Storehouses be kept in due Repair.

The Clerk of the Deliveries is to draw all Proportions for Deliveries of any
Stores or Provisions, and to be present at the Delivery. There are other Patent
Officers, as the Master-Gunner of England, the Keeper of the small Guns, a
principal Engineer, with diverse inferior Attendants and Artificers, which, for
brevity, we omit.

In the Tower is also the Office of Warden of the Mint, where is Coined all the
Bullion that is minted in England. The chief Officer is the Warder of the Mint,
who receives all the Silver and Gold brought in by Merchants, Goldsmiths, or
others, and pays them for it. Then the Master-Worker, who causes the Bullion to
be melted, delivers it to the Moneyers, and when minted, receives it again from
them. The Comptroller, who is to see that all the Money be made according to
the just Assize, etc. The Assay-Master weighs the Bullion, and is to see that
it be according to the Standard. The Auditor passes all Accounts. The Surveyor
of the Melting is to see the Bullion cast out, and not to be altered after it
is delivered to the Melter. There are several other inferior Officers, etc. As
for the Money, etc. See the Present State of England, p. 10.

The first Gold that was Coined in the Tower, was in the Reign of Edward III.
and the Pieces were called Florences, of the value of 6 s. 8 d. All great Sums
before were used to be paid by the Weight, as so many Pounds or Marks of Silver
or Gold, but not stamped. Lesser Payments in Starlings (probably because there
was a Star stamped upon them) and were called Pence: nor can we read of them
before the Reign of Henry II.

In this Tower only is the Brake or Rack, usually called, The Duke of Exeter' s
Daughter, because he was the first Inventer of it. So much of the Tower of
London.

Besides the Towers on the Bridge, which have suffered by the Accidents of
Fire, Antiquaries speak of two Castles that were on the West-part of London,
one the Castle of Monfiquet, built by a Baron of that Name, that came over with
the Conqueror, but since demolished, and the Black-Fryars risen out of the
Ruins of it.

The second is Baynard's Castle by Paul's Wharf, built by one Baynard, who came
hither likewise with the Conqueror, who being Ennobled, the Honor succeeded
from Father to Son a long time, till it came to Robert Fitz-water, a brave and
valiant Knight, who falling into the displeasure of King John, was banished,
and the Castle ruined; but recovering his favor by a notable Combat he
performed in France against an English Knight, ( Fitz-water being on the French
side) he was re-invested in his Possessions, and so repaired the Castle again.

He was made chief Bannerer (or Banner-bearer) of London; what his Office was,
and the Solemnity about it, is to be seen in Stowes Survey of London, in the
Chapter of Towers and Castles. When thi^ Honor fell from the Fitz-Waters, or
Baynard Castle, is uncertain. Henry VII. repaired this Castle and Queen Mary
was proclaimed there. We rea^ of a Tower that stood where Bridewell now stands
and a Royal Palace where our Kings kept the^ Courts, and summoned Parliaments.
A great part of this on the West Side was given to the Bishop (...) Salisbury,
and thence is derived the Name of Salisbury-Court. The Eastern-part was waste,
till Hen. (...) built a stately Palace there, and called it Bridewel^ where the
Emperor Charles V. was most magnificently entertained Anno 1522.

There was a Tower called the Royal Tower i^ the Parish of St. Michael de Pater
Noster, where King Stephen kept his Court, afterward called, The Queens
Wardrobe. There was another at Buckler^bury, called, Serns Tower, where King
Edward II kept his Court, and his Exchange of Money.

Barbican was likewise another Tower, where the City Sentinels were wont to
Watch, but demolishe^ by King Henry III. Anno 1227. after he was r^^conciled to
the Barons.

Sect. 2.
Of its Churches and Monuments.
THE Number of Parish-Churches, besides Chapels, within the Weekly Bills of
Mortality, is 132, (twice more than any City in Christendom can show;) The
Cathedral of which, is dedicated to the Apostle St. PAVL, and the only
Cathedral of that Name in Europe. It was founded by Aethelbert King of Kent,
Anno 610. (under whom Segbert a Saxon Reigned in this Tract of Ground) in a
place where stood a Temple of Diana, and afterward did endow it with Lands and
Privileges; so did afterward Athelstan, Edgar and Eward the Confessor. It was
much enlarged by Erkenwald, the Fourth Saxon Bishop thereof: And being almost
destroyed by Fire Anno 1078. Mauritius, another of its Bishops, began the
Foundation of this magnificent Pile, and went on about 20 years, but the Quire
and Tower were not finished till Anno 1221. As to other Casualties, we refer
you to the Chapter that treats of Fires.

As to its Dimensions, the length of it, according to Stow, was 240 Tailors
Yards, or 720 Foot; the Breadth, 130 Foot; the Height of the Steeple, 520
Foot; whereof the Stone Work was 260, and the Spire 260 Foot.

The Length of it, according to others, was 690 Foot, that is, 20 Foot more
than St. Peter's at Rome. It stood upon so much Ground, as contained above three
Acres and an half. Upon the Spire of Timber was a Bowl of Copper Gilt 9 Foot
and 1 Inch in compass, whereon stood the Cross 15 Foot and an half high, and
very near 6 Foot across, made of Oak, covered with Lead, and another Cover of
Copper over the Lead. Above all, stood the Eagle, or Cock of Copper Gilt 4 Foot
long, and the Breadth of the Wings 3 Foot and an half.

It was built in Form of a Cross, and in the midst of the Cross, upon mighty
high Arches, was the Tower built. It was a very magnificent Structure for
Beauty, Dimensions and Proportion, as William of Malmsbury says, adding, That
it ought to be numbered among the Number of the most excellent Edifices, the
large Arched Vault, and the Church above it, being of such a capacity, that
(says he) it may seem sufficient enough to receive any Number of People.

The Caemitery, or Churchyard, was of a very great Dimension, for it reached
North, as far as St. Nicholas Marketplace; West, almost as far as Lud-gate;
South, near to Baynards Castle. I my self this last year, viz. January 1680.
saw in the place where the New Conduit is a building, where they dug to lay
the Foundation, several Coffins and Bones, so that it extended farther by far
on that side, and probably on all sides, than it does now. As to its
Benefactors, and its being consumed by the dreadful Conflagration in 1666. more
shall be spoken under their proper Heads.

As to its Situation, it was built on the highest part of the City, and so more
conspicuous, perhaps, than any Cathedral in the World. His present Majesty in
the year 1673. having with great cost pulled down the Burnt Walls, removed the
Rubbish, and cleared the Foundation, has laid another Foundation, which is
considerably advanced; and for Magnificence, Splendour, Solidity, Figure, and
Curious Architecture, will, probably, excel any to be seen elsewhere.

Besides this stately Cathedral, there were destroyed in the dreadful Fire of
1666, Eighty seven Parish Churches, and six Consecrated Chapels, a great many
of which are since Rebuilt (far more stately and, magnificent than ever they
were before) of solid Stone, with very curious Workmanship, beautified with
excellent various Towers* and Fronts of true Roman Architecture.

Of the Churches in City and Suburbs we will give a brief Account, beginning
with Westminster Abbey, and so on with the rest Alphabetically.

Westminster Abbey was founded by Sebert King of the East Saxons, out of the
Ruins of a Temple of Apollo which stood there, and fell by an Earthquake in
the time of the Roman Emperor Antoninus Pius, about the year of our Lord 605,
and had its Name from its Situation, as being West from London, and its
Minster. It was dedicated to St. Peter, and destroyed in the furious Wars of
the Danes, but Reedified by Bishop Dunstan, by the favor of King Edgar, who
gave it some few Monks.

Afterward King Edward (called the Confessor) built it anew, and richly
endowed it; but about 160 years after, King Henry III. Rebuilt it from the
Ground, with that rare Architecture now seen. It was the work of 50 years
complete. The King himself laid the first Stone, and covered the Roof with Lead
in the year 1220. The Abbots much enlarged it afterward to the Westward. And
King Henry VII. Anno 1502. bestowed 14000 Pounds in Building that admirable
Chapel (which Leland calls the Wonder of the World;) for if we respect the
admirable and artificial Work without and within, Beauty, and Elegancy, it can
scarce be paralleled in the World: And it is the judgment of the most Exquisite
Architects, that it comprehends whatsoever is rare and delicate in that Noble
Art. Here is to be seen his own Tomb and Monument made of solid and massy
Brass.

The Form of the old Building, as an old Manuscript shows, was, That the
principal Plot or Groundwork of the Building, is supported with most lofty
Arches, cast round with a Apiece Work and semblable Joints. But the
Compass of the whole, with a double Arch of Stone on both sides, is enclosed
with Joined Work firmly knit and united together every way. The Cross of the
Church, which was to compass the Mid-quire of those that chaunted unto the
Lord, and with a twofold supportance that it had on either side to uphold and
bear the lofty top of the Tower in the midst, simply arises at first with a
low and strong Arch; then mounteth it higher, with many winding stairs,
artificially ascending with a number of steps; but afterward, with a single
wall, it reaches up to the Roof of Timber, well and surely covered with Lead.

But the new Work of King Henry III. far excels that for rare Workmanship,
being supported with several Rows of Marble Pillars in very curious Order, and
the Roof covered with sheets of Lead.

When the Monks were driven from this Church, it had (1) A Dean and
Prebendaries. (2) Afterward one Bishop (viz. T. Thurlby) who having wasted the
Church Patrimony, was removed. (3) Queen Mary set the Monks and their Abbot in
possession: But (4) They were by Queen Elizabeth and the Parliament cast out,
and it was converted to a Collegiate Church, and a Dean placed therein with 12
Prebendaries, and as many old Soldiers past Service. Petty Canons, and others
of the Quire, to the number of 30. And ten Officers belonging to the Collegiate
Diet, a Schoolmaster, and an Usher. Forty Scholars, who are in their due time
preferred to the Universities, they are called the Queens (or Kings) Scholars.
Twelve Almsmen, with plentiful Maintenance for all. Twelve poor Scholars,
besides Stewards, Receivers, Registers, Collectors, and other Officers; the
Principal whereof is the High Steward of Westminster, who is usually one of the
Prime Nobility. The Dean is entrusted with the Custody of the Regalia at the
Coronation, honored with a place of necessary service at all Coronations, and
a Commission of Peace within the City and Liberties of Westminster. The Dean
and Chapter invested with all manner of Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical and Civil,
not only in the City and Liberties of Westminster, but within the Precincts of
St. Martins le grand, within the Walls of London, and in some Towns of Essex,
exempted in the one from the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of London, and in the
other from that of the Archbishop of Canterbury. There is a fair public
Library free for all Strangers to study both morning and afternoon always in
Term-time. William the Conqueror, and all our Kings and Queens since, have been
Crowned in this Church.

The Monument of King Henry VII. in the New Chapel, was made and finished in
the year 1519. by one Peter a Florentine, for which he received of the Kings
Executors 1000 l. The King, with Elizabeth his Queen, lie Interred in it, being
(as was said) a Tomb of solid Brass, compassed about with these Verses, which,
for their Elegancy, and because they describe him to be so Renowned, we shall
here insert.

Septimus Henricus Tumulo requiescit in isto
Qui Regum splendour, lumen and orbis erat.
Rex vigil, and sapiens, comis, virtutis amator
Egregius formae, strenuus atque potens.
Qui p^perit pacem Regno, qui bella peregit
plurima, qui victor semper ab host redit.
Qui natus binis conjunxit Regibus ambas,
R^gibus and Cuncti foedere Junctus erat.
Qui sacrum hoc struxit Templum, statuitque sepulchrum,
Pro se, proque sua conjuge, prole, Domo.
Lustra December, atque annos tres plus compleverat annis.
Nam tribus octensis Regia Sceptra tulit.
Quindecies Domini centenus fluxerat annus,
Currebat nonus cum venit atra Dies.
Septima termensis lux tunc fulgebat Aprilis,
Cum Clausit summam tanta Corona Diem.
Nulla Dedere prius tantum tibi saecula Regem
Anglia, vix similem posteriora Dabunt.
This Church is famous for the Monuments and Tombs of our Kings, Queens,
Nobility, and other eminent Men, as Sebert the first Christian King of the
East^ Saxons. Harold the Bastard, Son of Canutus the Dane, King of England.
King Edward the Confessor and his Queen Edith. Maud Wife to King Henry the
First, the Daughter of Malcolm King of Scots. Henry the 3. and his Son. King
Edward the 1. with Eleanor his Wife, daughter to Ferdinando the first King of
Castile and Leon. King Edward the 3. and Philippa of Henault his Wife. King
Henry the 5. with Katherine his Wife, Daughter to King Charles the 6. of
France. Anne Wife to King Richard 3. Daughter to Richard Nevil Earl of Warwick.
King Henry the 7. with his Wife Elizabeth, Daughter to King Edward the 4. and
his Mother Margaret Countess of Richmond. King Edward the sixth (that most
Religious and truly Virtuous Prince,) who lies under the Brass richly Gilded
Altar, most curiously wrought with Excellent Workmanship. Anne of Cleave, the 4
th. Wife of King Henry the Eight. Queen Mary, and the Renowned Queen Elizabeth;
upon the Remove of whose Body from Richmond (where She Dyed,) to White Hall by
Water, these Lines were Written, which may for their Elegancy, and in
Remembrance of that most Illustrious Protestant Queen be inserted.

The Queen was brought by Water to White Hall,
At every stroke the Oars their tears let fall.
More clung about the Barge; Fish under water
Wept out their Eyes of Pearl, swam blindly after:
I think the Barge-men might with easier Thighs,
Have rowed her thither in her Peoples Eyes,
For howsoe'er, thus much my thoughts have scanned,
Sh'ad come by Water, had she come by Land.
Prince Henry, eldest Son of King James, the First Monarch of Great Britain.
King James Himself and Queen Ann his Wife; and the first Male born of King
Charles the First, dying an Infant. Of Dukes, and Earls, and Lords Degree.
Edmund Earl of Lancaster, second Son of King Henry the Third, and his Lady
Aveline de fortibus, Countess of Albemarle. William and Andomar of Valente, of
the Family of Lusignian, Earls of Pembrooke* Alphonsus, John, and other
Children of King Edward the first. John of Eltham, Earl of Cornwall, Son to
King Edward the Second. Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester, the youngest
Son of Edward the Third, with other of his Children. Eleanor, Daughter and Heir
of Humphry B^hun Earl of Hereford, and of Essex, Wife to Thomas of Woodstock.
The young Daughter of Edward the Fourth. And King Henry the Seventh. Henry, a
Child of two months old, Son of King Henry the Eighth. S^phia, the Daughter of
King James, who died as it were, in the first Day-dawning of her Age. Philippa
Mohun* Duchess of York. Robert of Henault, in right of his Wife, Lord
Bourchier, Ann the young Daughter and Heir of John Mowbra^, Duke of Norfolk,
promised in Marriage unto Richard Duke of York, younger Son to King Edward the
Fourth. Sir Giles Dawbny, Lord Chamberlain to King Henry the Seventh, and his
Wife, of the House of the Arundels in Cornwall. John Viscount Wells. Frances
Brandon, Duchess of Suffolk; Mary her Daughter. Margaret Douglas, Countess of
Lenex, Grandmother to James, King of Great Britain, with Charles her Son.
Winefrid Bruges, Marchioness of Winchester. Ann Stanhope, Duchess of Somerset,
and Jane her Daughter. Ann Cecil, Countess of Oxford, Daughter to the Lord
Burleigh, Lord High-Treasurer of England, with Mildred Burghley her Mother.
Elizabeth Berkly, Countess of Ormond. Frances Sidney, Countess of Sussex. James
Butler, Viscount Thurles, Son and Heir to the Earl of Ormond.

Besides these, Humphry Lord Bourchier of Cornwall. Sir Humphry Bourchier, Son
and Heir to the Lord Bourchier of Berners, both slain at Barnetfield. Sir
Nicholas Carew, Baron Powis. Thomas Lord Wentworth. Thomas Lord Wharton. John
Lord Russel. Sir Thomas Bromley, Lord Chancellor of England. Douglas Howard,
Daughter and Heir General of Henry Viscount Howard of Bindon, Wife to Sir
Arthur Gorges. Elizabeth Daughter and Heir of Edward Earl of Rutland, Wife to
William Cecil. Sir John Puckering, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England.
Frances Howard, Countess of Hartford. Henry and George Carry, the Father and
Son, Barons of Hunsdon, both Lords Chamberlains to Queen Elizabeth. The Heart
of Ann Sophia, the Daughter of Christopher Harley, Count Beaumont, Ambassador
for the King of France in England, bestowed within a small Gilt Urn over a
Pyramid. Sir Charles Blunt, Earl of Devonshire, Lord-Lieutenant-General of
Ireland. Geoffrey Chaucer, the Prince of English Poets in his time. Edmund
Spencer, an eminent Poet. William Cambden, Clarencieux King of Arms. Causabon
the Famous French Writer. Michael Drayton, etc.

Then there is George Villiers Duke, Marquess and Earl of Buckingham, Favorite
to King James, and King Charles the First. Also the Earl of Essex, and several
others Interred there, during His present Majesty's Absence from His
Government. There is also Interred George Duke of Albemarle, (Father to his
Grace the present Duke,) whose Funerals were Solemnly performed the Thirtieth
of April 1670. The Duchess of Albemarle, was also Interred in King Henry the
Sevenths Chapel, the twenty eighth of February 1669. in Westminster Church.
There is likewise Interred, that Celebrated Poet Mr. Abraham Cowley, under a
Monument of Exquisite Curiosity, at the Charges of his Grace the Noble Duke of
Buckingham.

Having done with Westminster-Abby, we shall give a Brief account of the other
Churches Alphabetically, as they were before the Fire: And of such as are
Rebuilt, (which are now far more Durable and Stately than before) the Reader
may expect an Account hereafter.

I. St. Albans Church in Woodstreet, is of great Antiquity, being Dedicated to
St. Albans the first Martyr of England. Another mark of Antiquity was to be
seen in the manner of the turning the Arches in the Windows, and heads of the
Pillars. There were also Roman Bricks found inlay'd here and there among the
Stones of the Building; it was, Anno 1632. (being wonderfully decayed,) pulled
down in order to be Rebuilt. In it were diverse Monuments, which for brevity
sake are omitted.

II. On the North side of the East end of Tower-street, is the Parish Church
called All-hallows Barkin, a very fair Church, standing in a large Churchyard;
on the North side whereof, was built a fair Chapel by King Richard the first,
whose heart ('it is said) was buried there, under the high Altar. This Chapel
was Augmented by King Edward the first. And a fraternity settled there by King
Edward the fourth. King Richard the third new Built it, and founded therein a
College of Priests; which was suppressed in the Year 1548. in the Second of
Edward the sixth, and the Ground made a Garden-Plat, till the time of Queen
Elizabeth; and then Built upon, and made a Storehouse for Merchants Goods. The
Church was Beautified and Repaired in the Year 1613.

III. On the East Side of Bread-street, at the corner of Watling-street, is the
Church of All-hallows Bread-street, wherein were diverse Monuments. This Church
had a fair Spired-Steeple of Stone, which in the Year 1559. September the
Fifth, about Noon, by a great Tempest of Lightning, and a great Clap of
Thunder, was struck about Nine or Ten Foot beneath the Top, out of which fell a
stone that overthrew a Man, and slew a Dog; but the Spire was taken down to
save the Charge of Repair. This Church was Repaired and Beautified at the
Parish Charge Anno 1625.

IV. Great All-hallows in Thames Street, was a fair Church, with a large
Cloister on the South side, in which were Sundry Monuments, but now Ruinated.
It was Repaired and richly Beautified at the Parish Charge, Anno 1627. and
1629. In the year 1632. all the Isles to the Chancel were raised a Foot and a
half, and the Pews a Foot above that, for convenience of Hearing, which cost
six hundred Pound. There was a Monument of Queen Elizabeth's, with these Verses:
If Royal Virtues ever crowned a Crown,
If ever Mildness shined in Majesty,
If ever Honor, honored true Renown,
If ever Courage dwelt with Clemency,
If ever Princess put all Princes down
For Temperance, Prowess, Prudence, Equity,
This, this was, She, that in Despite of Death,
Lives still Admired, Adored, ELIZABETH.
Many Daughters have done Virtuously, but these excellest them all.


In the Figure of a Book over her, were these words: They that trust in the
Lord shall be as Mount Sion, which shall not be removed.



On the one side. Spains Rod, Romes Ruin, Netherlands Relief,
Heavens Jem, Earths Joy, Worlds Wonder, Natures Chief.


On the the other side. Britains Blessing, Englands Splendour,
Religions Nurse, the Faiths Defender.


Under her. I have fought a good Fight, I have finished my Course, etc.



V. In Hony-lane near the Standard in Cheap Side is the small Parish Church
called All-hallows Hony-lane, Repaired at the Parish Charge, anno 1625. At the
cost of above Fifty Five Pound.

VI. In Thames Street is the Parish Church of All-hallows the less, which stood
on Vaults, and said, to be Built by Sir John Poultney, sometimes Mayor of
London; the Steeple and Quire stood on an Arched-gate, which was (being fallen)
Rebuilt by the Parish, anno 1594. The whole Church was Repaired and Beautified
at the cost of the Parishoners, anno 1616. Here was also a Monument of Queen
Elizabeth's.

VII. In Lumbard-street, stood the Parish Church called, All-hallows
Lumbard-street, -- begun to be New Built anno 1494. and finished 1516. To which
the Pewterers were good Benefactors; the Steeple was finished 1544. about the
36 of H. 8. Here were also diverse Monuments. It was Repaired and Beautified at
the Parish-charge, Anno 1622, and 1623, and cost 177 l. 9 s.

VIII. The Parish Church of Alhallows-Stayning, or, as commonly called
Stane-Church, lies on the South Side of Langborn-Ward, somewhat within
Mart-lane, in which were diverse fair Monuments, as of John Costin a Cirdler,
who dyed 1244. and gave the Poor of the Parish an Hundred Quarters of Charcoals
yearly for ever. John Mann, Citizen and Mercer, who gave an Hundred Pounds
toward the Repair of the Church, and dyed in the year 1615. It was Repaired
and Beautified at the Parish-charge, Anno 1630.

IX. The Parish Church of Alhallows the Wall, so called, because it stands
close to the Wall of the City in Bread-street-Ward. It was Repaired and
Beautified at the Charge of the Parishioners, Anno 1613. Again most curiously
Repaired and Beautified, Anno 1627. at 220 l. Cost.

Queen ELIZABETH'S Monument.
Read but her Reign, the Princess might have been
For Wisdom called Nicaulis, Sheba's Queen
Against Spain's Holofernes, Judith she
Dauntless gained many a glorious Victory:
Not Deborah did her in Fame excel,
She was a Mother to our Israel.
An Hester, who her Person did engage
To save her People from the Public. Rage;
Chaste Patroness of True Religion,
In Court a Saint, in Field an Amazon;
Glorious in Life, Deplored in her Death,
Such was Unparalleled ELIZABETH.
Born, Anno 1534.

Crowned, An. 1558. Jan. 15.

Reigned years 44. mon. 4. days 17.

Dyed An. 1602. Mar. 24.

X. The Parish Church of St. Alphage. The principal Isle of this Church,
toward the North, was pulled down, and a Frame of Four Houses set up in the
place. The other part, from the Steeple upward, was converted into a
Parish Church of St. Alphage: And the Parish Church which stood near unto the
Wall of the City by Cripplegate, was pulled down; the Plat thereof made a
Carpenters Yard with Saw-Pits. This being decayed, the Parishioners Repaired
it, Anno 1624. and being Beautifully finished, Anno 1628. it cost the Parish
500 l.

XI. St. Andrew Hubbard, or St. Andrew in East-Cheap, is situate in Love-Lane
in Billingsgate-Ward, which was Repaired and Beautifully adorned at the Cost of
the Parish, Anno 1630. amounting to above 600 l.

XII. St. Andrew Undershaft, stands at the North-West-Corner of Aldgate-Ward, a
Fair and Beautiful Parish Church; so called, because every May Day in the
morning, they were wont (in old times) to set up a high Shaft or May Pole in
the Street before the South-door, which, when fixed, was higher than the
Steeple. But this practice was discontinued since Evil May Day, when there was
an Insurrection of Apprentices, and other Young Persons, against Foreigners,
Anno 1517. The said Shaft being laid along under the Pent-houses of a Row of
Houses upon Iron Hooks, till the 3d of Edw. 6. the People Sawed it in pieces,
after it had lay'n 32 years, every man taking the length of his House: Which
was occasioned by the Preaching of one Stevin, who at Paul's Cross said, It was
an Idol, as giving Name to the Church. It was New Built by the Parish, Anno
1520. to which Stephen Jennings, Merchant-Taylor, sometimes Lord Mayor, was a
great Benefactor; as also John Kerby, Merchant-Taylor, sometimes one of the
Sheriffs; John Garland, Merchant-Taylor, and his Executor, Nicholas Levison,
and several others, and fully finished, Ann 1532. It was afterward Repaired
and Beautified at the Parish-charge, Anno 1627. They had at the lower end of
the North Isle, a fair Wainscot-Press full of good Books, the Works of many
Learned Divines, where at convenient times any that would, may read.

XIII. The Church of St. Andrew Wardrobe, was a proper Church in
Baynard-Castle-Ward, but few Monuments in it. John Parut founded a Chauntry
there, it was Repaired at the Charge of the Parish, Anno 1627.

XIV. On the North of Pope-Lane, so called of one Pope that owned it, is the
Parish Church of St. Ann in the Willows, (or St. Ann Aldersgate) so called (as
some think) of Willows growing formerly thereabouts. It was Burnt in part 1548.
but since Repaired. It was afterward much decayed, but beautifully repaired,
Anno 1624.

XV. St. Ann Blackfriars, it seems, was built in the Reign of Edw. III. It was
new built in the year 1430. 8 H. 6. Sir William Eastfield Mayor, William Russe
and Ralph Holland Esqs. Sheriffs; and the Commonalty granted of the Common
Ground of the City, Three Foot and an half in Breadth on the North part, and
Four Foot in Breadth toward the East, for the enlarging thereof. This Ancient
Church belonging to the Blackfriars, before the dissolution of such places by
H. 8. was one of the most spacious and fair Churches in London, but afterward
demolished Anno 1613. The Inhabitants of Blackfriars purchased so much Houses
on the South Side of their Church, as was 36 Foot in Length, and 54 in Breadth;
the Purchase whereof, together with the Vault for Burying, and other Rooms
under that part of the Church, etc. cost 1546 l. 6 s. Anno 1632. The
Inhabitants of the said Blackfriars, purchased the Rooms directly under an
upper Room, formerly converted to a Church, to repair the Walls and Foundations
whereon the Church stood at the cost (together with the Repairs) of 500 l. The
Sum of all bestowed upon Blackfriars Church, since the Reformation, amounted
to 2600 l. 4 s. till the year 1633. It was burnt down, Anno 1666. in the great
Fire, and not yet Rebuilt.

XVI. St. Anthonie^ Church (vulgarly called St. Antlins, or St. Antholins) in
Budge-Row in Cord-wainer-street Ward, was a fair Parish Church; Sir Thomas
Knowles, late Lord Mayor of London, lies Buried there, who Repaired, and was a
great Benefactor to it. It was Repaired and Beautified, Anno 1616. toward
which, Sir William Craven, Mr. Henry Jay Aldermen, Mr. Adrian Moore, Mr. Thomas
Boothby, Mr. Francis Dorrington, Mr. William Parker, Mr. Cleophas Smith,
Citizen and Draper of London, were free and bountiful Benefactors; the cost
amounted to near 1000 l.

XVII. The Parish Church of Augustine (vulgarly Austin) in Watling-street in
Faringdon-Ward-within, was a fair Church, and well Repaired. And was in the
years 1630, and 1631, in part Rebuilt, and Beautifully adorned at the charge
of the Parishioners, which cost 1200 l.

XVIII. The Parish Church of St. Bartholomew Exchange, at the end of
Bartholomew-lane, was new Built by Thomas Pike Alderman, with the assistance of
Nicholas Yoo, one of the Sheriffs of London, about the year 1438. Sir John
Lepington's Lady founded a Chauntry there, in the 21 of Edw. 4. Sir William
Capel Mayor, added a proper Chapel, Anno 1509. on the South Side. James Wilford
Tailor, one of the Sheriffs, 1499. appointed by his Testament, a Doctor of
Divinity, every Good Friday to preach a Sermon there of Christ's Passion, for
ever, from six a clock, till 8 before Noon. This Church was Repaired and
Beautified at the charge of the Parishioners, Anno 1620.

XIX. The Parish Church of St. Bennet, which, of Robert Fink senior who new
Built it, is called St. Bennet Finck, stands in Thread-needle-street in
Broad-street-Ward, which was a proper Church. It was Repaired and Beautifully
adorned at the Parish-charge, Anno 1633. at the cost of above 400 l.

XX. In the Street formerly called Grass-street, (but vulgarly Graces, or
Gracious-street) is the Parish Church called St. Bennet Grass-Church, of the
Herb-Market kept near it, but vulgarly Grace-Church in Bridge-Ward-within. This
Church was Repaired and Beautified, Anno 1630. with a new Clock-Dyal, and
Chimes added, Anno 1633.

XXI. St. Bennet Pauls-Wharf in Thames Street in Castle-Baynard-Ward, was a
proper Parish Church, with several Monuments in it.

XXII. The Parish Church of St. Sith, has an addition of Bennet-Shorne, (or
Shrog, or Shorehog) and is vulgarly called, St. Bennet Sherehog. The ancientest
name of these is Shorn, of one Benedict Shorn, sometime a Citizen and
Stock-fishmonger of London, who New Built, Repaired it, or was a Benefactor
thereof in the time of Edward II. so that Shorn is corruptly called Shrog, and
more corruptly Shorebog. Being very much decayed, it was at the Parish-charge
very amply Repaired and Beautified, Anno 1628. It is near Needles-lane in
Cheap-Ward.

XXIII. The Parish Church of St. Botolph in Thames Street in Billingsgate-Ward,
was a handsome Church, and had many fair Monuments in it, but now defaced. This
Church was Repaired and Beautifully adorned at the Parish-charge, Anno 1624.

XXIV. Christ-Church was founded by King Henry VIII. who gave the old
Parish Church of St. Nicholas, to the Mayor and Commonalty of London, toward
the maintenance of this New Church to be erected in the late dissolved Church
of the Grey-fryers called St. Ewin, which Parish Church, with the aforesaid
Parish Church of St. Nicholas, and so much of St. Sepulchers Parish as is
within Newgate, were then made one Parish Church by the name of Christ-Church.
Of the Hospital there, we shall speak under its proper head. There was a fair
and spacious Gallery erected in the North Isle of this Church, Anno 1628. which
cost the Parishioners 149 l. 10 s. which was not only necessary, but graceful
and beautiful. It is in Faringdon-Ward-within.

XXV. In Broad-street-Ward near the Stocks-Market, is the Parish Church of St.
Christopher: To which Richard Sherington, Anno 1392. gave Lands; so did the
Lady Margaret Norford, Anno 1406. John Clavering, 1421, etc. But, above all,
the charity of Robert Thorn Merchant-Taylor, and a Bachelor, is to be
perpetuated, who lay Interred there in a fair Tomb of Touch, and gave, by his
Will, 4445 l. to pious Uses. This Church was Repaired and Beautified at the
cost of the Parish, Anno 1621.

XXVI. St. Clements East-Cheap in Candlewick-street-Ward, is a small
Parish Church. William Chartney and William Overie founded a Chauntry there. It
was Repaired and Beautified at the cost of the Parishioners, Anno 1632.

XXVII. At the South-west corner of Lime-street in Langborn-Ward, stood the
fair Parish Church of St. Dionis, called Back-Church, new Built in the Reign of
Henry VI. to which John Bugge Esquire was a great Benefactor. John Darby Alderman,
added thereto a fair Isle or Chapel on the South Side, and was there Buried,
Anno 1466. He gave (besides sundry Ornaments) his Dwelling House, besides other
Houses, unto the said Church. The middle Isle of this Church was new laid in
the year of our Lord, 1629. The Steeple was repaired, a new Turret built, new
Frames were made for the Bells, and the Church very decently beautified, Anno
1632.

XXVIII. The Parish Church of St. Dunstans East, is so called, for difference
from another Church in the West of that Name. It was a fair and large Church,
of an ancient Building, and within a large Churchyard: There be many rich
Merchants, and other rich Tradesmen in that Parish, chiefly Salters and
Ironmongers. In this are diverse Monuments of worthy persons. There are also
Seven shillings three pence given to the Poor every Sunday throughout the year
in ready money, besides Bread, and other Gifts, according to the Wills and
Dispositions of Sir Richard Champion, and Alderman Heardson, with Coals given
besides at certain times. One man has given yearly on Ox, to be distributed by
a quarter thereof quarterly, and a Peck of Oat-meal therewithal, to the Poor:
But so ordered, that they that have the quarter of Beef and Peck of Oatmeal at
one quarter, must stay till other Poor be so served, and that it comes to their
turn again. There are other Charities which came in Gifts of ready money, and
are accordingly truly distributed. This Church being decayed, began to be
Repaired in the year of our Lord 1631. and was fully Repaired, and curiously
adorned, Anno 1633. the charge of it amounting to above 2400 l. to make up
which, many worthy Parishioners did very bountifully contribute.

XXIX. The Parish Church of St. Edmond King and Martyr, commonly called St.
Edmond Lombard Street by the South-corner of Birchover-lane, is also called St.
Edmond Grass-Church, because the Grass (or Herb) Market came down so low. In
this Church were diverse Monuments, and several pious Benefactors contributed to
the Relief of the Poor; of which more in its proper place, under the Head of
Benefactors. This Church was Repaired and Beautified very richly, at the charge
of the Parishioners, Anno 1631, and 1632. It cost 248 l.

XXX. The Parish Church of St. Ethelburgh stands near Little St. Helens in
Bishopsgate-Ward. It was Repaired and Beautified at the charge of the
Parishioners, Anno 1612. And Anno 1620, the Steeple was Repaired. Anno 1630, a
Gallery was built in the South Isle, at the charge of Owen Santpeere, an
Inhabitant of that Parish.

XXXI. At the West End of Jesus Chapel under the Quire of Paul's, was the
Parish Church of St. Faith, commonly called St. Faith under Paul's, which served
for the Stationers, and others dwelling in Paul's Churchyard, Paternoster Row,
and places ad^oining. The Chapel of Jesus being suppressed in the Reign of
Edward VI. The Parishioners of St. Faith's Church were removed into the same,
as being more large and lightsom, Anno 1551. As to the Repairs of this, we will
only say (what was anciently said of it) that This Church needs no Repair at
all,
Saint Faith's defended by Saint Paul.


XXXII. In the midst of Fenchurch-street stands the Parish Church, called St.
Gabriel Fen-church, to which Helming Legget Esquire by License of Edward III. in
the 49 year of his Reign, gave one Tenement with a Curtelage thereunto
belonging, and a Garden with an Entry thereto leading, to the Parson and his
Successors, as a Parsonage-house, and the Garden to be a Burying-place for the
Parish. This Church was enlarged Nine Foot, and very richly Beautified, at the
charge of the Parish, Anno 1631, and 1632. which cost them 537 l. 7 s. 10 d.

XXXIII. The Parish Church of St. George Botolph-lane in Billinsgate-Ward is
small, but had diverse Monuments. It was Repaired and Beautified at the
Parish-charge, Anno 1627.

XXXIV. Adjoining to the place where Lollards Tower stood, called the Bishops
Prison, where they committed such as gainsaid the Opinions of their Church, is
the Parish Church of St. Gregory, appointed to the Petty Canons of Paul's. This
Church was repaired and richly adorned, at the cost of the Parishioners, Anno
1631, and 1632. which amounted to above 2000 l.

XXXV. The Parish Church of St. Hellens in Bishopsgate-Ward, was sometimes a
Priory of Black Nuns, founded in the Reign of Henry III. which was demolished
the 30 of Henry VIII. The whole Church, and the Partition betwixt the Nuns
Church and Parish Church being taken down, remains to the Parish, and is a
fair Parish Church. This Church was Repaired and Beautified at the charge of
the Parishioners, 1631, 1632, 1633. which amounted to above 1300 l.

XXXVI. The Parish Church of St James Dukes-Place in Aldgate-Ward, was built in
King James's time, and consecrated Anno 1622. Sir Peter Proby being Lord Mayor,
John Hodges Esquire and Sir Humphry Hanford Knight. Sheriffs and Aldermen. It was built
where the Priory (as they called it) of the Holy Trinity formerly stood, the
Parishioners obtaining License of King James to build themselves a Parish
Church, having long been destitute; to the building of which, many worthy
Persons were Benefactors. It is a very beautiful and handsome Church, and at
the time of re-edifying it was called, Trinity Christ Church.

XXXVII. The Parish Church of James Garlick-hithe, or Garlick-hive, because on
the River Thames, near this Church, Garlic was usually Sold in former Days.
This was a handsome Church. It is Recorded that Richard Rothing, one of the
Sheriffs of London, new built it in anno 1326, and lies Buried there, etc. The
North I Will was New Built, and the whole Church Repaired at the charge of the
Parishioners, anno 1624. which amounted to above seven hundred Pound. This is
in Vintry-Ward.

XXXVIII. The Parish Church of St. John Baptist, (called St. John upon
Wallbrook, because the West end thereof is on the very Bank of Wallbrook, by
Horse-shooe-bridge in Horse-shooe-bridge-street) was some Years before the Fire
new built. For in the Year 1412, License was granted by the Lord Mayor and
Commonalty, to the Parson and Parish, to enlarge it with a piece of Ground on
the North part of the Quire, one and twenty Foot in length, and seventeen Foot
in breadth, and three Inches; and and on the South side of the Quire, one Foot
of the common Soil. The most Memorable Monument there, was that of Sir Henry
Fitz-Alwin, Draper, the first Lord Mayor of London, (in the Tenth of King John,
anno 1208.) who continued by many Elections in the Mayoralty several Years. His
dwelling House in that Parish was divided into two or three Houses, and given
to the Drapers, for which they pay a quit-rent in his Name yearly for ever. So
that Mr. Stow's avouching that he was Buried in the Priory of the Holy Trinity
within Ald-gate, (now called Dukes-place) is a mistake. The Curious in this
matter may be satisfied in the Drapers-Hall. This Church was Re-edified and
Adorned, anno 1621. It is in Wallbrook-Ward.

XXXIX. On the East side of Friday-street, (so called of Fishmongers dwelling
there that served Fridays Market,) is the Parish Church commonly called St.
John Evangelist, in Bread-street-Ward. It was Repaired and Beautified at the
cost of the Parishioners, anno 1626. And a new Gallery was Built and Beautified
at the proper charge of Thomas Good-year, a Citizen and Draper of London, that
dwelt in the Parish.

XL. At the North-West Corner of Maiden-lane, in Alder^gate-Ward, is the fair
Parish Church of St. John Zachary. Thomas Lichfield founded a Chauntry there in
the Fourteenth year of Edward the Second. Sir Nicholas T^yford, Goldsmith, and
Lord Mayor, with Dame Margery his Wife, lie Interred there. Of whose Goods the
Church was made, and new Built with a Tomb for them and their posterity, Anno
1390. Amongst many other Pious and Worthy Persons and Benefactors to the
public, we cannot omit a Monument erected there in Memory of Sir James
Pemberton Knight, who being Sheriff of this City, at the coming in of King
James, entertained near Forty Earls and Barons when the King was proclaimed.
Anno 1612. he was Elected Mayor of this Honorable City of London. He Erected a
Free School in the Parish of Ecleston in Lancashire, sixteen years before his
Death, and gave Fifty Pound by the Year for the maintaining thereof for ever.
He gave also five hundred pound to Christs-Hospital, and two hundred pound to
the Company of Goldsmiths, besides many liberal Gifts to the Poor of his
Kindred, and many other most Charitable uses. He Died the Eighth of September,
1613, Aged Sixty Eight Years.

This is the substance of the Inscription, with these Verses: Marble, nor
Touch, nor Alabaster can
R^veal the Worth of the long buried Man:
For often we see Men's Goods, when they are gone,
Do Pious deeds, when they themselves did none.
M^ne (while I lived) no goodness did express,
It Is not Inscriptions make them more or less:
In Christ I hope to rise amongst the Just,
Man is but Grass, all must to Worms and dust.


There are many other Verses, but our intended brevity will not admit of
Transcribing them. The Repairs of this Church from the Year 1616, to 1631, cost
120 l. 11 s.

XLI. Next Northumberland-House in Aldgate-Ward, is the Parish Church of St.
Katherine Coleman, which addition of Coleman, was taken of a great Haw-Yard or
Garden, of old time called Coleman-Haw, in Trinity Parish now Christ-Church,
and in the Parish of St. Katherine and All Saints called Coleman-Church. Sir
James Dean has given two Shillings weekly in Bread to the Poor for ever, which
is duly performed every Friday; and the Parishionners give as much every
Sabbath day. This Church was Repaired and Beautified, Anno 1620. And 1624.
their Vestry was built, and a Gallery new made for the Poor of the Parish to
sit in.

XLII. The Parish Church of St. Katharine Christs-Church in Aldgate-Ward,
commonly called Cree-Church, stands in the Caemitery of the Dissolved Priory of
the Holy-Trinity, and is a very fair Church. Mr. William Gilborn a Draper, gave
Four Marks Yearly for ever, to be bestowed in one Dozen of Bread, and to be
distributed on every Sabbath day to the Poor of the said Parish, which is duly
paid: he gave twenty pound toward building a Gallery in the said Church. Mr.
John Smith Mercer, gave three pound yearly for ever, to be distributed amongst
the Poor every Christmas yearly. Mr. George Lee Sadler, gave twenty Shillings
yearly for ever to the Poor. Mrs. Dane a Widow, gave Eight Shillings yearly
for ever. Mrs. Alice Bateman, gave forty two pound six shillings to the Parish,
the profit to be distributed to the Poor for ever. Mr. John Bedow Gent. gave
ten pound to be distributed in Bread yearly to the Poor. Mr. George Hothersal
Merchant-Taylor, gave four and twenty shillings yearly for ever, out of his
Land, to the Poor of this Parish. Mr. John Waddis, Cook, born in this Parish,
gave to the Poor thereof three pound to be distributed among them in Bread
yearly for ever. Stephen Roberts, Cook, gave also four and forty shillings
yearly for ever, to be distributed in Bread. These good Persons are remembered
as such whose Memories are worthy to be perpetuated, and to be upon Record as
an Example for others to imitate. But more under the head of Benefactors.

The Foundation of this Church was laid the twenty third of June 1628. It is
said in Stow's Survey, page 839. Edit. 1633. That digging under the South Row
of Pillars, they found the Scull of a Man, the thickness of which, was three
quarters of an Inch and better, measured by many, and admired by all (as well
they might) that saw it. The Structure was built of the best Freestone that
could be got, and finished anno 1630. There were many bountiful Benefactors and
Contributers to it; And a curious Table (one of the fairest in the City,) set
up as a Monument of our Renowned Queen ELIZABETH, but the giver would be
concealed.

XLIII. Southwest from Guild Hall, in Cheap-Ward, stands the fair and large
Church of S. Lawrence-Jewry, which addition, (viz. Jewry) was, because of old
time Many Jews Inhabited thereabouts. It had diverse Monuments. Mr. Stow tells
us, That Seventy years before his first Edition of his Survey, which was 1598,
that is now 163 years ago, he saw the Shank-bone of a Man (as it was taken,)
twenty five inches long by the Rule, and remained before the Fire, fastened to a
post of timber noted more for the thickness, hardness, and strength thereof,
then the length, for when it was hanged on the Stone Pillar, it fretted (with
moving) the said Pillar, and was not it self fretted, nor did it grow lighter
by remaining dry; but how found or discovered we cannot learn. Also a Tooth of
a very great bigness (he says of a man's Fist) hanged up for a show in a Chain
of Iron upon a Stone Pillar; but conveyed from thence long since: the credit of
this rests upon him. This Church was repaired and richly beautified at the
Charge of the Parishioners, Anno 1618. Amongst other Monuments, we must not
omit that of our celebrated and most Illustrious Queen Elizabeth, in this
Church, with these Verses, Here lies her Type, who was of late
The prop of Belgia, stay of France.
Spains foil, Faiths Shield, the Queen of State,
Of Arms, of Learning, Fate and Chance:
In Brief, of Women never was seen
So great a Prince, so good a Queen.
Such Virtues her Immortal made
Death (envying all that cannot Dye,)
Her Earthly parts did so invade,
As in it Wrackt self Majesty.
But so her Spirit inspired her Parts,
That she still lives in Loyal hearts, etc.


XLIV. The Parish Church of St. Laurence in Candlewick Street and Ward, was
increased with a Chapel of Jesus by Thomas Cole for a Master and Chaplain:
which Church and Chapel was made a College of Jesus and of Corpus Christi for
a Master and seven Chaplains by Sr. John Poultney Lord Mayor, (of whom this
Church was called St. Laurence Poultney) or Pountney, Confirmed by Edward the
Third in the Twentieth year of his Reign. This College was surrendered in the
Reign of Edward the Sixth, the Steeple of the Church was new Leaded, Five new
Bells were hung, and the Frames new made, all the ^les new raised and levelled,
and the whole Church within and without most beautifully repaired at the cost
of the Parish, Anno 1631. and 1632.

XLV. On Fishstreet-hill in Bridge Ward within, is the Parish Church of St.
Leonard Milk-Church, so termed of one William Melker an especial Builder
thereof, but commonly called St. Leonard-East-Cheap, because it stands at
East-cheap corner: The Church and Steeple were repaired and beautified in the
Year, 1618, 1619, 1620, and 1621. at the cost of Eight hundred and fifty pounds.

XLVI. On the West Side of Foster-lane in Alders-gate Ward is the Parish Church
of St. Leonards, called St. Leonards Foster-lane; for them of St. Martins le
Grand: A great number of Houses being built in place of the Great Collegiate
Church of St. Martin, the Parish is very much increased: It was enlarged,
repaired, and adorned at the Parish charge, Anno 1631. To which, John Trot
Citizen and Merchant was a bountiful Benefactor; the cost amounted to above
Five hundred pounds.

XLVII. On the East Side of Bridge-Ward stands the fair Parish Church of St.
Magnus, in which were buried many Eminent men: it had many repairs and charges
in the Years 1623, 1624, and 1625. which cost above Five hundred pound; in the
Year, 1629. it was very richly and beautifully adorned, all at the proper cost
and charge of the Parish.

XLVIII. The fair Parish Church of St. Margarets Lothbury in Coleman-Street
Ward stands upon the Watercourse of Walbrooke, which was Reedified, Anno 1440.
Robert Large gave to the Quire of that Church One hundred Shillings, and Twenty
pounds for Ornaments: and to the Vaulting over the Watercourse of Walbrook by
the said Church, for the enlarging thereof Two hundred marks: This Church was
repaired and richly beautified at the charge of the Parishioners, Anno 1621.

XLIX. In Friday street in Breadstreet-Ward, is the Parish Church of St.
Margaret Moses, so called of one Moses that was Founder, or Newbuilder thereof.
It was Repaired and Beautified at the cost of the Parishioners, Anno 1627,

L. In the same Wardon Fishstreet-hill stands the Parish Church of St.
Margarets New Fish-street, which was a Proper Church, but without any Monuments
of Note.

LI. St. Margaret Pattens in Rood-lane, Billings-gate Ward, being much decayed,
was Repaired and Beautified at the charge of the Parishioners, Anno. 1614. who
from that year, to 1632, expended 275 l. five s. 6 d. upon it.

LII. St. Mary Abchurch stands near unto the South-end of Abchurch-lane, in
Candleweek-street-Ward, upon a rising ground, and was a Fair Church with sundry
Monuments in it: It was Beautified and Repaired at the proper cost and charge
of the Parishioners, in the year of our Lord, 1611.

LIII. In Alderman-bury-street is the Fair Parish Church of St. Mary
Alderman-bury, with a Churchyard and Cloister adjoining, in which Cloister (as
Mr. Stow says) was hanged and fastened a shank-bone of a man, in length Twenty
eight inches and a half, of a size larger by three inches and a half than that
in St. Laurence Jewry, but not so hard: this is Monstrous, for it is more then
after the proportion of Five shank bones of any Man now living amongst us. The
Church was repaired and beautified An. 1633. at the cost of the Parish.

LIVE. Alder-Mary Church on the South Side of Budg-Row, by the West corner
thereof, in Cordwainer-street-Ward, is so called because older than any Church
of St. Mary in the City. Sir Henry Keble Grocer and Lord Mayor, who deceased
1518, gave a 1000 l. by his Testament, toward the Rebuilding it. It was
repaired and beautified by the Parish Anno 1632.

LV. At the upper end of Hosier-lane toward West Cheap, is the fair
Parish Church of St. Maryle-Bow, (vulgarly Bow-Church.) This Church in the
Reign of William the Conqueror, being the first in this City builded on Arches
of Stone, was therefore called New Mary Church, or St. Mary de Arcubus, or le
Bow, in West Cheaping. The Court of the Arches is kept in this Church, and
takes Name of the place, not the place of the Court. It Is in
Cordwainer-street-Ward.

We read that anno 1090. the Third of William Rufus, by tempest of Wind the
Roof of this Church was overturned, wherewith some persons were slain, and Four
of the Rafters of twenty six Foot in length, were pitched with such violence in
the Ground of the high street, that scarce four Foot of them remained above
Ground, which were fain to be cut even with the Ground, because they could not
be plucked out, for the City of London was not then paved, but a Moorish ground.

Anno 1271, a great part of the Church fell down; and slew many people, Men and
Women. John Rotham or Rodham, by his Will Anno 1465, gave the Parish (wanting
room in their Churchyard) a certain Garden in Hosier-lane, for burial of their
Dead, which so continued near a hundred Years, but now is built up and
converted to a private dwelling. The old Steeple was Re-edified Anno 1469, so
that it was ordained by a Common Council, that the Bow-Bell should be nightly
Rung at Nine a Clock, to maintain which, ( viz. the Ringing of Bow-Bell,) John
Den Mercer, by his Testament dated 1472, according to the trust of Reginald
Langdon, gave to the Parson and Wardens two Tenements with the Appurtenances,
since made into one, in Hosier-lane.

This Church has been Rebuilt very gorgeously since the great fire, and the
Steeple finished with that Elegancy of rare Architecture, height, and
curiosity, that it excels any in Christendom; of which more hereafter.

LVI. On the South Side of Walbrook-Ward, from Candlewick-street in the mid way
betwixt London-stone and Wallbrook-corner is the proper Parish Church called
St. Mary Bothaw or Boathaw, because adjoining to an Haw or Yard, wherein of old
times Boats were made and Landed from Dowgate to be mended. It was repaired and
beautified at the Charge of the Parish, in the Year of our Lord 1621.

LVII. The Parish Church called St. Mary-Cole-Church in Cheap-Ward, is so named
of one Cole that Builded it, upon a Vault above Ground, so that Men were forced
to ascend thereunto by certain steps. It was repaired and beautified at the
Parish charge, Anno Feb. 1623.

LVIII. In St. Mary-Hill-lane is the fair Parish Church of St. Mary on the
Hill, because of the ascent from Billingsgate. In the Year 1322, Rich^rd
Hackney, one of the Sheriffs of ^^ondon was buried there, Stow. p. 227.
and Alice his Wife, as Robert Fabian writes, saying thus: In the Year 1379,
in the Month of April, as Laborers dug for the Foundation of a Vault,
within the Church of St. Mary-Hill, near unto Billingsgate, they found a Coffin
of Rotten Timber, and therein the Corpse of a Woman, whole of skin, and of bones
undissevered, and the joints of her Arms pliable, without breaking of the skin,
upon whose Sepulcher this was engraven: Here lies the Bodies of Richard Hackney
Fishmonger, and Alice his Wife; the which Richard was Sheriff in the 15 th of
Edward II. ( viz. anno 1322.) So that her Body was, 175 years after she had
been buried, found uncorrupted: It was kept above ground three or four days
without Noyance, but then it waxed unsavory, and was again buried. This Church
was repaired and beautified at the charge of the Parish, Anno 1616.

LIX. In Milk-Street in Cripple-Gate-Ward, stands the Parish Church of St. Mary
Magdalen, in which were several Monuments, amongst which, one for Queen
Elizabeth. It was repaired and beautified at the charge of the Parish in the
year 1619.

LX. Over against the North-west end of Lambert-hill-lane in
Knight-Riders-street, is the Parish Church of St. Mary Magdalen, commonly
called so, with the addition of Old Fish-street. It was repaired and beautified
at the charge of the Parish, Anno 1630. which came to 140 l. in this was a
Monument of Queen Elizabeth; it is in Castle-Baynard-Ward.

LXI. The Parish Church of St. Mary de Monte also, commonly called St. Mary
Mounthaw, is situate on the West Side of Old Fish-street in Queen-hith-Ward. It
was built to be a Chapel of the House of the Mounthaunts, and the Bishop of
Hereford is Patron thereof. It was in part new built, and very much enlarged
and beautified, Anno 1609. In the South Isle there hung a very fair Picture of
King James, with the Figures of Peace and Plenty on either side of him; Peace
with her Olive Branch, and Plenty with her Sheaf of Wheat in her hands being
the Gift of Robert Plonker, then Churchwarden.

LXII. The Parish Church of St. Mary Sommerset at the South-end of St. Mary
Mounthaw-lane over against Broken-Wharf, is also in Queen-Hith-Ward, and a
proper Church; it was repaired and beautified, Anno 1624.

LXIII. The Parish Church of St. Mary called Stayning, because it stands at
the North-end of Stayning-lane in Aldersgate-Ward, was repaired and beautified
at the cost of the Parish, Anno 1630.

LXIV. Near Stocks-Market in Walbrook-Ward is the Parish Church called St. Mary
Wooll-Church, so called, of a Beam placed in the Churchyard, which was thereof
called Wooll-Church Haw, of the weighing of Wool there used; for amongst the
Customs of London written in French in the Reign of Edward II. there is to be
found a Chapter, entitled, Les Customs de Wooll-Church Haw. Wherein is set
down what was there to be paid for every parcel of Wool weighed. This weighing
of Wool was there continued till the 6th of Richard II. till John Churchman
built the Custom House upon Wooll-Key to serve for the said purpose. This was
(and is now) a fair and large Church.

LXV. The Parish Church of St. Mary Wolnoth in Langborn-Ward, was a proper
handsome Church, with some few Monuments in it.

LXVI. In Ironmonger-lane in Cheap-Ward, is the Parish Church of St. Martin,
formerly called Pomary, possibly of Apples growing where now Houses are built.
It was repaired and beautified at the Parish-charge, Anno 1629.

LXVII. The Parish Church of St. Martin by Ludgate in Farringdon-Ward-within,
was a proper Church, to which, Anno 1437. ( viz. 15th of H. 6.) Sir John
Michael Lord Mayor, and the Commonalty, granted a parcel of Ground, containing
28 Foot in length, and 24 in breadth, to build their Steeple upon.

LXVIII. The Parish Church of St. Martin Orgar in Candlewick-street-ward, is a
small Church; Sir William Crowmer Lord Mayor built a handsome Chapel on the
South Side thereof, and was buried there in an ancient Tomb, Anno 1533. it was
repaired 1630. at the cost of 122 l. 6 s. 6 d. There was a rich and very
beautiful Monument in the Chancel of Sir Allen Cotton Knight, and Alderman of
London, and sometimes Lord Mayor, who dyed the 24th of December, Anno 1628.
with a large Inscription, concluding with these Verses.

When he left Earth, Rich Bounty Died,
Mild Courtesy gave place to Pride;
Soft Mercy to bright Justice said,
Oh Sister! we are both Betrayed;
While Innocence lay on the Ground
By Truth, and wept at eithers Wound,
The Sons of Levi did lament,
Their Lamps went out, their Oil was spent;
Heaven has his Soul, and only we
Spin out our Lives in misery:
So Death, thou missest of thy End,
And kill'st him not, but kill'st his Friend.
There was also a delicate Monument of our famous Queen Elizabeth.

LXIX. The Parish Church of St. Martin Outwich, is on the South-part of
Threadneedle-street in Broad-street-ward; it is so called of Martin de
Oteswitch, Nicholas de Oteswich, William Oteswich, and John Oteswich, Founders
thereof, and all buried there, as appeared by their ancient Monument. There was
Interred Richard Staper, Elected Alderman of London, Anno 1594. the greatest
Merchant in his time, and the chiefest Actor in the discovery of the Trades of
Turkey, and the East India. He was prosperous, wealthy, bountiful, and a good
man; he died, Anno 1608. Sir Henry Row gave 5 l. yearly for Ever to the Poor of
this Parish, to be bestowed in Bread and Coals. And Mrs. Sotherton yearly for
Ever in Bread, 50 s.

LXX. The Fair Parish Church called St. Martin Vintrey in Vintrey-Ward, was
sometimes called St. Martin de Beremand Church. It was new built, Anno 1399. by
the Executors of Matthew Columbars, a Stranger born, and a French Merchant.

LXXI. The Parish Church of St. Matthew Friday-street, Farringdon-ward-within,
had diverse Monuments in it. It was repaired and beautified at the cost of the
Parish, Anno 1633.

AS TO

LXXII. The Parish Church of St. Michael, called St. Michael at Basing-hall in
Basing-hall-ward.

LXXIII. The Parish Church of St. Michael Cornhil in Cornhil-ward.

LXXIV. St Michaels Crooked-lane in Candleweek-street-ward.

LXXV. St. Mich. Queenhith in Queenhith-ward.

The are handsome Churches, affording no Remarkables, but what will fall under
other Heads.

LXXVI. St. Michael ad Bladum, or at the Corn, (corruptly called St. Michael
Querne) is in Farringdon-ward-within, and was a fair Church, with diverse
Monuments in it, amongst the rest one for John Leland, the famous Antiquary,
and others, as John Banks Esquire Mercer, who by his last Will written with his own
hand, gave to pious and charitable Uses 6000 l. which his Executor Robert
Tichburn carefully discharged.

LXXVII. St. Michael Royal in Vintrey-ward is a fair Parish Church. It was new
built, and made a College by Sir Richard Whittington Mercer, and four times
Lord Mayor; for a Master, four Fellows, Masters of Art, Clerks, Conducts,
Chorists, etc. There was also an Almshouse for thirteen poor men. The College
was suppressed in the time of Edward the Sixth, the Almshouses, with the poor
men, do remain, and are paid by the Mercers. This Church was beautified at the
proper cost of the Parish, Anno 1630. at the charge of 130 l. 9 s.

LXXVIII. The Parish Church of St. Michael in Wood-street in Cripplegate-ward,
was a proper Church, in which were diverse Monuments. Here was Interred the Head
of James the Fourth, King of Scots of that name, slain at Flodden-field. Here
was also a Monument of Queen Elizabeth.

LXXIX. The Parish Church called St. Mildred Bread-street in Bread-street-ward,
had diverse Monuments, amongst the rest, one for Sir John Chadworth, or
Shadworth Knight. some time Mercer and Lord Mayor of London, who gave a Vestry to
this Church, an House for the Pastor to dwell in, and a Churchyard to the
Parishioners, wherein to bury their dead. He deceased the 7th of May, An. 1401.
In Memorial of whom, there was a fair Inscription on the Wall, in these words:
Here lies a Man, that Faith and Works did even
(Like Fiery Chariots) mount him up to Heaven:
He did adorn this Church. When words were weak
And men forget, the living stones will speak,
He left us Land: This little Earth him keeps,
These black words Mourners, and the Marble weeps.


At the upper end of the Chancel was a fair Window full of cost and beauty,
which being divided into five parts, carried in the first of them a very artful
and curious Representation of the Spaniards great Armado, and the Battle in
1588. In the 2d, the Monument of Queen Elizabeth. In the 3d, of the Gunpowder
Plot. In the 4th, of the lamentable time of Infection, 1625. In the 5th, the
view and lively portraicture of that worthy Gentleman Captain Nicholas Crisp,
at whose sole cost (among other) this beautiful piece of Work was erected, as
also the Figures of his virtuous Wife and Children, with the Arms belonging
unto them. Upon the story of 1588, were these Verses: Star-gazing Wizards sat
upon this year,
Matter of wonder, and did threaten fear
Toward us, insomuch that Rome and Spain
This Land accounted their assured gain.
But mark how God did quite their hepes confound,
Both ships and men we did see flee and drowned.
Queen Elizabeth's Monument.
Marvel not why we do erect this Shrine,
Since Dedicated in to Worth Divine;
Religion, Arts, with Policy and Arms,
Did all concur in Her most Happy Reign:
To keep God's Church and us from Plotted Harms,
Contrived by Romish Wits, and force of Spain.
The Powder Plot, 1605.
When Force could not prevail, nor Plots abroad
Could have Success, Sin now invents new Fraud;
Guy Faux is sent Ambassador to Styx.
And thence returning, furnishes with Tricks
His damned Crew, who forthwith all conclude
To blow up King, the State, and Multitude.
The Great Plague, 1625.
The Story's past, God's blessings to the State
Do clearly show; but sure we were Ingrate,
For now, behold, instead of sweet protection,
Thousands are swept away by foul Infection;
But mark God's mercy in midst of greatest cries,
He sheathed his Sword, and wiped tears from our eyes.
The Founder's Figure, with their Wife, Children and Arms.
These Ensigns which you see and Monument,
Are not so much to represent
The Founder's Person, as his zealous care
TO express God's Love and Mercies rare
To this his Vineyard, for to that sole end
Did he these Stories thus commend
To After-Ages, that in their Distress,
They might God's Goodness still express.


LXXX. In the main Body of Cheap-Ward, stands the Parish Church called St.
Mildred Poultrey. The Founder is not to be read in any credible Record, but it
appears by certain ancient Evidences of the said Church, that from the
beginning it had not so much spare ground about it, as to make a Churchyard
of, until Anno 1420. And the 8 of H. 5. Thomas Morstead Esquire and Chyrurgeon to
the Kings H. 4. H. 5. and H. 6. (and afterward, Anno 1436. was Sheriff and
Alderman of London) gave unto the Church a parcel of Ground lying between his
dwelling House, and the said Church adjoining to it toward the North, to make
a Burying place of, containing from the course of Walbrook toward the West, 45
Foot; and in Breadth from the Church toward the North, 35 Foot. Besides other
Monuments, here was one for Queen Elizabeth, with several Copies of Verses,
some of which are before recited, (for there were Monuments for Her in several
Churches, and She well deserved it, as being a most Heroic Princess, that
checked the Plots and Encroachments of the Pope and his Adherents, and is
therefore to be perpetuated to Posterity,) and therefore what we have not
elsewhere met with, shall be inserted.

On the top of the Monument were these Lines: If Prayers or Tears of Subjects
had prevailed,
To save a Princess, through the World esteemed,
Then Atropos in Cutting here had failed,
And had not cut her thr^ad, but been redeemed.
But pale faced Death, and cruel Churlish Fate;
To Prince and People brings the latest Date.
Yet spite of Death and Fate, fame will display
Her Gracious Virtues through the World for aye.


Under Her were these Verses: The Admired Empress through the World applauded,
For Supreme Virtues Rarest imitation,
Whose Scepters Rule, Fames loud voto'd Trumpet lauded,
Unto the Ears of every Foreign Nation.
Canopied under powerful Angels Wings,
To her Immortal Praise sweet Science sings.


LXXXI. The Parish Church of St. Nicholas-Acons in Lumbard-street, in
Langborn-Ward, was Repaired and Imbattled by Sir John Bridges Draper and Lord
Mayor, Anno 1520, who was buried there. It was afterward Repaired and
Beautified at the Charge of the Parish Anno 1615. There was the Monument of
John Hall, Master of the Worshipful Company of Drapers, who dyed the Nineteenth
of November 1618. Aged Ninety three Years; and Fifty eight Years a House keeper
in that Parish, and had Twenty seven Children all born there.

LXXXII. Toward the West End of Knight-Riders-street, in Queen-Hith-Ward, is
the Parish Church called St. Nicholas Cole-Abbey (formerly Cold-Abbey,) which
was an Ancient and proper Church. In the Twenty sixth of Edward the III. Thomas
Friar, Fishmonger, gave a piece of Ground to the said Parish Church of St.
Nicholas, containing Eighty Six Foot in Length Forty three Foot at one end, and
Thirty four at another in Breadth, for a Burying place or Churchyard. It was
Repaired and Beautified at the cost of the Parish, Anno 1630.

LXXXIII. On the West End of Bread-street-Hill, also in Queen-Hith-Ward, is the
Parish Church called St. Nicholas Olave, wherein were diverse Monuments. Thomas
Lewen Ironmonger, Alderman, and one of the Sheriffs 1537, gave his Message
with Fourteen Tenements in the said Parish, to the Ironmongers, and they to
give Stipends to Alms-Men in Five Houses, built in the Churchyard of that
Parish. His Monument, with Agnes his Wife, was Revived and Beautified at the
Charge of the Right Worshipful Company of Ironmongers, Anno 1623.

LXXXIV. At the North-west corner of Sydon-Lane in Tower-street-Ward, is the
handsome Parish Church called St. Olave Hartstreet, in which were many
Monuments. It was Repaired and Richly Beautified at the Parish Charges, in the
Years 1632, and 1633, at the cost of above Four hundred thirty seven pound.

LXXXV. In the Street called the Old Jewry in Coleman-street-Ward, is the
Parish Church called St. Olave Jewry, in old Records called St. Olave Vpwell,
in which were several Monnments.

LXXXVI. At the North-end of Noble-street in Alders-gate-Ward, is the
Parish Church called St. Olave Silver-street. It was New built in the Year
1609, (and enlarged in Breadth above seven Foot, (and Anno 1619, Repaired and
Beautified, and enriched with a Fair Gallery, Anno 1632.

LXXXVII. In Needlers-lane in Cheap-Ward is the Parish Church, called St.
Pancras Soper-lane. Here was a fair Monument of James Hu^sh (Citizen and Grocer
of London) who by two Wives had twenty nine Children, he dyed the twentieth of
August 1590. he was a good Man, and Charitable; upon his Tomb was an Elegant
Latin Epitaph. Mr. Thomas Chapman in the Year 1617, gave a very fair and costly
Table, bearing the Figure of the Monument of the Renowned QVEEN ELIZABETH.

LXXXVIII. At the South-West corner of Wood-street in Farringdon-Ward within,
is the handsome Parish Church called St. Peter-Cheap. In which are but few
Monuments, Sir John Shaw Goldsmith and Lord Mayor, (deceased 1503,) appointed
by his Testament, the said Church and Steeple to be New built at his cost, with
a flat Roof. Yet Thomas Wood Goldsmith, of the Sheriffs 1491, i^ accounted a
Principal Benefactor, because the Roo^ of the middle I Will was supported by
Images of Wood-Men. It was Repaired and Beautified at the charge of the Parish
in the Years 1616 and 1617, which came to 314 l.

LXXXIX. The Parish Church of St. Peter's in Cornhil is an ancient building;
there is in that Church a Table fast chained, wherein it is said, the Anno 179,
King Lucius founded this Church, an^ made it an Archbishops See, and the
Metropolitan or chief Church of this Kingdom: and so endure^ Four hundred
Years, then the Archbishops See an^ Pall were removed to Canterbury. But
whethe^ the Church that King King Lucius built, be thi^ or St. Peter's
Westminster, is controverted by Historians, and therefore we shall not wrangle
about it. To the Poor of this Parish were sundry Benefactors, as Lancelot
Tompson of London Draper, who amongst other Charities gave one hundred pound to
the Drapers Company, and they to allow Five pound yearly for ever* for Bread
and Coals for the Poor of the said Parish; whom several other well minded
People imitated. It was most richly Repaired and Beautified at the Parish
Charge, amounting to about one thousand four hundred pound, in the Year 1633.

XC. The Parish Church called St. Peter-Pauls-Wharf, was in Queen-Hith-Ward,
wont to be called Parva or Little, because it was a small Church; it was
Repaired and Beautified Anno 1625. Therein was a Monument for Queen ELIZABETH.

XCI. In Broad-street-Ward is the Parish Church vulgarly called St. Peter-Poor,
peradventure so called, because the Parish was Poor formerly, (but now they are
otherwise,) or to difference it from others of that Name; here are sundry
Monuments, and several Benefactors to the Poor of the Parish. The Lady Payton,
gave 40 s. Yearly for ever in Bread; the Lady Ramsey gave four pound Yearly for
ever. Mr. John Quarles Citizen and Draper of London, gave the Sum of five pound
Yearly for ever, etc. It cost in sundry Repairs from the year 1615, to 1630.
the Sum of one thousand five hundred eighty seven pound; all which, except four
hundred which Sir William Garway Knight gave, was the proper charge of the
Parishioners.

XCII. The Parish Church of St. Stephen in Coleman-street and Ward, had diverse
Monuments, and Benefactors, but I cannot omit the Verses on the Monument of
Barn Roberts Esquire who Dyed Anno 1610. they are so Elegantly expressive of his
Wifes affection, (she was eldest Daughter to Sir William Glover Kinght, and
Alderman of London,) who Erected the Monument Anno 1611. at her own Charge.

If human worth could have preserved him still,
He had been much too strong for Death to kill.
Yet being Conquered, he got by the strife,
A better being, in a better life:
So, that great Victor over Nature, left him
More happiness ten fold than he bereft him.
This Church was sometime a Synagogue of the Jews, then a Parish Church, then a
Chapel to St. Olaves in the Jewry, and 7 E. 4. it was Incorporated a
Parish Church: It was Repaired and Beautified at the Parish Charge Anno 1622,
and a very fair Gallery added in the South I Will Anno 2629. Here was also a
Monument for Queen ELIZABETH.

XCIII. In Wallbrook-street, and Ward, is the fair Parish Church called St.
Stephen-Wallbrook. Sir Robert Chichely sometimes Lord Mayor, in the Year 1428* 6
H. 6. gave to this Parish one Plat of Ground containing two hundred and eight
Foot and a half in Length, and sixty six Foot in Breadth, to Build a New
Church, and for a Church Yard on the Eastside of the Old Church, (the place of
the Old Church being converted to a Parsonage-House,) This Ground he bought of
the Grocers for two hundred Marks, which was Let before for twenty six Marks
Yearly. He gave over and above one hundred pound, to the said Work, bore the
Charges of all the Timber-Work on the Procession-way, and laid the Lead upon it
at his own Post. He gave also all the Timber for the Roofing of the two Isles,
and paid for the Carriage therefore. It was finished 1439. The Breadth being
sixty seven Foot, the Length 125. The Churchyard Ninety Foot in Length, and
thirty seven in Breadth and more. It had many Repairs to the Year 1632,
amounting to five hundred and ten pound fifteen shillings and six pence.

XCIV. The Parish Church of St. Swithins is also in Wallbrook-Ward, on the
South-West corner of Swithins-lane, wherein were diverse Monuments.

XCV. In Knight-Riders-street in Vintry-Ward is the proper Parish Church of St.
Thomas Apostle. In which was a neat Monument, on which was an Elegant Epitaph
in Latin Verse, composed by Mrs. Katherine Killegrew for her self in her life
time. And another in neat Greek Verse by her Sister Elizabeth, for the said
Katherin^ when she dyed; besides two more, expressing the great Learning and
Accuteness of those Noble Sisters. But our intended brevity permits the Recital
but of two, and that for a ^aste, and to show what Women may arrive to, if
Studious.

What she Writ her Self was: Dormio nunc Domino, Domini virtute resurgam,
Et (...) meum carne videbo mea,
Mortua ne Dicar, fruitur pars altera Christo
Et surgar Capiti, tempore, tota, meo.


Here was another Epitaph by Andrew Melvin. Palladis and Phabi comes una, and
Pieris una,
Pieridumque soror, Pieridumque Parens
Gratia, suada, lepas, Gravitas, Constantia, Candor,
Religio, Pietas, and pudor, and probitas,
Atque Palestinae, and Latiae, Graiaeque Camenae
Clausit olim uno omnes pectore, nunc Tumulo.


It was Repaired and Beautified at the Parish charge, amounting to three
hundred pound, Anno 1630. There was also a Monument of Queen ELIZABETH, but the
Verses being the same we had in other places, we omit them, to avoid prolixity.

XCVI. In Knight-Riders-street is the small Parish Church of the Holy-Trinity.
To which John Bryan Alderman in the Reign of Henry the V. was a great
Benefactor, etc. It was Rebuilt at the Parish charge (being lamentably
decayed) Anno 1607, and 1608. To which the Worshipful Companies of Merchant
Tailors and Vintners, were very Bountiful Benefactors. As also these Aldermen,
Sir Thomas Cambel, Sir John Swinnerton, Sir John Gore, Sir William Craven, Sir
Thomas Middleton.

XCVII. The Parish Church called St. Vedast, alias Foster, in
Farringdon-Ward-within, was a Fair Church, had had many Benefactors, and in it
were several Monuments. To this Church at the Chancel end, the Breadth being
twenty Yards and above, was added twenty Foot of Ground, which Ground was given
to the Parish, to Lengthen the Church, out of a Fair Court then belonging to
the Sadlers-Hall.

Having given a brief Account of the Churches within the Walls as they were
formerly, (reserving their present State to another Head, there being Eighty
seven Destroyed by the Fire, of which many are bravely Rebuilt, etc.) We shall
proceed Alphabotically to those sixteen without the Wall. And,

I. The Parish Church of St. Andrew-Holborn, stands at the very corner of
Shooe-lane in Holborn. In which are several Monuments, but we cannot omit that
of R^lph Okey of Lincoln's Inn Esquire because of his Piety and Bounty in Legacies.
He was Master of St. Katharines, and one of the Masters of Requests to Queen
ELIZABETH, he Dyed the Fourth of June 1596. He gave by his Testament to
Christs-Hospital, one hundred pound. To the College of the Poor of Queen
ELIZABETH in East Greenwich, one hundred pound. To Poor Scholars in Cambridge,
one hundred pound. To Poor Scholars in Oxford, one hundred pound. To Prisoners
in the two Compters, of London, two hundred pound. To Prisoners in the Fleet,
one hundred pound. To Prisoners in Ludgate, one hundred pound. To Prisoners in
Newgate, one hundred pound. To Prisoners in the King's- Bench, one hundred
pound. To Prisoners in the Marshalsea, one hundred pound. Which is Eleven
hundred pound. Besides twenty pound to the Prisoners in the White-Lyon. And to
the Poor of St. Katharines, twenty pound. And to every Brother and Sister
there, forty shillings. He has a Curious Monument in the Wall of the Quire,
expressing in Latin his Descent, Employs, De^erts, and Piety, etc.

II. In treating of the Parish Church of St. Bartholome^-Great, in
Farringdon-Ward-without, it is necessary to say something briefly of its
Original. On the East Side of Duck-lane near Smithfield, one Rahere, a pleasant
wittied Gentleman, Founded the Priory of St. Bartholomew, about the Year 1102.
He placed Canons there, and became himself their first Prior, and so continued
while he lived, and was Buried there in a Fair Monument, Renewed by Prior
Bolton, who was the last Prior in that House; this Priory was New built Anno
1410. King Henry II. Granted it the privilege of a Fair to be kept Yearly at
Bartholomew-tide. When it was surrended in the Thirtieth of H. VIII. it was
valued at six hundred fifty three pound fifteen shillings per annum. Six Bells
in a Tune belonging to it, were Sold to the Parish of St. Sepulchers. And then
the Church being pulled down to the Quire, the Quire was by the Kings order,
annexed, for the enlarging of the old Parish Church adjoining, and so was used
till the Reign of Queen Mary, who gave the Remnant of the Priory-Church to the
Friars Preachers, or Blackfriars, and was used as their Conventual-Church,
until the first of Queen Elizabeth. Then those Friars were put out, and all the
said Church, with the old Parish Church, was wholly as it stood in the last
Year of Edward the VI. given by Parliament to remain for ever a Parish Church,
to the Inhabitants within the Close, called Great St. Bartholomews. Since which
time much cost has been spent in Repairs upon it.

III. The Hospital of St. Bartholomew (now the Parish Church called St.
Bartholomew the less,) was Founded by the above mentioned Rahere. This was
confirmed by Edward III. in his Twenty sixth Year; this Hospital was valued at
the Suppression Anno 1539. in the Thirty first of Henry VIII. at thirty five
pound six shillings and seven pence Yearly. It Remains now the Parish Church
to the Inhabitants in the Precinct of the Hospital. In the later end of July
Anno 1552. This Hospital was Repaired, New Endowed and Furnished at the charge
of the Citizens.

IV. The Parish Church of St. Bridget or Bride, in Farringdon-Ward-without, of
old time was a small Thing, but increased since with a large Body and side-Iles
toward the West, at the charge of William Vennor Esquire Warden of the Fleet,
about the Year 1480. All which he caused to be brought about in the Stone, in
the Figure of a Vine, with Grapes and Leaves, etc. The partition betwixt the
old work and the New, some time prepared as a Screen, to be set up in the Hall
of the Duke of Somerset's-House in the Strand, was bought for eight score
pound, and set up in the Year 1557. This Church was Repaired and Richly and
Curiously Beautified at the Charge of the Parishioners 1630, 1631, 1632. The
Battlements were New built, the middle Roof, and a very Fair Gallery on the
North side of this Church answerable to that on the South, erected Anno 1607.

V. As to Bridewel Precinct we refer you to the Section of Hospitals, with
respect to that Foundation. It was Enlarged and Beautified at the proper cost
and Charge of the Governors and Inhabitants of the Precinct, Anno 1620. Sir
Thomas Middleton being President, and Mr. Thomas Johnson Treasurer. There was
above twenty four Foot in Length added to it. It is a Beautiful Chapel; that
commends the care of its Governors. We must not omit to insert, that close by
the Pulpit, hangs the Picture of King Edward the VI. that truly Religious and
most Virtuous Protestant Prince, with the following Lines: This Edward of fair
Memory, the sixth
In whom with Greatness Goodness was commixt,
Gave this Bridewell, a Palace in old times,
For a Chastising-House of Vagrant Crimes.


There is likewise a Monument of Queen Elizabeth's, but the Verses being before
Recited, we shall for brevity here omit them.

VI. In Alders-gate-Ward, and in Britain-street, so called of the Dukes of
Britain that lodged there, is the Parish Church of St. Botolph, called
Aldersgate. There was a Popish Brotherhood Founded there Anno 1377, endowed
with Lands above thirty l. per annum, (a great Sum then;) but suppressed by
King Edward the VI. In this were diverse Monuments, amongst the rest was a Fair
Pyramid erected against a Pillar, with this Pathetick Inscription, not unworthy
to be Transcribed.

Katharina Mountague obiit 7. die Decembris anno Domini. 1612.
What Epitaph shall we afford this Shrine?
Words cannot Grace this Pyramid of thine:
Thy sweet Perfections, all summed up, were such,
As Heavens (I think) for Earth did think too much
Religious Zeal did thy pure heart command,
Pity thine Eye, and Charity thy Hand:
These Graces, joined with more of like degree,
Make each Man's word an Epitaph for thee.
Calm was thy Death, well ordered was thy life,
A Careful Mother, and a l^ving Wife.
Ask any, how these Virtues in thee grew?
Thou wast a Spencer and a Mountague.
VII. The Parish Church of St. Botolph-Aldgate, is a very Fair Church, not far
from Ald-gate in Portsoken-Ward. It is a Populous Parish, and there are several
Monuments in the Church. Amongst which (for his Charity, which deserves to be
Remembered,) we shall Remark that of George Clark) Citizen and Vintner of
London, who gave these following Legacies. For a public School in the
University of Oxford, the Sum of two hundred pound. To the use of the Poor of
the four Precincts of the Ward of Portsoken, being in this Parish, two hundred
ninety three pound six shillings and eight pence. To the Parish of
White-Chappel, for the Relief of the Poor there, one hundred and six pound
fifteen shillings and four pence. To the Company of Vintners ten pound. To the
Poor of Christ's- Hospital five pound. That is, eight hundred forty five pound
two shillings and two pence. He Deceased the fourteenth of April Anno 1606.
Aged 63 Years. This Church was Repaired and Beautified Anno 1621. There is a
Memorial Erected by the Right Worshipful the Company of Merchant-Taylors, for
Robert Dove Esquire Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of London, Master of the same
Company, and one of the Customers in the Port of London, who gave, in his
Lifetime, Three thousand five hundred twenty eight pound ten shillings and
eight pence, for Charitable Uses for ever, to diverse Poor Brethren of the same
Company, and other Uses for the said Company, viz. To Christ's- Hospital. To
St. Sepulchres-Parish. To the Two Compters. To Ludgate and Newgate. To the Poor
of this Parish. To St. John-Baptist's- College in Oxford. To Queen
Elizabeths-Hospital at Bristol, etc. He Dyed the Second day of May 1612. at the
Age of Ninety Years. His Arms under him, Three Doves. He lived Virtuously all
his Life, and Dyed a sincere Professor of the True Christian Protestant
Religion, in the Eleventh of King JAMES; who is remembered as being a Worthy
Example to the living, and deserves a Memorial in All Ages.

VIII. The Parish Church of St. Buttolph-Bishops-gate in Bishops-Gate-Ward,
stands in a Fair Churchyard, (adjoining to the Town-Ditch, upon the very Bank
thereof,) enclosed with a comely Wall of Brick, Repaired by Sir William Allen,
Lord Mayor Anno 1571. Because he was born in that Parish, where also he was
buried. Mrs. Wood the Wife of Robert Wood, gave large Gifts and Legacies to
this Parish, she Dyed November the twenty fifth 1600, and lies buried there.
John Heyward, Citizen, and Alderman of London, by his last Will and Testament,
Enrolled in the Court of Hustings in the Guild Hall of London, Anno 13th. of
Edward the IV. gave 25 Quarters of Charcoals Yearly, to be delivered by the
Company of Tallow-Chandlers, betwixt the first of November, and the twenty
fifth of December, with a Penalty of Forfeiture of twenty shillings for the
first quarter, if they be not Delivered as afore^aith, forty shillings for the
second quarter, four pound for the third quarter, and eight pound for the whole
Year, if they be not delivered: and so double still from quarter to quarter, if
defect of Payment herein be made. John Bricket Citizen and Tooth-Drawer, (by
Will dated the Eleventh of Feb. 1554.) gave for ever, Twelve Sacks of Charcoals
to the Poor of this Parish to be paid at Easter. Mrs. Mary Wilkinson, gave them
Sixty Quarters of Coals to be paid in November and December for ever, provided
that out of each Load (being Four in all, Thirty Quarters being two Loads) the
Overseers of the Precinct of Norton-Folgate, shall have Ten Sacks to be by them
given to the Poor of that Pre^inct. Sir William Allen, gave thirty shillings
for ever to be distributed by the Ironmongers to the Poor in Bread every Year.
Sir Stephen Scudamore Twenty shillings paid likewise by the Company of
Vintners* Mary Webster gave ten shillings for ever, so be paid to the Poor on
St. Thomas Day. Mr. William Hobby gave the Tenor Bell. Mr. Ralph Pinder Citizen
and Draper of London, gave to the Poor in Money Sixty pound, for which is given
to Thirteen Poor People every Sunday in the Year, two pence a piece, in good
Wheaten Bread. Anno 1626. Nicholas Rieve, gave the Sum of Forty six pound five
shillings to the Parish, with which they purchased Lands at Stratford and Bow,
worth twenty five pound per annum. In the Year 1628, on the twentieth of June,
the Earl of Devonshire then deceasing at Devonshire-House without Bishops-gate,
gave one hundred pound for ever to the Poor, for which the Churchwardens give
every Sunday in the Year to Fifteen Poor People of this Parish^, two pence a
piece in good Wheaten Bread. T. C. Citizen and Armourer of London, gave a 100
l. to the Chamber of London, for which 5 l. yearly is to be paid, to buy five
Wastecoats, and five Kirtles of good Kersey or Cloth, each Wastecoat and Kirtle
to be worth at least 15 s. five pair of Stockings, each worth at least 18 d.
five pair of Shoes, each worth at least 2 s. for five poor aged Widows, to be
received on St. Thomas the Apostles day for ever. These Charities are briefly
remembered, as Examples for others.

There is a Remarkable Monument in Petty-France, at the West End of the Lower
Churchyard of this Church without the Churchyard wall, erected to the memory
of one Coga Shawsware, a Persian Merchant, principal Servant and Secretary to
the Persian Ambassador, with whom he and his Son came over. He was aged 44
years, and buried the 10th of August, 1626. (now almost 55 years ago) the
Ambassador himself, young Shawsware his Son, and many other Persians,
mournfully following him to the Ground about Nine in the Morning. Their
Ceremony was, the Son sat cross-legged at the North-end of the Grave, did
sometimes read, and sometimes sing, both intermixed with sighing and weeping for
about half an hour. Some of them, morning and evening, came precisely at six
for a month together, and might have come longer, but that the Rudeness of our
People disturbed them. The Son, at his own charge, erected this Tomb of Stone
for him, with an Epitaph in Persian Characters.

IX. The Parish Church of St. Dunstan, called West, to distinguish it from that
in the East, is a fair Church with diverse fair Monuments. William Crowch
Citizen and Mercer of London, one of the Common Council, besides other
Legacies, gave 10 l. a year for ever, to be distributed among 36 poor People of
honest life of this Parish. He dyed April 16, Anno 1606. this is his pious
Epitaph: Lo, thus he Died; For vain and frail is Flesh:
Yet lives his Soul (by Faith) in endless Bliss,
By Faith in Christ; whose Grace was so enlarged,
That by his Blood man's sin he has discharged.


X. Over against Suffolk-place in the Borough of Southwark and
Bridge-Ward-without, is the Parish Church of St. George, sometimes pertaining
to the Priory of Bermondsey. Mr. William Evans of the Right Worshipful Company
of Merchant-Taylors, deceased July 1590. gave 10 l. 8 s. to the Poor yearly for
ever, to be distributed in Bread, by which 208 poor People are served every
Sunday, as appears by his Epitaph. James Savage gave 5 l. yearly, for ever, for
the same use. This Church, Steeple and Gallery, was Repaired, New Pew'd and
Beautified, and the South I Will enlarged by the Parishioners, with the assistance
of several Benefactors, amongst which several of the Companies of London
contributed 166 l. 10 s. Anno 1629.

XI. The fair and large Parish Church of St. Giles Cripplegate, is without the
Postern in Cripplegate-ward, which was burnt 1545. 37. H. 8. In it were diverse
Monuments, amongst which we must not forget John Fox the learned, godly and
famous Author of the Book of Martyrs, an indefatigable Searcher into Antiquity,
and a most faithful Assertor and Defender of Gospel Truth, who revived the
Marian Martyrs, as it were Phoenixes, from their ashes. He lies Interred in
this Church, and dyed the 18 of April, Anno 1587. (that is, in this present
year 1681, 94 years ago) in the 70th year of his Age, in whose Memorial his
eldest Son, Samuel Fox, upon a very fair Marble Stone on the end of the
South-wall of the Chancel, placed his Epitaph, which we shall insert, though we
are sure his Name will ever live in that Never-dying Monument (his stupendous
and most elaborate Work, viz. his great Martyrology^ to all succeeding
Generations. The substance of his Epitaph you have before in English, but take
it in Latin too.

CHRISTO S. S.
JOhanni Foxo, Ecclesiae Anglicanae Martyrolog^ Fidelissimo, Antiquitatis
Historicae Indagato^^ Sagacissimo, Evangelicae Veritatis propugnator^ acerrimo,
Thaumaturgo admirabili; Qui Martyrs Marianos, tanquam Phoenices, ex cineribus
redivivos praestitit. Patri suo omni pietatis officio imprimis colendo, Samuel
Foxus illius primogenitus, hoc Monumentum posuit, non sine lachrymis.

Obiit die 18 Men's. April. An. Dom. 1587. ja^^ Septuagenarius

Vita vitae mortalis est, Spes vitae immortalis.
There is a fair Plate Engraven on a fair Stone in the Chancel under the above
Monument, where he lies buried with these Verses: Sacra sub hoc saxo tria
Corpora mista quiescant,
Gulielmi Bullen Medici, Fratrisque Richardi,
Ac Johannis Foxi: qui tres, mihi, creed, fuerunt
Doctrina clari, rari and pictatis alumni.
Gulielmus Bullen Medicamina semper habebat,
Aeque pauperibus danda, ac locupletibus aeque.
Sicque Richardus erat, benefacere, and, ipse paratus,
Omnibus ex aequo quibus ipse prodesse valebat.
At Foxus noster per multas hos Parasangas,
Vita praecurrit, studiisque accedimus omnes.
Extant quae scripsit tormenta cruenta piorum,
Extans perdocte permulta volumina scripta,
Quae scripsit Foxus: Nulli fuit ipse secundus.
Obiit An. Dom. 1587. Apr. 18.


Though the Learned need no interpretation of these Verses, yet for the
satisfaction of the English Reader, I will adventure to paraphrase them, having
a great Veneration for the Memory of this good man, to whom all Protestants in
Europe are so much beholden. This is what English my Extemporary Muse can give
them: Three Sacred Corpse beneath this Stone do rest;
Of William Bullen, who with skill professed
Physic; with Richard his dear Brother, and
John Fox: No three more famous in the Land.
Of pious Doctrine they Promoters were;
In Life and Holiness Examples rare.
Bullen had Medicines for the free Relief
Of Poor and Rich to ease them of their Grief.
Richard was still a ready Benefactor,
For common good, where he would be an Actor.
But our Great FOX, did largely these outdo
In course of Life, and liberal Studies too.
His Works are extant, where he did describe,
Saints cruel Torments, by a hellish Tribe.
The Learning in his pious Volumes shown,
Do still proclaim him, Second unto None.


On the same Stone are these words,

Here lies buried William Bullen, who dyed the 17th of January, 1576. Under
this Stone sleeps the Body of Richard Bullen, a Faithful Servant and Preacher
of Jesus Christ, and was buried the 16th of October, Anno Dom. 1563.

Roger Mason of this Parish, Citizen and Vintner, gave to the Poor of this
Parish 200 l. wherewith a yearly Rent of about 16 l. per Annum, is purchased
for ever, to be bestowed on ten Gowns of Black Cloth lined, to be Yearly given
to ten Poor Men of Freedom of this Parish, upon All-Saints-day; he dyed the
Third of September 1603, Aged thirty seven Years. William Day Citizen and
Vintner of London, gave to the Poor of this Parish Eighty pound, with which the
Yearly Rent of six pound is purchased for ever, to be bestowed upon twelve
Coats of Green Cloth, for twelve Poor Orphans upon All-Saints-day.

Other Benefactors were Thomas Busby Cooper, who gave forty Dozen of Wheaten
Bread, and four Loads of Charcoal to the Poor for ever Yearly.

Mr. Blighton Butcher, gave forty Dozen of Wheaten Bread, and two Loads of
Charcoals to be Yearly distributed. Mr. Charles Langley Brewer, gave twenty
Gowns for Men and Women, and twenty Shirts for twenty other Men, and twenty
Smocks for twenty Women Yearly for ever on All-Saints-day, and a remainder of
money to be given amongst the Poor people that day, and forty shillings also
that day allowed for a Sermon. Mrs. Ann Harvist, gave forty Tenements of twenty
pound Yearly Rent, to be distributed quarterly to twenty Poor Widows by five
shillings a quarter each.

Mr. Robert Smith, gave four Bibles in Octavo, well buffed and bossed, to four
Poor Men's Children, such as can best deserve them by Reading, to be given every
Easter for ever. (A very good Act.) As also, fifty two Dozen of Wheaten Bread,
every Week one Dozen for ever. Mr. Richard Hanbury and Mr. Richard Bud, gave
six Common Prayer Books, and fifty Dozen of Wheaten Bread, in the same manner
to be distributed.

Mr. Roger Bellow, Brewer, gave twenty pound per annum, of which ten pound
Yearly to the Poor, and ten pound to be reserved to purchase Land for the
Relief of the Poor.

Here is also the Monument of John Speed, the famous Geographer and Historian,
who dyed July 28. 1629, in his seventy eighth Year. As also his Wife Susanna,
who was his Wife 57 Years, and had by her twelve Sons and six Daughters; who
dyed in her seventieth Year, the twenty eighth of March 1628. Here are diverse
other Monuments, but for brevity we omit them.

XII. The Parish Church called St. Olave Southwark, stands on the bank of the
River Thames in Bridge-Ward-without, the Parish, is large. And in the Church
there are some Monuments; amongst the rest, one for Queen Elizabeth.

XIII. The Fair Church called St. Mary Overy, (or over the Rye, that is, over
the River) vulgarly called S^viours Southwark, was formerly a Priory. For from
a House of Nuns, it was converted into a College of Priests. And Anno 1106
Founded again for Canons Regular. William Gifford Bishop of Winchester, Builded
the body of the Church Anno 1106. 7 H. 1. It was surrendered to Henry VIII. in
the thirty first of his Reign. Oct. 27. Anno 1539, valued at 624 l. 6. s. 6. d.
per annum. The Inhab^tants of the Borough in December following, purchased the
Church of the Priory, of the King; whereof they made a Parish Church, for the
Parish Church of St. Mary Magdalen, on the Southside of the Quire out of St.
Margarets on the Hill, which were made one Parish of St. Savior. In it there
be diverse Monuments; as of John Gower a Famous Poet, and a great Benefactor to
this Church, who lived in the times of Edward the III. and R. II. The Monument
of that Famous and Learned Bishop Andrews, who dyed in the Eleventh of Charles
the I. Anno 1626, Aged Seventy one Years. Here is likewise a very Fair Monument
of Dr. Loclyer, that Famous Physitiar. There are also diverse bountiful
Benefactors to the Poor of this Parish; and other Pious Uses. This is a Stately
and Spacious Church, and has been from time to time kept in good Repair, and
with much cost has received many Graceful and Useful Additions. Here is a
Monument of Queen Elizabeth, with these Verses: ELIZABETHA REGINA.
St. Peter's Church at Westminster,
Her Sacred Body does inter.
Her Glorious Soul with Angels sings.
Her Deed^ live Patterns here for Kings,
Her Love in every heart has Room,
This only shadows forth her Tomb.


XIV. The Fair Parish Church of St. Sepulchers stands without Newgate, in a
Fair Churchyard; but of late much Inc^oached upon, as being part of it Let
out for Buildings, and a Garden-Plat. This Church was Rebuilt about the Reign
of Henry the V. or Edward the IV. one of the Pophams was a great Builder there,
namely of one Fair Chapel on the South Side of the Quire, as appears by his
Arms there, etc. Here are diverse Monuments. There has been much money spent in
Repairs upon this Church. In it there is an Excellent Organ, and a very good
Ring of Bells. It is in Farringdon-Ward-without.

XV. Anno 1552. The Citizens of London having purchased the void suppressed
Hospital of St. Thomas in Southwark, in the Month of July, began the
Reparations thereof for Poor, Impotent, Lame and Diseased People, so that in
November next following, the Sick and Poor People were taken in. The Church of
this Hospital, remains as a Parish Church for the Inhabitants thereabout, by
the Name of St. Thomas Southwark. The Steeple was Repaired, New Leaded, and
from the Ground to the Top, Coated with a Beautiful Rough-Cast, and Enriched
with a very Fair Turret in the Year 1633. It is in Bridge-Ward-without.

XVI. In Portsoken-Ward is the small Parish Church called Trinity Minories,
there was first a Monastery of Nuns of the Order of Sancta-Clara, called the
Minories, Founded by Edmond Earl of Lancaster, Leicester, and Derby, Brother to
Edward the I. Anno 1293. Which was Demolished in King Henry the Eighths
Thirtieth Year, Anno 1539. There were built Storehouses for Armor and other
Martial Habiliments, with diverse Workhouses for that purpose, and near it,
this Church for the Inhabitants; who at several times Repaired and Beautified
it. In the Body of this Church is a Monument with this Inscription: Vivere
Cornices multos dicuntur in annos,
Cur vos Angusta condition sumus.


We shall now proceed to the out Parishes in Middlesex and Surrey.

I. As to Christ's-Church, we refer the Reader to another place, where he shall
have a fuller account than we can give here.

II. The Parish Church of St. John at Hackney, is an ancient and handsome
Church, and kept in good Repair; there are diverse Monuments in it, but our
Discourse being Principally of the City of London it cannot be expected, that
we should enlarge much more than the bare mention of generals, having things
much more Material, that require our dispatch. But the Fair Parish Church of

III. St. Giles in the Fields, is a very Neat and well built Parish Church, in
a handsome Churchyard. It was formerly an Hospital, Founded by Queen Matilda,
Wife to King Henry the I. about the Year 1117. at which Prisoners, conveyed
from London to Tyburn to be Executed, were presented with a great Bowl of Ale,
thereof to Drink at pleasure, as to be their last Refreshing in this Life. In
this Church are several Monuments. It began to be Raised a New, Anno 1623, and
was Finished in two Years, and encompassed with a Fair Brick-Wall in the Year
1631. To which there were many good and great Benefactors, many of whom would
be concealed. This is a very large Parish, and (next to St. Giles Cripple-gate
and Stepney) is reputed to be the most Populous in England, (if not in Europe;)
it being thought by such as have made an Estimate, that it contains above
100000 Souls, besides Strangers, who are very Numerous.

IV. The Parish Church called St. James Clerkenwell, in the North-West Suburbs,
was formerly a Priory, so called of Clark's- Well adjoining. It is a handsome
large Church with diverse Ancient and some Modern Monuments. And it had sundry
Benefactors. William Hern a Master of Defense, and Yeoman of the Guard 1580,
gave Lands and Tenements to the Cloathworkers in London, they to pay Yearly for
ever fourteen pound to the Churchwardens of Clerkenwel, and fourteen pound to
the Churchwardens of St. Sepulchers, toward Reparation of those Churches, and
Relief of Poor Men. More he gave after the Death of one Man, eight pound a Year
for ever, to the mending of Highways.

Thomas Sackford Esquire one of the Masters of Requests, gave to the Poor of that
Parish forty shillings a Year for ever, out of his Almshouse at Woodbridge in
Suffolk, where he is buried. Henry Stoke, Gardener, buried there, gave twenty
shillings a Year for ever, toward Reparation of that Church. The Priory was
valued to dispend 262 l. 9. s. per annum, and was surrendered 30 H. VIII. and is
now a Parish Church. It was Repaired after the fall of its Steeple, which
spoiled a great part of the Church, and finished, Anno 1627. at the cost of
1400 l.

V. The Parish Church called St. Katharine-Tower, because near the Tower of
London. On the East Side was an Hospital of St. Katharine, Founded by Queen
Matilda Wife to King Stephen. There lie buried (besides many others) in this
Church, the Countess of Huntington, Countess of the March in her time, 1429.
John Holland, Duke of Exeter, and Earl of Huntington 1447, and his two Wives,
in a Fair Tomb, Thomas Walsingham Esquire and Thomas Ballard Esquire by him 1465. This
Church was Repaired, and throughout Trimmed and Beautified, Anno 1618. Enlarged
with a Fair Gallery 1621. The Walls and outside clothed with a Beautiful
Rough-Cast, at the Charge of Sr. Julius Caesar, Anno 1626. Mr. Stephen
Scudamore, Citizen and Vintner of London, gave 20 s. per annum, to be bestowed
in Fuel amongst the Poor for ever. Mr. John Boum, Baker, gave 5 l. per annum,
to be bestowed in Bread among the Poor for forty Years.

VI. In the Church at Lambeth, are very many Monuments, which for brevity we
pretermit.

VII. The Archdeacon of London is always Parson of St. Leonard Shore-Ditch,
and the Cure is served by a Vicar. There were diverse Honorable Persons buried
there; and there were many Bountiful Benefactors to the Church and Poor. John
Fuller of Bishops-Hall Esquire gave a Sum of Money for the Building of twelve
Almshouses, for twelve Poor Widows of this Parish; who receive fifty pound
per annum of his Gift. William Peak Esquire gave two shillings a Week to be
distributed in Bread for ever on Sundays. Robert Brainforth, Gentleman, gave
eight pound Yearly for ever to the Poor. Thomas Russel, Draper, gave twelve
pence Weekly for ever, to be paid by the Drapers. George Clark, gave to the
Poor one hundred Marks in Money, etc.

VIII. The Parish Church of St. Magdalen Bermondsey, was built by the Priors of
Bermondsey, near the Abbey of Bermondsey, which was surrendered to King Henry the
VIII, it was much enlarged, Anno 1608, at the Charge of 860 l. so that it
became (and is) a Fair Church.

IX. The Church of St. Mary Istington. And,

X. The Parish Church of St. Mary Newington, are Fair Parishes, with some
Monuments, but being so Remote, we pretermit them.

XI. St. Mary White-Chappel is as it were a Chapel of Ease to Stepney-Parish,
and the Parson of Stepney has the Gift of it, it is a handsome Church and in
good Repair. There are some few handsome Monuments in it.

XII. The Parish Church of St. Paul's in upper Shadwel, was also lately made a
Parish Church; the Parish being too Numerous for the Church of Stepney. It is a
handsome Church with a large Churchyard, and the Parish very Populous.

XIII. In the Parish Church of Rotherhith (vulgarly Redriff) are some Monuments
also. It is a pretty handsome convenient Church.

XIV. The Parish Church of Stepney is indifferent capacious, yet too too narrow
for the Inhabitants, it being the most populous Parish in England, as appears
by our Bills of Mortality, and of a great Extent. There are diverse Monuments in
it; and some of great Antiquity. Now we shall speak of the Churches in the City
and Liberties of Westminster.

I. The Parish Church of St. Clements Danes near Temple Bar, is so called,
because one Harold, a Danish King, and other Danes, were buried there. It was
in the Liberties of the Duchy of Lancaster. This was a fair Church, and
likely; ere long, to exceed its former beauty. Here were several curious
Monuments. And it is a populous Parish, full of handsome Buildings.

II. St. Paul's Covent Garden is a very handsome and a delicate Church, of no
great Antiquity, yet a populous Parish.

III. St. Martins in the Fields is a spacious Church, and the Parish wonderful
populous. In it are diverse fair Monuments, and of several Persons of Honor,
which are too tedious to be recited, only for the pithiness, I shall insert one
Distich upon Charles Blount, an Infant, 2d Son to the Earl of Newport.

Vivus nil poteram fari, quin mortuus Infans,
Ecce loquor, Mortis sis memor, atque vale.
Which I shall English, without minding the Slavery of Rhiming:

Living I could not speak, an Infant dead,
Behold I speak, Mind Death, and so farewell.
IV. After the Savoy-House was burnt by the Kentish and Essex Rebels, for
Malice to John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, which for beauty and stateliness
none in the Kingdom could then compare with, as from Antiquity we learn; it
came to the Kings hands, and was Rebuilt, and made an Hospital of St. John
Baptist, by King Henry VII. about the year 1509. for which he purchased Lands,
to relieve an 100 poor People; it being valued to spend 529 l. 15 s. per Annum,
was suppressed in Edward the Sixth's Time; the Beds, Bedding, and Furniture
thereof, and 700 Marks of the said Land yearly given to the Citizens of London,
with his House of Bridewel for a Workhouse for poor and idle Persons, and
toward furnishing the Hospital of St. Thomas Southwark. The Chapel of this
Hospital serves now for a Parish Church to the places adjoining, called St.
Mary Savoy; in it are diverse Monuments. The Benefactors to it, are Registered in
a Book kept there, which are too many to be inserted in our small Volume.

V. The Parish Church of St. Margarets Westminster is a sumptuous and stately
Church, Rebuilt by King Edward the Confessor, for the Ease and Commodity of the
Monks of Westminster, because before that time the Parish Church stood within
the old Abbey Church in the South I Will, somewhat to their annoyance. It was new
built again by the Merchants of the Staple, and Parishion^^ of Westminster, and
is now, as was said, a very fair Parish Church, with very strong and beautiful
Galleries, where, in Parliament-time, the Honorable House of Commons sit, etc.
in it are diverse fair Monuments of Persons of Quality.

Having given a brief Account of the Churches within the Weekly Bills of
Mortality, reserving some Additions, especially relating to their Modern
Estate, and the Re-building of those demolished by the great Fire, to another
place; and omitting particular Chapels, of which there are many, and the
contiguous Churches round about London, (because not so immediately relating to
the Design in hand) we shall proceed to treat of Hospitals, especially the most
Eminent.

NEW BEDLAM.

BRIDE WELL.



SECT. 3.
Of HOSPITALS, etc.
1. CHrists-Hospital was founded by that Pious King Edward VI. upon this
occasion, which being so Remarkable, we shall recount from Mr. Stow and others.

Dr* Ridley, then Bishop of London, Preached before the King's Majesty at
Westminster, in which Sermon he made a fruitful and godly Exhortation to the
Rich, to be merciful to the Poor; and also to move such as were in Authority,
to act by some charitable way and means to relieve them. Whereupon the King's
Majesty, (being a Prince of Towardness and Virtue for his years, as England
before never brought forth, and being also so well retained and brought up in
all godly knowledge, as well by his de^r Uncle, the late Protector, Edward
Seymour. Duke of Sommerset, as also by his virtuous Schoolmasters) was so
careful of the good Government of the Realm. and chiefly to do and prefer such
things as most especially touched the Honor of Almighty God. And understanding
that a great number of poor People did swarm in the Realm, and chiefly in the
City of London, and that no good order was taken for them, did suddenly (and of
himself) send to the said Bishop, as soon as his Sermon was ended, willing him
not to depart, until he had spoken with him. And this that I now write (says
Mr. Sto^) was the very Report of the said Bishop Ridley, who (according to the
King's Command) gave his attendance. And as soon as the King's Majesty was at
leisure, he called for him, and caused him to come to him in a great Gallery at
Westminster, where no person was present but they two, and therefore made (...)
sit down in one Chair, and He Himself in another, which before the coming of
the Bishop were there purposely set, and caused the Bishop, notwithstanding his
unwillingness, to be covered, and then entered communication with him, in this
manner: First giving him hearty Thanks for his Sermon and good Exhortation; He
therein rehearsed such special things as he had Noted, and that so many, that
the Bishop said, Truly, truly, (for that was commonly his saying) I could
never have thought that excellency to have been in His Grace, but that I beheld
and heard it in him. At last the King's Majesty much commended him for his
Exhortation, for the Relief of the Poor.

But my Lord ( quoth he) you willed such as are in Authority to be careful
thereof, and to devise some good Order for their Relief; wherein I think you
mean Me, for I am in Highest Place, and therefore am the first that must make
Answer to God for my Negligence if I should not be careful therein, knowing it
to be the express Commandment of Almighty God, to have compassion of his poor
and needy Members, for whom we must make an Account unto Him. And truly, my
Lord, I am (before all things else) most willing to travel that way, and I
doubt nothing of your long and approved Wisdom and Learning, but that you
having such good Zeal as wishes help unto them, have also had some conference
with others, what ways are best to be taken therein, and therefore I pray you
to say your mind.

Which Speech being so truly Virtuous and Noble in so young a Prince, deserves
an everlasting Record.

The Bishop thinking least of that matter, and being amazed to hear the Wisdom
and earnest Zeal of the King, was (as he said himself) so astonished, That he
could not tell what to say. But after some pause, said, That he thought (at
this present) for some entrance to be had, it were good to practice with the
City of London, because the Number of the Poor there are very great, and the
Citizens also very many and wise; and he doubted not, but they were also both
pitiful and merciful; as the Mayor, and his Brethren, and other the Worshipful
of the said City: And that if it would please the Kings Majesty to direct His
Gracious Letters unto the Mayor of London, willing him to call unto him such
Assistants as he should think meet, to consult of this matter; for some Order
to be taken therein, he doubted not but good would follow thereon; and he
himself promised the King to be one himself that should earnestly travel
therein.

The King (forthwith) not only Granted his Letter, but made the Bishop tarry
until the same was written, and his Hand and Signet set thereto; and commanded
the Bishop not only to deliver the said Letter himself, but also to signify
unto the Mayor, that it was the Kings especial Request and express Commandment,
that the Mayor should therein travel; and so soon as he might conveniently,
give him knowledge how far he had proceeded therein. The Bishop was so joyous
at the having this Letter, that now he had occasion to travel in so good a
matter, wherein he was mavelous zealous, that nothing could have more pleased
and delighted him: wherefore the same Night he came to the Lord Mayor of
London, who was then Sir Richard Dobbs Knight. and delivered the King's Letter, and
showed his Message with effect.

The Lord Mayor not only joyfully received this Letter, but with all speed
agreed to set the matter forward, for he also favored it very much. And the
next day* being Monday, he desired the Bishop of London to dine with him, and
against that time the Mayor promised to send for such men as he thought meetest
to talk of this matter, and so he did. He sent first for two Aldermen, and six
Commoners, and afterward more were appointed, to the number of 24. In the end,
after sundry Meetings, (for by the means and good diligence of the Bishop it
was well followed) they agreed upon a Book that they had devised, wherein first
they considered on Nine special kinds and sorts of poor People, and those they
brought into these Three degrees, 1. The Poor by Impotency. 2. The Poor by
Casualty. 3. The Thriftless Poor.



1. The Poor by Impotency, are also divided into three kinds, viz. 1. The
Fatherless Poor Man's Child. 2. The Aged, Blind and Lame. 3. The Diseased
Person, by Leprosy, Dropsy, etc.



2. The Poor by Casualty, are likewise of 3 kinds; that is to say, 1. The
Wounded Soldier. 2. The Decayed Householder. 3. The Visited with any grievous
Disease.



3. The Thriftless Poor, are three kinds in like manner; viz. 1. The Rioter,
that consumes all. 2. The Vagabond, that will abide in no place. 3. The Idle
Person, as Strumpets, and others.



For these three sorts of Poor, three several Houses were provided:

(1.) For the Innocent and Fatherless, which is the Beggars Child, and is
indeed the Seed and Breeder of Beggary; they provided the House that was the
late Gray-Fryers in London, and called it by the Name of Christs-Hospital,
where poor Children are trained up in the knowledge of God, and some virtuous
Exercises, to the overthrow of Beggary.

For the (2) Degree, was provided the Hospitals of St. Thomas in Southwark, and
St. Bartholomew in West-Smithfield, where are continually at least 200 Diseased
Persons, which are not only there lodged and Cured, but also fed and nourished.

For the (3) Degree, they provided Bridewell, where the Vagabond and idle
Strumpet is chastised, and compelled to labor, to the overthrow of the vicious
life of Idleness.

They provided also for the honest decayed Householder, that he should be
relieved at home at his House, and in the Parish where he dwelt, by a Weekly
Relief and Pension.

And in like manner they provided for the Lazer, (or Leprous Person) to keep
him out of the City from Clapping of Dishes, and Ringing of Bells, to the great
trouble of the Citizens, and also to the dangerous Infection of many, that they
should be relieved at home at their Houses, by several Pensions.

Now after this good Order taken, (to the Eternal Honor of this Noble City)
and the Citizens willing to further the same, the Report thereof was made to
the King; And His Majesty, for the Advancement thereof, was not only willing to
grant such as should be Overseers and Governors of the said Houses, a
Corporation, and Authority for the Government of them: but also required, that
he might be accounted as the Chief Founder and Patron thereof.

And for the furtherance of the said Work, and continual maintenance of the
same, He, of his mere Mercy and Goodness granted, that whereas (before) certain
Lands were given to the maintaining of the House of the Savoy, founded by King
Henry VII. for the Lodging of Pilgrims and Strangers, and that the same was now
made but a Lodging for Loyterers, Vagabonds and Strumpets, that lay all day in
the Fields, and at night were harbored there, the which was rather the
maintenance of Beggary, than any Relief to the Poor: gave the same Lands, being
first surrendered by the Master and Fellows there, (which Lands were of the
yearly value of 600 l.) unto the City of London, for the maintenance of the
Foundation aforesaid.

And for a further Relief, a Petition being made to the King's Majesty, for a
License to take in Mortmaine, or otherwise without License, Lands to a certain
yearly value, and a space left in the Patent for His MAJESTY, to put in what
Sum He pleased: He looked on the void place, called for Pen and Ink, and with
His own Royal Hand wrote this Sum, 4000 Marks by the year, (which is 2666 l. 13
s. 4 d. and with the former 600 l. makes in all 3266 l. 13 s. 4 d.) and then
said, in the hearing of his Council, Lord, I yield thee most hearty thanks,
that thou have given me life thus long, to finish this work to the Glory of thy
Name.

After which Foundation established, he lived not above two days; whose life
would have been wished equal to the Patriarchs, if it had pleased God so to
have prolonged it. He dyed at Greenwich the 6th of July, Anno 1553. He was in
Body beautiful, of a sweet Aspect, and specially in his Eyes, which seemed to
have a starry liveliness and luster in them. For his pregnancy of Wit and
Knowledge in all kinds of Learning, Cardan (who coming into England, had often
conference with him) reports of him, that he was extraordinary skilful in
Languages, and in the Politics; well seen in Philosophy, and in Divinity; and
generally indeed, a very Miracle of Art and Nature.

He would answer Ambassadors sometimes upon the sudden, either in French or
Latin. He knew the state of Foreign Princes perfectly, and his own more. He
could call all Gentlemen of Account through his Kingdom, by their Names. And
all this, when he had scarce yet attained to the Age of Fifteen Years, and dyed
before Sixteen. That from hence we may gather, It is a sign of no long Life,
when the Faculties of the Mind are ripe so early.

His Pious and Religious Life was Remarkable, as may be seen in the whole
series of it; and his Death was no less, for the hour before he dyed, he was
overheard to pray thus by himself:

O Lord God, deliver me out of this miserable and wretched life. O Lord, thou
know how happy it were for me to be with thee; yet for thy Chosen's sake, if
it be thy Will, send me life and health, that I may truly serve thee. O Lord
God, save thy chosen People in England, and defend this Realm from PAPISTRY,
and maintain thy true Religion, that I and my People may praise thy Holy Name
for thy Son Jesus Christ's sake.

So turning his Face, and seeing some by him, he said, I thought you had not
been so nigh. Yes, said Dr. Owen, we heard you speak to your self. Then, said
the King, I was praying to God; I am faint, Lord have mercy upon me, and
receive my Spirit: And, in so saying, his blessed Spirit departed, to take
possession of an heavenly Crown, when he had enjoyed an earthly Crown, six
years, five months, and nine days.

He was buried the 9th of August, in Henry the Seventh's Chapel at
Westminster, near the Body of the said King Henry the Seventh his Grandfather.

This small Digression, I hope, will not be unacceptable to all true
Christians, being in memorial of that Peerless, and Never-enough Bewailed
Prince; but he was too good for the World, and rests now in endless Happiness.

In the year 1552, began the Repairing of the Gray-Fryers House, for the poor
Fatherless Children, and in the month of November the Children were taken in to
the same, to the Number of almost 400.

On Christmas Day in the Afternoon, while the Lord Mayor and Aldermen Rode to
Paul's, the Children of Christs-Hospital, from St. Lawrence-lane end in
Cheapside toward Paul's, all in one Livery of Russet-Cotton, Three hundred and
forty in Number; and at Easter next they were in Blue at the Spittle, and so
they have continued ever since, but they were this Year at St. Sepulchers.

This indeed was a work of extraordinary Piety, and, in my judgment, it is a
very Comely Sight to see the Poor Boys, when they Sup all together, with what
Decency, Order and Neatness they are served and Governed, by the respective
Persons in that Office; how plentifully they are provided with good Diet,
Washing, Lodging, and Learning, to fit them for business, which the City takes
care to settle them in, according to their respective Capacities; and it is
known that many of them came to be Men of Note, Wealth, and great Usefulness in
their Country.

Christs-Hospital, Bridewel and St. Thomas are Incorporated, by the Names of
the Mayor, Commonalty, and Commons of the City of London, Governors of the
Possessions, Revenues and Goods of the Hospitals of Edward King of England, the
Sixth, o^ Christ, Bridewel, and St. Thomas the Apostle^ etc.

St. Bartholomew-Hospital is Incorporated, by the Name of the Mayor,
Commonalty, and Citizens (...) the City of London, Governors of the Hospital
(...) the Poor, called, Little Saint Bartholomews, near to West-Smithfield, of
the Foundation of King Henry the Eighth.

In the Year 1533, the 10th of April, Sir George Barn^ (being Mayor of this
City) was sent for to the Court at W^itehall, where the King gave him ((...)
was said) his House of Bridewel, and 700 Marks of Land, late belonging to Savoy
Hospital, and all the Bedding, and other Furniture, etc. for Bridewel, and St.
Thomas in Southwark. The Gift was confirmed by Charter, dated June 26.
following. And in the Year 1555, Sir William Gerrard Lord Mayor, and the
Aldermen, entered Bridewel, and took possession thereof, according to the Gift
of the said King Edward, the same being confirmed by Queen Mary. This Bridewel,
is now bu^lt in a very curious and stately manner.

To reckon up the several Eminent and Bountiful Benefactors to these Hospitals,
would be endless, they, except some that would be concealed, are to be found in
the Records of those places, to which the Reader is referred. Only it being a
very singular Example of Honesty, Industry, and Piety, (not to detract in the
least, from any Worthy and Bountiful Benefactor) I will Remark one Richard
Castle, o^ Castell^r, Shoemaker, dwelling in Westminster, a Man of great labor
and care in his Faculty with his own hands, so that he was called the Cock of
Westminster, because both Winter and Summer he was at his Work before Four a
Clock in the morning: This Man thus honestly and painfully laboring for his
Living, God blessed and increased his Labors so ^bundantly, that he purchased
Lands and Tenements ^n Westminster, to the yearly value of 44 l. And having no
Child, with the consent of his Wife, who survived him, and was a virtuous good
Woman, gave the same L^^ds wholly to Christs-Hospital aforesaid, to the Relief
of the Innocent and Fatherless Children, and for the Succor of the Miserable,
Sore and Sick, harbored in other Hospitals about London.

Sir William Chester Knight. and Alderman of London, and John Calthrop Citizen and
Draper of the same City, at their own proper Costs and Charges, ^^ade the
Brick-Walls and Way on the Backside, which leads from the said New Hospital,
unto the Hospital of St. Bartholomew, and also covered and vaulted the
Town-Ditch from Aldersgate to Newgate, which before was very Noisome and
Contagiou^ to the said Hospital.

Sir Rowland Hill Lord Mayor, in the 3d Year of this King, besides many large
and bountiful Charities on other things, gave this Hospital 500 l. in his Life,
and 100 l. at his Death.

In the Year 1552, the Citizens of London having purchased the void suppressed
Hospital of St. Thomas in Southwark, in the Month of July began the Reparations
thereof, for Poor, Impotent, Lame, and Diseased People, so that in November
following the Sick and Lame were taken in.

II. Of all the Hospitals that ever were Founded in Christendom, there is none
can parallel that of Thomas Sutton Esquire called, Sutton's Hospital, which will
commend to all succeeding Posterity the duly deserved Praises of that truly
Worthy, and Never-to-be-forgotten Gentleman, the Phoenix of Charity in our
Times.

The Dissolved Charter House by West-Smithfield, belonging to the Right
Honorable Thomas Earl of Suffolk, after Lord Treasurer of England, is
sufficiently known to be a very large and goodly Mansion, beautified with
spacious Gardens, Walks, Orchards, and other Pleasures, Enriched with diverse
Dependencies of Lands and Tenements thereunto belonging, and very aptly seated
for wholesome Air, and several other Commodities.

All which Commodiousness of Situation, and largeness of Circuit, gave occasion
to this well minded Gentleman, Mr. Sutton, to affect that House, as the only
Place whereon to build the Foundation of his Religious Purpose.

For among other his Christian Determinations, he had formerly intended to
build an House at Hallingbury-Bouchers in Essex, to be an Hospital for such
Poor Men and Children, as he himself in his life time (or future Governors for
the same to be Deputed) should think fit to be Lodged and Relived there. Also
for a Schoolmaster and Usher, to Teach Children to Read, and Write, and
instruct them in the Latin and Greek Grammar, with a Learned Divine likewise,
to Preach the Word of God to them all. And a Master beside to Govern all those
People belonging to that House.

But finding this Goodly Mansion of the Charter House, to be much more
convenient for the purpose, he became an earnest Suitor to the Earl of Suffolk,
to purchase that House of him, acquainting his Honor with the alteration of
his mind concerning Hallingbury, and his earnest Desire to make the
Charter House the Hospital. The Earl being Honorably inclined to so Godly a
motion, the Price being concluded on, the Bargain and Sale was assured. The Sum
disburs'd for this purpose amounted to 13000 l. which was Paid down in hand,
before the unsealing of the Conveyance. Then he became Suitor again to his
Majesty, to perform all that, at the Chartor-House, which he had formerly
intended at Hallingbury. Whereto the King readily yielded, being Graciously
affected to so Charitable a Work, and Granted His Letters Patents to the same
effect.

This Gentleman lived always a Bachelor, and by sundry Employments and
Parsimony grew to great Wealth, which he well Employed, to his immortal
honnour. He endowed (...) Hospital with above 3000 l. a Year in Land, viz. All
and singular the Manors, Lordships, Messuages, Lands, Tonements, Reversions,
Services, Meadows, Pastures, Woods, Advowsons, Patronages of Churches, and
Hereditaments of the said Thomas Sutton whatsoever, Situate, lying and being
within the County of Essex, Lincoln, Wilts, Cambridg, and Middlesex, or in any
of them, with all and every of their Rights, Members, and Appurtenances
whatsoever. Except all his Manors and Lordships of Littlebury, and Haddestock,
with their Appurtena^ces in the County of Essex. In this Hospital he placed
Fourscore Poor Men, with convenient Lodging, Diet, and Allowance of Money for
Apparel; also Forty Poor Children with the like Provision; and a Grammar
School, with a Master and an Usher to Teach them: over all whom, he ordained, a
Learned Man to be Master of the Household, to be chosen by the Governors whom he
appointed for the present, by the Authority of the Kings Letters, Patents, to
be George Archbishop of Canterbury; Thomas Lord Elsemore Lord Chancellor;
Robert Earl of Salisbury Lord Treasurer, John Bishop of London; Lancelot Bishop
of Ely, Sir Edward Cook, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas; Sir Thomas Foster,
a Judge of the Common Pleas, Sir Henry Hubbard, the Kings Attorney General,
Doctor Overal Dean of Paul's; Doctor Mountain, Dean of Westminster; Henry
Thursby Esquire Master of the Chancery; Richard Sutton Esquire Auditor of the Impress;
Geoffery Nightingale Esquire; John Low Gentleman; Thomas Brown Gentleman, and
Master of the Household, for the time being, to be always one; and as any of
those Sixteen Governors should die, the Survivors to make present Additions of
others.

Toward the building of this Hospital, Chapel and School-House, he gave 5000
l. but he lived not to see it performed, but what Death bereft him of, he left
to the performance of his Faithful Executors, Mr. Richard Sutton, and Mr. John
Low, Men of Religious and upright Souls, who carefully accomplished the Work,
so that the Monday after Mich^^^mas day, being the 3 d of October, Anno Dom.
1614. The Captains, Gentlemen, and Officers, entered into their Famous prepared
Hospital, to the Glory of God, Honor of the King's Majesty, Credit of the
Governors, and Joy of Honest minds, and the Eternal Fame of the Noble Founder,
who is laid in a goodly Tomb in the Chapel of his own Hospital,

With this Inscription: Sacred to the Glory of God, in Grateful Memory of
Thomas Sutton Esquire.
Here lies buried the Body of Thomas Sutton, late of Castle Camps, in the
County of Cambridge Esquire at whose only Costs and Charges this Hospital was
Founded, and Endued with large Possessions, for the Relief of Poor Men and
Children. He was a Gentleman, born at Knayth in the County of Lincoln, of
Worthy and Honest Parentage. He lived to the Age of 79 Years, and Deceased the
12th. Day of December, Anno Domini 1611.



Though we Design to avoid all Prolixity, yet it is hoped it will be Pardoned,
if we Transcribe an Epitaph, made upon this Worthy Man, by a Friend to Piety
and Goodness; for he being a Rare Example, challenges, as his due Merit, a more
than ordinary mention.

When bad Men die, the Memory Remains
Of their Corruptions and ungodly ways,
As Merit to their mis-applyed pains,
Out of ill actions forming as ill praise.
For Virtue wounded by their deep disgrace,
Leaves Fame to their posterity and Race.
When Good Men die, the Memory remains
Of their true Virtue, and most Christian ways,
As a due Guerdon to their Godly gains,
Out of good Actions forming as good praise.
For Virtue cherished by their Deeds of Grace,
Leaves Fame to their Posterity and Race.
Among these Good (if Goodness may be said
To be among the seed of Mortal Men,)
In upright Balance of true Merit weighed,
Needs must we reckon Famous SUTTON then,
In whom, as in a Mirror does appear,
That Faith with Works in him did shine most clear.
And let us not, as is a common use,
Measure him by a many other more;
In Death, to cover their bad life's abuse,
To lanch out then some bounty of their store.
No, SUTTON was none such, his Hospital,
And much more else beside, speaks him to all.
For as God blessed him with abundant Wealth,
Like to a careful Steward he emplo'd it;
And ordered all things in his best of health,
As glad to leave it, as when he enjoyed it.
And being prepared every hour to die,
Disposed all his Gifts most Christian^y,
In Abraham's bosom sleeps he with the blessed,
His Works, they follow him, his worth survives,
Good Angels guide him to eternal rest,
Where is no Date of time, for Years or Lives.
You that are Rich, do you as he has done,
And so assure the Crown that he has wo^^*
To conclude in a word, this Famous Hospital, with the value of the Lands laid
into it, the Purchase of the House, Stock laid in, (which he has given into
the Treasury, or Store of the said Hospital to begin with, and to defend the
Rights of the House, being 1000 l.) and Allowance toward the Building: also
the Remainder of his Goods unbequeathed, his large Gifts and Legacies to diverse
Honorable and Worthy Friends, besides great store of far more inferior account
(which would puzle me to number) and the residue of 20000 l. left to the
discretion of his Executors, may truly and deservedly be said, to be the very
greatest and most bountiful Gift, that ever was given in England, no Abbey (at
the first Foundation thereof) excepted, or therewith to be compared, being the
Gift of one man only.

He gave to the Poor in Barwick 100 Marks. To the Poor of Stoke-Newington 10 l.
To the Poor Fishermen of Ostend in Flanders 100 l. To the mending of the
Highways between Islington and Newington, in the County of Middlesex 40 Marks
(or 26 l. 13 s. 4 d.) To the mending the Highways between Ashden and Walden,
called Waldenlane in Essex 100 l. To the mending the Highways between Great
Lynton in the County of Cambridge, and the said Town of Walden 60 l. 13 s. 4 d.
Toward the mending of Horseth-lane 60 l. To the mending of the Bridges and
ordinary Highways between South-Minster and Malden in Essex 100 l. To the
Chamber of London 1000 l. to be Yearly lent to Ten young Merchants, not having
any great Stocks of their own: and those Ten to be appointed by the Lord Mayor
and Aldermen of the City for the time being, and the Dean of Paul's: they are
(...) to pay any Interest for it, nor any to enjoy it but (...).

(...) the Poor People of Hadstock 20 l. To the Poor of Littlebury and Balsham
40 l. To the Parson and Churchwardens of Balsham for the time being, toward
the buying a Bell, to be hanged up in the Steeple, to amend the Ring there 20
l. To the Poor of South-minster 20 l. To the Poor of little Hal^enbury 20 l. To
the Poor of Dunsby, in the County of Lincoln 20. l. To the Poor Pri^^ers in the
Prisons of Ludgate, Newgate, the two ^ompters in London, the King's- Bench, the
(...) 2000 l. to be paid and divided among the same Prisoners by even and equal
portions.

To the Master, Fellows, and Scholars of the Corporation of Jesus College in
Cambridge 500 Marks* To the Master, Fellows, and Scholars of the Corporation of
Magdalen College in Cambridge, 500 l. To every one of his Fe^ffees, put in
trust about his (...) 26 l. 13 s. 4 d. To the Poor of Beverly, a (...) in
Cottingham. To the Poor of Lincoln, a Remainder of Years in the Rectory of
Glentham in the County of Lincoln. To Mr. Hutton, Vicar of Littlebury 20 l. To
the Poor of ^^mps Castle 10 l. To the Poor of Elcomb 10. l. To Mr. Flood,
Parson of Newington 13 l. 6 s. 8 d. To the Poor of the Parish of Hackn^y 10 l.
with several others, etc. And so much for Famous SVTTON and his Hospital, which
deserves an Eternal MEMORIAL.

III. The Hospital of St. Mary of Bethlem, vulgarly called Bedlam was, Founded
by Simon Fitz-Mary, one of the Sheriffs of London, Anno 1246. He Founded it to
have been a Priory of C^^ons, with Brethren and Sisters: and King Edward the
III. granted a Protection for the Brethren, Militiae Beatae Mariae de Bethlem,
within the City of London, in the Fourteenth of his Reign. But it was (...) an
Hospital for Distracted People. Stephen^^^^^nings, Merchant-Taylor, gave 40 l.
toward (...) chase of the Patronage, by his Testament, Anno 1523. The Mayor
and Commonalty purchased it with all the Lands and Tenements thereunto
belonging, in the Year 1546. The same Year King Henry the VIII. gave this
Hospital unto the City. The Church and Chapel thereof were taken down in the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and Houses built there, by the Governors of Christ's-
Hospital in London. In this Place People that be Distracted of their Wits, were
received and kept at the Suit of their Friends, but not without Charges to
their bringers in.

This Place being old, narrow, and not very pleasant, the City of London
resolved to build a New Hospital, which in April 1675, was begun, and to the
great Glory and Ornament of the City, and the great benefit of the Poor
Lunaticks, was finished July 1676, in so Stately and Beautiful a manner, that
the whole World can hardly Parallel it; It is of a great Length, reaching from
Moor-gate, to the Little-Postern, leading out of the North-East part of
Moor-Fields, into the City, near the City Walls, with a most Glorious Front
toward those Delicate Walks of Moor-Fields; the Architecture is very Regular,
Exquisite, and Rich, with a Stately Turret in the midst of a Curious Form, and
Fair green Courts, part of which are Paved with broad Stone for walks,
Environed with a very hansom Brick-Wall; there are two Stately Galleries,
reaching from one end to the other, on the sides of which, are the Lodgings of
the Distracted People, which are very neat and convenient, they are carefully
and very decently served with plenty of good wholesome Diet, and very well
attended, by Persons appointed to that purpose. This Work cost above 18000 l.
to which many Noble Citizens, etc. were Benefactors, (...) is indeed, a Work
very well becoming the Mag^^^nce of this Renowned City, who in all their
undertakings, and in all Public Acts of Ornament to the City, or Charity to
the Poor, have demonstrated themselves to be Peerless.

Besides these Grand Hospitals, there are a great many Almshouses in and about
the City, which were the Gifts of Pious and Worthy Persons, of which, as far as
we could obtain a distinct Information, we have given an account in the Chapter
of Churches. I have Read that in the 44 of Edward the III. an Hospital was
Founded by Robert Denton, Chaplain in the Parish of Barking, for the
Sustentation of Poor Lunaticks, or such as were Phrenetick, or Sick of the
Phrenzie, there to remain till they were perfectly whole, and restored to good
Memory. There was also an Hospital of St. Mary Spittle, in Spittle-Fields, but
dissolved. There was likewise an Hospital of St. Anthony, in the Parish of
Bennet-Fink. The Protectors of this House were to Collect the Benevolence of
Charitable Persons, toward the Building and Support thereof. These Officers
were charged with the oversight of the Markets in the City, and did several
times take from the Market-People, Pigs starved, or otherwise unwholsom for
Man's sustenance; which they slit in the Ear, and one of the Proctors of St.
Anthonies, tied a Bell about the Neck, and let it feed at pleasure, on
Dung-hills, or other places, which no Body would hurt or take up: but if any
gave them Bread or other Feeding, such would they know, watch for, and follow,
whining till they had given them something, whereupon was raised a Proverb. ^e
whines (or follows) like a Tantony-Pig; but if the Pigs WESTMINSTER HALL

THE ROYAL EXCHANGE

CLARENDON HOUSE

COVENT GARDEN

came to be Fat, and of good liking, the Proctor would apprehend them for the
Use of the Hospital; which is a matter not be much wondered at, for those
Persons usually loved their Bellies very well.

There was of old an Hospital of St. Mary Rouncival by Charing Cross, but
suppressed, and turned to Tenements. So much for the Hospitals.

SECT. 4.
Palaces and Houses of the Nobility.
WE will begin with the Royal Palaces, as White Hall, where the Court is kept
when the King is in the City. In ancient times Westminster-Palace was the
habitation of the Kings of England, from the time of Edward the Confessor,
which was by casual Fire burnt down in the time of Henry the VIII. This was a
very large and stately Palace, and for the building in that Age incomparable.
In the Remains of which, the High Court of Parliament Sits, but more of that
hereafter.

King Henry the VIII. translated his Seat to a House not far of, built by
Cardinal Wolsey, and is called White Hall. This Place formerly belonged to
Hubert de Burgh, Earl of Kent, by whom it was given to the Gray-Friers, and of
them bought by Walter Gray, Archbishop of York, and called York-place; but
Anno. 1529, the King took it from Wolsey and the Archbishop, and named it
White Hall: this King built there a Sumptuous Gallery, and a very Beautiful
Gate House, thwart the High Street to St. James's- Park. In this Gallery the
Princes* with their Nobility used to stand or sit, to behold all Triumphant or
Military Exercises.

To Describe all particularities relating to this Royall-Seat, would be too
tedious. Take a few short Remarks. There is a most Magnificent and Stately
Banqueting House, built by King James. And the Delicate Privy-Garden was
lately enlarged toward the South, with a Pond of an Oval form, supplied with
Water from Hide-Park, where you may see the Water shot, or forced up to a great
height from the surface of the Pond, and by its winding-fall delights the Eye,
and the Ear, with its pretty murmur.

Although this Palace of White Hall makes not so Glorious a show on the
outside, as some other stately Edifices, yet there is not in Christendom a
Court more convenient, and meet for Royal Accommodation, nor more Richly
Furnished. But for the Readers more distinct information, we will give him a
Brief account of our King's- Court, under two heads, Viz. 1. Its Government
both Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Military. 2. Its Hospitality, and plentiful
Tables.



1. Its Government, etc. The Dean of the Kings Chapel is usually some Grave
and Learned Prelate, chosen by the King, who only is his Superior, his Chapel
being exempt from all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, being called Capella
Dominica, the Demean Chapel, in no Diocese, but is a Regal Peculiar, Exempt
and Reserved to the Visitation and immediate Government of the King, who is
Supreme Ordinary, and as it were Prime Bishop over all the Churches and Bishops
of England. By the Dean are chosen all other Officers of the Chapel, viz. A
Sub-Dean or Praecentor Capellae; Thirty two Gentlemen of the Chapel, whereof
twelve are Priests, the other twenty, commonly called Clerks, of the Chapel,
are to perform, with the said Priests, the Office of Praying, Singing, etc. One
of these being well skilled in Music, is chosen Master of the Children,
whereof are twelve in Ordinary, to instruct them in the Rules and Art of
Music, for the service of the Chapel; three others are chosen to be
Organists, to whom is joined, upon Solemn Days, a Consort of the King's Music,
to make the Music more full and complete. There are four Officers called
Vergers, because they carry Silver Rods in their hands, viz. a Sergeant, two
Yeomen, and a Groom of the Chapel. Common Prayers are Read there three times a
day. The King has his private Oratory, where some of his Chaplains in Ordinary
perform the Office every day of the Week. Upon twelve high and Principal
Festivals in the Year, the King (after the Service is over,) attended with the
Principal Nobility, offers a Sum of Gold to God, in signum specialis Domini,
that by his Grace he is King, and holds all of Him, which belongs to the Dean
to be distributed amongst the Poor. This Gold offered is called the Bizantine,
which anciently was a Piece of Gold Coined by the Emperors of Constantinople,
in Latin, Bizantium; That which was used by King James, was a piece of Gold,
having on the one side, the Pourtrait of the King kneeling before an Altar,
with four Crowns before Him, and this Motto circumscribed, Quid retribuam
Domino, pro omnibus quae retribuit mihi? On the other side was a Lamb lying by
a Lion, with this Motto, viz. Cor Contutum and humiliatum non despiciet Deus.

The King has (besides His Extraordinary, which are many) Forty Eight
Chaplains in Ordinary, who are Eminent Doctors in Divinity, whereof Four every
Month wait at Court to Preach. The Lord High Almoner is usually the Bishop of
London, who disposes of the Kings Alms, and for that use receives (besides
other Moneys allowed by the King) all Deodands, and bona felonum de se, to be
that way disposed. Under the Lord High Almoner, there is a Sub-Almoner, two
Yeomen, and two Grooms of the Almonry. Then there is the Clerk of the Closet,
usually some Reverend Divine, much esteemed by His Majesty, who attends at his
Right hand in Service time, to Resolve Doubts about Spiritual matters, to wait
upon His Majesty in His private Oratory or Closet. The Dean of the Chappel's
Fee, is 200 l. Yearly. And the Sub-Deans, one hundred pound. The Clerk of the
Closet's* Fee is, twenty Nobles per annum.

The Chief Officer of Civil Government in His Majesty's Court, is, the Lord
Steward. To whom the State of the Kings-House is committed, to be Ruled and
Guided by his Discretion; whose Commands in Court are to be obeyed; whose
Power, State, and Dignity is very great.

He has Authority over all Officers and Servants of His Majesty's Court,
except those of His Majesty's Chapel, Chamber and Stable, etc. He may by his
Office, without any Commission, Judge of all Discords, as Treasons, Murders,
Felonies, Bloodsheds, committed within the Court, or the Verge thereof, which
is every way within Twelve Miles of the Chief Funnel of the Court, (only London
by Charter is exempted;) because where the King is, Justice ought to be
immediately sought of the King's own Officers. So that the Jurisdiction of the
Verge has been from very Ancient times Executed by the Lord Steward, with
great Ceremony, in the Ntaure of a peculiar King's- Bench, and that not only
within, but without the Kings Dominions.

The Lord Steward is a White-staff-Officer, for he in the King's presence
carries a White-staff, and at other times going abroad, it is carried by a
Footman bare-headed. Which White-staff is taken for a Commission. When the King
Dies, he breaks his Staff over the Hearse made for the King's Body, and
thereby discharges all the Officers, whom the succeeding Kings usually
establish in their former Offices. His Fee is 100 l. yearly, and 16 Dishes of
Meat daily, besides Wine, Beer, etc.

The next Officer is the Lord Chamberlain, who has the Oversight of all
Officers belonging to the King's Chamber (except the Precincts of the King's
Bedchamber, which is wholly under the Groom of the Stole) and all above
Stairs, who are all sworn by him (or his Warrant to the Gentlemen Ushers) to
the King. He has also the Oversight of the Officers of the Wardrobe, at all
His Majesty's Houses, and of the Removing Wardrobes, or of Beds, of the Tents,
Revels, Music, Comedians, Hanting, and of the Messengers, of the Trumpeters,
Drummers, of all Handicrafts and Artizans retained in the King's Services. He
has also the Oversight of the Heralds and Pursuivants, and Sergeants at Arms;
of all Physicians, Apothecaries, Chyrurgeons, Barbers, Chaplains, though
himself be a Layman. Also of the Charges of Coronations, Marriages, Entries,
Cavalcades, Funerals, etc. His Fee is 100 l. yearly, and 16 Dishes each Meal,
with the Appurtenances.

The third great Officer is the Master of the Horse, anciently called Comes
Stabuli, or Constable, who has the ordering and disposal of all the King's
Stables, and Races, or Breed of Horses. He has also power over the Escuries
and Pages, Footmen, Grooms, Riders of the Great Horses, Farriers, Smiths,
Coachmen, Sadlers, and all other Trades working to the King's Stables; to all
whom he (or by his Warrant the Avener) gives an Oath to be true and faithful.
He has the Charges of all Lands and Revenues appointed for the King's Breed of
Horses, and for Charges of the Stable, and for Litters, Coaches,
Sumpter-Horses, etc.

At any Solemn Cavalcade, he Rides next behind the King, and leads a Leer Horse
of State. His annual Fee is 666 l. 16 s. 4 d. and a Table of 16 Dishes each
Meal. The Account of the Stables for Horse-meat, Livery, Wages, and
Board-Wages, are brought by the Avener, being chief Clerk of the Avery, to be
passed and allowed by the Green-Cloth.

Under these Principal Officers, are almost all the other Officers and
Servants, as under the Lord Steirard in the Compting-house, is the Treasurer of
the Household, the Comptroller, the Cofferer, the Master of the Household, the
two Clerks of the Green Cloth, the two Clerks Comptrollers, one Serge^nt, two
Yeomen, the Cofferers Clerks, or Clerks of the Assignments, the Groom, two
Messengers.

The Compting-house is so called, because the Accounts for all Expenses of the
King's Household are the^e daily taken by the Lord-Steward, the Treasurer,
Comptroller, the Cofferer, the Master of the Household, the two Clerks of the
Green Cloth, and the two Clerks Comptrollers, who also there make Provisions
for the Household, according to the Law of the Land, and make Payments and
Orders for the Well-governing of the Servants of the Household.

In the Compting-house, is the Green-Cloth, which is a Court of Justice
continually sitting in the King's House, composed of the Persons last
mentioned; whereof the three first are usually of the King's Privy Council. To
this Court, being the first and most ancient Court of England, is committed the
charge and oversight of the King's Court Royal for matters of Justice and
Government, with Authority for maintaining the Peace, within 12 Miles distance
wheresoever the Court shall be and within the King's House, the power of
correcting all the Servants therein, that shall any way offend. It is called
the Green-Cloth, of a Green-Cloth whereat they (...), over whom are the Arms of
the Compting-house, bearing Vert a Key, or, and a Staff Argent Saultier,
signifying their power to Reward and Correct, as Persons, for their great
Wisdom and Experience, thought fit by His Majesty, to exercise both these
Functions in His Royal House.

The Treasurer of the King's House is always of the Privy Council, and, in
absence of the Lord Steward, has power with the Comptroller and Steward of the
Marshalsea, to hear and determine Treasons, Felonies, and other Crimes,
committed within the King's Palace, and that by Verdict of the King's Household.

If any Servants within the Check-Roll be found Guilty of Felony, they are to
have no Benefit of Clergy allowed them.

The Comptrollers Office, is to Control the Accounts and Reckonings of the
Green-Cloth. His Fee is Annually 107 l. 12 s. 4 d. A Table of 16 Dishes each
Meal. He bears a White Staff, etc.

The Cofferer is a principal Officer, and has especial Charge and Oversight
of other Officers of the House, for their good Demeanor and Carriage in their
Offices, and is to pay the Wages of the King's Servants, above and below
Stairs. And for Provisions, by the Direction and Allowance of the Green-Cloth.
His Annual Fee is 100 l. and a Table of seven Dishes each day.

The Office of the Master of the Household, is to survey the Accounts of the
House. His Fee is 100 Marks, and seven Dishes daily.

All Bills of Comptrolment, Parcels and Brievements, are lotted and allowed by
the Clerks Comptrollers, and summed up by the Clerks of the Green-Cloth.

Note, That though the King pays still the ancient Fees, which at first were
above ten times the value they are now; yet the Perquisites in many O^fices,
make sometimes a place of 10 l. Fee, to be worth near 500 l. per Annum.

Note also, That in each Office there is a Succession from one to another, the
inferior Degree still coming into the place of the next above if he dies, as
one of the Children may come to be Groom, then Yeoman, then Gentleman, then
Sergeant, etc. as he happens to outlive them above him.

The Chief Clerk waits upon, and appoints, the Kings, Queens, and Household
Dyets every third Month; waits upon all Foreign Princes, Strangers, and
Ambassadors, when His Majesty gives them Entertainment. He keeps all the
Records, Leger-Books, and Papers, relating to that Office; makes up all Bills,
Parcels and Debentures, for Board-Wages, and Provisions and Necessaries,
issuing from the Offices of the Pantery, Buttery and Cellar. Keeps Account of,
and makes up the Remains, with several other Duties, which oblige him to
constant Waiting. He appoints Scowrers, Turn-Brochers, and Porters in his turn
with the Master Cook, in the several Kitchens, and has a Fee equal to an
Officer of the Green-Cloth, and Diet, of seven Dishes each Meal.

The second and third Clerks wait upon the Diet, as abovesaid, each of them one
month in three, and attend the King and Queen in their Progresses, when
appointed by the Green-Cloth, and have a Table of five Dishes. There are three
Master Cooks for the King, Queen, and Household, who have each a Table of five
Dishes.

There is a Knight Harbinger, three Gentlemen Harbingers, and seven Yeomen
Harbingers. The Office is given to the Knight-Harbinger by Letters Patents
under the Great Seal of England, during Life. When the King goes on Progress in
England, or Beyond the Seas, he does by himself, or his Deputy, provide and
appoint all Lodgings and Harbingage for all great Persons, all Noblemen,
Bishops, all His Majesty's Servants and Attendants, etc. For all Ambassadors
and Foreigners, etc. His Salary is 20 Marks per Annum, and 10 s. a day out of
the Exchequer, besides Fees for Honors given by the King, and Homage done to
His Majesty, and diverse other Perquisites.

In the Court the Officers, according to their several Degrees, are called
either Lords, Knights, Esquires, Sergeants, Gentlemen, Clerks, Yeomen, Grooms,
Pages, or Children. There are two Lords, viz. the Lord Steward, and the Lord
Chamberlain. Two Knights, viz. the Knight Marshal, and the Knight Harbinger.
Four Esquires of the Body, etc.

The Knight Marshal, called Mareschalus Hospitii Regis, has Jurisdiction and
Cognizance of all Crimes within the Royal Palace, whereunto one of the Parties
is the King's Servant. He is one of the Judges of the Court called the
Marshalsea, or Marshal-Seat of Judicature, which is held in Southwark, and has
there a Prison belonging to the same. Upon Solemn Occasions he Rides before the
King with a short Baston tipped at both ends with Gold, and has six Provost
Marshals or Virgers, in Scarlet Coats to wait on him, and to take care of the
Royal Palace, that no Beggars, Vagabonds, Common Women that prostitute their
Bodies, Malefactors, etc. come within or near the Court. There are diverse other
Officers below Stairs under the Lord Steward, as also the Officers belonging to
the Queens Kitchen, Cellar, Pantery, etc. and to the Lords Kitchen, together
with Children, Scowrers, Turn-Broaches, etc.

His Majesty's Servants in Ordinary above-stairs, are as follows:

THE Gentlemen of the Bedchamber, whereof the first is called the Groom of the
Stole, as it were Servant of the Robe, or Vestment, he having the Office and
Honor to Present and Put on His Majesty's first Garment or Shirt every
morning, and to order the things of the Bedchamber.

The Gentlemen are usually of the prime Nobility of England. Their Office is
each one in his Turn to wait a Week in every quarter in the King's Bedchamber,
there to lie by the King in a Pallet-Bed all Night, and in the absence of the
Groom of the Stole, to supply his place. They wait on the King when he eats in
private, for then the Cup-Bearers, Carvers and Sewers do not wait. The yearly
Fee to each is 1000 l. There is a Vice-Chamberlain, a Keeper of the
Privy-Purse, a Treasurer of the Chamber, who pays Riding and Lodging Wages, as
the Lord Chamberlain shall direct, a Surveyor General of His Majesty's Works.
The Master of the Robes belonging to His Majesty's Person, whose Office it is
to order them at Coronations, St. George's Feast, and Parliament-Time. He has
also the ordering of all His Majesty's Wearing Apparel, of His Collar of Esses,
Georges, and Garter beset with Diamonds and Pearls.

The Grooms of the Bedchamber are Twelve, besides some Supernumeraries. They
are to be under the degree of Knights, and to attend in the King's Bedchamber,
to dress and undress him in private. The yearly Fee to each is 500 l. Then
there are Six Pages of the Bedchamber, Four Gentlemen-ushers of the Privy
Chamber, who wait, one at a time, in the Privy Lodgings. There are Forty eight
Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber in Ordinary, who are all Knights, or Esquires of
Note, of which Twelve every Quarter wait on the King's Person within doors and
without, so long as His Majesty is on Foot; and when the King is in the Privy
Chamber, they wait at the Table, and bring in his Meat. They wait also at the
Reception of Ambassadors, and every Night two of them lie in the King's Privy
Chamber. A Gentleman of the Privy Chamber, by the King's Commandment only,
without any written Commission, may Arrest any Peer of England, as Cardinal
Wolsey acknowledged.

There are Six Grooms of the Privy Chamber in Ordinary, all Gentlemen of
Quality. These wait (as all Grooms) without Sword, Cloak, or Hat: whereas the
Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber, wear always Cloak and Sword. There is also a
Library Keeper. In the Presence Chamber, Gentlemen-ushers daily Waiters in
Ordinary are four, whereof the first has that considerable Office of the Black
Rod, and in time of Parliament is to attend every day in the Lords House, and
is also Usher of the most Honorable Order of the Garter. Second Gentleman
Usher, daily Waiter, etc. their Office is to wait in the Presence Chamber, and
to attend next the King's Person; and after the Lord Chamberlain, and
Vice-Chamberlain, to order all Affairs, and all Underofficers above-stairs are
to obey these.

There are Eight Gentlemen-ushers, Quarter-Waiters in Ordinary, who wait also
in the Presence Chamber, and are to give Directions in the absence of the
Gentlemen-ushers daily Waiters to the Grooms and Pages, and other
Underofficers, who are to attend in all Offices, next below the
Gentlemen-ushers Quarter-Waiters. The Grooms of the great Chamber are Fourteen;
Six Gentlemen-Waiters, Four Cup-Bearers, Four Carvers, Four Sewers, Four
Esquires of the Body, whose Office is to guard the King's Person by Night, to
set the Watch, and to give the Word, and to keep good Order in the whole House
by Night; as the Lord Chamberlain, and his other Officers, are to do by day.
The Sewers of the Chamber are Eight. The Groom-Porter's Office is to see the
King's Lodgings furnished with Tables, Chairs, Stools, Firing; to furnish
Cards, Dice, etc. to decide Disputes arising at Cards, Dice, Bowling, etc.

There are Sixteen Sergeants at Arms, all Gentlemen, or Knights, attending upon
His Majesty. There are also Four other Sergeants at Arms, whereof one attends
the Lord President of Wales, another the Speaker of the House of Commons, and
another the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland.

There are Forty eight Chaplains in Ordinary, usually Doctors in Divinity, and,
for the most part, Deans or Prebends, and all principal Preachers, who attend
by Four every month to Preach before the King.

There are Four Physicians in Ordinary for the King's Person, whereof one is
assigned to attend the Queen. There are also Physicians in Ordinary to the
Household, of which one is for the Tower of London. There are, besides these,
above Twelve able Physicians, who are the King's Sworn Servants, but wait not,
nor have Fee.

There is a Master and Treasurer of the Jewel-house, and three Underofficers,
called Yeomen and Grooms, whose Office is to take charge of all Vessels of
Gold, or Silver Gilt, for the King and Queens Table of all Plate in the Tower,
of Chains and loose Jewels not fixed to any Garment.

The Master of the Ceremonies, has a Fee of 200 l. his Assistant 120 l. 13 s. 4
d. and one Marshal, 100 l. per Annum. This Office of Master of the Ceremonies.
was instituted by King James, for the more Honorable Reception of Ambassadors,
and Strangers of Quality. The Assistant Master of the Ceremonies, is to execute
the same Employment in all Points, whenever the other is absent. The Marshal
of the Ceremonies is their Officer, for the more easy performance of the said
Services, and being subordinate to them both, is to act nothing but by the
directions of one of them.

Amongst the King's Servants in Ordinary, are three Kings of Arms, six Heralds,
or Dukes of Arms, and four Pursuivants at Arms. The Title of the first is
Garter, whose Office is to attend and direct at those Ceremonies and
Solemnities that concern the most Noble Order of the Garter, and to Marshal the
Solemn Funerals of the Knights of that Order, as also of the Peers of England,
and to direct all things else relating to Arms, which appertain to the Peerage.

The Title of the Second is Clarencieux, who regulates and directs the
Proceedings at Solemn Funerals of all Degrees under Peers as shall be
celebrated in his Province, which is the Counties on the South of Trent, and
whatsoever else there relates to Arms.

The Title of the Third is Norroy, who regulates and directs like the Second
throughout his Province on the North of Frent.

The Offices of the Heralds and Pursuivants, besides their Services at the
aforesaid Solemnities, are (together with the Kings of Arms) to attend at
Public Solemnities, and some or all of them to proclaim War or Peace, carry
Defiances, summon Fortified Places, or Rebels in Arms, proclaim Traitors, and
to do their best Service in whatsoever relates to the Nobility and Gentry of
England in point of Honor and Arms.

Amongst the King's Servants in Ordinary, are reckoned one Geographer, one
Historiographer, one Hydrographer, one Library Keeper, one Cosmographer, one
Poet Laureat, and one Public Notary.

The King, besides the Great Wardrobe, has diverse standing Wardrobes at
Whitehal, Windsor, Hampton Court, the Tower of London, and Greenwich, etc.
whereof there are diverse Officers.

There is the Removing Wardrobe, which always attends upon the Person of the
King, Queen, and the Children, as also upon Ambassadors, Christenings, Masks,
Plays, etc. at the Command of the Lord Chamberlain, who has the disposing of
vacant places. Here are fix Officers, one Yeoman, two Grooms, and three Pages;
the Salary of the Yeoman is 200 l. of the Grooms 100 l. and of the Pages 100
Marks. And to all together, six Dishes each Meal. The Movables of this
Wardrobe are at length divided into three parts, whereof the Yeoman has one
for his own use, the Grooms another, and the Pages the third.

In the Office of the Tents, Soyls, Hayes, and Pavilions, are two Masters, four
Yeomen, one Groom, one Clerk Comptroller, and one Clerk of the Tents. The
Master of the Revels is to order all things concerning Comedies, etc. there is
one Yeoman, one Groom. Engraver Sculptor, one in each Office. In the Office of
the Robes, besides the Master abovementioned, there is one Yeoman, three
Grooms, one Page, two Purveyors, one Brusher, one Tailor, one Dyer, one
Girdler, one Clerk, one Lace-man, one Cutter and Racer, two Embroiderers, two
Silkmen, one Shoemaker, one Perfumer, one Feather-maker, one Millener, one
Mercer, one Hosier, one Draper, one Surveyor, etc.

Falconer with Thirty three Officers under him. Master of the Buck-Hounds, with
a Sergeant, and Thirty four persons under him. Master of the Otter-Hounds.
Master of the Harriers, and five under him. Master of the Ordnance, a
Lieutenant, and Master Armorer, with Seventeen Underofficers. Messengers of
the Chamber in Ordinary, two Clerks of the Check, and Forty more, in all Forty
two.

Musicians in Ordinary, Sixty two. Trumpeters and Kittle-Drummers, Fifteen.
Drummers and Fifes, Seven. Apothecaries Two, one for the King's Person, and one
for the Household. Chyrurgeo^s two. B^rbers two. Printers three, besides one for
the Oriental Tongues. Bookseller, Stationer, and Book-binder. Sil^man,
Woollen-Draper, and two Tailors. Post-Masters for all the Port-Towns in
England, all sworn to, and paid by the King. A Master of the Game of
Cock-fighting.

One Sergeant Skinner, who has the care of His Majesty's Furrs. Two
Embroiderers. Two Keepers of the Privy Lodging. Two Gentlemen and one Yeoman of
the Bows. One Cross-Bow-maker. One Fletcher. One Cormorant-Keeper. One
Hand-Gun-maker. One Master and Marker of Tennis. One Mistress Semstress, and
one Laundress. One Perspective-Maker. One Master-Fencer. One Haberdasher of
Hats. One Comb-maker. One Sergeant Painter. One Painter. One Limner. One
Picture-Drawer. One Silver-Smith. One Goldsmith. One Jeweller. One
Peruque-maker. One Keeper of Pheasants and Turkies. Joyner. Copier of Pictures.
Watch-maker. Cabinet-maker. Lock-Smith, of each one. Game of Bears and Bulls,
one Master, one Sergeant, one Yeoman. Two Operators for the Teeth. Two
Coffer-bearers for the Back-stairs. One Yeoman of the Leash. Fifty five
Watermen. Vpholsterer, Letter-Carrier, Foreign-Post, Coffee-maker, of each one.

Ten Officers beionging to Gardens, Bowling-Greens, Tennis-Court, Pall Mall,
Keeper of the Theater at Whitehall. Cutler, Spurrier, Girdler, Corn-cutter,
Button-maker, Embosser, Enameler, of each one. Writer, Flourisher, and
Embellisher, Scenographer, or Designer of Prospects, Letter-Founder, of each
one. Comedians, Seventeen Men, and Eight Women, Actors.

Gunner, Gilder, Cleanser of Pictures, Scene-keeper, Coffer-maker,
Wax-chandler, of each one. Keeper of Birds and Fowl in St. James's- Park, one.
Keeper of the Volery, Coffee-club-maker, Sergeant-Painter, of each one; with
diverse other Officers and Servants under the Lord Chamberlain to serve His
Majesty upon occasion. Many of which Offices and Places are of good Credit, and
great Profit, and enjoyed by Persons of Quality.

As to the Officers under the Master of the Horse, there are Twelve Querries,
so called of the French Escayer, derived from Escury, a Stable. Their Office is
to attend the King on Hunting or Progress, or on any occasion of Riding abroad,
to help His Majesty up and down from his Horse, etc. Four of these are called
Querries of the Crown-Stable, and the others are called Querries of the
Hunting-Stable. The Fee to each of these is only 20 l. yearly, according to the
ancient Custom; but they have allowance for Diet, to each 100 l. yearly,
besides Lodgings, and two Horse-Liveries.

Next is the chief Avener, from Avena, Oats, whose yearly Fee is 40 l. There
is, moreover, one Clerk of the Stable, four Yeomen-Riders, four Child-Riders,
Yeomen of the Stirrup, Sergeant-Marshal, and Yeomen-Farriers, four
Groom-Farriers, Sergeants of the Carriage, three Surveyors, a Squire and
Yeomen-Sadlers, four Yeomen-Granators, four Yeomen-Purveyors, a Yeoman-Peckman,
a Yeoman-Bitmaker, four Coach-men, eight Litter-men, a Yeoman of the Close
Wagon, Sixty four Grooms of the Stable, whereof 30 are called Grooms of the
Crown Stable, and Thirty four of the Hunting and Pad-Stable. Twenty six Footmen
in their Liveries, to run by the King' s Horse. All these Places are in the
Gift of the Master of the Horse.

There is besides these an ancient Officer, called Clerk of the Market, who
within the Verge of the King's Household, is to keep a Standard of all Weights
and Measures, and to burn all that are false. From the Pattern of this
Standard, all the Weights and Measures of the Kingdom are to be taken.

There are diverse other considerable Officers, not Subordinate to the Three
Great Officers, as the Master of the great Wardrobe, Postmaster, Master of the
Ordinance, Warden of the Mint, etc.

Upon the King are also attending in his Court the Lords of the Privy Council,
Secretaries of State, the Judges, the College of Civilians, the King's Council
at Law, the King's Sergeants at Law, the Masters of Requests, Clerks of the
Signet, Clerks of the Council, Keeper of the Paper-Office, or Papers of State,
etc.

There is always a Military Force to preserve the King's Person, which are His
Guards of Horse and Foot. The Guards of Horse are in Number 600 Men, well Armed
and Equipped; who are generally Young Gentlemen of considerable Families, who
are there made fit for Military Commands. They are divided into Three Troops,
viz. The King's Troop, distinguished by their Blew Ribbons and Carbine Belts,
their Red Hooses, and Houlster-Caps, Embroidered with His Majesty's Cipher and
Crown. The Queens Troops by Green Ribbons, Carbine Belts, covered with Green
Velvet, and Gold Lace, also Green Hooses and Houster Caps, Embroidered with the
same Cipher and Crown. And the Dukes Troop by Yellow Ribbons, and Carbine
Belts, and Yellow Hooses, Embroidered as the others. In which Troops, are 200
Gentlemen, besides Officers. Each of these Three Troops is divided into Four
Squadrons or Divisions, Two of which consisting of one hundred Gentlemen, and
Commanded by one Principal Commissioned Officer, two Brigadiers, and two
Sub-Brigadiers, with two Trumpets mount the Guards one day in six, and are
Relieved in their turns. Their Duty is always by Parties from the Guard, to
attend the Person of the KING, the Queen, the Duke, and the Duchess,
wheresoever they go near home, but if out of town, they are attended by
Detachments out of the said Three Troops.

Besides this, there is a more strict Duty and Attendance W^^^ly on the KING's
Person on Foot, wheresoever He walks, from His Rising to His going to Bed, by
one of the three Captains, who always waits immediately next the KING's own
Person, before all others, carrying in his hand an Ebony-staff or Truncheon,
with a Gold head, Engraved with His MAJESTY'S Cyper and Crown. Near him also
attends a Principal Commissioned Officer, with an Ebony-staff, and Silver head,
who is ready to Relieve the Captain on occasion; and at the same time also, two
Brigadiers, having also Ebony-staves, headed with Ivory, and Engraven as the
others.

There is added a Troop of Grenadiers to each Troop of Guards, one Division of
which mounts with a Division of the Troop to which they belong; they never go
out on small Parties from the Guard, only perform Centry-Duty on Foot, and
attend the KING also on Foot when he walks abroad, but always March with great
Detachments. The KING's Troop consists of a Captain, two Lieutenants, three
Sergeants, three Corporals, two Drums, two Hautbois, and eighty private
Soldiers Mounted. The Queens Troop, of a Captain, two Lieutenants, two
Sergeants, two Corporals, two Hautbois, and Sixty private Soldiers Mounted.
The Dukes Troop consists of the like Number with the Queens.

The Captains of His MAJESTY'S Guards always Command as Eldest Colonels of
Horse; the Lieutenants as Eldest Lieutenant-Colonels of Horse; the Cornets and
Guidons, as Eldest Majors of Horse; the Quartermasters, as Youngest Captains of
Horse; the Brigadiers as Eldest Lieutenants of Horse; and amongst themselves
every Officer, according to the Date of his Commission, takes precedence, when
on Detachments, but not when the Three Troops march with their Colors, for
then the Officer of the Eldest Troop, commands those of equal Rank with him in
the others, though their Commission be of Elder Date.

Next immediately after the Three Troops of Guards, His MAJESTY'S Regiment of
Horse Commanded by the Earl of Oxford takes place, and the Colonel of it is to
have precedence, after the Captains of the Guards, and before all other
Colonels of Horse, whatsoever change may be of the Colonel; and all the
Officers thereof, in their proper Degree, are to take place according to the
Dates of their Commissions. As to the Foot, the King's Regiment, Commanded by
the Honorable Colonel John Russel, takes place of all other Regiments, and the
Colonel thereof is always to precede as the first Colonel. The Colestream
Regiment, Commanded by the Earl of Craven, takes the next; the Duke of Yorks
Regiment next, then His Majesty's Holland Regiment, Commanded by the Earl of
Mulgrave, and all other Colonels, according to the Dates of their Commissions.
All other Regiments of Horse and Foot, not of the Guards, take place according
to their Respective Seniority, from the time they were first Raised, and no
Regiment loses its precedence by the Death of its Colonel.

At the KING's House there is a Guard for His Person, both above and below
stairs. In the Presence Chamber the Band of Gentlemen Pensioners wait,
instituted by King Henry the VII. and chosen out of the best and antientest
Families in England, to be a Guard to His Majesty's Person, and also to be a
Nursery to breed up hopeful Gentlemen, and fit them for Employments, Civil and
Military, as well abroad as at home; as Deputies of Ireland, Ambassadors in
Foreign Parts, Counselors of State, Captains of the Guard, Governors of
places, Commanders in the Wars, both by Sea and Land, of all which there have
been Examples. They are to attend the King's Person to and from His Chapel,
only as far as the Privy Chamber: also in all other Solemnity, as Coronations,
public Audience of Ambassadors, etc. They are 40 in Number, over whom there is
a Captain, usually some Peer of the Realm, a Lieutenant, a Standard Bearer, and
a Clerk of the Check. They wait half at a time quarterly. Those in quarter wait
daily five at a time upon the King in the House, and when He walks abroad. Upon
extraordinary occasions, all of them are Summoned. Their ordinary Arms are Gilt
Pole-Axes. Their Arms on Horseback in time of War, are Cuirassiers Arms, with
Sword and Pistol. These are only under their own Officers, and are always Sworn
by the Clerk of the Check, who is to take Notice of such as are absent when
they should be upon their Duty. Their Standard in time of War, is a Cross Gules
in a Field Argent, also 4 bends.

In the first Room above stairs, called the Guard-Chamber, attend the Yeomen of
the Guard of His Majesty's Body; whereof there were wont to be 250 Men of the
best quality under Gentry, and of larger Stature then ordinary (for every one
was to be Six Foot high) there are at present 100 Yeomen in daily waiting, and
70 more not in waiting, and as any of the 100 die, his place is filled up out
of the 70. These wear Scarlet Coats Down to the knee, and Scarlet Breeches,
both richly Guarded with black Velvet, and rich Badges upon their Coats both
before and behind, moreover black Velvet round broad Crowned Caps, with Ribbons
of the King's Color: One half of them of late bear in their hands Harquebuzes,
and the other half Partisans, with large Swords by their sides: they have Wages
and Diet allowed them. Their Office is to wait upon the King in His standing
Houses, 40 by by Day, and 20 to Watch by Night; about the City to wait upon the
King's Person abroad by Water or Land.

The KING's Palace Royal ( ratione Regiae dignitatis) is exempted from all
Jurisdiction of any Court, Civil or Ecclesiastic, but only to the Lord
Steward, and in his absence to the Treasurer and Comptroller of the King's
Household, with the Steward of the Marshalsea, who by virtue of their Office,
without Commission, may Hear and Determine all Treasons, Fellonies, Breaches of
the Peace, Committed within the KING's Court or Palace. The Orders and Rules
for the Demeanor of all Officers and Servants, are hung upon Tables in several
Rooms at the Court, and Signed with the King's own hand, worthy to be Read of
all Strangers.

The Court or House where the King resides, is accounted a Place so Sacred,
that if any Man presume to strike another there, and, only draw blood, his
Right hand shall be cut off, and he Committed to perpetual Imprisonment, and
Fined. All occasions of striking are also there forbidden.

The Court of England, for Magnificence, Order, Number^ and Quality of
Officers, rich Furniture, Entertainment and Civility to Strangers, and for
plentiful Tables, might compare with the best in Christendom, and far Excels
most Courts abroad. It has for a long time been a Pattern of Hospitality and
Charity, to the Nobility and Gentry of Eugland. All Noblemen or Gentlemen,
Subjects or Strangers, were freely Entertained at the plentiful Tables of His
Majesty's Officers. Diverse Dishes were provided every day extraordinary for the
King's Honor. Two hundred and forty Gallons of Beer a day, were allowed at
the Buttery-Bar for the Poor, besides all the broken Meat, Bread, etc. gathered
into Baskets, and given to the Poor, at the Court-Gates, by Two Grooms, and Two
Yeomen, of the Almonry, who have Salaries of His Majesty for that Service. The
Lord Almoner has the Privilege to give the King's Dish, to whatsoever Poor
Man he pleases; that is, the first Dish at Dinner which is set upon the King's
Table, or in stead thereof four pence a day, (which anciently was equivalent to
four shillings now;) next he distributes to 24 poor men, named by the
Parishioners of the Parish adjacent to the King's place of Residence, to each
of them four pence in money, a Two-penny Loaf, and a Gallon of Beer, or in
stead thereof three pence in money, equally to be divided among them every
morning at seven of the Clock at the Court-gate. The Sub-Almoner is to scatter
New-coined Two-pences in the Towns and Places where the King passes through in
his Progresses, to a certain Sum by the year. Besides there are many poor
Pensioners, either because so old that they are unfit for service, or the
Widows of any of the King's Servants that dyed poor, who have a Competency duly
paid them: Besides, there are distributed among the Poor the large Offerings
which the King gives in Collar days.

The magnificent and abundant plenty of the King's Tables, has caused
amazement in Foreigners. In the Reign of King Charles I. there were daily in
his Court 86 Tables well furnished each Meal, whereof the King's Tables had 28
Dishes, the Queens 24, 4 other Tables 16 Dishes each, 3 other 10 Dishes, 12
other 7 Dishes, 17 other 5 Dishes, 3 other 4, 32 had 3, and 13 had each two; in
all about 500 Dishes each Meal, with Bread, Beer, Wine, and all other things
necessary. There was spent yearly in the King's House of gross meat 1500 Oxen,
7000 Sheep, 1200 Veals, 300 Porkers, 400 Sturks, or young Beefs, 6800 Lambs,
300 Flitches of Bacon, and 26 Boars. Also 140 dozen of Geese, 250 dozen of
Capons, 470 dozen of Hens, 750 dozen of Pullets, 1470 dozen of Chickens, for
Bread 36400 Bushels of Wheat, and for Drink 600 Tun of Wine, and 1700 Tun of
Beer. Moreover, of Butter 46640, together with the Fish, and Fowl, Venison,
Fruit, Spice proportionably. This prodigious plenty in the King's Court, caused
Foreigners to put a higher value upon the King, and was much for the Honor of
the Kingdom. The King's Servants being Men of Quality, by His Majesty's special
Order went to Westminster Hall in Term-time, to invite Gentlemen, to eat of the
King's Acates or Viands, and in Parliament-time, to invite the Parliament Men
thereto.

On the Thursday before Easter, called Maunday Thursday, the King, or his Lord
Almoner, was wont to wash the Feet of as many poor Men, as His Majesty had
Reigned years, and then to wipe them with a Towel, (according to the Pattern of
our Savior) and then to give every one of them two Yards and a half of Woollen
Cloth, to make a Suit of Clothes; also Linen Cloth for two Shirts, and a pair
of Stockings, and a pair of Shoes, three Dishes of Fish in Wooden Platters, one
of Salt Salmon, a second of Green Fish or Cod, a third of Pickle-Herrings, Red
Herrings, and Red Sprats, a Gallon of Beer, a Quart Pottle of Wine, and four
six-penny Loaves of Bread, also a Red Leather-purse with as many single Pence
as the King is years old, and in such another Purse as many shillings as the
King has reigned years. The Queen does the like to diverse poor Women.

The Form of Government is by the wisdom of many Ages, so contrived and
regulated, that it is almost impossible to mend it. The Account (which is of so
many Natures, and is therefore very difficult, must pass through many hands,
and is therefore very exact) is so wisely contrived and methodized, that
without the Combination of every one of these following Officers, viz. the
Cofferer, a Clerk of the Green Cloth, a Clerk Comptroller, a Clerk of the
Kitchen, of the Spicery or Avery, or a particular Clerk, together with the
conjunction of a Purveyor and Waiter in the Office, it is impossible to defraud
the King of a Loaf of Bread, of a Pint of Wine, a Quart of Beer, or Joint of
Meat, or Money, or any thing else.

Having given this brief Abstract, if any would be more curious to read it more
at large, or about the Courts of the Queen and Royal Family, they are referred
to the Present State of England.

II. West from Charing Cross, there stood sometimes an Hospital of St. James,
founded by the Citizens of London, before the time of any Man's memory, for 14
Sisters, Maidens that were Leprous. This Hospital was surrendered to King Henry
VIII. in the 23 of his Reign. The Sisters being compounded with, were allowed
Pensions for term of their Lives, and the King built there a goodly Manor, now
the Duke of York's Palace, annexing thereunto the beautiful Park called St.
James's enclosed with a Wall of Brick, serving ind^^^erently for that Palace,
and the Court or Palace of Whitehall, which, in a word, for extraordinary
Commodiousness, Convenience and Situation, being seated between a Noble
Navigable River, and a most Deiectable and Spacious Park, full of great and
rare Varieties, (as has been hinted) for the Great Chamber there, called the
Banqueting House, the like whereof for Spaciousness, Beauty Peinture, and
exact Proportion, no King in Europe can parallel, deserves the View and Notice
of all Strangers.

III. Although it might seem more proper to treat of Westminster Hall, under
the Head or Chapter of Public Halls or Courts, yet being a Place so Eminent,
above any other in this Renowned City, and formerly a Royal Palace, we shall
leave our Remarks upon it with the Reader in this place, and give a brief
Account, (1) of its Foundation and Antiquity; (2) of the Courts held there,
especially the High Court of Parliament, which, we hope, will be acceptable.

1. Many Eminent Authors do affirm, That this Great Hall was built by William
Rufus, about the year of our Lord 1097. amongst whom, Roger of Windover, and
Matthew Paris write, that King William being returned out of Normandy into
England, kept his Feast of Whitsontide very Royally at Westminster in the
New-Hall, which he had lately built. This Hall, for all Dimensions, is not to
be equalled by any Hall in Christendom. It is (say some) 270 Foot in length,
and 74 broad. It is reported that the King should say to one that thought the
Hall too big, That it was not big enough by one half, and was but a Bedchamber
in comparison of what he meant to make.

This Palace was Repaired Anno 1163. by Thomas Becket Chancellor of England,
with exceeding great celerity and speed, being before ready to have fallen
down. It has been the principal Seat and Palace of all the Kings of England
since the Conquest, where they kept Coronation, and other Solemn Feasts, till
the time of King Henry VIII. In this Palace (by a marvelous Inundation or
Overflowing of the River of Thames in the year 1236, which drowned many Cattle
and Men, Women and Children) Men did Row with Wherries in the midst of the
Hall. The like (or rather more dreadful Inundation) happened in the year 1242.
the Thames overflowing the Banks about Lambeth.

In the year 1299, 27 Edw. 1. this Palace was burnt by a vehement Fire, kindled
in the lesser Hall of the King's House, by which the same (with many other
Houses adjoining, together with the Queens Chamber) was consumed, but after
that repaired.

In the year 1397, King Richard II. caused the Walls, Windows and Roof to be
taken down, and new made, with a stately Porch, and diverse Lodgings of a
marvelous Work, and with great Costs, which being finished, Anno 1399. He kept
a most Royal Christmas there, with daily Justings and Runnings at Tilt,
whereunto resorted such a number of People, that there was every day spent 28
or 26 Oxen, 300 Sheep, and Fowl without number. He caused a Gown to be made for
himself of Gold, garnished with Pearl and precious Stones, to the value of 3000
Marks. There daily fed there 10000 People, as appears by the Messes, told out
from the Kitchen, to 300 Servitors.

A great part of this Palace was burnt Anno 1512, the 4th of Henry VIII. since
which time it has not been Re-edified: Only the Great Hall, with the Offices
near adjoining, are kept in good Reparations, and serves, as before, for Feasts
at Coronations, Arraignments of Great Persons charged with Treason, and keeping
of the Courts of Justice. For whereas formerly the Courts and Benches followed
the King wheresoever he went, before and since the Conquest, but being found to
be troublesome, chargeable, and inconvenient to the People, it was, Anno 1224, 9
H. 3. agreed, that the^e should be a standing place appointed, where Matters
should be heard and judged, which was in the Great Hall at Westminster.

I. The Court of COMMON PLEAS.
Where he appointed Three Judgment-Seats, viz. at the Entry on the Right Hand,
the Court of Common Pleas; So called, because there are debated the usual Pleas
between Subject and Subject, as about Tenures of Lands, and Civil Actions. None
but Sergeants at Law may plead in this Court, and so many of them as the King
shall appoint, are bound by Oath to assist all that have any Cause depending in
that Court.

Pleas are distinguished into Pleas of the Crown, (as Treason and Felony, with
Misprision of Felony, which belong to the King's Bench) and Common or Civil
Pleas, whereof this Court takes Cognizance.

This Court may grant Prohibitions, as the King's Bench does. The Chief Judge is
called the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, or de Communi Banco, the
Common Bench, who holds his place by Letters Patents, Durante Beneplacito, and
so do the other inferior Judges of this Court, whereof there are commonly Three.

Here all Civil Causes, Real and Personal, are usually Tried, according to the
strict Rule of the Law. Real Actions are pleadable in no other Court, nor Fines
levied, or Recoveries suffered, but only in this Court. The King allows to the
Lord Chief Justice of this Court, a Fee, Reward, Robes, and two Tun of Wine.
Also to the other Judges of this Court, and to four Sergeants, is allowed Fees,
Reward and Robes to each one. The Officers are many, Custos Brevium, three
Protonatories, Clerk of the Warrants, Clerk of the Kings Silver, four
Exigenters, fourteen Filazers, Clerk of the Juries, Clerk of the Essoignes,
Clerk of the Outlawries, which belongs to the Attorney General, who exercises
it by Deputy, etc. For which at large, see the Present State of England, Page
102. Edit. 1679.

II. KING'S BENCH.
At the upper End of the Hall, on the Right Hand, or South-east Corner, the
Court of King's Bench was appointed, which is of a larger Extent of Power, and
more Uncontrollable than any other Tribunal: For the Law presumes, that the
King is there still in Person, He being Lord Chief Justice of England Himself;
yet it is observable, that though He should personally sit upon the Bench, He
can pass no Sentence of Judgment, but by the Mouths of His Judges, who did use
to sit there at His Feet when He was present. After the House of Lords in
Parliament, this is the Highest Court in England, and the Judicature, in the
Absence of the King, belongs to His Judges.

In this Court are handled the Pleas of the Crown, all things that concern loss
of Life or Member, of any Subject; for then the King is concerned, because the
Life and Limb of the Subject (in the sense of the Law) belong only to the King,
so that the Pleas here are between the King and the Subject. Here are handled
all Treasons, Felonies, Breach of Peace, Oppression, Misgovernment, etc.

This Court has power to Examine and Correct all Errors in Facto, and in Jure,
of all the Judges and Justices of England in their Judgments and Proceedings;
and this not only in Pleas of the Crown, but in all Pleas Real, Personal, and
Mixed, except only in the Exchequer.

In this High Court sit commonly four Grave Reverend Judges, whereof the first
is styled, The Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench, and is Created not by
Patent, but by a short Writ, yet of large Extent in point of Authority, thus --
Rex, etc.
Mathaeo Hale Militi, salutem.
Sciatis quod constituimus vos Justiciarium nostrum Capitalem ad placita coram
nobis tenenda, Durante beneplacito nostro,

test Me Ipso apud Westminster. etc.
That is in English, The King, etc.
To Sir Matthew Hale Knight. Greeting.
Know ye, That we have Constituted you our Capital (or Chief) Justice in Pleas
held before Us, during Our Pleasure.

Witness My Self at Westminster, etc.


The rest of the Judges of the King's Bench, hold their Pleas by Letters
Patents, in these words -- Rex omniblis ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint,
Salutem. Sciatis quod Constituimus Dilectum and Fidelem nostrum A. B. Militem,
unum Justiciariorum ad placita coram nobis tenenda, Durante beneplacito nostro.
Test, etc.

These Judges, and all the Officers belonging to this Court, have all Salaries
from the King, and the chief of them have Robes and Liveries out of the great
Wardrobe. In this Court, all young Lawyers that have been called to the Bar,
are allowed to plead and practice.

This Court may grant Prohibitions, to keep other Courts, both Ecclesiastical
and Temporal, within their due Bounds and Jurisdiction. The Jurisdiction of
this Court is general, extending to all England, as before. None can be a Judge
in this Court, unless he be a Sergeant of the Degree of the Coif, that is, a
Sergeant at Law, (and yet in the Writ or Patent to them made, they are not
called Sergeants) who upon taking this high Degree, is obliged to wear a Lawn
Coif under his Cap for ever after. For the Officers of this Court, see the
Present State of England, of the same Edition, Page 98.

III. CHANCERY.
On the Left Hand, or South-west Corner, sits the Lord Chancellor,
accompanied with the Master of the Rolls, and eleven other Men learned in the
Civil Law, and called Masters of Chancery, which have the King's Fee. This
Court is placed next the King's Bench, to mitigate the Rigor of it. It is Curia
Cancellariae, because (as some think) the Judge of this Court sat anciently
intra Cancellos, or Lattices, as the East End of Churches are separated per
Cancellos, from the Body of the Church, as peculiarly belonging to the Priest,
and were thence called Chancels.

This Court is Officina Justitiae, the Fountain of all our Fundamental Laws,
and Proceedings in Law, and the Original of all other Courts. It is as ancient
as the Civility of the Nation, though perhaps by another Name.

This Court proceeds, either ordinarily according to the Laws, Statutes and
Customs, of the Nation, and in Latin, granting out Writs Mandatory, and
Remedial, Writs of Grace: or else according to Equity and Conscience, and by
English Bill: so that the Chancery has two Courts in one: The Equitable part
is by Bills, Answers, and Decrees, to Examine Frauds, Combinations, Trusts,
Secret Uses, etc. To moderate the Rigor of the Laws, and Rescue Men out of the
hands of their Oppressors. To Relieve a Man especially in three things, viz.
against Cheats, unfortunate Accidents, and Breaches of Trust.

Out of this Court Issue out Writs, or Summons for Parliaments, Edicts,
Proclamations, Charters, Protections, safe Conducts, Writs of Moderata
Misericordia, when any Person has been Amerced too high, are for a reasonable
part of Goods for Widows and Orphans, Patents for Sheriffs, Writs of Certiorari
to remove Records, and false Judgments in inferior Courts, Writs of Audita
Querela, and Scire Facias: here are Sealed and Enrolled, Letters Patents,
Treaties and Leagues with Foreign Princes, Deeds between Party and Party
touching Lands, Estates, or Purchasers, taking Recognizances, and making
Extents upon Statutes, and Recognizances for Payment of Money, or securing of
Contracts, Writs Remedial or Magisterial, Commissions of Appeal, Oyer and
Terminer, etc. The Court of Common Pleas, which are between Subject and
Subject, has its Original and Commission from the Chancery, and cannot hold
Pleas without it.

For the Latin part of this Court, are the 24 Cursitors; and for the English
part, are the Six Clerks.

The Court of Equity, that proceeds not according to Law, is no Court of
Record, and therefore binds only the Person, not his Lands or Goods. The Judge
of this Court is the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of
England. He is here the Sole Judge, whereas in other Courts there are three or
four Judges. But he may and does often, in Cases of greater Weight and
Difficulty, in Cases of Law, call some of the other Judges to his assistance;
and therefore it is said, this Office may be discharged by one that is no
professed Lawyer, as it has been frequently to their great Praise. It is the
highest Dignity in England, that a Layman is capable of, it is Summum
ambientis animi quasi solstitium; and the Chancellor is, Magistratum omnium
Antistes. Anciently the Lord Chancellor had sometimes his Vice Chancellor,
commonly called Keeper of the Great Seal, but of latter times they differ only
in Name.

The Chancellor is said to be Keeper of the King's Conscience, to Judge
secundum aequum and bonum; according to Equity and Conscience; he is to
moderate the (...); the exact Rigor and Letter of the Law, whereunto other
Judges are exactly tied: For the Princes of this Realm, (in imitation of the
KING of Kings, governing the Wo^ld by Justice and Mercy) have Erected two
Supre^m Tribunals together, at the upper end of Westminster Hall, one of
Justice, wherein nothing but the strict Letter of the Law is observed; and the
other of Mercy, where in the Rigor of the Law is tempered with the sweetness of
Equity; which is nothing else, but Mercy qualifying the sharpness of Justice.

This Court being a Court of Conscience, the less it is perplexed with the
Quirks of Lawyers, the more it is guided by Conscience and Equity.

The manner of proceeding in this Court is thus; the Action is by Bill or
Plaint, the Witnesses Examined in private, the Decrees in English or Latin, not
in French. No Jury of Twelve Men, but all Sentences are given by the Judge of
the Court.

The place of Master of the Rolls is of great Dignity, in the Gift of the King,
for life, or during pleasure. This Officer has Jure Officii, the Gift of those
considerable Officers of the Six Clerks in Chancery, has the keeping of the
Rolls, and in the absence of the Chancellor, hears Causes, and makes Orders by
Virtue of a Commission, with two Masters, and that Jure Officii by right of
Office.

This Court is always open, whereas all the others are shut, but only in Term
time; so that if a Man be wrongfully Imprisoned, in the Vacation time out of
Term, the Lord Chancellor may Grant his Writ of Habeas Corpus. and do him
Justice according to Law, so likewise may this Gourt Grant Prohibitions in time
of Vacation, as well as in Term time.

The Defendant is to Answer Bills and Interrogatories upon Oath, though to the
accusing of himself in diverse matters Dammageable and Penal; the Witnesses are
to Depose upon Interrogatories and in perpetuam rei Memoriam, by the Term and
use of Final Decree, agreeable with the Civil Law.

In the Master of the Rolls Office are kept all the Rolls, since the beginning
of King Henry the VII. the rest are kept in the Tower of London. In this Gift
are besides the Six Clerks Office, the Offices of the Examiners, and three of
the Clerks of the Petty-Bag-Office.

The Office of Clerk of the Crown, is of High importance; he is either by
himself or Deputy continually to attend the Lord Chancellor for special matters
of State, and has place in the Higher House of Parliament. He makes all Writs
for Election of Members of Parliament, Sitting in Parliament, upon Warrant
directed to him upon the Death or Removal of any Member; and also Commissions
of Oyer and Terminer, Jail-delivery, Commissions of Peace, and many other
Commissions distributing Justice to His Majesty's Subjects.

The Office of the Protonotary of this Court is chiefly to expedite Commissions
for Embassies.

The Office of the Clerk of the Hanaper (or Hamper) is to receive all the Money
due to the King for the Seals of Charters, Patents, Commissions, and Writs, and
to attend the Keeper of the Seal daily in Term time, and at all times of
Sealing, with Leather Bags now (but anciently probably with Hampers) wherein
are put all the Sealed Charters, Patents, etc. And then those Bags delivered to
the Comptroller of the Hamper.

The Office of Warden of the Fleet, or Keeper of the Fleet-Prison, is very
Considerable. He is to take care of the Prisoners there, who are commonly such
as are sent thither from this Court, for contempt of the King, or His Laws, on
such as will not pay their Debts, etc. The Sergeant at Arms Office, is to bear
a Gilt Mace before the Lord Chancellor or Keeper for the time being. The Six
Clerks are Officers of great account, next in Degree to the Twelve Masters in
Chancery, whose Office is to Inroll Commissions, Pardons, Patents, Warrants,
etc. that are passed the Great Seal. They are Attorneys for Plaintiffs and
Defendants, in Causes depending in this Court. Their Offices are at a place
called Six-Clerks-Office in Chancery Lane; they keep Commons together in Term
time.

The Three Clerks of the Petty-Bag, are under the Master of the Rolls, they
make all Patents, for Customers Comptrollers, all Conge^d' Estires, first
Summons of Nobility, Clergy, Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses to Parliament.
From the Subpoena-Office, are Issued Writs to Summon Persons to appear in
Chancery. There are two Examiners who are to examine Witnesses upon upon their
Oaths in any suit on both sides. The Curssiters Office is to make out Original
Writs, they were anciently called Clerici de Cursu. They are in Number 24,
whereof each one has certain Counties and Cities allotted to him. They are a
Corporation of themselves, etc.

IV. EXCHEQVER.
Within the Port or Entry into the Hall, on either side, are ascendings up into
large Chambers without the Hall, adjoining thereunto, wherein certain Courts be
kept, namely on the Right hand, is the Court of Exchequer, which is so called*
as some think, from a Chequer-wrought-Carpet, covering the great Table in that
Court, or else from the French word Exchequer, a Chess Board, because the
Accomptants in that Office, were wont to use such Boards in their Calculation.
Here are Tried all Causes that belong to the King's Treasury or Revenue, as
touching Accounts, Disbursements, Customs, and all Fines imposed upon any Man.
In this Court do Sit the Lord Treasurer, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, the
Lord Chief Baron, and Four other Learned Judges, called Barons of the
Exchequ^r, and one other Cursitor-Baron, but the two first ^^^dom Sit, and the
five last seldom fail. The first of these five is the Principal Judge of this
Court which is a place of High Honor and Profit, he i^ styled Lord Chief
Baron, is created by Letters Pa^tents to hold this Dignity, quam diu been se
gesseri^ wherein he has a more fixed Estate than the Chi^ Justices of either
Bench, for the Law intends this a^ Estate for Life: In the absence of the Lord
Chie^ Baron, the other three Barons supply his place, ac^cording to their
Seniority; but the 5 th is said to b^ Cursitor of the Court, and Administers
the Oaths t^ the Sheriffs, under-Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Searchers, Surveyors, etc.
of the Custom-House.

In the Exchequer are held two Courts, one o^ Law, another of Equity, all
Judicial proceedings according to Law, are Coram Baronibus, before the Barons;
but the Court of Equity held in the Exchequer-Chamber, is, Coram Thesaurario,
Cancellario, and Baronibus, before the Treasurer, Chancellor, and Barons.

The Authority of this Court is of Original Jurisdiction, without any
Commission. All the Twelve Judges belonging to these High Tribunals, sit in
Robes, and Square Caps like Doctors of Divinity, because (as some say,) they
were in old times most commonly Clergy Men.

There are diverse Officers belonging to the upper Exchequer, as the King's
Remembrancer, in whose Office are Eight Sworn Clerks. All Accounts pass there
that concern the King's Revenue, for Customs, Excise, Hearth-Money, Subsidies,
and all aids granted to the King in Parliament, and all other Accounts of what
nature soever, concerning the King's Revenue, either Certain or Casual; all
Securities whether by Bond or Recognizances to the King for any of His Debts,
are taken here. All proceedings upon any Statute, by information for Custom,
Excises, or any other Penal Law. All proceedings upon the said Bonds or
Recognizances, or any other Bonds taken in the King's Name by Officers
appointed thereunto, under the Great Seal of England, and transmitted into this
Office for Recovery thereof. From whence Issue forth Process, to cause all
Accountants to come in and Account, etc. This Office is in the King's Gift.

The Office of the Lord Treasurer's Remembrancer is to make Process against all
Sheriffs, Receivers, Bailiffs, etc. for their Accounts, and many other things
of Moment, as Estreal Rules, all Charters and Letters Patents, whereupon any
Rents are reserved to the King. This also is in the KING's Gift.

The Clerk of the Pipe has all the Accounts and Debts due to the King, drawn
down out of the Remembrancers Office, and charge them down out of the
Remembrancers Office, and charge them down in the Great Roll or Pipe, (and
therefore probably called the Pipe-Office;) he has under him Eight Sworn
Clerks. Here Accountants have their quietus est, and here are made Leafes of
extended Lands.

The Comptroller of the Pipe writes out all Summons twice every Year to the
High Sheriffs, to Levy the Farms and Debts of the Pipe. He keeps a Roll of the
Pipe-Office Accounts, whereby to discover any thing that shall be amiss.

In the Office of the Clerk of the Pleas, all the Officers of the Exchequer,
and other privileged Persons, as Debtors to the King, etc. are to have their
Privilege to Plead, and be Impleaded, as to all matters at the Common Law. And
the Proceedings are accordingly by Declarations, Pleas, and Trials, as at the
Common Law, because they should not be drawn out of their own Court, where
their attendance is Required. In this Office are four Sworn Attorneys.

To the For^ign Opposers-Office, all Sheriffs repair to be by him opposed of
their Green-Wax, and from thence is drawn down a Charge upon the Sheriffs, to
the Clerk of the Pipe. This Office is kept in Gray's Inn.

The Office of the Clerk of the Estreats is to receive every Term the Estreats
or Extracts out of the Office of the Lord Treasurer's Remembrancer, and to
write them out to be Levied for the King. Also to make Schedules for such Sums
as are to be discharged.

The Auditors of the Impressed, Audit the Great accounts of the King's Customs,
Wardrobe, Mint, First Fruits and Tenths, Naval and Military Expenses, Moneys
imprested, etc.

The Auditors of the Revenue, Audit all the accounts of the King's other
Revenue, that arise by Aids granted in Parliament.

The Remembrancer of the first Fruits and Tenths, takes all Compositions, for
first Fruits and Tenths, and makes Process against such as pay not the same.
This Office is kept in Hatton-Garden, etc.

As to the other part of the Exchequer, where the King's Revenue is received
and disbursed, the Principal Officer is the Lord Treasurer, whose place is
sometimes (and is at this present) managed by Commissioners, appointed by His
Majesty.

The next is the Chancellor of the Exchequer, who is an Officer of great
Account and Authority. He has a Principal Power, not only in the
Exchequer-Court, but also here, in the managing and disposing of the King's
Revenue: he has the Custody of the Exchequer-Seal. He has the Gift of the
Comptroller, or Clerk of the Pipe, of the Clerk of the Pleas, of the Clerk of
the Nichils, and of the Seal of the Court. He is also under Treasurer, and has
the Gift of the two Praisers of the Court. Then there are two Chamberlains of
the Exchequer, in whose Custody are many ancient Records, Leagues and Treaties
with Foreign Princes, the Standards of Moneys, Weights and Measures, those
ancient Books called Doomsday, and the Black Book of the Exchequer. The former
was six Years a making by William the Conqueror, and is a Cense or compute of
all England as it was then, viz. all the Lands, with the value and Owners, and
Account of all Cities, Towns, Villages, Families, Men, Soldiers, Husbandmen,
Bondmen, Servants, Cattle; how much Money, Rents, Meadow, Pasture, Woods,
Tillage, Common, Marsh, Heath, every one possessed. So that in Disputes about
Taxes, this determined it without further controversy, as the Book of the
Great day of Doom will then, (and therefore so called.) It is kept under three
Locks, and not to be looked into under 6 s. 8 d. And for every Line Transcribed,
is to be paid 4. d.

The Auditor of the Receipts, is to File the Bills of The Tellers, whereby they
charge themselves with all Money Received, and to draw all Orders to be Signed
by the Lord High Treasurer, for Issuing forth all Moneys by Virtue of the Privy
Seals, which are Recorded and Lodged in his Office. He makes all Debentures to
the several Persons who have Fees, Annuities, or Pensions, by Letters Patents,
from the King, out of the Exchequer, and directs them for payment to the
Tellers. He receives every Week the state of the Account of each Teller, and
also Weekly certifies the whole to the Lord High Treasurer, who presently
presents the Estimate or Balance to the King. He takes the Tellers Account in
Gross at Easter and Michaelmas. By him are kept the several Registers appointed
for paying all Persons in Course, upon several Branches of the King's Revenue;
he is Scriptor Talliorum, has five Clerks to manage the whole Estate of Moneys
received, disbursed and remaining.

There are four Tellers who Receive all Moneys* due to the King, and thereupon
throw down a Bill through a Pipe into the Tally-Court, where it is received by
the Auditors Clerk, who there attends to write the words of the said Bill upon
a Tally, and then delivers the same to be Entered by the Clerk of the Pells, or
his under Clerk, who Enters it in his Book. Then the Tally is cloven by the two
Deputy Chamberlains, who have the Seals; and while the Senior Deputy reads one
part, the Junior Examines the other part with the other two Clerks.

The Clerk of the Pels, Enters every Tellers Bill into a Parchment of Skin, (in
Latin Pellis, whence this Office has its Name,) all Receipts and Payments for
the King, for what cause, or by whomsoever, and is in Nature of a Comptroller,
has four Clerks, whereof one is for the Introitus, and another for the Exitus.
Moreover he is to make Weekly and half Yearly Books, both of the Receipts and
Payments which are delivered to the Lord Treasurer.

He that Pays the King any Moneys, receives* for his Acquittance a Tally; (so
called from the French Verb Tallier to cut) that is, one half of a Stick
cloven, with certain proportionable Notches thereon, expressive of the Sum from
the said Deputy Chamberlains, who keep the other cloven part of the Stick,
called the Foyl, and Delivers it to the Tally-Joyners on the other side of the
Exchequer, who are also Deputies to the Chamberlains, an^ they join it with the
Foyl, which agreeing, the^ give it their Test, and send it by an Officer of
the^ own to the Pipe, where their quietus est is Ingrosse^ in Parchment.

In the Office of the Deputy-Chamberlains: Westminster, are preserved all the
Counterfoyls (...) these Tallies, so exactly ranged by Months an^ Years, that
they are to be presently found out, t^ be joined with their respective Stock or
Tally, when required, which proving true, they deliver it Attested for a Lawful
Tally, to the Clerk of the Pipe, for to be allowed in the great Roll; but in
Case any Corruption has been used, the same is easily and soon discovered, and
the Offender severely punished, by Fine and Imprisonment.

This Ancient way of striking of Tallies has been found, by long experience,
to be absolutely the best way that ever was invented, for it is Morally
impossible so to Falsify or Counterfeit a Tally, but that upon rejoyning it
with the Counterfoyl, it will be obvious to every Eye, either in the Notches,
or in the Cleaving, in the Longitude, Latitude, Natural growth or shape of the
Counterfoyl; whereas Acquittances in Writing cannot be so done, but that they
may be Counterfeited by skilful Penmen, and that so exactly, as that he who
wrote the Original, shall not be able to know his own hand from the
Counterfeit, as has been frequently seen in all the Courts of Westminster.

There are two Vshers, whose Office it is to secure the Exchequer by Day and
Night, and all the Avenues leading to the same, and to furnish all Necessaries,
as Books, Paper, etc.

There is a Tally-Cutter, and four Messengers. This Exchequer is the best
ordered public Revenue in the World.

Court of the Duchy of Lancaster.
Before we come to treat of the High Court of Parliament, we will give an
Account of the Court of the Duchy of Lancaster, kept at Westminster Hall, on
the left hand above Stairs, which takes Cognizance of all Causes that any way
concern the Revenue of that Duchy, which has been long since Annexed to the
Crown.

The Chief Judge of this Court, is the Chancellor of the Duchy, who is
assisted by the Attorney of the Duchy. To this Court belong diverse other
Officers. It is kept near the lower Exchequer, and at the Office of Sir Gilbert
Gerrard at Gray's Inn.

Of the High Court of PARLIAMENT.
Sir Richard Baker tell us in his Chronicle that King Henry the I. instituted
the Form of the High Court of Parliament: and that the first Council of this
sort was held at Salisbury, on the 19 th of April, and the 16 th of his Reign,
which is 560 and odd Years ago. Before the Conquest, the great Council of the
King, consisting only of the Great Men of the Kingdom, was called Magnatum
Conventus, the Convention or Meeting of the Grandees, or Great Men, or else
Prelatorum Procerumque Concilium, and by the Saxons in their own Tongue, Michel
Gemot, the great Assembly. After the Conquest it was called Parlementum, a
French word derived of Parler, to talk together, consisting still only of the
great Men of the Nation, till the aforesaid King's Reign.

None but the King has Authority to Summon a Parliament: In the King's absence
out of the Realm, the Custos Regni in the King's Name, does Summon a
Parliament; and During the King's Minority within the Realm, the Protector
Regni does the same.

When the King of England is with His Parliament, in time of peace, He is then
said to be in the height of His Royal Dignity, as well as when He is at the
head of His Army in time of War.

He can with the concurrence of his Lords and Commons then do any thing in
point of Enacting or Repealing Laws, Legitimate one that is born Illegitimate,
Bastardize one that is born Legitimate. He can make an Infant of full Age, make
an Alien or Foreigner an English Man, can Attaint a Man of Treason when he is
Dead, and when he is no more a Man, etc.

A Parliament is Summoned in manner following: About forty Days before the
Parliament does Assemble, the King Issues out His Writ out of the Chancery, cum
advisamento Consilii sui, with the advice of His Council, and the Warrant is,
per ipsum Regem and Consilium, by the King Himself and His Council.

The King's Writ (which is a short Letter or Epistle) is directed and sent to
every particular Person of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, commanding the
Lords Spiritual, in Fide and Dilectione, in Faith and Love; and the Lords
Temporal, per fidem and allegantiam, by their Faith and Allegiance, to appear
at a certain time, and place, to Treat and give their Advice in some certain
Important Affairs, concerning the Church and State, etc.

Other Writs are sent to the High Sheriff of each County, to Summon the People
to Elect two Knights for each County, two Citizens for each City, and one or
two Burgesses for each Borough, according to Statute, Charter, or Custom.

In these Elections, anciently all the People had their Votes, and most Votes
carried it, but for avoiding of Tumults and Trouble, it was Enacted by Henry
the VI. that none should have any suffrage in the Election of Knights of the
Shire, but such as were Freeholders, did Reside in the County, and had of
Yearly Revenue 40 s. which till the discovery of Gold and Silver in America,
was as much as 30 or 40 l. now.

The Persons Elected for each County, are to be Milites Notabiles, or at least
Esqs. or Gentlemen, fit to be made Knights, as it is in the Statutes of Henry
the VI. they ought to be de discretionibus Militibus and ad laborandum
potentioribus, of the discreetest Knights, and most able to endure Labor, of
age, ( viz. 21 Years at least,) and Experience, without Rancor, Malice, Heat
and Envy to be constant so as not to be swerved from Right, by Fear, Reward, or
Favor, and in Judgment no respecters of Persons; of a ripe and good Memory,
that remembering Perils past, they may prevent Dangers to come. They are to be
Vigorous, Active and Temperate, and content to give their Attendance for
Public Good, with which they are Entrusted, Men of Noble Spirits and good
Estates, to prevent their being Mercenary or Bribed, to betray their great
Trust; Men well verst in National and Political Affairs, and of Capacious
Understandings, that so they might not be imposed upon' by the Subtilty of such
as would overreach them. They ought also to be well acquainted with the Laws
of the Land, and the Transactions of former Parliaments, in order to the Repeal
of Old Laws; which though fit for the times they were made, may not be so for
the present times, (the Circumstances of things being varyed much from what
they were, by diverse Revolutions,) and to Enact New Laws for general Good. And
indeed we have had of late Parliaments of this Character, Men of such brave
Spirits, such Sagacity, Prudence, and Integrity, to promote the General Welfare
of that Great Body Politic, whose Worthy Representatives they were, as have
exceeded their Predecessors, and will hardly be outdone in succeeding times.

They ought to be Native English Men, or at least such as have been Naturalized
by Act of Parliament. No Alien or Denizen, none of the twelve Judges, no
Sheriff of a County, no Ecclesiastical Person that has curam animarum, the
cure (or care) of Souls, may be chosen to Serve for any County, City, or
Borough.

This Grand and Illustrious Senate, Consists of the three great Estates of the
Kingdom, (the King's most Excellent Majesty being the head,) viz. The Prelates
and the Peers of the Realm, and the Commons; in which is such a Co-ordination
of Power, such a Wholesome mixture betwixt Prince and Commonalty, during the time
of Consultation, that they make but one Body Politic, their Results when they
concur, being as so many Harmonious Diapasons, arising from the Touch of
different Strings. This Great Council is the great Bulwark of the English
Liberty, Property, and Religion, and the great Bank that keeps them from
Slavery, and the Inundations of Tyrannical Encroachments, and unbounded
Will-Government.

The People are liable to no Laws but what they themselves make, and are
subject to no Contribution, Tax, Assessment, or Pecuniary Leveys whatsoever,
but what they themselves Vote, and Voluntarily yield to. For there all Degrees
of People be Represented, the Yeoman, Merchant, Tradesman, Mechanic, etc. have
their inclusive Votes, as well as the Gentry, and Freeholders, their
Burgesses, and Knights.

The House of Lords consists of Eleven Dukes, whereof two are of the Royal
Family, viz. the Duke of York, and Prince Rupert, then the Lord Chancellor, or
Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, the Lord Treasurer, and the Lord Privy Seal,
takes Place before all Dukes not of the Royal Blood.

There are two Marquesses, the Lord High Chamberlain of England, the Lord
Steward of the King's Household, and the Lord Chamberlain of the King's
Household (in respect of their Offices) takes place of all Earls, who at
present are in Number, ( viz. such as may Sit in the House of Lords) 64. Then
there are 7 Viscounts, and 60 Barons, (according to the Printed List of the
last Parliament that met at Oxford March 21. this present Year 1681.) Then
there are two Archbishops, and twenty four Bishops, so that the whole Number
may be about 176, some of which Lords are under Age, some Employed abroad by
the King, some Sick or Infirm: so that the ordinary Number that Sits, (besides
the Peers in the Tower, and such as are Excluded by Act of Parliament for
Recusancy, etc.) may be about one hundred.

The House of Commons consists of two Knights for each of the 40 Shires in
England, being 80. One for each County in Wales, being 12 Knights. Two for each
of the 25 Cities in England, and four for London, in all 52. Sixteen Barons for
the Cinque Ports. Two Burgesses for each of the two Universities. About 330
Burgesses, for 168 Buroughs in England, of which, some few send but one
Burgess a piece. Lastly, of twelve Burgesses, ( viz. one for one Borough in
each County of Wales, so that the Total, according to the aforesaid List, is
513. Of which many are absent, sometimes by permission of the House upon
business, or because of Sickness, etc.

The Number of the Parliament Men, that each County sends, are as follows: 1.
Bedfordshire. 4 2. Berkshire. 9 3. Buckinghamshire. 14 4. Cambridgeshire. 6 5.
Cheshire. 4 6. Cornwall. 44 7. Cumberland. 6 8. Derbyshire. 4 9. Devonshire. 26
10. Dorsershire. 20 11. Durham. 4 12. Essex. 8 13. Glocestershire. 8 14.
Herefordshire. 8 15. Hartfordshire. 6 16. Huntingtonshire. 4 17. Kent. 10 18.
Lancashire. 14 19. Leicestershire. 4 20. Lincolnshire. 12 21. Middlesex. 8 22.
Monmouthshire. 3. 23. Norfolk. 12 24. Northamptonshire. 9 25. Northumberland. 8
26. Nottinghamshire. 8 27. Oxfordshire. 9 28. Rutland. 2 29. Shropshire. 12 30.
Somersetshire. 18 31. Southampton, Or, Southamptonshire. 26 32. Staffordshire.
10 33. Suffolk. 16 34. Surrey. 14 35. Sussex. 20 36. Warwickshire. 6 37.
Westmorland. 4 38. Wiltshire. 34 39. Worcestershire. 9 40. Yorkshire. 30
BARONS of the CINQUE PORTS.
Port of Hastings. 2 Town of Winchelsey. 2 Town of Rye. 2 Port of new Rumney. 2
Port of Hieth. 2 Port of Dover. 2 Port of Sandwich. 2 Port of Seaford. 2
WALES.
1. Anglesey. 1 Bewmaris. 1 2. Brecon. 1 Town of Brecon. 1 3. Cardigan. 1 Town
of Cardigan. 1 4. Carmarthen. 1 Town of Carmarthen. 1 5. Carnarvan. 1 Town of
Carnarvan. 1 6. Denbigh. 1 Town of Denbigh. 1 7. Flint. 1 Town of Flint. 1 8.
Glamorgan. 1 Town of Cardiff. 1 9. Merioneth. 1 10. Pembrook. 1 Town of
Haverford-west. 1 Town of Pembrook. 1 11. Montgomery. 1 Town of Montgomery. 1
12. Radnor. 1 Town of Radnor. 1


The Barons of the Cinque Ports, are at this Day, only as Burgesses in
Parliament, yet they are still called Barons, after the ancient manner, because
heretofore they got Renown by their Exploits at Sea, in defending the Kingdom,
in Memory whereof, they have yet the privilege to send Burgesses, to bear the
Cloth of State over the King's Head on the day of His Coronation, and to Dine
that Day in the King's presence.

The Writ or Summons to the Sheriff, for Election of Members to Serve in the
House of Commons, runs to this purpose: The KING to the Sheriff, etc. Greeting.
WHereas by the Advice and Assent of our Council, for certain arduous and
urgent Affairs concerning Us, the State and Defense of our Kingdom of England,
and the Church of England, We have Ordamed a certain Parliament of Ours, to be
held at this Our City of -- the -- Day of -- next Ensuing, and there to have
Conference, and to Treat with the Prelates, Great Men and Peers of Our said
Kingdom; We command and strictly enjoin you, that making Proclamation at Our
next County Court, after the Receipt of this Our Writ, to be holden the day and
Place aforesaid, you cause two Knights girt with Swords, the most fit and
discreet of the County aforesaid, and of every City of that County two
Citizens; of every Borough, two Burgesses, of the discreetest and most
sufficient, to be freely and indifferently chosen, by them who shall be present
at such Proclamation, according to the Tenor of the Statutes in that Case made
and provided; and the Names of the said Knights, Citizens and Burgesses so
ch^sen, to be inserted in certain Indentures, to be then made between you and
those that shall be present at such Election, whether the Parties so Elected be
present or absent, and shall make them to come at the said Day and Place; so
that the said Knights for themselves, and the County aforesaid, and the
Citizens and the Burgesses for themselves and the Commonalty of the said Cities
and Boroughs may have severally from them, full and sufficient Power, to do,
and to consent to those things, which then by the Favor of GOD, shall happen
to be Ordained by the Common Council of Our said Kingdom, concerning the
businesses aforesaid, so that the business may not by any means remain undone
for want of such Power, or by reason of the improvident Election of the
foresaid Knights, Citizens and Burgesses: But we will not in any Case that you,
or any other Sheriff of Our said Kingdom, shall be Elected, and at the Day and
Place aforesaid, the said Election being made in a full County Court, you shall
certify without Delay unto Us, in Our Chancery under your Seal, and the Seals
of them who shall be present at the Election, sending back unto Us the other
part of the Indenture aforesaid, affixed to these presents, together with the
Writ. Witness Our Self at, etc.



The King is in the sense of Law the Fountain of Justice, He is Lord Chief
Justice of England, and therefore all the Laws of the Realm are called His
Laws; for He is Caput, principium, and finis Parliamenti, (that is, the head,
beginning, and end of Parliament,) and nothing can have the Force of a Law, but
what has His Royal Assent.

The highest Court of Judicature in England, is the House of Lords in
Parliament, who are assisted with the most Grave and Eminent Lawyers of
England, both in Common and Civil Law, who are only Ministerial there, and have
no Voices; but to give their Opinions in matters of Law which become doubtful.

To the Judicature of this Supreme and most Honorable Court, all other Courts
and Persons that are Subjects of England, are accountable for all Crimes not
properly Tryable, Remediable, or Punishable in other inferiors Courts of
Justice, and to this Court all last Appeals are made, from whose Sentence there
lies no Appeal, but to a succeeding Parliament; and this Supreme Judicatory, or
Judicial Power, lies only in the King and House of Lords, and at the Bar of
this High Court may the House of Commons, as the Grand Inquest of the Nation,
Impeach the Highest Subject of England, whether of the Clergy or of the Laity,
and prosecute them till it come to a Sentence.

All Members of Parliament, both Lords and Commons, that they may attend the
public Service of their Country, are privileged with their Menial Servants
attending on their Persons, together with all their necessary Goods brought
along with them, from all Attachments and Imprisonments, for Debts, Trespasses,
Account, or Covenant, all the time that they are on the way to the Place of
Parliament, all the time that they tarry there, and return Eundo, Morando, and
ad propria redeundo, but not from Arrests for Treason, Felony, or breach of the
Peace.

The place of Meeting for this High and Honorable Assembly, is in whatsoever
City, Town, or House, the King pleases; but most usually at Westminster. All
the Lords Sit in a fair Room by themselves, and the Commons not far from them
in another Fair Room, heretofore the ancient Free Chapel of St. Stephen.

The King, as often as he comes, (which is usually at the opening of Parliaments,
passing of Bills, or Solemn Debates) is placed at the upper end of the Room in
a Chair of State, under a Cloth of State, under which, on either hand, sit none
but the King's Children.

On the King's right hand is a Seat for the Prince of Wales, on His left hand
is a Seat for the Duke of York.

On the King's right hand next the Wall, are placed on a Form, the two
Archbishops, next below on another Form, the Bishops of London, Durham and
Winchester.

Upon other Forms, on the same side, the rest of the Bishops sit, according to
the Priority of their Consecration.

On the King's left hand, upon Forms are placed the Lord Chancellor, Treasurer,
President of the King's Council, the Lord Privy Seal, if they are Barons, above
all Dukes, except those of the Royal Family; if they are not Barons, then they
Sit uppermost on the Wool-sacks.

On the same side Sit the Dukes, Marquesses, and Earls, according to their
Creations. Upon the first Form, across the House below the Woolsacks, sit the
Viscounts, and upon the next Forms the Barons, all in Order.

The Lord Chancellor or Keeper (if the King be present,) stands behind the
Cloth of Estate, otherwise sits on the first Woolsack, thwart the Chair of
State, his Great Seal and Mace by him, he is Lord Speaker of the Lords House.
Upon other Woolsacks sit the Judges, the Privy Counselors, and Secretaris of
State, the King's Council at Law, the Masters of Chancery; who being not
Barons, have no suffrage by Vo^ce in Parliament, but only sit (as was said,) to
give Advice when required.

The Reason of their sitting upon Woolsacks, is thought to be to put them in
mind of the Great Importance of our Woollen Manufactories, which is the Grand
Staple Commodity of England, and so not to be by any means neglected.

On the Lowermost Woolsack are placed the Clerk of the Crown, and Clerk of the
Parliament, whereof the former is concerned in all Writs of Parliament, and
Pardons in Parliament. The other Records all things done in Parliament, and
keeps the Records of the same. This Clerk has also two Clerks under him, who
kneel behind the same Woolsack, and write thereon.

Without the Bar of the Lords House, sits the King's first Gentleman Usher,
called the Black-Rod, from a Black-staff he carries in his hand, under whom is
a Yeoman Usher that waits at the Door within, a Crier without, and a Sergeant
at Mace, always attending the Lord Chancellor.

When the King is present with His Crown on his Head, none of the Lords are
covered. The Judges stand till the King gives them leave to sit. When the King
is absent, the Lords at their entrance do Reverence to the Chair of State, as
is or should be done by all that enter into the King's Presence Chamber.

The Judges then may sit, but may not be covered, till the Chancellor or Keeper
signifies unto them the leave of the Lords. The King's Council, and Masters of
Chancery sit also, but may not be covered at all.

The Commons in their House sit Promiscuously, only the Speaker has a Chair
placed in the middle, and the Clerk of that House near him at the Table. They
never had any Robes, (as the Lords ever had,) but wear every one what he
fancyeth most.

The time of Sitting in Parliament, is on any day in the Morning, or before
Dinner. When the day prefixed by the King in His Writs of Summons is come, the
KING usually in his Royal Robes, with His Crown on His Head, declares the cause
of their being Assembled, in a short Speech, leaving the rest to the Lord
Chancellor, who then stands behind His MAJESTY; the Commons in the mean time
standing bare at the Bar of the Lords House, who are Commanded to choose then a
Speaker, which without the KING's Command they may not do; whereupon they
Return to their own House, and choose one of their own Members, whom they
present on another Day to the KING; and being approved of by His MAJESTY,
sitting in His Chair, and all the Lords in their Scarlet Robes, he makes a
modest refusal, which not allowed, he Petitioneth His Majesty, That the Commons
may have, during their Sitting,

1. A free Access to His Majesty. 2. A freedom of Speech in their own House. 3.
Freedom from Arrests. Which the King Grants.
Before they enter upon Affairs, all the Members of the House of Commons take
the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, in the presence of an Officer, appointed
by the KING. And since the Papists have been found (by the Wisdom of the KING
and Parliament) to be Plotting and Contriving to introduce the pretended
Supremacy of their Pope, and inslave the Nation to their Tyrannical
Anti-spiritual Jurisdiction, by Horrid Projections, Plots, Intrigues, etc. to
prevent any such from Voting in either House, it was thought meet, ( though no
Oaths can bind such who profess the Impious Doctrine of Equivocation,) that all
are to declare their Opinion against the Doctrines of Transubstantiation,
Invocation and Adoration of Saints, the Sacrifice of the Mass: which Test, the
Lords also are Obliged to take in their House, before they can Sit and Debate
upon any Affair.

The Lords House has a power not only in Making and Repealing Laws, but also
in tractando and Consilium impendendo, (that is, in Treating and Counselling,
etc.) as the words of the Writ are; also in Judging of Controversies, Judging
in the Arraignment of any Peer of the Realm, putting Men to their Oaths,
especially in matters of Importance, as the Corruption of Judges and
Magistrates in Illegal proceeding in other Courts, in Appeals from Decrees in
Chancery. No Papist is to Sit, or have Suffrage in the Lords House.

The Lords, in case of necessary or unavoidable absence, may make their Proxies
to Vote in their place, after License obtained under the KING's Signet.

The Commons (as was said,) have a power in Making and Repealing Laws: they
have a Negative Voice, as the KING and Lords have; for nothing can pass into a
Law without the joint concurrence of the King and both Houses. Bills for
Levying of Money upon the Subject, begin in the House of Commons, because the
greater part of the same arises from them. The Commons have a power to
Supplicate and propose Laws, and (as before,) to Impeach public Delinquents of
the Highest Quality that are Subjects; for they are the Grand Inquest of the
Nation, and are to present Public Grievances to be Redressed, and Delinquents
to be punished.

To this end the Lords sit in their Robes on the Bench covered, they Swear and
Examine Witnesses, and at last pass Sentence; the Members of the House of
Commons stand bare at the Bar of the Lords House, produce Witnesses, manage
Evidences, etc.

Though every Member of the House of Commons is chosen to Serve for one
particular County, City, or Borough, yet he Serves for the whole Kingdom, and
his Voice is equal to any other; his power is absolute to consent or dissent.

They are to make it their special care to promote the good of that County,
City, or Borough, for which they Serve; so as that, no particular benefit may
interfere with, or be prejudicial to the Good of the whole Kingdom.

The Lords are to bear their own Charges, because they Represent only
themselves. The Commons usually had their Reasonable expenses. In the 17 of Ed.
II. they had Ten Groats for Knights, and Five Groats for Burgesses a day, and
not long after, Four s. a day for Dubbed Knights, and Two s. for all others,
which in those days, as appears by the Prices of all things, was a considerable
Sum, above Twenty times more than it is now. So that some decayed Boroughs
finding the expense heavy, Petitioned that they might not be obliged to send
Burgesses to Parliament, and so were Vnburgessed, etc.

It is the Practice of each House to debate all public Affairs, relating to
the general or particular Welfare, of the Kingdom or Subject. And every
Parliament may get a Bill drawn, and give it to the Speaker, or Clerk of the
Parliament, to be presented in convenient time. Whatsoever is proposed for a
Law, is first put in Writing and called a Bill, which being read in a full
Assembly, it is either unanimously rejected, or else allowed to be Debated, and
then it is Committed to a certain Number of the House, presently Nominated, and
called a Committee. After it has been Amended, and twice Read two several Days
in the House, it is Engrossed, that is, Written Fair in a Parchment, and Read
the Third time another day, and then (if in the Lords House) the Chancellor, or
(if in the House of Commons,) the Speaker demands if they will have it put to
the question, whether, a Law or no Law? If the Major part be for it, there is
Written on the Bill by the Clerk (of the Lords House,) Soit baille aux
Seigneurs, -- or (of the House of Commons,) Soit baille aux Communes, retaining
the Ancient Custom, which was to speak in French.

When the Speaker finds diverse Bills prepared to be put to the Question, he
gives Notice the day be^ before, that to morrow he intends to put such Bills to
the passing, or third Reading, and desires the special attendance of all the
Members.

If a Bill be rejected, it cannot be any more proposed during that Session. All
Bills sent by the Commons to the Lords House, are usually attended (to show
their respect) with several of their Members, and as they come up to the Lords
Bar, the Member that is to present the Bill makes three profound Reverences,
and delivers it to the Lord Chancellor, who comes down to the Bar to receive it.

A Bill sent by the Lords to the Commons is usually by some of the Masters of
Chancery, or some other whose seat is on the Wool-sacks (and by none of the
Members) who coming up to the Speaker, bow thrice, and deliver it to him, after
one of them has read the Title, and desired it might be taken into
Consideration. If it pass that House, then is Written on it, Les Communes ont
assentez.

When any Member of the House of Commons speaks to a Bill, he stands up
uncovered, and directs his Speech only to the Speaker; then if what he Delivers
be confuted by another, yet he is not allowed to Answer again the same day,
lest the whole time should be spent in a Dispute between two talkative persons.

Also if a Bill be debating in the House, no man may speak to it in one day,
above once. If any one speak words of offense which the House takes cognizance
of as such, he is called to the Bar, and sometimes sent to the Tower. The
Speaker is not allowed to persuade or dissuade in passing of a Bill, but only
to make a short and plain Narrative, nor to Vote, except the House be equally
Divided. In Committees, though of the whole House, it is allowed to Speak and
Reply as often as they please.

In the House of Lords they give their Suffrages or Votes, beginning at the
lowest Baron, and so to the highest Peer in order, every one Answering apart [
Content, or Not content.]

In the House of Commons, they Vote by Yea's, and No's, and if it be doubtful
which is the greater Number, then the Yea's are to go forth, and the No's sit
still, because these are content with their present condition, without any
addition or alteration of Laws, as the other desire; and then some are
appointed to Number them: But at a Committee, though it be of the whole House,
(as it is sometimes) the Yea's go on one side, and the No's on the other,
whereby they may be discerned.

If a Bill pass in one House, and being sent to the other House, they of the
other House Demur upon it, then a Conference is demanded in the Painted
Chamber, where certain deputed Members of each House Meet, the Lords sitting
covered at a Table, and the Commons standing bare: the business is then
debated; If they agree not, it is Nulled; if they do agree, it Passes.

When Bills have past both Houses, they are presented to his Majesty for his
Royal assent, who comes in his Robes with the Crown on his Head, and being
Seated in his Chair of State, (the Lords being all in their Robes,) the Clerk
of the Crown reads the Ti^tle of each Bill, and as he reads, the Clerk of the
Parliament, according to his Instructions from the King (who before has
maturely considered each Bill) pronounces the Royal assent. If it be a Public
Bill, the Answer is ( Le Roy le veut,) and then that Bill becomes a Law. If a
Private Bill, the Answer is ( Soit fait comms el est desire.) If it be a
Pubblick Bill which the King likes not, then the Answer is, ( Le Roy s'avisera)
which is taken for an absolute Denial, in a more Civil way, and that Bill
wholly nulled. So that nothing but what the King confirms by his Royal Assent,
has the force of a Law.

The King can by Commission granted to some of His Nobles, give His Royal
Assent to any Bill that requires haste.

If it be a Bill for Moneys given to His Majesty, then the Answer is, ( Le Roy
remercie ses Loyaux Sujets, accept leur Benevolence, and aussi le veut) which
is an ancient Ceremony of Thanking the Subjects for parting with their Money.

The Bill for the King's General Pardon has but one Reading in either House,
because they must take it, as the King will please to give it; so the Bill of
Subsidies granted by the Clergy Assembled in Convocation for the same Reason.
When the Bill for the General Pardon is passed by the King, the Answer is thus,
( Les Prelates, Seigneurs and Communes en ce Parliament Assemblez au nom de
tous vos autre Sujects, remercient tres humblement votre Majeste and prient
Dieu vous donner en sante bonne vie and Congue.

All Acts of Parliament before the Reign of Henry 7. were Passed and Enrolled
in French, now in English. The style runs thus; Be it Enacted by the King's
most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, etc.

When it pleases the King, the Parliament is Adjourned, Prorogued, or
Dissolved, thus:

Adjournments are usually made in the Lords House, by the Lord Chancellor in
the King's name, to what other day and place the King pleases; and then all
things already Debated and Read in one or both Houses, may be resumed, because
they continue in the same State they were in before, to the next Meeting.

When the Parliament is Prorogued there is a Session, and then all Bills and
Debates must begin anew, at the re-assembling of the Parliament.

The Speaker of the House of Commons, upon notice given that it is the King's
pleasure, that that House shall also Adjourn, does say with the Assent of the
House, This House is Adjourned.

When the King Prorogues or Dissolves the Parliament, He commonly comes in
Person to the House of Lords in his Robes, with the Crown on his Head, and
sends (by the Usher of the Black-Rod) for all the House of Commons, to the Bar
of that House, and after the King's Answer to each Bill signified as aforesaid,
his Majesty usually makes a Solemn Speech, the Lord Chancellor another, and the
Speaker of the House of Commons a Third. Then the Lord Chancellor by the
special Command of the King, does pronounce the Parliament Prorogued or
Dissolved.

The King being Head of the Parliament, if his Death does happen, during the
Sitting of the Parliament, it is ipso facto Dissolved.

IV. Sommerset-House in the Strand is the Queens Palace. In the Year 1549.
Edward Duke of Sommerset Uncle to Edward the 6 th, and Lord Protector, pulled
down several adjoining Buildings to make him a Mansion House there, the Stones
of which Houses, and some other more remote Buildings which he demollished,
were converted to this Spacious and Beautiful Palace; of which we cannot add
much more, but that it was the Fatal place, where the wicked Romish
Assassinates (prompted by Hell and their accursed Principles,) most barbarously
Murdered that Noble Patriot and never to be forgotten Knight, Sir EDMOND-BERRY
GODFREY, on Saturday the 12 th of October, 1678. The Bloody Villains being
enraged at the Discovery of their Execrable Plot, in which this brave Gentleman
was very active, made him a Sacrifice to their Revenge, so that he may be truly
styled the Martyr of the English Protestant Interest, and deserves a Memorial
in all Loyal Christian Hearts. The Narrative is published at large, to which we
refer our Reader; only we cannot omit his Majesty's Royal act, who so resented
this Abominable Villainy, that he issued his Proclamation the 20 th of October,
promising 500 l. to the Discoverer, and a Pardon if one of the Malefactors; and
another soon after promising on the word of a King, not only the said Reward of
500 l, but such care for the Security of the Discoverer as he could in Reason
propose; upon which Captain William Bedlow (since Dead,) and Mr. Miles Praunce,
a Silver-smith in Princesstreet, (which last confessed to have been in the
Fact,) made the Discovery; and upon their clear and undoubted Evidence, three
of the Wretches were Executed, viz. Green, Berry, and Hill, the rest fled from
Justice, but cannot escape Divine Vengeance.

Having spoken of these principal Palaces, it may be expected that we should
speak something of the Great and Famous Houses of the Nobility, which are very
many and Magnificent, not yielding to any in Europe; as Clarendon-House, which
for Situation, stately Architecture, spacious solid uniform Structure, is
admirable; Berkley-House, Wallingford-House, Northumberland-House, Salisbury
and Worcester Houses, Bedford, Leicester, Newport, Mountague and Southampton
Houses, and indeed most Houses of the great Peers: But the brevity of our
Volume will not admit a large Description, only in General we shall say
something of them in the Section that Treats of the Fire, Anno 1666. and the
Rebuilding of the City.

SECT. 5.
Of Exchanges and Publick-Halls.
THe Royal Exchange in Cornhil-Ward, was Erected in the Year 1566, just one
hundred Years before it was Burnt, in this manner.

Certain Houses upon Cornhil, containing Eighty Households, were purchased by
the City of London for above 3532 l. which they sold for 478 l. to such as
would take them down and carry them away. Then the Ground or Plot was made
plain at the Charges of the City, and Possession thereof was given to Sir
Thomas Gresham Knight, a Noble Merchant, and Agent to Queen Elizabeth, by
certain Aldermen in the name of the whole, for to Build an Exchange thereon for
Merchants to Assemble. On the 7 th of June he laid the first Stone in the
Foundation, being accompanied with some Aldermen, where every one of them laid
a piece of Gold, which the Workmen took up; The Work was advanced with such
Expedition, that in November, 1567, it was finished, and afterward in the
presence and by the special Command of the Queen, it was Proclaimed by a
Herald, and with sound of Trumpet named, The ROYAL EXCHANGE. It was Built most
of Brick, and yet was the most splendid Burse (all things considered) that was
then in Europe. The Burse for Merchants was kept before in Lumbard-street.

In the great and dismal Conflagration, Anno 1666. the Royal Exchange was
consumed; But it is since Rebuilt in a far more stately and Magnificent manner,
of excellent Portland Stone, almost as durable as Marble, with such curious and
admirable Architecture, especially for a Front, a Turret, and for Arch-work,
that it surpasses all other Burses in Europe.

The Form is Quadrangular, with a large Paved Court where the Merchants Meet,
it is Quadratum Oblongum, an Oblong square, and on each side are stately
Galleries or Portico's Checquered with a smooth and delicate Stone-Pavement,
the Arches supported with strong Stone Pillars, where in case of Rain or
extreme Heat, the greatest part may be sheltered. The whole Fabric cost above
50000 l. whereof one half was disbursed by the Chamber of London, and the other
by the Company of Mercers: And to reimburse them, there are to be let 190 Shops
above-stairs, at 20 l. per annum, and 30 l. Fine, besides the several Shops
below on the several sides, and the huge Vaulted Cellars under ground, so that
it must needs be the richest piece of Ground in the World. For,

The Exact Dimensions of the Ground whereon this Goodly Fabric is Erected, is
but 171 Foot from North to South, and 203 Foot from East to West, and little
more than three quarters of an Acre of Ground, yet producing above 4000 l.
Yearly Rent.

The New Exchange on the Strand was called Durham-House, Built by Thomas
Hatfield Bishop of Durham, who being made Bishop of that See, Anno 1549.
continued so 36 Years. It was a very Capacious Edifice, on the North side stood
a row of Thatcht low Stables, which the Right Honorable Robert Earl of
Salisbury, then Lord High Treasurer of England, purchased and pulled down,
Erecting in the room thereof, at his own Charge, a very goodly and beautiful
Building, with Cellars underneath, and a Walk fairly Paved above it, with Rows
of Shops, and the like above stairs.

The first Stone was laid the 10 th of June 1608, and it was finished in
November following. The Shops above and under were curiously adorned, and in
April following the Earl Invited King James, the Queen, the Prince, the Duke of
York, to come thither, who came attended with many of the Nobility, where after
a Rich Banquet the King named it Britains Burse.

There are also two Exchanges more, viz. The Middle Exchange, and Exeter
Exchange, which last was lately built; in both which Goods are sold, as at the
Royal Exchange.

Having done with Exchanges we shall proceed to the Public Halls of Companies.

As for the Great Guild Hall, for Orders sake the Reader is referred to the
Section in the Chapter of Government that Treats of Courts. And as for the
Publick-Halls of Companies, the Reader is also Referred to the Third Section of
the 5 th Chap. that Treats of the Respective Corporations.

SECT. 6.
Of Colleges and Inns of Courts.
THis RENOWNED CITY may not unfitly be styled an University, for all Liberal
Arts and Sciences are here Taught and Professed. Here is Divinity, Law, and
Physic Read; the Municipal or Common-Laws of the Nation Taught, and Degrees
taken therein, which can be said in no other Nation: Here a man may Learn all
^orts of Languages, all the Branches and Parts of the Mathematics, and the
Military Art, whatsoever is necessary to make an ingenious Nobleman or
Gentleman thoroughly accomplished, in Geography, Cosmography, Chronology,
History, Hydrography, Navigation, Arithmetic of all sorts, Vulgar,
Instrumental, Decimal, Algebraical, or Geometry, Astronomy, WHITE HALL

THE TEMPLE

PHYSICIANS COLLEGE

LORD SHAFTSBVRY HOUSE

Fortification, Gunnery, Gaging, etc. Brachygraphy or Shorthand, the Arts of
Riding, Fencing, Dancing, all sorts of Music, Vocal and Instrumental,
Fireworks of all kinds, Limning, Painting, Enamelling, Sculpture or Ingraving,
Heraldry, Architecture, Grammar, Rhetoric, Poetry, and indeed any thing that
may be named of European Art, whether Liberal or Mechanic, may be here Learnt
with most exquisite Curiosity.

But that which is to be most commended as the chief Blessing is, that this
Famous City excells all other in this World for number of Pious and Godly
Protestant Christians, of Reverend, Godly and Learned Divines, and Ministers,
who Preach the Gospel in order to its propagation in the Power and Truth
thereof; Men eminent for ability in all sorts of Learning, and for Piety and
Holiness in their Lives and Conversations; such Examples, as very well second
their Preaching. (Which is spoke not to boast of any humane perfection, as
meritorious, nor to magnify any without cause, nor including universals,
because some that take that Sacred Function upon them prove otherwise, but is
represented as a motive to provoke the Inhabitants to thankfulness for so great
a Mercy, and to make a seasonable and profitable Improvement of the Blessing,
lest their Candle be removed.)

In a few words it may be said of this City (in allusion to what is spoken,
Rev. 22. 11. -- He which is filthy, let him be filthy still, -- and he that is
holy, let him be holy still;) That whosoever has a mind to Associate himself
with sincere, pious Christians, may have the opportunity to do so as much as
can be desired, and such as are driven by the impetuosity of irregular and too
much prevailing evils, may find (which ought to be lamented, and if it may be,
restrained) Companions in all sorts of wickedness, which is not mentioned by
way of disparagement to any individual, much less to the City (which is
certainly better Governed than any in the World,) and more free from those vile
Debaucheries so extraordinarily frequent in other great Cities; but as a check
to those licentious persons, that (when they would act the parts of ill
persons) Resort to the Suburbs without the Jurisdiction of the Right Honorable
the Lord Mayor. It is indeed admirable to see what Order is kept, and with that
Harmony, so that upon any extraordinary occasion a civil man may walk any hour
in the night, giving good words and a good account to the well ordered and
regular Watches, etc. But of this more in the Chapter of Government.

Of Gresham-College.
The same Noble Merchant and Citizen of London, Sir Thomas Gresham (of whom we
spoke before) that gave the Royal Exchange, and Built Almshouses in
Broadstreet, that gave considerable sums of Money to be distributed quarterly
for ever to five Prisons and four Hospitals in and about this City, Built
Gresham-College, and endowed it with the Revenue of the Royal Exchange, of
which he gave one Moity to the Lord Mayor and Commonalty and their Successors,
and the other Moity to the Right Worshipful Company of Mercers in trust, that
the Lord Mayor and Aldermen should find in all time to come four able Persons
to Read Divinity, Geometry, Astronomy, and Music, and to allow each of them,
besides fair Lodgings, 50 l. a Year. And that the Company of Mercers should
find three more able men, to Read Civil-Law, Physic, and Rhetoric, each of
which to have also, besides fair Lodgings, 50 l. a Year, which Lectures are to
be Read every Day in the Week (except the Lords Day) in Term-time, in the
Morning in Latin, and in the Afternoon the same in English, except the Music
Lecture, which is to be read only in English. There was also within these few
Years a Mechanic Lecture for Natural Philosophy, instituted by a worthy
Gentleman, Sir John Cutler, with a Salary for the Reader of 50 l. per annum, to
be read at the time and place where the Royal Society shall meet.

Of the Charter House, called Sutton's Hospital, where are 80 decayed
Gentlemen, Soldiers, and Merchants, with a Governor and Chaplain; 44 Scholars,
with a Master and Usher, plentifully maintained in Diet, Lodging, Clothes,
Physic, etc. living in a Collegiate manner, with much neatness and
handsomness, the 44 Scholars (when fit for the Universities) being to receive
an Allowance of 20 l. a Year for eight Years after their Reception there, out
of the Revenue of this College. And such as are fit for Trades, a considerable
Sum to bind them Apprentices; where there are also all meet Officers, as a
Physician, Apothecary, Steward, Cooks, Butlers, etc. with competent Salaries;
we have spoke largely already in the Section of Hospitals, to which we refer.

Of Sion College.
This College stands not far from Cripplegate in Cripplegate-Ward, where there
was in ancient Times a House of Nuns. This being in great decay, William Elsing
Mercer, anno 1329. 3 E. 3. began in the place thereof the Foundation of an
Hospital for one hundred blind men, to which he gave two Houses of a
considerable value. But 'twas anno 1332. made a Priory for Canons Regular, and
in the same place there was at last a College erected by Thomas White Doctor
in Divinity, for the use of the Clergy of London, and the Liberties thereof,
and a part thereof to be for 20 poor People, 10. Men, and 10 Women. To perform
all this, (besides several Sums of money, and considerable yearly Revenues
given by the said Doctor White, to pious and charitable Uses in diverse places)
he gave 3000 l. to purchase and build this College; and for the maintenance of
those Poor, he settled 120 l. a year for ever, and 40 l. a year for four
plentiful Dinners for the Clergy that shall meet there, who are to have four
Latin Sermons, one at the beginning of every quarter.

In this College is a fair spacious Library built by John Sympson Rector of
St. Olaves Hart-street, London, and one of the said Doctor White's Executors,
who fitted it with Wainscot, Stalls, Desks, Seats, and other necessary and
useful Ornaments, befitting the place, at his own charge. This Library is well
furnished with choice Books of all sorts, but chiefly such as are useful for
Divines, and that by the bounty of several Benefactors. This College felt the
Rage of the great Fire, anno 1666. but it is very handsomely repaired; and the
damage of the Library, which was very great, made up, It receives increase
every year, by the Legacies or Gifts of worthy Persons, and the Piety of good
Authors, who commonly bestow one Book of what they publish, especially of
Subjects that are Voluminously handled, upon this College, where they are
Chained up, and kept very well; which is a very good work, much tending to the
advancement of Learning. Here any Student may repair at seasonable hours,
morning and afternoon, and may study six hours in a day without interruption,
and may enter himself a Member, if he pleases, paying Half a Crown to the
Library Keeper, and Twelve-pence to the Person that sweeps and keeps it clean.
To conclude, it is extraordinary useful, especially for the poorer sort of
Students, who cannot purchase a necessary store of Books for their own use. And
I could heartily wish, that some of our learned men who are of brave, public,
and generous minds, would examine wherein it is deficient, and set on foot some
Medium to furnish it better, especially with Mathematical, Physical, Common and
Civil Law Books, of all which there are many of our Modern Writers have Treated
more Exquisitely, than any of their Predecessors.

Of the College of Physicians.
In this Renowned City, there is a College or Corporation of Physicians, who
by Charters and Acts of Parliament of Henry VIII. and since his Reign, have
certain Privileges, whereby no man, though a Graduate in Physic of Oxford and
Cambridge, may without License under the said College Seal, practice Physic
in London, or within seven Miles of the said City, (nor in any other part of
England, in case he has not taken any Degree in Oxford or Cambridge) whereby
also they can administer an Oath, Fine and Imprison any Offenders; in that and
diverse other Particulars, can make Bylaws, purchase Lands, etc. whereby they
have Authority to search all the Shops of Apothecaries in and about London, to
see if their Drugs and Compositions be wholesome, and well made, whereby they are
freed from all troublesome Offices, as to serve upon Juries, to be Constables,
to keep Watch and Ward, to bear Arms, or provide Arms or Ammunition, etc. Any
Member of this College may practice Chyrurgery if he please, not only in
London, but in any part of England.

This Society had anciently a College in Knightrider-street, the Gift of Dr.
Linacre, Physician to King Henry VIII. since which, a House and Ground was
purchased by the Society of Physicians, at the end of Amen-Corner, whereon the
Famous Dr. Harvey, anno 1562, at his own proper charge did erect a magnificent
Structure both for Library and a Public Hall, and for the meeting of the
several Members of this Society, endowed the same with his whole Inheritance,
which he resigned up while he was living and in health, part of which he
Assigned for an Anniversary Harangue, to commemorate all their Benefactors, and
exhort others to follow their good Example, and to provide a plentiful Dinner
for the Worthy Company.

This Goodly Edifice was burnt Anno 1666, and the Ground being but a Lease, the
present Fellows of the College, have purchased with their own Moneys, a Fair
piece of Ground in Warwick Lane, whereon they have raised a very Magnificent
Edifice.

Of this College there is a President, four Censors, and eight Elects, who are
all Principal Members of the Society, and out of whom the President is Yearly
chosen. The four Censors have by their Charter, Authority to Survey, Correct
and Govern all Physicians or others that shall Practice in London, or within
Seven Miles of the same, to Fine, Amerce, and Imprison any of them, as they
shall see Cause.

The usual Fee of a Doctor in ancient times was 20 s. and one that had not
taken that Degree, 10 s. But now there is no certain Rule, but some that are
Eminent have received in Fees Yearly 2000 or 3000 l. and purchased great
Estates, which in other Countries (because the Fees are exceedingly less,) is
very rare. Besides the Members of this College, there are diverse able
Physicians in London, that have great Practice, although they never had any
License, which is connived at by the College; and so is the too much practice
of Empericks, Mountebanks, Apothecaries, Surgeons, etc. with other
pretenders to Cure, by things which they call Universal Medicines, or
Panpharm^c^. And certainly it is a very Perilous and Destructive abuse, to
suffer unskilful Persons, that know not the Nature of Diseases, nor are able
from the Constitution of the Patient, and requisite Symptoms, to infer a
Rational Conclusion, or make a true discovery of Causes, or give probable
Prognostics of the event, to take up this profession, because they neither
understand the Nature of Simples, nor the proper and fit mixture of Compounds,
and consequently cannot apply suitable Medicaments to the languishing Patient,
but where (by mere chance) they Cure one, they destroy hundreds, such being as
great Murderers of the Body, as some Audacious, Graceless, Heretical, and
unskilful Pretenders to Preach the Sacred Mysteries of the Gospel, are
instruments to pervert their too too Credulous Disciples, and consequently to
destroy their Souls; which is hinted not to cast any disparagement upon those
Honorable Functions, but only such as abuse them, and are not fitly qualified
to practice them. And it could be wished that there were a Reformation of the
abuses in each, their errors having a direct tendency to destroy both Body and
Soul.

Indeed the Law of England has provided, that if one who is no Physician or
Surgeon, or is not expressly allowed to practice, shall undertake a Cure, and
the Patient die under his hand, it shall be Felony in the Person presuming so
to do. And the Law of God is as expressly against the other, who must give a
strict account to the Physician of Souls, for infecting, instead of Spiritually
healing (as far as instruments may do) his Flock. But this by the way.

Of the College of Civilians, called Doctors Commons.
The Civil Law is most practiced in London, though Degrees therein are taken
only in Oxford and Cambridge, and the Theory there best acquired. The College
called Doctors Commons, was first purchased by Doctor Henry Harvey, Dean of the
Arches for the Professors of the Civil Law, where commonly did reside, the
Judge of the Arches, the Judge of the Admiralty, and the Judge of the
Prerogative Court, with diverse Eminent Civilians, who living in a Collegiate
manner, and Commoning together, it was called Doctors Commons. It stood near
St. Paul's in the Parish of St. Bennets Pauls-Wharf in Farringdon-Ward-within.
The Buildings were utterly consumed by the Dreadful Fire in 1666, and then they
resided at Exeter-House in the Strand, but it has been since Rebuilt at the
proper Cost and Charges of the said Doctors, in a most Capacious and Beautiful
manner, where they keep their Courts and pleadings every Term, which begins and
ends almost at the same time with the Term at Westminster.

The Chief Court is that of the Arches, so called from the Arched Church of St.
Mary-le-Bow, in Cheapside, where this Court was wont to be held, but now in the
Common Hall at Doctors Commons, the Judge whereof, is called the Dean of the
Arches, having Jurisdiction over a Deanery, consisting of thirteen Parishes
within London, exempt from the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of London. Hither are
directed all Appeals in Ecclesiastical matters, within the Province of
Canterbury; to this belong diverse Advocates, all Doctors of the Civil Law, two
Registers and ten Proctors. The Dean or Judge of the Arches, sits alone
without any Assessors, and Hears and Determines all Causes, without any Jury
of Twelve Men. The manner is briefly thus:

Fist goes out a Citation, then a Bill and Answer, then by Proofs, Witnesses
and Presumptions, the matter is Argued pro and con, and the Canon and Civil
Laws quoted, and then the Definitive Sentence of the Judge passes, and upon
that Execution. But by Statute 25 Henry the VIII. it was provided that it shall
be Lawful for any Subject of England, in Case of Defect of Justice in the Court
of the Archbishop of Canterbury, to Appeal to the King's Majesty in His Court
of Chancery, and that upon such an Appeal, a Commission under the Great Seal
shall be directed to certain Persons, particularly Designed for that business;
so that from the Highest Court of the Archbishop, there lies an Appeal to this
Court, and beyond it to none other. It is called the Court of Delegates, and in
Civil Affairs is the Highest Court in England.

Ecclesiastical Criminal Causes are Tried by way of Accusation, Denunciation,
or Inquisition. The first, When some one takes upon him to prove the Crime. The
second, When the Churchwardens Present, and are not bound to prove, because it
is presumed they do it without Malice, and that the Crime is Notorious.
Thirdly, By Inquisition, when by reason of Common Fame, inquiry is made by the
Bishop, ex Officio suo, by calling some of the Neighborhood, or the Party
Accused, to their Oaths. But this Oath ex Officio, was taken away by
Parliament, in the time of King Charles the First.

If the Party Accused, after Admonition submits not, he is Excommunicated from
the Church, and is disenabled to be a Plaintiff in a Law Suit, etc. Which is
called Excommunicatio Minor.

Excommunicatio Major excludes from the Church, and from Society in Temporal
Affairs, and that for Heresy, Schism, Perjury, Incest, or such grievous
Crimes; then a Man cannot be Plantiff, or Witness, in any Civil or
Ecclesiastical Court. And if he continues Excommunicated 40 Days, the King's
Writ de Excommunicato capiendo is granted out of the Chancery against him,
whereupon he is cast into Prison, without Bail, there to lie till he has
submitted to the Bishop, and satisfied for what he is charged with; by which
many tender Consciences have suffered deeply. There is an Anathematismus
inflicted upon an obstinate Person, that is Judged an Heretic, wherein he is
Cursed and Rejected to Damnation. There is also an Interdict, Prohibiting all
Divine Offices to a Place or People; if against a People, it follows them any
where; if against a Place, the People may go elsewhere to hear.

Sometimes a Person Adjudged a Delinquent, is punished another way, which is
called Public Penance, and is to stand in the Church Porch upon Sunday bare
Headed and bare Footed, in a White sheet, and a White Rod in his Hand, then he
is to go into the Church, and his Crime being publicly repeated, and he
professing Repentance, is Absolved; but in some Cases the Party may come off
for Money to the Poor, or some Pious Use, which is not always converted that
way.

Christian Burial is denied to Persons Excommunicate, or Perjured, to such as
are Hanged for Felony, or Kill themselves, to Apostates, Heretics, and
Extortioners. Sometimes the Clergy Men are suspened, ab Officio, viz. from the
Exercise of their Functions, sometimes there is a Deprivatio a Beneficio, when
deprived of their Livings; sometimes they are Degraded, that is, Deprived of
their Orders, which is commonly for some Heinous Crime. So much Briefly of
these Censures and Punishments.

The Office of Actuary attending the Court of Arches, is to set down the Judges
Decrees, Register the Acts of the Court, and send them in Books of the
Registry. The Office of the Register is to Attend the Court by himself or
Deputy, and receive all Libels or Bills, Allegations, and Exhibits of
Witnesses, Files all Sentences, and keeps the Records of the Court.

The Beadle attends the Court, carries a Mace before the Judge, and calls the
Persons Cited to appear. The Judge and all the Advocates (who are all Doctors
of the Civil Law) wear Scarlet Robes, with Hoods lined with Taffata, (if they
be of Oxford) or White Miniver Furr, (if of Cambridge) and the Proctors ought
to wear Hoods lined with Lamb skin, if not Graduates; but if Graduates, Hoods
according to their Degree.

The Proctors are Persons that Exhibit their Proxies for their Clients, and
make themselves Parties for them, and draw and give in Pleas, or Libels and
Allegations, in the behalf of their Clients, produce the Witnesses, prepare the
Causes for Sentence, and and attend the Advocates with the proceedings.

All Arguments made by Advocates, and all Petitions made by Proctors, are to be
in Latin. All process of this Court, runs in the Name of the Judge, and
returnable before him, heretofore in Bow-Church, but now in the Common Hall at
Doctors Commons. The Places and Offices of this Court are in the Gift of the
Archbishop of Canterbury.

These Ecclesiastical Laws consist of Canons made by General Councels, the
Opinion of Fathers, the Decrees of several Bishops of Rome formerly admitted,
and our own Constitutions, made anciently in several Provincial Synods, which
by 25 Henry VIII. are in Force so far as they are not Repugnant to the Laws and
Customs of England, or the King's Prerogative. Then the Canons made in the
Convocations of latter times, as Primo Jacobi, and confirmed by him; some
Statutes Enacted by Parliament, and diverse old Customs not written, but yet in
use; and where these fail, the Civil Law takes place.

Amongst the Great Officers of the Crown, which are Nine, ( viz. the Lord High
Steward of England, the Lord High Chancellor, the Lord High Treasurer, the Lord
President of the KING's Council, the Lord Privy Seal, the Lord Great
Chamberlain, the Lord High Constable, the Earl Marshal, and the Lord High
Admiral of England.) The last only appertains to this place; his Trust and
Honor is so great, that it has been usually given to the KING's Younger Sons,
near Kinsmen, or some of the Highest and Chiefest of all the Nobility. He has
the management of all Maritime Affairs, as well in respect of Jurisdiction, as
Protection; he Governs the Navy Royal, and decides all Civil and Criminal
Causes in Sea Affairs, whether done upon or beyond Sea, in any part of the
world, on the Sea Coasts, in all Ports or Havens, and all Rivers beyond the
First Bridge next toward the Sea. Which Dignity is now executed by Commanders.

To the ADMIRALTY belong several Courts, but this at Doctors Commons is the
Principal or Supreme, and it may not be improper in Treating of this College,
to give a brief account of it; for the rest the Reader is referred to the
Present State of England. In this Court, called the COURT of ADMIRALTY, he has
usually a Lieutenant, called Judge of the Admiralty, who is commonly some
Learned Doctor of the Civil Law. The proceedings in all Civil Matters, are
according to the Civil Law, because the Sea is without the Limits of the Common
Law, and by Libel they proceed to the Action, the Plaintiff giving Caution to
prosecute the Suit, and to pay what shall be Adjudged against him, if he fail
in the Suit; the Defendant on the Contrary, securing the Plaintiff by a
sufficient Surety or Caution, as the Judge shall think meet, that he will
appear in Judgment, and pay what shall be Adjudged against him, and that he
will ratify and allow all that his Proctor shall do in his Name, whereby the
Clients are well assured to obtain that which by Law shall be Adjudged to them,
let the Cause fall on which side soever.

They make use also of the Laws of Rhodes and Oleron; whereof the former is an
Island in the Medi^^rranean Sea, about 20 Miles distant from the Continent of
Asia Minor, and is now under the Turk, the ancient Inhabitants whereof by their
mighty Trade and Power at Sea, grew so expert in the Regulation of all Maritime
Matters and Differences, that their Determinations therein were esteemed so
Just and Equitable, that their Laws in such Affairs, have ever since been
observed for Oracles. Those Laws were long ago incorporated into the Volumes of
the Civil-Law: and the Romans who gave Laws to other Nations for their Sea
Affairs, referred all Debates and Differences to the Judgment of these Rhodian
Laws.

Oleron is an Island anciently belonging to the Crown of England, seated in the
Bay of Aquitaine, not far from the Mouth of the Garonne, where our Famous King
Richard the first caused to be compiled such Excellent Laws for Sea-Matters,
that in the Ocean-Sea West ward, they had almost as much repute as the
Rhodian-Laws in the Mediterranean; and these Laws were called La Rool d'
Oleron. What we have of the Rhodian-Law, with the Comments thereon, inserted by
the old Juris-Consults in the Pandects, and the Constitutions made by the Roman
Emperors, contained in the Code and in the Novelles, still hold pre-eminence of
all others. Under this Court there is a Court of Equity for Determining
Differences between Merchants. Former Customs and Decrees are of Force also to
decide Controversies.

The proceeding in Criminal Affairs, as about Piracy, is, according to two
Statutes made by H. VIII. to be Tried by Witnesses, and a Jury, by special
Commission of the KING to the Lord Admiral, wherein some of the Judges of the
Realm are ever Commissioners, and the Trial according to the Laws of England,
directed by those Statutes.

All Causes that happen between the High and Low-Water-Mark are determinable at
Common Law, because that place belongs then to the body of the Adjacent
Country, but when it is Full Sea, the Admiral has Jurisdiction there also, (so
long as the Sea flows) over matters done between Low Water Mark and the Land,
as appears in Sir Henry Constables Case, 5 Report, Coke, p. 107.

For Regulating and Ordering His Majesty's Navy, Ships of War, and Forces by
Sea, see those excellent Articles and Orders in Stat. 13. Car. 2. Cap. 9.

The Writs and Decrees of this Court run in the Name of the Lord High Admiral,
and are Directed to all Vice- Admirals, Justices of Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs,
Bailiffs, Constables Marshals, and other Officers and Ministers of our
Sovereign Lord the King, as well within Liberties ^s without.

To this Court belongs a Register; a Marshall, who carries a Silver Oar before
the Judge, whereon are the Arms of the King, and the Lord High Admiral. The
Lord High Admiral has here his Advocate and Proctor, and all other Advocates
and Proctors are presented by them, and admitted by the Judge.

This Court is held on the same day with the Arches, but in the afternoon in
the same Common Hall at Doctors Commons. But the Admiralty Session is held at
St. Margarets-Hill in Southwark, where it was anciently kept for the Trial of
Malefactors, and Crimes Committed at Sea.

The Places and Offices of this Court are in the gift of the Lord High Admiral.

At Doctors Commons is another Court belonging to the Archbishop of Canterbury,
called the Prerogative Court, which Judges all Estates fallen by Will, or by
Intestates; It is so called because the Archbishop, by virtue of his
Prerogative, has this Power throughout the whole Province, where the Party at
the time of Death had 5 l. or above, in several Diocesses. All Citations and
Decrees run in the Name of the Archbishop.

This Court is kept in the same Common Hall in the Afternoon, next day after
the Arches, and was heretofore held in the Consistory at Paul's.

The Judge is attended with a Register, who sets down the Decrees and Acts of
the Court, and keeps the Records, all Original Wills and Testaments of Parties
Dying, having Bona Notabilia, etc. The place is commonly called the Prerogative
Office, now kept in the Deans Court near St. Paul's Churchyard, where for a
Moderate Fee, one may search for, and have a Copy of any such Testament, made
since the Rebellion of Wat-Tyler and Jack-Straw, (which is above 300 years ago,
in the Reign of Richard the Second) for by those Rebels many Records and
Writings in London and other places were then burnt and destroyed.

The Places belonging to this Court are in the Gift of the Archbishop of
Canterbury.

The Court of Delegates, who upon every New Business have a New Commission, and
New Judges, according to the Nature of the Affair, is kept also in the same
Common Hall in the Afternoon, the Day after the Prerogative; But of this we
have spoken something before: the Citations and Decrees here run in the King's
Name.

Of the College of Heralds.
Not far from the College of Doctors Commons, stood the College of Heralds, now
Rebuilt.

It was an ancient House Built by Thomas Stanley Earl of Derby, who Married the
Mother of King Henry the VII. and was bestowed by Queen Mary on the King's
Heralds, and Pursuivants at Arms for ever, to the end that they and their
Successors might dwell together (if they so pleased,) and Assemble, Confer and
Agree for the good Government of their Faculty, and that their Records might
there be safely preserved.

These are to be the Messengers of War and Peace, they are skilful in Descents,
Pedigrees, and Coats of Arms. They were made a College or Corporation by
Charter of King Richard the III. and by him had several Privileges granted
unto them; as to be free from Subsidies, Tolls, and all troublesome Offices of
the Kingdom. Another Charter of Privileges was granted unto the Society by
King Edward the VI, in the Third year of his Reign.

Of this Collegiate Society are three styled Kings at Arms, six called Heralds,
and four Pursuivants at Arms.

The first and principal among the Kings at Arms, is called Garter, Instituted
by King Henry the fifth, whose Office (as was said in the Section wherein the
King's Court is treated of) is to attend the Knights of the Garter at their
Solemnities, and to Marshal the Solemnities at the Funerals of the higher
Nobility of England, to advertise those that are chosen of their New Election,
to call on them to be Instal^ed at Windsor, to cause their Arms to be hung up
upon their Seats there, to Carry the Garter to Kings and Princes beyond Seas;
for which purpose he was want to be joined in Commission with some principal
Peer of the Realm, etc.

The next is Clarencieux, so called from the Duke of Clarence, to whom he first
belonged: For Lionel, Third Son to Edward the Third, Marrying the Daughter and
Heir of the Earl of Vlster in Ireland, had with her the honor of Clare in
Thomond, whereupon he was afterward Created Duke of Clarence, or the Territory
about Clare; which Dukedom Escheating to King Edward the Fourth, by the Death
of his Brother George Duke of Clarence, he made this Herald, who properly
belonged to that Duke, a King at Arms, and named him Clarencieux in French, and
Clarentius in Latin. His Office is to Marshal and dispose the Funerals of the
Lower Nobility, as Baronets, Knights, Esquires and Gentlemen on the South Side
of Trent, and therefore sometimes called Surroy, or Southroy.

The Third King at Arms is Norroy, or Northroy, whose Office is to do the like
on all the North-side of Trent. These two are called Provincial Heralds,
England being divided by them into two Provinces.

These, by Charter, have power to visit Noblemens Families, to set down their
Pedigrees, to distinguish their Arms, to appoint men their Arms on Ensigns, and
with Garter to Direct the Heralds.

The Six Heralds, anciently belonging properly to Dukes, have been called Dukes
at Arms, and are thus called and Ranked. 1. Windsor. 2. Richmond, 3. Chester.
4. Somerset. 5. York. 6. Lancaster, who now wait at Court, attend Public
Solemnities, Proclaim War and Peace, etc. Of these Heralds there are at present
but Four, who are named Rouge-Cross, Rouge-Dragon, Portcullice, and
Blew-mantle; from such Badges heretofore worn by them, as it is thought. The
Service of the whole College is used in Marshalling and ordering Coronations,
Marriages, Christnings, Funerals, Interviews, Feasts of Kings and Princes,
Cavalcades, Shows, Justs, Tournaments, Combats before the Constable and
Marshal, etc. to take care of the Coats of Arms, of the Genealogies of the
Nobility and Gentry; and whatsoever concerns Honor. They all receive yearly
Sallaries out of the Exchequer, and are to be Gentlemen at least. The Six
Heralds are Exp^esly made Esquires by the King, when they are Created; which is
now done by the Earl-Marshal, who has a special Commission for every
particular Creation, which anciently was performed by the King himself. For the
Creating and Crowning Garter King at Arms, there are provided a Sword and Book,
whereon to take a Solemn Oath; then a Gilt Crown, a Collar of SS's, a Bowl of
Wine, which Bowl is the Fee of the New Created King, also a Coat of Arms of
Velvet, richly Embroidered.

He is thus Created. First he kneels down before the Earl-Marshal, and laying
his hand on the Book and Sword, another King at Arms reads the Oath; which
being taken, and the Book and Sword, the Letters Patents of his Office are
read, during which the Earl-Marshal pours the Wine on his head, giving him the
Name of Garter, then puts on him the Coat of Arms and Collar of SS's, and the
Crown on his head.

His Oath is, To obey the Supreme Head of the Most Noble Order of the Garter,
and then the Noble Knights of that Order, in such things as appertain to his
Office; to inquire diligently what Notable or Noble Acts are performed by every
Knight of the Order, and certify the same to the Register of the Order, that
he may Record it, and to give Notice to the King and the Knights of the Order,
of the Death of any of that Society: To have an exact knowledge of all the
Nobility, to instruct Heralds and Pursuivants in doubts concerning Arms, and to
eschew and avoid all persons of ill reputation; to be more ready to excuse then
to blame any Noble person, unless called by Authority to Witness against them,
etc.

This Officer has a Double Sallary, that is, twice as much as the other two
Kings; he has Fees at Instalments, yearly Wages given by the Knights of the
Garter, and their uppermost Garment when Installed, etc.

The two Provincial Kings at Arms, Clarencieux and Norroy, are Created by
Letters Patents, a Book, a Sword, etc. as Garter, and with almost the same
Ceremonies.

A Herald at Arms is Created with the like Ceremony, but his Coat of Arms is to
be Satin, imbroidered richly with Gold, he is brought in by two Heralds, as a
King at Arms is by two Kings at Arms.

They take a Solemn Oath to be true to the King, to be serviceable to
Gentlemen, to keep Secrets of Knights, Esquires, Ladies, and Gentlewomen, to
assist distressed Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, Widows and Virgins, to avoid
Taverns, Dicing, and Whore-Houses, etc. The Pursuivants at Arms are Created
likewise by Letters Patents, a Book, a Bowl of Wine, and a Coat of Arms of
Damask, and to be brought in as the Heralds before the Earl-Marshal or his
Deputy; to Swear Solemnly to be true to the King, to be serviceable to all
Christians, to be Secret and Sober, more ready to commend than to blame, to be
humble, lowly, etc.

This College felt the fury of the great Fire, but is since very beautifully
rebuilt by the Members, and the bountiful contribution of Honorable Persons.
Here are always Officers waiting to satisfy Comers, touching Descents,
Pedigrees, Coats of Arms, etc. These Officers are the King's Sworn Servants, of
which see the fourth Section of the third Chapter, where we treated of the
King's Court.

Inns of Courts.
The Colleges of Municipal or Common-Law-Professors and Students are Fourteen,
which may be (not unfitly) styled an University, where the Students of the Law
and Practitioners thereof live not of common Stipends, but by their Places or
Practice, or their own Proper Revenues, or their Friend* Exhibition, for they
are most commonly Gentlemen by Descent, and it was the command of King James
that none but such should be admitted, because others may be prone to debase
the honor of the Law, and play tricks; whereas the sense of Honor, in persons
of Birth and Fortune, engages them to preserve their Reputation.

These Colleges are called Inns, which was the old English Word for the Houses
of Noblemen or Bishops, or men of great Note, as the French word Hostel at
Paris.

There are Two Inns of Sergeants, Four Inns of Courts, and Eight Inns of
Chancery, of which there are Nine within the Liberty of the City, and five in
the Suburbs. Those within the City Liberties are Sergeants Inn Fleetstreet
Sergeants Inn Chancery Lane For Judges and Sergeants only.
The Inner The Middle Temple, in Fleet Street, are Inns of Court.
Cliffords Inn, Fleetstreet Thavies Inn Furnivals Inn Bernards Inn Staple Inn
Holborn Are Inns of Chancery.




Without the Liberties are
Grays Inn Holborn Lincolns Inn Chancery Lane Inns of Court.
Clements Inn New Inn Lions Inn Inns of Chancery.

Of these we shall briefly speak in this O^deras.

1. The Sergeants Inns are so called, because Diverse Judges and Sergeants at
Law keep their Commons, and Lodge there in Term-time. In these Inns (or
Colleges) the Students of the Common Law (when they are arrived to the highest
Degree) have Lodging and Diet. They are called Servientes ad legem, Sergeants
at Law. These are bred two or three years in the University, and there chiefly
versed in Logic and Rhetoric, which are expedient for a Lawyer, as also in
the Theory of the Civil-Law, and some knowledge in the French Tongue as well as
Latin, then the Student is admitted to be one of the Four Inns of Court, where
he is first called a Moot-man, and after about seven years Study, is chosen an
Utter Barrister; and having then spent twelve years more, and performed his
Exercises (of which more hereafter,) he is chosen a Bencher, and sometime after
a Reader. During the Reading, which heretofore was three Weeks and three Days,
as aforementioned, the Reader keeps a Constant and sumptuous Feasting,
Inviting the Chief Nobles, Judges, Bishops, Great Officers of the Kingdom, and
sometimes the King himself, that it costs them sometimes 800 l. or 1000 l.
Afterward he wears a long Robe different from other Barristers, and is then in
a capacity to be made a Sergeant at Law, when his Majesty shall be pleased to
call him, which is in this Manner.

When the Number of Sergeants is small, the Lord Chief Justice of the Common
Pleas, by the advice and consent of the other Judges, makes choice of six or
eight more or less, of the most grave and learned of the Inns of Court, and
presents their Names to the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper, who sends by the
Kings Writ to each of them, to appear on such a Day before the King to receive
the State and Degree of a Sergeant at Law; at the appointed time, they being
habited in Robes of two Colors. viz. Brown and Blew, come accompanied with the
Students of the Inns of Courts, and attended by a Train of Servants and
Retainers, in peculiar Cloath-Liveries, to Westminster Hall, and there in
public take a Solemn Oath, and are Clothed with certain Robes and Coifs,
without which they may be seen no more in public: After this, they Feast the
great Persons of the Nation, in a very Magnificent and Princely manner; give
Gold Rings to the Princes of the Royal Family, the Archbishops, Chancellor and
Treasurer, to the value of 40 s. each Ring, and to Earls and Bishops Rings of
20 s. To other Great Officers, to Barons, etc. Rings of less value.

Out of these are chosen all the Judges of the King's Bench and Common Pleas;
Wherefore all those Judges do always wear the white Linen Coif, which is the
principal Badge of a Sergeant, and which he has had the privilege to wear at
all times, even in the King's presence, and whilst he spoke to the King, though
anciently no Subject may be so much as capped in the King's presence. When any
of the Judges are wanting, the King by advice of the Council makes choice of
one of those Sergeants at Law to supply his place, and by Letters Patents
Sealed by the Lord Chancellor, who Constitutes him (sitting in the middle of
the rest of the Judges) by a set Speech, Declaring to the Sergeant that upon
this occasion he is called to do Justice with Expedition and Impartiality to
His Majesty's Subjects, causing the Letters Patents to be read, and then
Departs; after which the Lord Chief Justice places the said Sergeant on the
Bench, Junior to all the rest, and having taken an Oath well and truly to Serve
the King and his People in his Office, to take no Brib^, to do equal and speedy
Justice to all, etc. He sets himself to the Execution of his Charge. Being thus
advanced, he has great honor and a considerable Salary, besides perquisites,
for each one has 1000 l. a year from the King. His habit of a Sergeant is
somewhat altered; his long Robe and Cap, his Hood and Coif, are the same; but
there is besides a Cloak put over him, and closed on his Right Shoulder, and
instead of a Caputium lined with Minever, or de minuto vario, diverse small
pieces of white rich Fur; only the two Lord Chief-Justices, and the Lord
Chief-Baron have their Hoods, Sleeves, and Collars turned up with Ermine.

Note that the two Sergeants Inns belong to the twelve Judges, and about
twenty-six Sergeants.

The Fees in old times from a Client to a Sergeant at Law, for advice in his
Chamber, or for pleading in any Court of Judicature, was but 20 s. and the Fee
of a Barrister 10 s. which is now more then is given in our Neighbor Nations,
but at present it is usual to give some some Sergeants 10 l. and some 20 l. and
to a Barrister half as much at the pleading of any Considerable Cause; so that
some Lawyers gain 3000 or 4000 l. yearly in Fees, and purchase great Estates in
a few years, and are sometimes advanced to be Peers of the Realm, as late times
especially have shown.

When there was a call of Sergeants at Law, it was almost incredible to hear of
their preparations in old times, they have often kept their Feasts in Ely
House, which was the Bishop of Ely's Palace in Holborn.

There was a call of Seven Sergeants, in the year 1464. 4. E. 4. in Michaelmas
Term, who kept their Feast in this Palace, to which Sir Matthew Philip, Lord
Mayor of London, with the Aldermen, Sheriffs, and the most eminent Commoners,
were invited, to which they came; but the Lord Gray of Ruthen, then Lord
Treasurer of England, was placed (against the minds of the Sergeants, as they
said) before the Lord Mayor, who thereupon took such Distaste that he went away
with the Aldermen, Sheriffs, and Commons, without partaking of the Feast, to
the great trouble of the New Sergeants, as well as the dissatisfaction of the
City.

There was another Feast kept there for Five days by the Sergeants, in the Year
1531. 23 Henry VIII. where the King, Queen, and Foreign Ambassadors Dined, as
also the Lord Mayor, the Judges, the Barons of the Exchequer, the Aldermen of
the City, and several Eminent Persons, Merchants and Public Officers, and many
Gentlemen of Quality. There were brought to the Slaughterhouse 24 great Beefs,
at 26 s. 8 d. a piece, from the Shambles; one Carcass of an Ox at 24 s. One
hundred Fat Muttons, at 2 s. 10 d. a piece. 51 great Veals, at 4 s. 8 d. a
piece; 34 Porks at 3 s. 8 d. a piece; 91 Piggs at 6 d. each; 10 Dozen of Capons
of one Poulterer, (for they had three) at 20 d. a piece; Capons of Kent 9 Dozen
and a half at 12 d. a piece; Capons Course, Nineteen Dozen at 6 d. a piece;
Cocks of Gross 7 Dozen and 9, at 8 d. a piece; Cocks Course 14 Dozen and 8 at 3
d. a piece; Pullets the best 2 d half penny, other Pullets two pence; Pigeons
37 Dozen, at 10 d. the Dozen; Swans 14 Dozen; Larks 340 Dozen, at 5 d. the
Dozen, etc. with all other Appurtenances needful for a Splendid and Magnificent
Entertainment. Which is mentioned the rather, to show the Change of Prices,
this being but 150 Years ago.

The two Temples near Temple Bar, were formerly the dwelling of the Knights
Templers, who founded them in the Reign of Henry the II. These Templers took
beginning about the Year 1118. Their first profession was for safeguard of
Pilgrims, coming to visit the Sepulcher at Jerusalem, and increased mightily.
They bare Crosses of red Cloth on their uppermost Garments, to be known from
others, they were called Templers, or Knights of the Temple, because their
first Mansion was near the Temple in Jerusalem, granted to them by King
Baldwin. Many Noblemen afterward in all parts of Christendom became Brethren
of this Order, and built themselves Dwellings in every great Town, but this at
London was their chief Dwelling in England. Matthew Paris Reports, that they
were first so Poor, that they had but one Horse to Serve two of them; but they
became very Rich and Pompous afterward, and entertained the Nobility, and
Foreign Ambassadors, and the Prince Himself frequently; their Seal for the
reason aforesaid, was two Men riding upon one Horse. Many Parliaments and Great
Councels have been there kept, as appears in our Historys. In the Year 1308.
all the Templers in England and all Christendom were apprehended, and committed
to diverse Prisons, for Heresy and other Articles, by means of Philip King of
France, who procured them to be Condemned by a General Council, whose Lands
were given by a Council at Vienna, Anno 1324, to the Knights Hospitallers,
called the Order of St. John of Jerusalem, who took the Island of Rhodes from
the Turk, and bravely maintained it, till the time of Solomon the Magnificent;
who after a most sharp and tedious Siege of six Months, took it, when they had
Valorously kept it about 200 Years, and made a dismal slaughter in Solymans
great Army consisting of about 200000 Men, and 300 Galleys, etc. These Knights
have since Inhabited Malta, another Island in the Mediterranean Sea, given them
by the King of Spain. In the Reign of Edward the III. this Temple was purchased
by the Students of the Common Law, which is above 300 Years ago: they are
called the Inner and Middle Temple, in Relation to Essex-House, which was part
of the Knights Templers, and called the Outer-Temple, because Sealed without
Temple Bar. As to the Casualties of Fire and Tumults, by which this Temple
suffered, (but now restored in a Beautiful and Stately manner,) we refer to the
Chapter that particularly Treats of such things.

The Inns of CHANCERY, are
Cliffords-Inn in Fleet Street, sometimes belonging to the Lord Clifford, but
afterward let to Students of Law, Thavies-Inn in Holborn, begun in the Reign
of Edward the III, and since purchased by Lincoln's Inn, as was also
Furnivals-Inn in Holborn, Bernards-Inn, and Staple-Inn, belonging to the
Merchants of the Staple; These Five Inns of Chancery are within the Liberties
of the City: And Clements-Inn so called, because it stands near St. Clements
Church without Temple Bar; New-Inn, so called, because of a Newer Foundation
than the others, and Lyons-Inn, anciently a Common-Inn, with the Sign of the
Lion; which three last are without the City Liberties. These were heretofore
Preparatory Colleges for Younger Students, and many were entered here, before
Admitted to the Inns of Courts. But now they are for the most part taken up by
Attorneys, Solicitors and Clerks, who have here their Chambers apart, and their
Diet at a very easy rate, in a Hall together, where they are obliged to appear
in Grave long Robes, and Black round knit Caps. These Colleges belong all to
some Inns of Court, who send Yearly some of their Barristers to Read to these.
In each of which, one with another, there are about 60 or 70 Persons.

There are two Inns of Court without the City Liberties, called Lincoln's Inn,
which anciently belonged to the Earls of Lincoln; and Greys Inn, belonging to
the Noble Family of the Greys. These two Inns are very Capacious and Stately
Colleges, with very lovely Walks, and Gardens; Greys-Inn especially, being
Seated upon the very Edge or Skirt of the Sub^rbs in Holborn, yields a most
Gallant Prospect into the Country, and in its Beautiful Walks, one may partake
of the fresh Country Air, as well as if in the Country.

In these two Inns, and in the two Temples, (which are our four Inns of Court,
as was said,) the Gentlemen that are Studious of the Common Law, reside in a
Collegiate manner. And in the Reign of Henry the VI, they flourished so that
there were in each about 200 Students, each expending Yearly about 20 l. which
was as much as 200 l. now, and were, as Fortescue says, Vltra Studium legum,
quasi Gymnasia omnium morum; that is, Besides the Studies of the Law, as it
were Schools of all sorts of Civility and Good breeding, or manners.

These Societies are no Corporations, nor have any Judicial Power over their
Members, but have certain Orders among themselves, which have by consent the
Force of Laws: For lighter offenses they are Excommoned, or put out of Commons,
not to eat with the rest; and for greater Offenses they lose their Chambers,
and are expelled the College; and being once expelled, they are never received
by any of the three other Societies. Which deprivation of Honor to Young
generous Spirits, is more grievous than perhaps Deprivation of life.

They wear a Grave black Robe and Cap, when they meet at Chapel, at the Hall,
or at Courts of Justice, and at other times walk with Cloak and Sword, or what
they please. These Colleges have no Lands nor Revenues, because being no
Corporations they cannot purchase, but the charges of the House are defrayed by
what is paid at Admittances, and Quit-Rents for their Chambers.

The whole Company of Gentlemen in each Society, may be divided into 4 parts,
Benchers, Vtter-Barristers, Inner-Barristers, and Students.

Benchers are the Seniors, to whom is Committed the Government and ordering of
the whole House, and out of these is Chosen Yearly a Treasurer, who Receives,
Disburseth, and Accounts for all Moneys belong to the House.

Vtter-Barristers are such as from their Learning and Standing, are called by
the Benchers to Plead and Argue in the Society doubtful Cases and Questions,
which are called Moots (from Meeting, the old Saxon word, for the French
Assemble, or else from the French Mot, a word,) and whilst they Argue the said
Cases, they sit outermost on the Forms of the Benchers, which they call the Bar.

Out of these Moot-Men are chosen Readers for the Inns of Chancery belonging to
the Inns of Court, whereof they are Members, where in Term time, and Grand
Vacations, they Argue Cases in the presence of Attorneys and Clerks.

All the rest are accounted Inner-Barristers who for want of Learning or time,
are not to Argue in these Moots; and yet in a Moot before the Benchers, two of
these Inner-Barristers sitting on the same Form with the Vtter-Barristers, do*
for their Exercises, recite by heart, the pleading of the same Moot-Case, the
one taking the part of the Plaintiff, and the other of the Defendant.

They divide the Year into three parts.

1. The Learning Vacation. 2. The Term times. 3. The Dead, or Mean Vacation.
They have two Learning Vacations, viz. Lent Vacation, which begins the first
Monday in Lent, and continues Three weeks and Three days: and Summer Vacation,
which begins the Monday after Lammas day, and continues also Three weeks and
Three days. In these Vacations are the greatest Conferences and Studious
Exercises in this manner.

The Benchers appoint the Eldest Vtter-Barristers to Read among them openly in
the Hall, whereof he has Notice half a Year before; he then, the first day
about Eight of the Clock, makes choice of some Act or Statute, whereupon he
Grounds his whole Reading for that Vacation, and declares such Mischiefs and
Inconveniences as were not provided against before the same Act, and then
Recites certain Doubts and Questions which he has devised, that may grow upon
the said Statute, and declares his Judgment therein: after which one of the
Younger Vtter-Barristers, repeats one Question propounded by the Reader, and
does by way of Argument labor to prove the Readers Opinion to be against Law;
and after him, the Senior Vtter-Barristers and Readers, one after another,
according to Seniority, do declare their Opinions and Judgments in the same,
and then the Reader who did put the Case, endeavors to Confute the Objections
laid against him, and to confirm his own Opinion. After which the Judges and
Sergeants (if any be present) declare their Opinions; then the Youngest
Vtter-Barrister, again Rehearses another Case, which is Prosecuted as the
former was. And this Exercise continues Daily Three or Four hours. Out of those
who have Read once in the Summer Vacation, and are Benchers, is chosen always
one to Read in Lent, who observes the same Method and Order as the former. Out
of these Readers, Sergeants at Law are usually chosen.

The manner of Mooting, is thus: In these Vacations after Supper in the Hall,
the Reader with one or two of the Benchers comes in, to whom one of the
Vtter-Barristers propounds some doubtful Case; which being Argued by the
Benchers, and lastly by him that moved the Case, the Benchers sit down on the
Bench at the upper end of the Hall, (whence they are called Benchers) and upon
a Form in the Middle of the Hall sit two Vtter-Barristers: an^ on both sides of
them on the same Form sits o^^ Inner-Barrister, who does in Law- French,
declar^ to the Benchers (as the Sergeants do at the Bar i^ the KING's Court to
the Judges) some kind o^ Action, the one being (as it were) retained by the
Plaintiff, and the other for the Defendant. Which ended, the two
Vtter-Barristers Argue such Questions as are Disputable within the Case. Afte^
which the Benchers do likewise declare their Opinions, how they take the Law to
be in thos^ Questions.

In those Mootings the Junior always argues first^ as is used among the Judges
in the Exchequer-Chamber, and among the Sergeants in open Courts o^ Judicature.
The Inner and Vtter-Barrister Plea^ in Law- French, and the Benchers in
English, an^ at the Readings, the Readers Cases are put i^ English.

Mootings in the Inns in Chancery, are thus: I^ the Learning Vacation, each
Vtter-Barrister, who is a Reader in the Inns of Chancery, goes with two
Students of the same Inn of Court, to the Inn o^ Chancery, where he is
appointed to Read, and there meet him Commonly two of each of the other Inn: of
Court, who (sitting as the Benchers do in the Inns of Court at their Moots,)
hear and Argue his Case: in the Four Inns of Chancery, the Moots are read by
those of Greys-Inn, or Lincoln's Inn; in the other Four, by these of the two
Temples.

In Term Time the only Exercises of Learning is Arguing and Debating Cases
after Dinner, and Mooting after Supper, in the same manner as in the Vacation
time.

The time between the Learning Vacations and Terms, is called the Mean
Vacation, during which time, every day after Dinner, Cases are Argued a^ at
other times, and after Supper Moots are brought in, and Pleaded by the
Inner-Barristers in the presence of the Vtter-Barristers, which sit there in
the Room of the Benchers, and Argue as they do in Term Time and Learning
Vacation.

Every quarter Commonly the Benchers cause one of the standing Officers of the
House to Summon a Parliament, which is only an Assembly and Conference of
Benchers, and Vtter-Barristers, which are called the Sage Company, and meet in
a place called the Parliament-Chamber, and there Treat of such matters as shall
seem exped^ent for the good ordering of the House, and the Reformation of such
things as they shall Judge meet to be Reformed. Here are the Readers for Lent
and Summer Vacation Elected; also the Treasurer is here chosen, and the
Auditors appointed to take accounts of the old Treasurer, etc. Here Offenses
Committed by any of the Society are punished, etc. In these Four Inns of Court,
are estimated to be about 800 Students.

SECT. 7.
Of Bridges, Rivers, etc.
WE shall begin with the Bridge, which for admirable Workmanship, vastness of
Foundation, for all Dimensions, for Solid Stately Houses, and Rich Shops built
thereon, surpasses all others in Europe; it has Nineteen Arches, besides the
Drawbridge, Founded in a deep broad River. It is 800 Foot in Length, Sixty
High, and Thirty Broad; it has a Drawbridge almost in the middle, and 20 Foot
between each Arch. It was about the Year 1176, begun to be Built of Stone, and
after the Labor of 33 Years Finished, viz. Anno 1209. which was a work of
exceeding cost and difficulty, considering the great flux and reflux of the
River in that place, so that it has been frequently known that at the Ebbing
and Flowing of the water, it falls with so violent a Cataract, that it has
Drowned many that would adventure to Shoot through the Arches at such times.
Before some part of the Houses were burnt (for there happened many grievous Fires
there, of which and other Accidents, more hereafter) it looked more like a
stately and Continued Street, than a Bridge. The Charges of keeping this Bridge
in Repair are so great, that there is a large House, a vast Revenue in Lands
and Houses and Diverse considerable Officers set apart for the constant care and
Repair thereof: The principal whereof are the two Bridge-Masters, chosen out of
the Body of the Liveries upon Midsummer-day, after the Sheriffs and the
Chamberlain. Concerning this Bridge, and the stupendous site and structure
thereof, take the ingenious fancy of Mr. James Howel, in imitation of
Sannazarius the famous Venetian Poet, who writ the like about that City and the
Rialto, the prime Bridge there.

Cum Londinensem Neptunus viderat Vrbem
Vectus ibi propriis atque revectus Aquis,
Dum Densam penetrat sylvam, lucosque ferentes
Pro Ramis funes, pro foliisque cruces,
Cum superimpositum torrenti flumine Pontem
Viderat, and Rapido ponere jur freto,
Cum tantos Muros, ferrumina, Castra, tot Arcus
Vidit, and haec tergo cuncta jacere suo.
Arcus, qui possunt totidem formare Rialtos
Metiri siquis summa vel ima Cupit;
Haec Deus undarum aspiciens, fluxusque retrorsum
Tundere, and horrendos inde Boar sonos,
Nunc mihi quanta velis terrae miracula pandas,
Est primus Mundi pons, ait, iste Stupor.
The same Paraphas'd in English.
When Neptune, from his billows, London spied,
Brought proudly thither by a high Springtide:
As through a floating Wood he steered along,
And moving Castles clustered in a throng;
When he beheld a mighty Bridge give Law
Unto his Surges and their fury awe;
When such a shelf of Cataracts did roar,
As if the Thames with Nile had changed her shore;
When he such Massy Walls, such Towers did eye,
Such Posts, such Irons on his back to lie:
When such vast Arches he observed, that might
Nineteen Rialto's make, for depth and height:
When the Cerulean God these things surveyed,
He shook his Trident, and, astonished, said,
Let the whole Earth now all her Wonders count,
This Bridge of Wonders is the Paramount.
There was first a Ferry where this Bridge is built, and the Ferry-man and his
Wife Dying, his only Daughter, a Maid, named Mary, with what her Parents left
her, and the profits of this Ferry, built a House for Nuns, where the East part
of St. Mary-Overy's Church now stands, and gave them the oversight and profits
of the Ferry. This Nunnery was afterward converted into a Co^lege of Priests,
who built the Bridge of Timber, but the time when, is uncertain, but mention is
made of it, Anno 994. when the Londoners overthrew a part of Sweyn King of
Denmark's Army, who besieged them; many of the Danes being Drowned in the
Thames, because in their hasty flight they took no heed of, or could not
recover the Bridge.

This Bridge was burnt, Anno 1136. It was afterward new built; but the Charges
of continual Reparation being so great, it was by the Aid of the Citizens and
others built of Stone, as beforesaid, the Timber Bridge having been maintained
partly by the proper Lands thereof, partly by Legacies and Lib^rality of Diverse
Persons, and partly by Taxations in diverse Shires, at least 215 years before
the Bridge of Stone was built. And that we may give an Estimate of the Payments
and Allowances belonging to this great Bridge, it is recorded that in Henry the
7 th's time it amounted in one year to above 815 l. by which may be guessed
what improvement and increase it is come to by this time, the prices of things
being so vastly altered.

Besides this Bridge there are three other curious Sone-Bridges over that
mighty Chargeable and beautiful work or Channel, rendering Navigable the Fleet
Brook, from the River Thames to Holborn-Bridge, which is 100 Foot Broad, on the
sides of which are many huge Vaults to treasure up Coals for the use of the
poor, etc. About the middle of this Channel stands Fleet-Bridge, being
considerably advanced, though it lies in a level with Fleet Street, and the
bottom of Ludgate Hill, so that all Wagons, Coaches, Carmen, etc. pass over
it, the other two Bridges, viz. Bridewell-Bridge, and Fleet-laneBridge are
raised 14 Steps or Stairs above the Streets on each side of the said Channel,
in order to the admittance or giving passage to all Lighters, Barges, Boats,
Hoys, etc. which bring in plentifully every Tide, Coals; for which, and other
Goods brought, there are certain Duties paid to the City, which were granted to
the City by an Act of Parliament. This Channel was finished, Anno 1676. at the
Cost of above 74000 l. And by the same Act of Parliament, H^lborn-Bridge, at
the North-end of this Channel, was ordered to be enlarged, which is very
commodiously done, to the great advantage of Passengers. The^e were several
other inferior Bridges mentioned by Stow and others, but being of no great
eminency (and can hardly now be discovered) we pass them by.

Of Rivers, Aqueducts, etc.
The Great and famous River of Thames deserves precedence, not only of all
other Rivers in England, but perhaps of the World; because it is breadth, depth,
gentle strait and even Course, extraordinary wholesome Water and Tides, render
it more commodious for Navigation, than any other that we read of. The Sea
Flows up this River near fourscore miles, that is almost to Kingstone, 12 miles
above London by Land, and 20 by Water, bringing the greater Vessels to London,
and the smaller beyond; then against the stream, Boats are drawn to Oxford, and
higher many miles.

It is High Water at this City when the Moon comes to the North-East and
South-West points of Heaven, the one in our Hemisphere, and the other in the
opposite Hemisphere. The highest Tides are upon a Land Flood, the Wind
Northwest at the Equinoctial, and the Moon at Full; When these Four Causes
concur (which is very rare) the River over-flows its Banks in some places,
endamaging Westminster in their Cellars.

This Noble River opening Eastward toward Germany and France, is much more
advantageous for Traffic then any other River of England.

There is a variety of excellent Fish, especially incomparable Salmon, and
along its Banks on either side a fat and fruitful Soil, pleasant with Meadows,
and innumerable Palaces, and stately Buildings of the Nobility, Gentry, and
great Citizens, that it yields as beautiful a sight as can any where be met
withal; Which may be thus Described only from Windsor to London, with a little
alteration of Mr. Draytons Lines.

But now this Flood upon his Voyage pressed,
(That finds with strength his beauty still increast,
Where Windsor stood on Tip-toe to behold
The Goodly Thames so far as e're he could:
With Royal Houses Crowned, of stately pride,
On either Bank as he along does glide)
With sweet Delight does his long Course pursue,
Does Oatlands, Hampton Court and Richmond view,
Then Westminster great Thames does entertain,
That vaunts her Palace and her sumptuous Fane:
The Lands Chief Seat, that challenges for hers
Kings Coranations and their Sepulchers.
Then goes along by that more beauteous Strand,
That shows the Wealth and glory of the Land*
(Such sumptuous Seats within so little space
The all-viewing Sun scarce sees in all his Race)
By London leads, which like a Crescent lies,
Whose Windows view with the be-spangled Skies,
Her rising Spires so thick themselves do show,
As do the Reeds that on her Banks do grow,
There sees his Wharffs and People-crowded Shores:
His bosom spread with shoals of laboring Oars:
With that great Bridge that does him most Renown,
By which he puts all other Rivers down.
This Noble River has her Original out of the side of an Hill in Cotswold
Downs, a little above a Village called Winchcomb, in Oxfordshire, where it was
anciently called Isis, or the Ouse, running to Oxford, and by the way receiving
many small Rivulets and Brooks joining at that City with the Charwell, then by
Abington, Dorchester, where the River Them and Isis join, from whence it is
called Tham^sis, or Thames; thence by Reading, Maidenhead, Windsor, Stanes,
and several other considerable Palaces, Towns, and stately Houses, to London,
and receives the Medway, a considerable River that runs by the City of
Rochester, and Waters all the Southern parts of Kent: The length of it being,
at least, if measured by the Journeys at Land, 180 Miles, and Ebbs and Flows,
as before, near 80 Miles. The Common difference betwixt Tide and Tide is found
to consist of 24 Minutes, which wants but 12 of a whole hour in 24, by which
they come later than the other. Mr. Stow tells us that in his time (the first
Edition of his Survey being Printed above 80 years ago) there were 2000
Wherries or small Boats, whereby 3000 Watermen got their Living, their Gains
being most in Term-time, but now there are a great many more, this River being
a Nursery to breed young Men sit for the Sea to Serve His Majesty, or the
Merchants, etc. Besides these, there is an Infinite Number of Wherries,
Tide-Boats, Tilt-Boats, Barges, Hoys, etc. for Passengers, or to bring
necessary Provision of all sorts from all Quarters of Oxfordshire, Berkshire,
Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire, Hartfordshire, Middlesex, Essex, Surrey, and
Kent, unto the City; but of the Navigation of London, we refer to the Chapter
of Trade; and the Rates of Watermen to a distinct head, to be Treated of
hereafter.

The Extent of the Jurisdiction and Prerogative of the Lord Mayor, Commonalty
and Citizens of London on the River Thames, etc.
THe Lord Mayor of LONDON for the time being, and his Successors for ever in
that great Dignity, have full Power and Authority over the Rivers of Thames and
Medway, to inflict punishment upon all Transgressors relating to the said
Rivers, the Water-Bayly of London being his Substitute.

The Extent of this Jurisdiction begins at a place called Colnie-Ditch, a
little above Stains-Bridge Westward, as far as London Bridge, and from thence
to a place called Yendall, otherwise Yenland, or Yenleete, and the Waters of
Medway. This Authority and Jurisdiction belongs to the Lord Mayor, Commonalty
and Citizens of London, by diverse Grants, Charters, and Confirmations made by
the Kings and Queens of England, besides sundry Acts of Parliament.

Yet there have been some contests betwixt the Lord Mayor, and the Lord High
Admiral of England about it, but after a fair and Judicial Trial in open Court,
the Controversy was decided in favor of the City, and the Lord Mayor was
adjudged to be Conservator of the Thames. There were also some Controversies
about the Rivers of Thames and Medway, but all differences were absolutely
concluded, Anno 1613. Sir John Swinnerton being then Lord Mayor, and Thomas
Sparry Esquire being then his Deputy in that Office. So that the Lord Mayor bears
always since (as in former times) the style of Conservator of the said River,
within the said Limits and Bounds.

And whereas there was a Company of Fishermen called Tinckermen, that with
unlawful Nets and other devices, made an infinite destruction of the young
Brood, or Fry of Fish, to feed their Hogs; by the singular care and cost of the
Lord Mayor, and vigilance of the Citizens, they were many years ago suppressed,
and a regular and orderly manner of Fishing brought in use, that such a havoc
may not be made of the young Fry; As also sundry other abuses by unlawful
Fishing, and some annoying Timbers in Tilbury-hope, dangerous to Passengers,
and destructive to the young Brood of Fish and Fishermens Nets, were also to
general benefit reformed. Likewise they took care to clear and cleanse the
River Westward of about 79 Stops or Hatches, consisting of diverse great Stakes
and Piles, erected by Fishermen for their private lucre, and standing
illfavouredly for Passengers near the Fair-Deep; but none now are left, except
such as stand out of the passable high stream, that can prejudice none. The
like Course was kept in the time of Henry the 4 th, and Henry the 8 ths times.
There is also a watchful Eye that no Carrion nor Dead Carcasses be thrown into
the River to pollute or infect the stream.

To all these intents and purposes the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen his
Brethren, with the under Officers, meet eight times a year in the four Counties
of Middlesex, Surrey, Kent, and Essex, and have a Judicial sitting for
Maintenance of the Rivers Rights and Privileges, where they have power to
Impanel Juries, to make Inquisition after all Offenses committed upon the River
within their Exte^^, and as the Verdict given by the Jury makes it appear, so
they proceed to the punishment of the (...) sors according to the quality of
the offense, whereof it may be proper to give this Memorable Instance, as it is
Recorded by Mr. Stow in his Survey, page 20, Printed Anno 1633. and more
briefly delivered by Mr. Howel in his Londinopolis, Printed Anno 1657. page 15.
Thus.

Sir John Rolls Knight, and Lord Mayor of the City of London, and Conservator
of the River of Thames, and Waters of Medway, assisted and accompanied by the
Aldermen and two Sheriffs then contemporary, and attended by the Recorder, and
the Sub-conservation, or Water-Bayly, with 50 Officers and Servants, took their
Barges at Billings-gate, the third of July, 1616. and in a few hours arrived at
Graves-end in Kent, where a Session for Conservancy of the said River was kept
before the said Lord Mayor and his said Assistants, at which place and time a
Jury of the Freeholders of the said County being sworn to inquire of all
Offenses committed in any part of the River whatsoever, within the said County;
The Common Sergeant of the City (the Recorder being then absent upon
extraordinary occasions) Delivered them a Charge to this effect, That for as
much as there had not been any Session of Conservancy in many years passed kept
by any Lord Mayor of London in that place, it was probable and evident they
could not be well informed, neither of the Lord Mayor's Jurisdiction and power
to Reform Annoyances and Offenses there, and to inflict due punishments upon
the Offenders; nor of the Nature of the Service to be by them performed in the
Course of their Inquiry; therefore he thought it convenient to make both the
one and the other known unto them. Hereupon he showed them that the
Jurisdiction of the Court of London in the River of Thames, from Stanes Bridge
Westward, unto the points of the River next unto the Sea Eastward, appeared to
belong to the City, in manner and form following.

I. First in point of Right by prescription, as appears by an ancient Book
called Dun^horp, That Civitatis fundationis, aedificationis, and constructionis
causa erat Thamesis Fl^v^us, quorum vero Civitatis and fluminis gubernationem
tam duces, Majores, Custodes, Vicecomites, Aldr. and Magnates Civitatis
Memoratae hucusque obtinuerunt and habuerunt. Whence he inferred that the
Government of the River has, belonged to the City time out of mind.

In 21. H. 3. Jorden Coventry, one of the Sheriffs of the City, was sent by the
Mayor and Aldermen to remove certain Kiddles that Annoyed the Rivers of Thames
and Medway; who, ultra Yenland versus mare, did take diverse persons that were
Offenders, and imprisoned them; Whereupon complaint being made to the King, he
took the matter ill at the first, and sent for the Lord Mayor and Citizens to
Kennington; Where, upon hearing of the Matter before the said King, the Cities
Jurisdiction over the said River was set forth and allowed, and the
Complainants convinced, and every one of them Amerced at 10 l. and the
Amercements adjudged to the City; And afterward their Nets were burnt by
Judgment given by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen in the Hustings.

1. R. 2. Writs were directed to the Sheriffs of Essex and Kent, Reciting the
Cities Title, with Command not to suffer the Citizens of London to be molested
contrary to the Liberties formerly granted and allowed unto them.

II. Secondly, In point of Right by Allowance in Eire, the Conservation of the
Thames belongs to the City: For it was produced that 1 R. 2. before Hugh Bigot,
Justice I^enerant, the Sheriffs and Citizens of London were called in Question
for their Jurisdiction exercised on the Thames, before whom it was found, by a
Jury in Southwark, Quod nullus habet aliquid Juris in Thamisia, usque ad Novum
Gurgitem nisi Civis London.

In the 14, E. 2. The Constable of the Tower was Indicted by Diverse Wards of
London before the Justices in Eire at the Tower, De muneris and recep. Cove,
pro Kedellis in Thamisiis and Constabularius ad Kidellas respondet quod Justic.
non habent Jurisdictionem extra London, prolitum: inde cognoscere cum praedict.
Kidelli sunt in aliis Comitatibus, and Justic. dixerunt, aqua Thamisiae
pertinet ad Civitatem London, usque Mare, and si velit respondeat; Who then
Pleaded, Not Guilty.

III. He went further, in point of Right; that this Jurisdiction belonged to
the City by ancient Charters, 8 R. 1. that is 480 and odd Years ago. Dominus
Richardus Rex, Filius Regis Henrici secundi concessit and firmiter praecepit,
ut omnes Kidelli qui sunt in Thamisia amoveantur ubicunque fuerint in Thamisia;
-- 1. Joh. Rex concessit, and firmiter praecepit ut omnes Kidelli qui sunt in
Thamisia vel in Medway amoveantur, and ne caeteri Kidelli alicubi ponantur in
Thamisia vel in Medway super forf. 10 1. sterlingorum.

Then he urged the Famous Charter of King Henry the III. which ran thus: Henry
by the Grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Normandy, and
Aquitain, and Earl of Anjou, unto all Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors,
Earls, Barons, Justices, Sheriffs, Stewards, Ministers, and to all Bailiffs and
to all his True Men, Greeting: wotteth well, that we for the health of our
Soul, and the health of the Soul of King John our Fader, and the Souls of our
Ancestors; and also for the Common profit of our City of London, and of all our
Realms, have Granted and steadfastly Commanded, That all the Wears that be in
Thames or in Medway be done away: and that from henceforth no Wears be set in
Thames or Medway, upon the forfeiture of 10 1. Also we claim quit to our
Citizens of London, all that, that our Constable of our Tower of London was
wont to take of the said Wears. Wherefore we will, and steadfastly Command,
that no Constable of the aforesaid Tower at any time from henceforth forward,
any thing ask, nor any Grievance do to any of the same City by E^cheson of the
same Wears; it is to us known enough, and by our true Men do us to understand,
that most privacy and least profit might fall unto the same City, and to the
whole Realm by Enchesen of the same Wears; which we make for ever firm and
stable unto the same City, as the Charter of our Lord King John our Fader,
which our Barons of London thereof have reasonably Witnessed. Witnesses Eustace
of London, Peter of Westminster, etc. at Westminster the 18th of February, in
the Year of our Reign Eleven. Besides these he produced diverse others in this
King' s Reign to the purpose aforesaid, and the 7th. of E. III.

IV. This Jurisdiction belongs to the City of London by Acts of Parliament, W.
2. cap. 47. an. 13. No Salmons to be taken from the Nativity of our Lady, unto
St. Martins Day in all points, nor none to be taken in Mill-Pools from the
midst of April, until Midsummer, under penalty for the first Offense, of
burning of Nets and Engines; the second Offense, Imprisonment for a Quarter of
a Year; the third Offense, for a whole Year.

13. R. II. confirms the restraint of taking Salmons in many Waters, from the
midst of April, until Midsummer, upon the same pain; nor within that time to
use any Nets, called Stalkers, nor any other Engine, whereby the Fry may be
destroyed. He urged likewise 17 R. II. cap. 9. and the 11. H. VII. cap. 15.

1 Eliz. cap. 17. Against Nets, Wheels, and other Engines, for destroying the
Fish, against killing of Salmon and Trouts out of season, against killing Pike
or Pickerel, not ten Inches long, or Salmon not 16 Inches long, or Trout not 8
Inches long, or Barbel 12 Inches and more; nor to Fish with any Nets, but such
whereof every Meash or Mash shall be two Inches and a half broad, Angling
excepted. This not to extend to Smelts, Roches, Minoes, Bullhead, Gudgeons, or
E^les, in place where the same have been used to be taken, The Offender to lose
for every Offense. 20 ^s. and the Fish, also the unlawful Nets, Engines and
Instruments.

The Mayor of London ( Inter alia) has full Power and Authority by this Act to
Inquire of all Offenses Committed contrary thereunto, by the Oaths of 12 Men or
more, and to Hear and Determine all and every the same, and inflict
Punishments, and impose Fines accordingly.

V. He proceeds to assert the Cities Right, to the Conservation of the Thames,
and the Waters of Medway, by way of Inquisition, whereof there were two, the
one taken at Raynam in Essex, the other at Gravesend in Kent, before Sir
William Cambridge Grocer. then Lord Mayor of London, 9 Henry V. where it was
presented, that whereas by the ancient Ordinances of London, the Meshes of Nets
should be two Inches in the fore part, and one Inch in the hinder part, and it
being found that the Offenses according to the said Inquisitions, are Contra
libertates and consuetudines Civitatis, it was adjudged that the Nets should be
burnt, according to the ancient Custom in that behalf provided.

VI. He goes on after to prove that this Right belongs to the City by Decrees.
In 8 Henry IV. the Mayor and Aldermen did exhibit their humble Petition to the
King's Council, reciting, that (time out of mind) they had the Conservation and
Correction of the River of Thames, of all Trincks, Nets, and other Engines
whatsoever, in the River of Thames and Medway placed, and have used to make a
Sub-Conservator under them: and complaining that Alexander Bonner then
Sub-Conservator, having discharged his Duty in removing Kiddles, he was ill
entreated by the owners, dwelling in Erith, Bratriferry, Barking, Woolwich, and
other places in the Counties of Kent and Essex: and upon hearing of the matter
in Camera Stellata, they were found Guilty, and Constrained to submit
themselves to the Lord Mayor, and ordered to bring always their Nets unto him,
before they should use them, and that the Kiddles then taken should be at the
disposition of the Lord Mayor: so the Offenders made their submission
accordingly.

VII. He proceeds; This Right appertains to the City of London, by Letters
Patents, which he proved by a Grant made by Edward IV. to the Earl of Pembroke,
for setting up a Wear in the River of Thames: which Grant was Revoked, and
Cancelled at the Request of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, upon showing their
Right, therefore alleged it was contrary to their ancient Liberties. At which
time the Cities Title to the Conservancy of the Thames and Medway was at large
set forth, and recited to have been shown to the Lord Chancellor, and to the
said Earl and his Counsel, which accordingly was also read.

VIII. He reinforceth the Right of the City by Proclamations, whereof one was
made by H. VIII. in the 34 of His Reign, wherein it is affirmed, that the Lord
Mayor and his Predecessors, have had by diverse Grants of the Kings of England,
and by Acts of Parliaments enjoyed always the Conservacy of the Thames without
Impediments or Interruption: By which Proclamation it was Commanded that none
should resist, deny, or impugn the Lord Mayor or his Deputy in doing or
executing any thing that might conduce to the Conservacy of the River, and of
the Fish and Fry within the same.

IX. He produces Report, for in a Controversy betwixt the Lord Admiral, and
the Lord Mayor, for the Measuring of Coals and other things upon the Thames, it
then fell into Debate, to whom the Conservacy of the Thames did belong, which
cause was referred by Queen ELIZABETH's Council of State, 1597, to the
Attorney General, and Solicitor, who jointly Certified amongst other things,
that the Conservancy and care of the said River, did, and ought, to belong to
the City of London.

X. By quo Warranto it was proved that the Conservacy of the Thames, belongs to
the City: for 3 Jac. a quo Warranto was brought against the City in the
Exchequer, to know by what Title She claimed the Conservacy of the River of
Thames, and the Waters of Medway; whereupon the City made Her Title Good
thereunto, by ancient prescription, and otherwise: so Judgment was given in Her
Favor.

XI. He goes on afterward to confirm the Right of the City, by Proof of Usage,
in regard the Lord Mayor and Aldermen have time out of mind made Ordinances,
concerning the Good Government of the River of Thames, as well for the Seasons
and Manner of Fishing beneath London Bridge Eastward, upon pain of certain
Penalties, as appears from time to time, from the Reign of Henry III. and so
downward.

The Lord Mayor has removed Kiddles, Wears, Trinks, and other unlawful
Engines, and reformed the disorders of such as have offended besides in the
River of Thames, and inflicted punishment upon Offenders accordingly.

The Right of the City appears also by the Writs, and Preceps under the Test
of the Lord Mayor, to the Sheriffs of Kent and Essex, for the Returning of
Juries before him, to inquire of Offenses done in the River. The same Right of
the City appears also by Commissions, whereof diverse have been directed to the
Lord Mayor, to put in Execution the, Acts of Parliament, made for Conservance
of the Thames and Medway, and to inquire of all Offenses made, or done in the
said Waters, and to punish the Deliaquents accordingly.

Lastly, He makes good the Right and Title of the City, by the Continual Claim
She has made thereunto, as appears in those various Contests She had with the
Lord Admiral of England, wherein after diverse Debates and Disputes, She still
came off well, and made Her Title good. Which moved King Jamts in the third
Year of His Reign, to put a Final Determination to the Business, by the Letters
Patents he passed unto the City, wherein he says, That ad omnem Controversiam
in hac part Temporibus, tam presentibus quam futuris tollendam, and omne
Dubium amo vendam; that to cut off all Controversies, as well of the present
times, as of Future, and to remove all Doubts, he did Confirm and Ratify the
said Right unto the City of London, etc.

I. This Office of Conservator of so Noble a River, is of great Extent, for he
is to preserve the Currency of the stream, on the Banks on both sides.

II. To preserve the Fish and Fry within the same, that no Fishermen use
unlawful Nets or Engines, or fish at Prohibited Seasons.

III. To hinder the erection of any Wears, Kiddles, or Engines, and the
knocking in of any Posts, Piles, or Stake., which may in any sort hinder the
Stream, or Navigation; and to pull them up, if already done, and punish the
Offenders: also to prevent all encroachments upon the Rivers, and the Banks
thereof: likewise to inquire of all Bridges, Floodgates, Mill-dams, and such
like Annoyances; and whether any do hurl in any Soil, Dust, or Rubbish, or
other Filth whatsoever to choke her.

But for the strength and safety of the River against the Invasion of an Enemy,
by Block-Houses, Forts, Bastions, or Castles, and the securing of the Merchant
and Navigation to and fro, that Charge belongs to the Sovereign Prince.

The former Charge, Care, and Circumspection belongs properly to the City of
London, which is Seated in a fit place to be watchful over her, for which
Vigilance, the Thames Rewards the City abundantly, by bringing her in the
Spices of the South, the Jewels of the East, and the Treasures of the West, yea
a considerable share of the richest Merchandises of the World, etc. so that
this Famous River may be said, to be (as it were) the Radical Moisture of
London, and its best Friend; which was hinted by the Lord Mayor to King James;
for the King being displeased, because the City would not lend Him a Sum of
Money, told the Mayor and Aldermen, that he would Remove His Court with all the
Records of the Tower, and the Courts of Westminster Hall, to another place,
with further expressions of that kind. The Lord Mayor calmly heard all, and at
last Answered, Your Majesty has Power to do what You Please, and Your City of
London will obey accordingly; but She humbly Desires, that when Your Majesty
shall remove Your Courts, You would please to leave the Thames behind You.

Besides the inestimable Benefit that this Noble River brings to the City, and
the Adjacent places, by the easy conveyance of all Sorts of Goods and
Merchandises, almost all the Fuel for Firing being also brought by it from
Newcastle, Scotland, Kent, Essex, etc. It supplies the City in very many places
with excellent wholesome Water, conveyed into all the Adjacent Houses by Water
Engines, of great cost and Artifice. So much for the Thames.

The City of London is supplied with pure Spring Water, from above Twenty
Conduits, so Commodiously placed, that they serve all the Chiefest parts of the
City. And in all parts, though on the highest Ground, It is abundantly Served
with Pump Water, and those Pumps in many places hardly. Six Foot deep in the
Ground.

Of the New-River.
This Famous and never-to-be-forgotten Work brought by the Liberal Charge and
Exquisite Skill of one Worthy Man, Sir Hugh Middleton, Knight and Baronet,
Citizen and Goldsmith of London, deserves an everlasting Memorial. Several
Wells and Springs of sweet and fresh Water with which the City was served,
being Decayed, sundry Projects were on Foot to supply that want; but this
Principal Device was found out by the aforesaid Gentleman, and the Difficulties
and vast Expense made it for some time to be retarded, but Courage and a
Resolution to promote the Public Good, prompted him on to the Atchievment,
which since has proved happily Commodious, and of infinite Utility to the
whole City, so that the brave Adventurer deserves a Statue to Eternize his
Name, and Transmit his Memory, to keep it Fresh (like his Waters) to future
Ages. Now as Mr. Stow speaks very ingeniously, if those Enemies to all Good
Actions, Danger Difficulty, Detraction, Contempt, Scorn, and Envy, could have
prevailed by their Malevolent Interposition, either before, at the beginning,
and in the very Birth of the Attempt, and a good while after, this work had
never been accomplished.

Queen Elizabeth granted Power to the Citizens by Act of Parliament, for
Cutting and Conveying of a River, from any part of Middlesex or Hartfordshire
to the City of London, with a Limitation of ten Years time, for the performance
thereof. But She dyed before it was undertaken. King James Granted the like,
but without limitation of time. And when others would not undertake it, Sir
Hugh Middleton did, with infinite Pains and vast Charge, both begin and finish
it. He brought it from Amuel and Chadwel, two Springs near Ware in
Hartfordshire, from whence, in a turning and winding Course, it Runs threescore
Miles before it reaches the City.

At the North-side of the City at Islington, he built a large Cistern to
receive it, and from thence it is dispersed in Pipes, serving the highest parts
of London in their lower Rooms, and the Lower parts in their higher Rooms.

It was begun the 28 th of February, Anno Dom. 1608, and finished in five Years.

It can hardly be imagined what difficulties and rubs there were in the way,
through which the Water was to pass, some being Ozie, Soft, and Muddy; other
again as Hard, Craggy, and St^ny; in some places the Channel is Thirty Foot
deep; in other places it is carried over Valleys in open Troughs betwixt Hills,
which Troughs are supported by Wooden Arches, some of them fixed in the Earth
very deep, and rising in Height above 23 Foot. Over this New-River are made 800
Bridgs, some of Stone, some of Brick, and some of Wood, and six hundred Men
have been at once employed in this Great Work.

The River being brought to the said Great Cistern, the Water was not let in
till Michaelmas Day, Anno 1613. Sir John Swinnerton, then Lord Mayor, and Sir
Thomas Middleton, Brother to the said Sir Hugh, being Elected Lord Mayor for
the Ensuing Year. In the Afternoon, Sir John Swinnerton, and Sir Thomas
Middleton, with Sir Henry Mountague, the Recorder of London, and many of the
Worthy Aldermen, Rode in a Solemn manner to see the Great Cistern, and first
Issuing of the strange River thereunto, which was then made Free Denizen of
London; and the Solemnity was thus:

A Troop of Laborers of the Number of Sixty or more, well Apparrelled, and
wearing Green Monmoth Caps, after the British manner, all alike, carried
Spades, Shovels, Pickaxes, and such like Instruments of Laborious Employment,
and marching after Drums twice or thrice about the Cistern, presented
themselves before the Mount, where the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen were (with a
Worthy Company besides,) and one Man in the behalf of the rest, delivered a
handsome Speech in Verse; at the Conclusion of which, the Floodgates flew open,
and the Stream ran Cheerfully into the Cistern, the Drums Beating, and Trumpets
Sounding in Triumphant manner, and a Gallant Peal of Chambers gave a Period to
the Entertainment.

Upon which brave Man, these Lines were made.

Ad Hugonem Middleton Equitem Aurat um, De stupenda hac aquarum opera.
Compita qui fluvium per Londinensia Duxti,
Vt jam quisque suis vicus abundet aquis,
Non Aganippe tuas satis est depromere lauds,
Haec scaturigo novae quam tibi fundit aquae.
Before we leave this Head, although it is no^ necessary to give a particular
Account of every Conduit, whereof there are many in and about the City (as was
said,) and one now a Rearing in the place of the Old Conduit, at the West end
of Cheap^ side, which is intended to be a Stately one, and beseeming the
Magnificence of the City, and that Gallant Street where it is to be Erected,
etc. Ye^ that neatly-wrought Conduit in Stocks-Market, a^ the West end of
Lumbard-street, is not to be omitted, whereupon is placed a very Magnificent
Statue of KING CHARLES the II. on Horseback, Trampling upon an Enemy, all in
Excellent White-Marble, at the Sole Cost and Charges of Sir Robert Viner, who
was Lord Mayor of London, in the Year 1675.

There is likewise a very Magnificent Statue of King CHARLES the I. on
Horseback, all of^ Solid Brass, at Charing Cross; the Figures of both which
are here Exhibited.

THE K. AT THE STOCKs MARKET

THE K. AT CHARING CROSs.



CHAP. IV.
Of the Government of London.
IN this Chapter we shall briefly Treat of the Government of this Renowned
City, in Three Sections.

1. The Ecclesiastical Government.

2. The Temporal or Civil Government.

3. The Military Government.

SECT. 1.
Of the Ecclesiastical Government.
THe Government of London, considering how great and populous it is, is very
admirable, and might take up a volume in the Description thereof.

The Ecclesiastical Government is by a Bishop, and I have read that in the
Britains time it was an Archbishops See, (of which see page 57. before) but
removed in the Saxons time to Canterbury for the sake of Austin the Monk, who
first preached the Gospel to the Heathen Saxons, and lies buried there. To the
Cathedral of London belongs a Dean, a Chapter, a Treasurer, and 30 Prebendaries.

In the several Parishes there are placed many learned and eminent Divines, a
Rector or Vicar for every Parish, who are reputed the most excellent Preachers
in Christendom, insomuch that diverse Foreigners have come hither, on purpose to
learn their way.

There is in every Parish a Vicarage, or Parsonage-House for these Divines and
their Families, with good allowances for their Maintenance, of which* and the
Union of Parishes, take the following account*

By an Act of Parliament made in the 19 Car. 2. Cap. 3. Sect. 31. It was
Enacted that the Parishes to be Rebuilded within the City of London, in lieu of
those which were demollished by the late Dreadful Fire, should not exceed the
number of 39. But in the 22 Car. 2. Cap. 11. Sect. 62. It was Enacted that for
as much as upon an exact Survey taken of the Number of Houses to be Rebuilded,
and of the Extent of the respective Parishes necessary to be continued within
the said City, it does appear that the Parishes to be settled and continued, and
the Parish-Churches to be rebuilded within the said City of London, in lieu of
those demollished or consumed by the said late Fire, cannot conveniently by
Union, or otherwise, be reduced to a less Number than fifty one; It was
therefore further Enacted, that the Number of Parishes to be settled, and of
Parish-Churches to be rebuilded within the said City of London, should be Fifty
One, the aforesaid Act, or any thing therein contained to the contrary,
notwithstanding.

There was also Anno, 22. and 23. Car. 2. Cap. 15. An Act of Parliament for the
better Settlement of the Maintenance of the Parsons, Vicars, and Curates of the
said Parishes, to prevent Controversies of Law that might arise about the
alteration of Houses in the Rebuilding of the City; It was therefore reduced to
a certainty of Tithes, or a sum of Money in lieu of Tithes, as in the following
Table may be seen.

Note that the first Seventeen Parishes after mentioned, are to remain and
continue as heretofore they were: and that the respective Parish Churches to
each of the said Parishes belonging, were to be Rebuilded for the use of the
said Parishes.

Note likewise that the rest that are joined in Order, are the united Parishes,
and that the first Parish mentioned in each line, is the Parish Church of the
Parishes so united, and that the sum annexed to each is the annual payment to
be made to the Parson, Vicar, or Curate of the same, in lieu of Tithes.

l. 1. Allhallows Lumbardstreet 110 2. S. Bartholomew Exchange 100 3. S.
Bridget, alias Brides 120 4. S. Bennet-Fink 100 5. S. Michael Crooked-lane 100
6. S. Christopher 120 7. S. Dionys Back-Church 120 8. S. Dunstans East 200 9.
S. James Garlick-hith 100 10. S. Michael Cornhill 140 11. S. Michael Bassishaw
132 l. 11 s. 12. S. Margaret Lothbury 100 13. S. Mary Aldermanbury 150 14. S.
Martin Ludgate 160 15. S. Peter Cornhill 110 16. S. Stephen Colemanstreet 110
17. S. Sepulchers 200
Parishes United.
18. Alhallows Breadstreet and S. John Evangelist 140 19. Alhallows the Great,
and Alhallows the Less 200 20. S. Alban Woodstreet, and S. Olaves Silverstreet
170 21. S. Ann and Agnes, and S. John Zachary 140 22. S. Augustine, and S.
Faith. 172 23. S. Andrew Wardrobe, and S. Anne Blackfriars 140 24. S.
Antholin, and S. John Baptist 120 25. S. Bennet Grace-Church, and S. Leonard
East-cheap 140 26. S. Bennets Pauls-Wharff, and S. Peter Pauls-Wharff 100 27.
Christ-Church, and S. Leonard Foster-lane 200 28. S. Edmond the King, and S.
Nicholas Acons 180 29. S. George Botolph-lane, and S. Botolph Billings-gate 180
30. S. Laurence Jewry, and S. Magdalen Milk-street 120 31. S. Magnus, and S.
Margaret New Fish-street 170 32. S. Michael Royal, and S. Martin Vintry 140 33.
S. Matthew Friday-street, and S. Peter Cheap 150 34. S. Margaret Pattons, and
S. Gabriel Fen-Church 120 35. S. Mary at Hill, and S. Andrew Hubbard 200 36. S.
Mary Wolnoth, and S. Mary Wool-Church 160 37. S. Clement East-Cheap, and S.
Martin Orgars 140 38. S. Mary Abchurch, and S. Laurence Pountney 120 39. S.
Mary-Aldermary, and S. Thomas Apostles 150 40. S. Mary-le-Bow, S. Pancras
Soper-lane, and Alhallows Honey-lane 200 41. S. Mildred Poultry, and S. Mary
Cole-Church 170 42. S. Michael Woodstreet, and S. Mary Staining 100 43. S.
Mildred Breadstreet, and S. Margaret Moses 130 44. S. Michael Qeeen-hith, and
Trinity 160 45. S. Magdalen Old Fish-street, and S. Gregory 120 46. S. Mary
Sommerset, and S. Mary Mount^aw 110 47. S. Nicholas Cole-Abby, and S. Nicholas
Olaves 130 48. S. Olave Jewry, and S. Martin Ironmonger-lane. 120 49. S.
Stephen Walbrook, and S. Bennet Sh^erhog 100 50. S. Swythin, and S. Mary Bothaw
140 51. S. Vedast, alias Fosters, and S. Michael Quern 160
These respective sums, in live of Tyths, are to be yearly paid over and above
Glebes, Perquisites, and Bequests, the Assessment to be made by the Aldermen of
each Ward or his Deputy, the Common-Councel-men, and Churchwardens, and one or
more of the Parishioners. Impropriators are by the said Act to make the same
allowances to the Incumbents, as they did before the Fire. Upon Refusal of
Payment, the Lord Mayor may Grant his Warrant to the Collector, who with a
Constable in the Daytime, may Levy the same by Distress and sale of the Goods
of the Party so refusing, etc. restoring the overplus; but may deduct the
reasonable Charges of making Distress, etc. Provided that it shall and may be
lawful to and for the Warden and Minor Canons of S. Paul's Church London, Parson
and Proprietors of the Rectory of the Parish of S. Gregory aforesaid, to
receive and enjoy all Tithes, Oblations, and Duties arising or growing due
within the said Parish, in as large and beneficial a manner as formerly, etc.

The Parish-Churches were to be Rebuilt according to Models appointed by the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of London, and the Lord Mayor of London,
with the King's Approbation.

The Churchyards of the Demolished Churches were to be enclosed with Brick or
Stone-Walls, for Burial for the Parishes formerly belonging to the same, and
the Parishes to which they are respectively united, and not used or employed
for any other purpose whatsoever, except such parts thereof as the Lord Mayor
and Aldermen, with the Consent of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Lord Bishop
of London, and by his Majesty's Approbation, shall be thought necessary to be
laid into the Streets and Markets for Enlargement and Accommodation thereof,
and for public Store-places, etc.

This Brief account we hope is not impertinent, and being pursuant to our
promise, page 27. and for common information, we could not well omit it.

These Parish-Churches are for the most part Built (or a Building) in a very
stately and beautiful manner, far excelling their former Conditior.

So much for the Etclesiastical Government. I will only add, That for the
sincere and pure Worship of God, and Profession of the Reformed Religion, there
is no City or place in the World can compare with London. There being, besides
the Learned Divines of the Established Church of England, a great Number of
very Pious, Learned and Reverend Ministers of the Gospel, who are called
Dissenters, (and I wish some peevish persons would forbear Nicknames) because
they disapprove some things, with respect to Discipline, and some Opinions of
the Church of England. But it is my hearty wish, that since they all agree in
the Fundamentals of Religion, that there may be no clashing or disunion in
point of Brotherly Love and Charity betwixt them, for so God Commands, and the
times call for it, the common Enemy (like the Kite in Esop) hovering for an
opportunity to Devour us all: To prevent which (next the Divine Providence)
there cannot be used a more certain Medium, then for all Protestants to Join
(with heart and hand) together against their combining and united Foes, of
whose temper they have had instruction enough, by Plots, Massacres, Fires, and
other Barbarous Actions, of which all Protestants (but such as are Masqueraded)
are conv^nced by demonstrations, as clear as any Geometry can afford a
Mathematician.

But (though I am no professed Divine yet) I have admired, why men will be so
angry with others for not agreeing with them in some Point or Opinion in
Religion, not Fundamental; that is, not absolutely necessary to salvation: yea
so Barbarous and Inhumane are some grown, as to reproach, disgrace, yea,
persecute each other, because one will not be persuaded to see with the others
Eyes* Which is certainly a most irrational and Unchristian, (if not
Antichristian) practice, and I cannot but suspect such a persons Religion to be
no other then humor and fancy, acted by pride and spite, to such as perhaps
cannot in Conscience agree with them.

A thing may be clear to one man, that would fain impose it, but it may be
doubtful to him on whom it is imposed, which no man can help; Must he therefore
be persecuted? If the point be clear in Scripture, what needs any new Article
of Faith to impose it? If only deduced, what one thinks clearly deduced,
another, as learned and able as he, may think not to be so.

Men's understandings are as various as their speech or faces, and is it just
for one man to quarrel with another, because different from him in either of
these, or to put him upon a Rack in order to stretch him to his own Dimensions,
if not so tall as he? certainly that man is defective in charity that thinks
all Dissenters are either maliciously or wilfully blind. No man can be forced
to believe; he may be compelled to say this or that, but not to belive it. His
brains may be sooner knocked out then made clear, and able to see or perform an
action morally beyond his power. A man may as easily make a man stark blind to
read Greek, or distinguish Colors, as an unbeliver to believe, for that is
God's Gift. Arguments are good inducements, but force has no countenance in the
Gospel, much less a Command, John 20. 31. -- 5. 39. 2 Timothy 3. 15. Deuteronomy. 12. 32.
Force may make one blind, but never to see clearer; it may make a Hypocrite,
but no true Convert.

The Magistrate is (and ought) to punish evil doers, but not evil believers,
God reserves that to himself: And man can never have a right cognizance of evil
thoughts in another, for the greatest Professor may be the greatest Atheist.
Nothing is more derogatory to the honor of God, than for men to think that he
wants their help to defend him: Nor can any thing more affront him, than for
any one to intrude into his Tribunal, and usurp his Sovereignty. Christ
conquered his Enemies by Preaching and Suffering. And he that takes up Arms to
preserve himself from Persecution, is either a stark Atheist, because he
believes there is no such Reward, as Mat. 5. 12. or a stark fool (or madman)
to reject the opportunity of gaining it.

In a word, what to me seems clear, (which I humbly submit to the consideration
of others) is -- 1. That none ought to be persecuted for Religion, whose
Principles are consistent with humane Society, and behave themselves according
to the Established Laws of the Land quietly, and peaceably, but are to be won
by the mild ways of the Gospel.

2. That if under pretense of Religion they disturb the common peace, or wrong
any other, or be seditious and unquiet, they ought to be punished by the
Magistrate; because Religion teaches no such things, but the contrary.

3. That where we agree in Fundamentals we should have mutual Christian
Fellowship, without wrangling about Circumstantials, and that for this Reason;
which to me is instar ^mnium: I would ask the sober Reader, whether he thinks
his Brother that agrees with him in Fundamental Articles of Faith (which I
could wish were rightly stated) and lives soberly, has Communion with God or
no? If he says No, he has no Charity, and his own Religion is become as
sounding brass, or a tinkling Symbal, 1 Cor. 13. 1. If he believe that he has
Communion with God, how dares he deny him his Communion? is he better than God?
or where is his Warrant for so doing?

4. That when we have done our endeavor to convince such a dissenting or
doubting person in a Christian way, by Scripture, we have then cleared our
selves, and therefore ought to leave the rest to God, who only is his Judge,
and takes cognizance of such things, yet still to walk in love with him as far
as we agree, always provided the erro^s he holds are not expressly against the
Faith and Order prescribed by God, but things dubious and capable of debate.

5. Lastly we ought to have no Religious Communion with Atheists, Infidels,
Papists, or Idolaters, profane or ill livers, or Heretics, who err in
Fundamentals; yet not to persecute any of them merely for their Principles, but
where they transgress the Temporal Laws, let them, as others ought, suffer
accordingly; though it is absolutely necessary for the Magistrate to restrain
the spreading of such blasphemies and immoralities, etc. as direly affront the
Divine Majesty.

I beg the Readers pardon for this little digression, which my zeal for the
Union of Protestants, (though I would not have any to give up or lose Divine
Truths with the purchase of outward peace) forced me to insert, (and perhaps it
were more fit for a Divine, and for another Treatise) in this Section of the
Ecclesiastical Government of this Renowned City.

There belong to this Cathedral, besides those mentioned before, A. Chaunter, a
Chancellor, five Archdeacons, viz. London, Middlesex, Essex, Colchester, and
S. Albane, a College of 12 Petty Canons, 6 Vicars, Choral and Choristers, etc.
In the Bishop of London's Diocese there is contained the City of London, all
Middlesex, and Essex, and a part of Hartfordshire.

SECT. 2.
Of the Temporal Government of the City of LONDON.
THis great and populous City is governed with that admirable Order and
Regularity, that it is even astonishing: For therein (as in most other things)
she excells all the Cities in the World. To handle this at large, would make
this small Tract swell beyond bounds, we shall therefore give a brief abstract
of it for Methods sake under these heads.

1. Its Magistrates and Public Officers. 2. Its Charters and Privileges. 3.
Its Particular or Bylaws. 4. Its Courts. 5. Its Prisons. 6. Its Watches.
1. Of the Magistrates and Public Officers of London.
This Renowned City, in the time of the Romans was made a Praefectura, and the
chief Magistrate* called a Prefect, which continued about 300 years. In the
time of the Saxons the name was changed into a Portgreeve, that is, Custos or
Guardian, and sometimes Provost of London. After the coming in of the Normans,
the chief Magistrate was called Bailivus, from the French word Bailler, tradere
committere, that is Commissarius, or one that has Commission to govern others,
and there were sometimes two Bailiffs in London, till King Richard the First,
in the year 1189. changed the name of Bailiff into Mayor, which has so
continued 482 years.

The first Lord Mayor was Henry Fitz-Alwin Draper, who continued in the
Mayoralty from the first of Richard the First until the 15 th of King John,
which was above 24 years. He was interred in the Parish Church of S. Mary
Bothaw near to London-Stone, where he dwelt, (not S. John Baptist, as was by
mistake affirmed, p. 39. which the Reader is desired to correct by this,) etc.
In this place, before we come to treat more particularly of this great and
honorable Magistrate, it may not be amiss to give a List of all the Lord
Mayors and Sheriffs from that time to this present year, 1681.

Richard the First began his Reign July the 6th. 1189.
A. D. A. R. Lord MAYORS. SHERIFFS. 1189 1 Henry Fitz-Alwin. Henry Cornhil.
Richard Reynere. 1190 2 The same. John Herlion. Roger Du^e. 1191 3 The same.
William Haverel. John Buckmote. 1192 4 The same. Nicholas Duke. Peter Newly.
1193 5 The same. R^ger Duke. Richard Fitz-Alwin. 1194 6 The same. William
Fitz-Isabel. William Fitz-Arnold 1195 7 The same. Robert Besaunt. Joke de
Josne. 1196 8 The same. Gerard de Antiloche. Robert Durant. 1197 9 The same.
Roger Blunt. Nicholas Ducket. 1198 10 The same. Constable. Fitz-Arnold. Robert le
Bean. 1199 11 The same. Arnold Fitz-Arnold. Ri. Fitz Bartholomew King John
began his Reign the 6th of April, 1199.
A. D. A. R. Lord MAYORS. SHERRIFFS. 1199 1 Henry Fitz-Alwin. Arnold
Fitz-Arnold. Ri. Fitz Bartholomew 1200 2 The same. Roger Dorset. James
Bartholomew. 1201 3 The same. Walter Fitz-Allice. Sim. de Aldermanbury 1202 4
The same. Norman Blondel John de Ely. 1203 5 The same. Walter Brown. W.
Chamberlain. 1204 6 The same. Thomas Haverel. Hamond Brond. 1205 7 The same.
John Walgrave. Rich. de Winchester 1206 8 The same. John Holy Land Edm.
Fitz-Gerard. 1207 9 The same. Roger Winchester. Edmund Hardle. 1208 10 The
same. Peter Duke. Thomas Neal. 1209 11 The same. Peter le Josue. William
Blound. 1210 12 The same. Adam Whitbey. Stephen le Grass. 1211 13 The same.
John Fitz-Peter. John Garland. 1212 14 The same. Randolph Eyland. Constantine
Josue. 1213 15 Roger Fitz-Alwin. Martin Fitz-Allice. Peter Bate. 1214 16 The
same. Solomon Basing. Hugh Basing. 1215 17 William Hardel. John Travers. Andrew
Newland. King Henry the III. began His Reign the 19th of October 1216.
A. D. A. R. Lord MAYORS. SHERIFFS. 1216 1 William Hardel. John Travers. Andrew
Newland. 1217 2 Robert Serl. Thomas Bokerel. Ralph Holyland. 1218 3 The same.
Bennet Senturer. William Blundivers. 1219 4 The same. John Wail, or Veil, Josue
le Spicer. 1220 5 The same. Richard Wimbledon. John Wail, or Veil. 1221 6 The
same. Richard Renger. John Veil. 1222 7 The same. Richard Joyner. Thomas
Lambert. 1223 8 Richard Benger. William Joyner. Thomas Lambert. 1224 9 The
same. John Travers. Andrew Bokerel. 1225 10 The same. The same. The same. 1226
11 The same. Roger Duke. Mar. Fitz-Williams. 1227 12 Roger Duke. Stephen
Bokere^. Henry Cocham. 1228 13 The same. The same. The same. 1229 14 The same.
William Winchester. Robert Fitz-John. 1230 15 The same. Richard Walter. John de
Woborn. 1231 16 Andrew Bokerel. Michael of St. Helen. Walter de Enfield. 1232
17 Andrew Bokerel. Henry de Edmonton. Gerard Bat. 1233 18 The same. Roger
Fitz-Mary. Roger Blunt. 1234 19 The same. Ralph Ashwray. John Norman. 1235 20
The same. Gerard Bat. Rich. or Rob. Hardel. 1236 21 The same. Henry Cobham.
Jordan Conventry. 1237 22 The same. John Tolason. Gerv. the Cordwainer. 1238 23
Richard Benger. John Codras. John Wilhall. 1239 24 William Joyner. Reymond
Bongy. Ralph Ashwy. 1240 25 Gerard Bat. John Gisors. Michael Tony. 1241 26
Reymond Bongy. Thomas Duresm. John Voyl. 1242 27 The same. John Fitz-John.
Ralph Ashwy. 1243 28 Ralph Ashwy. Hugh Blunt. Adam Basing. 1244 29 Michael
Tony. Ralph Eoster. Nicholas Bat. 1245 30 John Gisors. Robert Cornhil. Adam of
Bewly. 1246 31 The same. Simon Fitz-Mary. Lawrence Frowick. 1247 32 Peter
Fitz-Alwin. John Voil. Nicholas Bat. 1248 33 Michael Tony. Nicholas Fitz-Josue.
Geoffry Winchester. 1249 34 Roger Fitz-Roger. Richard Hardel. John Tolason.
1250 35 John Gisors. Humphrey Bat. Will. Fitz. Richard. 1251 36 Adam Basing.
Lawrence Frowick. Nicholas Bat. 1252 37 John Tolason. William Durham. Thomas
Wimborn. 1253 38 Richard Hardel. John Northampton. Richard Richard. 1254 39 The
same. Ralph Ashury. Robert of Lim^n. 1255 40 The same. Stephen Do. Henry
Walmond. 1256 41 The same. Michael Bokerel. John the Minor. 1257 42 The same.
Richard Otwell. William Ashwy. 1258 43 The same. Robert Cornhill. John Adrian.
1259 44 John Gisors. John Adrian. Robert Cornhill. 1260 45 Will. Fitz-Richard.
Adam Browning. Henry Coventry. 1261 46 The same. John Northampton. Richard
Pichard. 1262 47 Thom. Fitz-Richard. John Tailor. Richard Wallbroke. 1263 48
The same. Rob. de Mountpeter. Osbert de Suffolk. 1264 49 Thomas Fitz, Thomas
Fitz-Richard. George R^kestey. Thomas de Detford. 1265 50 The same. Edward
Bl^nt. Peter Anger. 1265 51 William Richards. John Hind. John Walraven. 1266 52
Allen de-la-Zouch. John Adrian. Lucas de Batencourt. 1267 53 T. Wimborn Custos.
Sir Stephen Edward. Walter Harvey. William Duresm. 1268 54 Hugh Fitz-Ottonis,
Custos of London, and Constable of the Tower. Thomas Basing. Robert Cornhill.
At this time the KING Granted the Choice of the Mayors and Sheriffs, to the
City it Self.
1269 55 John Adrian. Walter Potter. Philip Tailor. 1270 56 The same. Gregory
Rochesly. Henry Walleis. 1271 57 Sir Walter Harvey. Richard Harris. John de
Wodeley. King Edward the First began His Reign the 16th. of November, 1272.
1272 1 Sir Walter Harvey. John Horn. Walter Potter. 1273 2 Henry Walleis.
Nicholas Winchester. Henry Coventry. 1274 3 Gregory Rokesley. Lucas Batencourt.
Henry Frowick. 1275 3 The same. John Horn. Ralph Blount. 1276 5 The same.
Robert de Arar. Ralph L. Fewre. 1277 6 The same. John Adrian. Walter Largley.
1278 7 The same. Robert B^sing. William le Meyre. 1279 8 Gregory Rokesley.
Thomas Box. Ralph Moore. 1280 9 The same. Willliam Farrendon. Nicholas
Winchester. 1281 10 Henry Walleis. William le Meyre. Richard Chigwell. 1282 11
The same. Ralph Blunt. Hawkin Betuel. 1283 12 The same. Jordan Goodcheap.
Martin Box. 1284 13 Gregory Rokesley. Stephen Cornhill. Robert Rokesley. 1285
14 Ralph Sandwich. Walter Blunt. John Made. 1286 15 The same. Thomas Cross.
Walter Hawteyne. 1287 16 The same. William Hereford. Thomas Stanes. 1288 17 The
same. William Betaine. John of Canterbury. 1289 18 The same. Fulk of St.
Edmund. Solomon Langford. 1290 19 The same. Thomas Romain. William de Lyre.
1291 20 The same. Ralph Blunt. Hamond Box. 1292 21 The same. Elias Russel.
Henry Bole. 2293 22 The same. Robert Rokesley. Martin Awbery. 1294 23 The same.
Henry Box. Richard Gloucester. 1295 24 Sir John Briton. John Dunstable. Adam de
Halingbury. 1296 25 The same. Thomas of Suffolk. Adam of Ful^^m. 1297 26 Henry
Walleis. Richard Refham. Thomas Sely. 1298 27 Elias Russel. John Armentor.
Henry Fingene. 1299 28 The same. Lucas de Havering. Richard Champnes. 1300 29
Sir John Blunt. Robert Collor. Peter de Bessenho. 1301 30 The same. Hugh
Pourte. Simon Paris. 1302 31 The same. Will. Combmartin. John de Burford. 1303
32 The same. Roger Paris. John de Lincoln. 1304 33 The same. William Causon.
Reginald Thunderley. 1305 34 The same. Geoffry, at the Conduit. Simon Billet.
King Edward the II. began His Reign the second of July, Anno Domini. 1307.
1307 1 Sir John Blunt. Nicholas Pigol. Nigellus Drury. 1308 2 Nicholas
Faringdon. William Basing. James Butler. 1309 3 Thomas Roman. Roger le
Palmer. James of St. Edmond. 1310 4 Richard Reffam. Simon Cooper. Peter
Blacney. 1311 5 Sir John Gysors. Simon Metw^^^. Richard W^^ford. 1312 6 Sir
John Gysors. John Lambin. Adam Lutkin. 1313 7 Nicholas Faringdon. Robert
Garden. Hugh Garton. 1314 8 Sir John Gysors. Stephen Abingdon. Hammond
Chickwell. 1315 9 Stephen de Abington. Hammond Goodcheap William Bodeleigh.
1316 10 John Wingrave. William Caston. Ralph Balancer. 1317 11 The same. John
Prior. William Furneaux. 1318 12 The same. John Pointel. John Dalling. 1319 13
Hammond Chickwell. Simon de Abington. John Preston. 1320 14 Nicholas Faringdon.
Reinald at the Conduit. William Prodham. 1321 15 Hammond Chickwell. R^chard
Constantine. Richard de Hackney. 1322 16 The same. John Grantham. Richard de
Ely. 1323 17 Nicholas Farindon. Adam of Salisbury. John of Oxford. 1324 18
Hammond Chickwell. Bennet of Fulham. John Cawston. 1325 19 The same. Gilbert
Mordon. John Causton. 3126 20 Richard Britain. Richard Rothing. Roger
Chauntclere. King Edward the III. began His Reign the 25. of January. 1326.
A. D. A. R. Lord MAYORS. SHERRIFFS. 1327 1 Hammond Chickwell. Henry Darcy.
John Hawton. 1328 2 John Grantham. Simon Francis. Henry Cobmartin. 1329 3
Richard Swanland. Richard Lazer. William Gysors. 1330 4 Sir John Pountney.
Robert of Ely. Thomas of Worwode. 1331 5 The same. John Mocking. Andrew Aubery.
1332 6 John Preston. Nicholas Pike. John Husband. 1333 7 Sir John Pountney.
John Hammond. William Hauford. 1334 8 Reginald at the Conduit. John Kingstone.
Walter Turk. 1335 9 The same. Walter Mordon. Richard Vpton. 1336 10 Sir John
Pountney. John Clark: W. Curtes. 1337 11 Henry Darcy. Walter Neal. Nicholas
Crane. 1338 12 The same. William de Pomfret. Hugh Marbler. 1339 13 Andrew
Aubery. William Thorney. Roger Fr^sham. 1340 14 The same. Adam Lucas.
Bartholomew Morris. 1341 15 John of Oxenford. Richard de Barking. John de
Rokesly. 1342 16 Simon Francis. John L^ufkin. Richard Killingbury. 1343 17 John
Hammond. John Steward. John Aylesham. 1344 18 The same. Geoffry Witchingham
Thomas Leg. 1345 19 Richard Lazer. Edmund Hemenhall. John of Gloucester. 1346 20
Geoff. Witchingham. John of Croydon. William Clopton. 1347 21 Thomas Leggy.
Adam Brampston. Richard Fas, or Bas. 1448 22 John Loufkin. Henry Bicard. Simon
Doleby. 1349 23 Walter Turk. Adam of Bury. Ralph of Lynne. 1350 24 Richard
Killingbury. John Notte. Will. of Worcester. 1351 25 Andrew Aubery. John Wroth.
Gilb. of Stenineshorpe 1352 26 Adam Francis. John Peace. John Stotly. 1353 27
The same. William Wood. John Little. 1354 28 Thomas Leggy. Will. Nottingham.
Roger Smelt. 1355 29 Simon Francis. Thomas Foster. Thomas Brandon. 1356 30
Henry Picard. Richard Nottingham Thomas Dolsel. 1357 31 Sir John Stody. Stephen
Candish. Bartholom. Frostling. 1358 32 John Loufkin. John Barns. John Buris.
1359 33 Simon Doulseby. Simon of Bemington. John of Chichester. 1360 34 John
Wroth. Walter Borny. John Dennis. 1361 35 John Peche. William Holbech. James
Tame. 1362 36 Stephen Candish. John of St. Albans. James Andrew. 1363 37 John
Not. Richard of Croyden. John Hiltoft. 1364 38 Adam of Bury. John de Metford.
Simon de Morden. 1365 39 John Loufkin. John Bukilsworth. John Ireland. 1366 40
The same. John Ward. Thomas of Lee. 1367 41 James Andrew. John Tarngold.
William Dickman. 1368 42 Simon Mordan. Robert Goideler. Adam Wimondham. 1369 43
John Chichester. John Piel. Hugh Holdich. 1370 44 John Barns. William Walworth.
Robert Gayton. 1371 45 The same. Adam Staple. Robert Hatfield. 1372 46 John
Piel. John Philpot. Nicholas Brembar. 1373 47 Adam of Bury. John Aubery. John
Fished. 1374 48 William Walworth. Richard Lions. William Woodhouse. 1375 49
John Ward. John Hadley. William Newport. 1376 50 Adam Staple. John Northampton.
Robert Laund. Richard the II. began His Reighn the 21. of June. 1377.
A. D. A. R. Lord MAYORS. SHERIFFS. 1377 1 Sir Nicholas Brember Nicholas
Twiford. Andrew Pikeman. 1378 2 John Philpot. John Boseham. Thomas Cornwallis.
1379 3 John Hadley. John Helisdon. William Barra. 1380 4 William Walworth.
Walter Doget. William Knighthode. 1381 5 John Northampton. John Rotu. John
Hynde. 1382 6 The same. Adam Bramme. John Sely. 1383 7 Sir Nicholas Brember.
Simon Winchcomb. John More. 1384 8 The same. Nicholas Exton. John French. 1385
9 The same. John Organ. John Churchman. 1386 10 Nicholas Exton. William
Stondon. William More. 1387 11 The same. William Venor. Hugh Falstalfe. 1388 12
Nicholas Twiford. Thomas Austin. Adam Carlehul. 1389 13 William Venor. John
Walcot. John Love. 1390 14 Adam Bamme. John Francis. Thomas Vivent. 1391 15
John Hind. John Shadworth. Henry Vamere. 1392 16 William Stondon. Gilbert
Mafield. Thomas Newington. 1393 17 John Hardley. Drew Barintin. Richard
Whittington 1394 18 Sir John Froyshe. William Bramston. Thomas Knolls. 1395 19
William More. Roger Ellis. William Sevenoke. 1396 20 Adam Brown. Thomas
Wilford. William Parker. 1397 21 Sir Rich. Whittington John Wodcock. William
Ascham. 1398 22 Sir Drew Barintin. John Wade. John Warner. King Henry the IV.
began His Reign the 29. of September. 1399.
1399 1 Sir Thomas Knolls. William Waldren. William Hende. 1400 2 Sir John
Francis. John Wakel. William Ebot. 1401 3 Sir John Shadworth. William Venor.
John Fremingham. 1402 4 John Walcot. Richard Marlow. Robert Chichely. 1403 5
Sir William Ascham. Thomas Falconer. Thomas Pool. 1404 6 John Hind. William
Louth. Stephen Spilman. 1405 7 Sir John Woodcock. Henry Barton. William Cromer.
1406 8 Sir Ric. Whittington. Nicholas Watton. Geoffry Brook. 1407 9 Sir
William Stondon. Henry Pontfract. Henry Halton. 1408 10 Sir Drew Barentine.
Thomas Buck. William Norton. 1409 11 Richard Marlow. John Law. William
Chicheley. 1410 12 Sir Thomas Knolls. John Pen. Thomas Pike. 1411 13 Sir
Robert Chicheley. John Rainwell. William Cotton. 1412 14 William Waldren. Ralph
Lovenham. William Sevenoke. King Henry the Fifth began his Reign the 20th of
March, 1412.
1413 1 Sir William Cromar. John Sutton. John Michael. 1414 2 Sir Thomas
Falconer. John Michael. Thomas Allen. 1415 3 Sir Nicholas Wotton. William
Cambridge. Alan Everard. 1416 4 Sir Henry Barton. Richard Whittington John
Coventry. 1417 5 Richard Marlow. Henry Read. John Gedney. 1418 6 William
Sevenoke. Jo. Bryan, Jo. Barton, John Parvess. 1419 7 Sir Rich. Whittington
Robert Whittington. John Butler. 1420 8 William Cambridge. John Butler. John
Well. 1421 9 Sir Robert Chicheley. Richard Gosseline. William Meston. King
Henry the Sixth began his Reign the 31th of August, 1422.
A.D.A.R. Lord MAYORS. SHERIFFS. 1422 1 Sir William Waldren. William Eastfield.
Robert Tatarsal. 1423 2 William Cromar. Nicholas James. Thomas Watford. 1424 3
John Michael. Simon Seaman. John Bywater. 1425 4 John Coventry. William Milled.
John Brokle. 1426 5 Sir John Rainwell. John Arnal. John Higham. 1427 6 Sir John
Gedney. Henry Frowick. Robert Otely. 1428 7 Sir Henry Barton. Thomas Duffhouse.
John Abbot 1429 8 Sir William Eastfield. William Russe. Ralph Holland. 1430 9
Nicholas Wotton Walter Cherssey. Robert Large. 1431 10 Sir John de Wells. John
Aderley. Stephen Brown. 1432 11 Sir John Parveis. John Olney. John Paddeslye.
1433 12 Sir John Brokle. Thomas Chalton. John King. 1434 13 Sir Roger Oteley.
Thomas Barnewell. Simon Air. 1435 14 Sir Henry Frowick. Thomas Catworth.
Robert Clopton. 1436 15 Sir John Michael. Thomas Moriseed. William Gregory.
1437 16 Sir William Eastfield. William Hales. William Chapman. 1438 17 Sir
Stephen Brown. Hugh Dyker. Nicholas Towe. 1439 18 Robert Large. Philip Malphas.
Robert Marshal. 1440 19 Sir John Paddesley. John Sutton. William Wilinhale.
1441 20 Robert Clopton. William Combis Richard Rich. 1442 21 John Aderley.
Thomas Beaumont. Richard Nordon. 1443 22 Thomas Catworth. Nicholas Wyford. John
Norman. 1444 23 Sir Henry Frowick. Stephen Foster. Hugh Witch. 1445 24 Sir
Simon Air. John Darby. Godfrey Fielding. 1446 25 John Olney. Robert Horn.
Godfrey Bullen. 1447 26 Sir John Gedney. William Abraham. Thomas Scot. 1448 27
Sir Stephen Brown. William Cotlow. William Narrow. 1449 28 Sir Thomas Chalton.
William Hulin. Thomas Canning. 1450 29 Nicholas Wilford. John Middleton.
William Dear. 1451 30 Sir William Gregory. Matthew Philip Christopher Wharton.
1452 31 Sir Geoffry Fielding. Richard Lee Richard Alley* 1453 32 Sir John
Norman. John Walden. Thomas Cook. 1454 33 Sir Stephen Foster John Field.
William Tailor. 1455 34 Sir William Marrow. John Young. Thomas O^dgnav^. 1456
35 Sir Thomas Canning. John Styward. Ralph Verney. 1457 36 Sir Godfrey Bullen.
William Edward. Thomas Reynor. 1458 37 Sir Thomas Scot. Ralph Joceline. Richard
Medham. 1459 38 Sir William Hulin. John Plummer. John Stocker. 1460 39 Sir
Richard Lee. Richard Flemming. John Lambert. Edward the Fourth began his Reign
the 4th of March, 1460.
1461 1 Sir Hugh Witch. George Ireland. John Lock. 1462 2 Sir Thomas Cook.
William Hampton. Bartholomew James. 1463 3 Sir Matthew Philip. Robert Basset.
Thomas Muschamp. 1464 4 Sir Ralph Joceline. John Tate. John Stones. 1465 5 Sir
Ralph Verney. Henry weaver. William Constantine. 1466 6 Sir John Young. Jo.
Brown, Hen. Brice, John Darby. 1467 7 Sir Thomas Oldgrave. Thomas Stalbrook.
Humphrey Heyford. 1468 8 Sir William Tailor. Simon Smith. William Herriot. 1469
9 Sir Richard a Lee. Richard Gardner. Robert Drope. 1470 10 Sir John Stackton.
John Crosby. John Ward. 1471 11 Sir William Edwards John Allen. John Shelley.
1472 12 Sir Will. Hampton. John Brown. Thomas Bledlow. 1473 13 Sir John Tate.
Sir William Stocker. Robert Belisdon. 1474 14 Sir Robert Drope. Edmund Shaa.
Thomas Hill. 1475 15 Sir Robert Basse. Hugh Brice. Robert Colwich. 1476 16 Sir
Ralph Joceline. Richard Rawson. William Horn. 1477 17 Sir Humph. Heyford. Henry
Collet. John Stocker. 1478 18 Sir Richard Gardner. Robert Harding: Robert
Bifield. 1479 19 Sir Bartholom. James. Thomas Ilam. John Ward. 1480 20 Sir John
Brown. Thomas Daniel. William Bacon. 1481 21 Sir William Herrot. Robert Tate,
Richard Charey, Will. Wiking. 1482 22 Sir Edmund Shaa. William White. John
Matthew. Edward the Fifth began his Reign the 9th of April. 1483. Richard the
Third began his Reign the 22d. of June, 1483.
1483 1 Sir Robert Billesdon. Thomas Newland. William Martin. 1484 2 Sir Thomas
Hill. Richard Chester, Tho. Britain, Ralph Astry King Henry the Seventh began
his Reign the 22d of August, 1485.
A.D.A.R. Lord MAYORS. SHERIFFS. 1485 1 Sir Hugh Brice. John Tate. John Swan.
1486 2 Sir Henry Collet. John Percival. Hugh Clopton. 1487 3 Sir William Horn.
John Fenket. William Remington. 1488 4 Sir Robert Tate. William Isaac. Ralph
Tilney. 1489 5 Sir William White. William Capel. John Brook. 1490 6 John
Matthew. Henry Cote, or Coote. R. Revell, Hugh Pemberton. 1491 7 Sir Hugh
Clopton. Tho. Wood. William Brown. 1492 8 Sir William Martin. William Purchase.
William Walbeck. 1493 9 Sir Ralph Austry. Robert Fabian. John Winger. 1494 10
Sir Richard Chawril. Nicholas Alwin. John Warner. 1495 11 Sir Henry Collet.
Thomas Kneesworth. Henry Summer. 1496 12 Sir John Tate. John Shaa. Richard
Hedon. 1497 13 Sir William Purchase. Barth. Read. Thomas Windew, or Windout.
1498 14 Sir John Percival. Thomas Bradbury. Stephen Gennings 1499 15 Sir
Nicholas Aldwine. James Wilford. Tho. or Rich. Brond. 1500 16 William
Remington. John Haws. William Steed. 1501 17 Sir John Shaa. Lawrence Aylmer.
Henry Head. 1502 18 Sir Bartholomew Read Henry Keble. Nicholas Nives. 1503 19
Sir William Capel. Christopher Haws. Robert Wats. 1504 20 Sir John Winger.
Roger Acheley. William Brown. 1505 21 Sir Tho. Kneisworth. Richard Shore.
Roger Grove. 1506 22 Sir Richard Haddon. William Coppinger* T. Johnson. Will.
Fitz-Williams. 1507 23 Sir William Brown. W. Butler. John Kerby. 1508 24 Sir
Stephen Jennings. Thomas Exmuel. Richard Smith. Henry the VIII. began His Reign
the 22d. of April, 1509.
1509 1 Tho. Bradbury. Sir William Capel. George Monox. John Doget. 1510 2 Sir
Henry Kebble. John Milborne. John Rest. 1511 3 Sir Roger Acheley. Nicholas
Shelton. Thomas Merfine. 1512 4 Sir Will. Coppinger. Sir Rich. Haddon. Robert
Holdernes. Robert Fenrother. 1513 5 Sir William Brown. Joh. Daws, Jo. Bruges.
Roger Bosford. 1514 6 Sir George Monox. James Yarford. John Mundy. 1515 7 Sir
William Butler. Henry Warley, Ri. Gray. Will. Bailey. 1516 8 Sir John Rest.
Thomas Seymour. John or Ri. Thurstone. 1517 9 Sir Thomas Exmewe. Thomas
Baldrie. Ralph, or Ri. Symons. 1518 10 Sir Thomas Merfine, John Allen. James
Spencer. 1519 11 Sir James Yarford. John Wilkinson. Nicholas Patrich. 1520 12
Sir John Burgh. John Skevington. John Kyme, ali. Keble. 1521 13 Sir John
Milbourn. J. Breton, or Britain* Thomas Pargiter. 1522 14 Sir John Mundy. John
Rudston, John Champnies. 1523 15 Sir Thomas Baldrie. Michael English. Nicholas
Jennings. 1524 16 Sir William Bailey. Ralph Dodmere. William Roche. 1525 17 Sir
John Allen. J. Caunton, or Calton. Christopher Askew. 1526 18 Sir Thomas
Seymour. Stephen Peacock. Nicholas Lambert. 1527 19 Sir James Spencer. John
Hardy. William Hollys. 1528 20 Sir John Rudstone. Ralph Warren. John Long. 1529
21 Sir Ralph Dodmere. Michael Dormer. Walter Champion. 1530 22 Sir Thomas
Pargiter. W. Dawsey, or Dancy. Richard Champion. 1531 23 Sir Nicholas Lambert
Richard Gresham. Edward Altham. 1532 24 Sir Stephen Peacock. R. Reynolds, J.
Martin N. Pinc^on. J. Priest. 1533 25 Sir Christoph. Askew. William Foreman.
Thomas Kitson. A.D.A.R. Lord MAYORS. SHERIFFS. 1534 26 Sir John Champneis.
Nicholas Levison. William Derham. 1535 27 Sir John Allen. Humphr. Monmouth.
John Cotes. 1536 28 Sir Ralph Warren. Robert, or Rich. Paget William Bowyer.
1537 29 Sir Richard Gresham. John Gresham. Thomas Lewin. 1538 30 Sir Will.
Foreman. Will. Wilkinson. Nicholas Gibson. 1539 31 Sir William Hollys. Thomas
Ferrer. Thomas Huntlow. 1540 32 Sir William Roch. William Laxton. Martin Bows.
1541 33 Sir Michael Dormer. Rowland Hill. Henry Suckley. 1542 34 Sir John
Cotes. Henry Hobblethorn. Henry Amcoats. 1543 35 Sir William Bowyer. John
Toulouse. Richard Dobbes. 1544 36 Sir William Laxton. John Wilford. Andrew
Jud^. 1545 37 Sir Martin Bows. George Barn. Ralph Allen, or Alley. 1546 38 Sir
Hen. Hobblethorn. Richard Jarveis. Thomas Curteis. King Edward the VI. began
His Reign the 28th, of January, 1546.
1547 1 Sir John Gresham. Thomas White. Robert Chertsey. 1548 2 Sir Henry
Amcoats. William Lock. Sir John Ayleph. 1549 3 Sir Rowland Hill. John York.
Richard Turk. 1550 4 Sir Andrew Jud. Augustine Hind. John Lion. 1551 5 Sir
Richard Dobbs. John Lambert. John Cowper. 1552 6 Sir George Barn. Wi. Garret,
or Gerard. John Maynard. Queen Mary began Her Reign July the 6th, 1553.
1553 1 Sir Thomas White. Thomas Offley. William Hewet. 1554 2 Sir John Lion.
David Woodroffe. William Chester. 1555 3 Sir William Garret, or Gerard. Tho.
Lee, or Leigh* John Machel. 1556 4 Sir Thomas Offley. William Harper. John
White. 1557 5 Sir Thomas Curteis. Richard Mallory. James Altham. 1558 6 Sir
Tho. Lee, or Leigh. John Halsey. Richard Champion. Queen Elizabeth began Her
Reign the 17th of November, 1558.
1559 1 Sir William Hewel. Thomas Lodge. Roger Martin. 1560 2 Sir William
Chester. Christopher Draper. Thomas Roe. 1561 3 Sir William Harper. Alexand.
Avenon. Humphry Baskervile. 1562 4 Sir Thomas Lodge. William Allen. Rich.
Chamberlain. 1563 5 Sir John White. Edward Banks. Rowland Heyward. 1564 6 Sir
Richard Mallory. Edward Jackman. Lionel Ducket. 1565 7 Sir Rich. Champion. John
Rivers. James Hawes. 1566 8 Sir Christoph. Draper. Richard Lambert, Ambrose
Nicholas, Jo-Langley 1567 9 Sir Roger Martin. Tho. Ramsey. John Bond. 1568 10
Sir Thomas Roe. Jo. Oliph. To. Harding. James Bacon. 1569 11 Sir Alexand.
Avenan. Henry Beecher. William Dane. 1570 12 Sir Rowland Heyward. Francis
Barneham. William Box. 1571 13 Sir William Allen. Henry Mills. John Branch.
1572 14 Sir Lionel Duckes. Richard Pipe. Nicholas Woodroffe. 1573 15 Sir John
Rivers, James Harvey. T. Pulloccel of Pullison 1574 16 Sir James Haws. Thomas
Blanke. Anthony Gamage. 1575 17 Sir Ambrose Nicholas. Edward Osborne. Wolstane
Dixie. 1576 18 Sir John Langley. William Kempton. George Barn. 1577 19 Sir
Tho. Ramsey. Nicholas Blackhouse. Francis Bowyer. 1578 20 Sir Richard Pipe.
George Bond. Thomas Starkie. 1579 21 Sir Nich. Woodroffe. Martin Calthrop. John
Heart. 1580 22 Sir John Branch. Ralph Woodcock. John Allot. 1581 23 Sir James
Harvey. Richard Martin. William Webb. 1582 24 Sir Thomas Blanke. Will. Roe. Jo.
Haydon. Cuthbert Buckle. 1583 25 Sir Edward Osborne. William Mashaw. John
Spencer. 1584 26 Sir Thomas Pulloccell. Stephen Slaney. Henry Billingsley. 1585
27 Sir Wolstane Dixie. Anthony Ratcliff. Henry Pranel. 1586 28 Sir George
Barn. George House. William Elkin. 1587 29 Sir George Bond. Thomas Skinner.
John Catcher. 1588 30 Sir Martin Calthrop. Sir Richard Martin. Hugh Offley.
Richard Saltonstall. 1589 31 Sir John Heart. Richard Gurney. Stephen Some. 1590
32 Sir John Allot. Sir Howland Heyward Nicholas Mosely. Robert Brook. 1591 33
Sir William Webb. Will. Rider. Bennet, or Benedict Barnham. 1592 34 Sir William
Roe. Jo. Garret, or Gerard. Robert Tailor. 1593 35 Sir Cuthbert Buckle. Sir
Richard Martin. Paul Banning. Peter Haughton. 1594 36 Sir John Spencer. Robert
Lee. Thomas Bennet. 1595 37 Sir Stephen Slaney. Thomas Roe. Leonard Hallyday.
1596 38 Sir Thomas Skinner. Sir Henry Billingsley. John Walls. Richard Goddard.
1597 39 Sir Rioh. Saltonstal. Henry Roe. John More. 1598 40 Sir Stephen Some.
Edward Holmdon. Robert Hampson. 1599 41 Sir Nicholas Mosely. Humphrey Walde.
Roger Clark. 1600 42 Sir William Rider. Th. Smith. Th. Cambel William Craven.
1601 43 Sir John Garret, or Gerrard. Henry Anderson. William Glover. 1602 44
Sir Robert Lee. James Pemberton. John Swinnerton. King James began His Reign
the Twenty Fourth of March. 1602.
1603 1 Sir Thomas Bennet. Sir William Rumney. Sir Tho. Middleton. 1604 2 Sir
Thomas Low. Sir Tho. Hayes. Sir Roger Jones. 1605 3 Sir Leonard Holyday. Sir
Clem. Scudamore. Sir John J^lles. 1606 4 Sir John Wats. William Walthal. John
Leman. 1607 5 Sir Henry Row. Geoffry Elves. Nicholas Style. 1608 6 Sir Humphrey
Weld. George Bolls. Richard Farrington. 1609 7 Sir Thomas Cambel. Sebastian
Harvey. William Cockaine. 1610 8 Sir William Craven. Richard Pyal. Francis
Jones. 1611 9 Sir James Pemberton. Edward Barkham. John Smiths. 1612 10 Sir
John Swinnerton. Edward Rotheram. Alexander Prescot. 1613 11 Sir Tho.
Middleton. Thomas Bennet, Henry Jay. 1614 12 Sir Thomas Hayes. Peter Proby.
Martin Lumley. 1615 13 Sir John Jolles. William Goare. John Goare. 1616 14 Sir
John Leman. Allen Cotton. Cuthbert Hacket. 1617 15 Sir George Bolles. William
Holyday. Robert Johnson. 1618 16 Sir Sebastian Harvey. Richard Hearn. Hugh
Hammersley. 1619 17 Sir William Cockain. Richard Dean. James Cambel. 1620 18
Sir Francis Jones. Edward Allen. Robert Ducie. 1621 19 Sir Edw. Barkham. George
Whitmore. Nicholas Raynton. 1622 20 Sir Peter Proby. John Hodges. Sir Hump.
Hantford. 1623 21 Sir Martin Lumley. Ralph Freeman. Thomas Mounson. 1624 22 Sir
John Goare. Rowland Heilin. Robert Parkhurst. King CHARLES the I. began His
Reign the Twenty Seventh of March, in the Year 1625.
1625 1 Sir Allen Cotton, Thomas Westraw. Elias Crisp, died. Jo. Pool. Chr.
Cletherow. after. 1626 2 Sir Cuthbert Hacket. Edward Bromfield. Richard Fen.
1627 3 Sir Hugh Hamersly. Maurice Abbot. Henry Garraway. 1628 4 Sir Richard
Dean. Rowland Backhouse. Sir William Acton, Knight and Bar. 1629 5 Sir James
Cambel. Humphry Smith. Edmund Wright. 1630 6 Sir Robert Ducie Bar. Arthur Abdy.
Robert Cambel. 1631 7 Sir George Whitmore. Samuel Cranmore. Henry Prat. 1632 8
Sir Nicholas Raynton. Hugh Perry. Henry Andrews. 1633 9 Sir R^lph Freeman. Sir
Thomas Mouldston Gilbert Harrison. Richard Gurney. 1634 10 Sir Robert
Parkhurst. John Heylord. John Cordel. 1635 11 Sir Christ. Cletherow. Thomas
Soame. John Gayer. 1636 12 Sir Edw. Bromfield. William Abel. John Garret. 1637
13 Sir Richard Fen. Thomas Atkin. Edward Rudge. 1638 14 Sir Maurice Abot. Isaac
Pennington, John Wollaston. 1639 15 Sir Henry Garraway. Thomas Adams. John
Warner. 1640 16 Sir Edmund Wright. John Towse. Abrah. Reynardson. 1641 17 Sir
Richard Gurney. George Garret. George Clarke. 1642 18 Isaac Pennington. John
Langham. Thomas Andrews. 1643 19 Sir John Wolaston. John Fowke. James Bunce.
1644 20 Thomas Atkin. William Gibbs. Richard Chambly. 1645 21 Thomas Adams.
John Kendrick. Thomas Foot. 1646 22 Sir John Gayer. Thomas Cullam. Simon
Edmonds. 1647 23 Sir John Warner. Samuel Avery. John Bide. 1648 24 Sir Abra*
Reinardson. Thomas Andrews, in his Room. Thomas Viner. Richard Brown. King
CHARLES the II. began His Reign the Thirtieth of January. 1648.
1649 1 Thomas Foot. Christopher Pack. Rowland Wilsen. John Dethick. 1650 2
Thomas Andrews. Robert Tichborn. Richard Chiverton. 1651 3 John Kendrick.
Andrew Richards. John Ireton. 1652 4 John Fowke. Stephen Eastwick. William
Underwood. 1653 5 Thomas Viner. James Philips. Walter Big. 1654 6 Christopher
Pack. Edmund Sleigh. Thomas Aleyn. 1655 7 John Dethick. William Thompson. John
Detherick. 1656 8 Robert Tichborn. Tempest Milner. Nathaniel Temms. 1657 9
Richard Chiverton. John Robinson. Tho. Chandler, died. Richard King. 1658 10
John Ireton. Anthony Bateman. John Lawrence. 1659/60 11/12 Sir Thomas Aleyn,
Knight and Bar. Francis Warner. William Love, Esquire 1660/61 12/^3 Sir Richard
Brown, Baronet. Sir Will. Bolton, Knt. Sir William Pe^k, Knight. 1661/2 13/14 Sir
John Frederick. Francis Menil Esquire Samuel Starling, Esquire 1662/3 14/15 Sir Joh.
Robinson, Bar. Sir Thom. Bludworth. Sir Wil^iam Turner. 1663/4 15/^ Sir Anthon.
Bateman Sir Richard Food. Sir Richard Rives. 1664/^ 16/17 Sir John Lawrence.
Sir George Waterman Sir Charles Do. 1665/6 17/^ Sir Thom. Bludworth. Sir
Robert Hanson. Sir William Hooker. 1666/7 18/^9 Sir William Boulton. Sir Robert
Viner. Sir Joseph Sheldon. 1667/^ 19/20 Sir William Peake. Sir Dennis Gauden.
Sir Thomas Davies. 1668/9 20/21 Sir William Turner. John Forth Esquire Sir Francis
Chaplain. 1669/70 21/22 Sir Samuel Starling. Sir John Smith. Sir James Edwards.
1670/71 22/23 Sir Richard Ford. Samuel Forth, Esquire Patience Ward, Esquire 1671/2
23/24 Sir George Waterman Sir Jonat. Daws, died. Sir Robert Clayton. Sir John
Moore. 1672/3 24/25 Sir Robert Hanson. Sir Will. Pritchard. Sir James Smith.
1673/4 25/^6 Sir William Hooker. Sir Henry Tulse. Sir Robert Jeffry. 1674/5
26/7 Sir Robert Viner, Knt. and Barronet. Sir Nathan. Herne. Sir John le
Thuil^er. 1675/6 27/^ Sir Joseph Sheldon. Sir Thomas Gold. Sir John Shorter.
1676/7 28/9 Sir Thomas Davies. Sir John Peak. Sir Thomas Stamp. 1677/8 29/30
Sir Francis Chaplain Sir William Royston. Sir Thomas Bec^ford. 1678/9 30/31 Sir
James Edwards. Sir Richard How. Sir John Chapman. 1679/80 31/2 Sir Robert
Clayton. Sir Jonath. Raymond. Sir Simon Lewis 1680/1 32/3 Sir Patience Ward.
Slingsby Bethel, Esquire Henry Cornish, Esquire

Having given a Catalogue of all the Mayors and Sheriffs that have been in
London to this present year, we shall proceed to give a brief Account of this
great Magistrate; for to give a full and distinct Account of all things,
relating to that high Place, quadrates not with the intended bulk of this
little Memorial.

The Lord Mayor of London, upon the Death of the King, is the prime Person of
England, and therefore when King James came to take possession of the English
Crown, Sir Robert Lee, then Lord Mayor of London, subscribed before all the
great Officers of the Crown, and all the Nobility. He is always for his great
Dignity Knighted before the Year of His Mayoralty be expired, unless Knighted
before whilst Alderman, which of (...) has been usual.

He keeps a Table so richly and plentifully furnished, (where all strangers or
others that are of any quality are nobly entertained at all times of the year)
that it is fit to receive the greatest Subject of England, or of other
Monarchs. Nay, it is Recorded that in the 31. E. 3. Henry Picard, Lord Mayor of
London, Feasted Four Kings, viz. The King of England, the King of France, the
King of Cyprus, and the King of Scotland, with other great Estates, all in one
day; And their Present Majesty's of Great Britain have been by some of the late
Lord Mayors, Treated at their Table.

There is also for the Grandeur of the Lord Mayor 1000 l. a year allowed for
his Sword-bearer's Table in the Lord Mayor's House. His Domestic attendance is
very honorable; He has Four Officers that wait on him, who are reputed
Esquires by their places, that is, the Sword Bearer, the Common-Hunt, the
Common-Cryer, and the Water-Bayliff; there is also the Coroner, three Sargeants
Carvers, three Sergeants of the Chamber, a Sergeant of the Channel, four Yeomen
of the Waterside, one Vnder-WaterBayliff, two Yeomen of the Chamber, three
MealWeighers, two Yeomen of the Wood-Wharffs, most of which have their Servants
allowed them, and have Liveries for themselves, etc.

His State and Magnificence is remarkable, when he appears abroad, which is
usually on Horseback, with rich Caparisons, himself always in long Robes,
sometimes of fine Scarlet Cloth richly Furred, sometimes Purple, sometimes
Puke, and over his Robes a Hood of Black Velvet, which is said to be a Badge of
a Baron of the Realm, with a great Chain of Gold about his Neck, or Collar of
SS's with a great rich Jewel Pendant thereon, with many Officers walking before
and on all sides of him.

He is usually Chosen on Michaelmas-day, by the Livery-men, or Members of the
several Companies in London, out of the twenty-six Aldermen, all persons of
great Wealth and Wisdom, in which Election the Senior Alderman has usually the
precedence; yet in this particular the said Electors are at their liberty.

On the 29 th of October there is a most Magnificent Cavalcade, when the Lord
Mayor (attended with all the Aldermen, all his Officers, all the several
Companies or Corporations) rides to the Waterside, where they enter their
stately Barges, with their Arms, Colors, and Streamers, and go to Westminster
to be sworn to be true to the King, etc. in the Exchequer Chamber; after which
he returns in the same manner to Guild Hall, that is, the great Common Hall of
Guilds, or Incorporated Fraternities, where is prepared for him and his
Brethren a most sumptuous Dinner, to which many of the Great Lords and Ladies,
and all the Judges of the Land are invited; And the King and Queens Majesty's,
the Duke of York, and Prince Rupert, did lately honor that Feast with their
presence.

The Lord Mayor on the Day of the King's Coronation is Chief B^tler, and bears
the Kings Cup amongst the highest Nobles of the Kingdom, which serve on that
Day in other Offices; He presents the King with Wine in a Golden Cup, having a
Cover, of which the King Drinks, and the Lord Mayor receives the said Cup for
his Fee.

The first Lord Mayor that went by Water to Westminster was Sir John Norman
Draper, Anno 1453. the 32. of H. 6. that is 228 years ago.

The two Sheriffs of this City are also Sheriffs of the County of Middlesex,
and are annually Chosen by the Citizens from among themselves, in the
Guild Hall, upon Midsummer-day, a high Privilege among many others anciently
granted to this City, by several Kings and Queens of this Kingdom, but they are
not Sworn till Michaelmas-Eve, and then are also presented at the Exchequer, to
be allowed by the Barons, and Sworn, after which they enter upon their Office.

If the Persons so chosen refuse to hold, they incur a Penalty, unless they
will take a Solemn Oath that they are not worth 10000 l.

In the Year 1199. (that is 482 years ago) King John granted the Sheriff-Wick
of London and Middlesex to the City, as King Henry the First before had done,
for the sum of 300 l. a year, which is paid into the Exchequer to this Day. He
gave them also Authority to Choose and Deprive their Sheriffs at pleasure.

In the 1. of R. 1. the Citizens obtained to be Governed by two Bailiffs, which
Bailiffs are in Diverse ancient Deeds called Sheriffs, according to the Speech
of the Law; which called the Shire Ball^va; etc. which King also (as formerly
said) gave the City liberty to be governed by a Mayor as their Principal
Governor, and their Bailiffs were changed into Sheriffs.

The Sheriffs of London, In the Year 1471. were appointed each of them to have
Sixteen Sergeants, every Sergeant to have his Yeoman; and Six Clerks, viz. A
Secondary, a Clerk of the Papers, and Four other Clerks, besides the
Under-Sheriffs Clerks, their Stewards, B^tlers, Porters, and other in Household
many.

There are Twenty-six Aldermen, that preside over the Twenty-six Wards of the
City, (of which more, when we speak of Wards) when any of these die, the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen choose another out of the most substantial men of the City;
If any so chosen refuse to hold, he is usually Fined 500 l.

All the Aldermen that have been Lord Mayors, and the Three eldest Aldermen
that have not yet arrived to that Honorable Estate, are by their Charter
Justices of the Peace of this City. In the Year 1555. Seven Aldermen Died in
less than Ten Months.

The Recorder of London is usually a Grave and Learned Lawyer, that is skilful
in the Customs of the City, who is to be an Assistant to the Lord Mayor. He
takes his place in Councels, and in Courts, before any man that has not been
Mayor, and Learnedly Delivers the sentences of the whole Court. The Present
Recorder is Sir George Treby, an eminent Gentleman, and a Worthy Member of our
last Parliaments.

The Chamberlain of London is, at present, Sir Thomas Player, a Gentleman that
has deserved very well of this City, and the Protestant Interest in General,
both in that Station, and as a Member for this Honorable City in the last
Parliaments.

The Chamberlain is Elected by the Commons, upon Midsummer-day, so are the Two
Bridge-Masters; The Auditors of the City and Bridge-House Accounts, the
Surveyors for BEER and ALE.

There is also a Town-Clark, or Common-Clerk, and a Remembrancer, who are
Esquires.

The Chamberlain of London is an Officer very considerable in point of power,
for without him can no man set up Shop, or Occupy his Trade without being Sworn
before him; no man can set over an Apprentice to another, but by his License;
he may Imprison any that disobeys his Summons, or any Apprentice that
misdemeans himself, or punish him otherwise.

On Monday and Tuesday in E^ster-week, all the Aldermen and Sheriffs come unto
the Lord Mayor's House before Eight of the Clock in the Morning to Breakfast,
wearing their Scarlet Gowns Furred and their Cloaks, as also their Horses
attending. When Breakfast is ended, they mount their Horses, and ride to the
Spittle, (which is an ancient Custom, not changed but once in 300 years, and
that upon extraordinary occasion, till this year, when they went to S.
Sepulchers,) the Sword and Mace being born before the Lord Mayor. There they
hear a Sermon and then return to Dinner, and some of the Aldermen Dine with the
Sheriffs, and some with the Lord Mayor.

On Wednesday in Easter-week they go thither in the same manner, only the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen wear their Violet Gowns, and suitable Cloaks: But the Ladies
(on the former Days) wearing Scarlet, on this Day are attired in Black.

On Whitsunday all the Aldermen use to meet the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs at the
New-Church-yard by Moorfields, wearing their Scarlet Gowns lined, without
Cloaks; there they hear a Sermon appointed for that Day, and so return to
Dinner.

When they choose Parliament Men, all the Aldermen meet the Lord Mayor and
Sheriffs at the Guild Hall, by nine of the Clock in the Morning, wearing their
Velvet Gowns and their Cloaks, either furred or lined, according as the time of
the year requires when they are to be chosen, and they sit in the
Hastings-Court until the Commons do make Choice of them. The last Honorable
Members that served for this Renowned City, were Sir Robert Clayton Knight,
that was Lord Mayor the last year, Thomas Pilkinton Alderman, Sir Thomas Player
Knight, and William (...) Esquire of whose real worth, courage, fidelity, and
wisdom in the management of that great Trust, the City is very sensible, as
appears by the public demonstrations deservedly given of it; and no less
sensible was the last Parliament (but one) of the Cities Loyalty, Fidelity, and
great care to preserve his Majesty's Royal person and the Protestant Religion,
that the thanks of the House was ordered to be given them, which was
accordingly done by the Worthy Members aforesaid.

What the Office of the Constables in the City of London is, you may gather
from their Oath, which is thus.

Ye shall Swear, that ye keep the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King well and
lawfully after your power. And ye shall Arrest all them that make Contest,
Riot, Debate or Affray, in breaking of the said Peace, and lead them to the
House or Compter of one of the Sheriffs. And if ye be withstood by strength of
Misdoers, ye shall rear on them an Outcry, and pursue them from Street to
Street, and from Ward to Ward, till they be Arrested: And ye shall search at
all times, when ye be required by the Seavengers or Beadles, the Common
Noysance of your Ward. And the Beadle and Raker ye shall help to Rear, and
gather their Sallary and Quarterage, if ye be thereunto by them required. And
if any thing be done within your Ward against the Ordinance of this City, such
defaults as ye shall find there done, ye shall them present to the Mayor and
Ministers of this City: And if ye be let by any person or persons, that ye
may not due^y do your Office, ye shall certify the Mayor and Council of the
City, of the Name or Names of him or them that so let you.

Ye shall also Swear, that During the time that ye shall stand in the Office,
and occupy the Room of a Constable, ye shall, once at the least every Month,
certify and show to one of the Clerks of the Mayors Court, and in the same
Court, as well the Names as Surnames of all Freemen which ye shall know to be
deceased in the Month, in the Parish wherein ye be inhabited, as also the Names
and Sirnames of all Children of the said Freemen so deceased, being Orphans, of
this City. And thus ye shall not leave to Do as God you help, etc.

The Scavengers Oath is thus.

Ye shall Swear that ye shall Diligently oversee that the Pavements within your
Ward, be well and sufficiently repaired, and not made too high in Noysance of
your Neighbors; and that the Ways, Streets, and Lanes, be cleansed of Dung,
and all manner of filth, for Honesty of this C^ty. And that all the Chimneys,
Furnaces, and Recedoes, be of Stone sufficiently made against Peril of Fire.
And if ye find any the Contrary, ye shall show it to the Alderman of the Ward,
so that the Alderman may Ordain for the amendment thereof. And thus ye shall
do, as God you help, etc.

Before we leave this Head, it may not be amiss to give an Alphabetical List of
the Officers and Rooms in the City of London in the Lord Mayors Gift.

Alvegars, Searchers and Sealers of Woollen-Cloath. -- Attorny-ship in the
Sheriffs Court. --

Baker of the Bridge-House. -- Bailiff of the Hundred of Osalston. -- Bayliwick
of Southwark. -- Beadle-ship of the Court of Request. -- Bell-man.

Clerkship of the Lord Mayors Court. -- Clerkship of the Papers. -- Clerkship
of the Chamber. -- Clerkship of the Compters. -- Clerkship of the Bridge-House.
-- Clerkship of the Works and Reparation-stuff. -- Clerkship of the Court of
Request. -- Clerkship of the Commissioners for the Inlargment of Prisoners in
Execution in the Compters. -- Clerk of Bridewell. -- Clerkship of
Blackwell-Hall. -- Clerkship of the Commissioners for Inlargment of Prisoners
in the King's Bench. -- Common Sergeant-ship. -- Common Pleaders. --
Common-Hunt. -- Common Cryers. -- Common Comptroller. -- Comptroller of the
Chamber. -- Collector of Scavage. -- Collectors of Wheeladge on London Bridge.
-- Conduit at Dowgate Drawing Water.

Foreigntaker. -- Gauger of Wines and Oil. --

Keeper of Blackwell-Hall. -- Keeper of the Storehouse in Blackwell-Hall. --
Keeper of Worsted-Hall. -- Keeper of Bay-Hall. -- Keeper of the Conduit at
Newgate. -- Keeper of Ludgate. -- Keepership of Newgate. -- Keepership of the
Compters. -- Keeper of the Compters in Southwark. -- Keeper of Bethlehem. --
Keeper of the Sessions House. -- Keeper Clean of the Market, and Market-House
in Newgate-Market, and Collector of Duties there. -- Keeper of the New
Burial-place. -- Keepers of the Wood and Coals for the poor in several places.

Measurage of Silks, Cloth, and Linen. -- Meal-Weighers. -- Measurage of
Cottons. -- Measurage of Bays. -- Packership, Protonariship, -- Portership of
Blackwell-Hall. -- Portership of the Bridge-House. -- Remembrancer. --
Rentership of the Bridge-House. -- Rentership of Finsbury. -- Sword Bearer. --
Secondariship. -- Solicitorship. -- Three Sergeant Carvers. -- Three Sergeants
of the Chamber. -- Sergeants of the Chaunel. -- Stewardship of Southwark. --
Stewardship of Finsbury. -- Town-Clerkship. -- Under-Sheriff-wick. -- Under
Water-Bayliff.

Weigher of Raw-Silks. -- Water-Bayliff. -- Two Yeomen of the Chamber. -- Four
Yeomen of the Waterside. -- Yeomen of the Channel. -- Six Young Men.

Au Abstract of the Charters of the Famous City of London.
THe ROYAL CHARTER granted by our Gracious Sovereign King Charles the Second,
the 24 th of June, in the 15 th of his Reign, in confirmation of all the
Charters of this City granted by his Royal Predecessors, recites them all
verbatim, of which (that is the most memorable) we can only give a brief
Alphabetical Abstract; the Reader that would read them at large, being referred
to larger Tracts.

By Charter of King H. 2. was granted Acquittal of Murder, within the City, and
in Portsoken thereof -- confirmed by King John, chapter 1. By Hen. 3. chapter 4. and
chapter 9. -- By Charter of King John, chapter 3. there was granted an Acquittal of
Duties in the Thames, claimed at the Tower, -- confirmed by King Hen. 3. chapter 3.

By Charter of King H. 1. an Acquittal of Toll, Tollage, Custage, and Custom,
that is, -- that all the men of London shall be quit and free, and all their
goods throughout England, and the Ports of the Sea, of all Toll, and Passage,
and Lestage, and all other Customs. And by H. 2. that if any in all England,
shall take any Custom or Toll of or from the men of London, after he shall fail
of Right, the Sheriff of London may take Goods thereof at London. Confirmed by
King John, chapter 1. by King H. 3. chapter 4. by the same, chapter 8. by E. 3. chapter 1. King
John chapter 2. The City Accounts to the King to be past in the Exchequer. -- See
E. 3. chapter by King John. 2. Allowance of Sheriffs is to be in the Exchequer, and
confirmed by H. 3. chapter 7. Aids: -- Citizens by Charter of Ed. 2. are not to War
out of the City, and the Aids then granted to the King, are not (by that
Charter) to be drawn into Example. -- None are to be amerced but according to
the Law of the City, by Charter of Hen, 2. confirmed by R. 3. chapter 1.

That the Sheriffs of London be as other Sheriffs by Charter of Ed. 1. and
their amerciament is not to exceed 20. l. H. 3. chapter 1.

By Charter of Ed. 4. Char. 1. Aldermen for term of Lives shall have this
Liberty; that is to say, that as long as they shall continue Aldermen there,
and shall bear the Charge of Aldermen proper, and also those which before had
been Aldermen, and have also with their great Costs and Expenses born the
Offices of Mayoralty, shall not be put in any Assizes, Juries, or Attaints,
Recognizances or Inquisitions, out of the said Ci^y, and that they, nor any of
them, shall be Tryer or Tryers of the same. although they touch us ( viz. the
King) or our Heirs, or Succescessors or other whomsoever. -- That Aldermen of
London are not to be made Collectors or Taxers out of the City, -- nor to
suffer for Refusal of such Offices.

By the same Charter, Aldermen past the Mayoralty are to be Justice. of the
Peace. The Mayor, Aldermen, and Recorder to be Justices of Oyer and Terminer,
and the Mayor to be of the Quorum.

By Charter of Hen. 1. All Debtors which do owe Debts to the Citizens of
London, shall pay them in London, or else discharge themselves in London that
they owe none: But if they will not pay the same, neither come to clear
themselves that they owe none; the Citizens of London to whom the Debts shall
be due, may take their Goods in the City of London of the Borough or Town, or
of the County wherein be Remains who shall owe the Debts. By Charter of E. 4.
chapter 1. Attachments are to be made by the City Officers in Southwark. And by
Charter of Ed. 6. The Lord Mayor, Recorder, and Aldermen, that are Justices of
the Peace in London, are to be Justices of the Peace in Southwark. All
Forfeited Recognizances about Alehouses, Inmates, Bastard Children, Appearance
at Sessions of Jail-delivery, Fines, and Issues of Jurors (except Fines or
Issues Royal,) etc. Granted to the City by Charter of King Charles 1. Chart. 1.
That no Aliens are to keep Houses in London, nor be Brokers, by Charter of E.
3, chapter 5. That no Citizen shall wage Battle, H. 1. H. 2. R. 1. chapter 1. John. chapter
1. H. 3. chapter 4. chapter 9.

No Stranger is to buy Goods before they be weighed by the King's Beam, H. 3.
chapter 9. The Inhabitants of Blackfriars to be exempted from Taxes and
Fifteenths, King James, chapter 2.

By Letters Patents of King Henry the VIII. Dated at Westminstor Jan. 13. In
the 28 th Year of his Reign he did give and grant unto the Mayor and Commonalty
and Citizens of the City of London, and their Successors, the Keeping,
Ordering, and Governing of the House and Hospital called Bethlehem, situate
without and near Bishops-gate, and all Manors, Lands, Tenements, Possessions,
Revenues, and Hereditaments whatsoever, and wheresoever lying and being,
belonging or appertaining unto the said Hospital or House called Bethlem; and
Made and Constituted by the same his Letters Patents, these, the Mayor and
Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London, and their Successors, Masters,
Keepers, and Governors of the said House and Hospital called Bethlem, and of
the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, and other premises belonging to the same
House or Hospital, to have, hold and enjoy the said Custody, Order and
Government of the said House or Hospital, called Bethlem, etc. for ever, etc.

London is by King James, ( Char. 3.) styled his Royal Chamber, who not only
confirmed the Charters of his Predecessors, but did give, grant and confirm
unto the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of London, and to their Successors,
the weighing of all Coals, called Stone-Coals weighable, Earth-Coals, and all
other Coals weighable, of what kind soever, in or at the said Port of London,
coming or brought up the said River of Thames in any Ship, Boat, or Barge, or
other Vessel whatsoever, floating or being in any Port of the same Water of
Thames, and upon whatsoever Bank, Shore, or Wharf of the same Water of Thames,
from the Bridge of Stanes, to London Bridge, and from thence to a place called
Yendal or Yenland, toward the Sea. -- For which the Duties Payable to the
Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens, etc. is Eight pence for every Tunn, -- none is
to unlade Coals till the Mayor has Notice, -- and of the quantity; -- because
the Mayor, etc. should be capable at any time, when required, to inform His
Majesty, etc. what quantity of Coals of what sort soever, from time to time, is
brought into the City, etc. and how the City and Adjacent places are supplied.
-- No Markets of Coals to be in any Boats, Lighters, or other Vessel
whatsoever, except in the Ship that first brought in the Coals; no
Forestalling, Engrossing, Regrating, upon pain of incurring such Pains and
Punishments as the Law provides for contemners, and neglecters of Royal
Mandates.

By Charter of Ed. IV. chapter 4. In consideration of 7000 l. etc. was granted to
the Mayor, etc. the Offices or Occupations of Packing all manner of Woollen
Clothes, Sheepskins, Calves-Skins, Goat Skins, Vessels of Amber, and all other
Merchandises whatsoever, to be Packed, Tunned, Piped Barrelled, or any wise to
be included, with the oversight of opening all manner of Customable
Merchandises, arriving at the Port of Safety, as well by Land, as by Water,
within the Liberties and Franchises of the said City and Suburbs, etc. And als^
the Office of Carriage and Portage of all Wool^ Sheepskins, Tynn-Bails, and
other Merchandises whatsoever, which shall be carried in London, from the Water
of Thames, unto the Houses of Strangers; and contrariwise from the said Houses
to the same Water, or of other Merchandises which ought to be carried, being in
any House for a time. -- And also the Office, etc. of Garbling of all manner of
Spices, and other Merchandises, coming to the said City at any time, which
ought to be Garbled. -- Also the Office of Gager. -- Office of Wine-Drawers,
etc. to be exercised by them or their Deputies. -- The Office of Coroner to
beat the Mayors (etc.) disposal. -- Severed them from the Office of
Chief-Butler, etc. Witness the King at Westminster, the 20 th of June, Anno
Regni 18.

By Charter of E. III. chapter 1. It is granted thus: -- Whereas in the Great
Charter of the Liberties of England, it is contained, that the City of London
may have all their ancient Liberties and Customs, and the same Citizens at the
time of the making of the Charter, from the time of Saint Edward, King and
Confessor, and William the Conqueror, and of other our Progenitors, had diverse
Liberties and Customs, as well by the Charters of those our Progenitors, as
without Charter by Antient-Customs, whereupon in diverse the Circuits, and other
the Courts of our said Progenitors, as well by Judgments as by Statutes, were
Invaded and some of them Adjudged: We Will and Grant for us and our Heirs, that
they may have the Liberties according to the Form of the abovesaid Great
Charter, and that Impediments and Usurpations to them in that behalf made,
shall be revoked and Annulled, etc. That the Mayor be one of the Justices of
Jail-delivery of Newgate, and to be Named in every Commission thereof to be
made. -- That the Citizens may have Infangtheft. [This is a Saxon word,
signifying a Liberty Granted to certain Lords of Manors, to Judge any Thief
taken within their Fee.] And Outfang-theft, [that is, a Liberty Granted to the
Lord to try any Thief taken out of his Fee,] and Chattels of Felons, of all
those which shall be Adjudged before them, within their Liberties, etc.

Citizens may Devise Lands in London, in Mortmain, or otherwise, -- Merchant
Strangers to Sell Goods within Forty Days, -- and may not keep Houses, but are
to be with Hosts, (that is, Lodgers,) -- The KING's Marshall, Steward, or Clerk
of the Market of the King's Household, may not Sit within the City Liberties. --
No Citizen is to be drawn to Plead without the Liberties of the City, about any
thing that happens within the Liberties thereof. -- No Escheator may Exercise
that Office in the City, but the Mayor for the time being is to do it. --
Citizens to be Taxed in Subsidies as other Commoners, not as Citizens. -- To be
quit of all Tallages, [this word is derived from the French word Taille, a
piece cut out of the whole, signifying the paying a part or share of a Man's
substance by way of Tribute, Tax or Toll,] and that the Liberty of the said
City shall not be taken into the hands of us, or our Heirs for any Personal
Trespass or Judgment of any Minister of the said City; Neither shall a keeper
in the said City for that occasion be Deputed, but the same Minister shall be
punished according to the quality of his Offense, etc. -- No Purveyor of the
Kings, etc. is to make any Prices of the Goods of the Citizens, without the
Consent of the Party, -- no Price to be made of the Citizens Wines against
their Wills, etc. No Purveyor is to be a Merchant of the Goods whereof he is
Purveyor. -- That no market is to be kept, nor afterterwards to be Granted to
any within Seven Miles in Circuit of the said City. -- That all Inquisitions to
be taken by the Justices of London, etc. shall be taken in St. Martins [le
Grand] in London; but not elsewhere, except the Inquisitions to be taken in the
Circuits at the Tower of London, and for the Jail-delivery at Newgate. -- That
no Citizen is to be Impleaded in the Exchequer, unless it concern the King, etc.

By Charter of Henry the First, the Citizens to be free from Scot and Lot, and
Dane-Guilt; [that is, a Tribute laid upon our Ancestors of Twelve pence, for
every Hide of Land throughout the Realm, by the Danes, for clearing the Seas,
as they pretended of Pirates.] H. the II. R. the I. chapter 1. King John chapter 1.

Henry the III. chapter 8. The Citizens may Traffic with their Commodities and
Merchandises wheresoever they please, throughout His Majesty's Kingdoms and
Dominions, as well by Sea as by Land, without Interruption of him or his, as
they see Expedient, quit from all Custom, Toll, Lestage; [that is, a Custom
challenged in Fairs fer carrying of things,] and Paying, etc. and may abide for
their Trading wheresoever they please, in the same His Kingdom, etc. as in
times past they were Accustomed, etc.

Henry the VII. Granted a Charter, That no Stranger from the Liberty of the
City, may Buy or Sell from any other Stranger to the Liberty of the same City,
any Merchandises or Wares within the Liberties of the same City, upon pain of
Forfeiture of the said Goods, etc. to the Use and Profit of the Mayor,
Commonalty, etc. Strangers may Buy things in Gross for their own Use, but not
to Sell again, etc.

None is to take Loding in the City by Force, by Charters of H. the I. R. the
I. chapter I. H. the III. chapter 4. H. the III. chapter 9.

By Charter of King CHARLES the I. the Offices of Paccage of Clothes, Wools,
Woollfels, etc. Balliage of Goods, etc. Portage of Goods, Seavage of all Goods,
etc. Customable, granted to the Mayor, Commonalty, etc. with a power to
Administer an Oath for the discovery of concealed Goods, etc.

The Sergeants of London may bear Maces of Gold or Silver, Ed. III. chapter 4.

By Charter of King Henry I. It was granted to the Citizens of London to hold
Middlesex to Farm for 300 l. upon Account, to them and their Heirs; so that the
said City shall place as Sheriff whom they will of themselves, and shall place
whomsoever, or such one as they will of themselves, for keeping of the Pleas of
the Crown, and of the Pleading of the same, and none other shall be Justice
over the same Men of London, etc.

This was confirmed by King John by Charter, dated July 5, Anno Reg. 1. the
City paying 300 l. as aforesaid, of Blank Sterling Money at two Terms in the
Year, viz. at the Easter-Exchequer 150 l. and at Michaelmas-Exchequer 150 l.
saving to the Citizens all their Liberties and Free Customs, etc.

If the Sheriffs offend so as to incur the loss of Life or Member, they shall
be Adjudged (as they ought to be) according to the Law of the City, etc. --
wherefore (says the Charter) we Will and Steadfastly Command, that the Citizens
of London, and Middlesex, with all the said Sheriffwich belonging, of us and
our Heirs, to possess and enjoy Hereditarily, Freely and Quietly, Honorably and
Wholly, by Fee Farm of 300 l. etc.

All Fish^rs, Vintners, and Victualers, coming to the City, shall be in the
Rule of the Mayor and Aldermen, 7 R. II. cap. 11. Aldermen shall not be Elected
Yearly; but remain till they be put out. -- Ibidem, Cap. 11.

Merchants may Sell Cloth, Wine, Oil, Wax, or other Merchandise, as well by
Wholesale as Retail, to all the KING's Subjects, as well as Londoners,
notwithstanding Franchise to the Contra, 7 H. IV. chapter 9. Citizens worth 400
Marks, in Goods or Chattels may be Jurors in Attaint, and the Justices to sit
only at the Guild Hall, or within the City, notwithstanding 23 H. VIII. cap. 3.

The Mayor, etc. next Court after the first of Michaelmas, is to name Watermen
Yearly, to be Overseers of Rowing between Graves-End and Windsor, the 2 and 3
Pbillip and Mary, cap. 16. Sect. 3.

The Mayor, etc. to Assess the Fare of Watermen, and two Privy-Councellors to
sign it, 2 and 3 Phillip and Mary. chap. 16. Sect. 11.

Citizens of London and other Inhabitants, Tradesmen, etc. for Debts under 40
s. may Summon in to the Court of Conscience; (that is, the Court of Requests,)
and the Commissioners there to Determine the Difference, and to Register
Orders. 3 Jac. cap. 15. Sect. 2.

These brief Memorandums are produced, not as comprehending the full Abstract
(much less the words at length) of the several Charters and Privileges of thi^
Famous City, but as Guides to direct where they may read at large; to be more
full, would be inconsistent with the designed brevity of this small Tract, for
it would make a Volume it self: yet what is here pointed at, with what is
scatterd up and down the Book under particular Heads, (which to avoid
repetition are not mentioned here) may inform the Reader of the most Memorable,
which was the thing only intended. He that would consult them more largely, is
referred to a Book Entitled the Royal Charter of Confirmation, granted by King
CHARLES the II. to the City of London by S. G. Gent. And Rastals Statutes at
Large; from whence, with some others, these Memorials were Collected.

Some brief Heads of the most memorable Customs or particular Laws of the City
of LONDON.
IN this place we shall only mention some of the most remarkable of these Laws,
referring the Reader to a Book called the City Law, Printed 1658.

The Mayor and Aldermen have always used to cause to come before them the
Malefactors which have been taken and Arrested within the said City, for
carrying of Tales, and spreading abroad of News imagined, in disturbance of the
Peace, makers and Counterfeiters of false Seals, false Charters, and for other
notorious Defects, and those which they have found culpable of such misdeeds by
confession of the Parties, or by inquest thereof made, shall be punished by
setting in the Pillory, or further Chastised by Imprisonment, according to
their Merit, and according to the Reasonable Discretion of the said Mayor and
Aldermen. Men and Women by usage of the said City may Devise their Tenements,
Rents, and Reversions within the said City, and Suburbs thereof, to whom they
will, and of what Estate they will. And may also Devise a New Rent to rise from
their Tenements, in manner as they like best. And those which are Freemen of
the said City may Devise their Tenements in Mortmain.

Infants within Age may not make a Devise, nor can Women-Covert Devise their
Tenements by License of their Husbands, nor in other manner, during the
Coverture. -- The Husband may not Devise his Tenements to his Wife for a higher
Estate, upon pain to lose the whole. Neither may the Husband Devise the
Tenements descended to his Wife, nor the Tenements which the Husband and Wife
have jointly purchased, but if the Husband and the Wife have Tenements Jointly
to them and to the Heirs of the Husband, the Husband may Devise the Reversion.
All Testaments by which any Tenements be Devised, may be enrolled in the
Hustings Court of Record, at the suit of any which may take advantage by the
same Testaments. And the Testament which ought to be enrolled shall be brought
before the Mayor and Aldermen in full Husting. And there shall the said
Testaments be Proclaimed by the Sergeant, and the same also to be proved by two
Discreet men well known, the which shall be sworn and examined of all the
Circumstances of the said Testaments, and of his Seal, and if the proof be
found good and loyal, and agreeable, then shall the said Testament be enrolled
in the same Hustings of Record, and the Fee shall be paid for the Inrollment,
and no Testament Noncupative, nor other Testaments may be enrolled of Record
except that the Seal of the Testor be put to the same Testament. But the
Testaments that may be found good and loyal are effectual, although they be not
enrolled, nor of Record.

The Testament within the said City ought by Custom of the same City to be
adjudged effectual and Executory, having Regard to the Testators Wills,
although that the Words of such Testaments be defective, and not according to
the Common Law, etc.

The Mayor and Aldermen that are for the time, by Custom of the City, shall
have the Wardship and Marriages of all the Orphans of the said City, after the
Death of their Ancestors, although the same Ancestors do hold to them and the
City of any other Lord, by what service soever. The Mayor and Aldermen ought to
inquire of all the Lands and Tenements, Goods and Chattels, within the said
City appertaining to such Orphans, and safely keep them to the use and profit
of such Orphans, or otherwise commit the same Orphans, together with their
Lands and Tenements, Goods and Chattels, to other their Friends, by sufficient
Surety found of Record in the Chamber of Guild Hall, to maintain conveniently
the said Orphans, during their Nonage, and their Lands and Tenements to
repair, and the said Goods and Chattels safely to keep; and thereof to render a
good and Loyal Account before the said Mayor and Aldermen, to the profit of the
same Infants, when they shall come to their Age, or when they shall be put to a
Mystery, or shall Marry by the Advice of the said Mayor and Aldermen.

And that in all Cases, except that it be otherwise ordained and disposed for
the same Orphans, or for their Lands and Tenements, Goods and Chattels by
express words, contained in the Testaments of their Ancestors.

No such Orphans ought to be Married without the Consent of the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen. -- Where Lands and Tenements, Goods and Chattels within the said City
are Devised to an Infant within age, of one City, or of the same City, his
Father living, that such an Infant is no Orphan; yet by usage of the said City,
the said Lands and Tenements, Goods and Chattels, shall be in the Custody of
the Mayor and Aldermen, as well as of the Orphans, to maintain and keep them to
the use and profit of the same Infant. Except that the Father of the Infant, or
some other of his Friends, will find sufficient Surety of Record to maintain
and keep the said Lands, etc. to the use and profit of the said Infant, and
thereof to render a good and loyal account, etc.

The Magistrates and Officers of the said City ought to obey no Commandment,
nor no Seal, but only the Commands and Immediate Seal of the King* Nor ought
any Officer of the King to make Seizure or any Execution within the said City,
nor the Liberties thereof, by Land or by Water, but only the Officers of the
said City.

The Sheriffs of London may make Arrests, and serve Executions in the River of
Thames, from the East-part of London Bridge until the Return, and from the
West-part of the said Bridge unto Stanes-Bridge.

The said Sheriffs ought to have Forfeitures of the Chattels of all kind of
Fugitives and Fellons, and of Deodands (that is in Latin, a thing forfeited to
God, as if a Horse kills his Keeper, or a Cart run over a Man, such are
forfeited to the King, to be distributed to the poor) within the said City, and
the River of Thames, in aid of their Farm, ( viz. 300 l. per Annum) which they
pay yearly to the King.

If the Goods of a Freeman be Arrested, or wrongfully detained to pay Toll,
etc. elsewhere, and witnessed by men of credit, the Goods or Merchandise of the
party detaining, or of others of the same Village where the wrong was done, if
found within the City of London, are to be Arrested by the City Officers, to be
detained in the Name of Withernam [ which word in the Common Law, is the taking
or driving a Distress to a hold, or out of the County where the Sheriff cannot
come upon a Replevin to make Deliverance thereof to the party Distreined]
until agreement be made with the said Freeman for damages sustained, etc.

The Lord Mayor (as was said before) being chief Buttler on Coronation Days, is
to have a Golden Cup at the Coronation of every King, -- as was given when his
present Majesty was Crowned; Baker's Chron. p. 748. Edit. 1679.

If a Woman that has a Husband, as a Woman Sole, hire any House or Shop within
the City, she shall be charged to pay the Rent of the said House and Shop, and
shall be impleaded and pursued as a Sole Woman, by way of Debt, if need be,
notwithstanding that she was Married at the time of the Lease, the Lessor not
knowing thereof.

If a plaint of Trespass be made against a Man and his Wife, for a Tresspass
done by the Wife solely, then the Wife shall answer sole without her Husband,
if the Husband come not, and shall have Plea as a sole Woman, and if she be
attainted of Trespass, she shall be condemned, and Committed to Prison until
she has made agreement.

If Plaint be made against a Freeman resident within the City, or by the Law of
the City has a Summons, because of the Franchise, if the Plaintiff come to the
Sheriff, and bring with him six or four Freemen, credible persons, that will
testify that the Defendant is going to run away, withdraw, or absent himself,
the Sheriff may arrest the Defendant by his Body or Goods, as a Foreigner, etc.
When a Debtor in the said City is bound by Obligation in a certain sum to be
paid at a certain time to come, the which Debtor was held sufficient at the
time when he was bound, and after is become Fugitive, or not sufficient, then
if the Creditor come before the Mayor and Sheriffs of the said City, making
such a suggestion, and has with him six or four credible Freemen of the same
City, that will truly testify that the Debtor will withdraw, and Convey his
Goods out of the City, or that he is not sufficient to make Payment, then the
Mayor or one of the Sheriffs, before whom the Suggestion is made, uses to
Arrest the Debtor, although the Day contained within the Obligation be not yet
come, and to keep the same Debtor in Prison, until the Day of Payment be come,
or otherwise that he shall find Pledges to attend at the same Day, and so to
Arrest for House-hire before the Day, if the Tenant be Fugitive.

If a Freeman of the City find his Debtor suddenly within the same City, which
Debtor has absented himself before, or that he be Fugitive, City-Law. page 105.
and the which Debtor will Escape away, before that the Creditor can have an
Officer, the usage is in such Case, that the Freeman himself, with aid of his
Neighbors, without other Officer, may Arrest his Debtor and carry him to the
Office of one of the Sheriffs, and there make his Suit, as the Law requires.

A Brief Account of the Courts held in this Honorable City.
THe highest and most ancient Court in this famous City is that called the
Hustings, a Saxon Word, Hus signifying a House, and Sthing, or Thing, a Cause
or Plea, so that it is Domus Causarum, a House of Causes, or Pleas, or
Pleadings.

This Court preserves the Laws, Rights, Franchises and Customs of the City. --
There be handled the the Intricatest Accounts and Pleas of the Crown, and of
the whole Kingdom.

It is of great Antiquity, the Laws of Edward the Confessor much referring to
it, where may be read these words, -- Debet enim in London, quae caput est
Regni and Legum, semper Curia Domini Regis singulis septim^nis die Lunae
Hustingis sedere and teneri, etc. That is, The Court of our Lord the King ought
to sit, and be held every Week on Monday at the Hustings in London, which
(City) is the head of the Kingdom and Laws, etc. But now it is held on
Tuesdays, in the Guild Hall of London, before the Lord Mayor, Sheriffs and
Aldermen; every Week. All the Lands and Tenements; Rents, and Services, within
the City and Liberties, are pleaded there, in two Hustings; one is called
Husting de placito terrae, Husting of Plea of Land, the other de Communibus
placitis, of Common Pleas: It is held on Monday to Demand the Demandants, and
to award Non-suites, to allow Essoynes, and on Tuesday to award the Default and
Plead. For certain times no Hustings may be held by Custom of the City, viz.
Husting of Plea of Land ought to be held a Week by it self, at the aforesaid
days, but the Inrollments and Titles of the said Hustings make mention of
Monday only.

In Husting of Plea of Land, are Pleaded Writs of Right, Patents Directed to
the Mayor and Sheriffs of London, which Writs have this process, by Custom of
the City, viz. The Tenant, or Tenants, shall first have three Summons at the
Tenements Demanded at three Hustings of Plea of Land next ensuing after the
Livery of the Writ, and of the Hustings, without Demanding the Tenements at any
aforesaid. And after the three Summons ended, three Essoynes at three other
Hustings of Plea of Land then next ensuing; and at the next ensuing after the
third Essoyne, and the Tenants making Default, Process shall be made against
them by a Grand cape, or petit cape, after the appearance and other Process at
the Common Law. And if the Tenants shall appear, the Demandants shall Count
against the Tenants in the Nature of what Writ they will, except certain Writs
which are Pleadable in Husting of Common Pleas, etc. without making
Protestation to see in the Nature of any Writ. And the Tenants shall have the
view, and shall be Essoyned after the view, as at the Common Law. And the
Tenant shall have an Essoyn after every appearance by Custom of the City.

And although that such a Writ be abated after the view, by exception of
Joynt-Tenancy, or other exception Dilatory, or other such Writ be ^evived, the
Tenants, by the Custom of the City, shall have the view in the second Writ:
Notwithstanding the view before had. And if the parties plead to Judgment, the
Judgment shall be pronounced by the Recorder, and six Aldermen at least were
wont to be present at the giving of every such Judgment.

Every Beadle of the City, by the advice of the Alderman of his Ward against
every Hustings or Plea of Land, shall Summon Twelve Men Freeholders, being the
best and most sufficient of his Ward, to come to Guild Hall for to pass in an
Inquest, if there be need, for the rest of the Freeholders of the said Ward.
And if the parties plead and descend to an Inquest, then shall the Inquest be
taken of the People Inheritors, having at the least Frank-Tenement of the same
Ward where the Tenements are, and other three Wards next to the place where the
Tenements are; so that four sufficient men of the same Ward where the Tenements
are, shall be sworn in the same Inquest, if there be so many. No Damages by
Custom of the City are recoverable in any such Writ of Right, Patent, and the
Inquest may pass the same day by such common Summons of the Beadle, if the
parties be at Issue, and the Jurors come. -- Otherwise Process shall be made to
cause the Inquest to come at another Husting of Plea of Land ensuing, by
Precept of the Mayor directed to the Sheriffs, who shall be Ministers by the
Commandment of the Mayor to serve the Writs, and to make Execution thereof,
notwithstanding that the Original Writ be directed to the Mayor and Sheriffs
Jointly. And it is to be understood, that as well the Tenants as the Demandants
may make their Attorneys in such Pleas, etc. See City-Law, p. 46. etc.

In the Hustings of Common Pleas are Pleadable Writs, called ex gravi querela,
for to have Execution of the Tenements out of the Testaments which are Enrolled
in the Hastings. Writs of Dower, unde nihil habet. Writs of Gavelkind, and
Custom, and of Service, Instead of a Cessavit. Writs of Error of Judgments
given before the Sheriffs. Writs of Waste. Writ de Partitione facienda, between
Copartners. Writs of quid Juris clamat, and per quae ^erviti^, and others;
which Writs are close, and directed to the Mayor and Sheriffs; and also
Replegiaries of things taken, and of Distresses wrongfully taken, are Pleadable
before the Mayor and Sheriffs, in the same Husting of Cowmon-Pleas, by Plaint
without Writ, etc.

The Aldermen of London are summoned to the Husting, and they ought, by usage
of the said City, to be summoned by an Officer of the Sheriffs, sitting upon an
Horse of 100 s. price at least.

Of the Court of Requests, or Conscience.
THis Court was first Erected by an Act of Common Counsel, 9 H. 8. viz. That
the Lord Mayor and Aldermen for the time being should Monthly assign two
Aldermen, and four Discreet Commoners to sit twice a week to hear and Determine
all matters brought before them (betwixt Freemen) where the Due Debt or Damage
did not exceed 40 s. Afterward the said Number of Commissioners were enlarged
to the Number of Twelve, which continued till the end of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, and 3 Jacobi cap. 15. confirmed by Act of Parliament, where it was
Enacted, That every poor Citizen and Freeman inhabiting in London, being sued
for Debt under 40 s. may exhibit his suit in the Court of London called the
Court of Requests, where shall be nominated Twelve Commissioners, three of
which may send for any Creditor, who is complained of in suing such a Debt
under 40 s. and if he refuse to come, or perform not their Orders, they may
cause him to be Arrested, by any Sergeant of London, and Commit him to Prison,
there to remain until he perform the said Order, etc.

This Court was to continue by the first Act of Common Counsel but for two
years, but being found Charitable and Profitable for the relief of poor
Debtors, unable to make present payment, and to restrain malicious persons from
proceeding in wilful Suits, and to help poor persons as had small Debts owing
to them, and unable to prosecute Suits in Law elsewhere, it was continued by
diverse Acts of Common Counsel, as aforesaid.

Of the Court of the Lord MAYOR and ALDERMEN.
IN this Court the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, as also the Recorder and Sheriffs
(who are usually Aldermen, or else constantly Chosen upon the next vacancy)
sit; this is a Court of Record principally instituted (among other causes) for
the redressing and correcting the Errors, Defaults, and misprisions, which
happen in the Government of the City; It is kept on Tuesdays and Thursdays.

In this Court are comprehended several other Courts, as

I. The Court of Orphans; for the Mayor and Alderman (as was said at large
before) by Custom have the Custody of the Orphans within the City, etc. -- The
Chamberlain is a sole Corporation to himself and his Successors for Orphans;
and a Recognizance made to him and his Successors touching Orphans, shall by
Custom go to his Successor. The Government of Orphans is so invested in the
Mayor, that if any Orphans sue in the Ecclesiastical Court, or elsewhere for a
Legacy, or Duty due to them, by the Custom, a Prohibition does lie.

2. The Court of Wardmote, or of the Wardmote Inquest, for the whole City being
divided into twenty-six Wards, every Ward has such an Inquest, consisting of
twelve or more, who inquire after Abuses and Disorders, and present them to be
redressed inquiry is also made into all things that can conduce to the
Regulating and well governing the City.

3. The Court of Hall-mote, or Hall-Court, or Assembly of every Guild or
Fraternity, for Redressing what belongs to the said Companies in particular.

4. The Court of the Conservation of the Water and River of Thames, which
belongs to the Lord Mayor, from Stanes-Bridge unto the Water of Yendal, and
Medway, of which we have spoke largly before, when we Treated of the River of
Thames.

5. The Courts of the Coroner and Escheater, which both belong to the Lord
Mayor; he being Coroner and Escheator by virtue of his Authority and Office.

6. The Court of Policies and Assurances to Merchants that venture and
Traffic on the Seas, where Ships and Goods are Insured at so much per Cent.
where there is an Officer of good Quality who Registers those Assurances.

7. The Court of the Tower of London which is held within the Verge of the
City, before the Steward, by prescription of Debt, Trespass, and other Actions;
Now part of the Tower is within the City, and part in Middlesex, ( viz the East
part, but the West in London) whereof (as was formerly said when we spoke of
the Tower, p. 14.) there was a notable Example in the Person of Sir Thomas
Overbury, who being poisoned in a Chamber on the West part, the principal
Murderers were Tried before Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer in London, and
so was Sir Gervase Elways, the Lieutenant of the Tower at that time.

8. The Court of Common Counsel, consisting (as the Parliament of England) of
two Houses, one for the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, and the other for the
Commoners; In which Court are made all Bylaws, which bind all the Citizens of
London; for every Man, either by himself, or by his Representative, gives his
assent thereunto: wherein consists the great happiness of the English Subject,
above all the Subjects of any other Prince in the World; that neither in Laws
nor Bylaws, neither in Taxes or Imposts, any man is obliged but by his own
Consent.

The Oath of a Common-Councel-Man.
YE shall Swear that ye shall be true to our Sovereign Lord the King, that now
is, and to his Heirs and Successors, Kings of England, and readily ye shall
come, when ye be summoned, to the Common Council of this City, but if ye be
reasonably excused; and good and true Council, ye shall give in all things,
touching the Commonwealth of this City, after your Wit and Cunning: and that
for favor of any person ye shall maintain no singular profit against the
Common profit of this City; and after that ye be come to the Common Counsel,
you shall not thence depart until the Common Counsel be ended, without
reasonable cause, or else by the Lord Mayors License. And also any secret
things that be spoken or said in the Common Counsel, which ought to be kept
secret, in no wise you shall disclose, as God you help.

The Common-Councel-Men are chosen at the Wardmote-Inquest, for the respective
Wards, and are to be of the most sufficient, honest, and discreet Men of the
Ward, to serve for the ensuing year, on St. Thomas the Apostles day.

9. The Court of the Chamberlain of the City, to whom belongs the Receipts of
the Rents and Revenues of the City; And to his Court belongs the business of
Apprentices, over whom he has great Authority (as was said before.) This
Officer is chosen by the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons, He over-sees, and
keeps, all the Books, Rolls, Records, and other Monuments, and Remembrances
that ought to remain of Record, and the City Treasure -- to keep and maintain
all the Rents and Tenements pertaining to the Chamber of London -- His Office
about Orphans we have showed before: as also about Apprentices, to which we
shall add, that he is to cause their Indentures to be Enrolled, and make those
Apprentices to serve out their time. One may be a Freeman of London, 1. By
Se^vice, as in case of Apprentiship. -- 2. By Birthright, as being the Son of
a Freeman. -- 3. By Redemption, by Order of the Court of Alderm^n: For such as
are made Free this way, the Chamberlain of London is to set the Fines of such
Redemptions, -- He is to take Fines of such as are rebellious to their Masters
or Guardians, and for certain other Defaults, etc.

To show the Piety of the honorable Governors of this great City, in ancient
as well as modern times, I shall produce the Instructions Recorded for the
Apprentices of London, out of Stow, p. 668. Edit. 1633. The Observation of
which is heartily recommended to the Youth concerned.

It is thus.

YOu shall constantly and Devoutly on your knees, every day, serve God, Morning
and Evening, and make Conscience in the Due hearing of the Word Preached, and
endeavor the right practice thereof in your Life and Conversation: You shall
do diligent and faithful Service to your Master, for the time of your
Apprentiship, and Deal truly in what you shall be trusted: You shall often read
over the Covenants of your Indenture, and see and endeavor your self to
perform the same to the uttermost of your power: You shall avoid all evil
Company, and all occasions which may tend, or draw you to the same, and make
speedy Return when you shall be sent of your Masters or Mistresses Errands: You
shall avoid Idleness, and be ever Employed, either for God's Service, or in
your Masters business: You shall be of fair, gentle, and lowly speech and
behavior to all men, and especially to all your Governors. And according to
your Carriage expect your Reward, for Good or Ill, from God and your Friends,
etc.

Of the Sheriffs Courts.
THere are two Courts of Sheriffs, one for the Counter in Woodstreet, and
another for the Counter in the Poultry, whereof there are two Lawyers as
Judges, well read in the Customs of the City, as well as the Common-Laws; but
if an erroneous Judgment be given before the Sheriffs, the party grieved may
sue a Writ of Error, and remove it to the Hustings, before the Mayor and
Sheriffs; if they yield no Redress, then shall certain Justices be assigned by
the King's Commission, to sit at St. Martins le Grand, by Nisi prius, for to
Redress the said Judgments, and if there be default found in the the Mayor and
Sheriffs, they shall be punished for their Misprisions, by the form contained
in the Statute of 28 E. 3. c. 10.

One taken in Execution in London upon a Condemnation in the Sheriffs Court,
and Removed by Habeas Corpus into the King's Bench, shall be committed there in
Execution for that Debt; and having discharged all Causes in the King's Bench,
shall be remanded.

Then there is the Court of Sessions or Jail-delivery held usually eight times
a year at the Old-Bayly, both for the City and Middlesex, for the Trial of
Criminals, whereof the Lord Mayor is the Chief Judge; and has the power of
Reprieving condemned Persons.

The Prisons in London.
OF Ludgate we have spoken in the Section of Gates, page 9. And of Newgate,
page 10. The Counter in the Poultry belongs to one of the Sheriffs of London,
and has been kept and continued there time out of mind.

The Counter in Woodstreet belongs also to one of the Sheriffs, prepared to be
a Prisonhouse, Anno 1555. and on the 28 th of September that year, the
Prisoners that lay in the Counter in Breadstreet were removed to this Counter;
Both these Counters were burnt in the Year 1666, but Rebuilt since, much more
stately and Commodious than they were before.

There is also in the late Parish of St. Margaret Southwark a Prison, called
the Counter, in Southwark, etc.

The Fleet is also a Prison, so called of the Fleet or Water running by it, now
made Navigable, and called the Fleet-Dike.

There was also in Southwark a Prison, called the Clink, on the Banks-side;
also a Prison called the White-Lyon in Southwark, so called, because it was
formerly an Inn with that Sign, this being the appointed Goal for the County of
Surry, Stow, p. 455.

There are besides these, two Prisons more in Southwark, viz. The King's Bench,
and the Marshalsea; which last belongs to the Marshals of England.

Lastly, there is the Gate House in Westminster, a Prison likewise for
Offenders, etc.

Of the Watches in London.
To speak in general terms, there cannot be found in the World, more Regular,
Careful, and Orderly Watches, than are in this great City, which indeed is very
needful; for where there is such a vast confluence of a^^ sorts of People, it
is of absolute necessity to keep diligent Watch, to prevent Disorders and
Mischiefs, which else would happen.

William the Conqueror commanded, that in every Town and Village a Bell
(called Curfew-Bell) should be Nightly rung at Eight of the Clock, and that all
People should then put out their Fire and Candle, and take their rest; which
Order was observed in his Reign, and the Reign of William Rufus; but Henry the
First revoked that Order. But Henry the Third, Anno 1253. Commanded Watches in
Cities and Buroughs to be kept, in order to the preservation of Peace and
Quietness amongst his Subjects, etc.

There are in the Respective Streets convenient Stations for the Watchmen, who
are Citizens, and obliged to perform that Duty in their turns with their
Officers, and are to Examine all persons that walk in unseasonable hours, and
to Apprehend Suspicious persons, or such as are Riotous, or otherwise
mis-behave themselves, and secure them. At set and convenient times, they
appoint a Party to go their Rounds, and to apprehend such as they find Tippling
in Victualing-Houses at unseasonable hours, or in Houses of ill-name, or
Night-walkers, or any other persons wheresoever that are uncivil, or cannot
give a good account of themselves, and the Reason of their being abroad; and
when any such are Apprehended they keep them all night in safe Custody, on the
Guard, or send them to one of the Counters, to be forthcoming before a Justice
of the Peace the next day, who deals with them according to the merit of their
Cause. By this means an Infinite deal of Evils, as Murders, Roberies, Felonies,
Fires, etc. are prevented, which would otherwise happen; it being certain, that
in so great and populous a City, amongst the many good People, it cannot be
avoided but that a great many wicked persons, capable of the blackest
Villainies, do creep in, as daily and sad experience shows.

Of the Military Government of London.
HAving Treated of the Ecclesiastical and Temporal Government of this Great
City, we will give some brief touches of its Military Government, Ancient and
Modern.

In the 23 of H. VIII. 1532. At a General Muster in London, were first taken
the Names of all Men within this City and Liberties only (which reach not far
from the Walls) from the Age of 16 to 60. Also the Number of all Harnesses, and
all sorts of Weapons for War; than they drew out of these, only such able Men
as had White Harness, and them all to appear in White Coats, with Breeches, and
white Caps and Feathers, and because Notice was given, that the King himself
would see them Muster, they all prepared to appear as splendidly as they could;
and to that end, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, Recorder, and Sheriffs, and all who
had been Sheriffs, had all white Harness, and over that Coats of black Velvet,
with the Arms of the City Embroidered thereon, each one a great Gold Chain, and
Mounted on a goodly Horse, with rich Trappings, on their Heads Velvet Caps, in
their Hands Battle-Axes gilt; Each Alderman and the Recorder had four
Halberdiers in white Silk, or else Buff-Coats, waiting on them with gilt
Halberds; and the Lord Mayor and sixteen tall men, apparrelled in white Satin
Doublets, Caps and Feathers, Chains of Gold, and other Gorgeous Attire, with
long gilt Halberds following his Lordship at a distance: But next to him he had
four Footmen in white Satin, then two Pages clothed in Crimson-Velvet, and
Cloth of Gold, riding on Gallant Horses richly furnished, one of them carrying
the Lord Mayors Helmet, and the other his Pole-Ax, both richly gilt and adorned.

Most of the Citizens of any Quality or Office, were in white Satin, or white
Silk Coats, with Chains of Gold, and some with rich Jewels; what the Number of
Men in Arms was, is not recorded, but it may be guessed at by what follows:
They Mustered in Mile-end-Fields, and before Nine of the Clock in the Morning
began to March, entering at Aldgate in excellent order down to Westminster,
where the King and Court stood to view them, passing by; thence they Marched
about St. James's-Park, so through Holborn up to Leaden Hall, and there
Disbanded immediately, and yet this was not done till five of the Clock in the
Evening, which was Eight hours continual March.

At His Majesty's Return to his Government, there were in London and the
Liberties, six Regiments of Trained-Bands, and six Regiments of Auxiliaries,
and one Regiment of Horse; these thirteen Regiments, about six Weeks before his
Majesty's arrival, Mustered in Hyde-Park, being then drawn out for promoting
and securing his Majesty's Return. These twelve Regiments of Foot were 18000
Men complete. Eight of these Regiments had seven Companies in each, and the
other four had six Companies in each, in all Eighty Companies. The Regiment of
Horse of six Troops, and 100 in each Troop, this considerable Army drawn
together before the 20 th of May, was Judged to be highly useful for
facilitating that great Work. Some Months after the King sent to the City a
Commission of Lieutenancy, appointing several persons as his Lieutenants in
London, giving them the same power that the Lords Lieutenants have in their
respective Counties, and in pursuance of that Commission, the Regiments were
new settled. There were six Regiments of Train-Bands, commanded by six
Citizens, Knights, and their Lieutenant-Colonels were all Knights, and there
were six Regiments of Auxiliaries. In all these twelve Regiments were 20000
Men; then were listed two Regiments of Horse, each consisting of five Troops,
in all 800 Horse; these were all Drawn into Hide-Park, where His Majesty was
pleased to take a view of them. But in case of need, it is certain that in
London, and within the Liberty, there may in few days be raised 400000 Men;
Besides Southwark one Regiment of Train'd-Bands, 1500 Men; The Hamlets of the
Tower, two Regiments, in all 3000 Men; then Holborn Regiment, and Westminster
Regiment, 2000 each, and in case of necessity they can raise 20000 more; that
is in all 66500 Men; and in case of absolute need, they can double that Number,
and yet leave enough to manage Trade, etc.

To demonstrate this, we shall look back into former times, when London was far
less populous, and of less dimensions then Now, and produce what we find
Recorded of its Military power.

Stow in his Survey, p. 85. says, that Anno, 1539* 31. H. VIII. a great Muster
was made of the Citizens on the 8 th of May, at Mile-end, all in bright
Harness, with Coats of white Silk or Cloth, and Chains of Gold, in three great
Battles to the Number of 15000, which passed through London to Westminster, and
round St. James's Park, and so home through Holborn. This was for the Midsummer
Watch, which custom was discontinued till 1548. 2 E. 6. and then revived with
an Addition of above 300 Demi-La^ces and light Horsemen, prepared by the City,
for Scotland, for the Relief of the Town of Haddington, kept by the English.

The like Marching Watch has not been used since, though some attempts have
been made in order to its continuation, as Anno, 1585. A Book was written by a
grave Citizen, Mr. John M^ntgomery, Dedicated to Sir Thomas Pullison, then Lord
Mayor, and the Aldermen; containing the Manner and Order of a Marching-Watch on
the accustomed way, wherein he used this Motive; That Artificers of sundry
sorts were thereupon set to Work, none but rich men charged, poor men helped,
old Soldiers, Trumpets Drummers, Fifes, and Ensign-be^rers, with such like men
meet for the Princes Service kept in ure, wherein the^ safety and defense of
every Commonwealth consists. Armor and Weapons being yearly used thereby,
the Citizens had of their own ready prepared for any need; whereas by
intermission hereof, Armourers are out of Work. Soldiers out of ure, Weapons
overgrown withfoulness. few or none good being provided, etc.

Mr. Howel in his Londinopolis, Printed 1657. Writes thus p. 398. For strength
Defensive and Offensive, for Arms of all sorts, for Artillery, Ammunition, for
Arsenals and Docks on both sides the River, for Castles and Block-houses, etc.
London is not inferior to any; she has 12000 Trained-Band Citizens
perpetually in a Readiness excellently Armed, etc. The City of London has sent
out strong Fleets in former times, to scour and secure the Four Seas from
Depredations and Pyracy. Anno 1293 She was able to set forth a Fleet of 95
Ships -- Another Record shows, that in King Stephens Reign, the City raised
60000 Foot, and 20000 Horse, for Land Service, which is about 500 years ago. --
No place is better furnished with Magazines of Corn and Arms against a Famine;
for besides that at Leade^-Hall, and the Bridge-House, How many Halls have
Storehouses of this kind!

By the Computation of humane Souls in this great City, may be guessed what
Military force may be raised, of which the said Author says thus.

In the year 1636. King Charles the First sending to the Lord Mayor, to make a
Scrutiny what Number of Papists and Strangers were in the City, the Lord Mayor,
Sir Edward Bromfield, took occasion thereby to make a cense (or computation) of
all the people, and there were of Men, Women, and Children, above 700000 that
lived within the Bars of his Jurisdiction alone; and this being so long ago,
viz. 45 years, it is judged by all probable computation, that London has more
by a third part now than at that time. Then the City of Westminster, and all
the Suburbs without the Lord Mayor's Jurisdiction, and the contiguous Buildings
that join with it, as an Entire piece on all sides, contain by all likely
conjecture at least as many more; so that taking all together, the Number of
humane Souls may amount to above one Million and an half; this computation was
thus delivered by Mr. Howel, 24 years ago, and it is certain that the Number is
vastly encresed since, as may appear by the great Addition of Buildings even
within these few years. At that time Mr. Howel Judged the Circumference of the
City, etc. to be above twelve Miles, but it is certain whatever it was then, it
is much more now: so that upon the whole, if the Number of Inhabitants be no
more then as above, and allowing but the tenth part able to bear Arms, the City
and Suburbs may raise 150000 Fighting-men, of which a third part is enough for
a Brave Army, viz. 50000 Men, according to the Modern manner of War.

Besides these Train'd-Bands and Auxilliary-men, beforementioned, there is the
Artillery Company, which is a Nursery of Soldiers, and has been so threescore
and odd years. The present King listed himself there, when he was Prince of
Wales, and so did the Duke of York, who commanded that Company; But lately His
Majesty was pleased to honor that Company himself so highly, as to tell them,
when they were last February about a New Election, that he would Himself be
their Leader, which was resented with the Universal Joy of the Company, it
being indeed an extraordinary honor, to be under the Immediate Commands of so
Royal a Leader.

Under His Majesty there is a Leader who exercises this Company every Tuesday
fortnight, in the Artillery-Ground, (a spacious and delicate green Field,
enclosed with a fair Brick-wall, near Moorfields, for that purpose.) And the
other Tuesday the Exercise is performed by the several Members of the Company,
who are there Trained up to Command.

Of this Society there are many of the Nobility, also the Lord Mayor, and most
of the Aldermen, all the Commanders of the Train-Bands and Auxiliaries here
Exercise Arms. This Company consists of about six hundred men. Their Officers
are a Leader, two Lieutenants, two Ensigns, two Sergeants, a Provost-Marshal,
three Gentlemen of Arms, etc. They have also a Court-Marshal, consisting of a
President, a Vice- President, a Treasurer, and Twenty four Members of the
Company.

On the second Tuesday in February, at a General Rendezvous every year, the
Officers are Elected.

So much of Government: which I shall shut with the Words of one of the great
Magistrates of this famous City, viz. Slingsby Bethel Esquire one of the Sheriffs,
in a late Paper of his Just Vindication against the malicious and lying
Invectives of some base, ill-minded persons, that were so impudent to asperse
him in his Honor and Reputation, upon occasion of the late Poll in Southwark,
where he was one of the Candidates to serve for that Borough in Parliament;
but the well known Worth of that wise and eminent Gentleman, is above the reach
of such Detractors Tongues; for while they go about to sully his spotless
Reputation, they render it (though against their minds,) so much the more
illustrious; all sober persons concluding that he must needs be a good man,
because bad men hate him: for to be praised by such is ever esteemed a kind of
reproach; and so the Philosopher took it, when he exclaimed (in some heat) for
being praised by a scandalous person. Which is but by the by, as the impartial
sense of one that has not the happiness of personally knowing that worthy
person; Yet no stranger to his due Character.

This City is indeed, ( says he, p. 7.) a great and opulent City, full of
People and Trade; a City eminent for the great Charters, Privileges, and
Immunities with which it is invested; Renowned for its many Courts, and
Councels, Companies and Societies; and for the good Laws therein Instituted and
Ordained for the better Government of the several Ranks and Orders of men
amongst them, whereby they are enabled to obtain, their own Justice, maintain
their own Peace, and pursue all the good and advantageous ends of Trade, with
the better success, and greater security.

And as the happiness and good estate of this City does depend upon the right
use and improvement of these advantages, and upon a Due and Righteous Execution
of those good Laws, so the honor and esteem which this great City most justly
finds from all men, both at home and abroad, does principally result and arise
from hence.

I confess there is another thing that does well befit this great City, which
we call State and Grandeur, which (though it is far below, and differs in the
esteem of wise men, as much from that honor which I have before described, as
my Lord Mayors Horse, accoutred with his richest furniture and trappings, does
from that Honorable Person that sits upon him clothed with eminency of Power
and Authority) is found nevertheless most necessary to attract that Reverence
from the Vulgar and Common People toward so August a Government; which they
(giving Judgment of things more by outward appearance, then by intrinsic
worth, and real value) would otherwise hardly give to the greatest Potentates.

To this end the City has its several Ensigns of Authority and Power, sitted
to all degrees of Magistracy, and showing the place they bear in the Government
with a becoming Greatness. They have their solemn Processions and Cavalcades,
set forth with Habits, Equipages, Attendants, and other Ornaments, suitable to
the several Degrees and Orders of Men, for the greater State.

They have also their Public Shows and Triumphs upon set times and occasions,
adorned with much splendour, to Entertain and Divert the People with Gaze and
Admiration. -- And they have (besides these) their public Feasts upon set
times and solemn occasions of assembling and rejoicing together for their
refreshment. And I do agree, that as these being practiced with that
moderation, and within those limits which the Laws of the City upon great
Reason have wisely Ordained, may be of good Use to the ends aforesaid; so I
have not been wanting in performing my part therein, etc.

CHAP. V.
Of the Trade of LONDON.
TO go about to Demonstrate the great Necessity and Benefit of Trade in
General, in a Commonwealth or City, were but ( in re non dubia, uti oratione
non necessaria,) in a matter which is undoubted to use a needless Harangue; it
being certain that Wealth and Riches (which are acquired by Traffic and
Industry,) are Subsidia Belli, and Ornamenta Pacis, the Supports of War, and
Ornaments of Peace, by which the wants of one place, are supplied by the plenty
of another, and the Indigence of the Poor, relieved by Employments from the
Rich; there being such a general dependence of one Calling upon another, from
the Highest to the Lowest, that they cannot well Subsist without the mutual aid
of each other; in which is manifest the Infinite Wisdom of the Sovereign
Disposer of all things, who has ordered Human Affairs to so due and regular a
Subordination to each other, and so necessary a Concatenation among themselves,
that by a perfect Symmetry or Symphony of Parts, they conclude in a perfect
Harmony of General Good to Mankind, which Superlative Blessing should be
improved to mutual Advantage, and the Glory of the Supreme Author of it.

In this Chapter we Design to produce some Remarks, with respect to Trade in
some Particulars; as, 1. The Particular Advanges of London, with Respect to
Trade. 2. Its Merchants. 3. Its Trade into the Country. 4. Its Trade to Foreign
Parts. 5. Of the twelve Principal Companies, with their Coats of Arms, etc. 6.
Of the other Corporations with their Coats of Arms. 7. Of the Custom-House. 8.
Of the Post Office. 9. Of Of the Rates or Fares of Watermen, Carmen, Coachmen.
10. Of the Carryers, Waggoners, and Stage-Coaches, that come to the Principal
Inns, with the Days of their coming in, and setting forth, to all the Principal
Parts of England.


SECT. 1.
SOme of the Advantages of this great City were hinted, Page third and fourth,
to which we shall add, that one of the Supreme Advantages, is by the goodly
River of Thames, which, opening Eastward toward Germany and France, is much
more Advantageous for Traffic, than any other River in England; and it may be
said without Vanity, that no River in the World can show a Braver sight of
Ships than are commonly to be seen (like a Floating Forest) from Black-Wall to
London Bridge; which in continual Voyages Import all sorts of Goods, either for
Need or Ornament, and Export our Superfluities, to the extraordinary Advantage
of all sorts of People, high or low; of this see more in the Section of the
River Thames.

Another Advantage that London has, is its being Situate so farwithin the
Land, that it is plentifully supplied with all necessary Provision from the
Country, at easy and indifferent Rates, and the Manufactures of the Respective
Counties, which the City disperses to Markets beyond Seas; in Recompense, the
Country is supplied by the City, with all sorts of necessary Merchandises,
wanting there, etc. Insomuch that London is a large Magazine, of Men, Money,
Ships, Horses, Ammunition, of all sorts of Commodities necessary or expedient
for the Use or Pleasure of Mankind. It is the mighty Rendezvous of Nobility,
Gentry, Courtiers, Divines, Lawyers, Physicians, Merchants, Seamen, and all
kind of Excellent Artificers, of the most Refined Wits, and most Excellent
Beauties: for it is observed, that in most Families of England, if there be any
Son or Daughter that Excells the rest in Beauty or Wit, or perhaps Courage or
Industry, or any other rare Quality, London is their Pole Star, and they are
never at rest till they point directly thither; which vast Confluence, (besides
being the Kings Chief and Imperial Seat, where Parliaments, and the Principal
Courts of Justice are held, where the Inns or Colleges of the Municipial Laws
are Seated, with the Great Houses of the Nobility and Ministers of State) must
needs bring a vast Advantage and Increase to Trade, besides the most Exquisite
Ornament and Gallantry that any Place in the World can show.

SECT. 2.
Of the Merchants of London.
Merchandising may be said to be an Art or Science, invented by Ingenious
Mankind for the Public Good and Profit of all, supplying (as was said,) the
Native wants of one Place, by the abundance of others, that do not Consume
their own Growths, Products, or Manufactures. Such as Negotiate and Traffic
this way are called Merchants. The things Sold or Exchanged are two. First,
Wares or Goods. And Secondly, Moneys or Coin, which are usually Contracted or
Bargained for, three ways.

First, When Goods are Exchanged for Goods; that is, so much of one Sort, for
like value of another, and this is called Bartering, usual here in old times,
and in many places of America, Asia, and Africa in these days: but in Process
of time, Men finding it too difficult and troublesome to carry about them, all
things thus Bargained and Truckt for, from place to place, invented a common
Standard, or Measure that should countervail, and be in Value as all other
things, and be Accounted in Payments, Satisfaction and Equivalency to all
others: and this is called Money, of Gold Silver, or other Metals. This Use of
Money is as old as Abraham, but it was not then Coined, but only in Pieces
Unstampt; and since by Authority of Princes, it was divided into great and
small Pieces, and into several and Distinct parts and Denominations, and Stamped
or Coined with several Characters, denoting the true Weight and Value of the
same. This was done first by Servius in Rome, of Brass, whereon was Imprinted
the Image of Sheep and Oxen, betokening the Wealth and Riches of those days;
ten of those Pieces made a Denier or Penny, and were called by Latins,
Denarii. This was the Original of Money, which afterward came to be Coined of
Silver and Gold.

Secondly, The Second way is of Goods for Money, and this is Termed Bargaining,
or Buying and Selling; this Facilitates Merchandising, and to prevent the
Inconvenience and Danger of the Carriage of Money about a Man, another Medium
was found, and that was:

Thirdly, Exchanging, which is the giving of so much Money in one Place to one,
who should cause it to be again repaid in another place by another for him. In
all Exchanges there is concluded two Payments, two places, and four distinct
Persons, viz. he that Pays in one place, and Receives in another; and he
that Receives in the one place, and Pays in the other, and so no Man can
Remit, except there be another to Draw; nor can any Receive, except there be
another Authorized to Pay.

The first of these ways was taught to Mankind by Necessity, the second was
found out to Facilitate the first, and the third to Facilitate the second. Thus
was the Original of Exchanges, to Accommodate Commerce, which was first
Practiced without Benefit or Loss, or any other Consideration, they using to
Pay the Value of the very Sum Received: but in time it came to be considered,
that the Party Paying, loses time, and runs a hazard, and therefore it was held
reasonable that he should have some benefit. Hence Exchanges are converted to
an Art or Mystery, Moneys being remitted for benefit, without so much respect
to the end of its Original Institution.

In the first sort, the Merchant ought to know the Commodities delivered and
received, the present Value of both the quality, viz. whether lasting or
perishable; the property, viz. whether of Natural growth, or Artificial; and
lastly, the quantity, viz. whether plentiful^ or scarce, and in few Lands.

In the second sort, the same things are necessary, and also a knowledge how
the things are bought and sold, whether by weight, as ponderous Goods; by
concave or long measures, as Commodities of length; or such as are Solid or
Liquid. A knowledge of Weights and Measures of the Fineness, Goodness, and
Current Value of Money, etc. A Merchant is to know what to Bargain for, how to
Bargain, when to Bargain, and with whom, which comprehends the knowledge of the
Commodity, Weights and Measures, proper Seasons, and credit of the Party
Bargained with.

In the third sort there is necessary, a knowledge of the Fineness, Goodness,
and Current Value, of the Princes Coin, where the Remitter and Party Receiving
abide, -- a knowledge of the Current Rate of Exchanging, of the Par, or Value
for Value, both according to the Standard of the Country, and according to the
Valuation of the Current Coin there passable. Then of the Usance of the Place,
-- and a knowledge of the Drawer and Receiver. -- As also the due Manner, and
Form of making of all Legal Intimations, Protests, and other such needful
Instruments, Circumstances and Observations, as are requisite upon Default of
Payment, according to the strict and Solemn Rules required in a Bill of
Exchange. These General Heads are not to instruct Merchants, but to give a kind
of a view of this Noble Calling to others that are strangers to it.

More particularly in this Famous City, is a great Number of Merchants, who for
Wealth, for Stately Houses within the City in Winter; and without, in Summer,
for rich Furniture, plentiful Tables, Honorable living, for great Estates in
Money and Land, excel some Princes in some of our Neighbor Nations. A great
many of whom have frequently born the Dignity of the Chief Magistracy in the
City, and have been Bountiful and very Liberal Benefactors to the Public, and
other Pious Uses.

The Merchants of London have been by diverse Princes of this Kingdom
Incorporated into Societies and Companies, to encourage their Endeavors, and
in reward of the Discoveries of the Trade of those Countries, whereof they take
their Name, they have Power and Immunities, granted them, do make Acts and
Orders for the Benefit of Commerce in General, and of their Companies in
particular.

The Antientest of these, called the Company of Merchant Adventurers, have had
their Original and Continuance since Edward the First, Grounded at first upon
the Exportation of Wo^ll only, as the Prime and Staple Commodity of England;
but now upon Clothing, into which the Wool is converted: that King Removed
the Staple out of Flanders, and allured over some Flemings which taught the
English to make Cloth, so that they are now the best Clothiers or Cloth-Workers
in the World, -- And to Encourage them, he Enacted in the twenty seventh of His
Reign, by Statute, that it should be Felony to Transport Wools unwrought. This
Staple was afterward Removed to Callais, to Enrich it; afterward to Antwerp,
Middleborough, Stoad, Delph, Rotterd^m, and Hamborough. -- It now includes all
Drapery, and is Governed beyond Sea by a Deputy and certain Assistants, and in
England by a Governor, Deputy, and certain Assistants. Stow says, that the
Company of Merchants called the Staple, were Incorporated by Edward III. But
the Merchant Adventurers by Edward IV.

The Company of Merchants of Levant, termed Turkey Merchants, were Incorporated
by Queen Elizabeth, and had their Charter Confirmed and Enlarged by King James.
They first made discoveries into the Traffic of the Seigniory of Venice, and
the Dominions of the great Turk, having then the privileges of the East-Indian
Traffic, -- the Navigation to us then unknown by Sea, but the Portugals knew
it.

Now there is a Great and Eminent Company, that Manage the East India Trade,
and by themselves Incorporated, in Queen Elizabeth's time, Anno 1600. Employing
a Joint Stock, they have a Great Capital, or House, called the
East-India-House; by the said Trade and Stock they have Built many Warlike
Ships, and brought all those Indian Commodities to our homes, which before were
brought to us by other Nations; both which Companies, ( viz. the Levant and
East India,) now supply our Land, and by their second Transportation many other
Countries, with those rich Merchandises which Veneria, Turkey, Arabia, Persia,
China, and India yield; these have their respective Governors, to which are
joined certain Commissioners and Assistants.

The Company of Merchants of Russia were Incorporated by King Edward VI and
their Charter Confirmed and Enlarged by Queen Elizabeth. As also the Company of
Merchants of Ebbing, the Eastland Company, -- the Green-Land Company, -- the
Spanish Company, -- the French Company of New Adventurers, -- the Company of
French (...). -- There is also the Merchants of Virginia, Bermudas or Summer
Islands, the Affirican or Guiney Company, etc.

These Companies, besides others not at all Incorporated, being encouraged by
sundry Privileges, Govern themselves by settled Acts and Orders, under certain
chosen Governors, Deputies, and a Selected Number of Assistants, which have
been found to be so profitable to these Kingdoms, by Exporting the Native
Commodities thereof, by setting the Poor on Work, by Building of many brave
Ships, and by Importing hither of sundry Necessaries, both for Use and
Ornament, that the Benefit thereof cannot here be certainly expressed. But for
a taste, I shall Transcribe one Instance from Mr. Lewis Roberts in his Map of
Commerce, Written near Fifty Years ago, about the Levant Company in particular.
It was found (says he, p. 295.) that in our last Voyage to Cales, and to the
Isle of Rhee, they were the owners of Twenty great Sail of Ships, that served
in both those Voyages, and it is probable that they are owners of Thirty Sail
more, which one with the other, may contain 12 or 13000 Tuns of Burden, 1200
Guns at least, and about 4 or 5000 Sa^lers Yearly, besides Porters, Weighers,
Bargemen, Lightermen, Carmen, which cannot be less than 2 or 3000 more, and
they pay above 50000 l. Yearly Customs to the King, partly by Exportation of
Cloth, Tin, and other Goods, and partly Importation of Silks, Cottons, Galls,
Grograms, Spices, Drugs, Currants, and other Levantine Commodities. Which shows
the great Benefit of a well Governed Trade. And we may well Estimate, if it was
so then, that it is much greater now, and that the Benefit of these, and the
other Estinent Societies, to this City and Kingdom, is mighty considerable.

^. Of the Trade of London into the Country.
OF this we need say no more, but what is expressed already, it being so
Universally known to the whole Land; The Londoners using to supply all the
Trading places of the Kingdom, especially on great Fairs, to which they resort
in great Numbers, and afford their Goods at the best hand; to their own and
their Countries great Benefit; and in Requital, the Adjacent Counties supply
the City with all manner of Necessaries for Food, Hay, Fuel, etc. insomuch that
Strangers have admired at the Prodigious plenty of all Sorts that are to be
seen in the Great and well Furnished Markets of Leaden Hall, Stocks,
Milk-shreet, Newgate, Clare, South-hampton, St. Albans, Westminster, Hungerford
and Brooks, with several others; so that here is a perpetual Mart, where any
sort of Goods may be Purchased at a Convenient and Reasonable Rate. Nor is
there any Place in the Kingdom where Poor People (or such as would be very
Frugal) may live Cheaper; or the Splendid Liver, Gallanter, etc.

The Laws of the Market. Stow. p. 664.
1. IN all the Markets of this City, no Victual shall be Sold, but by the Price
set by the Mayor of this City.

2. No Man shall Forestall any Victual coming to the Market; as for to Buy in
any Inn or other prlvy place, or yet coming to the Market, whether it be found
in the Hands of the Buyer, or of the Seller, under pain of Forfeiture of the
same: And no Inn-holder shall suffer any thing to be Sold in his House, upon
pain of Forfeiture of Forty Shillings.

3. No man shall regrate any Victuals which is in the Market, or buy any
Victual to ingrate in the Market, so that the Commons can or may have any part
of such Victual, as in especial such as be known for Hucksters, or other people
occupying their Living by such Victual as they would so ingress, under pain of
forfeiture of such Victuals so regrated: Provided always, that any Steward for
any Noble Feast, may buy or ingrate such Victual as is convenient for the same
Feast.

4. No Butter shall be sold but according to the Weight, for the time of the
year allowed.

5. No Po^lt^rers shall deceiveably occupy the Market, to sell any stale
Victual, or such as be Poulterers of this City, for to stand in strange
Clothing so to do, under pain of forty shillings, and the forfeiture of such
Victual, forty shillings.

6. No Hucksters shall stand or sit in the Market, but in the lower place, and
the ends of the Market, to the intent they may be perfectly known, and the
stranger-market-people have the pre-eminence of the Market, under pain of three
shillings four pence, if the Hucksters disobey the same.

7. No unwholesom or stale Victual shall be sold under pain of forty shillings,
and forfeiture of the same Victuals.

Of the Foreign-Trade of London.
4. AS to the Trade of London into Foreign Parts, we have almost prevented our
self by what is delivered before; we shall therefore only add, that England
abounding with many rich and useful native Commodities, as Woollen-Cloaths of
all sorts, Broad and Narrow, called by several Names in several Shires, also
Perpetuances, Bays, Says, Serges, Cottons, Kersies, Buffins, Mocadoes, Grogams,
Sattins, Tabbys, Calimancaes, Camlets, Velvets, Plushes, Worsteds, Fustians,
Durances, Tukes, Crapes, Flannels, and infinite others. -- Furrs and Skins, as
Coney-skins, Squirrel-skins, Fitches, Calf-skins, Hides, etc.

Mines, as Tin, Lead, Allom, Copper, Iron of all sorts, Sea-Cole, Salt, etc.

All manner of Grain, as Oats, Pease, Bar^^y, Rye, and Wheat in great plenty,
etc. Also Linnen-Cloath, Fl^x, Hemp, etc. All Iron Wares, Tallou^, Leather,
Glasses of all sorts, and Glass; Venice Gold and Silver, Train-Oyl, Salmons,
Pilchards, Herrings, H^ke, Conger, Haberdine, Cod, Ling, Hops, Wood, Butter,
Cheese, Beer, Cider, Saltpeter, Gunpowder, Honey, Wax, Alabaster, and other
Stones, Woolls, Woolfells, Yarn, Fullers-Earth, Saffron, Liquoris, etc. and
many other good and rich Commodities, too tedious to be enumerated; the
Merchants of London do yearly export great Quanties of such of these Goods, as
are not prohibited, to Foreign Markets, and make good Returns, and bring to
supply the Kingdom, a great deal of Treasure and rich Commodities from all
parts of the World, to the enriching of themselves, unspeakable benefit of the
Nation, and credit of the English in general, who are generally as fair Dealers
as any in the World, and of as active and undertaking Souls; and the Principal
Seat or Emporium of this great Trade, is the great and famous City of London.

Of the Corporations of London.
5. THe other Traders in London are divided into Companies or Corporations; who
are as so many Bodies Politic. Of these there are Twelve called the Chief
Companies, and he that is chosen Lord Mayor, must be free of one of these
Companies, which are

1. Mercers, 2. Grocers, 3. Drapers, 4. Fishmengers. 5. Goldsmiths, 6.
Skinners, 7. Merchant-Taylors, 8. Haberdashers, 9. Salters, 10. Ironmongers,
11. Vintners, 12 Clothworkers.

And if it happen that the Lord Mayor Elect, is of any other Company, he
presently removes to one of the Twelve. All these Companies have
Assembly-places, called Halls, which are so many Basilikes, or stately and
sumptuous Palaces, worthy to be viewed by all Strangers. It has been the
Custom of our Kings to honor some of these Companies by taking their Freedom
thereof; and the present King was pleased to be made Free of the Company of
Grocers, and the present Prince of Orange was not long ago made free of the
Company of Drapers.

Each Company or Mystery has a Master annually chosen, from among themselves,
and other subordinate Governors called Wardens, or Assistants. These do
exactly correspond with the general Government of the City, by a Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Common Counsel; who are selected out of these several Companies,
so excellent a harmony there is in this Government.

Of the Twelve Chief Companies out of which the Lord Mayor is to be annually
Chosen.
1. MERCERS.
The Mercers have been always allowed the first place, who were Incorporated
into a Society 17 R. 2. Anno 1393. For their Arms, they bear Gules, a
Maidenhead proper crowned, Or, Wascot purple, issuing out of Clouds proper,
within a Bordure Nebulee, Or.

2. GROCERS.
The Grocers were at first called Pepperers, and Incorporated by the name of
Grocers, Anno 1345. 20 E. 3. They bear a Chevron, nine Cloves Sable, with this
Motto, God grant Grace; Supporters Helm and Crest, granted by Clarencieux, in
the Reign of H. 8. Anno 1562.

3. DRAPERS.
The Drapers were Incorporated, 17 H. 6. An. 1430. The Arms first granted by
Garter; Crest and Supporters by Clarencieux. The Coat Gules, three Triple
Crowns, Or, Capt Gules issuing out of Clouds resting upon Sunbeams; their
Motto, Unto God only be Honor and Glory.

4. FISH MONGERS.
The Fishmongers were at first two Companies, to wit, Stock-Fishmongers, and
Salt-Fishmongers; but 28 H. 8. They were imbodied into one Company; Their Arms
Azure, three Dolphins in pale paper crowned, Or, betwixt four lives Salterways
Argent, all crowned Or, on a Chief Gules, three Cross-keys Salterways Argent,
the Motto, All Worship be to God only.

5. GOLDSMITHS.
The Goldsmiths were Incorporated 16 R. 2. Their Arms quarterly Gules and
Azure, two Leopards heads, Or, two Golden Cups covered 'twixt two Buckles Or,
the Motto, To God only be all Glory.

6. SKINNERS.
The Skinners were Incorporated 1 E. 3. Anno 1327. and made a perfect
Fraternity, 18 R. 2. Their Arms Ermin on a Chief, Gules, three Ducal Crowns,
Or, sinned of the first, their Motto the the same with the Goldsmiths, To God
only be all Glory.

7. MERCHANT-TAYLORS.
The first Patent of these Arms were granted by Clarencieux, to the Company of
Tailors and Linen Armourers, 21 E. 4. 1480. And Incorporated 17 H. 7. 1501. by
the name of Merchant-Taylors. Their Arms Argent a Tent, two Robes Gules on a
Chief Azure, a Lion passant, regardant, Or; the Motto, Concordia parvae res
crescunt.

8. HABERDASHERS.
The Haberdashers, called of old Hurrers, were Incorporated a Society of St.
Katharines 26 H. 6. Anno 1447. Confirmed 17 H. 7. by the name of
Merchant-Haberdashers. Their Coat Nebulee Argent and Azure, on a Bend Gules, a
Lion passant, regardant, Or; the Crest and Supporters, granted by Clarencieux,
Anno 1571. The Motto, Serve and Obey.

9. SALTERS.
The Salters had the Arms of ^ Society given them, 22 H. 8. Anno 1530. the
Crest and Supporters by ^ Clarencieux, 29 Eliz. Anno 1587. The Coat party per
Chevron, Azure and Gules, three Salts covered, overflowing, Argent, with this
Motto, Sal sapit omnia.

10. IRONMONGERS.
The Iron-mongers were Incorporated 3 E. 4. 1462. Their Arms Granted by
Lancaster King at Arms, Marshal to Clarencieux, An. 1455. 34 H. 6. Their Coat
Argent on a Chevron, Gules, three Lockets capted, Or, between three Steel Gads,
Azure.

11. VINTERS.
The Vintners were Incorporated by E. 3. by the name of Wine-Tonners, confirmed
15. H. 6. Anno. 1436. Their Arms first Granted by Clarencieux, 6 H. 6. 1427.
They bear Sable a Chevron, between three Tunns Argent.

12. CLOATH-WORKERS.
The Cloath-Workers grew to be a Company, 22 H. 8. Anno 1530. Their Arms then
Granted by Clarencieux, Sable a Chevron Ermin in Chief, two Crabbets Argent in
base, a Beazel, Or, Supporters and Crest granted by Clareucieux, Anno 1587.

The other Corporations, besides these Twelve, enjoy large Privileges by the
King's Charter, and they have fair Halls to meet in, most of which were
consumed in the great Fire, Anno 1666. but they are since rebuilt for the most
part in a very stately and magnificent manner: The Hall belonging to the
Company of Dyers was a few weeks ago consumed by an unhappy Fire that happened
near, as were also some Houses in Thames Street.

Of the other Corporations in London.
1. DYERS.
The Dyers were first Incorporated by a special Charter of H. 6. 16 Feb. in the
49 th of his Reign. Their Coat a Chevron Engrail'd between three Woolsacks.

2. BREWERS.
The Brewers were Incorporated 22 d February 6 H. 6. and confirmed 13 July 2.
Eliz. Their Coat is a Chevron Engrailed, Argent, three Tunns Sable, 'twixt 6
Garbes Salterways, Or.

3. LEATHER-SELLERS.
The Company of Leather-Sellers is ancient, for they were first Incorporated, 6
R. 2. Their Coat is three Bucks trippant regardant Gules.

4. PEWTERERS.
The Pewterers were Incorporated in the Reign of E. 4. in the 13 of his Reign,
Jan. 20. Their Arms Azure, on a Chevron Or, three Roses Gules between.

5. BARBER-CHYRVRGEONS.
The Barber-Chyrurgeons were Incorporated by Edw. 4. but confirmed by every
King and Queen since, with enlargments. Their Arms are a Cross quartered Gules,
a Lion passant gardant, Or, in the first quarter a Chevron between three. In
the second party, per pale Argent and vert, a Rose crowned with an Imperial
Crown, the first as the fourth, the second as the third.

6. ARMOVRERS.
The Armourers were Incorporated in the beginning of H. 6. the King himself
being pleased to be Free of their Company. Their Arms Argent on a Chevron
Gules, a Gantlet between four Swords in Saltire, on a Chief Sable, a Buckler
Argent, charged with Cross Gules, betwixt 2 Helmets of the first.

7. WHITE-BAKERS.
This Company are of great Antiquity; they were a Company 1 E. 2. had a new
Charter, 1 H. 7. confirmed by H. 8. E. 6. Queen Ma. Queen Eliz. and King James.
Their Arms Gules three Garbs, Or, on a Chief, an arm issuing out of the Clouds
proper, holding a pair of Scales, Or, between three Anchors of the first.

8. WAX-CHANDLERS.
These are also of ancient standing, and much used in times of Popery; they
became Incorporated, Anno 1484. 2 R. 3. Their Arms Azure on a Chevron between
three Lamps Argent, three Roses Gules.

9. TALLOW-CHANDLERS.
This is a Society of great Antiquity, first formally Incorpora^ed 2 E. 4.
Their Arms a Pale counterchang'd Argent, and Azure between th^ee Doves Argent
volant, with O^ve branches vert*

10. CVTLERS.
Incorporated beginning H. 5. Their Arms six Swords Salterways proper.

11. GIRDLERS.
Incorporated 6 th August, 27 H. 6. yet very ancient. Their Arms Azure, Or, and
a pale between three Gridirons Azure.

12. BVTCHERS.
This Company came not to be Incorporated till the third of King James, then
they were made a Corporation by the Name of Master, Wardens and Commonalty of
the Art and Mystery of Butchers, yet the Fraternity^ is ancient; their Arms
Azure, two Axes Salterways Argent, between two Roses Argent, as many Bulls
heads Cowped of the second attired, Or, a Bores head Gules, 'twixt two Garbs
vert.

13. SADLERS.
This Company is very ancient, as showing their beginning in the times of E. 1.
have continued in their Livery, and given Livery ^ear 400 years; what the said
King and R. 2. H. 4. E. 2. E. 3. H. 5. H. 6. E. 4. R. 3. H. 7. H. 8. E. 6.
gave, King James confirmed. Their Arms a Chevron, between three Saddles, Or.

14. CARPENTERS.
This Ancient Company were Incorporated by Letters Patents of Edw. 4. in his 17
th year, the 7 th of July, by the Name of the Master, Warden, and Commonalty of
the Mystery of Freemen of the Carpentry of the City of London. Their Arms
Azure, a Chevron engrailed between three Compasses Argent.

15. CORDWAINERS.
This Company of Shoomakers, called Cordwainers of old, were Incorporated 17.
H. 6. and confirmed by all Kings since. Their Arms Azure a Chevron Or, between
three Goats heads, erased Argent, attired Or.

16. PAINTERS.
This Company having the Addition of Painters-Stainers are of high Antiquity,
yet not Incorporated till Anno 1580. 23 of Qu. Eliz.

17. CVRRIERS.
These are also Ancient, but Incorporated, 12 June, 3 Jacobi. Their Arms Azure,
a Cross ingrailed, Or, between four Saws Salterways Argent.

18. MASONS.
The Company of Masons, called Free-Masons, were a loving Brotherhood for many
Ages, yet not regulated into a Society till 12 H. 4. Their Arms Sable, on a
Chevron between three Castles Argent, a pair of Compasses of the first.

19. PLVMMERS.
Incorporated 9 Jacobi, yet a a very Ancient Fellowship,

20. INHOLDERS.
Incorporated 6. H. 8. Their Arms a Chevron quarterly Or. and Gules
counterchanged between three Garbs Or.

21. FOVNDERS.
Incorporated 18 th Sept. 12 Jacobi; Their Coat, Gules, a Spoon-pot 'twixt two
Candlesticks, Or.

22. EMBROIDERERS.
Incorporated 4 th Eliz. Their Arms Barry of 8 Argent, and Azure on a Fesse,
Or, a Cup Argent, between as many Lions passant regardant.

23. POVLTERS.
Incorporated 19 H. 7. Their Arms are three Swans of the first, as many Herons
of the second.

24. COOKS.
Incorporated 12 E. 4. Their Arms a Chevron Sable, between three Burray
branches proper.

25. COOPERS.
Incorporated 16 H. 7. by the name of Master, Wardens, or Keepers of the
Commonalty of the Freemen of the Mystery of Coopers in London, and the Suburbs
of the same City; Their Arms party per pale Gules, and Or, a Chevron between
three Hoops in a Chief Azure.

26. TYLERS and BRICK-LAYERS,
Though very ancient, yet not Incorporated till the 10 th of Qu. Eliz. Their
Arms Azure, a Chevron, a Flower-de-luce, Or, in Chief, 'twixt two Gads of Steel
of the second.

27. BOWYERS.
This Company though of great Antiquity and Honor to the English Nation; yet
their Incorporation was but 21 of K. James. Their Arms Sable on a Chief, three
Mullets on the first, between three Saws of the first.

28. FLETCHERS.
These are also a Corporation; Their Arms Sable, a Chevron Or, between three
Arrows Argent.

29. BLACK-SMITHS.
A very ancient Fraternity, Incorporated 20 th of Eliz. Their Arms Sable, a
Chevron between three Hammers crowned Or.

30. JOYNERS.
Joyners, or Seelers, were Incorporated by Qu. Eliz. in her 13 th Year: Their
Arms Gules, a Chevron, 'twixt two Compasses, and a Globe Argent, on a Chief
pale Gules, charged with an Escalop, Or, between two Roses of the first.

31. PLAISTERERS.
Incorporated in the Reign of H. 7. Their Arms Azure, an Eschutcheon, Or, a
Rose between two Flower-de-luces Gules, two Hammers and a Brush Argent.

32. WEAVERS.
The Company of Weavers were of very ancient Note, as having three several
Societies of themselves, viz. the Woollen-Weavers, the Arras-Weavers, and the
Linnen-Weavers. Their Arms Azure, three Leopards heads, with three Shuttles in
their Mouths, Argent, on a Chevron Gules, Or between.

33. FRVITERERS.
Incorporated 3 Jacobi; Their Arms Argent, the Tree of Paradise between Adam
and Eve proper.

34. SCRIVENERS.
An ancient Society Incorporated 28 Jan. 14 Jacobi: Their Arms an Eagle volant,
holding in his Mouth a Penner and Inkhorn.

35. BOTTLE-MAKERS and HORNERS.
As for these, the precedent times have remembered them to be of Antiquity, and
two Distinct Companies combined in one: But I find (says Stow, page 638.) no
Record that they were at any time Incorporated.

36. STATIONERS.
This Company was of great Antiquity before Printing was invented: Their old
Dwelling was in Paternoster Row, and the parts adjoining, yet not Incorporated
till 3 Ph. and Mary* Their Arms Argent, on a Chevron between three Bibles Or, a
Falcon volant between two Roses, the Holy Ghost in Chief.

37. MARBLERS.
The Company called the Marblers, or Sculpters, are in one Fraternity with the
Masons, yet they have a different Coat, viz. a Chevron between two, and a
Mallet Argent.

38. WOOL-PACKERS.
There was a Company of Wool-packers in the time of the Hans, when the Staple
of Wool flourished, their Coat Azure, a Wool-sack Argent.

39. FARRIERS.
Had their rise from Henry de Ferraris, a Norman, who was Master of the Horse
to the Conqueror, who gave him the honor of Tutbury, the first preferment of
the Ferrars. Their Arms three Horse-shoos Azure.

40. PAVIOVRS.
This is an ancient Company, their Coat Argent, a Chevron between three Rummers
Sable.

41. LORINORS.
Their Arms are Gules on a Chevron Argent, three Horse-Combs 'twixt three Roses
Argent.

42. BROWN-BAKERS.
Incorporated 19 Jacobi; their Arms Gules, a hand issuing out of the Clouds a
chief Barry wavie, Or and Azure, on a Chevron Gules.

43. WOOD-MONGERS.
Incorporated 3 Jacobi. Their Coat Argent, a Chevron 'twixt three Faggots Sable.

44. VPHOLSTERS, or VPHOLDERS.
Their Arms Sable, three Tents Gules on a Chevron Or, three Tents of the second.

45. TVRNERS.
Incorporated 2 Jacobi. Their Coat Azure, a Katharine-wheel Argent.

46. GLAZIERS.
Their Arms two Crosiers Salterways Sable, four Sprigs on a Chief Gules, a Lion
passant Gardant, Or.

47. CLARKS.
The Company of Clarks, called Parish-Clarks, is ancient, and stand Registered
in the Books of Guild Hall. They were incorporated 17 H. 3. Their Arms Azure, a
Flower-de-luce, Or, on a Chief Gules, a Leopards head 'twixt two Books, Or.

48. WATERMEN
Have for their Arms barry waive of six, Azure, and Argent, a Lighter proper on
a chief Gules, a pair of Oars Salterways, 'twixt two Cushions, Or.

49. APOTHECARYES.
This Company having separated themselves from the ancient Society of the
Grocers, grew so much in favor with King James, that he used to call them his
Company; and therefore gave them a Charter of Incorporation the 15 th of his
Reign. Amongst many worthy Members of this Company, I may not forget Dr. Gideon
De Laune, Apothecary to King James, a man noted for many singularities in his
time, a great Benefactor to to the Public, and particularly to the Foundation
of the Apothecaries-Hall in Black-Fryars, where his Statue, in white Marble, is
to be seen to this day. And to whom I have the honor to be nearly related,
which is not the Reason that I mention him, but to perpetuate his Memory as
well as others, as his due desert; he lived piously to the age of 97 years, and
worth (notwithstanding his many acts of public and private piety,) near as
many thousand pounds as he was years, having 37 Children by one Wife, and about
60 Grandchildren at his Funeral. His famous Pill is in great request to this
day, notwithstanding the Swarms of pretenders to Universal Pill-making. This
little digression, I hope, will not be offensive.

50. SILK-THROWERS.
This Company was made a Fellowship of this City, 19 Jacobi; and Incorporated
by the name of the Master, Wardens, Assistants, and Commonalty of the Trade or
Mystery of Silk-throwers of the City of London, 13 April, 5 Car. 1.

Besides these there are several other Societies, of which more hereafter.

These Corporations, or Bodies-Politick, have all their stately spacious Halls
(as was said) with Clerks and other Ministerial Officers, to attend them when
they meet to consult about the regulation of their respective Societies, and
for promoting public Good, and advancement of Trade and Wealth, as also when
they meet at their sumptuous and splendid Feasts. And in this London surpasses
all other Cities.

The Arms of LONDON
To conclude our Heraldry, the Arms of this Illustrious City shall bring up the
Rear, as well as it has been placed in the Front. It is Argent, Cross Gules,
with the Sword of St. Paul, not Sir William Wallworth's Dagger, as some have
conceited; for this Coat did belong to the City before the said Sir William
Walworth, Lord Mayor, slew the Rebel Wat Tyler, as learned Antiquaries Affirm.

The Oath of a Freeman.
YE shall Swear that ye shall be good and true to our Sovereign Lord King
Charles the Second, and to the Heirs of our said Sovereign Lord the King.
Obeysant and Obedient ye shall be to the Mayor and Ministers of this City, the
Franchises and Customs thereof, ye shall maintain, and this City keep harmless
in that which in you is. Ye shall be contributary to all manner of charges
within this City, as Summons, Watches, Contributions, Taxes, Tallages, Lot and
Scot, and to all charges, bearing your part as a Freeman ought to do. Ye shall
color no Foreigners Goods, under, or in your Name, whereby the King or this
City might or may lose their customs or advantages. Ye shall know no Foreigner
to buy or sell any Merchandise with any Foreigner within this City or Franchise
thereof, but ye shall warn the Chamberlain thereof, or some Minister of the
Chamber. Ye shall implead or sue no Freeman out of this City, whiles ye may
have Right and Law within the same City. Ye shall take none Apprentice, but if
he be Freeborn (that is to say) no Bondmands Son, nor the Son of any Alien,
and for no less term than for seven Years, without fraud or deceit: and within
the first Year ye shall cause him to be enrolled, or else pay such Fine as
shall be reasonably imposed upon you for omitting the same: And after his terms
end, within convenient time (being required) ye shall make him Free of this
City, if he have well and truly served you. Ye shall also keep the King's Peace
in your own person. Ye shall know no Gatherings, Conventicles, or Conspiracies
made against the Kings Peace, but ye shall warn the Mayor thereof, or let it to
your power. All these points and Articles ye shall well and truly keep
according to the Laws and Customs of this City to your power, so God you help,
etc.

Of the Guild Hall.
PAge 160. The Reader was referred to what should be spoken about the great
Guild Hall, to the Chapter of Government, where an account has been given of
the several Courts there, therefore there is no need of further addition here
as to that, only we shall briefly remark its Antiquity.

Fabian says, that this Hall was begun to be built New, Anno 1411. 12 H. 4. By
Sir Thomas Knolles then Lord Mayor, and his Brethren the Aldermen, and made a
large and great House. 1 H. 6. The Executors of Sir Richard Whittington gave
toward the paving of this great Hall, 20 l. and next year 15 l. more, to the
said pavement with hard stone of Purbeck; they also Glazed the Windows thereof,
and of the Lord Mayors Court, on every of which the Arms of Sir Richard
Whittington were placed. The Foundation of the Mayors Court was laid 3. H. 6.
and of the Porch on the South Side of the Court; Then were built the Lord
Mayors Chamber, the Councel-Chamber, and other Rooms above stairs. The New
Councel-Chamber (a very good and honorable Deed) with a fair Room over it,
appointed for a Treasury for the Books and Records of the City, and another
Room underneath for necessary use and Employment, was begun, Anno 1614. and
finished Michaelmas 1615. at the charge of 1740 l. which was well well
bestowed. The Kitchins, etc. were built about Anno 1501. for accommodation of
the Lord Mayors Feast, by means of Sir John Shaa, Goldsmith, Lord Mayor, who
kept the first Lord Mayors Feast there, which were wont to be kept before in
Merchant-Taylors, or Grocers-Hall, etc. The adjoining Chapel or College of
Mary Magdalen, and All Saints, was called London-College, built, Anno 1299.
which had a Custos, seven Chaplains, three Clerks, and four Quiristers.
Adjoying to this Chapel was a fair and large Library, pertaining to the
Guild Hall and College; but the Books (to the quantity of threescore Cartloads
Howel. p. 118.
) in Edw. 6. time were sent for by Edw. Duke of Somerset, with promise to
restore them, but they were never returned. The Library was built by the
Executors of Sir Richard Whittington aforesaid; and by W. Bury.

This great Guild Hall was destroyed by the great Fire, 1666, but very
Magnificently rebuilt; In the great Hall, on the East End, it is very Richly
hung with the lively Effigies of His Majesty and the Duke of York, and round
about on all sides, it is adorned with the costly and lively Pictures of the
great Ministers of State, and Judges of the Land. There are many large and
spacious Courts and Offices, where the Respective Affairs of the City are
managed as before in the Section of the Civil-Government of London.

Of Blackwell-Hall.
THis place was purchased by the Lord Mayor and Commonalty, for 50 l. 20. R. 2.
and employed as a Weekly Marketplace for all sorts of Woollen-Cloaths, broad
and narrow, brought from all parts of the Kingdom there to be sold. 21 R. 2. It
was Decreed, that no Foreigner or Stranger should sell any Woollen-Cloath, but
in Blackwell-Hall, upon pain of forfeiture thereof. It was Rebuilt, being
decayed, Anno 1558. at the charge of 2500 l. to which Richard May,
Merchant-Taylor, gave 300 l. at his Decease.

It was destroyed by the great Fire, 1666, but rebuilt in a very capacious
manner, and is the greatest Market and Storehouse for all sorts of
Woollen-Cloath, etc.

Of Leaden Hall.
ANno 1411. This Hall was confirmed unto the City by Sir Richard Whittington,
and others, who purchased it. Anno 1443. 21 H. 6. Sir John Hatherly, Lord
Mayor, purchased License of the King to take up 200 fodder of Lead, for the
building of Water-Conduits, a Common Granary, and the Cross in Cheap Side, more
beautifully for the honor of the City. This Granary was built by the
honorable and famous Merchant, Simon Air, (the words of the Grant be, Cum
Nobilis and potens, vir, etc. Whereas the Noble and powerful man, etc.)
sometime an Vpholsterer, and then a Draper, Anno 1419. He built it of square
Stone, as it now shows, having escaped the fury of the great Fire, with a
fair and large Chapel on the East Side of the Quadrant, over the Porch he
caused to be Written, Dextra Domini exaltavit me; The Lords Right hand exalted
me. Within the Chapel was written, Honorandus and famosus Mercator Simon Air,
hujus operis, etc. In English thus, The honorable and famous Merchant Simon
Air Founder of this Work, once Mayor of this City, Citizen and Draper of the
same, Departed out of this Life 18 Sept. 1459. 38 H. 6. He was buried in the
Church of St. Mary Wolnoth, in Lumbard-street. He gave very many large and
bountiful Legacies, to be read in Stow, page 163.

This Hall was Burnt, Anno 1484. but Rebuilt again in a very stately and
capacious manner. There were kept the Artillery, Guns, and other Armor of the
City. -- The Store of Timber for the necessary reparations of the Tenements
belonging to the Chamber of London. It was a Free Market for Victuallers. There
were the Common Beams for weighing of Wools and other Wares, the Scales to
weigh Meal, there were made the Pageants for the Midsummer-Watches. In other
parts Woolsacks were stowed. Abovestairs the Painters workt upon the Pageants,
the Residue were let to Merchants, etc. Now there is kept the greatest
Flesh-Market about the City; And a great Magazine of Corn.

In speaking of Halls it may not be impertinent to remember the Right
honorable Baptist Lord Hicks, Viscount Cambden, who besides many noble and
charitable acts of Piety in King James his time, recorded by Stow, p. 760, 761.
built the Sessions House for the Justices of Middlesex, in St. Johns-street, at
the charge of 600 l. called after his Name Hicks's-Hall, which was a great
convenience, they sitting before in a common Inn, called the Castle.

As for the particular Halls of Companies, we have spoke of them Generally
before, which is all that appears at present necessary.

SECT. 7.
Of the Custom-House.
THe House where this great Office was kept a little below Billingsgate, was
destroyed by the great Fire, but is Rebuilt in a much more magnificent uniform,
and commodious manner by the King, which has cost His Majesty 10000 l.

Here is received and managed all the Impositions laid on Merchandise Imported
or Exported from this City, which are so considerable, that of all the Customs
of England, (which amount to about 600000 l. a year) divided into three parts,
the Port of London pays two thirds, that is about 400000 l. per annum. A great
Number of Officers are here Employed, whereof diverse are of considerable
quality and ability.

There are at present Five Commissioners, who have the charge and oversight of
all His Majestics Customs in all Ports of England, Viz.

Sir Richard Temple, Bar. Sir George Downing, Knight. Charles Cheney, Esquire Francis
Millington, Esquire John Vpton, Esquire The Sallaries to each of these is 1200 l. a
Year, they have many Deputies or Waiters in the Port of London, and also in all
the Out-Ports.

Then there are Customers, Collectors, Comptrollers, Surveyors, Searchers,
Waiters, etc.

Sir John Shaw Collector Inwards (and for the Act of Navigation, Fee 966. l.
13. s. 4. d.)

Sir Nicholas Crisp Collector Outward, Sallary 276 l.

Alderman Edward Backwell Comptroller, Sallary, 255 l.

George Nicholas Esquire Surveyor-General, Sallary 500 l.

The Searchers Office is managed by a Chief, and five Under-Searchers, Clerks,
etc.

Since the happy Restoration of His Majesty, there has been in all Eleven
Persons Under-Searchers in that Office, viz.

Six who have all (except one) disposed of their place by His Majesty's grace
and favors. Mr. Daniel Colwall. Rob. Forster. Leonard Scot. Will. Dockwra.
Tho. Hampson. John Seymour, Esquire

The Five Undersearchers now in Possession, are Mr. Tho. Burton. John Evans.
Richard Goodlad. Charles Beauvoir. Richard Pierce.


The Chief Searcher has 120 l. per annum.

The Undersearchers have each 12 l.

And sundry Fees settled upon them by Authority of Parliament, which are paid
them by Masters of Ships, and Merchants, etc. Having always been Officers
remarkable for their Industry and great Integrity, who have a continual
attendance incumbent on them from Morning to Night, and who discharge the Duty
of their Places with a very clear Reputation; And Maugre all the Malice and
Envy that has many times been making attempts upon them, their honesty has
(verified the Proverb) proved the best Policy to defend them from all their
open and secret Enemies.

There is also Five Deputy Searchers under the Commissioners or Farmers for the
time being, who do assist the Five Undersearchers, in Shipping goods, and doing
other business by Bills and Copies of the Original Warrants, which are by Law
directed to the King's Searchers. These Deputies, because there is no Fee due
to them, have 80 l. per annum Sallary, but are no Patent Officers.

Surveyors,
Mr.
Daniel Ford. Thomas Fownes. Tho. Cook. Hew. Cheely.
Sallary 150 l. per annum.
Six Tide Surveyors,
Mr.
Simon Tomlins. -- Jones. -- Tombs. Steph. Chusman Edm. Clark. -- Sumpter.
Sallary 80 l. per annum.
19 Kings-Waters, Sallary to each 80 l.

40 Land-Waiters, Sallary to each 80 l.

80 Tyde-Waiters in Fee, 5 l. per annum, and 2 s. 6 d. per Day.

50 Ditto Extraordinary, no Sallary, 2 s. 6 d. per Day.

There are many other Officers, as Richard Kent Esquire Receiver-General of the
Revenue of the Customs; Giles Lidcot Esquire Accomptant-General; there is a
Customer of Cloth, and petty Customs, Fee 277 l. Two Customers of the great
Customs, Sallary 50 l. Comptroller of the Cloth and petty Customs, Fee 30 l.
Register of the Seizures, Sallary 106 l. Surveyor of the Out-Ports, Sallary 250
l. A Secretary, Ware-house-keeper, Surveyor of the Warehouse, etc. Besides
there are several persons Commissioned to Seize Goods uncustomed, either inward
or outward Bound; There are also Noontenders, Watchmen, and several inferior
Officers.

Note that the due perquisites belonging to these Officers are very
considerable, and to some are much more than their Respective Sallaries.

Of Docks.
THese Docks or Harbors are cut into the Land without further Current, and are
useful for the convenient lying of Vessels, Hoys, Lighters, Barges, Boats, etc.
in order to the convenient Delivery of Provision, as Victual, Fuel, etc. to the
adjacent Inhabitants. They are in number very many. -- Some of the chief are,
Scotland-Dock, adjoining to White Hall. -- White-Fryars-Dock: Puddle-Dock, at
the West End of Thames Street. -- Queen-Hith-Dock, a place of much Trade for
ground Corn, or Meal, which is brought out of the West Country thither in great
Quantities; Billingsgate-Dock, a place of great Trade, and where ships of
considerable Burden may Harbor. -- Sabbs-Dock, Tower-Dock, St.
Katharines-Dock, -- Hermitage-Dock, -- Execution-Dock, which though it be of
later years, fitted up retains to this day the former name which it received,
because it was the only place for Executing Pirates, and Sea-Robberts, which is
usually done by Hanging them on a Gibbet erected at Low-water-mark --
Limehouse-Dock. And on the South-shore are Clink-Dock, and St. Saviours-Dock --
There are besides these, many Docks for private use, as for repairing of Ships
and Vessels, which we omit.

Under this head of TRADE, and in this place, it may not be improper to give a
Brief Account of the Porters of London, who are not incorporate Companies, but
Brotherhoods, whose Original and Government are by Acts of Common Counsel. --
They are of two sorts.

1. Ticket-Porters, who do take up, weigh, load, and ouse all Merchants Goods,
as Cloth, Fruit, Sugars, Oils, Wines, Metals, etc. and have to their
Governor Sir Thomas Allen: These are very numerous; their Quarteridge is 4 d.
each.

2. Fellowship Porters. -- To these belong the shoring, or landing, housing,
carrying, or recarrying all measurable Goods, as Corn, Salt, Coals, etc. Their
chief Governor is the Alderman of Billingsgate Ward, who is at present Sir
John Peak. These are in Number about 700 and their Quarterige is 12 d. each. --
These and the former have very good Government and Orders among themselves, and
before any is admitted to that Employ among them, they pay a Fine. -- The
Ticket-Porters give good security for their Honesty and Fidelity, so that no
more need be done, but to take notice of his Name, which is s^ampt on his
Ticket that hangs at his Girdle, and repairing to their Governor, satisfaction
may be had for any wrong or mis-behaviour, etc.

There is a very remarkable Custom among the Fellowship Porters, as an
Ingenious person that belongs to their Society informed me, which is thus:

The next Sunday after every Midsummer-day, they have a Sermon preached to
them, so ordered by an Act of Common Counsel, in the Parish Church of St.
Mary-On-the-Hill, preparative to which, this Order is observed, they furnish
the Merchants and their Families about Billings-gate with Noseg^ys or Posies
overnight, and in the morning they go from their Common Hall, or place of
Meeting in good Order, each having a Posie or Nosegay in his hand; They walk
through the middle Isse to the Communion Table, where are two Basins, and every
one offers something to the Relief of the Poor, and toward the Charges of the
Day. After they have all past, the Deputy, the Merchants, their Wives,
Children, and Servants, do all come in Order from their Seats, and bestow their
Offerings also; which is a Ceremony of much variety. I am certainly informed,
that the very charges of their Nosegays cost them, in one year, not long ago,
near 20 l.

Coal-Market.
AT the head of Billingsgate-Dock is a square Plot of ground compassed with
Posts, known by the Name of Roomland, which with the Adjacent part of the
street has been the usual place, where the Ship-Masters, Coal-Merchants,
Woodmongers, Lightermen and Laborers, do meet every Morning, in order to the
Buying, Selling, Delivering and taking up of Sea-Coals and Scotch-Coals, as the
principal Market. This Coal-Market was kept on Great Tower Hill in the time of
the Cities late Desolation.

Corn-Market.
UPon Bear-key, between Sabs-Dock and Porters-key, is the usual place or Chief
Market for Corn, which is bought and sold there every day, but principally
Mondays, Wednesdays and Frydays, which are the Market-days, where great
Quantities of all kind of Grain are bought and sold by small Examples, commonly
called Samples, whether it be lying in Granaries or Ships, and, it (viz.
Bear-key) is the principal place where the Kentish and Essex Corn-Vessels do
lie.

Fish-Market.
THe Fresh Fish-Market is kept at Billings-Gate, Mondays, Wednesdays and
Frydays.

Of the Navy-Office, where the whole Business concerning the King's Ships of
War is managed.
FIrst there is the Treasure of the Navy, his Office is to receive out of the
Exchequer, by Warrant from the Lord Treasurer of England, and to pay all
Charges of the Navy, by Warrant from the principal Officers of the Navy, for
which he had formerly Sallary, 220 l. 13. s. 4 d. besides 3 d. in the pound for
all Money paid by him, but has now an honorable allowance certain from His
Majesty in lie^ thereof.

Next the Comptroller of the Navy, whose Office to attend and Control all
payments of Wages, to know the Market-Rates of all Stores belonging to
Shipping, to examine and audit Treasurers, Victuallers, and Score-keepers
Accounts, his Sallary is 500 l. yearly.

Surveyor of the Navy, whose Office is Generally to know the state of all
Stores, and see the Wants supplied; to sind the Hulls, Masts and Yards, and
estimate the Value of Repairs, by Indenture to charge all Boat-swains and
Carpenters of His Majesty's Navy, with what Stores they Receive, and at the end
of each Voyage, to state and audit their Accounts, his Sallary is 490 l.

Clarks of the Acts, whose Office is to Record all Orders, Contracts, Bills,
Warrants, and other business transacted by the Principal Officers and
Commissioners of the Navy, etc. the Sallary of the Commissioners of the Navy is
500 l. yearly to each. There are two Commissioners, whose particular work is to
be at Portsmouth and Chatham, always in readiness to give Orders for the better
Management of His Majesty's Affairs in his Yards or Storehouses there; Sallary
to each is 350 l. Yearly.

Each of these Officers abovenamed have two Clarks, and some of them more, all
paid by the Treasurer of the Navy, all hold their places by Patent from the
King, and most of them during pleasure.

The King has for his Navy Royal and Stores, four great Yards or Storehouses,
( viz.) at Chatham, Deptford, Woolwich, and Portsmouth, where his Ships are
Built, Repaired and laid up after their Voyages. In which yards are Employed
Diverse Officers, whereof the six principal are Clerks of the Check,
Store-keeper, Master, Attendants, two at Chatham, Master-Shipwright, Clark of
the Control, Clark of the Survey.

Note that the Charges of the Clarks and Instruments are included in the
aforementioned Sallaries.

Besides these four Yards, his Majesty has diverse Rope-Yards, as at Chatham,
Woolwich, and Portsmouth, where are made all his Cables and Cordage for his
Navy. Also in time of Sea-War, the King has another Yard at Harwich, where
there is, out of War time, continued an Officer at the charge of 100 l. yearly.

The ordinary Charge of his Majesty's Navy in times of Peace, continuing in
Harbor, is so well regulated, that it amounts to scarce 7000 l. Besides, all
Charges of Building of Ships, etc. or setting forth any Fleets, which some
years, even in peaceable times, amounts to 12, or 13000 l. more, as may easily
be conjectured by the Charges of Building and Rigging of Ships, and of one
Months expense at Sea.

Of the Post Office.
THis Office is now kept in Lumbard-street, formerly in Bishops-gate-street,
the Profits of it are by Act of Parliament settled on his Royal Highness the
Duke of York. But the King by Letters Patents, under the great Seal of England,
constitutes the Post-Master-General.

From this General Office, Letters and Packets are dispatched,

On Mondays
To France, Spain, Italy, Germany, Flanders, Sweedland, Donmark, Kent and the
Downs.

On Tuesdays
To Holland, Germany, Sweedland, Denmark, Ireland, Scotland, and all parts of
England and Wales.

On Wednesdays
To all parts of Kent, and the Downs.

On Thursdays
To France, Spain, Italy, and all parts of England and Scotland.

On Frydays
To Flanders, Germany, Italy, Sweedland, Denmark, Holland, Kent, and the Downs.

On Saturdays
All parts of England, Wales, Scotland, and Ireland. Letters are returned from
all parts of England and Scotland, certainly every Monday, Wednesday and
Friday; from Wales every Monday and Friday; and from Kent and the Downs every
day: But from other parts more uncertainly, in regard of the Sea.

A Letter containing a whole sheet of Paper is conveyed 80 Miles for 2 d. two
sheets for 4 d. and an Ounce of Letters for 8 d. and so propo^tionably; a
Letter containing a sheet is conveyed above 80 Miles for 3 d. two sheets for 6
d. and every Ounce of Letters for 12 d. A sheet is conveyed to Dublin for 6 d.
two for a shilling, and an Ounce of Letters for 12 d.

This Conveyance by Post is done in so short a time, by night as well as by
day, that every 24 hours, the Post goes 120 Miles, and in five days, an answer
of a Letter may be had from a Place 300 Miles distant from the Writer.

Moreover, if any Gentlemen desire to ride Post, to any Principal Town of
England, Posthorses are always in readiness, (taking no Horse without the
consent of his owner) which in other Kings Reigns was not duly observed; and
only 3 d. is demanded for every English Mile, and for every Stage to the
Post-Boy, 4 d. For conducting.

Besides this Excellent convenience of conveying Letters, and Men on
Horseback, there is of late such and admirable commodiousness, both for Men
and Women of better rank, to travel from London, and to almost all the Villages
near this great City, that the like has not been known in the World, and that
is by Stage-Coaches, wherein one may be transported to any place, sheltred from
foul Weather, and foul ways, free from endamaging ones Health or Body by hard
jogging, or over violent motion; and this not only at a low price, as about a
shilling for every five Miles, but with such velocity and speed, as that the
Posts in some Foreign Countries, make not more Miles in a day; for the
Stage-Coaches, called Flying-Coaches, make forty or fifty Miles in a day, as
from London to Oxford or Cambridge, and that in the space of twelve hours, not
counting the time for Dining, setting forth not too early, nor coming in too
(...).

The several Rates that now are and have been taken for the Carriage of
Letters, Packquets, and Parcels, to or from any of His Majesty's Dominions, to
or from any other parts or places beyond the Seas, are as follows, that is to
say,
s. d. MOrlaix, St. Maloes, Caen, New Haven, and places of like distance,
Carriage paid to Rouen -- Single 0 6 Double 1 0 Treble 1 6 Ounce 1 6
Hamburgh, Colen, Frankfort, -- Carriage paid to Antwerp, is -- Single 0 8
Double 1 4 Treble 2 0 Ounce 2 0
Venice, Geneva, Legorn, Rome, Naples, Messina, and all other parts of Italy by
way of Venice, Franct pro Mantua, -- Single 0 9 Double 1 6 Treble 2 3 Ounce 2 8
Marseilles, Smirna, Constantinople, Aleppo, and all parts of Turkey, Carriage
paid to Marselles. -- Single 1 0 Double 2 0 3/4 Oun. 2 9 Ounce 2 8
And for Letters brought from the same places to England -- Single 0 8 Double 1
4 Treble 2 0 Ounce 2 0
The Carriage of Letters brought into England, from Calice, Diep, Bulloign,
Abbeville, Amiens, St. Omers, Montrel -- Single 0 4 Double 0 8 Treble 1 0 Ounce
1 0 Roven -- Single 0 6 Double 1 0 Treble 1 6 Ounce 1 6
Genoua, Legorn, Rome, and other parts of Italy by way of Lions, Franct pro
Lions -- Single 1 0 Double 2 0 3/4 Ounce 2 9 Ounce 3 9


The Carriage of Letters Outward.
To Bourdeaux, Rochel, Nants, Orleans, Bayon, Tours, and places of like
distance, Carriage paid to Paris -- Single 0 9 Double 1 6 Treble 2 3 Ounce 2 0
Letters brought from the same places into England -- Single 1 0 Double 2 0 3/4
Oun. 3 0 Ounce 4 0
The Carriage of Letters Outward.
To Norembourgh, Bremen, Dantzick, Lubeck, Lipswick, and other places of like
distance, Carriage paid to Hamburgh -- Single 1 0 Double 2 0 3/4 Oun. 3 0 Ounce
4 0 Paris -- Single 0 9 Double 1 6 Treble 2 3 Ounce 2 0 Dunkirk, Ostend, Lisle
Ipers, Cambrary, Ghent, Bruxels, Bruges, Antwerp, and all other parts of
Flanders. Sh^^e, Flushing, Middleburgh, A^^ster^am, Rotterdam, Delph, Hague,
and all other parts of Holland and Zealand -- Single 0 8 Double 1 4 Treble 2 0
Ounce 2 0
All Merchants Accounts, not exceeding a Sheet, Bills of E^change, Invoices,
Bills of Lading, shall ^e allowed without rate in the price of the Letters, and
also the Covers of the Letters not exceeding a Sheet, to M^rseilles, Venice, or
Legorn, toward Turkey.

The said Office is managed by a Deputy, and other Officers, to the Number of
seventy seven persons; who give their actual attendance respectively, in the
dispatch of the business.

Upon this Grand Office, depends one hundred eighty two Deputy-Post-Masters in
England and Scotland; most of which keep Regular Offices in their Stages, and
Sub-Post-Masters in their Branches; and also in Ireland, another General Office
for that Kingdom, which is kept in Dublin, consisting of Eighteen like
Officers, and Forty-five Deputy Post-Masters.

The Present Post-Master-General, keeps constantly, for the transport of the
said Letters and Pacquets;

Between England and -- France, two Pacquet-Boats. Flanders, two Pacquet-Boats.
Holland, three Pacquet-Boats. Ireland, three Pacquet-Boats.

And at Deal, two Pacquet-Boats for the Downs.

All which Officers, Post-Masters, Pacquet-Boats, are maintained at his own
proper Charge.

And as the Masterpiece of all those good regulations, established by the
present Post-Master-General, for the better Government of the said Office, he
has annexed and appropriated the Market Towns of England, so well to their
Respective Post-Stages, that there is no Considerable Market Town, but has an
easy and certain Conveyance for the Letters thereof, to and from the said
Grand Office, in the due course of the Males every Post.

Though the Number of Letters Missive in England, were not at all Considerable
in our Ancestors days, yet it is now so prodigiously great, (since the meanest
People have Generally learnt to write) that this Office is Farmed for above 40,
rather 50000 l. a Year.

Of the PENNY-POST.
THis Ingenious Undertaking being so extraordinary useful in the facilitating
of Commerce and mutual Correspondence, and consequently very serviceable to
Traders, etc. shall be briefly handled; and, I hope, that what proceeds from
me, who am no interessed Person, will be resented Heartily, and Examined, as to
the Argumentative part, according to the Solidity and Strength of the Reasons
produced.

I have heard this Undertaking disparaged by some Censorious Persons, and have
examined the Reasons, with the quality of the Objectors, and have found it all
along opposed by none but the Ignorant, or such as preferred some particular
Ends, before Public Utility. To my knowledge I never saw nor corresponded
directly nor indirectly with any of the Undertakers, till being very desirous
to insert this Affair of the Penny-Post in this Book for Public Information, I
made an Address to one of the Gentlemen concerned, who Courteously supplied me
with some particular Informations which I wanted, and for which I am beholding
to him. This I speak, to satisfy the Objectors that I do voluntarily, and not
by any inducement of theirs mention this Affair, which, in my opinion, is so
far from being a prejudice, that the City, as well as the whole Nation, is
beholding to them for their Ingenious Contrivance, and their Constancy and
Generosity in minding the Public Good so much as they have done; for it is
certain that they have been at very great Expense to hold it up, under the
Discouragements that some Persons have thrown upon them, and the necessary
Charge to support it is yet very considerable. But to be more particular:

1. I will give some Hints of what this Undertaking is in Point of Practice.

2. Its general and particular Usefulness.

3. I will consider an Objection or two.

1. What I can say of this Undertaking in Point of Practice, is briefly what
follows, only I would premise a few words as my opinion, and the opinion of
impartial Persons of my acquaintance, as to the thing in general.

This useful Invention is little more than a year old, being begun in April
1680. The chief Undertaker that introduced it into Practice, is one Mr. William
Dockwra Merchant, a Native and Citizen of London, formerly one of His Majesty's
Sub-Searchers in the Custom-House of London, as in the List of those Officers
appears. A Person, whose approved Reputation for Industry and Fidelity was well
known to all for above ten years in that Office: And to whom the Public is
obliged, he having, with his Partners, spent much time, and a great Sum of
money, to bring this Undertaking on foot, wherein they encountered with no
small Difficulties, not only by Affronts and Indignities from the Vulgar sort,
who seldom weigh any Public or Generous Designs, but at the Beam of Little,
Selfish, By-Ends, but also by more dangerous Attaques; for there have been
Attempts made, by some Persons, to persuade his Royal Highness the Duke of
York, that it entrenched upon the General Post Office, and damnifi'd it;
whereupon many Actions were brought, and a chargeable Suit of Law followed:
But, questionless, the Duke is better informed now; for it is most certain,
that this does much further the Revenue of the Grand Post Office, and is an
universal Benefit to all the Inhabitants of these Parts: so that whoever goes
about to deprive the City of so useful a thing, deserves no thanks from the
Duke, nor any Body else, but to be Noted as an Enemy to Public and Ingenious
Inventions.

It is with all Humility submitted to the Consideration of all worthy Citizens
that happen to peruse this small Tract, that it becomes not the Honor of the
City to suffer any of its Ingenious Natives, especially Persons who have lived
and do live in good Fashion and Repute, to sink under the carrying on of an
Undertaking so advantageous not only to the Public, but also to private
Persons, since their industrious Service to their Generation deserves
encouragement from their Fellow-Citizens, and all others, viz.

(1.) To discountenance petty Persons that would, for the profit of running of
Errands, rob the Community (if they could) of this more than ordinary
convenience for safe, cheap, and necessary Dispatches.

(2.) To reject any INTRUDER that may attempt to set up another Penny-Post;
because, if the thing be hereafter profitable, all the Reason and Equity in the
world will plead for the Inventers, viz. that they ought to reap the Benefit.
And it is a Note of Consideration, That Mr. Dockwra has a numerous Family of
eight young Children; who being forsaken by some others soon after it began,
and left to shift for himself, carried on this Undertaking singly, for above
half a year at his own proper charge and hazard, against all the Difficulties,
Oppositions and Discouragements that attended it, though now he has several
Citizens in partnership with him. But I am truly informed, that the Income does
not yet amount to three fourths of the necessary Charge to support it;
therefore I am persuaded that this Honorable City will employ the Inventers,
rather than an Invader, if ever any such should be; And that it is much below
such a Prince as his Royal Highness is, to desire the Ruin of such a Family.

I am the more large upon this Particular, because it would be a general
Discouragement to the Contrivers of useful and profitable Inventions, if others
should be encouraged to reap the Crop of what they with so much charge and
labor have sown.

This Penny-Post is thus managed.
The Principal Office to which all Accounts, etc. are daily transmitted, is in
Lyme-street, at the Dwelling House of the said Mr. Dockwra, formerly the
Mansion House of Sir Robert Abdy K.nt.

There are seven Sorting-houses, proper to the seve^ Precincts, into which the
Undertakers have divided London, Westminster, and the Suburbs, situated at
equal distances, for the better maintenance of mutual Correspondence.

There are about 4 or 500 Receiving-houses to take in Letters, where the
Messengers call every hour, and convey them as directed; as also Post-Letters,
the writing of which are much increased by this Accommodation, being carefully
conveyed by them to the General Post Office in Lombard street.

There are a great Number of Clerks and poor Citizens daily employed, as
Messengers, to Collect, Sort, Enter, Stamp and Deliver all Letters, every
Person entertained giving Fifty pounds security, by Bond, for his Fidelity; and
is to be subject to the Rules and Orders, from time to time, given by the
Undertakers, who oblige themselves to make good any thing delivered to their
Messengers under the value of Ten pounds, if Sealed up, and the Contents
Endorsed; And these Messengers have their Wages duly paid them every Saturday
night.

By these are conveyed Letters and Parcels, not exceeding One Pound Weight, nor
Ten Pound in Value, to and from all Parts at seasonable times, viz. of the
Cities of London and Westminster, Southwark, Redriff, Wapping, Ratcliff,
Lyme-house, Stepney, Poplar, and Blackwall, and all other places within the
weekly Bills of Mortality, as also to the four Towns of Hackney, Islington,
South-Newington-Butts, and Lambeth, but to no other Towns, and the Letters to
be left only at the Receiving-houses of those four Towns, for the said four
Towns; but if brought home to their Houses, a Penny more in those Towns; nor
any Letter to be delivered to them in the Street, but at the Receiving-houses.

They now do use Stamps to mark the hour of the Day on all Letters when sent
out from their Office to be delivered, by which all Persons are to expect their
Letters within one hour, (little more or less, from the time marked thereon,
excepting such Letters as are to be conveyed to the Out-Towns, and Remotest
parts, which will be longer) by which the cause of delay of Letters may be
easily discerned, viz. whether it be really in the Office, or their own
Servants, (or others) with whom Letters are left.

The Marks they make use of for this purpose, are these:

Of which the First, signifies Eight in the Morning, the Last, Four in the
Afternoon, and the Middlemost, is the Letter of the chief Office in
Lyme-street, each Office having its proper Letter, and an Acknowledgment that
the Penny-Post is paid, to prevent the giving of any thing at the Delivery.

All Persons are desired not to leave any Town-Letters after Six of the Clock
in the Winter, and Seven in the Summer on Saturday Nights, because the many
poor Men employed, may have a little time to provide for their Families against
the Lord's Day, having no leisure all the week besides.

Upon three days at Christmas, two days in Easter and Whitsontide, and upon the
30 of January, the Penny-Post does not go.

To the most Remote places Letters go four or five times of the day, to other
places six or eight times of the day. To Inns of Court, and places of business
in Town, especially in Term or Parliamenttime, 10 or 12 times of the day. For
better information of People where the Receiving-houses are, there are great
Numbers of Printed Tickets dispersed from time to time amongst the
Neighborhood, and Advertisements in the Public Intelligences, which all
concerned may take Notice of, so that any body may be by the Neighborhood
immediately informed where a Receiving-house is. Carriers and Stage-Coach
Letters are to have Twopence enclosed to each Carrier or Coachman, because
they often reject them for want of money; Hundreds of such being returned,
which any Inquirer may have again upon notice, for they lie Alphabetically
disposed of in the chief Office for that end.

On all Post-Nights due Care is taken to call for, and convey to the General
Post House in Lombard Street all Post-Letters, whether Foreign or Inland, left
in any of the Penny-Post Receiving-houses, at or before Nine of the Clock at
Night. And I could wish, for Encouragement of the Undertakers, that all Persons
would so far contribute to the continuance of this useful Design, as to send
their Post-Letters by this Conveyance to the Post Office in Lombard Street,
which they do not Convey by themselves, or Servants.

If any Post-Letters be left without Money that should pay beforehand, they
will be Returned to the Office, therefore such as send Money, are to indorse
the Postage-money upon their Letters.

Such as enclose Money in Town-Letters, are to Indorse the true Sum on the
Outside, and to tie fast and seal up, under a plain Impression, all Parcels,
which may be one way to prevent Disputes, in case any thing be lost. The
Undertakers will not answer for any Centents unseen, unless sealed fast, and
the Value Indorsed plain to be Read.

2. Some brief Hints of the Usefulness of this Office.
1. In and near this great and famous Emporium, is the usual Residence of our
Kings, the High Court of Parliament, the fixed Seats of all the Courts of
Judicature, and in it is managed a vast Trade, as was showed in the Chapter
that Treats of it; now a cheap, frequent, and safe way of Correspondence, is
very advantageous for all that are concerned in Commerce, or Business.

The principal Trade of London depends upon Navigation, and therefore the City
and Suburbs are situate along the River of Thames, extending in length, as was
showed, page 5. from Ly^ne-house, to the end of Tuttle-street 7500 Geometrical
P^ces, that is seven Miles and an half; and from the end of Blackman-street, to
the end of St. Leonard Shoreditch, 2500 Paces in Breadth, that is two Miles;
and the whole Circumference (as by Demonstration can be made apparent) is above
20 Miles, taking in all the Contiguous Suburbs and Westminster, so that it is
the longest, if not the greatest and most populous City in Christendom. This
extraordinary Length, though it adds to its Splendour and Beauty, yet it renders
speedy Communication and Intercourse in Business very uneasy, and much more
troublesome, than in such great Cities as Paris, which is almost of an orbicular
Form. Now to keep up a necessary Correspondence, the way formerly used, was to
hire Porters at Excessive Rates to go on Errands, and to send Servants or
Apprentices, who, in the mean while, lost that time that should be spent to
learn their Trades, and benefit their Masters, and would often loyter, and get
vicious habits, and evil company, etc. (when they need not) to their own and
Masters hurt; or else such as could not spare the Porter so much money, nor
kept Servants, (as some poor Artificers and Laborers (have been forced to
sweat and toil, and leave their work, for, it may be, half the day, to do that
which now they may perform at the easy rate of a Penny.

But now all these Inconveniences are remedied by the Penny-Post with great
Safety and Celerity, for which the Contrivers really deserve the Thanks of all
who reap benefit by it; and I may be bold to say, that all the Inhabitants in
general, and their Fellow-Citizens in particular, are already very sensible of
the great Convenience thereof: For, among the innumerable Benefits of this
Penny-Post, which, for brevity we omit, Friends may converse with Friends, at
any distance; Merchants, Shopkeepers and Tradesmen with their Customers, or
such as deal with them; Clients may consult with Lawyers; Patients with
Doctors; Poor Prisoners with Creditors, or Benefactors; and all Bills dispersed
for Publication of any Concern; all Summons or Tickets conveyed; all Entries of
Brewers to the Excise-Office; and many more, for One Penny.

3. The Objections I have heard of, are,
1. From some sort of Porters, viz. that it hinders their Livelihood.

Answ. (1.) It Is certain that this is a mistake, for their Livelihood never
depended upon going on Errands, their Business being other laborious Work, and
carrying of Burdens, etc. But some of the Free-Porters are now in the service
of the Undertaking.

(2.) Most Business dispatched by this Undertaking, was formerly either not done
at all, or performed by other hands, to save Charges, (Porters Rates being so
dear) and Persons themselves, or their Servants, went on their own Errands.

(3.) If the Porters, who are an inconsiderable Number, in respect of the whole
Inhabitants of this great City, should suffer some small loss of Petty Employ
by it, yet vast Numbers of poor People, and others, are exceedingly eased and
beenfited thereby, which deserve as much, or more pity, than Porters: And a
general and useful Undertaking, should not in Equity or Prudence be
discountenanced, for the peculiar advantage of some few, any more than all the
Pipes or Water-Conduits of the City should be destroyed, merely for the
Accommodation of Tankard-Bearers; Printing suppressed, to accommodate Writing
Clerks; Guns, for Fletchers; Navigable Rivers, for Carriers; and (...) Trade of
Jack-smiths, for Turn-spits, etc. Nor have Porters any Authority to monopolize
to themselves the Delivery of Letters, it being by Law free for any Person to
use what Conveyance they think good for their Letters, within or without the
Freedom. And Coach-men, Car-men, Watermen, etc. may as well be put out of their
Callings, as the Undertakers disturbed in this Concern, because then the
Porters may have more Burdens to carry. Neither is any prohibited or restrained
by this Undertaking, but they may still employ a Porter if they please, so that
this Objection is causless, and is levelled against the whole Body of
Inhabitants, as well as the Undertakers in particular.

2. Others allege, That their Letters are not speedily answered, and therefore
say they miscarry.

Answ. That may be, because the Party is not at home, and his Servants do not
produce his Letter as he ought, though punctually left by the
Penny-Post-Messenger (this I have very often known to be my own Case, and some
of my Friends.) Or the Party may not be at leisure, or not willing to write, or
removed, or would pretend he received it not, when Dun'd for money, which he
cannot, or will not pay. And indeed I am also informed, that abundance of
Letters are so ill superscribed, or uncertainly directed, when frequently the
particular Trade of the Party, the Sign, or what Noted Place is near, are
omitted, that it is impossible to deliver such, which is the fault of the
Senders, and not of the Office.

To conclude this Subject. The Reader may expect hereafter a small Tract by it
self, Printed for the Undertakers of the Penny-Post. What I have here inse^ted
being briefly Remarkt, as my own Notions, concerning so laudable a Design, by
way of Specimen, and as a thing suitable to my present Work.

The Rates and Orders of Coachmen.
BY an Act of Parliament made in the Fourteenth Year of Our Sovereign Lord King
CHARLES ^he Second, it is appointed, That no person or persons, after May 1.
1662. shall presume to drive, (except Stage-Coaches) or let the Hire by the
hour or day, or otherwise, any Hackney-Coach or Coach-Horses within the
Parishes comprised within the Bills of Mortality, without an especial License
from the Commissioners appointed by His Majesty for Licensing and regulating
Hackney-Coaches. That no Horse, Gelding, or Mare, to be used with such Coaches,
be under 14 hands high, according to the Standard. That the Number of Coaches
so Licensed shall not exceed 400. That every Coach so Licensed shall have a
Mark of distinction by Figure, or otherwise, as the Commissioners shall think
fit, to the end they may be known, if any complaint shall be made of them. That
no person shall be Licensed to keep more than two Coaches, which Coaches shall
have several Figures or Marks of distinction, as if belonging to several
persons. That no person shall put that Figure or Mark upon his Coach which is
appointed for any other, under the forfeiture of five pounds. That no person
shall be Licensed to drive or keep a Hackney-Coach, or Coach-Horses, that uses
any other Trade or Occupation. That first such as have been ancient Coach-men,
or such Coach-men as have suffered for their Service to His Majesty or his
Father, or the Widows of such (that have Coaches of their own) be Licensed.
That the Commissioners forfeit one hundred pounds for every Coach they License
above the Number of 400.

That no Hackney-Coach-man so Licensed shall presume to take for his Hire in or
about the Cities of London and Westminster above Ten shillings for a day,
reckoning 12 hours to the day; and by the hour, not above 18 pence for the
first hour, and 12 pence for every hour after; nor for his Hire from any of the
Inns of Courts, or thereabouts, to any part of St. James's or Westminster,
(except beyond Tuttle-Street) above 12 pence, and the like from the same places
to the Inns of Court, or thereabouts; nor from the Inns of Court, or
thereabouts, to the Royal Exchange, more than 12 pence; but if to the Tower,
Bishopsgate-Street, Aldgate, or places thereabouts, 18 pence; and so from the
same places to the said Inns of Court, as aforesaid. That the like Rates be
observed from or to any place, at the like distance with the places
before-named. That if any Coachman shall refuse to go at, or exact more for
his Hire than these Rates, he shall for every Offense forfeit Ten shillings.

An Alphabetical Account of all the Carriers, Wagoners, and Stage-Coaches, that
comes to the several Inns in London, Westminster, and Southwark, from all Parts
of England and Wales, with the respective days of their Coming in, and Going
out.
A.
Abington.
WIlliam Perton Wagoner, comes to the Bell in Friday-street on Wednesdays, and
goes out on Thursdays.

Edward Perton with Coach and Wagon the same days, to and from the
Sarazens-head in Friday-street.

Aylesbury.
John Christmas Wagoner, comes to the George by Holbourn-Conduit on Wednesdays,
goes out on Thursdays.

Mr. Webb Coachman, comes to the Crown in Holbourn on Mondays, Wednesdays and
Fridays, and goes out on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays.

Mr. Fryer's Coach comes to the Black Swan in Holbourn, on Tuesdays, Thursdays,
and Saturdays, and goes out on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays.

Andover in Berkshire.
Roger Bird Wagoner, comes to the King's-Arms in Holbourn-Bridge on Wednesdays,
and goes out on Thursdays.

Haverhill in Suffolk.
William Swan Carrier, comes to the Four Swans in Bishops-gate on Wednesdays,
and goes out on Thursdays.

Mr. Ashton, Towns and Cole, Edward Onyou Carriers, come to the Four Swans in
Bishopsgate-street on Wednesdays, and go out on Thursdays.

John King Carrier, comes to the Rams-head in Fenchurch-street on Wednesdays,
and goes out on Thursdays.

Ashby-de-la-Zouch in Leicestershire.
Thomas Richards Carrier, comes to the Axe in Aldermanbury every week on
Saturdays, and goes out on Mondays.

Ashbourn in Derbyshire.
John Osbourne, Dabridge, Court, Dunkley, Carriers and Wagoners, come to the
Castle in Woodstreet on Saturdays, and go out on Mondays.

St. Albans.
Joseph Marshall Coachmen, comes to the Cock in Aldersgate Street on Mondays,
Wednesdays, and Fridays, and goes out on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays.

Widow Trotts Wagons come to the Cock in Aldersgate Street on Mondays and
Fridays, and goes out on Tuesdays and Saturdays.

Godfrey Scofield Wagoner, comes to the Cock in Aldersgate Street on Mondays,
and goes out on Tuesdays.

Anthony Wilson's Coach comes to the Bell in Aldersgate Street on Mondays,
Wednesdays and Fridays, and goes out on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays.

William Newels Wagon c^mes to the Bell in Aldersgate Street on Mondays,
Wednesdays and Fridays, and goes out on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays.

Robert Carr Wagoner, comes to the Vine in Old-street on Mondays and Thursdays,
and goes out on Tuesdays and Fridays.

William Jones, John Cook Wagoners, come to the Vine in Old-street on Mondays
and Fridays, and go out on Tuesdays and Saturdays.

Amersham in Bucks.
John Sells Coachman, comes to the Bell in Holbourn on Mondays, Wednesdays and
Fridays, and goes out on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays.

Matthew Reading Wagoner, comes to the White-Hart in High-Holbourn on Mondays
and Fridays, and goes out on Tuesdays and Saturdays.

Thomas Brown Wagoner, comes to the White-Hart in High-Holbourn on Mondays and
Fridays, and goes out Tuesdays and Saturdays.

Ab^^sley in Huntingtonshire.
Thomas Basse Carrier, comes to the Red Lion in Aldersgate Street on
Wednesdays, and goes out on Thursdays.

Agham in Hampshire.
Mr. Woodman Wagoner, comes to the White-Hart in Ch^ring-cross ^n Wednesdays,
and goes out on Thursdays.

Arundel in Sussex.
George Moore an^ William Deane comes to the Queens-head in Southwark on
Wednesdays, and goes out on Thursdays.

Ashford in Kent.
Philip Smith Carrier, comes to the Spur in South-wark on Wednesdays, and goes
out on Thursdays.

B.
Brumly in Kent.
Widow Ingerhams W^gon comes to the King's Arms in Barnaby-street in Southwark
on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays, and goes out Tuesdays, Thursdays and
Saturdays.

William and Daniel Woolfs Wagon comes to the same place, and uses the same
days.

Bristol.
Robert Barrett, John Barrett, Samuel Wilkin, Robert Gains Carriers, come to
the Three Cups in Bread-street on Tuesdays and Fridays, and go out on
Wednesdays and Saturdays.

Philip Woodroofe, Thomas Keen, Bernard Keen, Silvester Keen Wagoners, come
to the White-Swan at Holbourn-Bridge on Thursdays, and goes out on Fridays.

John Booth, William Baldwin, Robert Toby, their Coaches to Bristol and Bath,
come to the Sarazens-head in Friday-street on Saturdays and Wednesdays, and go
out on Mondays and Thursdays.

Bradford in Berkshire.
Widow Seywards Wagon comes to the White-horse in Southwark on Wednesdays, and
goes out on Thursdays.

Bath.
William Tyley Carrier, comes to the Three Cups in Bread-street on Fridays, and
goes out on Saturdays.

Basingstoke.
Lawrence Wardner's Wagon comes to the King's Arms in Holbourn-Bridge on
Wednesdays, and goes out on Thursdays.

Beckles in Suffolk.
John Richardson's Coach comes to the Gross-Keys in Gracechurch-street on
Thursdays, and goes out on Fridays.

Bynfield in Berkshire.
William Johnson's Wagon comes to the George in Aldersgate Street on Tuesdays,
and goes out on Wednesdays.

Brentwood
-- Coach, comes to the Blue-Boar without Aldgate, in and out every day.

John Hills Carrier, comes to the Crown without Aldgate on Tuesdays and
Thursdays, and goes out on Wednesdays and Saturdays.

Barnstaple in Devonshire.
John Glowing Carrier, comes to the Bull and Mouth by Aldersgate every other
Friday, and goes out the Saturday following.

Bleechenly in Surrey.
John Russel Carrier, comes to the Half Moon in Southwark on Fridays, and goes
out on Saturdays.

Bridgenorth in Shropshire.
Edward Bradley Carrier, comes to the Bull and Mouth by Aldersgate on Fridays,
and goes out on Saturdays.

St. Edmonds-Bury.
Robert Coak's Coach comes to the Bull within Bishopsgate on Tuesdays, and goes
out on Wednesdays.

Robert Coak's Wagon comes in on Wednesdays, and goes out on Thursdays.

John Barwick Coachman, comes to the Bull in Bishopsgate-street on Saturdays,
and goes out on Mondays.

Richard Nelson, Robert Cook, their Coach comes to the Green Dragon in
Bishopsgate-street on Thursdays and Saturdays, and goes out on Fridays and
Mondays.

Burwash in Sussex.
Nicholas Garrett Carrier, comes to the Queenshead in Southwark on Wednesdays,
and goes out on Thursdays.

Brentry in Essex.
Arthnr Paulmer Coachman, comes to the Cross-Keys in Gracechurch-street, in and
out every day.

Mr. Bunting's Wagon comes to the Pewter-Pot in Leaden-hall-street on
Thursdays, and goes out on Fridays.

Mr. Robinson's Coach comes to the Ipswich Arms in Cullumstreet on Mondays,
Wednesdays and Fridays, and goes out on Tuesdayt, Thursdays and Saturdays.

Blakebourn, Bolton-berry, Ribchester, Coulney, Padcam and Preston in
Lancashire.
Thomas Cave Carrier, comes to Blossoms-Inn in Lawrence-lane on Thursday, and
goes out on Friday, once in three weeks.

Burford in Oxfordshire.
Leonard Mill's Wagon comes to the Bell in Friday-street on Wednesdays, and
goes out on Thursdays.

Bakewel in Derbyshire.
John Syms Carrier, comes to Blossoms-Inn on Thursday, and goes out on Friday
once in three weeks.

Bridgenorth in Shropshire.
Hugh Garrett Coachman, comes to the Blue-Boar in Holbourn on Saturdays, and
gons out on Mondays.

Bridgenorth and Wenlock.
Widow Jane Gower Carrier, comes to the Swan with two Necks in Lad-lane on
Friday, and g^^s out on Saturdays, once in a fortnight.

Barton in Oxfordshire.
John Bryon Carrier, comes to the Bell in Woodstreet on Wednesdays, and goes
out on Thursdays.

Berkshire.
Widow Sayward's Wagon comes to the Cross-Keys in Woodstreet on Wednesdays, and
goes out on Thursdays.

Barnet.
Peter Blackwel's Coach comes to the Bell in St. Johns-street in and out every
day.

Barfeild great in Essex.
Christopher Johnson's Wagon comes to the Ramshead in Fenchurch-street on
Wednesdays, and goes out on Thursdays.

Bedford.
John Johnson Carrier, comes to the Cock in Aldersgate Street on Tuesdays, and
goes out on Wednesdays.

Anthony Rush's Wagon comes to the Red Lion in Aldersgate Street on Wednesdays,
and goes out on Thursdays. The same man comes to the same place with a Coach on
Tuesdays, and goes out on Thursdays.

Baldock in Hertfordshire.
Thomas Ma^es Wagon comes to the Red Lion in Redcross-street on Tuesday and
Friday, and goes out on Wednesday and Saturday.

John Hare's Wagon comes to the Sun-Dial near Swan-Alley in Old-street on
Monday and Thursday, and goes out on Tuesday and Friday.

Bishop-Stafford.
Mr. Reve's Wag^n comes to the King's Head in Leaden-hall-street on Tuesday, and
goes out on Wednesday.

Brackley in Northamptonshire.
Mr. Ralph Harlow Carrier, comes to the Mermaid in Carter-lane on Saturday, and
goes out on Monday.

Battle in Sussex.
John Colstock Carrier, comes to the Spur in Southwark on Wednesday, and goes
out on Thursday.

Buckingham Carrier.
Philip Webster and his Son, comes to the George in West-Smithfield on Tuesday,
and goes out on Wednesday.

Banbury in Oxfordshire.
John Jordan's Wagon comes to the Bell-Savage on Ludgate Hill on Wednesday, and
goes out on Thursday.

Bocking and Brantry in Essex.
Thomas Robinson's Coach comes ^o the Ipswich Arms in Cullum-street on Monday,
Wednesday and Friday, and goes out Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.

B^^dley in Worcestershire.
Thomas Freeman comes into the same Inn on Saturday, and goes out on Monday.

Barcomstead in Hertfordshire.
Thomas Wilkinson Coachman, comes to the Bell in Holbourn on Monday, Wednesday
and Frid^iy, and goes out on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.

Bisciter in Oxfordshire.
Richard Ewins's Wagon comes to the Bull in Holbourn on Tuesday, and goes out
on Wednesday.

Burton in Staffordshire and Vtoxiter.
Henry Ash and Matthew Bakewel Carriers, come to the Castle in Smithfield on
Saturday, and go out on Monday.

Bredhempstone.
Thomas Blewman Carrier, comes to the Queens-head in Southwark on Wednesday,
and goes out on Thursday.

Bagworth in Leicestershire.
Joseph Stowrer Carrier, comes to the Castle in West-Smithfield on Saturday,
and goes out on Monday, once a fortnight.

Billegray in Essex.
Mr. Thresher Coachman, comes to the Blue Boar in Whitechappel on Tuesday and
Friday, and goes out on Wednesday and Saturday.

Thomas Barker's Wagon comes to the same place on Wednesday, and goes out on
Thursday.

Brill in Buckinghamshire.
Robert Bedford Carrier, comes to the Bear and Ragged-staff in Smithfield on
Tuesday, and goes out on Wednesday.

Bunington in Hertfordshire.
Flying Coach comes to the Dolphin without Bishopsgate on Monday, Wednesday and
Friday, and goes out on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.

Bushey in Hertfordshire.
John Weeden's Wagon comes to the Angel in St. Giles's on Monday, Wednesday and
Friday, and goes out on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.

Thomas Mason's Wagon comes to the Maidenhead in St. Giles's on Monday,
Wednesday and Friday, and goes out on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.

John Mason's Wagon comes to the Maidenhead in St. Giles's on Tuesday and
Friday, and goes out on Wednesday and Saturday.

Billinghurst and Purbeck.
Robert Cramber Carrier, comes to the Queens-head in Southwark on Thursday, and
goes out on Friday.

Bath and Bristol.
Mr. Saunders and Drew's Coach comes to the Chequer near Charing Cross on
Monday, and goes out on Tuesday.

Robert Toby's Coach comes to the Swan near Somerset House on Wednesday and
Saturday, and goes out on Monday and Thursday.

Thomas Balden, Robert Toby, and Mr. Booth, come to the Bell in the Strand in
the Summertime on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday, and go out on Monday,
Wednesday and Friday.

Thomas Balden, Robert Toby, and Mr. Booth, come to the Talbot in the Strand on
Wednesday and Saturday, and goes out on Monday and Thursday.

William Drew's Coach comes to the Angel on the Backside of St. Clements on
Wednesday and Saturday, and goes out on Monday and Thursday.

Beconsfield in Bucks.
John Rolf's W^gon comes to the Bell in Warwick Lane on Monday, goes out on
Tuesday.

C.
Chipton-warden in Northamptonshire.
Richard Farbrother's Wagon comes to the White Swan on Holbourn-Bridge on
Wednesday, goes out on Thursday.

Chesham in Buckinghamshire.
Gabriel Adam's Wagon comes to the same place on Tuesday and Friday, goes out
on Wednesday and Friday.

John Christmas's Wagon comes likewise to the same place on Wednesday, goes out
on Thursday.

Cherbury in Oxfordshire.
Mr. Willis's Wagon comes to the Rose on Holbourn-Bridge on Wednesday, goes out
on Thursday.

Coxell.
Abraham Aves Carrier, comes to the Spread-Eagle in Gracechurch-street on
Thursday, goes out on Friday.

Cranfield in Bedfordshire.
Stephen Parish's Wagon comes to the George in Aldersgate Street on Wednesday,
goes out on Thursday.

Coddicote in Hertfordshire.
John Fisher Coachman, comes to the George in Aldersgate Street on Monday and
Friday, goes out on Tuesday and Saturday.

Cambridge.
Mr. Andrew Hart's Coach comes to the Bull within Bishopsgate on Tuesday,
Thursday and Saturday, and goes out Monday, Wednesday and Friday.

Mr. Andrew Hart's Wagon for Cambridge and Norwich, comes to the same place on
Tuesday and Thursday, goes out on Wednesday and Friday.

Mr. Stiles's Wagon comes in on Wednesday, and goes out on Thursday.

Robert Greene's Wagon comes in on Thursday, goes out on Friday.

William Martin Carrier, comes in on Saturday, goes out on Monday. All from the
Bull within Bishopsgate.

Joseph Wildman, Charles Tyne, Nathanael Sayer Carriers, come to the Green
Dragon in Bishopsgate-street on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday, go out on
Wednesday, Thursday and Friday.

William Watterson Coachman, comes to the Green Dragon in Bishopsgate-street on
Monday, Wednesday and Friday, goes out on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.

John Day Carrier, comes to the Vine in Bishopsgate-street on Thursday, goes
out on Friday.

Thomas Eagleton Carrier, comes to the Three Cups in Aldersgate Street on
Thursday, goes out on Friday. The same man carries to several Parts in
Cambridgeshire and Huntingtonshire.

Thomas Sterne's Wagon comes to the Cross-Keys in Gracechurch-street on
Thursday, goes out on Friday.

Canterbury-Post.
Brankerd Barnes and Gilbert come to the Dark-House at Billingsgate on Saturday
and Wednesday, go out Monday and Thursday.

Mr. Foster and Frelyton Coachmen, come to the George in Southwark on Monday,
Wednesday and Friday, go out on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.

Chesterfield in Derbyshire.
Mr. Richard Merchant Carrier, comes to the Castle in Woodstreet on Wednesday,
goes out on Friday.

Cirencester in Glocestershire.
Richard Shurle's Wagon comes to the Sarazens-head on Thursday, and goes out on
Friday, once in a Fortnight.

Chelton in Glocestershire.
Thomas Kinnot Carrier, comes to the Sarazens-head in Carter-lane on Friday,
and goes out on Saturday.

Crandan in Buckinghamshire.
James Butler Carrier, comes to the George in Smithfield on Thursday, goes out
on Friday.

Coventry in Warwickshire.
John Mitchel's Wagon comes to the Bell-Savage on Ludgate Hill on Wednesday,
goes out on Thursday.

William Mitchel's Coach-Wagon comes to the same place on Friday, goes out on
Saturday.

Roger Roberts Wagon comes to the same place on Saturday, goes out on Monday.

Copel in Bedfordshire.
John Patenam Carrier, comes to the Red Lion in Aldersgate Street on Tuesday,
goes out on Wednesday.

Coliasby in Northamptonshire.
Edward Allein and James Rants Carriers, come to the Castle in West-Smithfield
on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday.

Clapham.
John Day's Coach comes to the Spread-Eagle in Gracechurch-street, in and out
every day in the week.

Crandon in Northamptonshire.
Thomas Edwards Carrier, comes to the Bear and Ragged-staff in Smithfield on
Wednesday, goes out on Thursday.

Chelmsford in Essex.
Shadrech Cooper's Wagon comes to the Spread-Eagle in Gracechurch-street on
Monday, Wednesday and Friday, goes out on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.

Arthur Palmer's Coach comes to the Cross-Keys in in Gracechurch-street on
Monday, Wednesday and Friday, goes out on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday. And
his Wagon to the same place comes on Tuesday and Friday, goes out on Wednesday
and Saturday.

Mr. Spicer's Wagon comes to the Blue Boar without Aldgate on Tuesday and
Friday, goes out on Wednesday and Saturday.

Thomas Robinson's Coach comes to the Ipswich Arms in Cullum-street in and out,
every day in the week.

Chipton-Norton in Oxfordshire.
Robert Bridgeman Carrier, comes to the Bear and Ragged-staff in
West-Smithfield on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday.

Colchester.
Abraham Vall's Wagon comes to the Spread-Eagle in Gracechurch-street on
Thursday, goes out on Friday.

Thomas Starchpoole Coachman, comes to the Kings-Arms in Leaden-hall-street on
Monday, Wednesday and Friday, goes out on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.

Cockthrop near Oxford.
Mr. Whiting's Wagon comes to the Bell in the Strand on Tuesday, goes out on
Wednesday.

Croydon.
John Windham's Coach comes to the Greyhound in Southwark, in and out every day
in the week.

Henry Batchellor and Norwood's Coach, comes to the Katherine-Wheel in
Southwark, in and out every day in the week.

Chinord near Them in Oxfordshire.
Mr. Mallard, Samuel Bardal, comes to the Bell in the Strand on Thursday, goes
out on Friday.

Cramborough in Kent.
John Botten Carrier, comes to the King's Head in Southwark on Wednesday, goes
out on Thursday.

Clare.
John Rash Carrier, comes to the Spread-Eagle in Gracechurch-street on
Thursday, goes out on Friday.

Chichester.
Mr. Barnes Carrier, comes to the White-hart in Southwark on Thursday, goes out
on Friday.

Mr. Tuff Carrier, comes to the same place on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday.

Cranbroke in Kent.
William Woollett Carrier, comes to the Talbot in Southwark on Wednesday, goes
out on Thursday.

Chittenstone in Kent.
John Harrison Carrier, comes to the White-horse in Southwark on Thursday, goes
out on Friday.

Crookhorne and Evil.
Mr. Clark and his Son, and William Matthews Carriers, come to Gerrards-hall in
Basing-lane on Friday, go out on Saturday.

D.
Dusely in Glocestershire.
Mr. Church's Wagon comes to the Rose on Holbourn-bridge on Thursday, goes out
on Friday.

Little Didlington in Bedfordshire.
William Curphe's Wagon comes to the George in Aldersgate Street on Tuesday,
goes out on Wednesday.

Denby, Rexham and Ruthen.
William Harrison Carrier, comes to Blossoms-Inn in St. Lawrence-lane on
Friday, goes out on Saturday, once in three weeks.

Dreyton in Buckinghamshire.
Joseph Sare Carrier, comes to the Mermaid in Carter-lane on Tuesday, goes out
on Wednesday.

Daventree in Northamptonshire.
Thomas Moore's Wagon comes to the Bell-Savage on Ludgate Hill on Saturday,
goes out on Monday.

Humphrey Barker Carrier, comes to the Castle in West-Smithfield on Saturday,
goes out on Monday.

D^^stable.
George Boswel Carrier, comes to the Three Cups in Aldersgate Street on Monday,
Wednesday and Friday, goes out on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.

Dunchurch in Warwickshire.
Thomas Southam Carrier, comes to the Castle in West-Smithfield on Wednesday,
goes out on Thursday.

Derinton and Wellingborough in Northamptonshire.
Mr. Cole's Wago^ comes to the Castle in West-Smithfield on Wednesday, goes out
on Thursday, once a fortnight.

Dorset, Salisbury and Blandford.
Edward Cooper, Mr. Minchel, and Michael Minchel come to the Castle in
West-Smithfield, on Wednesday and Saturday, go out on Monday and Thursday.

Dover.
Thomas and Stephen Gibben's Wagon comes to the King's Head in Southwark on
Wednesday and Saturday, goes out on Monday and Thursday.

John Gibbens Carrier, comes to the Rams-head in Fenchurch-street on Wednesday,
goes out on Thurs-

Darking.
Widow Moore's Wagon comes to the Greyhound in Southwark on Tuesday, goes out
on Wednesday.

Dulwich.
Will. Hicks Coachman, comes to the Katherine-wheel in Southwark, in and out
every day.

Dorchester.
William Cooper, Michael Minching Coachmen, come to the Bell in the Strand on
Wednesday and Saturday, go out on Monday and Thursday.

Dunmore and High-Ruden in Essex.
Peter and William Wescoat Carriers, come to the Rams-head in Fenchurch-street
on Monday and Thursday, go out Tuesday and Friday.

Francis Cramphorne's Wagon comes to the Three Nuns without Aldgate on
Wednesday, goes out on Thursday.

E.
Exeter.
Mr. Whiffen's Wagon comes to the Rose on Holbourn-bridge on Saturday, goes out
on Monday.

John Lowry, John Baker, Arthur Baker Wagoners, come to the Kings-Arms on
Holbourn-bridge on Tuesday, goes out on Wednesday.

Thomas Morris Carrier, comes to the Sarazens-head in Friday-street on Friday,
goes out on Saturday.

Benjamin Flemen, John Booth, William Baker, John Smead Coachmen, come to the
same place on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday, go out on Monday, Wednesday and
Friday.

East-Ham in Essex.
George Holloway's Coach comes to the Three Nuns without Aldgate, in and out
every day.

Will. Golding's Coach comes to the Blue Boar without Aldgate, in and out every
day.

Ely.
Simon Jackson's Wagon comes to the Bull within Bishopsgate on Monday, goes out
on Tuesday.

Enfield.
Robert Hockley's Coach comes to the Bull within Bishopsgate, in and out every
day.

Edmonton.
Thomas Boulton comes to the same place, in and out every day.

John Blower comes to the Green Dragon within Bishopsgate, in and out every
day, both Winter and Summer.

Egham in Surrey.
The Coach comes to the Black-Lyon in Water-lane on Monday, Wednesday and
Friday, goes out Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.

Elstree in Hertfordshire.
Mr. Mou^tague's Wagon comes to the Angel in St. Giles's on Monday, Wednesday
and Friday, goes out on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.

Epsom.
Thomas Wells Coachman, comes to the King's Head in Southwark, in and out every
day.

Thomas Bird Coachman, comes to the Spread-Eagle in Gracechurch-street on
Monday, Wednesday and Friday, goes out on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.

Robert^Bird comes to the Cross-Keys in Gracechurch-street in and out every day.

Eatonbridge in Kent.
Thomas Saxby Carrier, comes to the White-horse in Southwark on Monday and
Thursday, goes out Tuesday and Saturday.

Eversham in Worcestershire.
John Robert's Wagon comes to the Castle in Woodstreet on Friday, goes out on
Saturday.

Epping in Essex.
John Cornish's Coach comes to the Nags-head without Aldgate on Monday and
Friday, goes out on Tuesday and Saturday.

Richard Galor Coachman, comes to the same place on Tuesday, goes out on
Wednesday.

F.
Fulham in Middlesex.
Mr. Woodman's Coach comes to the White-hart in Charing Cross, in and out every
day.

Falkingham in Lincolnshire.
Mr. Wentword's Coach-Wagon comes to the Bell in West-Smithfield on Saturday,
goes out on Monday, once a fortnight.

G.
Gloucester.
William Allen comes to Blossoms-Inn in Lawrence-lane on Thursday, goes out on
Friday.

Mr. Fettyplace Coachman, comes to the Bell-Savage on Ludgate Hill on Saturday,
goes out on Monday.

John Pinbury, Thomas Harris, Francis Batchellor Wagoners, comes to the same
place on Thursday, goes out on Friday.

Susanna Bowers, and John Wood's Wagon, comes to the Sarazens-head in
Friday-street on Friday, goes out on Saturday.

Susanna Bowers, and Dorothy Cromwels Coach, comes to the Sarazens-head on
Tuesday and Saturday, goes out on Monday and Wednesday.

Gainsborough in Lincolnshire.
William Plaster, Henry Brewmett Carriers, comes to the Red-Lyon in
Aldersgate Street on Saturday, goes out on Monday.

Grantham in Lincolnshire, Newark, and all places thereabouts.
Henry Wayring's Coach-Wagon comes to the Cross-Keys in Whitecross-street on
Saturday, goes out on Monday.

Godliman in Sussex.
Will. Miller Coachman, comes to the White-horse in Fleetstreet, in and out
every day.

Thomas Heart Carrier, comes to the King's Head in Southwark on Wednesday, goes
out on Thursday.

Guilford in Surrey.
George Plummer Coachman, comes to the Bell in the Strand on Tuesday and
Friday, goes out on Wednesday and Saturday.

Widow Kent's Coach comes to the Talbot in the Strand on Monday, Tuesday,
Thursday, Friday, goes out on Tuesday, Wednesday, Friday, Saturday.

Richard Thore's Wagon comes to the Queens-head in Southwark on Monday, goes
out on Tuesday.

Thomas Richard's Coach comes to the same place on Monday and Thursday, goes
out on Tuesday and Friday.

Grinstead in Sussex.
Mr. Coster Carrier and Coachman, comes to the White-horse in Southwark on
Tuesday and Friday, goes out on Wednesday and Saturday.

H.
Henley upon Thames.
Mr. Hatheway's Coach comes to the White-Swan (...) Holbourn-bridge on Tuesday,
Thursday and Saturday, goes out on Monday, Wednesday and Friday.

Hooknorton in Oxfordshire.
-- W^g^ner, comes to the Rose on Holbourn-bridge on Wednesday, goes out on
Thursday.

Highworth in Wiltshire.
Christopher Viner's Wagon comes to the George on Holbourn-bridge on Saturday,
goes out on Monday.

Hempsteade in Hertfordshire.
George Weeden Wagoner, comes to the George on Holbourn-bridge on Tuesday, goes
out on Wednesday.

Hadham in Hertfordshire.
William Summers Wagon-Coach comes to the Bull within Bishopsgate on Friday,
goes out on Saturday.

Hertford.
Mr. Bethel and his Partner, come to the Bull within Bishopsgate on Monday,
Wed^^sday and Friday, and go out on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.

James Moss's Wagon comes from Hertford, Ware, Hitchen, to the Katherine-wheel
without Bishopsgate on Tuesday, Wednesday and Friday, goes out on Monday,
Thursday and Saturday.

John Smart's Coach comes to the White-Swan without Bishopsgate on Monday and
Thursday, goes out on Tuesday and Friday.

Mr. Weeb Wagoner, comes to the Four Swans in Bishopsgate-street on Monday and
Thursday, goes out Tuesday and Friday.

John Laybee Carrier, comes to the same place on Monday and Thursday, goes out
Tuesday and Friday.

Hodsdon in Hertfordshire.
John Cresp, and Robert Heard's Coach and Wagon, comes to the Green Dragon
within Bishopsgate on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, goes out on Tuesday,
Thursday and Saturday.

Hatfield in Hertfordshire.
Daniel Addison's Coach comes to the Red Lion in Aldersgate Street on Monday,
Wednesday and Friday, goes out on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.

Hallifax in Yorkshire.
Henry Rieves, Gabriel H^ynes, Josias Smith, come to the White-horse without
Cripplegate on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday.

Edward Polard, John Dison, come to the same place, go in and out the same days.

Mr. Walker Carrier, comes to the Bell in Woodstreet on Wednesday, goes out on
Thursday.

Hereford.
John Lane, Richard Hewlyn Carriers, come to the Cross-Keys in Woodstreet on
Friday, goes out on Saturday.

Hurst in Berkshire.
Mr. Wright's Wagon, and Mr. Cox's Wagon, come to the Windmill in Shoe-lane on
Wednesday, go out on Thursday.

Harrow on the Hill in Middlesex.
William Summers Coachman, comes to the Bell in Holbourn every day in the week
in and out.

Nathanael Page Coachman, comes to the Red Lion in Holbourn, in and out, every
Monday, Thursday and Saturday.

Hampstead in Middlesex.
Daniel Lion Coachman, comes to the Bell in Holbourn, in and out, every day in
the week.

Mr. Taylor's Coach comes to the King's Head in Grays-Inn-lane, in and out,
every day in the week.

James Neveld's Coach comes to the Cock and Dolphin in Grays-Inn-lane, in and
out every day.

Huntington.
John Vintner's Wagon comes to the Red Lion in Aldersgate Street on Wednesday,
goes out on Thursday.

The same man, to the same place, with a Coach, comes in on Tuesday, goes out
on Wednesday.

William Guy Carrier, comes to the Three Cups in Aldersgate Street on
Wednesday, goes out on Thursday.

Harrold in Bedfordshire.
Edward Edwards Carrier, comes to the Bear and Ragged-staff in West-Smithfield
on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday.

Hadnam in Buckinghamshire.
Joseph Holyman Wagoner, comes to the Talbot in the Strand on Thursday, goes
out on Friday.

Hitching in Hertfordshire.
John Scearle Carrier, comes to the Swan in St. Johns-street on Wednesday, goes
out on Thursday.

Horsham in Sussex.
Widow Mussel's Wagon comes to the King's Head in Southwark on Tuesday, goes out
on Wednesday.

Hemingham.
John Knap's Wagon comes to the Spread-Eagle in Gracechurch-street on Thursday,
goes out on Friday.

Harwich
Coach comes to the Sarazens-head within Aldgate on Monday and Thursday, goes
out on Tuesday and Friday.

John Newton, belonging to the Pacquet-Boat, comes to the Ipswich Arms in
Cullum-street near Fenchurch-street on Monday and Thursday, goes out on Tuesday
and Friday.

Hornchurch in Essex.
Thomas Rayman's Wagon comes to the Three Nuns without Aldgate on Tuesday and
Thursday, goes out Wednesday and Friday.

John Tiffin's Coach comes to the Three Nuns without Aldgate, in and out every
day.

I.
St. Ives in Huntingtonshire.
Thomas Johnson Carrier, comes to the Cross-keys in Whitecross-street on
Wednesday, goes out on Thursday.

Ipswich.
John Richardson's Wagon comes to the Cross-keys in Gracechurch-street on
Wednesday, goes out on Thursday.

John Richardson, and Henry King Coachmen, come to the same place, in and out
every day.

Ingerstone in Essex.
Thomas Stretton's W^gon comes to the Three Nuns without Aldgate on Wednesday,
goes out on Thursday.

K.
Kendall in Westmorland.
Samuel Briggs, Thomas Briggs, Richard Geynwood, John Yeates, come to the
White-horse without Cripplegate every week on Thursday, goes out on Friday.

Kempton in Hertfordshire.
Thomas Hynde's Wagon comes to the Bell in Aldersgate Street on Monday, goes
out on Tuesday.

Kenton in Warwickshire.
William Rickett's Wagon comes to the George in West-Smithfield on Wednesday,
goes out on Thursday.

Kettring in Northamptonshire.
William Simpson's Wagon comes to the Rose in Smithfield on Wednesday, goes out
on Thursday.

Kimbolton in Huntingtonshire.
Nicholas Clark Carrier, comes to the Red Lion in Aldersgate Street on Tuesday,
goes out on Wednesday.

William Jones Carrier, goes to Bedford, Wootton, and Elstow, and comes to the
Three Cups in Aldersgate Street on Tuesday, goes out on Wednesday.

Kilworth in Leicestershire.
John Oswin Carrier, comes to the Red Lion in Aldersgate Street on Saturday,
goes out on Monday, once a fortnight.

Kidderminster and Sawbridge in Worcestershire.
Richard Fielder Carrier, comes to the Bear and Ragged-staff in West-Smithfield
on Friday, goes out on Saturday.

L.
Lempster in Herefordshire.
Oliver Hacklet, Richard Rogers, come to the White-Swan on Holbourn-bridge on
Friday, goes out on Saturday.

Ludlow in Shropshire.
Mr. Miles, Mr. Rogers Carriers, come to the George without Aldersgate on
Friday, go out on Saturday.

Louth in Lincolnshire.
Mr. Baxter and Mr. Furnace Carriers, come to the George in Aldersgate Street
on Saturday, goes out on Monday.

Lyn.
John Pain, Thomas Crispe Coachmen, come to the Green Dragon within
Bishopsgate on Saturday, go out on Monday.

Leedes in Yorkshire.
George Brown, John Chester, John Lupton Carriers, come to the White-horse
without Crippl^gate every week on Wednesday, go out Friday.

Lancaster, Wiggon, Narington, Liverpoole, Bolton, and other Parts in that
Country.
Richard Abbott, William Abbott, George Glover, John Knowis Carriers, come to
the Swan with Two Necks in Lad-lane on Thursday, go out on Friday; one of them
every week.

John Green, Edward Knight, John Scott, Peter Green Carriers, come to the
Castle in Woodstreet every Thursday, goes out on Friday.

Ledbury in Herefordshire.
Thomas James Carrier, comes to the Castle in Woodstreet on Friday, goes out on
Saturday, once in a fortnight.

Luton in Bedfordshire.
Mr. Marshal's Coach comes to the Cock in Aldersgate Street on Monday,
Wednesday and Friday, goes out Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.

Leicester.
James Lee, John Swift, Thomas Bass, Thomas Swift Wagoners, come to the Rose in
West-Smithfield on Saturday, go out on Monday.

Littleworth in Leicestershire.
William Perkins, Mrs. Elizabeth Pellins Wagon, comes to the Ram in
West-Smithfield on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday.

Lawford, Rugby, Dunchurch in Warwickshire.
Henry Colledger's Wagon comes to the Bell in West-Smithfield on Wednesday,
goes out on Thursday.

Leachsteed in Oxfordshire.
Edward Varney Carrier, comes to the Bell in Holbourn on Wednesday, goes out on
Thursday.

Lincoln, Barton, Stanford, Grantham, and other Parts.
William Clark's Coach comes to the Crown and Coach and Horses in High-Holbourn
on Friday and Saturday, goes out on Monday, once a fortnight.

Robert Barnes, Benjamin Broomhead, John Newcomb Carriers, come to the Red Lion
in Aldersgate Street on Saturday, goes out on Monday.

Robert Barnes Coach comes to the Three Cups in Aldersgate Street on Friday,
goes out on Monday, once a fortnight.

Luton in Bedfordshere.
John Bridgeman Carrier, comes to the Red Lion in Aldersgate Street on Tuesday
and Friday, goes out Wednesday and Saturday.

Loughborough in Leicestershire.
William Henshaw, Matthew Smith Carriers, come to the Red Lion in
Aldersgate Street on Saturday, go out on Monday, in every other week.

Litchfield in Staffordshire.
William Olds Carrier, comes to the Castle in Smithfield on Saturday, goes out
on Monday, once in three weeks.

Lemsted in Buckinghamshire.
Thomas Varney Carrier, comes to the Bear and Ragged-staff in West-Smithfield
on Tuesday, goes out on Wednesday.

Jews in Sussex.
Thomas Talbott, Thomas Rawlinson, John Alsop senior, Carriers, come to the
Talbot in Southwark on Wednesday, go out on Thursday.

William Aldridge's Wagon comes to the same place in and out the same days.

Linsfield in Surrey.
William Hall, and William Edsol Carriers, come to the Half Moon in Southwark
on Fridays, go out on Saturdays.

Lavenham in Suffolk.
John Poole Carrier, comes to the Cross-Keys in Grace Church Street on
Thursday, goes out on Friday*

Low-Layton in Essex.
Francis Green Coachman, comes to the Crown without Aldgate in and out every
day.

M.
Marlborough.
Mr. Yarrent Carrier, comes to the White Swan on Holbourn-bridge on Wednesday,
goes out on Thursday.

Mr. Coleman's and Mr. Perdue's Wagons come to the Rose on Holbourn-bridge on
Wednesdays, go out on Thursdays.

Richard Hobb's Coach comes to the Angel on the Backside of St. Clements on
Tuesday, goes out on Thursday.

Manchester.
John Garnett Carrier, comes to Blossoms-Inn in Lawrence-lane on Thursday, goes
out on Friday, once in three weeks.

Edward Homes, and John Lease Carriers, come to the same place, in and out the
same days.

Mr. Banks, Mr. Ralif, and Mr. Goodyard, come to the Axe in Aldermanbury on
Thursday, go out on Friday.

Maxfield, Manchester, Congerton, Leake.
John Beach senior, William Silito, John Beach junior, come to the Swan with
two Necks in Lad-lane every week on Thursday, go out on Friday.

Middlewich, Manchester, Boulton, Knulsford.
Thomas Chantler Carrier, comes to the Axe in Aldermanbury on Thursday, goes
out on Friday.

Manchester Stopord.
Thomas Banford Carrier, comes to the same place, in and out the same days.

Monmouth.
Robert Long, Thomas Bright Carriers, come to the Cross-Keys in
Whitecross-street on Friday, go out on Saturday.

Morlington in Oxfordshire.
Thomas Wescor Carrier, comes to the Sarazens-head in Carter-lane on Wednesday,
goes out on Thursday.

Marsh in Buckinghamshire.
Thomas Cole Carrier, comes to the Mermaid in Carter-lane on Tuesday, goes out
on Wednesday.

Mansfield in Nottinghamshire.
William Hurst, William Lacy Carriers, come to the George in West-Smithfield on
Saturday, go out on Monday.

Maidenhead in Berkshire.
Mr. Rider's Coach comes to the Bolt and Tun in Fleet Street on Thursday, goes
out on Friday.

Melton Mowbray in Leicestershire.
George Whitehead's Wagon comes to the Bell-Savage on Ludgate Hill on Saturday,
goes out on Monday.

Malmesbury in Wiltshire.
John Speak Carrier, comes to the Bell in the Strand on Tuesday, goes out on
Friday, every three weeks.

Mavill in Sussex.
Anthony Page Carrier, comes to the King's Head in Southwark on Wednesday, goes
out on Thursday.

Maidstone in Kent.
Mr. Varnham's Coach comes to the Star on Fishstreet-hill on Monday and Friday,
goes out on Tuesday and Saturday.

Malden in Essex.
Mr. Webb's Coach comes to the Blue Boar in White-Chappel on Tuesday and
Friday, goes out on Wednesday and Saturday.

His Wagon comes to the same place on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday.

N.
Newbery.
Henry Gerle's Wagon comes to the Kings-Arms on Holbourn-bridge on Wednesday,
goes out on Thursday.

Newport in Buckinghamshire.
John Williamson's Wagon comes to the Bull and Mouth by Aldersgate on
Wednesday, goes out on Thursday.

Richard Tom's Wagon comes to the Bell in Aldersgate Street on Wednesday, goes
out on Thursday.

Norwich.
Robert Cook's Wagon comes to the Bull within Bishopsgate on Tuesday, goes out
on Wednesday.

Mr. Philips's Wagon comes to the Green Dragon within Bishopsgate on Saturday,
goes out on Monday.

Thomas Southgate's Wagon comes to the Four Swans in Bishopsgate-street on
Thursday, goes out on Friday.

Roger Hurst's Coach comes to the same place on Monday, Wednesday and Friday,
goes out on Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday.

Roger Hurst's Wagon comes to the same place on Thursday, goes out on Friday.

John Be^croft's Wagon comes to the Dolphin without Bishopsgate on Wednesday,
goes out on Friday.

His Coach comes to the Sarazens-head within Aldgate on Tuesday, Thursday and
Saturday, goes out on Monday, Wednesday and Friday.

Newport-Dreyton.
William Chetwood, Thomas Chetwood Carriers, come to Blossoms-Inn in St.
Lawrence-lane on Friday, goes out on Saturday.

Mr. Whitchurch and Weem Carriers, come to the same place, in and out the same
days, once in three weeks.

Newcastle Vnder-line, Litchfield, Stone, Stafford and Coventry.
Thomas, and John Badely Carriers, come to the Swan with two Necks in Lad-lane.

Northampton.
Richard Cooper's Wagon comes to the Rose in West-Smithfield on Thursday, goes
out on Friday.

William Smith, and William Brandon's Wagon, comes to the Ram in
West-Smithfield on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday.

John Ashby Carrier, comes to the same place, in and out the same days.

John and Richard Newcomb's Coach-Wagon, comes to the Bell-Savage on
Ludgate Hill on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday.

Nottingham.
John Tuffin's Coach-Wagon comes to the Bell-Savage on Ludgate Hill on
Saturday, goes out on Monday.

Newmarket.
Nathanael Hooks's Coach and Wagon comes to the Chequer in Holbourn on
Saturday, goes out on Monday.

Newport in Essex.
A Wagon comes to the Dolphin without Bishopsgate on Tuesday, goes out on
Wednesday.

O.
Oxford.
Mr. Bartlett Carrier, comes to the White Swan ^n Holbourn-bridge on Saturday,
goes out on Monday.

Mr. Morgan's Wagon comes to the Windmill in Shoe-lane on Thursday, goes out on
Friday.

Mr. Buy Coachman, comes to the Chequer in Holbourn on Saturday, goes out on
Monday.

Mr. Thomas Dye's Coach comes to the Crown in Holbourn o^ Monday, Wednesday and
Friday, goes out Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.

Thomas Jifft's Wagon comes to the Eagle and Child in the Strand over against
Somerset House on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday.

Oldham, Aston Vnder-line in Lancashire.
James Barsley Carrier, comes to Blossoms-Inn in Lawrence-lane on Wednesday,
goes out on Thursday, once in three weeks.

Any in Buckinghamshire.
John Kent's Wagon comes to the Red Lion in Red-cross-street on Wednesday, goes
out on Thursday.

Oundell in Northamptonshire.
Faulconer Griffin Carrier, comes to the Ram in Smithfield on Wednesday, goes
out on Thursday.

Onger in Essex.
William Stane's Wagon comes to the Crown without Aldgate on Monday and
Thursday, goes out Tuesday and Friday.

His Coach comes to the same place on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, goes out
Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.

John Goodibeard Carrier, comes to the White-Bear in Lime-street ou Tuesday and
Friday, goes out on Wednesday and Saturday.

P.
Pool in Dorcetshire.
Robert Buddin's Wagon comes to the Kings-Arms on Holbourn-bridge on Saturday,
goes out on Monday.

Peterborough, Spalding, Horn-Castle in Northamptonshire and Lincolnshire.
William Browning Wagoner, comes to the Cross-Keys in White-cross-street on
Monday and Wednesday, goes out Thursday and Saturday.

Pissey in Berkshire.
Thomas and Jane Peacock Carriers, come to the same place on Wednesday, goes
out on Thursday.

Potten in Bedfordshire.
John Merriday Carrier, comes to the Red Lion in Aldersgate Street on
Wednesday, goes out on Thursday.

Papworth.
Robert Wessington's Wagon comes to the King's Head in Southwark on Wednesday,
goes out on Thursday.

Portsmouth.
Roger Goldring's Wagon comes to the White-Hart in Southwark on Wednesday, goes
out on Thursday.

His Coach comes to the same place on Friday, goes out on Monday.

Thomas Jaquis Coach comes to the George in Southwark on Friday, goes out on
Thursday.

His Wagon comes to the Queens-head in Southwark on Wednesday, goes out on
Thursday.

Mr. Battle Carrier, comes to the George in Southwark on Wednesday, goes out on
Thursday.

Pettworth in Sussex.
Mr. Startup, Clarke and Roberts Carriers, come to the White-hart in Southwark
on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday.

Petersfield.
Mr. Jaquis Wagon comes to the Queens-head in Southwark on Saturday, goes out
on Monday.

R.
Royston.
Jeremiah Pilgrame comes to the Vine within Bishopsgate on Thursday, goes out
on Friday.

Rachdale Carrier, Buxton, Basington, and Longnor,
Come to Blossoms-Inn in Lawrence-lane on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday.

Richmond in Yorkshire.
John Chambers, Christopher Burril, Robert Teasdil Carriers, come to the
White-horse without Cripplegate on Saturday, go out on Monday, one of them
weekly.

Reading in Berkshire.
Mr. Coats and Mr. Harris's Coach comes to the Bolt and Tun in Fleet Street, in
and out every day.

Widow Barnet's Coach comes to the White-horse in Fleet Street, in and out
every day.

William Walker's Wagon comes to Gerards-hall in Basing-lane on Wednesday, goes
out on Thursday.

Rickmansworth in Hertfordshire.
Bryan Robinson Carrier, comes to the Greyhound in Holbourn on Monday and
Friday, goes out Tuesday and Saturday.

Rigate in Surrey.
Thomas Woodward's Wagon comes to the Greyhound in Southwark, in and out every
day.

Rumford in Essex.
William Harris and Thomas Beaumont Coachmen, come to the Red Lion in
White-Chappel, in and out every day.

Rudenhigh in Essex.
William Westcoat Carrier, comes to the White-Bear in Lime-street on Monday and
Thursday, goes out on Tuesday and Friday.

S.
Southampton.
Mr. Syms and his Partners Coach, comes to the White-Swan on Holbourn-bridge on
Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday, goes out on Monday, Wednesday and Friday.

Robert Waldron's Wagon comes to the Kings-Arms on Monday, Wednesday and
Friday, goes out on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.

Salisbury.
Hugh King's Wagon comes to the Kings^Arms on Holbourn-bridge on Thursday and
Saturday, goes out Monday and Friday.

Mr. Mincham and his Partners Coach, comes to the Angel on the Backside of St.
Clements on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday, goes out Monday, Wednesday and
Friday.

Saffron-Walden.
William Meriday's Coach comes to the Blue-Boar without Aldgate on Monday and
Friday, goes out on Tuesday and Saturday.

John Austin's Wagon comes to the Bull within Bishopsgate on Wednesday, goes
out on Thursday.

John Wakefield Carrier, comes to the Vine within Bishopsgate on Wednesday,
goes out on Thursday.

Mr. Falmouth's Coach comes to the Blue-Boar without Aldgate on Monday,
Wednesday and Friday, goes out Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.

Sheffield in Yorkshire.
Richard Merchant Carrier, comes to the Castle in Wood-street on Wednesday,
goes out on Friday.

Sheffield in Yorkshire, Mansfield and Rotherham.
Jarvis Flyman Carrier, comes to Blossoms-Inn in St. Lawrence-lane on
Wednesday, goes out on Friday, once in three weeks.

Shrewsbury, Welch-Poole, Ossestry, and other Parts.
Richard Lloyd, Thomas Lloyd, Nathanael Jones, William Lloyd, Thomas Forster
Carriers, come to the Bell in Wood-street on Thursday, go out on Friday.

Shrewsbury, and other Parts adjacent thereto.
John Simonds, George Smith, James Davis Carriers, come to the Castle in
Wood-street on Thursday, go out on Friday.

Stroud in Glocestershire.
Josiah and George Hewland Carriers, come to the King's Head in the Old-Change
on Thursday, go out on Friday.

Strayton-Harlow in Warwickshire.
Thomas Wescor Carrier, comes to the Sarazens-head in Carter-lane on Wednesd.,
goes out on Thursd.

Stoke-Haven in Buckinghamshire.
Thomas Tailor Carrier, comes to the Mermaid in Carter-lane on Tuesday, goes
out on Wednesday.

Strout-Water in Glocestershire.
William Poole, and William Bailey Carriers, come to the same place on
Thursday, go out on Friday.

George Holder Carrier, comes to the Three Cups in Bread-street on Thursday,
goes out on Friday, once a fortnight.

Lawrence Hewlin Carrier, comes to Gerards-hall in Basing-lane on Thursday,
goes out on Friday.

Stratford upon Avon in Warwickshire.
Richard Newcomb's Coach-Wagon comes to the Bell-Savage on Ludgate Hill on
Wednesday, goes ou^ on Thursday.

Swallowfield in Wiltshire.
Nicholas Pembrook's Wagon comes to the Bull in Holbourn on Thursday, goes out
on Friday.

Stanmore in Middlesex.
James Allen Coachman, comes to the Blue-Bo^^ in Holbourn, in and out every day
in the Summer.

Stoke-Bruen in Northamptonshire.
Daniel Stephens Carrier, comes to the Castle in West-Smithfield on Tuesday,
goes out on Wednesday.

Stony-Stratford in Buckinghamshire.
Richard Crowch's Wagon comes to the same place on Wednesday, goes out on
Thursday.

Sturbridge and Broomsgroove in Worcestershire.

Robert Cole Carrier, comes to the Bear and Ragged-staff in West-Smithfield on
Friday, goes out on Saturday.

Stanes.
Henry Bars Carrier, comes to the King's Head in Southwark on Wednesday, goes
out on Thursday.

Shoreham in Sussex.
Thomas Blewman Carrier, comes to the Queens-head in Southwark on Wednesday,
goes out on Thursday.

Sunnock in Kent.
Richard Cockett's Wagon comes to the Spur in Southwark on Monday and Thursday,
goes out on Tuesday and Friday.

Sydenham.
Richard Clark's Coach comes to the Greyhound in Southwark, in and out every
day.

Sear in Surrey.
Mr. Chitty Carrier, comes to the Katherina-wheel in Southwark on Tuesday, goes
out on Wednesday.

Sudbury.
Francis Dyer's Wagon and Stage-Coach, comes to the Spread-Eagle in
Grace Church Street on Thursday, goes out on Friday.

Stow-Market.
Mr. Sidney's VVagon comes to the Pewter-Pot in Leaden-hall-street on
Wednesday, goes out on Thursday.

Stanbourne in Essex.
Thomas Fitch Carrier, comes to the Rams-head in Fenchurch-street on Wednesday,
goes out on Thursday.

Stansteed Mountfitchett in Essex.
John, Thomas, and George Peacock Carriers, come to the Rams-head in
Fenchurch-street on Monday, go out on Tuesday.

Sawbridge in Herefordshire.
Thomas Browne's Wagon comes to the Nags-head without Aldgate on Tuesday, goes
out on Wednesday.

T.
Tring in Bedfordshire.
George Meade's Wagon comes to the George on Holbourn-bridge on Tuesday, goes
out on Wednesday.

Taunton-Deane in Somersetshire.
Philip Bridle, John Powel Wagoners, come to the Cross-Keys within
White-cross-street.

Mr. Stone's Wagon comes to the Bell in Wood-street on Friday, goes out on
Saturday.

John Booth, Benjamin Fleming Coachmen, come to the Sarazens-head in
Friday-street on Monday, go out on Tuesday.

Tociter in Northamptonshire.
John Lymon's Coach-Wagon comes to the Bell-Savage on Ludgate Hill on Thursday,
goes out on Friday.

Thomas Harris Carrier, comes to the Castle in West-Smithfield on Thursday,
goes out on Friday.

Texel in Warwickshire.
Thomas Barnes's Wagon comes to the Bell-Savage in Ludgate Hill on Saturday,
goes out on Monday.

Tamworth in Warwickshire.
Mr. Sedgwick Carrier, comes to the Castle in West-Smithfield on Saturday, goes
out on Monday, once a fortnight.

Thomas Boss's Wagon comes to the Bear and Ragged-staff in West-Smithfield on
Saturday, goes out on Monday.

Thrapson and Bristock in Northamptonshire.
Richard Stanyon Carrier, comes to the Bear and Ragged-staff in West-Smithfield
on Wednesday, goes out on Thursday.

Tunbridge in Kent.
-- Carrier, comes to the White-hart in Southwark on Wednesday, goes out on
Thursday.

Nathanael Field Carrier, comes to the Queens-head in Southwark on Tuesday,
goes out on Wednesday.

Tenderton in Kent.
Francis Holmes Carrier, comes to the Spur in Southwark on Wednesday, goes out
on Thursday.

Them in Oxfordshire.
Humphrey Cooke's Wagon comes to the Sarazens-head in Friday-street on
Thursday, goes out on Friday.

V.
Vpingham and Hookham in Northamptonshire.
Hawkins Bringhurst's Wagon comes to the Bell in West-Smithfield on Wednesday,
goes out on Thursday.

Vxbridge.
Henry Landon Coachman, comes to the Bull in Holbourn, in and out every day.

W.
Winchester.
Thomas Waldren's Wagon comes to the Rose (...) Holbourn-bridge on Wednesday
and Saturday, goe^ out on Monday and Thursday.

Witney in Oxfordshire.
Thomas Hucks Wagoner, comes to the George in Holbourn-bridge on Wednesday,
goes out on Thursday.

Richard Chirles Wagon comes to the Cross-Keys in White-cross-street on
Wednesday, goes out on Thursday.

Wing in Buckinghamshire.
Edward Stephens Wagon comes to the George on Holbourn-Bridge on Thursday, goes
out on Friday.

Watford in Hertfordshire.
Henry Gifford, William Alden Wagoners, come to the George on Holbourn-Bridge
on Tuesday, goes out ^n Wednesday.

Wickham in Buckinghamshire.
Mr. Prestley's Caravan comes to the Bull and Mouth by Aldersgate on Monday,
goes out on Wednesday.

Elias Lane's Wagon comes to the George in Aldersgate Street on Tuesday, goes
out on Wednesday.

William Norman comes to the Sarazens-head in Friday-street on Tuesday, goes
out on Wednesday.

Warrington in Lancashire.
William Wood, Thomas Atherton, John H^lton with Pack-Horses, come to the
Castle and Falcon in Aldersgate Street every Thursday, goes out on Friday.

Woolverhampton in Staffordshire.
Mr. Tailor Carrier, comes to the same place in Aldersgate Street every other
Friday, goes out the Saturday following.

Wallingford in Berkshire.
Sylvanus Wiggan's Wagon comes to the Bull and Mouth by Aldersgate Street on
Tuesday, goes out on Wednesday.

Worcester.
Mrs. Elizabeth Twitty's Coach comes to the Blue Boar in Holbourn on Saturday,
goes out on Monday.

Richard Roger's Wagon comes to the Bull and Mouth by Aldersgate on Friday,
goes out on Saturday.

Mary Clare and John Fleet comes to the Bell in Woodstreet on Friday, goes out
on Saturday.

John Roberts, John Haurton Wagoners, come to the Castle in Woodstreet on
Friday, go out on Saturday.

Wisbich in the Isle of Ely.
John Bond, Thomas Bond Carriers, come to the Bull within Bishopsgate on
Thursday, go out on Friday.

Whitchurch in Shropshire.
Humphrey Swanwick Carrier, comes to the Castle in West-Smithfield on
Wednesday, goes out on Thursday.

Walthamstow in Essex.
George Diggs Coachman, comes to the Crown without Aldgate, in and out every
day.

Waltham-Ab^y.
John West Coachman, comes to the Green Dragon within Bishopsgate, every day in
the week, and returns again the same day.

Ware.
Robert Heard's Coach comes to the Vine i^ Bishopsgate-street on Monday,
Wednesday and Friday, goes out Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.

Another Coach comes to the Dolphin without Bishopsgate on Monday, Wednesday
and Friday, go^^ out Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.

Weston, Weeden, Toceter.
John Gibbs Carrier, comes to the Bell in West Smithfield on Wednesday, goes
out on Thursday.

Weeden in Northamptonshire.
John Amos, and William Cox Wagoners, come (...) the Pewter-Platter in St.
Johns-street on Thursday go out on Friday, once a fortnight.

Westchester and Nantwich.
William Perin comes to Blossoms-Inn in St. Lawrence-lane on Friday, goes out
on Saturday.

Westchester, Newport, Dreyton, Rixham, Denby, Ruthen and Nantwich.
Thomas Johnson's two Gangs of Horses comes to Blossom-Inn in St. Lawrence-lane
on Friday, goes out on Saturday, once in three weeks.

Richard Hat^on's two Gangs of Horses comes to the same place on Friday, goes
out on Saturday, once in three weeks.

Westchester, Wrexham, and Oss-Westry.
George Woolwoon Wagoner, comes to the Pewter-Platter in St. Johns-street on
Wednesday, goes out on Thursday, not constantly.

Woolon, Vnderidge, Dursely and Nibly in Glocestshire.

William Pierce comes to Blossoms-Inn in Lawrence-lane on Thursday, goes out on
Friday.

Robert Bedford senior, comes to the Bear and Ragged-staff in West-Smithfield
on Tuesday, goes out (...) Wednesday.

Wallingford in Berkshire.
Richard Kerby Carrier, comes to the Bell in Woodstreet on Wednesday, goes out
on Thursday. Wells in Somersetshire, and other places thereabouts.

John Proviss, Worthington, Price Carriers, come to the Castle in Woodstreet on
Thursday, goes out on Friday.

Warwick.
John Windmill, Anthony Bailey Carriers, come to the Rose in West-Smithfield on
Wednesday, goes out on Thursday.

Mr. Rothwel Carrier, comes to the Bell in West-Smithfield on Wednesday, goes
out on Thursday.

Thomas Wilmotte, Francis Purden, Thomas Ousler, Daniel Swift's Coach-Wagon,
comes to the Bell-Savage on Ludgate Hill on Saturday, goes out on Monday.

Windsor in Berkshire.
Mr. Bennet's Coach comes to the White-horse in Fleet Street, in and out every
day.

Mr. Saunders Coachman, comes to the Bell-Savage on Ludgate Hill, in and out
every other day.

Robert Burridge, Samuel Bradford Coachmen, come to the Eagle and Child in the
Strand, in and out every day.

Samuel Bennet Coachman, comes to the King's Head near Charing Cross, in and out
every day.

Mr. Hattox, Reader, Neal, and Burt, come to the Chequer-Inn near
Charing Cross, in and out every day.

Philip Best's Coach comes to the Unicorn in the Hay-market, in and out every
day.

Elias Gliss Coachman, comes to the Crown in the Hay-market, in and out every
day.

The same Man comes to the Black-horse near the Mews-gate, in and out every day.

Mr. Burt's Coach comes to the George in Kings-street, Westminster, in and out
every day.

Wolverhampton in Staffordshire.
William Woolley's Wagon comes to the Bell-Savage on Ludgate Hill on Saturday,
goes out on Monday.

Watford in Hertfordshire.
John Halsey's Coach comes to the Bull in Holbourn on Monday, Wednesday and
Friday, goes out on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.

Wiltopp in Hampshire.
Mr. Garaway's Wagon comes to the Windmill in Shoe-lane on Wednesday, goes out
on Thursday.

Watford in Leicestershire.
William Biggs Carrier, comes to the Castle in West-Smithfield on Wednesday,
goes out on Thursday.

Wemington in Leicestershire.
^eorge Goods^n Carrier, comes to the Bear and Ragged-staff in West-Smithfield
on Saturday, goes out on Monday.

Woodford.
Edward Lake Wagoner, comes to the Maidenhead in St. Giles's on Tuesday and
Thursday, goes out Wednesday and Friday.

Worcester.
John Winslow, Thomas Winslow^, Flying-Coach, comes to the King's Head near
Charing Cross on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday, goes out Monday, Wednesday and
Friday.

Woodford in Essex.
John Hinton's Coach comes to the Three Nuns without Aldgate, in and out every
day.

Wonsted in Essex.
William Humphrey's Coach comes to the Blue^ Boar witout Aldgate, in and out
every day.

Wadhurst in Sussex.
James Reed Carrier, comes to the Queens-head in Southwark on Wednesday, goes
out on Thursday.

Weam in Shropshire.
William Chetwood Wagoner, comes to Blossoms-Inn in Lawrence-lane on Friday,
goes out on Saturday, once in three weeks.

Wittham in Essex.
John Summers Carrier, comes to the Cross-Keys in Grace Church Street on
Thursday, goes out on Friday.

Y.
Yarmouth and Norwich.
Mr. Philips Coachman, ^^nes to the Green Dragon within Bishopsgate every
Wednesday and Friday, goes out Thursday and Saturday.

York.
Francis Gardner, Margaret Gardner, Henry Molden's Coach, comes to the Black
Swan in Holbourn on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, goes out Tuesday, Thursday
and Saturday.

The Rates and Orders for Carmen.
At a General Quarter Sessions of the Peace holden for the City of London (the
10th of October. in the Twenty ninth year of His Majesty's Reign, Sir Thomas
Davies then Lord Mayor) at Justice-Hall in the Old Bailey, the following Rates
and Orders were appointed for Carr-men.
Rates for Carr-men.
ALL Carr-men Trading or Working with Carrs in the City of London, and
Liberties thereof, shall and may demand and take for every Carriage or Load of
the Commodities under-mentioned, the Rates hereafter following, that is to say,
s. d. From any the Wharfs between the Tower and London Bridge, to Tower-street,
Grace Church Street, Fen-Church-street, Bishopsgate-street within, Cornhill,
and places of like distance up the Hill, with 18 Hundred Weight, not exceeding
20 Hundred Weight 2 2 And being above 20 Hundred Weight, for every Hundred 0 2
In which may be included.
Two Pun2heons of Prunes, 2 Bales of Mather, 20 Barrels of Figs, 2 Fats of
Fustians, 6 ordinary Sacks of Cotton-Wools of Smyrna, and 3 Cyprus Bags, a Butt
of Currants, a great Butt of Oils, 3 Chests of Sugar, 8 Bags of Al^ms, 1 Last of
Flax, 1 Last of Hemp, and any other Goods herein not named of the like Weight,
for every Load 2 2 And for Sea-Coals, 14 pence the Load, every Load to be half
a Chaldron; and for one Hundred Fagots the like Rate. 1 2 And from any the
Wharfs aforesaid, to Broad-street, Lothbury, Old Jury, Bassishaw,
Coleman-street, Ironmonger-Lane, St. Lawrence- lane, Milk-street, Aldermanbury,
Cheapside, Wood-street, Friday-street, Bread-street, and places of like
distance, for the like Weight of 18 Hundred, not exceeding 20 Hundred Weight,
for the Goods aforesaid, and other Goods herein not named, of the like Weight,
for every Lo^d 2 6 And being above 20 Hundred Weight, for every Hundred 0 2 And
so. Sea-Coals, 16 pence the Load, every Load to be half a Chaldron; and for one
Hundred Fagots the like Rate 1 4 Also from any the Wharfs aforesaid, to
Smithfield-Ba^s, Holborn-B^^s, Temple Bar, or any of the Bars on the North-side
of the City, and places of like distance up the Hill, with 18 Hundred Weight,
not exceeding 20 Hundred Weight, for every Load 3 4 And going beyond the said
places, the parties to agree with the Carr-men. Also from any the Wharfs
aforesaid, to Tower-street, Bishopsgate within, Cornhill, and others places of
like distance up the Hill, with 14 Hundred Weight, not exceeding 18 Hundred
Weight. 1 10
In which may be included.
Twenty pieces of Raisins, a Load of Raisins of the Sun, 6 Bags of Pepper, 6
ordinary Bags of Galls, 3 great Bags of Galls: 6 Bales and Barrels of Indico, 6
Bales of Grogram Yarn. 6 Bales of Turkey Silk, 5 Hogsheads of Cloves, 4 Bales
of Callicoes, 3 Hogsheads of Wines, 2 Chests of Sugar, or any other Goods of
the like Weight, 5 Hogsheads of Tobacco, not exceeding 18 Hundred weight 1 10
Also from any the Wharfs aforesaid, to Broad-street, Lothbury, Old Jury,
Bassishaw, Col^man-str^et Ironmonger-Lane, St. Lawrence-Lane, Milk-street,
Aldermanbury, Cheapside, Wood-street, Friday-street, Bread-street, and places
of the like distance, for any of the said Goods of the same quantity and
Weight, for every Load 2 0 Also from any the W^arfs aforesaid, to Tower-^treet,
Grace Church Street, Fan-Church-street, Bishopsgate-street within, Cornhill,
and other places of like distance up the Hill, with 8 Hundred Weight, not
exceeding 14 Hundred Weight 1 6
In which may be included
All Bu^s and Pipes of Wine, or a Pipe of Oil, Packs of Canvas, 2 Hogsheads, or
3 Terces, a Fat of Fustians, and all other Goods of the like Bulk and Weight,
for every Load 1 6 And from any the Wharfs aforesaid, to Broadstreet, Lothbury,
Old Jury, Bassishaw, Coleman-street, Ironmonger-Lane, St. Lawrence-lane,
Milk-street, Aldermanbury, Cheapside, Wood-street, Friday-street, and other
places of like distance, for any other Goods of like Load or Weight, for every
Load 1 8 Also from London-Bridge-foot, Westward to the Old Swan, Cole Harbor,
the 3 Cranes, Queen-hith, Broken Wharf, Paul's Wharf, Puddle Wharf, the
Wardrobe, and to all other places not exceeding the Poultry, Cheapside, or
Newgate-Market, for 13 Hundred Weight, not exceeding 18 Hundred Weight 1 10 And
for Sea-Coals, 14 pence the Load, every Load to behalf a Chaldron; and for one
Hundred Fagots the like Rate 1 2 And from all other Wharfs and places between
London Bridge and Temple Bar, to the same, and places of like distance, for
every Load of Coals 14 pence, every Load to be half a Chaldron; and 100 of
Fagots the like Rate 1 2 And to all places Northwards of the Poultry,
Cheapside, Newgate-Market, Holborn-Bridge, and Fleet Street, for 14 Hundred
Weight, not exceeding 18 Hundred Weight 2 2 And from Tower-street,
Grace Church Street, Fan-Church-street, Bishopsgate-street within, Cornhill,
and other places of like distance, for every Pack of 20 Cloths, for 6 Bales of
Cloths and Kerseys, 6 Bales of Pepper, 6 Barrels of Indico, 5 Hogsheads of
Cloves, and for other Goods not herein mentioned, of like Weight, to the
Waterside 1 4 And from Broad-street, Lothbury, Old Jury, Bassishaw,
Coleman-street, Ironmonger-Lane, St. Lawrence-Lane, Milk-street, Aldermanbury,
Cheapside, Wood-street, Friday-street, Bread-street, and other places of like
distance, to the Waterside, for the like Weight 1 8
And for places nearer, or of less distance, the parties hiring, and to be
hired, are to make Agreement answerable or proportionable to the Rates
beforementioned.

Orders for Carr-men.
THe Carr-men for the foregoing Rates are to help load and unload their Carrs.

If a Carr-man exact more than these Rates, upon due proof (...) Lord Mayor, or
any two Justices of the Peace, he (...) suffer Imprisonment for the space of 21
days, without Bail or Mainprise.

If any Merchant, or other person shall refuse to pay a Carr-man for his Hire
after these Rates, upon Complaint made by the Carr-man to the President of
Christ-Hospital, or any Justice of the Peace, the President or Justice may
oblige them to do it.

All Merchants, or others, may choose what Carr they please, except such as
stand for Wharf-work, Tackle-work, Crane-work, Shop and Merchants Houses, which
are to be taken in turn.

Every Carr-man standing with his empty Carr next to any Goods to be laden,
shall upon the first demand load the same without bargaining for any other
Wages than the Rates beforementioned.

If a Merchant, or other person, shall cause a Carrman to attend at his House,
Shop, Warehouse, or Cellar, with his laden Carr, above half an hour before he
unloads, (the Carr-man being willing to help unload the same) he shall pay the
Carr-man after the rate of Twelve pence for every hour after the first half
hour, for his Attendance.

Every Licensed Carr-man is to have a piece of Brass fixed upon his Carr, upon
which is to be set a certain Number, which Number (together with the Carr-man's
Name) is Registered in a Register kept in Christ's Hospital; so that if any
Carr-man offends, it is but taking notice of the Number of his Carr, and scarch
for that in the said Register, and you will find his Name.

Every Carr-man that shall not conform to these Rules, or Work without a
Numbered Piece of Brass fixed on his Carr, may be suspended from his Employment.

Complaints of the Abuses of Carr-men may be made every Tuesday, at Two of the
Clock in the Afternoon, to the Court sitting in Christ-Hospital.

The Rates or FARES of WATERMEN.
As they were set forth by the Lord Mayor, and Court of Aldermen, Sept. 7. 1671.
Oars. Skul. s. d. s. d. FRom London to Limehouse, New-Crane Shadwel-Dock,
Bell-wharf, Ratcliff-cross 1 0 0 6 To Wapping-Dock, Wapping-New, and Wapping
Old-Stairs, the Hermitage, Rotherhith Church-Stairs, and Rotherhith-Stairs 0 6
0 3 From St. Olaves to Rotherhith-Church-Stairs, and Rotherhith-Stairs 0 6 0 3
From Billingsgate and St. Olaves, to St. Savior's Mill 0 6 0 3 All the Stairs
between London Bridge and Westminster 0 6 0 3 From either side above
London Bridge, to Lambeth and Fox-Hall 1 0 0 6 From White Hall to Lambeth and
Fox-hall 0 6 0 3 From Temple, Dorset, Black-Fryars Stairs, and Pauls-Wharf, to
Lambeth 0 8 0 4 Over the Water directly in the next Skuller, between
London Bridge and Limehouse, or London Bridge and Fox-Hall 0 0 0 2
OARS.
Wh. Co^ Fare pany s. d. s. d. FRom London to Gravesend 4 6 0 9 From London to
Graise, or Greenhive 4 0 0 8 From London to Purfleet, or Eriff 3 0 0 6 From
London to Woolwich 2 6 0 4 From London to Black-Wall 2 0 0 4 From London to
Greenwich or Deptford 1 6 0 3 From London to Chelse^, Ba^^erse^, Wansor 1 6 0 3
From London to Put^y, Fulham, Barn-Elms 2 0 0 4
OARS.
Wh. Com Fare pany d. s. d. From London to Hammersmith, Chiswick, Mortlack 2 6
0 6 From London to Brainford, Thistleworth, Richmond 3 6 0 6 From London to
Twickenham 4 0 0 6 From London to Kingston 5 0 0 9 From London to Hampton Court
6 0 1 0 From London to Hampton-Town, Sunbury, and Walton 7 0 1 0 From London to
Weybridge and Chertsey 10 0 1 0 From London to Stanes 12 0 1 0 From London to
Windsor 14 0 2 0
Rates for carrying Goods in the Tilt-Boat, between Gravesend and London.
A Half Firkin, 1 d. a Whole Firkin, 2 d. a Hogshead, 2 s. A hundred weight of
Cheese, Iron, or any heavy Goods, 4 d. A S^ck of Salt or Corn, 6 d. An ordinary
Chest or Trunk, 6 d. An ordinary Hamper, 6 d. The Hire of the whole Tilt-Boat,
1 l. 2 s. 6 d. Every single Person in the ordinary passage, 6 d.

What Waterman takes and demands more then these Rates, lies liable to pay
Forty Shillings, and suffer half a years Imprisonment.

And if he refuse to carry any Passenger or Goods at these Rates, upon
Complaint made to the Lord Mayor (...) Court of Aldermen, he shall be suspended
from (...) Employment for Twelve Months.

An Historical Account of the most Memorable Wars, Tumults, Fires, Epidemical
Diseases, Rarities, Accidents, etc. that have happened in the City of London:
Briefly abstracted from Ancient and Modern Writers.
BBcause it may be no less Profitable, more Recreative, and less Tedious, to
deliver what is to be treated of in this Chapter, rather in a Miscellaneous
Method, then otherwise, we shall not tie our selves to observe a strict
Pedigree and Succession of Time, respecting these things as they lie in order
to each other, but yet we shall omit no Account that we find recorded of the
respective Seasons when they happened; keeping exactly to the Sense of History,
and supplying the Shortness of one by the Fullness of another; paring off
Superfluities, and fitting it with Language suitable to our Times, not with
respect to Elegancy, but Plainness.

Under the term of Wars, Tumults, etc. we include all Popular or Military
Disorders, in which the City was any way concerned. And in order to that, I
will note by way of Preface* some few of the Martial Services performed by the
City in Ancient Times.

The first Passage I shall produce, shall be out of Polydore Virgil, Printed at
Basil, 1534. 147 years ago. He says thus: -- Hoc (...) success^ Danus ferocior
effectus, Londinum, quo (...) Etheldredum se recepisse m^tu^ causa aggrediendum
^^^stituit Itaque, etc. Which in English is to this sense: The Dane being grown
more fierce by the success of his Affairs, resolved to make his Approaches to
London, where he understood that Ethelred had retired; having therefore
prepared all things necessary for his Expedition, he proceeds to beleaguer the
City, and begirt it round; by this perilous Attempt either to terrify the
Enemy, or try their Strength and Courage: On the other side, the Citizens,
although somewhat fearing the effect of so great a Storm, yet considering that
upon their case depended the General Fate of their Country, and that this was
the Principal City, defended themselves bravely; some sally out, and others
annoy the Besiegers from the Walls, every one in all places striving to excel
others in Bravery of Courage, and Gallantry of Action: At last, though the
Danes gave many stout and sharp Assaults, yet the Valiant Londoners in Defense
of their King, notwithstanding the peril of such an Enterprise, gather into a
Body, and set open the Gates, and ran upon the Enemy with great Fury and
Courage. But the Dane, whilst he encourages his men, and was striving to
complete the Victory, which he thought he was almost in possession of, is
encompassed and beset on all sides, and his men slain in great numbers, yet he
breaks out through his Enemies Weapons, and with the residue of his before
huge, but now Routed Army, (marching night and day) arrives at Bath in two days
etc. So far he. This happened almost sixty years? before the Conquest, in the
days of Ethelred, King Sweyne being then King of Denmark.

After the death of this Sweyne, his Son Canutus, afterward King of England,
besieged London both by Land and Water, but after much dangerous labor,
judging it impregnable by the obstinate Valor of the Defendants, he departed,
but returned with greater Forces the same year, and besieged the City again;
but the Citizens behaved themselves so gallantly, and destroyed so many of his
Soldiers, that he was forced to betake himself to a shameful flight.

In the dissension between King Edward the Co^fessor, and his Father-in-law
Earl Godwyn, (which was the mightiest Subject within this Realm) the Earl with
great Army came to London, yet was by the Citizens resisted, till by means of
the Nobility they were reconciled.

Seventy years after the Conquest, Maud the Empress made War upon King Stephen
for the Right of the Crown, and had taken his Person Prisoner, but by the
Strength of the Londoners and Kentish-men, she was routed at Winchester, and
her Brother Robert Earl of Gloucester was taken, in exchange for whom King
Stephen was delivered.

In the year 1383, (but Polidore Virgil says Anno 1581.) about 4 R. II. and 298
years ago, there fell out an Accident which created much disturbance in the
Kingdom, and particularly in London, occasioned (as I find Recorded in several
Chronicles) through the Rudeness of a Poll-money Collector, who coming into the
house of one John Tyler at Deptford in Kent, demanded of his Wife Poll-money
for her Husband, her Self, their Servants, and Daughter; the Woman alleges,
that the Daughter was not of Age to pay: The rude Fellow said he would try
that, and by force immodestly turns up her Coats, (having in several places, as
was reported, used the same trial) the Mother makes an Outcry, and Neighbors
run in; her Husband being at work hard by, and hearing the noise, comes in with
his Lathing-Staff in his hand (for he was a Tyler) with which (after he had
reasoned a while with the Collector, who gave him provoking Language, and
struck at him) he knocked his Brains out; and making his Appeal to the People,
who were apt to receive any occasion of Tumult, he so incensed them, with the
help of a Factious Clergyman, one John Ball, that the Commons from diverse
parts drew together; and whether beginning in Kent or Essex, they drew into
their Faction the Commons of Sussex, Hertfordshire, Cambridgeshire, Suffolk,
Norfolk, and other Shires, and apprehending all Passengers, made them swear to
be true to K. Richard, and never to receive any King that should be called
John, which they did, for the Envy they bore to John Duke of Lancaster. Thus
their Number still increased, that by that time they were come so far as
Black Heath, they were esteemed to be One hundred thousand. They took upon them
to cut off the Heads of all that professed the Law, Justices of the Peace, the
Country Jarors, and any person that they thought to be learned; especially if
they found any to have Pen and Ink, they pulled off his Hood, and with one
voice cried, Hale him out, and cut off his Head; and it was immediately done.

They resolved to burn all Court-Rolls and Records, with all old Monuments.
Their Chaplain, John Ball, a wicked Priest, advised them to destroy all the
Nobility and Clergy, so that there should be no Bishop in England but one
Archbishop, which should be himself; and that there should not be above two
Religious persons in one house, but that their Possessions should be divided
among the Laity, for which Doctrine they held him as a Prophet. The King was at
this time at Windsor, but removed, in all haste to the Tower of London, to whom
repaired the Archbishop of Canterbury Chancellor, the Bishop of London, the
Prior of St. John Treasurer, the Earls of Buckingham, Kent, Arundel, Warwick,
Suffolk, Oxford, and Salisbury, and others of the Nobility and Gentlemen, to
the number of 600. The Commons of Essex came on the other part of the River
Thames. From Black Heath the Kentish Rebels came to Southwark, and broke open
the Prisons of the Marshalsea, and the King's Bench, with other Prisons, and let
out the Prisoners. The Essex Rebels spoiled the Archbishop's house at Lambeth,
and burnt all the Goods, with the Books, Registers, and Remembrances of the
Chancery, with several other Outrages. Then they came to London over the
Bridge, and sent for one Richard Lion a grave Citizen, who had been Tyler's
Master, and struck off his Head, carrying it upon a Pole in Triumph before
them. The next day they came to the Savoy, the Duke of Lancaster's House, which
they set on Fire, burning all the rich Furniture, breaking in pieces Plate and
Jewels, to an extraordinary value, and then throwing them into the Thames,
saying, They were men of Justice, and would not, like Robbers, enrich
themselves with any man's Goods. And when one of their Fellows was seen to
convey a fair piece of Plate into his bosom, they took him, and threw him and
that into the Fire. Thirty two of them were got into the Dukes Wine-Cellar,
where they stayed Drinking so long that they were not able to come out in time,
but were shut in with Wood and Stones that immured up the Door; they were heard
to cry seven days after, and then perished.

From the Savoy they went to the Temple, where they burnt the Lawyers Lodgings,
with their Books and Writings and all they could lay hands on. They broke up
the Fleet Prison, and let the Prisoners go where they would. The like they did
at Newgate; and made a most dreadful havoc up and down. The house of St. John's
by Smithfield they set on fire, so that it burnt seven days together.

After this they came to the Tower, where the King was then lodged: And though
he had, at that time, 600 armed Men, and 600 Archers about him, yet he durst
not but suffer them to enter, where they abused the King's Mother in a rude
manner, offering to kiss her, etc. that she fell into a Swoon. And finding in
the place Simon Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury and Lord Chancellor, and Sir
Robert Hale Prior of St. John and Lord Treasurer, and one Richard a Carmelite
Monk the King's Confessor, these they led to Tower Hill, and there most cruelly
cut off their heads, as they served diverse others.

Indeed Polidore Virgil writes, That the Rebels were not at all in the Tower,
but that the King sent these three men to appease them, hoping that they would
not offer to abuse such eminent Clergymen: For (says he) Si vulgus it a
concitatus turrem expugnasset, non eos utique tres duntaxat, uti credere par
est, sed and Regem and relquos ommes, quos imprimis ad supplicium petebat,
interfecisset; that is, If the enraged Common People had taken the Tower by
force, they would, in all probability, destroy not only those three, but the
King also, and all the rest, whom first of all they demanded to be delivered to
them ^or punishment.

They drew Thirteen Flemings out of Austin-Fryers, and Beheaded them in the
Streets. Seventeen more out of another Church. And Thirty two out of the
Vintry, and several out of their own, or others, whom they Beheaded; yet after
all these barbarous and bloody Outrages, the King proclaimed Pardon to all such
as would lay down Arms, and go quietly home; which the Essex men did, but the
Kentish men continued still with their Captain Wat-Tyler of Maidstone, a crafty
Fellow, of an acute wit, but very graceless; Polidore Virgil says, He was
Manibus promptus, ac Consiliis praeceps, of a ready hand, and hasty or
precipitate in counsel. To this Ringleader of Mischief, the King sent Sir John
Newton, to understand what his meaning was; Wat Tyler was offended, because he
came on Horseback, telling him, It became him to alight from his Horse in his
presence, and therewith drew out his Dagger to strike him. The King perceiving
this Noble Knight to be in danger, to qualify the severity of Wat for a time,
commanded Sir John to alight, which did not pacify, but made Wat the more
insolent, and would have the King's Sword, which Sir John carried, offering
again to assault him. But the Lord Mayor of London, William Walworth, with
other Persons of Quality, being just come, affirmed it to be an unheard of
Indignity, and a most intolerable Disgrace, if the King should suffer so Noble
a Knight to be basely murdered in his presence. Upon which the King commanded
the Lord Mayor to arrest him, who did it to purpose; for being a man of an
invincible Courage, and a brave Mind, he regarded not the hazard that probably
would follow, his attacking that Darling, and Leader of a Rude, Numerous, and
Rebellious Rabble, but preferred his Duty to his King and Country, and the
Generosity of rescuing an abused Gentleman, even before life. I insert this, as
a Remark due to this brave and memorable Action, which deserves never to be
forgotten.

The Mayor immediately rides up to Wat, and Arrests him with such a salutation
of his Mace on his head, that he tumbles him down, and then he was by some of
the King's Servants (some say, by John Cavendish Esquire) run through in several
places, many persons encompassing him, so as that he could not be seen by his
Plebeian Army, and then caused his dead Body to be drawn into St. Bartholomews
Hospital. But the Commons perceiving it, they cried, Their Captain was slain,
and animated each other to revenge: Upon which the King, though not above 15
years of age, was so Courageous as to ride up to them, telling them, That now
their Leader was dead, he would be their Leader himself; and if they would
follow him into the Fields, they should have whatsoever they desired.

In the mean time the Lord Mayor, Walworth, with one Servant, Rides speedily
into the City, and raised One thousand armed Men, where meeting Sir Robert
Knolls, a Citizen, by accident, got him to be their Leader, who coming into the
Field where the Rebels were, so daunted them, that throwing down their weapons,
they cried for mercy: so that it was a wonderful thing to see how suddenly Fear
overtook Presumption, and how quickly terms of the most servile Submission,
succeeded their insolent Brags, viz. That they had the King's life in their
power, etc. and what else they would do.

On the other side 'twas as strange, to see how quickly Boldness surprised Fear
in those about the King; for a little before, they trembled at the sight of the
Rebels, but now they are mad to be at them, which the King would not suffer,
but commanded the Charter they had demanded to be scaled, and delivered to
them, because these Commotions might have the speedier End, for the Commons in
other places, were not yet quiet, and the King thought it more prudent rather
to pacify, than provoke them. The Rabble being dispersed, the King called for
the Mayor, and Knighted him in the Field, as also five Aldermen his Brethren,
viz. Nicholas Brember, John Philpot, Robert Lawnd, John Standish, Nicholas
Twyford, and Adam Francis. Some affirm, that the Dagger was added to the City
Arms for this Reason, but Antiquaries make out, that this Coat, with the Sword
of St. Paul (not a Dagger) belonged to the City long before this happened.

The Mayor of London, after this, sat in Judgment upon Offenders, where many
were found Guilty, and were Executed; amongst others, Jack Straw, John Kirby,
Alane Tredder, and John Sterling, who gloried that he slew the Archbishop. Sir
Robert Tresilian, the Chief Justice, was appointed to sit in Judgment against
the Offenders, before whom above 1500 were found Guilty, and in several places
put to Death, amongst whom was John Ball the Priest, their Incendiary. And thus
ended that dangerous Rebellion.

About the Year 1450. 29 H. 6. there was another Insurrection in Kent, headed
by one Jack Cade, who styled himself John Mortimer, Captain Mend-all. He
marches with a small, but well-ordered Number to Black Heath, where he lay
about a Month, exercising his Men, and in the mean time presents several
Complaints to the King and Parliament of various Grievances and Oppressions,
but they were judged too insolent, and therefore rejected. The Privy Council
solicit the King to suppress this Rebellion by force of Arms, who thereupon
draws his Army to Greenwich, and appointed diverse Lords to assail the Rebels;
but the Lords could get no Followers to fight against them, who sought only for
reformation of Abuses, and for punishment of such Traitors as the Lord Say, the
King's Chamberlain was. Whereupon the Lord Say was committed to the Tower, the
King and Queen retire to London, from thence, within two days, the King (being
now 15000 strong) marches in person toward Captain Mend-all, who, politickly,
withdraws his Forces to Sevenoke-wood: Upon notice whereof, the King retireth
again to London, but the Queen, longing for dispatch, sends the two Staffords,
Sir Humphrey and William, with many Hotspurs in the Court, to follow the
Rebels, who were soon cooled; for they found Captain Mend-all in good order
ready to receive them, and in the first Encounter slew Sir Humphrey, and
afterward his Brother, with many others, and put all the rest to flight.

The King's Forces being at Black Heath, could neither by Threats not
Entreaties be gotten to rescue them, but rather wished the Queen and her
Favorites in the Staffords Case, or that the Duke of York were in England to
aid his Cousin Mortimer, (now first acknowledged to be of his Kindred) and many
of them stole away to the Rebels, whose Number from ^^ssex and Surrey daily
increased, whom yet their Captain restrained from all outrageous actions, (...)
with them to Black Heath, where the King's Army lay the Night before, but now
was fallen down to Greenwich.

Then was the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Dake of Buckingham sent to
expostulate with the Rebels about their Demands; to whom Jack Cade gave very
good language, but said directly, That he would yield to no Cessation of Arms,
unless the King in person would hear the Grievances of his Subjects, and pass
his Princely Word for the Reformation of their Wrongs.

This Resolution of his being made known to the King, who had no assurance of
his own Soldiers, made him march presently to Killingworth Castle in
Warwickshire, which he fortified. Cade marches to Southwark, commanding his men
to commit no Outrage, and not to wrong any person, which they obeyed.

The next morning he marches to London Bridge, and so into the City by
London-stone, where he struck his Sword, saying, Now is Mortimer Lord of
London. He then commands all Lombards, Merchant-Strangers, Genoeses, Venetians,
Florentines, and others, to send him 12 Harnesses complete, 24 Brigandines, 12
Battle-Axes, 12 Glaves, six Horses completely furnished with Saddles and
Bridles, etc. and 1000 Marks ready money, or he would cut off the Heads of as
many of them as he could catch: All which was immediately sent him.

The next day he causes the Lord Says Head to be cut off in Cheapside, as also
his Son-in-laws, Sir James Cromer, High Sheriff of Kent, uext day he causes
some of his Fellows to be Executed for some Disorders against his Proclamation,
fined Persons at pleasure, and beheaded others. But the Citizens finding his
Insolency to increase intolerably, with a select Party encounter them on the
Bridge, through whom Cade sorced his passage, and fired several Houses. In this
Bickering several persons were slain, and in a little time the Citizens, by the
aid of fresh Supplies, recovered the Bridge again, and drove the Rebels beyond
a place, then called the Stoop in Southwark Cade set all Prisoners in the
Prisons there at Liberty, as well Felons as Debtors. But the generality of the
Rebels grew weary, so that upon notice of the King's Proclamation, and
assurance of Pardon, they dropped away to their several Habitations. Cade
afterward attempting to raise New Troubles, was (because he resisted when he
was to be apprehended) killed by one Mr. Alexander Eden, a Kentish Gentleman,
his Body was brought to London, where he was quartered, and his Head set upon
London Bridge. Of 800 of these Rebels that were found Guilty, eight only were
Executed.

The Story of Evil-May-Day, Anno 1517, 9 H. 8. is so remarkable, that old men,
formerly, were wont to reckon their Age from that day. The occasion was briefly
thus. Several Artificers of Foreign Parts repaired to London, which disgusted
the multitude, who complaiued, That their Selling of Wares, and Exercising of
Handicrafts, impoverished the Kings own Subjects, and were born out of England,
and that they had offered many great Insolences and Wrongs to the English,
particularly one Williamson, a Carpenter of London, bought two Pigeons in
Cheapside, and as he was about to pay for them, a Frenchman snatched them out of
his hand, saying, They were no meat for a Carpenter. This begat a Contest, and
by the French Ambassador's means, who aggravated the matter, the Carpenter was
imprisoned, etc. These, and such like Insolences, provoked one John Lincoln to
draw them up in Form of a Bill, and persuaded Dr. Beale on Easter Tuesday, at
the Spittle to read it openly in the Pulpit, which occasioned these Foreigners
to be very severely handled, and oftentimes knocked down in the streets.

At last, one Evening, many Prentices and others assembling, rifled some
Strangers houses, and much mischief was like to be done, but by the care of the
Lord Mayor and Aldermen, etc, many of ehe Rioters were committed to Prison,
whereof Lincoln, and twelve others, were hanged; 400 more in their Shirts bound
with Ropes, and Halters about their Necks, were carried to Westminster, but
crying Mercy, Mercy, were all pardoned by the King, which Clemency got him much
Love.

To describe all the particular tumultuous Disorders of Apprentices, and
others, would swell this Manual too much; and I would rather they should be
forgotten, than any more be brought into Example, and therefore, at present,
they are omitted.

In the Year 1629. 5 Car. 1. about the month of July, there happened a great Fray
in Fleet Street, upon the Rescue of one Captain Bellingham, an Officer in the
Expedition to the Isle of Rhee, which was attempted by some Students in the
Temple, wherein some were hurt, and some carried to Prison; but this drew
together many of the Gentlemen to rescue the Prisoner, who made a Barricade
against St. Dunstans Church, and beat back the Sheriffs Officers, and released
their Friends; of which the Lord Mayor being informed, he and the Sheriffs,
with some of the Trained-B^nds, came thither to keep the Peace, and disperse
the Causers of the Tumult who were increased by that time to the Number of 500,
and armed with Swords and Pistols. The Lord Mayor made Proclamation That on
pain of Rebe^lion they should dissolve themselves but prevailed not. He then
tried other means, and the Soldiers fired their Mu^que^ (...) them Charged wit^
Powder only, but the Gentlemen provoked at this, shot Bullets, and very
furiously attaqued the Trained-Bands, killed five outright, and wounded near
One hundred; yet the City Soldiers were so reinforced, that in the end the
Gentlemen were subdued, and one Ashhurst and Stamford, two Captains, with some
others, were taken and committed. The King was much offended at the Uproar, and
immediately sent for the Lord Chief Justice, by whose advice a special
Commission of Oyer and Terminer was issued out, and about a Fortnight after the
Malefactors were Arraigned at the Guildhall of London, and Ashhurst and
Stamford being found guilty of Murder, were Condemned and Executed at Tyburn.
Much more may be said of these Tumults, but for necessary Reasons it is
reserved to another place.

In the Relation of FIRES we shall only give a brief account of the most
remarkable.

In the time of King H. 1. All the Buildings from Cheapside to Aldgate, which
was a large Tract, was consumed by a dreadful Fire. Some of the Fires on
London Bridge we have already mentioned. -- In the Year 1212, on the 10 th of
July, at night, there happening a great Fire in Southwark, a great Multitude of
People going over the Bridge to see it, or help to quench it; on a sudden by
blowing of the South Wind, the North part of the Bridge was set on fire, upon
which the People on the Bridge would have returned, but could not; and it
happened that while they lingered too long, the South end of the Bridge took sire
also, so that the People thronging between the two Fires, expected nothing but
present Death. Then there came to aid them several Ships and Ves^els, into
which the Multitude so un advisedly rushed, that the Vessels were thereby sunk,
or were overset; (...) that by Fire and Water, there perished above 3000
persons. In the Year 1633, about Midnight, (...) third part of the Houses on
the Bridge were consumed by a great Fire, to the Number of 42 Houses, with a
great part of the Wares, Goods, and rich Furniture in them, before eight a
Clock next Morning, and the Fire remained glowing and burning for a Week after
in their Vaults and Cellars. Many Fires there were that damaged St.
Pauls-Church, In the Conquerors time, Anno 1087, it was quite consumed,
together with the greatest part of the City, -- This Fire is recorded to begin
at the entry of the West-gate, and consumed the Eastgate.

June the 4 th, 1561, between three and four in the afternoon, the great Spire
of the Steeple of St. Paul's was fired by Lightning, which broke forth two or
three yards beneath the foot of the Cross, and from thence it burnt downward,
so that in four hours the Steeple with all the Roof of the Church was
destroyed. To repair which, Queen Elizabeth immediately gave 1000 Marks, and a
Warrant for 1000 Loads of Timber to be taken out of her Woods, or elsewhere,
etc.

In the 27 E. 1. The Palace at Westminster and the Monastery adjoining were
consumed with fire. It would be endless to give a particular account of all the
Fires by which this famous City suffered from time to time, especially of late
years, which being so fresh in Memory, and so fully set forth in Narratives, I
shall at present for bear to transcribe; as the Fires at Waping, Limehouse,
Shadwell, the Temple, the great Fire that lately happened in Southwark, Wednesday
night the 8 th of this instant June, the former great Fire that consumed
several 100 Houses in the said Borough, but are now very gallantly rebuilt,
etc. And for an Instance of all, we will give a brief and particular account of
that Dreadful FIRE in Anno 1666, which laid the City in Ashes, and did (almost)
incredible mischief.

The City of LONDON within the Walls is seated upon abont 460 Acres of Ground,
whereon was bilt about 15000 Houses, the Fire destroyed 373 Acres within the
Walls of the City, and 63 Acres 3 Roods without the Walls; There were burnt
13200 Houses, 87 Parish-Churches, six Chapels, most of the principal public
Edifices, as the great Cathedral, the great Guild Hall, the Royal Exchange, the
Custom-House, most of the stately Halls of Companies, whereof the whole Damage
is (almost) incredible.

It was observed, as judicious Stationers computed, that in that one Commodity
of Books was lost 150000 l. and the loss in other cumbersome Goods, as Wines,
Tobacco, Sugars, Plumbs. etc. was extra ordinary, insomuch that one Person, Sir
Robert Jeffery, Alderman, now living, lost of Tobacco to the value of 20000 l.

It has been computed by an Ingenious person, that the 13200 Houses burnt,
valued one with another at no more than 25 l. yearly Rent, and at the low rate
of 12 years purchase, will amount to 3900000 l. Sterlin. The 87 Churches, the
spacious Cathedral of St. Paul's, the 6 Chapels, the Exchange, Custom-House,
Guild Hall, the magnificent Halls of Companies, the several principal City-
Gates, with other public Edifices and Colleges, may be well valued above
2000000 l. The Wares, Houshold-Goods, Moneys lost, and spoiled by the Fire, or
pilfered away by those wicked wretches that made their gain of the Common
Calamity, may modestly be computed above 2000000 l. The Money spent on a
General removing of Goods, during the Fire, and bringing them back afterward,
in the hire of Boats, Carts, and Porters, may be reckoned at least 2000000 l.
the Total whereof 9900000 l. Sterlin.

This Dreadful FIRE began upon the Second of September, at two of the Clock in
the Morning (being the Lord's Day) and lasted till Thursday following, being the
sixth of the same Month, it brok^out in Pudding-lane, near London Bridge, at
one Fariner, a Baker's House, and spread it self, besides breadth, from almost
Tower Hill to St. Dunstans-Church, near Temple Bar, in Fleet Street.

The Consternation of all persons was extraordinary, (and no Wonder) for, that
Raging and Masterless Element did more mischief in a matter of four days ^ime,
than three or four Armies unresisted could ha^^ easily done in twice the time.

Some Men were forced to pay 5 l. 10 l. 20 l. 30 l. for a Cart to carry away
into the Field some choice Goods; and certainly they had little Conscience that
exacted so much. He that would more largely peruse every Days progress, -- let
him peruse Mr. Vincent's excellent Book, Entitled, Gods terrible Voice to the
City, Printed, 1671, page 46.

Who were the Authors, Contrivers and Promoters of this prodigious
Conflagration, may be read at large in Capt. William Bedloes Narrative of it,
Printed Anno 1679. to which I am forced to refer my Reader, only shall
transcribe a few things, which he particularly advertises the Citizens to take
notice of,

First, The Ways taken by Papists to begin and promote FIRES.
1. BY Fireballs put in with Poles or otherwise through holes, or open places
into Houses; as at Mr. Fariner's House, which began the great Fire.

2. By hard Fireballs thrown through Glass-Windows, as at the Smiths in
Black-Fryars.

3. By flinging the said Balls, or other Combustible matter fired, into
Cellars, through the Bars on Grates, where they are left without Shutters, as
a^ the Oly-mans in Southwark.

4. By firing their own Lodgings, as the Frenchman did in Shoo-lane, in the
time of the great Fire and likewise the two Peter's near Saffron-hill.

5. By hiring Cellars in dangerous places, ^illing them with Combustibles, and
then firing them, which (Mr. Bedlow says) was a course they much advise him to.

6. By firing Hay-lofts, as in Smithfield.

7. By strangers feigning Eirands, as in the Temple.

8. By untyling Houses, breaking Windows, etc. and there putting in their
Combustibles.

9. By getting into empty Houses and setting them on fire, as in Budge-row,
1670.

10 By creeping into Back-yards, and firing stacks of Bavins, Reed, etc. as at
Lime-House.

11. By going into Victualling-Houses and leaving behind them Trains for
firing, as at the Cooks in Fetter-lane, and in Southwark.

12. By Con^ederate Servants, as lately at the Attorneys in the same Lane.

Secondly. Their Instructions are
1. TO do it in Select places, amongst old Buildings, and where Engines cannot
play.

2. To Fire the Water-Houses, and get the Newriver-water stopped, if they can for
that time, near that place.

3. To have some of their chief Friends thereabouts, that may misadvise great
persons, that they may blow up Houses where it is not necessary, or where
rather it will do harm by opening a passage for the fire.

4. To have some of their active Instruments, who under pretense of helping may
scatter Fire-halls in contiguous Houses, and break down the Windows, Roof, etc.
to let in the fire more easily.

5. To have others attending that shall cry out against French and Papists, and
mightily pity the People, thereby getting to be trusted with removing of
Goods, and so to plunder and steal, or if they find an opportunity to fire
Houses at a distance.

6. Curiously to observe Wind and Tide, in all attempts, as likewise Frosts and
very dry times, and choose Sundays for doing the business, because then there is
least Water.

Now whether those wicked Incendiaries have observed these Rules in that
monstrous and execrable villainy before recited, is left at the Tribunal of the
Readers Impartial Judgment, who may consider the Circumstances following, of
which they ( viz. the Papists) made a fatal use.

1. It was the dead time of the night, or rather a little before two in the
Morning, when all persons gave themselves to their repose, and were in a dead
^leep.

2. The Dead time of the Week, being Saturday night, when Traders were retired
to their Country-Houses, and none but Maidservants or Apprentices to look
after their Houses.

3. The Dead time of the Year, being then the long Vacation, when Tradesmen
were generally in the Country to fetch in their Debts.

4. The Closeness of the Buildings there facilitated the progress of the Fire,
and hindered the playing of Engines.

5. The Houses were generally Wooden, or built of old Timber.

6. A very dry preceding Summer made the Timber very apt to take Fire.

7. In those parts were the greatest Magazines and Storehouses of the City, of
Oils, Pitch, Tar, Rosin, Wax, Butter, Brimstrne, Hemp, Cordage, Cheese, Wine,
Brandy, Sugars, etc.

8. An Easterly Wind, continued long before, and then blew strongly, a fatal
help to spread the Fire Westward.

9. The Thames-Water-Tower was immediately burnt down, being near the place
where the fire began, so that they could not be supplied with Waters that way.

To conclude, The same several Testimonies and Depositions taken by a
Committtee appointed for that purpose by the House of Commons Tuesday 25 Sept.
1666. viz. That this was acted by a Hellish Combinat^on of Papists, evidenced
by the words of Papists before the Fire, by their actual flinging of
Fireballs, etc. and otherwise promoting the Incendium during the Fire, many of
which were catched in the Fact, but conveyed away by some of their Friends,
under pretense to secure them. -- The free Confession of the Frenchman, Robert
Hubert, who was hanged for it, and the Witness of Capt. Bedloe, and others, who
have made out that they were concerned in it; I say all these are enough to
satisfy any that will not wink himself blind, that London was burnt by Romish
Fireballs, (which they were wont to call Tewxsbury Mustard-balls) thrown by
Romish hands.

But Renowned LONDON, notwithstanding those vast losses, and the
Devouring-Plague the Year before, and the chargeable War we had then against
three powerful Neighbor Nations, lay not long in Rubbish, but began
Phenix-like to revive out of the ashes of its consumed Predecessor.

This dismal Calamity gave His Majesty a sad opportunity of exercising hs
Compassion and Care toward many distressed Families, who lay in the open
Fields. His Majesty therefore issued Proclamations to Justices of the Peace for
causing Provisions to be sent into the Markets, and ordered his Sea-store to be
opened for a present supply of Bread in Ship-Bisket, etc.

The King passed an Act of Parliament for establishing a Judicature, to take
Cognizance of; and Determine all Differences that might arise among parties
concerning burnt or Demollished Houses. And by Act of Parliament there was a
New-Model of Building appointed, which may be worth the Readers perusal; It was
past, Anno 1666. 19 Car. 2. See Kebles Statutes at large, p. 1327, to 1335. but
it is too large to be transcribed.

Pur^uant to this Act, the Citizens betook themselves cheerfully to Rebuild,
and in four years time they erected in the same Streets 10000 Houses, and laid
out for the same 3000000 of pounds Sterling. counting but 300 l. a House, one with
another, besides several large Hospitals, diverse very stately Halls; 19 fair
solid Stone Churches, that did cost above 100000 l. were all at the same time
erecting, and soon after finished; And since that time they have gone on
Cheerfully to Rebuild, so that there is hardly a vacant place in the City;
except such as are designed for other uses than Dwelling-Houses.

And as if the Fire had only purged the City, the Buildings are become
infinitely more Beautiful, more Commodious, and more Solid (the three main
Virtues of all Edifices) then before; Nay, as if the Citizens had not been any
was impoverished, but rather enricht by that huge Conflagration, they may be
said to be even rather excessive than otherwise in their Expenses upon the
stately Italian Faciata's or Fronts of their New Houses, Churches, and Halls,
many of excellent Portland-stone, upon their richly adorned Shops, Chambers,
Balconies, Signs, Portals, etc. The public Halls which are so magnificent and
richly adorned, with excellent and Curious Architecture, Carved Work in Stone
and Wood, with Pictures and Wainscot, not only of Firr and Oak, but some with
sweet smelling Cedar -- The Churches beautified with excellent various Towers,
and Fronts of true Roman Architecture. They have made their Streets much more
large and straight, paved on eachside with smooth-hewen-stone, and guarded the
same with many Massy Posts for the benefit of Foot Passeugers; and whereas
before they dwelt in low, dark Wooden Houses, they now live in lofty,
lightsome, uniform, and very stately Brick-buildings, -- A great number of the
Halls, stately Taverns, and magnificent Houses of Merchants and other Wealthy
Citizens, being fit to receive the greatest Monarch in Europe, with a brave
Train, at an Entertainment.

Abundance of these are built backwards, for the advantage of Trade and
Shopkeepers which are toward the Street, whereas if they were (as is usual in
Italy and elsewhere) built toward the great and principal streets, no City in
the whole World could go beyond it for beauty and magnificence.

Near the Bridge of London, where this Dreadful Fire began, is now erected (as
was ordered by Act of Parliament,) a Pillar in perpetual Memory of that great
Incendium. It is of the Dorick Order, 175 Foot high from the Superficies of the
Ground, and 15 Foot Diameter, all of solid Portland-stone, with a fair
Staircase in the middle, of black Marble, and a large Iron Balcony at the top,
-- from whence a man may have a gallant prospect of all the City and Country,
this is commonly called the MONVMENT, the Pedestal is likewise all of
Portland-stone, and is 21 Foot square, and 40 Foot high, Carved with most
exquisite and significant resemblances, or figures to the Street-side, and on
the other sides it bears these Inscriptions, carved in large Letters.

Anno Christi MDCLXVI Die IV Nonas Septembris. Hinc in orientem, pedum CCII
intervallo (quae est hujusce Columnae Altitudo) Erupit de media nocte
incendium, quod vento spirante hausit etiam longinqua, and parts per omnes
populabundum ferebatur cum impetu and fragore incredibili XXCIX Templa, Portas,
Praetorium, Aedes publicas Ptochotrophia, Scholas Bibliothecas, Insularum
magnum Numerum, Domuum CM^ 00 00 00 CC, vicos CD absumpsit. De XXVI Regionibus
XV funditus Delevit, alias VIII laceras and semiustas reliquit. Vrbis Cadaver
ad CDXXXVI jugerae (hinc ab aree per Tamisis ripam ad Templariorum Fanum,
illinc ab Euro Aquilonali porta secundum Muros ad Fossae Fletanae Caput)
porrexit; adversus opes Civium and fortunas infestum, erga vitas innocuum: Vt
per omnia referret, supremam illam mundi exustionem.

Velox Clades fuit; exiguum tempus eandem vidit Civitatem florentissimam and
nullam.

Tertio Die, cum jam plane evicerat humana Consilia and subsidia omnia,
Caelitus ut par est credere, Jussus stetit fatalis ignis and quaquaversum
elanguit.

On another side.
CAROLO II C. Mart. F. Mag. Brit. Fran. and Hib. Rex, Fid. D. Princeps
clementissimus, miseratus luctuosam rerum faciem, plurima fumantibus iam tum
ruinis in solatium Civium and Vrbis suae Ornamentum providit. Tributum remisit
preces ordinis and popu li Londinensis retulit ad Regni Senatum; qui continuo
decrevit uti publica opera, pecunia publica ex vectigali Carbonis fossilis
oriunda in Meliorem formam restituerentur: Vtique aedes sacrae and D. Pauli
Templum a fundamentis omni Magnificentia extruerentur; Pontes, Portae, Carceres
Novi fierent: Emundarentur alvei, Vici ad Regulam responderent, Clivi
Complanarentur, Aperirentur Angiportus, fora and Macella in Areas sepositas
eliminarentur: Censuit etiam uti singulae Domus Muris integerinis
concluderentur, Vniversae in frontem pari altitudine consurgerent, omnesque
parietes saxo quadrato aut ^octo latere solidarentur: Vtique Nemini liceret
ul^ra septennium aedificando immorari. Adhaec, lites de terminis orituras lege
lata praescidit; adjecit quoque supplicationes annuas and ad aeternam
posterorum Memoriam H. C. P. C.

Festinatur Vndique. Resurgit Londinum Majori celeritate an splendore incertum:
Vnum triennium absolvit, quod seculi opus credebatur.

Incepta

Richardo Forde Equ. Praetore Land.

A. D. MDCLXXI.

Perducta altius.

Geo. Waterman Eq. Prae.

Roberto Hanson Eq. Prae

Guliel. Hooker Eq. Prae.

Roberto Viner Eq. Prae.

Josepho Sheldon Eq. Prae.

Perfecta.

Thoma Davies Eq. Prae. Urb. Anno Dom. MDCLXXVII.

The substance of these Elegant Latin Inscriptions is a brief account of the
Fire and the Devastation it made, its swiftness and stop. -- His Majesty's
gracious care for the rebuilding of it, the Tribute laid upon Coals for the
building of Churches and other public structures, etc. the regularity,
uniformity and Model of the New Buildings, And that all should build in seven
years, the Act for erecting a Judicature (as beforementioned) concluding that
it is a doubt, whether the Resurrection of London be with greater ^elerity or
splendour, since three years completed what was Judged to be the work of an Age.

This was begun, Sir Richard Ford being Lord- Mayor, 1671 -- raised higher Sir
Geo. Waterman Knight, Sir Robert Hansen Knight, Sir Will. Hooker Knight, Sir
Robert Viner Knight, Sir Joseph Sheldon Knight, Lord Mayors; finished, Sir
Thomas Davies Knight, Lord Mayor, in the Year of our Lord, 1677.

So much for Fires, only amongst many that may be mentioned, I cannot forget a
lamentable accident that happened to a Family to which I was nearly related,
one Mr. De Laune, that lived in Lothbury, a Merchant, who above twenty years
ago, with his Wife (who was then ready to lie in) the Daughter of Sir Thomas
Allen of Finchly, and all their Family, were burnt in their House there, and no
account but conjectures can be given how the fire came.

In the first year of the Reign of K. H. 7. in Autumn, toward the end of
September (that is about 196 years ago) there began and reigned in the City and
other parts of the Kingdom, a Diease then new, which of the accidents and
manner thereof, they called the Sweating-sickness. This Disease had a swift
Course both in the sick body, and in the time and period of the lasting
thereof: For they that were taken with it, upon twenty-four hours escaping,
were thought almost assured. And as to the time of the Malice and Reign of the
Disease ere it ceased; It began about the 21 st of September, and cleared up
before the end of October. It was a Pestilent Fever not seated in the Veins or
Humors, for there followed no Carbuncle, no purple or livid spots, or the
like, the Mass of Blood, or of the Body, being not tainted; only a malignant
Vapor flew to the Heart, and seizsd the Vital Spirits; which stirred Nature to
send it forth by an Extreme sweat. And it appeared by experience, that this
Disease was rather a surprise of Nature, then obstinate to Remedies, if it were
in time looked into. For if the Patient were kept in an equal temper, both for
Clothes, Fire, and Drink, moderately warm, with temperate Cordials, whereby
Natures work were neither irritated by heat, nor turned back by cold, he
commonly Recovered. But infinite persons dyed suddenly of it, before the manner
of Cure and Attendance was known. It was conceived to be not an Epedemick
Disease, but to proceed from a Malignity in the Constitution of the Air,
gathered by the predispositions of Seasons: and the speedy cessation declared
as much.

The Remedy of this Disease (which happened again in the 9 th of K. H. 8. Anno
1517. and of which vast numbers died, remarkable by this Circumstance, that
Englishmen were taken with it in any Country, but no others, and therefore
termed by Foreigners Sudor Anglicus, that is, the English-sweat) is given by
Polidor Virgil, p. 561. Thus; Quibus Rebus ita usu venit, etc. by which means
it grew to a Custom, that after a vast destruction of men (by this Distemper)
this kind of help was found effectual. If any person was taken with this Sweat
by day, he must go to Bed with his Clothes on; If by night, and the party be in
bed, then he must rest and not stir for 24 hours complete, in the mean time, he
must be so covered as not to provoke Sweat, but let it proceed of its own
accord, he must neither eat nor drink any thing but what will just serve to
keep him alive, -- he must not so much as put forth hand or foot to be cooled,
for that is death unavoidable -- If the Patient observes this, he is certainly
cured, else lost; and this Disease (says he) invaded only England (or
Englishmen) which men at that time made portentous constructions of.

This Mortal Distemper was succeeded by a rageing Plague, which swept away
many, so that the King was forced to remove his Court from one place to
another. By that Sweating-sickness in H. 8's time, infinite multitudes of
People dyed in several places of England, especially in London, sparing neither
rich nor poor, for even in the King's Court the Lord Gray of Wilton, and the
Lord Clinton, and many Knights, Gentlemen and Officers, died of it. The like
Sweating-sickness happened in the 20 th year of his Reign, which began in London,
and afterward spread it self into all parts of the Kingdom, so that the Term
and the Assizes were adjourned.

In the 20 E. 3. (as Baker says, p. 131.) there died in London of a Plague
57374 persons. In the 4 th of Queen Mary, hot burning Agues and other strange
Diseases, took away much People; So as between the 20 th of October and the
last of December, there died 7 Aldermen of London, namely, Henry Heardson, Sir
Richard Dobs, Sir Will. Laxton, Sir Henry Hobblethorn, Sir John Champney, Sir
John Ayleph, and Sir John Gresham, of which some were Lord Mayors, etc. I find
that in the 8 th of Qu. Eliz. there died in ten Months seven Aldermen of
London, viz. Edward Banks, Richard Chamberlain, Sir Martin Bows, Sir Richard
Mallory, Sir William Hewet, Sir Thomas White, and Richard Lambert, one of the
Sheriffs for that year.

In the 36 th of Qu. Eliz. there dyed of the Plague in London and the Suburbs
17890. besides the Lord Mayor and three Aldermen, and Michaelmas-Term was
holden at St. Albans. The first of King James, viz. 1602 there died in London
and Liberties 38244, whereof of the Plague 30578, yet the next year, though the
City was increased with a great number of Strangers, there died of all Diseases
but 4263. There broke out likewise a great Plague in the First of King Charles
the First, whereof more died than in the beginning of his Fathers Reign. Many
other Plagues have been in the City, but I shall conclude this subject with a
brief account of the great Plague in 1665.

In the beginning of May, the Bill of Mortality mentions nine that died of the
Plague, and decreased the next Week to three, then increased to fourteen, next
to seventeen, next forty three, and then great Persons began to retire into the
Country. In June the Bill increases to 112, next 168, next 267, next 470, then
do many Tradesmen go into the Country: and many Ministers take occasion to
absent themselves from their Charge. In July the Bill rises to 725, then to
1089, next 1843, next to 2010, Now most Parishes are infected, a vast number of
Houses shut up, no Trade at all, and the number of dying persons still
increasing, although so many thousands left the City. In Aug. the Bill rises to
2817, next 3880, next 4237, and then 6102, all which died of the Plague,
besides other Diseases. -- Now there is a dismal solitude in London-streets,
every day looks with the face of a Sabbath, observed with greater solemnity
than it used to be in the City, Shops are shut up, very few walk about, so that
grass begins to spring in some places. A deep silence every where, no rattling
of Coaches, etc. no calling in Customers, no London Cries, no noise but dying
Croans and Funeral Knells, etc.

In September the Bill rises to 6988, the next falls to 6544, but then rises
again to 7165, which was the greatest Bill. There were but four Parishes that
were not infected, and in them few tarried. The next Bill falls to 5538, then
to 4929, then to 4327, then to 2665, then to 1421, then to 1031. -- First Week
in November it rises to 1414, but falls to 1050, then to 652, then to 333, and
so lessened more and more to the end of the year, when we had a Bill of 97306,
which died of all Diseases, which was 79000 more than the year before, and the
number of them which died of the Plague was reckoned to be 68596 that year; but
others say that there died of that fatal Disease, in little more than a years
space, near 100000 persons in London, and some adjacent places.

I shall proceed to remark briefly some few things more, which are
Miscellaneous Collections of my own from Diverse Authors.

In the time of Edward the Second, when the workmen were digging the Foundation
of a Work about Paul's, there were found more than 100 heads of Oxen, which
confirmed that opinion, that of old time it had been the Temple of Diana, and
that there was the Sacrifice of Beasts.

In the 3 H. 5. It is said that seven Dolphins came up the River of Thames,
whereof four were taken. In the Fourth of Q. Mary, before Harvest, Wheat was
sold for four Marks the Quarter, Malt at 44 s. the Quarter, Pease at 46 s. 8 d.
Yet after Harvest, Wheat was sold for 5 s. the Quarter, Malt for 6 s. 8 d. Rye
at 3 s. 4 d. In the Country, Wheat was sold for 4 s. the Quarter, Malt at 4 s.
8 d. and in some places a Bushel of Rye for a pound of Candles, which was 4 d.

I have read that in the Third of King James a Whale came up within eight miles
of London, whose body was seen diverse times above water, and judged to exceed
the length of the largest Ship in the River, but when she tasted the
fresh water, and sented the Land, she returned into the Sea.

I find recorded by diverse Writers, that the 17 th of July, 1619, one Bernard
Calvart of Andover, rode from St. George's Church in Southwark to Dover, and
from thence passed by Barge to Callice in France, and from thence returned back
to St. George's Church the same day, setting out about three in the Morning,
and returned about eight in the Evening, fresh and lusty, being 184 miles,
which was very strange.

In the 14 th R. 2. on Christmas Day, a Dolphin was taken at London Bridge,
being ten Foot long, and a monstrous grown Fish.

In the 37 H. 8. On Tuesday in Easter week, William Foxely* Pot-maker for the
Mint of the Tower of London, fell asleep, and could not be awaked with P^^ching
or Burning till the first Day of the next Term, which was full Fourten Days,
and when he Awaked, was found in all points as if he had Slept but one Night;
and lived forty Years after.

In the Second of King James a strange accident happened, to the terror of all
Bloody Murderers; A Woman called Ann Waters, enticed by a Lewd Persou she was
wont to keep Company with, consented to have her Husband strangled, and then
Buried him secretly under the Dunghill in a Cowhouse; whereupon, the Man being
mist by his Neighbors, and the Wife making an extraordinary show of wondering,
with much counterfeit Sorrow for his Absence, she past on, unsuspected for a
time: But it pleased God, that one of the Inhabitants of that Street Dreamed
That his Neighbor Waters was Strangled and Buried under the Dunghill in a
Cowhouse; and upon Declaring his Dream, search being made by the Constable, the
dead Body was found as he had Dreamed, whereupon the Wife was Apprehended, and
upon Examination confessing the Fact, was burned. What hope therefore of
Concealment can any Murderers have, when they are subject to be Discovered by
any man's Dream?

In the Fifth of Queen Mary, there fell Hailstones that were fifteen Inches
about, I my self saw Hailstones that fell in London in May last was Twelve
Month, some of which were Six, some Nine Inches about, and others say, they saw
some that were more.

About the Sixth of Edward the Fourth, one Walter Walker a wealthy Citizen,
dwelling at the Crown in Cheapside, one day, when his Child cried, did bid him
be quiet, and he would make him Heir of the Crown; which words being subject to
Interpretation, he was called in question about them, Arraigned, Condemned, and
put to Death; which was an Act of great Severity, for the Man had no other
meaning, than that he would make his Child Heir of his own House with that Sign.

Anno One thousand five hundred ninety five, upon Digging for a Vault to be
made in Cheapside, there was found at Seventeen Foot deep a fair Pavement, like
unto that above ground, and at the further end of the Channel was found a Tree
sawed into five steps, which was to step over some Brook running toward
Walbrook, upon the edge of which, there lay the bodies of two great Trees, the
ends wereof were then sawed off, and were firm Timber; so that the Ground of
the City had been raised to that time above Seventeen Foot.

In the Third of William the Second, anno 1090. On St. Lukes day, Six hundred
Houses in London were thrown down by a terrible Tempest, and then it was, that
the Roof of Bow-Church in Cheapside fell with that violence, mentioned page 46
before.

In the time of Henry the First, the Thames so failed of Water, that between
the Tower of London and the Bridge men, waded over on Foot for the space of two
days.

In the Seventh year of Henry the Sixth, November Eight, The Duke of Norfolk
was like to have been Drowned passing through London Bridge, his Barge being
set upon the P^les was overwhelmed so, that Thirty Persons were Drowned, and
the Duke with others that escaped, were fain to be drawn up with Ropes. The
same year the Postern Gates of London by East Smithfield against the Tower of
London did sink by Night more than Seven Foot into the Earth. In his Eighteenth
year, all the Lions in the Tower Dyed. And in this present year three of the
Lions in the Tower died. In the year 1623, October. 26. A Popish Priest Preached
in the Afternoon at Hunsdon-house in Blackfriars London in an upper Chamber,
where there were Assembled above Three hundred Men and Women, when about the
middle of the Sermon a great part of the Floor fell, with such violence, that
it brake down the next Floor under it: In the Fall whereof, the Preacher and
almost a Hundred of his Auditors were Killed, besides as many more hurt.

About the Year, One thousand two hundred eighty two, through a great Frost and
deep Snow, five Arches of London Bridge were born down and carried away.

Anno One thousand three hundred ninety six November 30. The young Queen Isabel
of about Eight years old, being to be conveyed to the Tower, such a Multitude
went to see her, that Nine persons were crowded to Death on London Bridge.

In the time of Richard the First, for three or four years together, there was
so great a Dearth, that Wheat was sold for Eighteen Shillings six pence a
Quarter; and then followed so great a Mortality of Men, that the Living could
scarce Bury the Dead.

In the Seventeenth Year of Henry the Third, were seen five Suns at one time
together; after which, followed so great a Dearth, that People did eat Horses
and Barks of Trees, and in London 20000 were starved for want of Food.

Anno 1313. 7 Edward 2. The price set on Victuals was, for a fat stalled Ox
twenty four shillings. A fat Mutton, twenty pence: a fat Goose two pence half
penny: A fat Capon, two pence: A fat Hen, one penny: Two Chickens, one penny:
Three Pigeons, one penny: Twenty four Eggs a penny. Yet the next year there was
such a Famine and Mortality of People, that the Living were scarce sufficient
to Inter their Dead Friends.

And the next year again, there was so early a Harvest, that a Bushel of Wheat
which had been sold for Ten shillings, was now sold for Ten pence.

In the Fifteenth of King Stephen, Horses and Carts passed over the Thames upon
the Ice. Anno 1609. 6 King James, A Frost began in December which continued
till April following, with such violence, that not only the Thames was so
Frozen, that Carts Laden were driven over it as on dry Land; but also many
Fowls and Birds perished, and also much Herbage in Gardens, especially
Hartichoaks and Rosemary were destroyed. The like violent Frost happened in the
Seventh of Eliz. That Men performed all kinds of Exercises upon the Thames. In
her 35th. year, the River so failed that a Horseman might Ride over near
London Bridge.

In 5 Q. Mary, There fell so great a Rain in September, that Westminster Hall
was full of Water, and Boats were Rowed over Westminster-Bridge to Kingstreet.

In the 9 th. of Hen. 4. There was so sharp a Winter, and such a bundance of
Snow continued December, January, February, March, that almost all small Birds
dyed through Hunger.

In the time of Edw. 3 d. A Frost lasted from the midst of September to the
Month of April.

In his Eleventh Year, there was so great Plenty, That a Quarter of Wheat was
sold at London for two Shillings: A fat Ox, for a Noble: A fat Sheep, for six
pence: Five Pigeons for a penny; and other things after that Rate. But in his
27 th. Year, there was great Scarcity, by reason there fell little or no Rain,
from March to July, and it was therefore called, the dry Summer.

In June Anno 1603, There was one Whipped through the City of London for going
to Court when his House was Infected.

December 22. 1607. Nineteen Pirates were Executed at Wapping.

These Historical Memorandums, with what is scattered up and down the Book,
Comprehend the most memorable Tumults, Fires, Plagues, Rarities, and
Casualties, in which this Great City has been concerned. I confess, there are
many more of less Remark, but I must of necessity refer the Reader at present,
to larger Tracts, if he be so Curious as to pe ruse them.

An APPENDIX, Containing the Names of the Present Aldermen of the City of
London, and the respective Wards they Govern: Also a List of the Officers of
the Lord Mayors House, and the Offices belonging to the Two Compters.
IN this Appendix shall be inserted some few things that should have been put
into their proper place, could I have timely obtained distinct Information.

The City of London is divided into Twenty Six Wards, each of which is Governed
by its Respective Alderman; the Names of which are these that follow, with the
several Wards which they Govern.

Aldersgate-Ward. Sir Thomas Bludworth, Alderman. Algate-Ward. Sir Thomas
B^c^ford, Alderman. Bassishaw-Ward. Sir Simon Lewis, Alderman.
Billingsgate-Ward. Sir John Peak, Alderman. Bishopsgate-Ward. Sir Joseph
Sheldon, Alderman. Breadstreet-Ward. Sir Henry Tulse, Alderman. Bridge-Ward.
Sir George Waterman, Alderman. Broadstreet-Ward. Sir William Pritchard,
Alderman. Candlewike-Ward. Sir James Edwards, Alderman. Castlebaynard-Ward. Sir
William Turner, Alderman. Cheapside-Ward. Sir Robert Clayton, Alderman.
Colemanstreet-Ward. Sir John Frederick, Alderman. Cordwayner-Ward. Sir Robert
Jeffery, Alderman. Cornhil-VVard. Sir William Hooker, Alderman.
Cripplegate-VVard. Sir John Shorter, Alderman. Dowgate-VVard. Sir Thomas Gold,
Alderman. Farringdon-Ward within, The Right Honorable Sir Patience Ward, L.
Mayor. Farringdon-VVard without. Thomas Pilkington Esquire Alderman.
Langborne-VVard. Sir Robert Viner, Alderman. Limestreet-VVard. Sir William
Rawsterne, Alderman. Portsoken-VVard. Sir James Smith, Alderman.
Queen-Hythe-VVard. Sir John Lawrence Alderman. Tower-Street-Ward. Sir John
Chapman, Alderman. Vintry-VVard. Henry Cornish Esquire Alderman. Walbrook-Ward. Sir
John Moore, Alderman. Sir Thomas Allen, Alderman of Bridge-Ward without.
A List of the Officers of the L. Mayors House.
William Man Esquire Sword Bearer. John Wells Esquire Common-Cryer. To. Cheney Esquire
Common-Hunt. Harvey Esquire Water-Baily. John Robotham, Coroner. Jo. Bancroft, R.
Capel, Tho. Blenksop, Sergeant Garvers. John Clare, John Beverly, John Cole,
Se^^eants of the Chamber. John Bradnox, Sergeant of the Channel. William Jones,
Thomas Cross, William Page, Lee Sadler, Yeomen of the Waterside. John Noyes,
Yeoman of the Channel. William Shaw, Under Water-Bayliff. Daniel Man, and
Samuel Boufoy, Yeomen of the Chamber. Francis Brown, Richard Ball, Thomas
Hewit, Sydrach Denham, John Doley, Young Men. John Weightman, and two more,
Meal-Weighers. William Cave, John Fickels, Yeomen of the Wood-Wharf. William
Cave, Fruit-Meter. Daniel Man, Hall-keeper.
Officers belonging to Woodstreet-Compter.
Richard Normansel, Secundary. George Kingswel, Clerk of the Papers. Benjamin
Woodworth, William Scot, John Mordent, and Marshal, Clerks Sitters. Longworth
Cross and Robert Reves, Attorneys. Sergeants.
Will. Newton Edw. Howard ^ohn Prigmore ^ohn East ^ohn Boyer ^no. Brown ^ohn
Hill Wells ^ohn Costhust Ed. Thompson Fran. Bromley John Bell Andr. Lambeth
Henry Lee Ralph Lewis W. Thorn dead Will. Keath John Rand
Yeomen.
Dan. Beverly Rob. Cooper Will. Bell, sen. Will. Jacobs John King Steph. Webb.
Jos. Hill Tho. Stanton Na. Churchman Nath. Thwait Henry Wit Will. Bell, jun.
Tho. Audley Geo. Cotterel Andrew Harris Edward Omans Tho. Crayford William
Alcock

Officers belonging to the Poultrey-Compter.
Trotman, Secundary. William Pim, Clerk of the Papers. John Normansel, George
Dixon, Ger. Green, Gabriel Neve, Clerks Sitters. Dutton Seymour, Robert Brabon,
Godfrey Woodward, Richard Dalling, Thomas Baynes, Lewis Newenham, Attorneys.
Sergeants.
Richard Cole Arth. Seth Tailor John Cushy Simon S^nds Edward Cole Robert Cole
George Benson Henry Linnet James Witham Edward Tudor Richard Ashby James Smith
Thomas Bond Abraham New (...) Tric^^ Samuel Mabbs Archibald Sparks
Yeomen.
Fletcher Edward Hen Sheldon John L^^son John Wes^^^cut Will. Trickle Tim.
Cotterel Will ^^therston Mab^ John (...) William Phil^ps William Parker Zach
Gardner Edward Barber (...) (...) Joseph (...) John (...)

Note, That though the several Attorneys, Serjean^^^ and Yeomen belonging to
the two Compters, are in a strict sense said to belong but to One Compter, yet
do they do business in Both, as occasion requires, and as they happen to be
Employed.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
IF there be any defect or imperfection in the Accoun^ of the Carriers,
Waggoners, and Stage-Coach^^ it is really the fault of such Persons to whom
(...) was made in the respective Inns for a Perfect Account, to get which,
there were six Persons employed Yet in many places, partly by the ignorance of
some the discourtesie or suspicions of others, the Persons employed could not
procure so Satisfactory an Account (...) ^^uld be wished. Therefore if any
Carriers, Wagg^^^, or Stage-Coachmen, will send their Names, (...) Days, to the
Booksellers for whom this (...), Care shall be taken for Common Benefit (...)
them in due place.


