A New LITTANY, designed for this Lent, and to be Sung in all the Conventicles,
in and about London, for the Instruction of the Whiggs.
By T. D. Gent.
Set familiarly to an Excellent Old Tune, called Cavalilly Man.

^ I.
FRom Counsels of Six, where Treason prevails,
From raising Rebellion in England, and Wales,
From Rumbold's short Cannons, and Protestant Flayls,
For ever good Lord deliver me.
II.
From Shaftsbury's Tenets, and Sydnies Old Hint,
From seizing the King by the Rabbles Consent,
From owning the Fact, and denying to Print,
For ever, etc.
III.
From Aiming at Crowns, and indulging the sin,
From playing Old-Nol's Game over again;
From a Son and a Rebel, stuffed up in one skin,
For ever, etc.
IV.
From Swearing of Lies like a Knight of the Post,
From Pilgrims of Spain, that should Land on our Coast,
From a Plot like a Turd, swept about 'till it is Lost,
For ever, etc.
V.
From Oats's clear Evidence when he was Vexed,
From hearing him squeak out Hugh Peter's Old Text,
From Marrying one Sister, and Raping the Next,
For ever, etc.
VI.
From tedious Confinement by Parliament Votes,
From B -- ts Whig Sermons and Marginal Notes;
From saving our Heads, by Cutting our Throats,
For ever, etc.
VII.
From Presbyter Bandogs, that Bite and not Bark,
From losing ones Brains by a blow in the Dark,
From our Friends in More-fields, and those at More-park,
For ever, etc.
VIII.
From Citizens Consciences, and their Wives Itch,
From Marrying a Widow that looks like a Witch,
From following the Court with design to be Rich,
For ever, etc.
IX.
From Trimmers arraigning a Judge on the Bench,
From slighting the Guards, that we know will not Flinch,
And from the Trained Bands Royal-Aid at a Pinch,
For ever, etc.
X.
From all that to Caesar sham duty Express,
That cringe at his Couch, and smile in his Face,
And two years ago thought it scorn to Address,
For ever, etc.
XI.
From having the Gout, and a very Fair Daughter,
From being Obliged to our Friend cross the Water,
From Strangling and Fleying, and what follows after,
For ever, etc.
XII.
From Wit that lies hidden in gay Pantaloons,
From Women's ill Nature as frail as the Moons,
From Franckys's lame Jests, and Sir Rogers Lampoons,
For ever good Lord deliver me.
ADVERTISEMENT.
1. Butler's Ghost, or the Fourth Part of Hudibrass. 2. Scandalum Magnatum, or
Potapskies Case. 3. The Malcontent, or the Sequel of the Progress of Honesty,
a Satyr upon the Times. 4. A Collection of Songs. All Four by the same Author.
Are Sold by Joseph Hindmarsh.
LONDON, Printed for Joseph Hindmarsh, (Bookseller to his Royal Highness,) at
the Black-Bull in Cornhill: 1684.


