The Trial of Spirits Both in TEACHERS and HEARERS.

Wherein is held forth The clear Discovery, and certain Downfall OF THE Carnal
and Antichristian Clergy of These NATIONS.

Testified from the Word of God to the University-Congregation in Cambridge.

By WILLIAM DELL.

Whereunto is added A plain and necessary Confutation of diverse gross Errors
DELIVERED BY Mr SYDRACH SIMPSON In a Sermon preached to the same Congregation
at the COMMENCEMENT, Anno 1653.

Wherein (among other things) is declared, That the Universities (according to
their present Statutes and Practices) are not (as he affirmed) answerable to
the Schools of the Prophets in the time of the Law; but rather to the
Idolatrous High Places.

And, that Humane Learning, is not a Preparation appointed by Christ, either
for the Right Understanding, or Right Teaching the Gospel. With a brief
Testimony against Divinity-Degrees in the Universities.

As also, Luthers Testimony at large upon the whole Matter.

And lastly, The right Reformation of Learning, Schools, and Universities,
according to the state of the Gospel, and the Light that shines therein.

All necessary for the Instruction and Direction of the faithful in these last
times.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert at the Black spread-Eagle, at the West End
of Paul's, 1660.

To all the truly Faithful, the very little Flock of Christ in these Nations,
now despised and almost worn out (according to the Prophesies) for the Word of
God, and Testimony which they hold.
Grace be multiplied unto you, and Peace, from God our Father, and the Lord
Jesus Christ, our Head and Hope.
I Could not choose but distinguish You thus, from all the rest of the People
of these Nations, of what Condition or Quality soever, seeing God Himself has
first done it, having chosen you to Himself in Christ, and set you apart for
Himself, as a Peculiar People, zealous of good works. And I have chosen to
speak this only to You, because You are all taught of God, and have heard and
learned from Him the Truth, as it is in Jesus: and because You have an inward
Unction from God, whereby You know the Truth from Error, though it be never so
much reproached by Carnal Christians; and whereby you know Error from the
Truth, though it be never so much exalted and magnified by them. You are those
Spiritual Men who judge All things, because you have received the Word and
Spirit of Judgment in Christ, from the Father. Besides, You are the Men, whom
God will use in his Greatest and most Glorious Works, which he has yet to do
in the World, to wit, in the Destruction of the Kingdom of Antichrist, and in
the Setting up, and enlarging the Kingdom of Christ; which Things, are not to
be done by the Might and Power of worldly Magistrates, (which it may be you
have not received, and if you had, it would not be helpful here) but by the
Spirit of the Lord, which You all have received in some measure. Yea farther,
none but You, will be contented to live only by Faith, and to follow Christ in
Untrodden Paths, and to undertake impossible Works to flesh and blood; and none
but You, will be willing to have the residue of Christ's Life and Works, and of
his Sufferings and Death, fulfilled in your mortal bodies.

It grieves me much to see so Many Men as I have known once hopeful in the
Army, and elsewhere, to be now so full gorged with the flesh of Kings, and
Nobles, and Captains, and Mighty Men, that is, with their Estates, Manors,
Houses, Parks, Lands, etc. that they can now be contented to take their ease,
and to comply with the World and worldly Church, and the Teachers thereof, and
can persuade themselves, that there is enough done for their time, after it
has fared thus well with them; and can leave the Remainder, to Men that are as
plain and mean as Themselves were at first, forgetting Him who remembered Them,
when they were in Low Condition. But they that were indeed Righteous among
them, are Righteous still, and they that were indeed Holy, are Holy still; and
Prosperity has only slain the Fools, as the Scriptures speak. But You
Christians, are Called, Chosen and Faithful, and You will still be found with
the Lamb on mount Sion, and with the rest who have his Name, and his Fathers
Name written in their Foreheads; and you dare still own the Ancient Truth,
Cause and Work of Christ, how great disadvantage soever is for the present
risen up against it, through the Apostasy of Carnal Christians, the Lovers of
this World. And You all know, that all that has been done hitherto by the
Sword, is but the Preparation of Christ's way to his Work, and that the Work it
self is still behind, and to be done, by those Worthies of the Lord, who love
Jesus Christ and his Kingdom, and Coming, a thousand times better then the
present World, and all the best things of it, yea then their own Lives.
Wherefore I advise You all, to whom now I speak, to take heed that you neither
drink, nor sip of the Clergies Cup, which carries in it, the Wine of the wrath
of the
fornication of Antichrist; lest having drunk thereof, you fall asleep through
the strength of their Enchantments, and so are rendered unable to follow Christ
any farther. For many Powers and Magistrates of the world, once hopeful, have
been thus overcome and seduced into Antichrists cause against Christ, to their
utter ruin in the end. And how have the present Clergy, with their most
Plausible Men, attempted some of this Present Power; yea some of the very
Chiefest and most Godly in the Army; and have put them into some (that I say
not) great Danger? Wherefore remember you that word of the Lord spoken by his
Angel, Rev. 14. 9, and 10. If any man worship the Beast and his Image, and
receive his Mark in his forehead, or in his hand, the same shall drink of the
Wine of the Wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture, into the cup of
his indignation, etc.

IF ANY MAN WORSHIP THE BEAST, that is, the Antichristian Church of the Pope
and his Prelates and Clergy, which is called the Beast, because of its
Fierceness and Cruelty against the Saints: Or, HIS IMAGE, that is, the Church
of the Bishops and Presbyters, which in a lesser Volume, and less Letters, does
answer the Other, and is directly like it. Whoever shall WORSHIP THESE, that
is, highly esteem them for their Humane Learning, and School Divinity, and
Sacredness of their Orders, and count them worthy all Honor and Respect, and
worldly Maintenance; and also to have Power in matters of Religion, to allow
and determine of Doctrine, and to appoint and institute in matters of
Government: and being Worldly Powers, do subject Themselves, and all the
worldly People under them, to these men's Religion, Authority, Doctrine,
Discipline, etc. Whoever shall thus worship them: Or, SHALL RECEIVE HIS MARK,
that is, this Principle, that, It is lawful to punish and persecute men in
Matters that merely relate to Faith and the Gospel, and this, under pretense of
the Glory of God, and Good of Christian people; which is the BEASTS MARK in
every Age, and under every Change of Outward Form: Whoever shall receive this
mark IN THEIR FOREHEAD, that is, to profess this Doctrine only: Or IN THEIR
HAND, that is, to execute it according to Laws, which the Nations have been
seduced to make to this purpose: The same shall drink of the Wine of the Wrath
of God, which is poured out without mixture into the cup of his Indignation,
and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy
Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb, and the smoke of their torment
ascends up for ever and ever.

Wherefore You Faithful Ones have great cause to be very well advised in these
things, seeing the chief Design of Antichrist, is to seduce the Elect; seeing
he has no Body else in all the World, that dare oppose Him, or know how to do
it, but You: and He knows, if He can prevail with You, all the World besides,
will follow Him headlong, as the Gadarens swine ran into the sea, and were
choked.

Now I have adventured, through the Inspiration of the Almighty, to undertake
Openly and Plainly against the Clergy and Universities, which in their Present
State are the Residue of the Hour and Power of Darkness upon the Nations: And
the Lord of his Grace, has helped me through this Work, by his Spirit of
Counsel and Might. And so I have freely and willingly exposed my Self for
Christ and his Truths sake, to all the reproaches, slanders, revilings,
contradictions, and (if their power shall serve) Persecutions of the
Universities and Clergy, and of all those People high and low, bond and free
who have received their Mark and Worship them: choosing rather to suffer with
Christ, and with You, his Seed, all manner of Tribulations, then to reign with
Them; and much rather embracing Christian Communion, with poor plain Husbandmen
and Tradsmen, who believe in Christ, and have received his Spirit, then with
the Heads of Universities, and Highest, and Stateliest of the Clergy, who under
a specious form of Godliness, do yet live in true Enmity and Opposition to the
Gospel.

I do indeed, freely acknowledge, that I have often been ready to complain to
God in the anguish of my Spirit, that he had called Me a very Bruised Reed, to
a more difficult Task, in one Regard, then either Wickliffe, Hus, or Luther,
those strong Pillars in the House of God; to wit, Because much of the gross
Body of Antichristianism, against which They chiefly ingageed, being done away
by their Ministry, there still remains the cunning and subtle Soul and Spirit
thereof, which yet is All in All, in Antichrists Kingdom, though it be farther
removed from the Knowledge and Notice of the Common Sort of Christians. And so
the Mystery of Iniquity, is now become more Mysterious and Deceiving then in
their Times: and as Perfect and Bitter Enmity against Christ and his Spirit,
and the true Temple of God, the Spiritual Church, as ever was in all Their
Times, does now prevail under the Name of Orthodox Doctrine, and the
Reformation of Religion by the late Assembly of Divines, which the Clergy are
all now ready to set up, if they could gain the Secular Arm to strengthen them
thereunto, (of which now they have greatest Hopes) and without which, their
Religion can find no high place in this World.

Now herein the old Mystery of Iniquity is renewed amongst these Men, that
they would have an outward Letter and Ministry, without the Spirit of Christ,
to be the Doctrine and Ministry of the New Testament, which is the Ministration
of the Spirit and not of the Letter: and would have the Secular Magistrate, to
have Right and Power, to enforce men to such a Religion, as Himself judges
True, by the Help and Counsel of those Ministers, which Himself judges
Orthodox: as if some Men were able to teach spiritual things, and all to
understand them, by Natural Reason made use of, and improved, which yet these
Men deny in Terminis, whilst they assert it in the Principle. For, they will
not leave it to the Father, to draw whom He pleases to the Son; neither will
they leave it to the Spirit, to choose what Living stones he pleases, to build
them together to be the Habitation of God: but the Ecclesiastical state, having
seduced the Temporal, do make them believe, that the Magistrates Worldly Power,
in union with their worldly Religion, may make a National Church of all, that
they between Themselves, please; and may allow, and set up, such a Doctrine for
Orthodox, which these Men who are in Academical Degrees* and Ecclesiastical
Orders, do approve for Such; though the Spirit of God in all Believers
testifies, that these Men have not the mind of Christ, but of Antichrist, in
all they teach, and act, and counsel; in their Assemblies, Churches, Doctrine,
Ordinances, Works, Duties, Days, Times, Fastings, Thanksgivings, and Every
Thing else: Yet these having the outward Carcass or Appearance of Religion,
though destitute of the inward Soul of it, which is true Faith and the Spirit
of God, do cozen not only the meaner People, but the very Magistrates of the
World, who are glad to hear, that the Clergy have given them such high Power in
the Kingdom of Christ, and made them Magistrates in both Worlds; though indeed
in the end, it be not for the Magistrates Advantage, but wholly for the
Clergies.

And thus is the Mystery of Iniquity grown more Mysterious now, then
heretofore. But this is our Comfort and Help, that God still causes his Light
to shine forth proportionably to his People, to discover every new Change and
Form, of the Mystery of Iniquity. And though the Mystery of Iniquity in every
age, is mysterious enough, to cozen all the Unbelieving World, though never so
wise and learned; yet is it never able to deceive the Faithful, who have always
sufficient Light from God to discover it, and sufficient Grace to overcome it.

And now You faithful and beloved Ones, to whom I have spoken all this, stand
You fast, and depart not from Christ, his Word, and Work (all which You know in
faith) for any Good or Evil things, that may befall you in this short life; but
finish in Faith and Patience, the Work which God has given you to do, in your
several Places, waiting for the Glory which shall be given you at the
Revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ; in Whom I remain, though most unworthy,

Your humble and faithful Servant in the Gospel. W. D.

THE TRIAL OF SPIRITS.
1 John 4. 1. Beloved, believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits, whether
they be of God, because many false Prophets are gone forth into the world. 2.
Hereby know ye the Spirit of God: every Spirit that confesses that Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh, is of God. 3. And every Spirit that confesses not
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God: and this is that Spirit
of Antichrist whereof you have heard, that it should come, and even now already
it is in the world. 4. Ye are of God, little Children, and have overcome them,
because Greater is he that is in You, then he that is in the World. 5. They are
of the World, therefore speak they of the World, and the World hears Them. 6.
We are of God; he that knows God, hears us; he that is not of God, hears
not us; hereby know we the Spirit of Truth, and the Spirit of Error.
IN this Scripture, we may take Notice of these Six things.

1. The Apostle gives notice to the Beloved Six observable things in this
Scripture.
Congregation of Spiritual Christians, of a Great Evil risen up in the world,
1.
(which if not carefully heeded) might occasion some great Trouble and Danger
to them; Many false Prophets (says he) are gone out into the world. V. 1.

2. He prescribes them a sufficient Remedy against this Evil, 2.
saying, Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they be of God.

3. That the Faithful might be able to make a right 3.
Judgment of Spirits, he gives them one short Rule of Trial, which yet
comprehends in its self all Rules: verse. 2. and 3. Hereby know we the Spirit of
God; every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of
God; and every Spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh, is not of God, etc.

4. He shows them, with Whom these false Prophets, who 4.
have the Spirit of Antichrist, should not prevail; to wit, with none of the
true Children of God, verse. 4. Ye are of God, little Children, and have
overcome them; because Greater is he that is in You, than he that is in the
World.

5. He shows them, with whom the false Prophets should 5.
prevail, to wit, with the World and Carnal People; verse. 5. They are of the
World, therefore speak they of the World, and the World hears them. The World
seeking its own Things,
receives Antichrist, and his Prophets.

6. He shows, how the Spirit of Truth and Error may 6.
be known in the People, as well as in the Teachers; to wit, by the Peoples
cleaving, either to the Teachers of Truth, or to the Teachers of Error, verse.
6. We are of God; he that knows God, hears us; he that is not of God,
hears not us; hereby, know we the Spirit of Truth, and the Spirit of Error.

These six things are held forth to us, in this Scripture, and they are all
very Profitable and Necessary for the true Church to be acquainted withal,
especially in these last of the last Times. I shall begin with the First; which
is,

1. Point. 1. Point.

The Great and Dangerous Evil of which the Apostle gives notice The great evil
endangering the Church.
to the Church of Believers, and that is, The going out of false Prophets into
the World. Many false Prophets are gone out into the world.

ANd here it is to be noted, that from the very beginning Note.
of the world, there have been two Seeds or Generations Two contrary Seeds from
the beginning of the World.
of Men, very contrary the One to the Other, as is evident, in Genesis 3. 15.
where God says to the Serpent, I will put enmity between Thee and the Woman,
and between thy Seed and her Seed; so that the Serpent has his Seed, as well
as the Woman her Seed; and this was the Woman's Curse, to have her sorrows and
Conceptions* multiplied, and to bring forth the Serpents Seed as well as her
Own, that is, the Children or Seed of the first Blessing; and both these
Contrary Seeds do partake of one and the same common Nature or Humanity. And
one of these Seeds are called the Sons of God, the other the Sons of Man, Genesis
6. 6. And Both these, being the The two Seeds distinguished by the Spirits that
dwell in them.
children of one Adam according to the Flesh, are yet distinguished by several
Spirits, that dwell in them, and inspire them: For the Spirit of God, that is,
the Spirit of Righteousness and Truth, does inspire the One, and these are
truly called the Children of God, as Paul says, Romans 8. as many as are led by
the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God. And the Spirit of Satan, which is
the Spirit of Wickedness and Error, does inspire the Other; and these are truly
called the sons of Men, who all have sinned, and are deprived of the Glory of
God.

Now these two Different and Contrary Spirits, which They act differently about
mankind.
have dwelt in these two distinct Seeds, have begun to act presently from the
very beginning of the world, each one according to his own Nature, and to trade
and traffic about Mankind, and out of it, to bring forth Children to
Themselves, like to Themselves in all things; and so One has endeavored to
beget and bring forth the Children of God, and of Truth; the Other the children
of Men, and of Error; And to this end, the One has held forth the Truth of
God, by the true Spirit of God; the Other has held forth Error and Falsehood,
yet as it were the Truth: The One has endeavored to bring Man unto God
through true Faith and Repentance; the Other to turn Men from God through Sin:
The One has sought to work Salvation in Men, the Other Destruction.

Now the False Spirit has been the most Common in the The false Spirit the
most common in the world.
World, and has had the greatest Opportunities and Advantages to multiply it
self, seeing it finds the whole World already lying in Wickedness, and fully
prepared to receive it self. But the true Spirit has been found in very few,
and The true Spirit more scarce.
that from the beginning; for there have been but few true Prophets, who have
had the true Spirit, and have spoken the true Word, as you may see all* along
in Scriptures, especially in the times of Elijah and Micajah; but Christ says,
Many false Prophets shall arise and deceive Many; and Peter says in his second
Epistle, Chap. 2. verse. 1, 2. That as there were false Prophets among the
People, that is the Jews, so there shall be false Doctors and Teachers among
the Christians, who should privily bring in damnable Heresies, and that Many
should follow their pernicious ways.

So that, as there have been many false Prophets from the beginning, so
especially in the days of the New Testament; for the more Christ has appeared
by his Spirit to lead men into Truth, the more has the Devil appeared by his
Spirit to lead men into Error, and this is properly called Antichrist; For
Flesh and Blood is not Antichrist, but a Spirit contrary to Christ's Spirit,
that dwells in Flesh and Blood, and chiefly among those that profess the
Christian Religion; This is Antichrist.

No Spirit in the Jews or Gentiles, is properly called Antichrist, but the
Spirit of Satan in false Christians appearing as an Angel of light, this is
Antichrist. Before Christ came in the flesh, the Devil was an evil Spirit, and
a Liar, and a Murderer, and the Unclean Spirit, and Prince of this world, but
he was not properly* Antichrist, because Christ was not then come in the flesh.
The Devil was the Devil before, and did dwell and work in Evil Men; but from
the beginning of the Christian Church he is called Antichrist, and that not
every where, but in the Church or Kingdom of Christ; For Antichrist is a Spirit
that dissolves Jesus, and that not openly, but subtly and cunningly, yea,
under the name and pretense of Jesus, he is wholly contrary to Him. Wherefore,
the discerning of Spirits, as it has been necessary from the beginning of the
World, so also is it especially necessary in the days of the Gospel, wherein
the Mystery of Iniquity is become most Mysterious, through the operation of
Antichrist in those Many false Prophets which are gone forth into the world.
And so we proceed to the second Point.

2. Point. 2. Point.

And that is, That Sufficient Remedy, which the Apostle The Remedy against
false Prophets.
prescribes to the true Church, against that great Evil, of many false Prophets
being gone out into the world.

Now the Remedy the Apostle prescribes to the faithful against these false
Prophets, is not, that they should stir up the Secular Power, to imprison,
banish, or burn Them, that so they might be rid of Them; for this is
Antichrists proper Remedy against those that oppose Him; but the Apostle shows
a more Christian Remedy, which is this, Believe not every Spirit, but try the
Spirits whether they be of God; and this Remedy alone is sufficient for the
true spiritual Church of the faithful in every Age, to preserve it safe and
sound against all false Teachers whatsoever, and their false Doctrines: neither
does it desire, or need any other. Wherefore in this Case, the Apostle contents
himself, to give only this Caution to the Faithful, Believe not every Spirit,
but try the Spirits whether they be of God.

Believe not every Spirit, etc. that is, every one that speaks Note.
of Spiritual Things. Whence it is plain, that we neither ought rashly and
hastily to believe every man's Doctrine, nor yet rashly and unadvisedly to
censure and condemn it, till it be heard and known what it is: but it is a
Christians duty to prove All Things, and to hold fast that which is Good, upon
Proof, as Paul advises; wherefore John also adds here, But try the Spirits
whether they be of God.

Whence we note, That Christians have Right and Power to try and judge the
Spirits and Doctrines of their Teachers: Christians have right and power to try
Spirits.
and this is evident by many plain Scriptures, as

Matthew. 7. 15. Beware of false Prophets (says Christ to the faithful) which
come unto you in Sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves; ye
shall know them by their fruits.

Matthew. 16. 6. Jesus said to them, Take heed and beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.

Matthew. 24. 4. Jesus said, take heed that no man deceive you, for many shall
come in my Name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many.

John 10. My Sheep hear my voice, and know my voice, and a stranger will they
not hear, but flee from him, for they know not (that is, own not) the voice of
strangers. And all that came before me are Thieves and Robbers, but the Sheep
did not hear them.

By all which Scriptures, and many more that might be added, it is manifest,
that the faithful, the true Sheep of Christ, have Right and Power to judge of
the Spirits and Doctrines of the Teachers.

Let Fathers, Schoolmen, Doctors, Councels, Assemblies of Divines,
Universities, Ministers, propound and publish what Doctrine they please, the
Sheep of Christ, the faithful Flock, have Power and Authority from Christ
Himself, to try and judge, whether the Things they speak be of Christ, or of
Themselves and of Antichrist. And this Power the faithful People ought not to
part with, neither for any fear, nor for any favor. It concerns the faithful
to try the Spirits, for two causes.


Yea, it most nearly concerns the faithful, to try the Spirits, and judge the
Doctrines of the Teachers, for these two Considerations among others.

First, Because we must each one give an account for Our First.
selves before the Judgment seat of Christ: wherefore it concerns every one of
us, to look to our own Eternal Condition, and not to leave this care to Others
for us. In Death and Judgment, Each one must answer for Himself; and therefore
we ought to be as certain of the Word of God, on which we build our immortal
Souls, as we are sure we live, and are Creatures; we ought, I say, to be sure
Our selves, and not to trust any body for us, in this great Matter whereon
depends either eternal Life, or eternal Death.

Secondly, It concerns us to try the Spirits and Doctrines, Secondly.
because otherwise we may easily mistake, and instead of Antichrist and his
Disciples, dash against Christ himself, and his precious Saints. Yea, we have
seen how the World and worldly Church, not being able to try the Spirits and
Doctrines, have contradicted and crucified the Son of God himself, and have
reproached and persecuted all his People, who are baptized into one Spirit with
him; and doing this, they have thought they have done God good service too; and
all because they were not able to judge of the Spirit and Truth of Christ in
Himself and his Members, but have followed the Judgment and Council of the
chief Guides in the outward Church, who have caused them to err, and to
mistake Truth for Error, and Error for Truth, Christ for Antichrist, and
Antichrist for Christ.

Wherefore it concerns every one, to be wise to salvation for Himself, and to
try the Spirits for himself, and not to content himself to say, thus said
Augustine, Ambrose, Hierom, etc. or this was the Judgment of the Fathers, or
thus have the Councels and Universities determined, or thus do our Ministers
teach us; but if thou art one of Christ's flock, thou must have skill to know
and judge for Thy self, which is Christ's Spirit and Doctrine, and which is
Antichrists; otherwise thou will certainly miscarry in this great Matter, and
be undone for ever. If thou build on Men in these things, and can not judge
for Thy self, thou will be sure to be undone.

But now this Power of Trying Spirits, and Judging Doctrines, which Christ has
given his true Flock, and which The Clergy have usurped to themselves this
power of trying Spirits.
they ought to have upon so good Grounds, the Teachers of the false and
Antichristian Church, that is, the Common Clergy, distinguished by several
Names, Titles, and Degrees, have robbed them of, and have falsely and
treacherously arrogated to themselves, the Power of trying Spirits, and Judging
Doctrines, and have said, that it belongs to the Clergy or National Ministry,
and their Councils, and Assemblies of Divines, to Judge of Spirits, whether
they be right or false; and to Judge of Doctrines, whether they be agreeable to
Gods Word, or no; and that all Christians ought to expect their Judgment and
Determination, and to submit to it, and to depend on it, as on an Oracle from
Heaven, yea, though it be, not only without, but also against their own
particular Judgment.

And these men (I mean the Clergy) through the Ecclesiastical and Temporal
Power which they had gotten, have stricken great fear into the whole World, and
have miserably vexed innumerable Consciences, with a grievous and lasting
bondage, and have even driven them to Despair, whilst none durst approve or own
any Spirit or Doctrine, though never so manifestly of Christ and his Gospel,
without their Allowance and Approbation; so mightily has the power of
Antichrist prevailed in the World, and that against the express Word of Christ.

Now the ground of this their Antichristian Pride, and Usurpation is This, that
they arrogate to Themselves, that They are the Guides and Shepherds of all
Christian men, and are to teach them the Gospel, which they are only to receive
from their lips; whereas Christ has promised his true Church, that they shall
be all taught of God, and shall hear and learn Themselves from the Father, and
has also promised to send to them the Spirit, to lead them in all Truth, By
this usurpation the Clergy have made themselves Masters in the Church of God.
and to give them an Anointing, to teach them All Things.

Now they by robbing the Faithful of this Power, and arrogating it to
Themselves, have made themselves contrary to Christ's Command, Lords and Masters
in the Church of God, and have usurped to themselves Superiority and Authority
over other Believers, and have subjected all the World to their Opinion and
Judgment in the things of God: by which means, they have set wide open the
floodgates to Antichrist and his Kingdom, to break in upon the World, and to
overflow it, whilst they had robbed all Christian People of their own Judgment
in all the Things of God, and had made them to depend wholly on the Judgment
of the Clergy.

And had not Christian People thus unchristianly delivered up their Judgments
to the Clergy, and that in the very Highest Points of Religion, Christianity
had not been so miserably blinded and corrupted as it is, and the Mystery of
Iniquity had not so much prevailed in the World, as now it has. For when
Christians would not try the Spirits whether They were of God, and the
Doctrines, whether they were the Word of God or no, but thought this a matter
too High for them, and would refer and submit all to the Judgment of their
Ministers; then Antichrist (the Apostle of the Devil) came forth boldly, and
proudly exalted Himself above all that is called God, and his Kingdom, above
all the Kingdoms of the World, having first put out both the Eyes of
Christians, by taking away from them their Right and Power of trying Spirits
and judging Doctrines.

But when true Christians shall search the Scriptures (as God I trust has now
fully put into their hearts to do) and shall justly and lawfully take to
themselves the Power which God has given them, to try Spirits and Doctrines,
then Antichrist, and his Agents, the carnal Clergy, must soon be brought down:
for the Faithful by that Word shall soon perceive, that They are not of God,
nor their Doctrine of that right Gospel, which is after the Mind of Christ.

Well then, by what has been said, You, who are of Christ's true Sheep may
perceive, that it is evident by the The Gift of Trying and Discerning Spirits,
is a Common Grace in the true Church.
Word, that faithful Christians have Right and Power to try Spirits and
Doctrines, though Antichrist, for many Ages has robbed them of this Privilege.

For (that I may speak a little more to this matter) the Trial of Spirits does
unquestionably belong to all Men, who have received the Spirit of God: for to
this Spirit of God which dwells in the faithful, the Gift of Discerning
Spirits is inseparably annexed: and the Spirit of Christ, which truly dwells in
all true Christians, cannot deceive, nor be deceived in the Trial of Spirits.
So that this now is a Common Grace, that in some measure belongs to all true
Christians, who have received the Unction that teaches them all things, and is
true, and is no lie.

And though there be in the Church Diversities of Gifts from the same Spirit,
which are given to some, and not to others, as Tongues, and Interpretation of
Tongues, and Miracles, and Gifts of healing, etc. mentioned by Paul, 1 Cor. 12.
yet this gift of Trying Spirits is given to All in some measure, that have
received the Spirit. For as in the Natural Body there are several Gifts given
to several Members, which are not given to all the members, as Seeing to the
Eye, Hearing to the Ear, Walking to the foot, etc. but Feeling is given to all
the Members; so also in the Body of Christ, that is, the spiritual Church,
several Gifts are given to several Saints, but the Trial of Spirits and
Doctrines to all Saints, who have received the Spirit; and if any have not
Christ's Spirit he is none of His; and if any have Christ's Spirit, he can in
some measure discern and judge of all Spirits in the World: and the more any
man receives Christ's Spirit, the more able is he to judge of all Other Spirits.

Wherefore they who are true Believers, and have received
Christ's Spirit, their Judgment is to be preferred in the Trial of Spirits,
before the Judgment of a whole Council of Clergy men.

And they only, who can try Spirits by the Spirit of God,
and Doctrines by the Word of God, written in their hearts by the Spirit, are
fit to commend Ministers to the Work of God: that is, the Congregations of the
faithful, and not Universities, and Assemblies of Divines.

And thus you may perceive that seeing many false Prophets are gone out into
the World, it concerns the faithful, as they tender their own everlasting
Salvation, not to believe every Spirit that speaks of Christ, and his Kingdom,
and his Things, but to Try the Spirits whether they be of God.

Object. But now (it may be) some will be ready to say, Objection.
We ought indeed to try the Spirits, seeing there are many falfe Prophets in
the world; but we hope there are no such Persons among us, but only some
upstart Men, with their new Light, who with their Novelties and Fancies trouble
the Nation, and would fain turn all things upside down, and we know these well
enough already, and do sufficiently despise them.

Answ. It is very like you do; but yet let me say to you, Answer.
Men, Brethren, and Fathers, understand Your selves, and know what you do in
this matter. For at the beginning of the Reformation by the Ministry of Luther,
Zuinglius, Calvin, and diverse others, precious servants of Jesus Christ, the
Popish Clergy applied all these Scriptures, Try the Spirits whether they be of
God, for many false Prophets are gone out into the world; and beware of false
Prophets, which come to you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly are ravening
wolves; I say, these, and the like places of Scriptures, they applied to these
Godly Men, and yet they Themselves were the false Prophets indeed, and the
Other, whom they termed such, were true Ones. Wherefore it is possible for You
to be mistaken as well as They, and no doubt but you will be mistaken, except
the Lord be gracious to you, and give you his own Spirit, by which alone you
can make a Right Judgment in this Matter.

Wherefore, that he that reads may understand, you must False Prophets not
easily discerned:
know, that the false Prophets are not so easily discerned as you think; for
they seem to be true Prophets, and Godly, Holy, Learned, Orthodox men, Men of
Eminency and Renown in the Church and State: and so to flesh and blood, and the
Wisdom and Religion of the world, it will be a difficult, yea, an impossible
thing to find them out: for Because of their several Vailes under which they
lie hid.
the false Prophets have several glorious Vails over them, to hide and obscure
them from common Knowledge.

Wherefore we declare unto you from the Word of the Lord, touching these false
Prophets, who shall do so much mischief.

1. That they shall not proceed, or come forth from First.
among the Jews, or Turks, or out of the barbarous Nations, but they shall
arise out of such as are called Christians.

2. Seeing among Christians* some are openly profane and Secondly.
evil, others seem to be Religious and Godly; the false Prophets shall be found
among the better sort; and therefore says Christ, they shall come in Sheeps
clothing, as if they were of Christ's own flock: and Paul says, they have a
form of Godliness* that is, they shall be painted over gloriously, with all
appearances of truth, righteousness, honesty, goodness, and all the names of
godliness.

3. Seeing amongst those that seem to be the better Sort of Thirdly.
Christians, some give themselves to the Ministry of the Word, and some do not;
the false Prophets shall be found among those Christians who take upon
themselves to be Preachers, as Paul testifies, Acts 20. where having called
together the Elders and Teachers of the Church of Ephesus, he says to them, ex
vobis ipsis, out of your Own Selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things,
to draw away disciples after them.

4. And seeing among those who are Ministers, some are Fourthly.
light, and vain, and carnal, and formal Persons, and others are men of great
Worth and Reputation, and seem to be the precious Members of Christ, and even
Pillars in the Church, so that the Common People think, that all Religion would
go down with such Good men, they having some Gifts and enlightnings of the
Spirit, and seeming more than ordinarily godly, religious, wise, holy, sober,
devout; now the false Prophets shall be found among These. And as they who
opposed Christ at his first coming in the flesh, seemed more wise, and holy,
and eminent* in the Church than the rest, as the Scribes and Pharisees, who sat
in Moses Chair, and had the outward Letter of the Word in all exactness, and
the outward Form of Religion in all strictness; so they, who do, and shall most
oppose Christ in his coming in his Spirit, and shall contradict his Word, and
resist his Servants and Witnesses of his Truth, do, and shall appear more Wise,
Holy, Learned, and Godly, than the rest of the Teachers of the Church.

And thus you see, that the false Prophets of Antichrist shall arise among
Christians, and among such Christians as seem to be Godly; and among such
seeming Godly Christians as Preach the Word; and among such Preachers of the
Word as seem to be of greater Worth and Eminency then the rest: and so in all
these Regards it will be a hard matter to discern them.

2. Again, Such Persons, of such appearance of Worth 2. Difficulty in trying
false Prophets.
and Holiness as these, do usually get to their side, the Greatest and Highest
Persons in the Kingdoms and Nations, and do obtain, not only their Countenance
and Favor, but also their Power and Authority for Themselves.

3. By both these means (to wit, their seeming Holiness, 3. Difficulty.
and their Interest with Worldly Powers) they exceedingly enlarge their Credit
and Reputation with the World, and do get Multitudes of People and Nations to
entertain them.

For Antichrist could not deceive the World with a company of foolish, weak,
ignorant, profane, contemptible Persons, but he always has the Greatest,
Wisest, Holiest, and most Eminent in the visible Church for Him, and by These
he seduces and subjects to Himself, even the Whole World.

Besides, they that are against Him and his false Prophets, 4. Difficulty.
are but a very handful of Saints, who have the Spirit of Christ, and through
his Spirit discern Them, and oppose Them, and for so doing are despised and
hated of all the World.

Wherefore it is a harder matter to try these false Prophets, then we are well
aware of. And yet as hard as it is, the Apostle, by the Spirit, has given us a
manifest and certain Rule of Trial: And this is the third general thing I
named.

The Third Point. Third Point.

To wit, The sufficient Rule, whereby the true Church may The Rule of Trial.
thoroughly try the Spirits and Prophets, how cunningly and subtly soever
they are disguised, and this he lays down, verse 3.

Hereby know we the Spirit of God; Every Spirit that confesses that Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh, is of God; and every Spirit that confesses not
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God, etc.

Now this Scripture we may understand two ways. A twofold understanding of
this Scripture.


1. Of a right Knowledge of Jesus Christ in his own Person. 2. Of a true
Receiving of this Christ into us by faith.
1. Of the right Knowledge of Christ in his own Person. 1.
Of a right knowledge of Christ.


1. For whereas he says, Every Spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is
come in the flesh, etc. this gives us to understand 1. That true God.
that he is true God, and was before he came into the flesh.

2. Whereas he says, every spirit that confesses that Christ 2. That true Man.
is come in the flesh; this gives us to understand that he is true Man, our
very Brother, partaker of the same flesh and blood with us.

3. Whereas he says, every spirit that confesses that Jesus 3. That both are
united in Him in one Person.
Christ is come in the flesh, etc. this also gives us to understand, that in
Him, true God and true Man are united into One inseparable Person.

4. Whereas he says, every spirit that confesses that Jesus 4. The End
wherefore this excellent Person came into the world: whence flows the Knowledge
of his Offices.
Christ is come in the flesh, etc. this gives us occasion to consider the End
of his Coming; seeing God did not become Man in vain, or for some slight Cause,
but that he might Redeem unto God, all those whom the Father had Elected in
Him, and save them perfectly, from the Law, Sin, Death, and Hell: And hence we
may rise up to conceive of his Offices, to wit, of his Priestly, Prophetical,
and Kingly Office, and of the Infinite Virtue and Efficacy of them.

Now he that makes this confession of Jesus Christ, from the revelation of the
Father, is of God; and he that speaks otherwise, is not of God.

2. But Secondly, We may understand this Scripture, not 2.
only of the true Knowledge of Jesus Christ, but also and Of a right receiving
of Christ.
especially of the true Receiving of Him by faith: Every spirit (says he) that
confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God: that is, he is of
God, that believes and acknowledges that the Son of the living God is come, not
only into that Humanity of Christ that was born of the Virgin, but also, that
he is come into Us, and dwells in Us; according to these Scriptures, That
Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith: And Christ in you the hope of Glory:
And know ye not, that Christ is in you, except you be reprobates, etc.
Wherefore the true Prophets do not only acknowledge that Jesus Christ is come
into his own flesh, but also into theirs, which by this means is made His; and
that Christ is in them of a truth, and dwells in them.

For Antichrist himself, and his Ministers, do all acknowledge, that Jesus
Christ is come into that flesh which he did assume of the Virgin, but they will
not confess that this is true, in Him, and in Us: They will acknowledge the
mystery of God manifested in the flesh, as to Christ the Head, but they will
deny it, as to the Church his Body: and so, whilst they separate the Head from
the Body, and the Body from the Head in this Mystery, they do solvere Jesum,
they dissolve Jesus.

I say some hold, that the Eternal Word or Divine Nature came indeed into that
flesh which was born of the blessed Virgin, but they will by no means allow it
to come into Ours, through our Union with him by Faith: only they say, some
created Habits or Gifts of Grace come into us, or in our flesh, but not Christ
himself, or the Divine Nature, or Son of the living God. And so these men set
up these Created Gifts and Graces in the Members, instead of Christ Himself the
Head.

And yet these Teachers make a Glorious Show in the flesh; and this is
Antichrist, to wit, when men think that these Created Habits of Grace (which
they fancy) will renew, comfort, sanctify, and save them; and so do make to
themselves of Them, a Glorious, but yet a false Christ.

Wherefore let us know, that he that denies Jesus Christ in the Members, is,
though not so great, yet as true Antichrist, as he that denies Jesus Christ in
the Head: and he that denies Christ dwelling in our hearts by Faith, to be, and
to be alone Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption to Us, as he
that denies Him to be the Power, Wisdom, and Righteousness of God in Himself.

The sum of this matter is this, that the true Spirits or Prophets do
acknowledge, not only that Christ the Son of the Living God is come into that
Son of Man which was born of the blessed Virgin, but also that Christ is come
into Them, and dwells in Them, as in his own true and proper Members.

And so, He that has Jesus Christ dwelling in his heart, is a true Prophet;
and he that has not Christ dwelling in his heart, is a false Prophet, though
his Knowledge and Religion be never so high, and glorious, and holy also in the
opinion of the World. And this is the chief Sign and Mark, whereby we may know
the true Prophets and true Christians, from the false Prophets and false
Christians.

Object. Now if any shall say, But how shall we know whether Objection.
a man has Christ dwelling in his Heart or no? and so consequently, whether he
be a true or false Prophet?

Answ. I Answer, You shall certainly know it, by the Answer.
truth of the Word of Christ in him, and by the truth of the Life of Christ, in
reference to his Office in the Word.

1. First then, the true Prophets are to be discerned from the Signs whereby
the true Prophets are discerned from the false.
false,

By the truth of the Word of God in them. From the true Prophets speak the true
Word of God, even the Word of Wisdom, the Word of Righteousness, the The true
Prophets speak the true Word of God.
Word of Life, the Word of Power, the Word that is able to save, which is the
true Gospel Word. For this is the Covenant that God has made with Christ and
his seed, saying, Isai. 59. 21. My Spirit which is upon thee, and my Word which
is in thy mouth, shall never depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of
thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, from henceforth and for ever.

And this was perfectly fulfilled in Christ; for that Word, Thus did Christ:
which in the beginning was with God, and was God, was made flesh in him, and
dwelt in him; and out of that Word Jesus Christ spoke all that ever he spoke;
his whole Doctrine did flow from that Eternal Word which dwelt in him.

And Christ communicated to the Disciples the same Word And his Disciples.
which he had received, as he says, John 17. 8. I have given to them the Words
that thou gave me, (that is, the word of Righteousness and Life) and they
have received them, and have known surely, that I came out from thee, and they
have believed that thou did send me; and so that word, which they Themselves
received by faith, they also held forth to Others, as John says, 1 John 1. 1.
That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with
our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled, of the Word of
Life, declare we unto you.

And to this also John the Baptist gives Testimony, John 3. 34. Where he says,
He whom God has sent speaks the Words of God; not the words of Men, or
Angles, but of God; and this is true, both in Christ and in his Seed.

But now the false Prophets speak not the Word of God, for The false Prophets
speak not the Word of God, but their own, or other Men's Word.
they have it not in their hearts; but what Word they have in their hearts,
that they speak; and so they speak the words of their own Reason, Wisdom, and
Righteousness, or of other Men's; but beyond Humane Things they do not go,
whether they pretend to high Notions on the one hand, or to sound Orthodox
Doctrine on the other hand.

Now of this, true Christians are to take special notice; because, as the true
Word of God is the greatest Commodity to the Church that can be, and brings the
presence of Christ, and all the things of Christ along with it; so the Words of
Man is the greatest Mischief to the Church that can be; for it brings
Antichrist, and his Kingdom, and all his Things along with it. And thus does
vain Philosophy, and School Divinity (which is an unlawful mixing of
Philosophy with the outward letter of the Word) pervert all things in the
Church of carnal and false Christians.

2. As the true Prophets speak the true Word of God, so 2.
also they speak it by the true Spirit of God, and not by their They speak it
by the true Spirit of God.
own Spirit: and thus did Christ, who says of himself, The Spirit of the Lord
is upon me, for he has anointed me to preach the Gospel; and so he spoke the
Word of God by the Spirit of God.

And Christ commanded his Disciples to stay at Jerusalem till they had received
the Spirit, and then to go forth and preach; because he knew they could not
preach Gods word aright, without Gods Spirit; and also Christ says of all the
faithful, that it is not they that speak, but the Spirit of their Father that
speaks in them; yea, and the whole Gospel is called, the Ministration of the
Spirit.

Now the true Prophets, speaking the Word of God by and And so in the right
sense of it.
in his Spirit, do also speak it in the Right Sense, and after the true mind of
Christ, as Paul says of himself, and of other believers who had received the
Spirit, We have the mind of Christ.

But the false Prophets, though they speak the word of the The false speak
without the Spirit.
letter exactly, and that accordingly to the very Original, and curiosity of
Criticisms, yet speaking it without the Spirit, they are false Prophets before
God and his true Church; seeing all Right Prophecy has proceeded from the
Spirit in all Ages of the World, but especially it must so proceed in the days
of the New Testament, wherein God has promised the largest effusion of his
Spirit.

And they speaking the Word of the Letter without the And so do mistake the
mind of Christ.
Spirit, do wholly mistake the Mind of Christ in all, and under the outward
Letter of the Word of God, do only bring in the Mind of Man. And this is one of
the greatest Delusions, and most mischievous snares that can be laid in the
Church, to bring in the Word of Christ without the Mind of Christ, yea, to
bring in the Word of Christ against the Mind of Christ, and according to the
Mind of Antichrist: this is the effectual Operation of Error, whereby all
Hypocrites and false Christians are deceived, and that without all hope of
recovery.

And thus you see, that the true Prophets bring the true Word, and bring it
also by the true Spirit, and this manifests them to be of God: but the false,
either bring not the true Word, or if they bring the Word in the Letter, yet
they bring it without the Spirit, and thus it is manifest, they are not of God.

Object. But some will object here: If a man preach the Objection.
Word in the Letter, even good, sound, and orthodox Doctrine, Whether a man
destitute of the Spirit, may not be a profitable Preacher.
no doubt but such a man is to be heard, and he may do much good in the Church,
though he want Christ's Spirit: This I have heard from very many, who have
thought they have said something.

Answ. But to this I answer: That they who want Christ's Answer.
Spirit, which is the Spirit of Prophecy, though they preach the exact Letter
of the Word, yet are false Prophets, and not to be heard by the Sheep.

1. Because under the New Testament we are not to regard 1.
the Letter without the Spirit, but the Spirit as well as the Letter, yea, the
Spirit more then the Letter: and therefore Paul says, that Christ shall destroy
Antichrist with the Spirit of his Mouth, and the Brightness of his Coming: he
scarce takes any notice of the Letter, but calls the true preaching of the
Gospel, the Spirit of Christ's Mouth, or the Ministration of the Spirit. And
therefore the spiritual People cannot join to that Ministry, where the Spirit
of Christ is wanting, though there be the Outward Letter of the Word in it.

2. They that preach only the Outward Letter of the Word 2.
without the true Spirit, they make all things Outward in the Church, and so
carry the people, with whom they prevail, only to Outward Things, to an Outward
Word, to Outward Worship, Outward Ordinances, Outward Church, Outward
Government, etc. whereas in the true Kingdom of Christ all things are Inward
and Spiritual; and all the true Religion of Christ is written in the Soul and
Spirit of man, by the Spirit of God; and the Believer is the only Book, in
which God Himself writes his New Testament.

3. They who preach the Outward Letter of the Word, 3.
though never so truly without the Spirit, do (as has been said) wholly mistake
the Mind of Christ in the Word for want of the Spirit, which is the only true
and infallible Interpreter of his Mind; and so under the Outward Letter of the
Word, preach their own Mind, and not Christ's Mind; and do make all the
Scriptures serve their own Turns, even their own Worldly Ends and Advantages,
and nothing else.

4. They that preach the Outward Letter of the Word 4.
without the Spirit, can with such a Word both live Themselves, in all the
inward Evils of corrupted Nature, and allow Others to do so too. And thus the
Gospel, which in the Spirit of it, is the Judgment of sin, is made in the
Letter of it, the Covering for sin, and the Encourager of it: seeing such Men,
who have the Letter of the Word in their mouth, do live in the inward
Corruptions of their Hearts, more securely and quietly than other Men.

5. Last of all, let us know, that whoever does agree 5.
with Christ, never so exactly in the Letter, and yet differs from him in
Spirit, is very Antichrist* And therefore when the Devils in him that was
possessed, said to Christ, We know thee who thou art, the holy One of God, and
so agreed very exactly with the Gospel in the Letter, yet Christ forbad them to
speak, because they spoke not by a right Spirit. And Christ has said, Whoever
is not with me (that is, in the Spirit) is against me, though he have the same
outward Letter of the Word with him.

And so, as Christ builds up his Church by his Spirit through his Word; so
Antichrist builds up his Church by the Word without the Spirit: and Christ's
Church and Antichrists, do often* differ very little or nothing in Word or
Letter, yet do always infinitely differ in Spirit.

Wherefore to conclude, Let us know, that that Church that has the Word, if it
wants the Spirit, is Antichrists Church; and that that Ministry that uses the
Word, and wants the Spirit, is Antichrists Ministry; and that all works,
duties, prayings, preaching, fasting, thanksgiving, etc. without Christ's
Spirit, are nothing but the very kingdom of Antichrist, and the Abomination of
Desolation.

And so I proceed to the second general Rule of Trial, which I propounded,
whereby we may discern the true Prophets The second general Rule of the Trial
of Spirits.
of Christ, from the false Prophets of Antichrist, and that is:

By the Truth of the Life of Christ, in reference to his Office in the Word.
And here I shall give you many Trials, how you may The true Prophets are known
by the truth of the Life of Christ.
certainly know and discern the false Prophets of Antichrist from the true,
humble, and faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ.

And the Lord Jesus Christ, before whom we are all present this day, and before
whose Tribunal we shall all be Judged, He knows, that I shall not purposely
speak any thing at this time, either to please Myself, or to displease You; But
I shall desire to speak all out of very faithfulness to Him, who has remembered
Me when I was in low condition, for his Mercy endures for ever.

The first sign then, whereby the true Prophets 1. Sign.
may be discerned from the false, is this:
First, the true Prophets are all sent of God. So was Moses, whom God sent to
the children of Israel, and bid him tell The true Prophets are sent of Christ.
them, that I AM, even the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, has sent him to
them; and he gave him a proportionable measure of his Presence, to cause them
to believe it. And Christ a greater Prophet then Moses, even the Head of all
the children of God, said by Isaiah, chap. 48. 16. Come ye near unto me, hear
ye this; I have not spoken in secret from the beginning, and now the Lord and
his Spirit has sent me. And everywhere in the Gospel, He still declares, how
he came not of Himself, but his Father sent him.

And as the Father sent Christ, so Christ sends all his Seed, the true
Ministers of the Gospel, as is manifest, John 20. 21. where Christ said to his
Disciples, As my Father sent Me, so send I You; which he spoke not only
touching Them, but touching All that should believe in his Name through their
Word; And Paul also says, Romans 10. 15. How shall they teach except they be
sent? So that true Preaching comes from
true Sending, and this comes from the Grace of God.

Now I desire you farther to take notice, that God has reckoned the Choice of
his Ministers, one of the weightiest things that belong unto his Kingdom;
wherefore he would God has not committed the choice of his Ministers to any
sort of men.
never commit the trust of this to any Sort of Men whatsoever. Yea, Christ
himself did not choose his Disciples at his own Humane Will, but only at the
Will of God, and therefore was much in Prayer before he chose them.

And the Apostles themselves durst not of Themselves, when they were all met
together, choose any one into the room of Judas, but they betook themselves to
Prayer, and desired the Lord to show whom He had chosen. And Acts 13. The
Spirit said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called
them. And Paul tells the Galatians, that he was an Apostle, not of Men, nor by
Men, but by Jesus Christ and God the Father.

By all which Scriptures we may perceive what care the Lord has always had,
to send his own Ministers Himself into his own Church, and would have his true
Church receive no Ministers but such as He sends them.

And the great and chief sending into the Church is from He sends them himself.
God Himself, as we see in Moses, and all the Prophets, and in Christ Himself
the Head of them, and in all the Apostles, and in all Believers.

Now the proof of a man's sending from God is this, to be The proof of his
sending them.
anointed with the Spirit: as John 20. 22. When Christ said to his Disciples,
as my Father sent me, so send I you; He breathed upon them, and said, Receive
the holy Spirit: For his Father sent him only by pouring out his Spirit on him;
and he sends them so only; and he that says, The Unction of the Spirit alone
is not sufficient for the Ministry of the New Testament,
he denies Christ and his Apostles to have been sufficient Ministers, and he
perverts the Scripture, and seduces the People.

Now the true Teachers through the pouring forth of the Spirit on them, they do
truly know Christ Himself, and the great Mystery of the Gospel, and all the
things that are freely given us of God; and they are also filled with love to
their Brethren, and are enabled to confess the Truth, and to do thereafter, and
to contemn the World, and patiently to suffer rebukes, etc. all which is a
sufficient Proof of any ones Sending from God.

And thus the true Prophets are all sent of God, which is their great comfort
and support in all trouble and difficulties, because he that sends them, is
still with them. Lo (says Christ) I am with you always, to the end of the
world.

But now on the contrary, the false Prophets and Ministers The false Prophets
run without sending.
of Antichrist are not sent of God, but are sent and appointed by Men, and that
through their own desire, and seeking. And of such the Lord complains, Jer. 23.
21. I have not sent these Prophets, yet they ran; I have not spoken to them,
yet they prophesied: but because I sent them not, neither commanded them, they
shall not profit this people at all, says the Lord, v. 32.

And Christ says, Many false Christ's, and false Prophets shall arise: i. e.
are not sent of God, but shall arise of Themselves. And Paul says to the
Elders of the Church of Ephesus, Acts 20. Out of your selves shall men arise,
speaking perverse things, to draw Disciples after them. They arise of
Themselves, they are not sent of God.

Now such Teachers as these do usually spring up in the Church, through
Academical Degrees, and Ecclesiastical Ordination; which two things have poured
forth into the Church whole swarms of false Prophets, and Antichristian
Ministers, never sent of God, nor anointed of his Spirit, to the irreparable
damage, prejudice, and ruin of the People and Nations who have received them,
with their false and poysonfull Doctrine.

Wherefore all those Teachers who are not sent of the Lord and his Spirit, but
arise of Themselves, and come into the Church in the strength and might of
their Degrees and Orders, they are all false Prophets.

The Second Sign.
The true Prophets, who are sent of God, take all their Warrant 2.
True Prophets take all their warrant from God in what they teach. The Learned,
i. e. they who are taught of God, and have heard and learned of the Father: who
are the learnedest Men in the world, whatever the foolish and ignorant world
says to the contrary.
and Authority from God, for what they teach, and do not at all regard Men, or
build on Them. And this has all along made the true Teachers so bold, and so
confident, in the Name of God, against the World and worldly Church: So Isaiah
50. 4, etc. says, The Lord God has given me the tongue of the learned, that I
should know how to speak a word in due season to him that is weary; he wakeneth
morning by morning; he wakeneth my ear to hear as the learned.

The Lord has opened mine ear, and I was not rebellious, neither turned away
back.

For the Lord God will help me, therefore shall I not be confounded; therefore
have I set my face as a flint, and I know I shall not be ashamed.

He is near that justifies me; who will contend with me? let us stand together,
who is mine adversary? let him come near me.

Behold the Lord will help me; who is he that shall condemn me? Lo they all
shall wax old as a garment, the moth shall eat them up. See here the admirable
confidence of a Teacher sent from God.

And so also our Lord Jesus Christ in the days of his flesh, how bold was He
in his Ministry, coming in the Name of the Lord, and having his Authority and
Doctrine from Him! how boldly did he reprove the Scribes and Pharisees, the
chief Teachers of the Jewish Church! And what a clear and glorious Confession
of the Truth of God, did he hold forth against all their Opposition and
Contradiction.

And the Apostles, when the Rulers, Elders, and Scribes, and Annas the High
Priest, and Caiaphas, and John, and Alexander, and all the kindred of the High
Priest were gathered together, and threatened them, and straightly charged them,
to preach no more in that Name, they answered, Whether it be right in the sight
of God, to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye: For we cannot but
speak the things which we have seen and heard, Acts 4. verse. 19.

And so Wickliffe, John Hus, and Luther, who were sent of God, did take all
their Authority from God alone, and so were bold and confident, each of them in
their time, against the whole World.

But now the false Prophets, who come of Themselves, False Teachers take all
their Authority from Man.
and by the sending of Men, they do all by the Authority and Warrant of Man;
and accordingly do join themselves together, by secular Power, to bring about
their Doctrines and Designs in the Church; and from the Civil Authority they
procure Leave and Power to publish their Doctrine, and set up their Discipline
in the Church, and to suppress what ever is contrary thereto; and without this
worldly License and Authority, they neither can nor dare do any thing: and
are never bold, but when the Authority of Man is for them. But the true
Prophets (as has been said) do only take their Authority from Christ for what
they teach, and are bold in his Name only, to hold it forth: and so after they
have published the Word in faith, in the same faith they leave the maintenance
and defending of it to Him alone, whose Word it is; and they neither publish it
for Man's commanding, nor smother it for Man's forbidding.

Wherefore those Teachers, who have not their Warrant from Christ for their
Doctrine, and are not bold in his Name alone, but do derive all their Authority
and Encouragement from Men, to speak and act in the things of God, they are all
false Prophets, and Ministers of Antichrist.

The Third Sign. 3.

The true and faithful Teachers, as they are sent of God, True Prophets, they
only preach Jesus Christ.
and take their Authority from God, so in all their Doctrine they only hold
forth Jesus Christ. And this they have learned from God Himself.

For the Father speaking immediately from Heaven, preached nothing but Christ,
saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him: And this
he spoke thrice from the excellent Glory; manifesting, that He Himsef had no
Higher Thing, nor no Other Thing to declare to the World, than his Son Jesus
Christ, in whom alone are hid all the Treasures of all true and spiritual
Wisdom and Knowledge.

The Son also in all his Ministry, only declared who Himself was, whom the
Father had given to the Elect Church; saying, Psalm. 2. I will publish the
Decree, whereof the Lord has said unto me, Thou art my Son, this day have I
begotten thee: And in all his Ministry only declared Who he was, and to what
End his Father had given him: saying, I am the bread of life, which comes down
from Heaven; he that comes to me shall never hunger; and he that believes in
me shall never thirst. And I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life; no man comes
to the Father but by me: And all his Doctrine and Works were to this end, that
we might believe that Jesus is the Son of God, and that believing in him we
might have Eternal Life.

The Apostles also of the Lord, after they had received the Spirit, did go up
and down the World, only preaching Non dixit Christus suo primo Caetui, Ite and
praedicate mundo Nugas; sed verum illis dedit Fundamentum; and illud tantum
sonuit in ore Ipsorum. Dantes.
Jesus, and Repentance, and Remission of sins in his Name.

And Paul a laborious Preacher, through the Grace of God, did renounce and
reject all his Worldly Learning, and all his Humane Accomplishments and
Excellencies in the Ministry of the Gospel, and preached nothing but the right
Knowledge of Christ, and right Faith in Him, as He himself testifies, Phil. 3.
7, etc. saying, What things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ;
yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss for the Excellency of the
Knowledge of Jesus Christ my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all
things, and do count them but dung, that I may win Christ, and be found in Him,
not having mine own Righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is
through the faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by faith; That I
may know Him, and the power of His Resurrection, and the fellowship of His
Sufferings, and be made conformable to Him in his Death, if by any means I
might attain to the Resurrection from the Dead.

And he also tells the Corinthians, that he desired to know nothing amongst
them, but Jesus Christ and him crucified.

And thus the true Teachers preach nothing but Christ; and Him they preach, not
according to their own Humane Conceptions and Apprehensions, but according to
the Revelation they have received from the Father by the Spirit.

But on the contrary, the false Teachers preach nothing The false preach
nothing less than Christ.
less than Christ, and faith in him: but they chiefly teach the Law, and Moral
Doctrine, and Works, or else Philosophy, and Philosophical Subtilties and
Speculations, which yet the Apostle has expressly forbidden, Col. 2. 8. saying
to the faithful, Beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy and Vain
Deceit, after the Tradition of Men, after the Elements of the World, and not
after Christ; for in Him dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily; and ye are
complete in Him who is the Head of all Principality and Power: And so we need
not turn from Christ, to Philosophy that vain Deceit.

Wherefore they who preach not the Mystery of Christ, through the Revelation
of the Father, and the Spirit, but Moral Virtues and Vain Philosophy, instead
of Christ, are all of them false Prophets, and Ministers of Antichrist.

The Fourth Sign. 4.

The true Ministers and Prophets of Christ, as they only The true Prophets
Preach Christ for love, and not for gain.
hold forth Christ, so they hold him forth only for the Love of God, and their
Brother, and not for any worldly Profit or Gain.

Thus Christ taught his Disciples, out of the Love of God; as he says, I
delight to do thy will, O my God, yea thy Law is within my Heart, that is, his
Love to God. And also out of Love to his Brother; for having Loved his own, he
Loved them to the end, and out of this Love taught Them; as he says, I have
called you Friends; for whatsoever I have heard from my Father, I have declared
unto You.

And as he taught out of love Himself, so he has commanded all His Seed to
teach one another, out of the same Love, and has given them his Spirit, which
is Love, that thereby they might love both Him and their Brethren; and
therefore Christ (knowing how difficult a Work it was, to feed his Sheep with
the right and found Doctrine of the Gospel, and that none could or would
perform this, except they loved Christ from their very Heart root) said thrice
to Peter, Peter, do thou Love me? do thou Love me? do thou Love me? then
feed my sheep, my lambs, my sheep; and Paul says, The Love of Christ
constrained him, to teach the Gospel: and the fruit of the Spirit, in all
Believers being Love, in this Brotherly Love, they serve one another in the
Gospel.

And as Christ himself did not sell his Spiritual Travel to his Church, for
worldly Profit or Gain; no more do his true Seed and Servants; for says Paul,
Acts 20. 33. I have coveted no man's Silver or Gold, or Apparel; ye your selves
know, that These Hands have ministered to my Necessity, and to Them who were
with me: And 2 Cor. 12. 14. Behold the third time I am ready to come to you, I
will not be burdensome to you, for I seek not Yours but You. And v. 17. Did I
make a Gain of you, by any of them whom I sent unto you? or did Titus make a
Gain of you? walked we not Both in the same Spirit?

And thus the true Teachers do not seek any Temporal Gain or Commodity, from
the hands of men by their preaching, but do truly and cheerfully teach out of
the Love of Christ, and their Brother. The false Preach for gain, and not for
love of Christ.


But on the contrary, the false Teachers, though they do not teach the Gospel
(being destitute of the Spirit) but vain Philosophy and Humane Doctrines
instead of it, yet will they live by the Gospel, and not by the Labor of their
Hands in a lawful Calling; they will have the temporal Goods of the Church,
and yet not minister the Spiritual Treasure of it; and what they do minister,
they do it for Reward, as it is written, Micah 3. 11. The Priests teach for
Hire, and the Prophets divine for Money; and he that puts not into their
mouths, they even prepare war against him.

And to show they Preach for the love of gain, they are brought up to the
Ministry as to a Trade to live by; and they run in this way, from one Place to
another, from a Lesser to a Greater Living, and where they may Gain most of
this World, there will they be sure to be: Yea, so much are they addicted to
their Worldly Advantage, that they had rather Christ's Kingdom should never be
set up in the World, nor Antichrists never be thrown down, then suffer any Loss
or Diminution in their Profit, Power, Dignity, Authority, or in any Worldly
thing, whereof they have got the Possession and Enjoyment.

Wherefore they that teach Christ, not for the love of Christ, and their
Brother, but for Temporal Gain, and Worldly Advantage only, are all of Them
false Teachers and Ministers of Antichrist.

The Fifth Sign. 5.

The true Teachers teach Christ to others, as they have The true Prophets Teach
for the Glory of Christ, and not for vain glory.
been taught him of God, only for the Glory of God, and not out of Vainglory.
Wherefore Christ said of himself, John 8. 50. I seek not mine own Glory: And
John 7. 18. He that speaks of himself seeks his own Glory; but he that
seeks the Glory of him that sent him, the same is true, and no
unrighteousness is in him: So that whoever speaks from God, seeks Gods
Glory: And so also Paul says, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 6. Nor of Men sought we Glory;
neither of You, nor yet of Others.

So that the true Teachers do not preach the Word to win to themselves Glory in
the World, and Praise and Applause from Men; but do rather seek the Glory of
God by their Doctrine, though Hypocrites and Carnal people, for this cause do
deride and scorn them.

But on the contrary, the false Teachers seek above all The false seek their
own glory, neglecting Christ's.
things their own Glory by their Ministry, and to this end,

1. They get to themselves Titles and Degrees in the University, for their
pretended Knowledge in Divinity above other Christians; and by these Degrees,
they get the uppermost seats in the Synagogues, and greetings in the Markets,
and are called of men, Doctor, Doctor, which Christ has expressly forbidden in
his Gospel.

2. Having got such Titles, they go forth in their own Name as men of approved
Religion, Learning, Reputation and Worth, and for Such they make account the
World should receive them.

3. They especially desire to Preach to Rich men, and Great men, and men in
Place and Authority, that from Them they may have Protection, Favor,
Preferment, and a Quiet Life, and care not much to Preach to the poor, plain,
mean People, by whom they can expect no Worldly Advantage.

4. To this end also, they speak in the Words which Man's Wisdom teaches, and
so mingle Philosophy with Divinity, and think to credit the Gospel with Terms
of Art; and do sprinkle their Sermons with Hebrew, Greek, Latin, as with a
Perfume acceptable to the Nostrils of the World.

In a word, they Preach all things in a Pleasing Spirit to the World, that they
by all may get Glory to Themselves, and may be accounted, with Simon Magus,
some Great Ones: And in all this, they show they speak of Themselves, and not
of God; seeing they seek not Gods Glory, but their Own; for, He that speaks
of Himself, seeks his own Glory.

Wherefore they who by their Ministry do not seek the Glory of God alone, and
of his Son Jesus Christ, but seek their own Glory, and the Praise of men, as
the Clergy generally do, and not least of all in this Place, They are all of
them false Prophets, and Ministers of Antichrist.

The Sixth Sign. 6.

The true Preachers and Ministers of Christ, when they are The true Prophets
endure reproaches and persecutions with meekness.
opposed, resisted, slandered and persecuted for the Words sake, they endure it
with all meekness, humility and patience. Thus Christ endured all the
reproaches, contradictions, revilings, and persecutions from the Jews; and when
he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered he threatened not, but
committed himself to him that Judges righteously, 1 Pet. 2. 23. And Paul says
of himself to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 12. 12. You had the signs of my
Apostleship in all Patience.

But on the contrary the false Teachers, when any Truth The false are angry
against the reproofs of the Word.
is preached that they know not, or that is against their Gain or Glory, they
snarl and bark at it, and bite Them that bring it. And therefore says Paul,
Beware of Dogs, Phil. 3. 2. not Dogs by Nature, but by Practice and Condition.
Now a cursed Dog lying on a rich Garment* or soft Carpet at his ease, as long as
he may lie still he is very quiet, but if you would remove him from his place,
he soon snarls and flies at you, and shows of what mettle he is made. So the
false Teachers, who have gotten a carnal Knowledge of the Word, and have
thereby gotten Preferment, and great Advantages in the World, they lie quiet on
these soft things, as long as they may lie still; but if any seek by the Word
of God to rouse them up from these things, they rise up like angry Dogs, and
bark at them, and rend them, as much as they can or dare.

Wherefore those Teachers who cannot patiently suffer wrongs for the Words
sake; but on the contrary, when they are reproved by the Word, and their Sheeps
Clothing pulled off, even their false vizard of Religion, do presently grow
impatient and furious; and they that bark and foam against the late revealed
Truth, which touches them very near, they all are false Teachers, and
Ministers of Antichrist.

The Seventh Sign. 7.

The true Prophets, and Ministers of Christ, do not force The true Prophets
force no body to hear them against their wills.
any body to hear them, and obey their Doctrine against their Wills, neither do
they vex and trouble them with Secular Power, who will not obey them, and be
subject to them; but they leave all such People as they found them, lest they
should seem by their Doctrine, to seek any Worldly thing.

Thus Christ when he taught the Gospel, still cried out, He that has ears to
hear, let him hear; and he that had not ears to hear, he did not punish him:
and again says Christ, If any man Will be my Disciple, let him deny Himself,
and take up his cross and follow Me; and still left men to their own Freedom,
whether they would be his Disciples or no.

And as Christ did thus Himself, so he left the same thing in command with all
his true Disciples; and when he sent them forth to Preach, Matthew. 10. he
charged them saying, Whoever will not receive You, nor hear Your Words, when
you depart out of that house or City, shake off the dust of your feet, as a
Testimony against them; he does not bid them if they be refused, to betake
themselves to the Secular Power, to get Authority from thence to stay and abide
there, whether they will or no, or otherwise to punish them, but bids them only
to shake off the dust of their feet, that they might know, they came not to
them for the Love of Earthly things. And when the Apostles out of a false zeal
would have had Christ to have commanded fire to have come down from Heaven to
have destroyed them that would not receive Him; he plainly reproved them,
saying, Ye know not of what Spirit ye are; for the Son of Man is not come to
destroy men's Lives, but to save them.

It is recorded in the life of Simon and Jude the Apostles, as both Gulielmus
de sancto Amore, and John Hus relate, That when the Chief Ruler was very angry
with those who defamed the Doctrine of those Apostles, and in great zeal
commanded a great Fire to be made, that such Opposers might be cast into it,
The Apostles fell down before the Emperor, saying, We beseech you (Sir) let
not Us be the Authors or Causers of this Destruction, who are come to publish
the Doctrine of eternal Salvation; neither let Us who are sent to Revive those
who are Dead through sin, become the Killers of those who are Alive.

Wherefore those Teachers who for Worldly Advantage The false force men by the
power of the Magistrate.
sake, will force Themselves upon those men against their Wills, who will not
Willingly receive them; and will provoke the Worldly Powers and Magistrates to
punish those who will not hear and receive Them and their Doctrine, they all
are false Prophets and Ministers of Antichrist.

The Eighth Sign. 8.

The true Teachers are content that Others should teach as The true Prophets
are content that others should teach as well as they.
well as They, and would not make a Monopoly of the Ministry to themselves
alone, for Worldly Advantage sake.

Thus our Lord Jesus Christ did not content Himself to preach the Gospel alone,
but he sent forth Others, as his Father sent forth him, yea, he pours forth his
Spirit on all flesh, that sons, and daughters, and servants, and handmaids may
prophecy, and so Knowledge may cover the Earth, as Waters the Seas: and to
make the world willing to receive such Teachers, he says, He that receives
You, receives Me; and he that receives Me, receives Him that sent Me.

And when Eldad and Medad upon whom the Spirit of the Lord did rest, did
prophecy in the Camp of Israel, without asking any License from Moses, and one
told Moses of it in great displeasure, and Joshua thereupon wished Moses to
forbid them to Prophecy, then Moses the meek servant of the Lord replied,
Enviest thou for my sake? would God (says he) that all the Lords people were
Prophets, and that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them All, Numb. 11. 29.
And so the Godly mind of any faithful Teacher, desires to be helped in the
work of the Word, that the precious Truth of the Gospel, which he himself alone
cannot sufficiently express, all men's tongues might declare. And so they do not
envy in Others those Spiritual Gifts which God has given them, but do wish,
that Every man had a Mouth and Wisdom given him, to declare the Mystery of the
Gospel, and the infinite Love, Mercy, Wisdom, Truth, Power, Redemption, and
Salvation of God by Jesus Christ, which cannot by all men's Tongues be
sufficiently published in the World.

Farther, as no worldly Prince or Magistrate has such unlimited Power over the
Goods of the people, as to forbid them to give corporal Alms to them that stand
in need, as occasion is ministered; no more has any Power, whether
Ecclesiastical or Civil, such Dominion over the Word and Truth of God, written
by the Spirit in the hearts of Believers, but that they may at all times, and
upon all occasions, minister spiritual Alms to them who stand in need, by the
teaching of the Gospel.

Wherefore those Teachers, who are envious that any The false would have none
to teach but themselves, and their own Tribe; lest their gain should be
prejudiced.
should preach the Word but Themselves, and their own Tribe, as they call it,
(because they get great Worldly Advantage thereby, whereas otherwise they would
be contented that any should preach) and so would have the civil Magistrate
only to License Them to be Preachers, because of their Degrees and Orders, and
to forbid all Others, they all are false Teachers, and Ministers of Antichrist.

The Ninth Sign. 9.

The true Teachers do not only teach the Word, but are The true Prophets are
willing to suffer for the Truth they teach.
also ready to seal to the Truth of it, with their Estates, Liberties, and
Lives.

Thus did Jesus Christ, as was foretold by Isaiah, Chap. 50. 5. where Christ
says by his Spirit, The Lord has opened mine ear, and I was not rebellious,
neither turned away back; I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them
who plucked off the hair; I hid not my face from shame and spitting. And in the
days of his flesh, how willingly did he seal to the Truth of his New Testament
Doctrine with his Suffering, and suffered himself to be apprehended by the
hands of men, and to be crucified, when he could have commanded Legions of
Angels for his succor, if he had pleased, and would not have made use of his
own infinite and almighty Power.

And this submission and willingness to suffer for the Truth, Christ has
commanded all his Disciples, saying, He that will save his life, shall lose it;
and he that will lose his life for my sake shall save it: And if any man will
be my Desciple, let him deny himself, take up the cross, and follow me: And
again, I send you forth as sheep among wolves, and ye shall be brought before
Kings and Rulers for my Names sake, that is, for the true and Spiritual
Teaching of the Gospel.

Now as nothing will procure us more enmity, than the spiritual holding forth
of the Gospel, which will cause the worldly Church to cast out our Name as
evil, and to cast our Persons out of their Synagogues, yea, and also to kill
us, when they can get Power; so if we be true Teachers, must we be ready and
willing to suffer all this for Christ's Name sake.

Wherefore those Teachers who embrace the height and The false teach to avoid
suffering.
Honor of this Life, and will not own the Gospel of Christ, farther than they
may thereby procure to themselves credit, reputation, profit, and preferment in
the World; and to this end, in doubtful and difficult times carry themselves so
subtly, that what ever Party shall prevail, they may still stand on their
legs, and enjoy their present Prosperity and Preferment, and so are neither
hot nor cold, neither truly for the Truth, nor openly against the Truth, but
seek by all subtle means to decline the Cross of Christ. And though in Christ
himself, they praise his meanness, plainness, simplicity, suffering, and cross,
yet They themselves are delicate, and cannot endure these things for Christ's
sake in Themselves, but bend and frame the whole course of their Ministry so,
as they may obtain all Good things from the World, and avoid and escape all
Evil things from it; these all are false Prophets, and Ministers of Antichrist.

By these nine Signs (for I shall name no more now) may the true Prophets and
Ministers of Christ be manifestly distinguished and discerned from the false
ones of Antichrist, by all the true people of God, who have received his Spirit.

Now let God and his Word be true, and every Man a Liar.

And now I shall make but two Uses of this Discourse Two uses.
briefly, and so conclude for this time. And the first shall be to Those of You
who are spiritual Christians: and the second to the carnal Clergy.

First, You who are true believers, and spiritual Christians, 1. use.
may judge aright, by what you have heard, of the present To spiritual
Christians.
Clergy, or Common Ministry of the Nation; and may see by the clear light of
the Word, that they, for the Generality of them, are not true but false
Prophets; not the Ministers of Christ but of Antichrist; not sent of God, nor
anointed by his Spirit, but ordained and appointed by Men, at their own desire
and seeking, for Worldly Advantage sake; men who stand and minister in the
Church, only in the strength of their Academical Degrees and Ecclesiastical
Ordination, but do not stand and feed the people, In the strength of the Lord,
and in the Majesty of the Name of their God. And this corrupt Ministry or
carnal Clergy have deceived the People and Nations, with a corrupt and carnal
Understanding of Christ, and of the Scriptures, and of the Kingdom of Christ,
and of the Government of his Kingdom, and of all the things of Christ: Yea,
they have under the Name and pretense of Christ, set up a Church to Antichrist
everywhere, and do continually mislead thousands of poor souls, and carry them
captive to Hell, and that under the color and pretense of Religion.

And this, I say, is the great evil in these false Teachers,
that under the Name of Christ, they fight against Christ, and under the Name
of the Word, they fight against the Word, and under the Name of the Church,
they fight against the Church: And this is a grievous Abomination of Desolation
in the Temple of God, that they who should be the chief for the Truth, are the
chief against it; and that they who should be faithful Witnesses to the holy
Truth of Christ, should prove lying Witnesses against it. If a profane person,
or Heathen should do this, it would be Wickedness and Impiety even in them; but
this is horrible Abomination, and Antichristianism in the Church of Christ,
that They, who are come into it as friends, and have obtained the chief Places
in it, should yet under this vizard be indeed very Enemies, and Seducers, and
Hinderers of the Word of Christ crucified. Wherefore says the Truth against
such, Psalm. 55. 12. It was not an enemy that reproached me, then I could have
born it; neither was it he that hated me, that magnified himself against me,
for then I would have hid my self from him; but it was Thou, a man, mine equal,
my guide, and my acquaintance; we took sweet counsel together, and walked unto
the house of God in company, etc.

And so these false Teachers are these familiar Enemies, who exercise all their
hatred under the pretense of love, all their enmity under pretense of
friendship, and practice all their wickedness under a form of godliness; and by
this subtilty have they deceived the World. They will not plainly contradict
the words of the Prophets, Apostles and Christ, in the Letter of it, but will
praise it, and speak well of it; but yet they are utter Enemies to the true and
spiritual Meaning of it, both in their Lives and Doctrine: and the more these
men make a show of Religion and Holiness, the greater Antichrists they be in
the Church.

Wherefore to You who are true Christians, and have received an Anointing from
God, this is the Word and charge of God, Come out from among Them, my People,
and touch not the Unclean Thing, that is, their carnal Doctrine; have nothing
to do with such Prophets and Ministers, but remember what Christ says, John
10. that His Sheep hear his voice, and will not hear the voice of Strangers;
for they know the voice of Strangers. And if any of you live in any Town or
Parish, where such false Prophets are, though they go under the Name of Godly
and Orthodox, yet touch not the Unclean Thing, but know, that it is better for
you Believers to assemble together among Your selves, though you be but few,
than to communicate with the false Prophets in their false Ordinances: seeing
Christ has promised his Presence to his Believers, even where but two or three
meet together in his Name; yea, has said, If any Two of you shall agree
together to ask any thing on earth, it shall be done of my Father which is in
heaven. And if you, having these Promises, shall meet together among your
selves, in the Name and Spirit of Christ, in the use of the Word, and Prayer of
faith, lo Christ himself will be with You; and though you be but few, yet are
you the Church of the living God, the Pillar and Ground of Truth, and of that
very Church, against which the Gates of Hell shall not prevail; And thus much
to you spiritual Christians.

2. And now for the carnal Clergy, or false Prophets, their 2. Use.
burden is this, from the Lord. You have run when You were To the carnal Clergy.
not sent, You have said, thus says the Lord, when the Lord has not spoken by
You; You have grieved the hearts of the faithful, and strengthened the hands
of the Wicked: You have been forward to advance the Form of Godliness, whilst
you have been bitter enemies to the Power of it: You have deceived the Nations,
and made them drunk with the cup of the Wine of your fornications: you have
done more against Christ and his true Church, and more for Antichrist and his
false Church, than all the People in these Nations besides. Wherefore this is
the Word of the Lord to You, throughout all your quarters, That the Nations
shall not much longer be deceived by you, nor buy any more of your Merchandise,
for your Wine is the poison of Dragons, and the cruel venom of Asps; your
Doctrine being the word of Philosophy, and not of Faith; after the mind of Man,
but contrary to Christ's mind: to set up Your selves and your own Interest, to
the prejudice of Christ's Word and People. Wherefore how much you have georified
your selves, and lived deliciously by this Trade of making Merchandise of the
Word of God, so much Torment and Sorrow shall God give you, and your Plagues
shall come upon you in a Day, and your Judgment in an Hour; and your Lovers
shall not be able to help you, nor the Petitioners for You, to uphold You; but
God shall bring You down wonderfully, by the clear light of his Word, and his
mighty and unresistable Providence accompanying it; and the World shall
tremble, and wonder at the Noise of your Downfall; and the Heavens, and holy
Apostles, and Prophets, shall rejoice over You, when God shall avenge their
Cause upon you. And the Lord will save his Flock; and they shall be no more a
Prey to You, neither shall You any more serve Your selves of Them. And he will
set up one Shepherd over them, even Jesus Christ; and he shall feed them, and
be their Shepherd. And till these things be fully brought to pass, you shall be
clothed with trembling, when you shall perceive the Lord is risen up, to
perform all these things, according to his Word.

And now for conclusion, if any of You, or most of You, or all of You, are
offended at these things, in such sort, that you cannot contain your selves
from anger and bitter zeal, I do entreat you, to consider seriously, how much
better, and more profitable to your Eternal Salvation it would be, for You to
resist and to refrain from such evil and unchristian Passions; and that You
would rather (if there be any hope) return to your own hearts, and try your
works, and repent before our holy and righteous Lord, and return truly and
speedily to Christ from Antichrist, lest you be inwrapped, both in his temporal
and eternal Destruction.

And thus much was delivered to the University Congregation in Cambridge, for a
Testimony against them, except they repent. The rest, for the substance of it,
was delivered elsewhere in the Town, as follows. Anno 1653.

THE TRIAL OF SPIRITS.
1 John 4. 1, etc. Believe not every spirit, etc.
IN this Scripture we have noted these six things.

1. That the Apostle gives the faithful notice of a Great Evil risen up, Many
false Prophets are gone into the world. 2. He prescribes them a sufficient
Remedy against that evil; Believe not every spirit, but try, etc. 3. He gives
them a right Rule for Trial, verse. 2. and 3. 4. He shows, with Whom those false
Prophets, who come in the Spirit of Antichrist, should not prevail, to wit,
with none of the true children of God, ver. 4. 5. With Whom they should
prevail, to wit, with the Worldly and Carnal people, ver. 5. 6. He shows, How
the Spirit of Truth and Error may be known in the People, as well as in the
Teachers, v. 6.
Of the three first of these Points, I have spoken already, in the University
Congregation. The last time I spoke of the third thing, that is, the Rule of
Trial, how the false Prophets may be known and discerned from the true: And I
gave forth clearly and plainly out of the word of God, Nine signs to
distinguish them, not One of which can possibly be contradicted, but by the
Spirit of Antichrist, or by the profane and ignorant World: And then I also
delivered two Uses, the one to spiritual Christians, and the other to the
Carnal Clergy, all which you may have recourse to, in the former Discourse.

But how these things have since vexed and tormented the false Prophets, you
very well know; and how exceedingly grieved and angry they are, that this Word
of God should be taught the People, and that in their Presence. Unto which Word
of Christ, they say by their Deeds, as Satan in the possessed said once to
Christ himself in words, Mark 1. 24. Let Us alone, what have We to do with
Thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? Art Thou come to destroy Us? I know thee who thou
art, the Holy One of God. This Unclean Spirit knew, and acknowledged Christ to
be the Holy One of God, and yet would have Nothing to do with Him, because he
was come to Destroy him. So these false Prophets cannot choose but acknowledge
(in their Hearts at least) that the Word that has been taught them, is the
Holy Word of God, but yet (they say) What have We to do with it? for it is come
to destroy Us. For the more the Word of Christ is held forth in the clearness
and plainness of the Gospel, the more does it destroy Them, and their Affairs:
Their carnal Clergy, flowing from the Antichristian Fountain of the
Universities; their Ecclesiastical Assemblies, arising out of the Clergy; their
Presbyterian Government, springing up out of their Ecclesiastical Assemblies;
their National Church, the product of their Presbyterian Government: together,
with their worldly power and Domination, their high Titles, their Scarlet
Robes, their Divinity-Degrees, etc. I say, the Word of the Gospel comes with
full Might and Mind to destroy all these, and all their other Things, in which
their souls delight, as bringing worldly Profit, Power, and Honor to them.
Wherefore this Word, which abases, and casts down Them, and all their Things,
and exalts Christ alone, and all his Things, they cannot endure; but do account
it their reproach and shame, and say to it, What have We to do with Thee, thou
holy Word of God! for thou art come to destroy Us; and so, against this Word,
they are angry, and enraged at no ordinary or Humane Rate, but as David says,
Psalm. 59. They belch out with their mouth, and make a noise like a dog, and go
up and down, full of pride, cursing and lying. But the Lord laughs at these
Heathen, and has them in derision, for he sees the day is coming, when they
shall wander up and down for meat, and grudge if they be not satisfied.

Now this behavior of theirs, toward the Word of God, is plainly foretold,
Rev. 16. ver. 10, 11. where it is said, that when the God of Heaven poured
forth his Vial by the fifth Angel, on the Seat or Throne of the Beast, his
Kingdom was full of Darkness, and they gnawed their tongues for pain, and
blasphemed the God of Heaven, because of their pains and their sores; and yet
repented not of their Deeds. Now the Throne of the beast in these Nations, are
the Universities, as the fountain of the Ministry; the Vial poured on them, is
the true Word of God, or the plain and simple Gospel, which is the Word of
Faith, than which, Nothing is more grievous to them who have been bred up in
Philosophy, and in the Knowledge, Wisdom, Learning, Righteousness and Spirit of
the World; Now the primary event of the pouring forth of this Vial of the Word
of God on this Seat, is the darkning of Antichrists Kingdom, as it is said, his
Kingdom was full of Darkness; it was full of Darkness before, but now it is
discovered to be full of Darkness; their Philosophy is Darkness, and vain
deceit; their School Divinity Darkness, and Antichristianism; their Divinity
Acts and Clerums, Darkness; their Professorships of Divinity Darkness, yea, all
their Doctrine, Faith, Worship, Works, Church Discipline, Titles, Ordination,
and all are discovered to be Darkness, even gross Darkness, by the word of
Faith: And then follows the secundary event of the pouring forth this Vial,
which is, They gnawed their Tongues for pain, and blasphemed the God of Heaven
because of their pains and sores which the Word inflicted on Them; that is,
they had not the ordinary anger of Men against the Word, but the anger and
wrath of Devils, causing them to blaspheme again. But yet for all these things,
they repented not of their Deeds (as we see manifestly) which yet would have
been more profitable for them.

And this also discovers them to be false Prophets indeed, and the right
Ministers of Antichrist: and this appertains to the sixth Sign of false
Prophets, which I gave before.

The Fourth General Point.
And now I proceed to the fourth Thing, wherein the Apostle The fourth General
Point: To wit, With whom Antichrist cannot prevail.
shows, with Whom the false Prophets, which come in the spirit of Antichrist,
should not prevail; namely, with None of the true Children of God: and this is
set down, in ver. 4.

We are of God little children, and have overcome them, because greater is he
that is in you, then he that is in the world. Here now the Apostle shows the
Victory, which the truly faithful and spiritual Christians do obtain over
Antichrist and his false Prophets, together with the Grounds of that Victory.

1. The Victory is set down in these words, Little children, ye have overcome
them. 2. The Grounds of this Victory are two. 1. Because the Faithful are of
God, as Children of their Father: Ye are of God little Children, and have
overcome them. 2. Because that Spirit which the Faithful have received, and
which dwells in them, is stronger, and mightier than that Spirit which the
World receives, and which dwells in them. Greater is he that is in You, than he
that is in the World.

I shall first speak something of the Victory it self; that is, 1.
The Victory which the faithful do obtain over Antichrist, and his Prophets.
of that glorious Victory, which all the true Children of God do obtain over
Antichrist. For though Antichrist and his Teachers do come in Christ's Name (as
Christ has foretold) and in Sheeps Clothing; and though they transform
themselves into the Apostles of Christ, and come with all Deceivableness of
Unrighteousness, holding forth a false Christ the Head; a false Church the
Body; a false Word, a false Worship, false Works, false Ordinances, and all
these false things exceedingly like the True, and in the very form and
appearance of the True; in such sort, that they prevail with all the National
Church, and the Generality of the people of the World, which all wonder after
Them; yet are they not able, by all these things, to prevail with any of the
true Children of God, as Christ has taught us, saying, Many false Christ's and
false Prophets shall arise, and shall come with lying Signs and Wonders; able,
if it were possible, to deceive the Elect: And though they do deceive all
Others, yet is it not possible for them to deceive the Elect of God, that is,
thoroughly and fully, as they do deceive Others; but the Faithful and Elect
people of God do escape their Deceits, and do overcome them; yea, though they
be but little Children, new in the Faith, and young in Christ, yet do they
overcome all the false Prophets in the World. For these little Children are so
stripped of their old Nature, that they overcome the lusts of the Flesh, the
lusts of the Eye, and the pride of Life, which are not of God, but of the
World, and through which only, the Ministers of Antichrist are mighty: and so
these Teachers can find nothing in Them, on which they can lay hold to prevail.
Besides, as new born babes can discern and taste which is good and wholesome
milk, and suitable to them, and can refuse what is otherwise; and this instinct
they have in their very nature, as soon as they have a being, to judge of their
Food, which is good for them, and which is hurtful. So the Children of God, as
soon as ever They by faith are made partakers of the Divine Nature, they can
immediately judge of the Milk of the Word, and can surely taste and discern
whether it be sincere or adulterated, whether it be good or hurtful for them.
And so in the virtue of their New Nature, they reject and overcome all the
false Doctrine of the false Teachers.

And thus we have seen all along, in the several Ages of Uses.
the Reign of Antichrist, that Christ has always had a People of his own,
though but few in number, and mean in condition, 1.
and despised of the World, whom Antichrist never could prevail against,
neither by the subtilty of his Doctrine, nor by the violence of his Tyranny;
but they have by their Faith and Patience, and Word of their Testimony,
withstood Him, and his Multitudes, yea, the whole World, whom he has all along
seduced.

Thus in every Age has Christ had so great Care of all Christ has always
kept his own.
those whom his Father has given him, that he has lost none of Them, no not
one Single Person, but by his Word and Spirit which he has put into them, and
by his own Presence in them, through his Word and Spirit, he has still
preserved them, and has strenghthened them, to oppose and resist Antichrist to
the Death, and to overcome as He overcame. Antichrist has never prevailed
against one of the Elect.


And so during all the Reign of Antichrist in the World, whom has he prevailed
withal, and deceived, but only the World? but not one Single person of the
Elect children of God, though he has especially sought to prevail with Them.

But Jesus Christ (who only knows who are his) has kept The care of the true
Church committed only unto Christ.
all along Those whom he has Known, that we might understand, that the Care of
the true Church is committed to Him alone from the Father, and that all the
Magistrates and Powers of the World, are not at all Capable of such a Trust,
which would have been too Great for the very Angels of Heaven.

And though Antichrist during his Reign, had inwrapped the Elect Themselves
into all his Errors, before Faith came, as the first Adam had inwrapped them in
all his Sin; yet as God wrought Faith in them, and gave them his Spirit, so
they by degrees recovered out of the Errors of Antichrist, and prevailed
against them.

Lastly, Seeing all the true Children of God do overcome 2. Use.
Antichrist has no cause to boast, nor the true Church to be discouraged for
any that are lost.
Antichrist and his Ministers, Antichrist has no cause to boast of his Reign
in the World, nor the true Church of Christ to be discouraged at it.
Antichrist, by all his subtilty and strength, and by all his own Ecclesiastical
Power, and by all the Temporal Power of Princes, whom he has seduced, has
conquered to Himself none but the World, that is, the people that were not of
God. And the true spiritual Church, of Christ's own building, the new Jerusalem
from above, that sojourns in this World, has not lost one stone out of its
Building, nor one Member out of its Body, by all that Antichrist, and the Devil
his Head, could do. And therefore Antichrist has no cause to boast, for He
has got none but his own: and the true Church has no cause to be discouraged,
for it has lost none of its own: and None ever went out from it, but those
that were not of it; and all that were truly of it, have ever continued with it.

And thus much briefly touching the Victory which the Faithful obtain aganst
Antichrist and his Prophets.

Now the Grounds of this Victory here named, are two. 2
The grounds of their Victory.


1. The first is, Because they are of God: Ye are of God little Children, and
have overcome them. 1.
Because they are of God.

Antichrist and his false Prophets cannot prevail against the truly Faithful,
because They are of God, as the Spirit also speaks elsewhere, saying, 1 Cor. 1.
30. Of Him are ye in Christ Jesus: and they are of God, as Children are of the
As Children of their Father:
Father, as it is written, Jam. 1. 18. Of his own will begat he us, by the Word
of Truth, that we should be a kind of First Fruits of his Creatures.

So that, as the Children of Men, are of their Fathers, through a Natural
Generation, and Being; so the Faithful are of God, through a Spiritual
Generation, and Being.

And as the Children of Men partake of the very Nature of And s^ partake (...)
his ve^^^ Nature.
their Fathers, so do the Children of God partake of the Divine Nature; the
Faithful being born again, not of corruptible, but of incorruptible seed, by
the Word of God, which lives and abides for ever.

That as Jesus Christ (who according to his Humane Nature, was a Man, and in
all things like to us, sin excepted) came to be of God, and to be the Son of
God, through the coming and dwelling of the Living Word of God in his flesh,
according to the Love, Will and Counsel of the Father; so the same Living Word,
coming and dwelling in the Faithful, his Members, according to the same Love,
Will, and Counsel of God, They also, come to be of God in Christ, as Christ is
of God, according to his Humane Nature.

And as Christ being thus of God, according to the Word of God, that dwelt in
his Humane Nature, overcame the Devil, the Head of Antichrist, and Antichrist
and his Body, the Temple of the Devil; So do all Christ's Members overcome
Antichrist, and his Prophets, through the same Living Word of God dwelling in
Them, or through the Word of Righteousness and Life, its being incarnate in
them, that is, its being written in their Hearts by the Spirit, or put into
their inward parts. Wherefore Christ throughout, that is, from the Head it self
to the lowest Member, is called Immanuel, God with us: or which is all one, God
manifested in the flesh.

And for this Cause these faithful, or little Children of God cannot be
prevailed against, inasmuch as they are of God, and so have in them, by true
Union and Communion, the Nature of God, and the Word of God, and the Spirit of
God, and the Righteousness of God, and the Wisdom of God, and the Power of God,
and the Life and Light of God, and all the Things of God, as the Apostle Paul
says, in the New Creature all things are become New, and all* things (that is,
all these New Things) are of God, (that is, they are the very Things of God.)
And so these Faithful People cannot be prevailed against by Antichrist, or by
the Devil, the Head of Antichrist; but They do prevail against the Doctrine of
Antichrist, by the Doctrine of Christ; against the Spirit of Antichrist by the
Spirit of Christ; against the Sin of Antichrist by the Righteousness of Christ;
against the Error of Antichrist by the Truth of Christ; and against all the
Things of Antichrist, by the infinite and eternal Things of Christ.

Wherefore you see, that all they that are of God, through a New birth, and are
the trne Children of that Heavenly Father, and do partake of his Divine Nature,
and all his Divine Things, they cannot be overcome of Antichrist and his
Prophets, but they do mightily overcome them all, through that Immortal seed of
the True and Living Word of God, of which they are born, and in which they live
and act.

But, They that are overcome by Antichrist and his Teachers through their
deceivableness of Unrighteousness, they never were the true Children of God,
but Hypocrites, and Unbelievers under a form of Godliness, that is, as the
Apostle styles them, Bastards, or false Children, who never had received the
true Nature of God through Faith.

The Second Ground. 2.

And now follows the second Ground, why the Faithful Ground of the Victory of
the faithful, to wit, Because greater is he that is in them, than he that is in
the World.
cannot be overcome by Antichrist, and his Prophets; to wit,

Because greater is he that is in You, than he that is in the World. And here
the Apostle shows, that the true faithful Christians, are not only of God, but
also have God himself dwelling and abiding in them: For they are built up by
the Spirit to be the Habitation of God; and God is in Them of a Truth; and that
not by created Habits of Grace, as Antichrist and his Prophets have thought and
taught; but the true God is in them of a Truth, and He dwells in them, and
walks in them, as Himself has said, and the Tabernacle of God is with Men. And
now, as the Sun is never without its light and heat, and all its Virtues, and
wherever it goes, all these go along with it, being inseparable from it; so
wherever the Lord God comes, He comes with all his Righteousness, Wisdom,
Power, Peace, Joy, and all his infinite and eternal Things; and where God
Himself is, there are all the Things of God.

And thus God in his Faithful People, is Greater than He is that is in the
World; that is, He is greater than Antichrist, and the Devil his Head. He is
greater in his true Word, than They in their pretended Word; greater in his
true Spirit, than They in their pretended Spirit; greater in his true
Righteousness, than They in their pretended Righteousness; greater in his true
Wisdom, and Power, than They in their pretended Wisdom, and Power, etc. Greater
is He that is in You, than He that is in the World. Now for certain, the Less
is overcome by the Greater; and seeing God and his Spirit in his Saints, is
Greater in Goodness, Righteousness, Wisdom, and all Things, than the Devil is
in Antichrist and his Prophets; therefore the Faithful in whom God dwells, and
manifests Himself, must needs overcome Antichrist and the false Prophets, in
whom the Devil dwells, and manifests himself.

Now hence we may learn several things.

And first, we may learn, That Antichrist can prevail 1. Use.
against any Outward Form of Religion and Godliness, Antichrist prevails
against Forms, but not against God in the flesh.
against any Humane Virtues and Graces, and Works, and Prayers, or any thing
that is of Man, or flows from Him, though in never so great appearance of
Holiness; as we by sad experience have seen, many Men of great seeming
Religion, famous for Preaching, and Praying, and reputed Pillars in the Church
when they have come hither into the University (where Antichrist and his
Spirit, have remained in their full strength, notwithstanding the great
Consumption which God has brought on them, by his Word in other parts) how
soon have they cased from that sense of the Gospel, which they once seemed to
have had; and how suddenly have they been entangled and overcome with the
Spirit of the University, and of Antichrist, for Worldly Honor and Advantage
sake? and so, the highest and strongest formal Religion in the Church,
Antichrist can soon prevail against.

But Antichrist can never prevail against God in the Saints, nor against the
Righteousness, Wisdom, and Power of God in them, all which are contained in his
true Presence; nor against the Faith, Hope, and Love of Saints, which are the
Works of God in them by his Spirit; against these Antichrist cannot prevail;
For greater is He that is in Us, than he that is in the World.

So then, if thou have any thing in thee that is truly of God, or rather, that
is God Himself in thee, That Antichrist cannot overcome, by all his Arts and
Power; but he will easily overcome any thing else. Antichrist cannot prevail
against Immanuel, which is God with Us, nor against the Mystery of Godliness
in us, which is, God manefest in the flesh; but every other thing, though it
seem never so Angelical, he prevails against.

2. We may learn hence, That it is not an easy thing to 2. Use.
overcome Antichrist, and to get the Victory over that Beast, Not easy to
overcome Antichrist, seeing he is the Temple of the Devil.
and his Image, and his Mark, and the Number of his Name, seeing Antichrists
coming is after the working of Satan (as the Apostle says) and through
Antichrist the Devil Himself speaks, works, and acts, yet as an Angel of light,
in all lying or false Power, Wisdom, and Righteousness: and this he does for
the Damnation of Men, and to bring Them all, who have no true love to the
Truth, to perish with Himself for ever. And his Operation of Error is so mighty
and efficacious, that it cannot be resisted and overcome by any in all the
World, but by those who are born of God, and do partake of his Nature and
Presence in them. For the Power, Wisdom, and Righteousness of Antichrist and
his Prophets, which is so suitable to the Nature of the World, and so glorious
in its Eye, cannot possibly be overcome, but by the true Power, Wisdom, and
Righteousness of God, in his true Children or Prophets.

3. Hence also let us learn, not to be dismayed at Antichirist, 3. Use.
and his Prophets, who have in all Ages, got such Not to be dismayed at the
fullness of Antichrist, seeing the fullness of Christ is greater.
Reputation, Power, and Glory to Themselves in the World, because of their
seeming Learning, Righteousness, and Religion; seeing Christ in Us, and in all
his poor People, is infinitely more mighty than They are, and the Devil in
them; and nothing can prevail against Us, except first it can prevail against
Christ. Wherefore if We in our selves are never so weak, and through our
weakness never so fearful and trembling, yet let us not be discouraged, or
faint, seeing our might is not in Our selves, but in Christ, who dwells in Us,
and who is infinitely greater than He that dwells in the World. He that dwells
in Us through Faith, is Greater than he that dwells in Them through Unbelief;
and in His strength, let us abide by his Word and Doctrine, even to Suffering
and Death, if need be: and in all these Evils we shall overcome Them, by whom
we seem to be overcome, as also Christ our Head did.

And thus much for the fourth General thing.

The Fifth Point. The fifth General Point: To wit, With whom Antichrist does
prevail.

The Apostle shows with whom Antichrist and his Teachers should prevail, to
wit, with the Worldly and Carnal People, verse. 5.

They are of the World, therefore speak they of the World, and the World hears
them. The World hears them. The World hears them.
Antichrist and his Prophets prevail with the World, and Worldly People, and do
obtain their favor, love, and applause: and They are their Auditors, and
delight in Them and their Doctrine.

Now by the World here is meant, such People, who though Who are the World.
they have an outward Christianity and Religion, yet inwardly remain in their
Natural Condition and Corruption, without any true renewing through Faith and
the Spirit. And all such People, notwithstanding their seeming Religion and
Righteousness, do love Themselves, and this World, and the Things of it, better
than Jesus Christ and his Truth. And these here are called the World: and this
World, or these worldly Christians, do hear and entertain the Teachers of
Antichrist and their Doctrine.

Two Grounds of which, the Apostle here gives us (to wit, Why these People
cleave to these Teachers.)

1. The first is, Because these Teachers are of the Grounds.
World. 2. Because they speak of the World.
1. They are of the World. 1.

That is, though by their Breeding and Profession, their Degrees Because they
are of the world.
and Ordination, they seem to be set at a great distance from the Common
people, and to be nearer the Kingdom of God, and the Knowledge and Possession
of it, then the Common People of the World; yet for all this, They indeed, and
in truth, are still of the World; and all their liberal Education, their
manner of Life, their Study, Knowledge, Learning, Languages, Sciences, Degrees,
and Ordination, does not at all change their inward evil Nature, Mind, Will,
Affections, nor the corrupt Disposition and Principle in which they were born;
but notwithstanding all these things, they are still the very same throughout,
as when they came first into the World, being destitute of a New Birth and
Heavenly Nature: Nay, by all these things they are more taken into the Spirit
of the World, into the corruptions and evils of it, into the pride, lust,
covetousness, and ambition of it, by how much, through such Indowments and
Accomplishments, they think Themselves better than other Men; and so,
notwithstanding their Academical Degrees, and Ecclesiastical Orders, they are
not less, but more of the World, even fully of the World.

And hence we may learn, That it is not Study, Parts, Use.
Breeding, Learning, nor any Natural Indowments, or acquired Accomplishments,
that will deliver any man out of this World (or corrupt state of Mankind) or
that can change his Nature, or give him the least Place or Interest in the
Kingdom of God; but only a new Birth, and true faith in Jesus Christ, whereby
we are made the Children of God: without which Men are still of the World,
notwithstanding all their other Improvements.

And this very thing manifests, that Universities cannot be the fountains of
the true Ministry of the Gospel, seeing all the Education in it,
Philosophical, Moral, and Theological, cannot change men's Natures, or deliver
them from their Corruptions, or translate them one hairs breadth out of this
present evil World; yea, generally we see, that by University-Education (as
things have hitherto been managed) Youth is made more of the World, than they
were by Nature, through Universities cannot be the fountain of the true
Ministry.
the High Improvement of their corruptions, by their daily converse with the
Heathens, their vain Philosophers, and filthy and obscene Poets; and by these
Heathenish abominable Accomplishments, are they made the more fit Teachers for
the World and Worldly People, and become the more suitable to them, and obtain
the greater Aptness and Ability to please them. Wherefore it may be most truly
said of that Ministry that flows merely from the fountain of the Universities,
that it is Of the World.

And now, when the Teachers are of one Nature and Principle, of one Heart,
Mind, and Consent with the Hearers, there must needs be a Great Agreement
between them; for each one approves and loves that which is like himself; and
so the Worldly people must needs cleave to the Teachers that are of the World.

Yea farther, and which is very considerable, the World can
endure and like any Doctrine, though in the Letter never so Holy and
Spiritual, from such Teachers are of one Nature and Spirit with it self. And He
that speaks of the things of Christ, without the Spirit of Christ, and by the
Spirit of the World, can never, by any such Doctrine, be grievous to the World,
but rather acceptable: Seeing there is more in the Nature of those Teachers to
reconcile the World to them, than in their Doctrine to set the World against
them: For the World cannot but agree with those Teachers that are of the World,
let their Doctrine in the Letter be what it will.

Whereas on the contrary, the faithful are not of the World, but of another
Seed, Nature, and Principle, which is in direct Enmity to the World; and so
they speaking the things of Christ in the Spirit of Christ, must needs be
grievous and troublesome to them who have the Spirit of the World; and the
Friends of Christ crucified, cannot but be grievous to the Friends of this
World.

And this for the first Ground.

2. The second Ground, Why the Worldly People hear 2.
the Worldly Teachers, is this. Because they speak of the World.


Because they speak of the World.
For as they are, so they speak; out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth
speaks; and so They that are of the World, speak of the World: and this we
may conceive of in three particulars.

1. The Worldly Teachers speak of the World, that is, they Their speaking of
the World may be understood in a threefold sense.
speak the Spiritual Word of God in a Carnal and Worldly Sense; they speak of
Divine things, as of Humane things, according to their Natural and Humane
Mind, Reason, Knowledge, Learning, and Understanding of them. And so, they
give forth Christ himself, and his Kingdom, and all his 1.
Things, his Redemption, Reconciliation, Salvation, as also They speak the
Spiritual Word of God in a carnal sense.
Faith, Hope, Love, and all the Graces of the Spirit, and Riches of Christ,
they give forth all these things, in a Carnal Understanding and Notion to the
People. And the World can like well enough of Christ, his Kingdom, and Things,
in a Worldly Sense; they can bear, or endure Faith and Repentance, and the New
Creature, and the New Jerusalem in a Carnal Sense; while in the true Spiritual
Sense of them, and as they are in Themselves, and according to the Mind of
Christ, they are the greatest Enemies to them that can be.

Now Believers must know in this Matter, That whoever speaks the Things of Gods
Spirit, by the spirit of a Man, or Spiritual Things, in a Humane, Carnal, and
Worldly Sense, is a false Prophet, and Teacher of Antichrist. Whoever reading
or hearing the Gospel of God our Savior, does understand and frame it after
his own Humane Sense, and does not so understand it as the Lord has spoken it,
He is a false Prophet, understanding and speaking the Gospel after his own
mind, but contrary to Christ's; and these open their own Hearts to the People,
and not Gods.

Now when the People that are of the World, hear the Teachers that are of the
World, speaking Spiritual Things in a Carnal and Worldly sense, and according
to such an Apprehension as they have already in their own Hearts, they do
exceedingly cleave to, and embrace such Teachers, and their Doctrine.

For such Doctrine, man in his Natural Condition can well like of, seeing it
leads men only to a change of Outward Works, and to a performance of Outward
Worship, which any man by his own natural abilities can perform: aad the World
can well endure to put on the fairest form of Godliness, and the strictest, so
their Nature inwardly may remain the Same.

And thus the Worldly People comply readily with the Worldly Doctrine of the
Worldly Teachers, seeing it is after the sense and mind of Man.

But on the contrary, Christ and his Seed, as they are not of the World, so
neither do they speak of the World, but being of God, they speak the Things of
God according to God; they speak of the Things of God by the Spirit of God, and
so according to the Mind of God: they speak of the Things of God, in the
Wisdom, Righteousness, Truth, Light and Life of God; and thus the World cannot
endure the Word, nor Those that teach it.

2. The Prophets of Antichrist speak of the World, that is, 2.
They speak the Spiritual Word of God to a carnal end.
they turn the Word of God into Worldly and Carnal doctrine, for Worldly
Advantage sake; they preach the spiritual Word of God carnally, that they may
make it serve their own Turns and Ends. That Word of the Gospel, which God has
given only to serve the spiritual and eternal Welfare of his Church, the
Worldly Teachers frame and use this, only thereby to serve their own Worldly
Credit and Reputation, their Worldly Profit and Preferment, and their Worldly
Authority and Dominion.

And thus that Word of Faith, which in its own proper Nature and Working, calls
off all Men from this World, and the Things of it, to the Kingdom and Glory of
God; they make this very Word to sound carnally, that by it they may seek
Themselves, and the Things of this present Life.

But Christ and his Seed, who are of God, they speak of God, and not of the
World, seeking no Worldly thing at all by the Word of God, which They teach and
hold forth, as is manifest in the Life of Christ, and his Christians.

3. The Ministers of Antichrist, or worldly Teachers speak 3.
They turn the Word of God into worldly Doctrine, to avoid the Cross.
of the World, that is, they turn the Word of God into Worldly Doctrine, that
thereby they may avoid the Cross, which the Word of God, in the Spiritual Sense
of it, would certainly expose them to. But now these Worldly Teachers, as they
love the World, so they cannot endure the Cross, that is, reproach, poverty,
shame, sufferings and death for the true Word. Wherefore they Preach the Gospel
in such a sense as shall please the World, but never offend them; as shall make
the World their Friends, but never their Enemies; for they cannot endure to
think of, much less to suffer the utmost Hatred and Persecution of the World
for Christ's Names sake. Wherefore I say again, though in Christ, they will
praise his reproach, his shame, his poverty, his tribulation, his death and
crucifying, yet they cannot endure these things in Themselves, for his Truths
sake; but are most careful and studious to preach the Word of God in such a
Worldly Sense, as shall never provoke the World against them, to do them the
least harm; but shall rather incline them to confer upon them (according to
their own phrase) all Countenance and Maintenance. And thus the worldly Teachers
speak of the World, in this sense also.

But Christ and his Seed who are of God, they speak not of the World, but of
God, that is, they speak the Word of God, according to God, never regarding
whether the World be pleased or displeased therewith. Yea, they speak Gods
Word, according to Gods Mind, though they certainly know, that it will procure
them all sorts of reproaches, and tribulations, and all manner of evil to be
spoken and done against them; in as much as they love God and his Word, more
than Themselves and this World: and so, they are so far from declining the
Cross of Christ, which the right Confession of the Word will bring upon them,
that they account it their greatest Glorifying, to have fellowship with Christ
in his Sufferings, and to be made conformable to him in his Death: all which
things He endured, because he spoke Gods Word according to Gods mind, and
contrary to the mind of the World, and Worldly Church.

And thus we see by John's Doctrine, who spoke by the Spirit, Who they are, with
whom Antichrist and his false Prophets prevail, to wit, the World and worldly
People; as also the Grounds why they prevail with them, namely because They are
of the World, and speak of the World.

And now for the Use.

The World hears these Teachers, who are, and speak of the World. And hence
first we learn, That Antichrist and his Prophets, 1. Use.
the Worldly Teachers, come with such Deceivableness All natural men deceived
by Antichrist, whatever their accomplishments may be.
of Unrighteousness, that no Natural or Worldly men whatever, of whatever
Parts, Learning, Knowledge, Righteousness, can possibly discern Them. If men
are but Natural men, though never so accomplished, Antichrist deceives them
all, and makes them his Disciples.

For Antichrist comes so subtly, and in such glorious appearances of Holiness
and Religion, that none can know Him and his Ways, except they be singularly
taught of God; according to that of Christ to his Disciples, To You it is given
to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, to them it is not given. And to
whom it is given to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Christ, to Them also
it is given to
know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Antichrist: and none can truly know,
either the One, or the Other, without a special Gift from God.

Whence it is most evident, That Men are not able to understand Antichrist, and
his Kingdom, and Things, as they are men learned in Philosophy, and in the
Knowledge of the Tongues, or as they are men of such and such Degrees and
Titles in the University, or of such and such Ecclesiastical Orders in the
Church: I say, Men by all such abilities and accomplishments (as they speak)
are not able to discern Antichrist, but rather are the more ready to be
overcome by Him, seeing by all these Humane and Ecclesiastical Things,
Antichrist can lay the faster hold on them, and make them the more his own.

And Antichrist must needs be unknown to such men, in as Antichrist is unknown
to them, seeing Christ is unknown to them.
much as Christ Himself, as he is held forth in the Word, and whatever he is
and does, both in Himself and Members, is wholly unknown to them; yea, is so
strangely unknown, that by a prodigious mistake, they do judge Christ, and his
Members, and their Doctrine to be Antichrist, and his Members, and their
Doctrine: And on the contrary they do judge Antichrist, and his Members, and
their Doctrine, they do account and esteem of, as of Christ Himself, and his
Members, and their Doctrine. And thus, is the Multitude of carnal Christians,
(which are even the whole World almost) through the effectual Operation of
Satan, brought to think and believe assuredly, that the Prophets of Antichrist,
who handle the Scriptures carnally, and after the mind of Man, do verily teach
the very Doctrine and Truth of God; and of this they are so confident, that
they would have the Worldly Powers and Magistrates to force all Men to believe
as They say, and to practice as They command. Yea, these Worldly Men, with all
their Worldly Accomplishments, are so deluded by Antichrist, that whilst they
oppose and persecute the faithful People of God, or rather Christ Himself, and
his Word, Works, Truth, and Righteousness in them; they verily think they
oppose and persecute Antichrist Himself, and the falseness of his Members. And
as the Scribes and Pharisees, the chief Teachers of the Jewish Church, being
Deceivers Themselves, did yet call Christ a Deceiver, and in killing and
crucifying Him, thought they did God good service; so the carnal Clergy, and
the Head of them, being Antichrists Themselves, do yet tell of, and terrify
People with another Antichrist: And being Seducers Themselves, do yet rise up
against the very Members of Christ, as Seducers, that thereby they may boast
themselves to be Righteous. So thoroughly and perfectly has Antichrist deluded
and enchanted them, through the cup of the Wine of his Fornications.

Thus the whole World is overcome by Antichrist, and cannot by all their
Highest Seize discern Him from Christ; only they, who are born of God,
and are his true Children, and (being plain, simple, meek, and lowly in Spirit)
are taught of God, These only know Antichrist, and overcome Him; but these are
the little flock.

Secondly, In that the World Hears the Ministers of Antichrist: 2. Use.
Men of a (...) worldly Spirit cannot understand the Deceits of Antichrist.


We are given to understand, That men that are of a Worldly Spirit, and through
that, are addicted to the World, and so seek and follow after the Profits,
Pleasures, and Honors of this life, they cannot possibly understand the
Impostures and Deceits of Antichrist and his Teachers, but They all are seduced
and overcome by them*

Whoever therefore do profess or pretend to Religion and Godliness, and
nevertheless live in the Spirit of this World, and are swallowed up with the
Cares and Comforts of this World, all such Christians are a fit Prey for
Antichrist: Seeing*

1. Such carnal Christians are so addicted to Worldly Occasions, that they
cannot attend to the Word of God in the Spiritual Sense of it, which is only
known by Temptation, Prayer, and Gods own Teaching. And hereupon they want the
true light, by which only Antichrist can be discerned. For Antichrist comes in
so great subtilty and likeness to Christ, that he cannot be perceived, but by
Christians much acquainted with the Word, and much mortified and quickened
through it.

2. Such carnal Christians, as they neglect the Word in the spirituality of it,
so also they do love this World, and this quenches in their hearts the love of
God, as John says, If any man love this World, the love of the Father is not
in him; now they whose Hearts are inwardly destitute of the true love of God,
and yet do outwardly profess and worship God, all these are a fit Prey for
Antichrist.

And thus the World loving and seeking it self, and its own
things, receives Antichrist whilst it cannot discern Him. Wherefore the
Scriptures do every where give Christians so many warnings against
Covetousness, which takes from men all true desire after Christ* and all
regard, sense, and knowledge of Antichrist. Christ therefore said to his
Disciples, Take heed and beware of Covetousness; for where the Treasure is,
there will the Heart be also, etc. And thus all they, who are Lovers of
Themselves, and of this World, the greater outward Profession they make of
Religion, the more ready are they to receive and entertain the Ministers of
Antichrist, and their Doctrine, seeing, They are, and speak of the World.

3. Seeing the World hears Antichrist, and his Teachers, 3. Use.
We are to take notice, That the carnal and Antichristian The carnal Clergy
have a numerous Auditory.
Ministers have a Numerous Auditory, all the Worldly People cleaving and
joining to them, because they speak that which is in their Hearts. And
therefore it is said, Revel. 17. 15. That the waters, whereon the great Whore
(that is, the Ecclesiastical State which chiefly consists in the Clergy)
sits, are People, and Multitudes, and Nations, and Tongues; So that the
false Prophets have all the World to hear them, except the Faithful and
Spiritual people, and Multitude is a certain Sign of their Church. And Rev l.
15. v. 7. It is said, that Power was given to Antichrist over all Kindreds, and
Tongues, and Nations, and that all that dwell on the earth shall worship him,
whose Names are not written in the Lambs book of Life. So that Antichrist by
degrees, and by his several Forms and, Appearances, one still more deceitful
than another, does win to Himself all mankind, but the very Elect. And so from
time to time hitherto, he has gotten to Himself National Churches, even the
Generality of all the People, of whole Nations, Kingdoms, and Commonwealths,
to hear his Teachers, and to receive and submit to his Doctrine and Discipline,
as most true and Orthodox.

And thus has Antichrist Multitudes, even the whole World to follow his
Teachers, and to submit to them. But let not the true Church, and little Flock
of crucified Jesus, be offended hereat, seeing they are but the World who hear
Antichrists Teachers, that is, they are such People.

1. Whose inward Nature is earthly, carnal, divelish. The Hearers of
Antichrists Prophets.
2. Such, who love an outward Form of Religion and Godliness, whilst they are
bitter Enemies to the Power of it. 3. Such, who love such a Doctrine and
Religion, as may stand with their old corrupt Nature, and may beautify and
surport it; and so may make them painted Sepulchers, outwardly fair, whilst
they are inwardly abominable. 4. Such, who love the World, in the sense of
their own Mind, but hate and abhor it, in the sense of Christ's Mind; and reckon
it so, to be the greatest Error and Heresy in the World. 5. Such, as so
profess Christ and his Gospel, as to make them serve their own Worldly Ends and
Advantages, without the least regard or respect had to Christ's true Kingdom. 6.
Such, as love Themselves and their Own Things, the provisions of the flesh, and
a quiet, easy, and commodious life, better than Christ Jesus and his Things.
7. In a word, they are such, as under the glorious Profession, and subtle
Pretense of Christ's Church, are truly and inwardly, the Church of the Devil and
Antichrist.
Such a people and no other has Antichrist to hear Him, and to embrace and
depend on Him, and his Doctrine, Ministry, and Ordinances; that is, the
Multitude of false and carnal Christians, which are almost the whole World, of
the outward Professors of the Gospel and Christianity. For as Antichrist and
his Prophets are of the World, and speak of the World, so also the World hears
them.

And thus much for the fifth Point.

The Sixth Point.
In the sixth place the Apostle shows, How the Spirit of How the Spirit of
Truth and Error may be known in the Hearers, as well as in the Teachers.
Truth and Error may be known in the People, as well as in the Teachers, to
wit, by the Peoples cleaving to the Teachers of Truth, or to the Teachers of
Error, saying, verse. 6.

We are of God; He that knows God hears Us, He that is not of God, hears
not Us; hereby know we the Spirit of Truth, and the Spirit of Error. We are of
God; to wit, according to his New Workmanship in Christ Jesus, through which we
partake of the true Nature of God in Christ, as Members, as Christ Himself does
partake of that Nature, as Head; and being thus of God, we cannot but confess
God, his Name, and Truth, in our Heart, Month, and Life.

He that knows God, hears Us; that is, he that knows God through the
teaching of God, knows Us who are born and taught of God; because we speak to
them of God, and the Things of God, as God himself has taught Them, of
Himself, and of his Things; and therefore They readily receive from Us that
Testimony of the Truth, which God himself, either has already inwardly taught
them, or does teach them by his Spirit, whilst we yet speak by that Spirit. And
so they hear Us, by being satisfied, and acquiescing, or being at rest, in the
true and wholesome, and saving Doctrine of Jesus Christ, which we teach. Hereby
know we the Spirit of Truth, to wit, in the Hearers; when they cleave to the
Truth of the Spirit, or to the Truth, as it is and dwells in Jesus, published by
the Teachers of Truth.

It follows,

He that is not of God hears not Us; That is, He that is not of God, through
a New Birth, and the Renewing of the Spirit, and so is destitute of the Divine
Nature, or of the Eternal Word, and Spirit, which through his Unbelief have no
place in his Heart: He that, thus, is not of God, but contrarily is of the
Devil, through Sin, Error, Darkness, Death, Enmity to God, and his whole evil
Nature, He hears not Us; that is, he does not taste, and relish, and approve,
and receive, and embrace, and love the Word of Faith, and Mystery of Christ
and his Gospel, which we teach; but does rather hate, oppose, reproach and
persecute our Doctrine.

And hereby know we also the Spirit of Error, to wit, in the Hearers, when they
do not receive the Word of Truth from the Teachers of Truth, but do contrarily
cleave to Humane, and Philosophical, or Moral, or Formal, and National
Doctrine, published and held forth by the Teachers of Error.

Now hence it is evident, That there are two Heads, or Two Heads or chief
Teachers in the World.
chief Teachers in the World, which are Christ and Antichrist; and also, that
there are two Seeds, or Generations, which flow from them, begotten by their
Doctrine: The One is Christ's Seed, or the Elect and Faithful: the Other is
Antichrists Seed, or the Reprobate and Unbelievers; And each Sort of these
People, do join Themselves to their several and proper Heads; and by this, they
are certainly distinguished, known, and discerned.

Antichrist and his false Teachers, who are the Head of the Malignant Church
and People, they come in great Pomp and Glory, as to the eye of the World,
being beautified, and dignified with Degrees, Names, and Titles; being exalted
to great Honor, Authority, and Power; being full of fleshly Wisdom, Rhetorical
Eloquence, and Philosophical Learning; and so to Humane Judgment, They are
most considerable Persons in the Church, and very Angels of Light in
appearance. And they being thus adorned and beautified, to the pleasing and
content of the World, all the World come in, and commit fornication with Them,
and do hear and conceive Them, and are conquered by their Enchantments.

But Christ and his Teachers, come in true Humility, and Self-denial, and
Meekness, and Lowlyness, and without the Titles and Glory of the false
Teachers, which they utterly despise, and refuse, and without all Excellency of
Speech, and Wisdom, and Learning of this World; and These do contradict the
Religion and Righteousness of the World, and speak the Truth which is of God,
by the Spirit which is of God: and these Teachers, all the true Sheep of
Christ, the faithful flock do own and acknowledge, and they come and hear the
Words of their lips; being assured, that it is not They that speak, but the
Spirit of their Father, which speaks in Them.

For the Body and Members of Christ, do necessarily cleave to Christ their
Head; and the Body and Members of Antichrist, do in like manner necessarily
cleave to Antichrist their Head. And as the Body and Members of Christ do
cleave to Christ their Head, and to those that are in his Spirit, and will not,
nor cannot join to Antichrist, and to those that are in his Spirit; so also the
Body and Members of Antichrist, do cleave to Antichrist their Head, and those
that are in his Spirit, and will not, nor cannot join to Christ, and to those
that are in his Spirit.

For such as the Body it self is, such a Head will it choose to it self; and so
a Spiritual, Heavenly and Faithful People, will join Themselves to such a
Teacher, or rather to Christ Himself, in and through him: And a carnal,
worldly, and unbelieving People, will join Themselves to such a Teacher, and to
Antichrist Himself in and through him.

Wherefore, as they that hear the true Teachers, and Christ in them, and do
join and cleave by faith to the Word and Doctrine which they hear, knowing that
it is of God, as all Such are certainly of God, even his true Children and
People, and the true Sheep of Christ, in as much as they know his Voice, and
cleave to it; So they that hear the false Teachers, and Antichrist in them, and
do cleave to their Doctrine and Ministry, and do like, commend, and applaud
that, all such are not of God, but of their father the Devil, and the true and
natural Members, and People of Antichrist.

And this very Doctrine Christ Himself, has clearly taught in his Gospel; as
John 5. 43. where he says to the Jews, I am come in my Fathers Name, and ye
receive me not; another shall come in his Own Name, and Him ye will receive.
That is, the Unbelieving Jews would not come and cleave to Christ as their
Head, though coming in the Name of God, that is, in the true Power, Wisdom, and
Righteousness of God, because they were none of Christ's own Sheep; But
Antichrist coming in his own Name, that is, in his own Power, Wisdom, and
Righteousness, they receive Him, and join to Him as to their own true and
Natural Head. And again, John 8. 47. Christ says to the Jews, He that is of
God, hears Gods Word; ye therefore hear it not, because ye are not of God.

Whence it appears, that to hear and cleave to the true Word of God, taught and
held forth by Christ and his Prophets, is a manifest Token that men are of God;
but to turn away from it, and to despise it, and to embrace another Doctrine,
is as manifest a Sign, that they are not of God. but of the Devil, as Christ
says, to the same people, ver. 44. Ye are of your Father the Devil; for there
is no Truth in Him, and he abides not in the Truth, no more do Ye. Again, John
10. v. 4. 5. Christ says, His own Sheep follow Him, the true Shepherd, because
they know his Voice; and a stranger will They not follow, but flee from Him,
because they know the Voice of Strangers.

Wherefore they that hear the Word of Faith, in the true Teachers of the
Gospel, They have in them the Spirit of Truth; but they that dislike and
disrelish that Word, and join to the Teachers and Doctrine of Antichrist, They
all have in them, the Spirit of Error.

And therefore it concerns us, more than the World is aware of, to take heed,
Whom we hear: For if we cleave to the Teachers of Truth, as has been declared,
then have we the Spirit of Truth; but if to the Teachers of Error, then are we
of the Spirit of Error.

And thus this Scripture teaches us how to know and discern the Spirit both of
Christ, and of Antichrist, and that both in the Teachers and in the Hearers;
both which are of great Use to the true Church of God in all Times, but
especially in these Last Times. And these things I have spoken and testified
freely, (according to the measure of grace given) knowing that they will be as
acceptable to the true Friends and Members of Christ crucified, as they are
troublesome and displeasing to the Members of Antichrist.

FINIS.
A Plain and Necessary CONFUTATION Of diverse gross and Antichristian Errors,
DELIVERED To the University Congregation, At the Public Commencement, Anno.
1653.

By Mr. Sydrach Simpson, Master of Pembroke HALL in CAMBRIDGE.

Potentior est veritas quam eloquentia, potior spiritus quam ingenium, major
fides quam eruditio: and ut Paulus ait, Stultum Dei sapientius est hominibus.
Luther. Epist. ad Caspar. Bornerum. Profes. Lipsens.

Non est istud temeritas, sed fides; neque inconsideratio, sed ratio; neque
furor, sed fiducia. Hilarious lib. contr. Constantium Augustum.



LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at the Sign of the
Black-spread-Eagle, near the West End of Paul's. 1660.

An Apology to the Reader, touching the following Reply to Mr. Sydrach
Simpsons Sermon.
IF it shall seem grievous to any, that I have Why the Anthor deals so plainly
1. With Mr S. Simpson.
dealt thus freely and plainly with Mr. Sydrach Simpson, one of the first
Pastors of an Independent Congregation in England; let them consider how Paul
dealt with those Brethren, Gal. 2. to whom (according to his right Zeal, and
the present occasion) he gave no place by subjection, no not for an Hour, that
the Truth of the Gospel might continue with the Galatians; and though those
brethren seemed to be somewhat, yet says Paul, what ever they are, it makes no
matter to me, seeing God accepts no man's Person: And so notwithstanding their
Reputation, he did not spare them. Yea, let them consider how Paul at Antioch
withstood Peter to the face, for dissembling with the Jews in the case of the
Gentiles, and for not walking uprightly according to the Truth of the Gospel:
wherefore Paul did publicly and sharply reprove Him before them all. For no
true believer is to keep silence, when the Doctrine of the Gospel is corrupted
by the Doctrines of Men, or is to be modest in this matter. Wherefore I was
compelled to speak thus plainly to him, for his gross prevarication in the
things of God; and I am well satisfied in my conscience in the discharge of my
duty, whatever shall be the Censure of carnal Christians, who have no true
sense of the Glory of Christ's Gospel, or of the Profit of his People, Whom yet
Christ so loved, as to lay down his life, and to be Crucified, for them.

Again, if it shall offend any, that I deal thus roundly 2. With Humane
Learning.
against Humane Learning; Let them know, that I am not against Humane Learning
upon all accounts, but do allow How the Author is for Humane Learning, and how
against it.
Humane Learning (so it be sober and serious) in its own Place and Sphere, as
well as other Humane things: But I do oppose it, as it is made another John
Baptist, to prepare the Way of Christ into the World, or to prepare the Worlds
way to Christ: And also, as men make it Necessary for the true Knowledge of
Scriptures; Yea, the very Unction for the Ministry.

And herein, according to the Grace of Christ, I both do The great mischief of
Humane Learning mingled with Divinity.
and will contend against it for ever: Seeing Humane Learning mingled with
Divinity, or the Gospel of Christ understood according to Aristotle, has
begun, continued, and perfected the Mystery of Iniquity in the outward Church.
Wherefore I do in all boldness appear for Christ the Wisdom of God, against
Humane Learning the Wisdom of the World;
knowing assuredly, that He is as very Antichrist, who opposes Christ as the
Wisdom of God, as he that opposes Him, as the Power and Righteousness of God:
and Men may as well bring into the Church of God, another Righteousness then
Christ, and another Power then Christ, as another Wisdom then Christ.
Wherefore, as They who bring in Humane Righteousness, that is, Civil or Moral
Righteousness, or any Works or Duties of Men for Righteousness, into the Church
of Christ, They are true Antichrists in so doing; seeing herein they are
contrary to, and do oppose Christ the Righteousness of God: And as They who
bring in Humane Power, or the Secular Arm into the Church of Christ, to do, or
leave undone, to reward or Punish, to promise or threaten, to encourage or
discourage by That, They are true Antichrists in so doing; seeing herein they
are contrary to, and do oppose Christ the Power of God; So also They that bring
in Humane Wisdom, or the Learning and Philosophy of men into the Church of
Christ, They also are true Antichrists in so doing; for herein they are
contrary to, and do oppose Christ, the Wisdom of God; For Christ is, and is to
be, the only Power, the only Wisdom, and the only Righteousness in the Church
of God; And he that brings in any other Power, Wisdom or Righteousness, besides
Christ Himself, that Man is in very deed Antichrist. And in this matter also,
it was necessary that I should be bold for Christ against Antichrist.

3. Again, if any shall be offended that I speak thus freely 3. With the
Universities.
against the Universities, which are of such Honorable Esteem everywhere in
the Nation, especially with the Ignorant and Vulgar people, and with Men of all
sorts, who have not the right Knowledge of Christ and his Gospel (wherein are
so contained all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, that no part of this
Treasury is left out thereof, to enrich Heathenish Men of unquestionable Worth,
and Godliness, have spoken freely of the Universities, in former times, as
Philosophy withal, which by the Gospel is left as a Desolate Thing, empty and
destitute of all true Wisdom and Knowledge) I say, if any think that I have too
deeply censured these Universities; let them know, that I have done in this
matter but as Wickliff, Hus, Luther, and several others, Holy Men of God, and
Happy Instruments in the hand of Christ, have done before me. As for instance;

Wickliff terms the Universities, Castra Cainitica, Cains Wickliff.
Castles; Synagogas Satanae, the Synagogues of Satan, and affirms that They
were never Ordained or Instituted by Christ.

John Hus (or Otho Brunfelsius, if he set out the Contents Hus.
of the Chapters) calls them Satrapas Antichristi, the Lieutenants of
Antichrist.

Luther in his book Contra Ambrosium Catharinum, showing Luther.
out of Daniel the Prophet, that Antichrist is Rex facierum, the King of Faces,
or Appearances, he affirms that the Universities are one of those Faces of
Antichrist, and that they are very comely or sightly to look on, and yet indeed
are a very Chaos and open Gate of Hell, and that in these the most Choice Youth
of Christian people are prostituted, and are cast into the open throat of Hell;
And* that in these Aristotle is read* whereby the wits of Christian Youth are
possessed and busied with Humane and Heathenish Learning; Yea, are quite
blinded and oppressed with it.

He says also, that the Universities are the Woe, that the
fifth Angel (mentioned Rev. 9.) brought upon the earth: and that whoever it
was that did first institute and confirm Universities, he was a Star fallen
from Heaven to Earth: to wit, from the Gospel of Christ to Humane Learning.

And in his Exposition on Psalm. 22. he calls the Universities the Mothers of
Learned men, the Gates of Hell, and says, they are called ( Scholae, i. e.
Ludi) Schools, that is, Plays, by a Fatal Name; seeing they make Sport with the
Scriptures, and cast lots upon them, as upon the Garments of Christ, every one
dividing to himself a share of them, according to his own Humane and
Philosophical Apprehension. And he says, that the Doctors of these
Universities are by the same providence, called Doctores Scholastici, i. e.
Ludicri, vel Illusorii: School-Doctors, that is, trifling or May Game Doctors.

Again he says, those most Glorious Mothers of Studies, the Universities,
stink before God with most Loathsome Abomination.

These Universities are those Antichristian Soldiers, who
put a Reed into Christ's right Hand instead of a Scepter: and this Reed is
Philosophy, that vain deceit, or as the Apostle elsewhere terms it, the
Operation of Error: by which Philosophy (says he) the unhappy people of Christ
began to be governed, that is, to be seduced, and to be led away from the
Gospel of God. And this vain Reed they put into his Right Hand, by preferring
Learning before Godliness; saying, (according to their usual manner of
speaking) he is a Learned and a godly man; hereby making Learning to take place
of Godliness. And yet this Philosophy is nothing but a weak Reed, which
counterfeits a Scepter, rather then represents it, and so is nothing but Vain
Deceit; for there is nothing propounded in such Doctrine, but Vanity and Lying,
though under the title of Knowledge and Religion.

In a word, he calls them Antichristi Lupanaria, the Stews of Antichrist.

Melancthon also terms the Universities, Domos mendacii, Melancthon. Omnes
Scholas esse haereticas, vel Theologia Scholastica arguit. Melanct. in Apol.
pro Mart. Luther.
Houses of lies, and says, it is manifest that they are all heretical by their
School Divinity; which all the Schools in Europe have received from the
University of Paris, and are thereby infected with Heresy; and he says, the
Students in the Universities, are not the People of the Gospel, nor yet of the
Law, but are the People of Aristotle's Morals.

And thus it is manifest that Others have spoken freely and sharply against the
Universities before now. And therefore wise and Godly Christians will have no
just cause to be offended at Me, who have spoken in like Manner, having the
same Cause.

Object. Now if any shall Object, that they all spoke against Objection.
Popish Universities, and that our Universities are otherwise now, then They
were then; and so, there is not the same Cause to speak against Them now, as
there was heretofore.

Answ. To this I answer, That though the outward form Answer.
of gross Popery be taken away from them (as also from the rest of the People
of this Nation) God having put it into the hearts of the Civil Power to reject
it, after the light of the Gospel had begun to shine to them; yet are the
brains, The Universities the same for the Substance, now as formerly
heart, bowels, bones, marrow, sinews and blood of the Universities, the
self-same Now as Heretofore; and though the Outside of it has passed under a
very little Change, yet the Inner parts of it remain as before, in the full
strength of Antichrists Kingdom, and that without any alteration at all. For
the self-same Statutes of the Universities and Colleges still remain with them
in force, which were at first given to them by their Popish Founders, through
the help of Antichrist: and these Statutes are of such Authority with them,
that they depart from the Rule of Christ's Gospel, to walk by the Rules of
sinful Men, for worldly Stipends and Rewards sake. Farther, the same
Philosophy or Heathenism, and the same School Divinity or Antichristinnism, are
yet instilled into the Youth and Students, as were many hundred years ago, in
the darkest times of Popery; and These Things are all in all in the University
Learning and Education; insomuch, that No Man is of any esteem and reckoning
with them, know he the Gospel of Christ never so soundly and truly, if he be
not (as they speak) a good Philosopher, and School-Divine. So that the
University for its inside is the self-same now, as it was in Wickliff, Hus, or
Luthers time, being informed and possessed with the same Heathenish and
Antichristian Doctrine, now as then: Yea, many of the self-same outward and
Antichristian Forms and Follies still remain with Them, more then with any
other People in the Nation again; even to their Hoods, Caps, Scarlet Robes,
Doctoral Ring, Kiss, Gloves, their Doctoral Dinner and Music: neither could
they ever yet to this day find in their hearts to lay aside their very
Praevaricator, which is some notable Varlet picked out of the University, and
brought forth in the presence of all the Heads, Students, Scholars, and all the
great resort of Ministers and People, at their public Commencement, to make
shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience before them all; and in open Defiance
of the Gospel, which stands in faith and love, to abuse, and deride, and jeer,
and reproach all sorts of Persons, of all Ages, Sexes, Professions, and this
presently after their Divinity Acts; which is a Wickedness the very Heathen
would be ashamed of, and which plainly declares what kind of Divinity is taught
and learned in the University, which can endure, allow, countenance, and be
merry at that, which so highly contradicts Gods Word, and grieves his Holy
Spirit: yet because it makes them merry after a full Dinner, and puts more joy
into their Hearts then the holy Scriptures, they could hitherto dispense
withal, to this day.

And so however Religion for the Outward Form, has been much Reformed in these
Nations; yet the Universities as the strongest Holds which Antichrist has had
amongst us, have still remained much what the same, not only as to the Inward
Substance of all things, to wit, their Statutes, Philosophy, and Divinity, but
also in a great measure to their Outward Forms, as they were in their first
Antichristian Institution.

Wherefore it was necessary also, that I should be plain and free for Christ's
sake, and his Churches, against these (as Luther calls them) stews of
Antichrist, and Dens of Thieves, who have been, and still are the constant and
fruitful Seed of Antichrists Kingdom in the World, out of which it might
suddenly on all occasions and opportunities grow up afresh, how greatly soever
it had been before wasted and destroyed among the people, by the clear Word of
God, and his mighty Providence and Works accompanying it.

Now as it was necessary this Work should be done, so through the Grace of
Christ, was I made willing to do it, seeing no body else more fit and able did
appear. And well knowing, that he that provokes the Universities and Clergy
against him, provokes Principalities and Powers, and the Rulers of the Darkness
of this world against him; as is evident in the example of Wickliff, Huss,
Luther, Tindal, and others: I have therefore according to Christ's Counsel, sat
down and counted the cost of this Undertaking, and after all do say, the Lord
is on my side, I will not fear what Man can do unto me. And so I commit thee
Christian Reader, to that Grace which is from God, to keep thee in this new
hour of Temptation, if the Lord suffer it to come forth upon the earth.

4. Again, if any shall Object in reading this Reply, that I Objection.
my self make use of Humane Learning, whilst I speak against it.

I Answer, what part of Philosophy is here made use of? or Answer.
who of the Heathens are here quoted? I have chiefly made use of the Testimony
of some faithful Christians, who have lived in several Ages, and yet have all
witnessed by the same Spirit, the same Truth. And it is no more Humane Learning
to quote Believers in the Church since Christ, then to quote the Patriarchs and
Prophets before Christ, or the Apostles and Evangelists which immediately
followed him.

5. And last of all. If any say, I my self relate to the Objection.
University, why then do I speak against it thus?

I answer, that I neither do, nor will relate to the University, Answer.
as it is polluted with any of the Abominations herein mentioned: But as by the
Providence of God alone, I have been brought to that Relation in which I now
stand, and continue in it, against the Wills and Workings of many; so through
his Good Pleasure I will remain, till He shall otherwise dispose of Me; and
during my sojourning with them, I will not fail to testify against their evil,
and to endeavor to win all those, whom God shall persuade to receive his
Truth, from Heathenism to the Gospel, and from Antichrist to Christ.

Wherefore let none be offended that I am made willing to hazard and part with
my Worldly Accommodations for Christ's Names sake; but let them rather praise
the Grace of God, which has enabled me to witness a good Confession, what ever
Worldly Disadvantage I might run into thereby. Wherefore, Welcome the
Righteousness, Power, Wisdom, Truth, Word, and whole Kingdom of Christ, though
they swallow up all my Earthly Accommodations: For such Fear and Love of his
Name, has the Lord graciously put into my Heart, that I would not willingly
conceal any thing of his most precious Truth, either to gain or to preserve to
my self the Whole World. And so righteous Father, not my will be done, nor
theirs, but Thy will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven.

THE CONFUTATION OF Mr. Sydrach Simpsons Errors.
Isaiah 62.1. For Sions sake I will not hold my peace, and for Jerusalems sake
I will not rest, until the Righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and
the Salvation thereof as a Lamp that burns.
MAster Sydrach Simpson at the Commencement, An. 1653. preaching to the
University Congregation in Cambridge* and to many Others, especially Ministers
there gathered together at that time, from several parts of the Nation, among
other things, he let fall in that Discourse of his, these gross and
Antichristian Errors.

The Rehearsal of the Errors.
1. He brought in that Scripture, 2 Kin. 6. ver. 1, 2. which was his Text: the
words whereof are these, And the Sons of the Prophets said unto Elisha, Behold
now the Place where we The Rehearsal of the Errors.
dwell with thee, is too strait for us; let us go we pray thee unto Jordan, and
take thence every man a beam, and let us make us a Place where we may dwell:
and he answered, Go ye. This Scripture he used to prove the Lawfulness and
Religiousness of the present Universities, and the Usefulness and Necessity of
Humane Learning to the Church and Ministry of the New Testament. And what the
Scripture speaks of those Schools, he brought to countenance, encourage and
justify These: adding, that if it were objected, That that was the Old
Testament: He did answer, That the Old and the New were not distinct
Testaments, but Administrations: thereby holding forth, that the Universities
now, are answerable to the Schools of the Prophets that were then; and that the
Universities are as agreeable to the New Testament, as the Schools of the
Prophets to the Old. 2. That They who have endeavored to pull down Schools,
have always been Men who were found Enemies to Religion. So Julian the Apostate
shut up the doors of the Schools, because he would have all Religion to go
down. 3. That the knowledge of Heavenly things cannot come to us but by things
on Earth, and that all Divinity is swadled in Humane Learning. 4. That Paul was
brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, and that God took him so fitted, and made
him an able Minister of his Church. 5. That men's hatred to God, does as well
appear in their hatred to Humane Learning, as if they hated the Scriptures. 6.
That if the spirit teach without Means, men may as well be without the
Ordinances, as without the Universities and Humane Learning. 7. That men now
are not to receive the Spirit, in that immediate way to understand the
Scriptures, in which it was given to them who wrote the Scriptures. 8. That men
now are to get Knowledge by Studies and Humane Learning, and not by
Inspiration. 9. That Humane Learning is as the Outworks to the Fort of the
Gospel, and as the outer Court to the Temple of the Gospel: and so, if you will
keep the Fort well, you must keep the Outworks strong; and if you will preserve
the Inward, you must look to the Outward Court. 10. But what is the bottom of
all this (says he) to wit, of some men's appearing against Humane Learning, as
the Unction of the Ministry, and against the Universities as the Fountain of
the Ministry) but this? that some say, They are One with Christ; and as Christ
has the Divine Nature in him, so every Believer has; and he that has God in
him, need not go to any Man to learn; whereas in John 17. Christ speaks of
Believers as at an infinite distance from Him: And if Believers be so united to
Christ as they say, then will follow, that Christ should not be the only
begotten of God; and that Christ and We should be Equal, and He not our Lord,
etc. 11. Arts and Tongues are the Cups in which God drinks to us. 12. We shall
never keep up Religion, if we do not keep up Learning: but when Learning goes
down, Religion goes down too. 13. Seeing Religious Foundations are so Ancient,
then keep them up: Your Destruction will never be but from Your selves.
These Notes were taken from Mr. Simpsons mouth and delivered to me by an
honest hand, and affirmed to be true for the Substance of them; and I also
heard several others who were hearers of that Sermon, relating the same things.

Now because I find that this Doctrine has not only grieved the hearts of the
Faithful, but also strengthened the hands of the Carnal and Evil People: The
things which he then delivered, being usually the Thoughts of their hearts, and
Words of their mouths; I thought it my duty, being set in my place for the
Defense of the Gospel, to give a Public Reply to such Gross Errors so
publicly delivered, to the danger of so many; and which, one would never have
thought should have proceeded from such a Man; especially after the day of the
Gospel has so far dawned, and the Antichristian shadows are so far retreated
and flown away.

And so I shall begin with the first of these Errors, and proceed in the Order
in which they are set down.

1. ERROR. 1. Error.

He brought that Scripture, 2 King. 6. 1, 2. Touching the Sons of the Prophets,
asking leave of Elisha to go and build at Jordan, to prove the Lawfulness and
Religiousness of the Universities, in their present Use and Customs, etc.

Answer.
To this I Reply, that there is a vast Difference between Answer.
those Schools, and these Universities, as in many Other things, No Heathenish
Learning was taught in the Church of God all the time of the Old Testament.
so chiefly in This; That in those Schools of the Prophets, named by Him, the
Holy Men of God freely taught the Youth, who came willingly to them to learn,
especially in the corrupt times of Israel and Judah; I say they taught them
only the Knowledge of the Books of Moses, and of the other Prophets then
extant, and no Heathenish Knowledge, or Disciplines of What Learning the
Fathers before the Flood taught in their Schools, and the Patriarchs and
Prophets afterward.
the Gentiles at all. And these kind of Schools began early in the Church: For
the Fathers before the Flood, and the Patriarchs after, all taught their
Children and Families the Word of God; And so each of their Families was such a
School. And that we may not be at uncertainties in this matter, it is manifest
what Doctrine they taught, by that which God himself says of Abraham, Genesis 18.
19. I know Abraham (says God) that he will command his Children and Household
after him, that they keep the Way of the Lord, and to do Justice and Judgment:
This was the sum of Abraham's Doctrine to his Family. And this is farther
confirmed by that of Asaph, Psalm. 78. 2, 3, 4. where he says, I will open my
mouth in a Parable, I will utter dark sayings of old, which we have heard and
known, and our Fathers have told us: We will not hide them from their Children,
showing to the Generation to come the praises of the Lord, and his strength,
and the wonderful works that he has done: Where we plainly see what Doctrine
the Children received from their Parents, and the Parents taught their children
from one Generation to another; to wit, not Vain Philosophy, and the
Disciplines of the Heathens, but the Praises of the Lord, and his Strength and
Wonderful Works. This also is manifest by the practice of Jehosaphat King of
Judah, who sent his Princes with the Levites up and down throughout Judah, and
they only took the Book of the Law of the Lord with them, (and no Heathenish
Authors) and taught the People, 2 Chronicles. 17.

And Ezra after the Peoples return from Babylon, took only the Book of the Law
of Moses, and read it to them; and the Levites also read in the Book of the Law
of God distinctly to the People, and gave them the Sense, and caused them to
Understand it, Nehem. 8.

And this also James the Apostle witnesses, Acts 15. 21. saying, Moses of old
time has in every City them that Preach Him, being read in the Synagogues
every Sabbath day.

So that the faithful Prophets of the Lord, during all the Old Testament, had
the chief care in their Schools to keep the Word of the Lord among them in a
Right Sense, according to the mind of the Spirit. For seeing the Lords People
are his Portion, they knew they were to be carefully Educated and Instructed in
the Right Knowledge of the Scriptures, to prepare them for the Lord, and to
make them meet for his Kingdom. And the keeping of the Word and Doctrine of God
pure, is one of the Greatest Matters of all in the Church of God: For as the
Word is, such is the Worship, such is the Faith, such is the Conscience, such
is All. Wherefore the Holy Men of God would by no means bring in the Philosophy
or Doctrine of the Heathens into their Schools, to teach that to their Sons, or
Scholars, but only the true, faithful, and unmixed Word of God.

`And if against this it be Objected, That Moses was learned Objection.
in all the Learning of the Egyptians.

To this I Reply. But did Moses ever teach any of that Answer.
Learning in the Church, or publish any of the Doctrines of it? Or did he
command, or encourage any of the People of God to learn it? Or did any other of
the Prophets of the Lord in any Age, teach their Sons or Scholars, any of the
Egyptian Philosophy, which was the Antientest, or the Smaragdine Table of
Hermes Trismegistus (the pretended Scholar of Moses) so much boasted of, or any
Heathenish Author whatsoever, of which there were many then extant? I say, let
them prove, that but one Heathenish Author, was read by any of the Prophets to
their Scholars, and then they will have some color for the present
Universities and their Practice: But this they can never do, during all the Old
Testament.

And now for the New Testament, it is well known, that Neither was any
Heathenish Learning taught the Church in the time of the New Testament Christ
taught no Philosophy to his Apostles.
Christ himself, (who was the Son of God, made of a woman) was the first and
chief Teacher of this Doctrine: Even the Son, out of the bosom of the Father,
full of Grace and Truth: and He set up the first Christian School, and taught
his twelve Apostles, whom at his own pleasure He chose to Himself.

And what the Doctrine was which He taught them, is manifest in the Gospel; in
all which there is not One Word of Heathenish Philosophy, or of the Doctrine
and Traditions of Men, but He only taught them the Words of Eternal life; which
no Man, nor Angel could teach; He teaches that Word which is the Power, Wisdom,
and Righteousness of God; through which, Sin is forgiven, and Righteousness is
given; Death is destroyed, and Life is brought in; Hell is put out, and Heaven
is planted, in all them that do believe: He teaches a Word, through which the
World is renewed, and Men are made like Angels, and are made meet to partake of
the Inheritance of Saints: He teaches a Word wherein is contained all the
Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge that are in God Himself.

And so Christ taught in his School no vain Philosophy, or Heathenish Doctrine,
and yet he came from God, and went to God, and is a pattern for Doctrine to all
true Christians that are his Disciples indeed; To whom he commanded when he
left the world, and went to his Father, that they should teach all Nations, and
gather one Christian School out of them all, by teaching them to observe, and
do Whatsoever he had commanded them, to wit, in the Gospel; and nothing else,
or more: He commanded them to teach all that, and only that: and promised
himself to be with them to the end of the World, in all such Doctrine.

And the Apostles accordingly, (not by any help of Humane The Apostles taught
no Philosophy.
Learning) but when they had received the Spirit, went forth to teach the
Nations, and to set up Christian Schools everywhere by their Doctrine; and They
all, only taught Jesus, and the Resurrection from the dead.

Thus Peter first taught the Men of Judea, and Inhabitants Peter.
of Jerusalem, That God had made Jesus, whom they had crucified, both Lord and
Christ; having raised Him from the dead, because it was not possible for Him to
be holden of Death, who was the Lord and Author of Life.

And Steven, disputing with the Libertines, Cirenians, and Steven.
Alexandrians, and diverse Philosophers of Cilicia and Asia, did hold forth to
them nothing but Christ, and that He should put an end to the Temple and Law,
and should change all the Customs of Moses. And, They were not able to resist
the Wisdom and Spirit by which He spoke, Acts 6.

And Paul at the University of Athens, reproved there Heathenism, Paul.
and taught Nothing among the Epicureans and Stoics, and other Sects of
Philosophers, but the Resurrection of Christ, and his Kingdom and Judgment,
Acts 17.

He also disputed daily in the School of one Tyrannus, and that for two years
together, and persuaded only the things touching the Kingdom of God, brought
into the World by Jesus Christ, Acts 19. And he so prevailed with his Doctrine,
that Many which used Curious Arts, brought their Books together, and burnt them
before all men, and the price of them was counted at Fifty Thousand pieces of
Silver: So that, as the Gospel prevailed, and the Name of Christ was magnified,
so did People renounce Philosophy, and burn their Books of Curious Arts: To
recover which Books again out of their ashes, if it might be, our University
would give as much Money (if they could procure it from good Benefactors) as
they were then valued at by the Heathen. So that as They, through the efficacy
of the Gospel, of Heathens became Christians, and threw away all other
Learning, and burnt their Books of Great Value, lest they should infect others:
So on the contrary, in our Universities of Pretended Christians, Men usually
become true Heathens; never valuing the Precious Gospel of God our Savior, as
they do other Heathenish and Philosophical Books.

Farther, the same Paul dwelt after at Rome two whole Years in his own hired
House, and during all that time, Preached only the Kingdom of God, and taught
those things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ, with all boldness: But taught
not one Word of Philosophy.

He also at Corinth, a great and famous City of Greece, full of Philosophers
and Orators, taught nothing among them, but Christ Crucified, to the Jews a
Stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness; But to them that believe, both
of Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.

And as he made no Use of Humane Learning all this while, so in 1 Cor. 2. he
plainly renounces it, and rejects it; saying,

Ver. 1. And I brethren when I came to you, came not with Excellency of Speech
or Wisdom, declaring unto you the Testimony of God. Ver. 2. For I determined
not to know any thing among You, save Jesus Christ, and him Crucified. Ver. 3.
And I was with you in weakness, and fear, and much trembling. Ver. 4. And my
speech and Preaching was not with enticing Words of Man's Wisdom, but in
Demonstration of the Spirit and Power. Ver. 5. That your Faith should not stand
in the Wisdom of Man, but in the Power of God. Ver. 6. Howbeit, we speak Wisdom
among them that are Perfect; Yet not the Wisdom of this World, nor of the
Princes of this World, which come to naught. Ver. 7, But we speak the Wisdom of
God in a Mystery, even the Hidden Wisdom, which God Ordained before the World
unto our Glory, etc. Ver. 13. Which things also we speak, not in the Words
which Man's Wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Spirit teaches, comparing
Spiritual things with Spiritual things.
In a word, this whole Chapter tends to the Utter Rejection of Philosophy,
(which is the Wisdom of the World,) in the Kingdom of Christ, which is the
Kingdom of God.

He also in his Epistle to the Colossians, chap. 2. gives forth another plain
Testimony against Philosophy, desiring verse. 2. that the Hearts of the
Believers might be comforted, and that they might be knit together in Love, and
unto all riches of the full assurance of Understanding, to the acknowledgement
of the Mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ, in whom are hid all
the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge; And this (says he) I say, lest any man
should beguile you with Enticing Words: Wherefore v. 8. says he, Beware lest
any man spoil you through Philosophy and Vain Deceit* after the Tradition of
men, after the Rudiments or Elements of the world, and not after Christ; for in
Him dwells the Fullness of the Godhead bodily, and ye are Complete in Him, who
is the Head of all Principality and Power. Here is a sufficient Caution against
Philosophy, for the true Church for ever. For what need we (if we are true
Christians) to turn aside for Wisdom, and Knowledge, and Learning, and curious
Arts, to the Heathen, seeing God has given Christ to us, in Whom is treasured
up all the Heights, and Depths, and Lengths, and Bredths of Wisdom and
Knowledge, whereby the whole World was made, and every Creature formed and
fashioned, and in which it has its Being, Subsistence, and Operation? Yea in
this Christ dwells all the Fullness of the Infinite and Eternal God, and he is
the Head of all Principality and Power, in Earth and Heaven; and there is in
Him alone, infinitely enough to make us Wise and Learned for ever, without
calling in the Help and Contributions of the vain Philosophers, and their
foolish Wisdom. It is enough for Christian Schools, to be taught to know
Christ, by the Ministration of the Spirit; and all other Learning that is out
of Christ, though it seem to be never so High and Deep, all faithful Christians
are to reject it, as mere Sophistry and Deceit.

And thus you see that the Apostles, as well as Christ, taught their Scholars
and Disciples only the Gospel, and spoke not one word for Philosophy, but
directly against it.

And the following Fathers, and next Teachers of the Christian The Primitive
Christians and Believers taught no Philosophy.
Church after the Apostles, they also obeyed the Command of Christ, and
followed the example of the Apostles in this matter. For the Bishops and
Presbyters, that is, the Overseers and Elders, had tender regard to the
Children of Christians, and did teach Them as well as the People, the pure
Doctrine of the Gospel; They held forth to them, Christ Crucified, and did
exhort them to Faith, new Obedience, the Confession of Christ, and patient
Suffering, and did not at all intermingle Philosophy with their Divinity, but
always rejected and condemned it, all along the first and purest times of the
Christian Church, till the Mystery of Iniquity began to arise, and did
cunningly insinuate itself into the Church, by the means of Humane Learning.

And here it will not be amiss to Relate what Justine Martyr Justine Martyr
forsook Philosophy, and betook himself only to the Scriptures.
says of himself, as to this matter; who was before his Conversion to the
Christian Faith, a great Philosopher: and lived about 150. years after Christ's
Nativity: He (in his Dialogue with Trypho) relates, How first he joined Himself
to that Sect of Philosophers called the Stoics, and after to the
Peripateticks, after to the Pythagorean Sect, and after to the Platonists, but
had no Satisfaction in his Mind by all this Knowledge: But at last he beholding
the Torments and Sufferings of Christians, and seeing Them bear them with such
Comfort and Constancy, he did thereby conceive that it was impossible for that
kind of People to be subject to any Vice, on carnality; which Vices of their
own Nature are not able to sustain any sharp Adversity, much less the
bitterness of Death. And hereupon, He began to love and search after the
Christian Religion: and being afflicted in Mind, he did withdraw Himself into a
solitary Place, where there met Him an old Ancient Father, of comely Visage,
and gentle behavior, who began to reason with Him, and to tell him that there
was no Knowledge of Truth among the Philosophers, who neither knew God, nor
were aided by his Holy Spirit: And did farther reason with Him of the
Immortality of the Soul, of the Reward of the Godly, and Punishment of the
Wicked. Then Justine being Satisfied with his Reasons, yielded to him, and
demanded of him, How He might attain to that true Knowledge of God, whereof he
had spoken? Who counseled Him to read the Scriptures, adjoining therewith
Prayer, etc.

And as this Justine left all other Learning, and betook Non ad humanas
rations, sed ad voluntatem Doctrinae Spiritus, interpretatio est accommodanda.
Justin. in Exposit. fidei.
himself only to the Scriptures; so in the understanding of the Scriptures he
rejected all his Philosophy, and Philosophical Apprehensions; Saying, that the
Interpretation of the Scripture is to be accommodated to the Will of the
Doctrine of the Spirit, and not to Humane Reasonings. And that he might be sure
and safe in all things, he had constant recourse to the Scriptures, thus
understood. So that Justine Martyr being effectually Converted, wholly left his
Philosophy, and betook himself to the Scriptures, and taught them to the
Church, as He had been taught them of God, by his Spirit.

Constantine the Emperor (though he were the first that Constantine the
Emperor, took care for the teaching the Scriptures to Christians. Eusebius. lib.
4. de vita Constantin.
brought in the Mystery of Iniquity into the Christian Church, by mingling the
Civil and Ecclesiastical states and Laws together) there being in His time, a
great Increase of Christians, through the Ministry of the Gospel, and a great
Confluence of them to his Imperial City for the Words sake, he wrote to
Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, in a special Letter, Wherein he desired him with
all Diligence and Speed, to procure fifty Volums of the Scriptures to be
written in parchment Well and Legibly, and in such a bignenss or Volume as
might be carried with greatest ease; for the further teaching and instructing
of Those that came to attain the Knowledge of the Christian Religion: Judging
it most meet, that Christian People should be Instructed in the Doctrine of
Christ only, and not in Heathenish Philosophy.

And though afterward, when the Suffering Times of the Church began to be
over, Christians became more carnal and secure (and that in the very days of
Constantine) and so began to decline the Word of Faith, and to seek after
Philosophy; yet had God in all the Ages of his Church some of his Servants, who
did reject it, and did cleave only to the Word: Among which, I shall only for
the present, produce the Testimonies of Berno, who lived above six hundred
years ago, and Zuinglius of latter times.

Berno, who lived about the year 1008. and was a man Berno Augiensis Abbas. Se
multis jam annis Poetarum figmenta and Paganorum Historias, seculariumque
Literarum studia, velut stercora respuisse; omnemque mentis intentionem ad
divina perscrutanda convertisse. Berno in Epist. ad Magnifred.
furnished with all sorts of Learning, says, That he had for many years
rejected as dung the figments of the Poets, and the Histories of the Heathens,
and the study of Secular Letters, and had converted the whole Intention of his
Mind to the Word of God, and the Divine Things contained therein: And
accordingly, he taught no other Doctrine to any.

Huldricus Zuinglius also Pastor of Zurich in Helvetia, a Cum juvenis adhuc, in
omni Disciplinarum genere exercerer, certo affirmare possum, me non minus quam
reliquos aequales meos profecisse, etc. Zuingl. lib. de Certitud. and Veritat.
Verbi Dei.
man who had been educated in all kind of Learning, and was after through faith
and the teaching of God an eminent Instrument in his Church, he says thus of
himself; When (says he) I being yet a Youth, was exercised in all sorts of
Learning, I can truly say, that I did not profit less then the rest of my
Equals: But when about seven years ago, I betook my self to the study of the
Holy Scriptures, then the things that I had before sucked in, or learned from
Philosophers and Divines, did procure me so much Trouble, that being then moved
by the Authority of the Scriptures, I judged that all those things were to be
cast away and counted as dung, and that the true Mind of God was only to be
received from his pure and simple Word. And therefore I began humbly to entreat
the Lord that he would vouchsafe me his own Light: By which means it shortly
came to pass, that the reading of the Holy Scriptures did much delight and
please me; and they being nakedly and alone propounded, did flow unto me with
more ease, then if I had read them divided and distracted with variety of
Comments. And as he rejected Philosophy wholly, and entertained the Word, So
did he only teach this Word to faithful Christians, who are the only true
School of Christ in the World.

Now by all this it appears, that the Schools of the Prophets and Apostles, and
of Christ himself the Head of them, and of the most faithful Christians, that
followed Christ, in the first and latter Ages, were in no sort like the Schools
in the present Universities, where Humane Learning, according to the Statutes
of the Universities, prevails for the first seven years, and they think, Youths
cannot be made good Christians except they be first made good Heathens.

The Schools of the Prophets and Apostles would not meddle with the Philosophy
of the Heathen, but led the children and youth presently to the Word of God,
and therein to the true Knowledge of God in Christ: But these Schools first
lead Youth from God and his Word several years together, to the corrupt Reason,
Wisdom, Notions, Conceptions; yea to the Idolatry, Blasphemy, Atheism, Lusts,
Filthiness, and Villainies of the cursed Heathen, that thereby (in a strange and
Antichristian Method) they may be the fitter to know and understand the
Scriptures.

The Schools of the Prophets taught only Moses and the Prophets, to the Jewish
Youth; and the Schools of the Apostles taught Christ only and his Gospel, to
the children of Christians: But the Universities lead men both from Moses and
from Christ, both from the Law and the Gospel, to the Heathen, to make men
hereby the more able Christians and Divines.

The Queen of the South neglecting the Magi, or Wise men of the Heathen, came
from the utmost parts of the earth, to hear the Wisdom of Solomon; And the
Universities leave Christ, who is Infinitely Greater and Wiser then Solomon,
and go to the utmost parts of the earth for Wisdom from the Heathen. So that in
these Universities, there has been the greatest Apostasy and Withdrawing from
Christ, and the greatest Dishonor and Disparagement offered to Him, and his
Gospel, as ever was known in all the World.

For, Is it not a matter of greatest Wonder and Amazement, that after that
Word, which was with God, and was God, and is God blessed for ever, has been
manifested in the flesh, and that Flesh of His has been justified by the
Spirit, to have the Fullness of the Godhead dwelling in it bodily: and, that
This so Wonderful a Person has come to his Church, in the same Common Nature
with it, filled with all the Righteousness, Wisdom, Truth, Power, Life, Peace
and Joy, and all the things of God; I say, is it not strange, that He who alone
comprehends the fullness of all things, and in whom are hid all the Infinite
Treasures of Divine and Heavenly Wisdom and Knowledge; that He alone should not
be counted sufficeent and enough, no not by Those who pretend his Name, to make
us Wise to Salvation (which is the only True, Excellent, and necessary Wisdom
in the World) and to make the man of God Perfect, and the whole Church of God
Complete? but to the great Dishonor of Christ, yea, to the very Rejection of
Christ, the children of Christians must be led from the Doctrine of Christ, the
Son of the Living God, to the Doctrine and Disciplines of the Wretched, Filthy,
Abominable, Wicked, and Damned Heathen: and to spend the prime and flower of
their Youth in these things: Who but Antichrist Himself could have brought in,
and set up such an Abomination of Desolation in the Church of God?

And yet for the better credit of all things, must These corrupt Heathenish
Schools be called the Schools of the Prophets; though Nothing but the Ignorance
of the Law and Gospel be taught in Them; and the Highest Enmity to Christ in
all the World, lives and flourishes in them.

And thus as the Christian Schools at first, brought men from Heathenism to the
Gospel; so These Schools, carry men from the Gospel to Heathenism, as to their
great Perfection.

And the Fruit of this Education of Youth is manifest: For The sad Fruit of
University Education.
where has the Gospel found less Favor, and more Enmity at any time, then
from the Universities?

Ridly the Martyr, with Cranmer and others, being in Prison in Oxford for the
Testimony of the Gospel, writes thus to Bradford, As yet says he, there was
never Learned Man, nor any Scholar, or other that visited us, since we came
into Bocardo.

And in another Letter to him, he says, And yet as we hear, the Scholars bear
us more heavily then the Townsmen: A wonderful thing, among so Many, never yet
Scholar offered any of Us, so far as I know, any manner of favor, either for,
or in Christ's Cause. Fox. vol. 3. p. 442, 443.

Yea farther, where shall you see Youth again in all the Nation, so vain,
proud, fantastical, bold, impudent? Where shall you meet with such Mockers and
Scoffers at God, and his Gospel, as here? How many Hopeful Youths have here
been sacrificed to the Heathen, and their careful Parents after much cost have
received them home, as full of Heathenish Manners, as Doctrine? And if some are
lately become more civil and seemingly Religious; yet is their Enmity to the
Gospel in its true Spiritual Sense, as it is the Word of Faith, nothing
abated; For such as is the Doctrine among them, such also of necessity must
their Consciences and Lives be*

Wherefore the Universities, according to their Statutes and usual Practice,
are not the Schools of the Prophets, or of Christians, but of Heathen Men; and
Plato, and Aristotle, have more credit in the University, then Moses, or Christ
Himself. And, if after their course, or running their Circle in Philosophy,
they betake themselves to Divinity; yet do they so mingle, spoil, and corrupt
it with Philosophy, according to which they both understand the Scriptures, and
speak of them, that their Divinity cannot be called the Doctrine of Christ, but
of Antichrist, being wholly contrary to the Word of Faith.

And therefore Mr. Simpson was the more to blame to flatter them in their
Evils, and to deceive the World, in appropriating to Them the glorious Title of
the Schools of the Prophets, Who are in all things, so Contrary and
Contradictory to Them.

Now the Sum and Certainty of this Matter, is this; That the Congregations of
Believers, where only the Word of the Gospel is truly taught, according to the
Ministration of the Spirit, whether to Youth or Men, They under the New
Testament, are answerable to the Schools of the Prophets under the Old, who
only taught Moses and the Prophets: And the Universities wherein Philosophy is
first taught the Youth, and after Divinity, and then both are mingled together,
to the utter perverting and corrupting the Gospel of Christ; I say, these
Universities in the time of the Gospel are answerable to the High Places in the
time of the Law, where a Doctrine and Worship prevailed, which was not
according to Gods Word, but man's Will; and where Judaism, and Heathenism were
mingled together into one Mungrel Religion, most odious and abominable to God
and his People: And so the Universities in the time of the Gospel, are only
answerable to the High Places in the time of the Law: but not at all to the
Schools of the Prophets, as Mr. Simpson pretends.

And now for the Conclusion of this matter (which I reckon The Testimonies of
the Faithful to the former Doctrine.
to be of Great Concernment for the true Church to be thoroughly instructed in:)
I shall bring forth the Testimony of some Godly men; of Whom some show how the
Schools and Universities of Christians came first to be Corrupted, to wit, by
departing from the plain Word of the Gospel, and bringing in Philosophy: And
another foretells the Reformation of the Schools of Christians again, to wit, by
rejecting Philosophy again, and bringing in the Word of Faith. All which will
serve as a Confirmation of what has been already spoken.

Matthias Parisiensis a Bohemian by Nation, who lived Matthias Parisiensis.
Antichristum omnes Universitates and eruditorum Collegia seduxisse, ita ut jam
nihil sani doceant, aut Christianis recte sua Doctrine praelu^^ant. Illyric.
Flac. Catal. Test. Veritat.
about the year 1380. wrote a large book against Antichrist, wherein he affirms
That Antichrist had seduced all Universities and Colleges of Learned men; so
that now they teach no sincere Doctrine, neither give any true Light to
Christians through their teaching: to wit, they being all corrupted through
Philosophy, and having through that corrupted all Divinity.

And John Hus, that humble and faithful servant of Jesus John Hus. Sedu^it
Antichristus a Divi^a sapientia, plen^ Salute and Spiritu Sancto, ad prudentiam
and scientiam Hominum and Principum hujus mundi: quam copiavit nimis
vehementer, and dilatavit and au thenticavit and lucrosam Divitiarum and
Honorum in hoc seculo effecit, ut ita Divina Sapienta and Scientia esset
neglecta a Christianis, inveterata and obducta, and quasi vilis and inutilis ab
iisdem reputata, etc. Joh. Hus. Lib. de vita and Reg. Antichr. cap. 30.
Christ, and blessed Martyr, says, That Antichrist has seduced all carnal
Christians from Divine Wisdom, which is full of Salvation, and the Holy Spirit,
to the Wisdom and Science of Men, and of the Princes of this World, which
(Wisdom and Science) he has exceedingly enlarged and increased, and made
Authentical, and very gainful of Riches and Honors in this World: that so by
this means, Divine Wisdom and Science might be neglected of Christians, and
grow old, and be covered over, and be accounted as Vile and Unprofitable by
them; And, that only That, which is High with Men (to wit, Humane Learning)
might be reckoned Glorious and Excellent, and of great Authority with Christian
People.

The same Hus says, That this Humane Learning, Wisdom and Knowledge,
Antichrist does perfectly subject to Himself, and his Service, He being more
Mighty and Subtle through the Operation of Satan, then all Worldly Men, whom
with all their Learning, Disciplines, and Abilities, he strongly subjugates to
Himself, and does especially serve Himself of These: wherefore says Job, chap.
41. sub ipso erunt radii solis, the Beams of the Sun shall be under Him, that
is, the Holy Scripture, and the chief Doctors and Teachers of it: and He shall
prepare Gold as dirt, that is, he shall have all the Wisdom and Learning of Men
at his Pleasure, and in great Readiness, and with much Ease shall gain it to
Himself. And Antichrist by such Men (says I. Hus) does make his Body or Church
strong against the Saints of God, and Welfavoured and Glorious, that it may
appear very taking to the World, and may* win in all Men to it, that are not
taught of God and renewed by his Spirit. And thus Antichrist serves himself of
all Learning and Learned men; whereas Divine Learning, and the Teaching of God,
He could never in any measure subject to Himself, but is always discovered,
resisted and overcome by it.

Martin Luther says, That whosoever it was, whether Martin Luther.
Alexander of Hales, or Thomas of Aquine, who first instituted Universities; he
was a Star fallen from Heaven to Earth, who received the Key of the bottomless
Pit, and opened it, and brought forth into the Church, Philosophy, long ago
dead and damned by the Doctrine of the Apostles; and from the Smoke of the
Bottomless Pit, that is, Philosophy, came forth Locusts M. Luther. De Captiv.
Babylon.
on the Earth; that is, says he, populus Universitatum, e Philosophia natus,
the people of the Universities, born and bred of Philosophy, etc. thus Luther.

Abbas Joachim Calaber, who was long before these, and Joachim Calaber.
flourished about the year 1230. in his Commentary on Jeremy the Prophet,
speaks to this purpose, That the sixth Angel, mentioned, Rev. 9. opens the
Bottomless Pit, and brings out Philosophy into the Church; and out of the Smoke
of this Doctrine Lecusts proceeded, and are spread over all the Church into
every Fruitful Place; and these Locusts, he says, are Scholastici and
Magistri, qui nunc facie tenus blandiuntur ut decipiant, nunc cauda tenus
feriunt ut subvertant simplices and incautos; that is, the Locusts are Scholars
and Masters, (according to the Academical Degrees) who sometimes flatter with
their Countenances to deceive, and sometimes strike with their Tails, that they
may subvert the Simple and Unadvised. And to these Scholars and Masters, the
Ignorant and Common People resort; and they open to them the old Cisterns of
Heathenish Learning and Disciplines, long ago stopped up by the Doctrine of the
Apostles: and these Cisterns they open, by teaching Philosophy to the People:
But they shut up the Living Fountain of saving Water, that is, the Word of
Faith: But the Spirit of the Lord (says he) in the following Prophets, whom
the Lord shall raise up, idola studiorum carnalium visitabit, shall visit the
Idols of Carnal Studies, maintained and kept up by Secular Stipends.

Further he says, that as Antichrist brings forth his Mark, which is,
Philosophical Doctrine in the Church of Christ, and by this Mark all his
Teachers and People are known; so there shall rise up against these, such as
have the Mark of Christ, or the sign of Thau in their foreheads, that is, the
Open and Manifest Doctrine of Christ Crucified. And as the Signs of Moses
destroyed the Signs of the Magicians, so shall the Word or Preaching of the
Cross, destroy all Philosophical Doctrine, and Humane and Secular Learning out
of the Church. And then the Children, and Youth, and men of all Ages, Sorts,
and Conditions, shall be taught no other Doctrine in the Church of Christ, then
that which is found in the Scriptures, even in the Writings of the Prophets and
Apostles; and that not according to any Humane and Philosophical Understanding,
but according to the Teaching and Mind of the Spirit. And God by all his true
Servants, shall destroy the Studies of carnal Doctors, and Masters in Divinity,
and shall dissipate all Secular and Philosophical Learning, by the Word of
Truth in their mouths. And so shall the Church be reformed aright, when the
Doctrine of Christ only shall be received and esteemed of, and shall live and
flourish among Christians.

And thus as Antichrist has laid aside the Scriptures, and all true Spiritual
and Divine Learning out of his Schools and Universities, and has brought into
them, instead thereof, Philosophy and Humane Learning (and so these Schools are
most unlike to the Schools of the Prophets) so in due time, when God shall
undertake to reform his Church, all this Sort of Learning shall be cast out
again, as dirt and dung, and the plain Word of the Gospel only shall prevail
and flourish among the Christian People: Which Time the Lord hasten for his
Elects sake.

2. ERROR.
That they who have endeavored to pull down Schools, have 2. Error.
always been Men who were found Enemies to Religion; So Julian the Apostate
shut up the doors of the Schools, because he would have all Religion to go down.

Answer.
True it is, that they who have sought the subversion of Answer.
Christian Schools, wherein the Doctrine of the Gospel is purely taught without
the mixture of Philosophy and Heathenism, They all have been, and are very
Enemies to the true Religion: But they that seek to put down Heathenish
Schools, and to erect Christian, or to reform the Schools of Heathen into
Christian, or to remove Heathenism out of Christian Schools, They are not,
before God and Good Men, Enemies to true Religion, but the great Friends of it.
Nay they that call Heathenish Schools by the name of Christian, that they may
still remain with the better credit in their Heathenism, without any true
Reformation according to the Gospel, I rather judge them to be Enemies to the
true Religion, and Friends only to their own Profit, Preferment and Ends.

Julian indeed did forbid that Christians should be instructed Vetuit ne
Christiani Gentilium Disciplinis instruerentur. Sozomen. Histor. Eccles. cap.
17.
in the Disciplines of the Gentiles; but says Sozomen (the Writer of the
Ecclesiastical History) he did this because he thought, that by those
Disciplines men might attain to a Great Faculty to persuade, which Advantage he
would not have the Christians to gain to the Help of their Religion. Now
certainly this was done, as Socrates (another Writer of the Ecclesiastical
History) does acknowledge, by the Singular Providence of God. For seeing then
Christians had begun to degenerate from the Gospel, and to betake themselves to
Heathenish Learning, Julian attributed all the Glory and Excellency of
Christianity to that Learning, and so thought with Mr. Simpson, that if Humane
Learning were denied to Christians, Christianity it Self would soon be at end.
Wherefore the Lord stirred up Julian to put down the Doctrine of
the Heathen in the Schools of Christians, that it might appear True Religion
depends not on Humane Learning.
to all the World, That as the true Christian Religion is not helped by Humane
Learning, so neither is it hindered by the Want of it: And that there is more
Light, Knowledge, Truth, Wisdom, Power, Utterance given to Christians by the
Unction of the Spirit alone, which all receive who believe, then through all
Heathenish Disciplines: And also that it might be manifest that true
Christianity is founded on Faith in Christ and the Gift of his Spirit only, and
not at all on Humane Learning. For what Humane Learning had Peter and John? and
yet in what Wisdom and Authority did they being Ignorant and Unlearned men,
Reprove, Convince, Acts 4. 13.
and Silence the Greatest and Ablest men of the Jews? And what Humane Learning
had Steven? and yet he confuted the Libertines, and Cyrenians, and
Alexandrians, and all the Philosophers of Cilicia, and Asia, which disputed
with him; Acts 6. 10.
and they all were not able to resist (not the Humane Learning but) the Wisdom
and Spirit by which he spoke. And Christ has promised all his People, that
when for his Names sake they should be brought before Kings anh Rulers, who
usually have the greatest accomplishments of Humane Learning, that then They
should not study before hand what to say; for He would give them, in that very
hour, a Mouth and Wisdom which None of their Adversaries should be able to
resist. And the Power and Virtue of the Gospel, and the Wisdom, Knowledge, and
Utterance of Gods Spirit, is more gloriously manifest in Plain Men then in
Learned Men; For in the One, the Grace and Virtues of the Spirit are attributed
to Humane Learning; But in the Other, to God only, who dwells in them.
Wherefore that the Wisdom and Knowledge, and Light, and Power of the Word of
Faith in true Christians, might not be attributed to Humane Learning, God
stirred up an Enemy to Christian Religion to be so serviceable to it, as to
hinder Heathenish Doctrine from being taught in the Schools of Christians, that
so the Church might be restored to be as in the days of its Youth, when there
flourished in it only the simple and plain Word of Faith, without any
intermingling Philosophy or Humane Doctrine. And if Constantine had made such
an Order in his time, Julian had not had such an opportunity to have renounced
Christianity, and turned Heathen. for Julian being instructed in the Philosophy
and Disciplines of the Heathen by Libanius his Tutor, by this means, He came to
love Philosophy better then the Gospel, and so by degrees turned from
Christianity to Heathenism. Which may be a fair Warning to all Christians, that
they suffer not their Children to be so educated, lest at last, with Julian,
they (at least in their hearts) loath and reject the Gospel, and become with
him Apostates and Pagans.

And hence it is most evident, that Heathenish Philosophy Christianos de
integro Gentilium Disciplinam imbibere, nemo est qui Christianae Religioni
prodisse concesserit. Nam non est extra periculum Christianos Gentilium
eruditione institui, quippe quae docet multos esse Deos. Socrates Histor.
Eccles. cap. 14.
is so far from being a Profitable Study for the Children of Christians, that
it is very Dangerous for them to be so educated, as Socrates is forced to
confess; where he says, For Christians to be thoroughly instructed in the
Disciplines of the Gentiles, there is none will grant that this is Profitable
to the Christian Religion: For it is not without Danger for Christians to be
taught in the Learning of the Heathens, seeing this teaches that there are
Many Gods. And therefore says he, the Doctrine of the Heathen is not approved
by Christ or any of his Apostles or Disciples.

Wherefore said Luther, My Counsel is, that a Youth should Meum consilium est,
ut adolescens vitet Philosophiam ac Theologiam Scholasticam, ut mortem animae
suae. Luth. Tom. 2. fol. 434. b.
shun Philosophy, and School Divinity, as the Death of his Soul.

3. ERROR.
That the Knowledge of Heavenly things cannot come to us 3. Error.
but by things on Earth: and that all Divinity is swadled in Humane Learning.

Answer.
I conceive that all Christians at the first reading of this, Answer.
will acknowledge that this Doctrine is not Divine, but Philosophical.

The Philosophers say, that nothing is in the Understanding, but that which is
first in the Sense, (which is proportionable to that which Mr. Simpson speaks)
and yet they know not The Knowledge of Heavenly things comes down from Heaven
to us.
what they say, when they say so. But let us consider if this be so: That the
Knowledge of Heavenly Things cannot come to us but by things on Earth: then how
shall we know the Mystery of God, even the Father, and the Mystery of Christ,
who is God manifest in the flesh? Or how shall the Mystery of Faith, and of
our Union with Christ through Faith into One Flesh and Spirit with Him, be
known? Or the New Birth and New Creature, which has all things New in it, and
all those New things, the Things of God? Or how shall the free Justification of
a Sinner through the Death of Christ, and his Reconciliation to God, be known?
with all the rest of the Things of the Gospel? seeing Nothing on Earth can
reveal the least part of these things? And if the World by Wisdom, that is, its
Philosophy, knew not God, how can it by that Wisdom reveal God and his things,
which it never knew? Nay, the Apostle does clearly testify against this Carnal
and Corrupt Doctrine, in 1 Cor. 2. 7, 8. saying, We speak the Wisdom of God in
a Mystery, even the Hidden Wisdom, which God ordained before the World unto
our Glory, which None of the Princes of this World knew: and by Princes of this
World, he means not only Worldly Powers, as Chrysostom affirms, but also
Philosophers and Orators, who often obtained the chief Government among the
Nations. God has wrapped up his Gospel, says Paul, into such Hidden Wisdom,
that they are never able to search into it, or to discover the least part of
it, seeing God contrived it all, and appointed it before the World, unto our
Glory: and all Their Knowledge is but from the World. Yea, he adds, Eye has
not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have ever entered into the Heart of Man; the
Things which God has prepared for them that love Him; In which words, God has
shut out the Natural Man for ever, with all his study, knowledge, abilities,
and seize, from the having any Right Understanding of his Kingdom, or the
Things of it: For the Eye of Man has not seen them at any time, nor his Ear
heard them, nor has any Knowledge of them entered into his Heart: so far is
this Doctrine from truth, that The Knowledge of Heavenly Things cannot come to
us, but by Things on Earth. But the Apostle shows how the Faithful come to
know these high, holy, spiritual, and eternal things, which lie infinitely
beyond the Knowledge and Discovery of all Men, to wit, by the Spirit, saying,
But God has revealed them to Us by the Spirit; for Ver. 10.
the Spirit searches all things, yea the Deep Things of God. So that the
People of God know the things of the Gospel, not by Earthly Things, as Mr.
Simpson affirms, nor by Philosophy (...). Chrysostom. in 1 Epist. ad Cor. Hom.
7.
and outward Wisdom, which only reaches to Earthly Things, but by the Spirit.

Farther, If all Divinity be swadled in Humane Learning: then I do affirm that
all such Divinity has no great Depth; seeing the bottom of Humane Learning is
easily fathomed.

But can any Christian Heart think, that all true Divinity, Humane Learning too
strait and narrow to comprehend true Divinity.
which comprehends in it the Height, and Breadth, and Length, and Depth of the
Love of God, which passes Knowledge, and all the Unsearchable Riches of
Christ, and all the infinite and incomprehensible Treasures of his Wisdom,
Power, and Righteousness, of his Love, Goodness, Truth, Faithfulness, and of
all the Fullness of the Godhead, wherewith he is filled, can be contained and
wrapped up in the Narrow and Scant Bounds of Humane Learning? How much truer
Doctrine had it been to have taught, that all true Divinity is contained in God
and his Word, and that we can know Nothing of God aright, but by his Word,
which Holy men have spoken by the Spirit, and Believers do receive by Faith;
and out of this Word, all the Learning in the World does not contain in it
Self, neither can it reveal to Us aright, ^he Least Thing of God, or of his
Mind and Will.

But I conceive he might speak thus, That all Divinity is wrapped up in Humane
Learning, to deterr the Common People from the Study and Enquiry after it, and
to cause them still to expect all Divinity from the Clergy, who by their
Education have attained to that Humane Learning which the Plain People are
destitute of: For it is the Old and New Design of Antichrist, to make the
People depend on the Clergy for all Divinity, though the People have the
Scriptures as near Them, and the Grace of God usually nearer to them, then
They; seeing God resists the Proud, and gives Grace to the Humble.

Again, if all Divinity be swadled in Humane Learning, then must it sadly
follow, that all who want Humane Learning, must needs also want Divinity; And
then how shall poor plain People, who live in lawful Callings, and have not
the leisure to attain Humane Learning, how shall They do to be saved? Or what
Help must they have to teach them Divinity, who have not opportunity to gain
Humane Learning?

And yet farther, if all Divinity be swadled in Humane Learning; then Christ
and his Apostles had no true Divinity; for they had no Humane Learning to
swadle it in, nor would have none; Shall we say now, according to Mr. Simpsons
Doctrine, that they had no Divinity? I do with all boldness affirm, that this
Doctrine is contrary to the Christian Faith.

4. ERROR.
That Paul was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, and God 4. Error.
took him so fitted, (to wit, with Humane Learning) and made him an able
Instrument in his Church.

Answer.
Not so, But God took Paul, not a good Scholar, and so Answer.
made him an able Preacher; but he took Him, as a Blasphemer, Paul made a
Preacher through the Grace of God and not through Humane Learning.
and Persecutor, and as a cruel and enraged Enemy against Christ and his Truth,
and People, and magnified the riches of his Mercy in converting such an One:
and Paul having much forgiven him, loved much; and through his Great Love, was
the fitter to preach the Gospel, according to that of Christ to Peter; Peter,
do thou love me? feed my Sheep. Yea Paul Himself ascribes his painful and
profitable Preaching, not to his Learning and Education under Gamaliel (which
also was, or ought to have been, only in the Law and Prophets, as has been
proved) but to the free Grace of God bestowed on him, saying, I labored more
abundantly then They all, yet not I, but the Grace of God in me: So that Paul
became so excellent a Preacher, not by his fitting through Humane Learning, but
through the Grace of God.

And here I shall mind Mr. Simpson of a passage which I have read in
Chrysostom, which comes home to this Matter in hand; it is in his third Homily
on the first Epistle to the Corinthians, where he says, That God had no need,
at the beginning of the Gospel, of Learned men, and Sophisters to preach the
Gospel, and to convince the World with Syllogisms, but did only use the Word of
Faith, in the mouths of plain Handicrafts men, and Artificers: Wherefore (says
he) when the Greeks shall accuse the Disciples of Christ, as ignorant of
Letters, and Unlearned, let Us our selves who are Christians, accuse them More.
Neither let any one say, that Paul was Wise and Learned; but let us say, Their
Men were Wise and Learned, but Ours were Rude and Ignorant; For in thus doing
(according to the truth) we shall have the Greater Advantage against them. For
if Paul were Unlearned, and yet overcame Learned Plato, his Victory was the
Greater, and the Grace of God the more Glorious. (...), etc.
Now this I say, (says he) because the other day, I heard a certain Christian
discoursing ridculously with a Greek; each of them in their Discourse
prejudicing their Own Cause: For the Greek spoke that which the Christian
should have said; and the Christian spoke that which the Greek should have
said. For the Question between them being touching Paul and Plato, the Greek
endeavored to prove that Paul was Rude and Unlearned; but the Christian
through his Simplicity, did endeavor to prove, that Paul was more Learned and
Eloquent then Plato. And so, the Greek should obtain the Victory, if the
Christians Reasons should prevail. For if Paul were more Learned then Plato,
then might men object, That he overcame not the World through Grace, but
through Eloquence. Wherefore that whith the Christian spoke, made for the
Greek; and that which the Greek spoke, made for the Christian. Wherefore (he
says) when the Greeks shall say the Apostles were Rude, and Unlearned, Poor,
Mean, Simple, Obscure Persons, let us acknowledge it as the Truth; For this is
not their Reproach, but their Glory; that being Such, they yet overcame the
Learned Men, the Wise Men, the Philosophers, the Rhetoricians, the Orators, the
Princes, and all the World, as if They had not been Men. For when any thing is
done above the State and power of Nature, this does exceedingly manifest and
magnify the Grace of God.

And so it appears, that Chrysostom was of another mind in this matter touching
Paul, then Mr. Simpson; and that Paul was of another mind touching Himself.

Now seeing Mr. Simpson does here insinuate that Humane Humane Learning does
not fit a man to the Ministry of the Gospel.
Learning fits a man to the Ministry of the Gospel: and seeing this also is the
Opinion of all the Carnal and Unbelieving People, I do desire them to consider,
what some Godly Men have spoken clearly from the Word of God in this Matter.

Chrysostom (who knew the Mystery of the Gospel more Testimonies.
clearly then any of the Ancient Writers) in his Comment on the first Epistle
to the Corinthians, does wholly exclude Humane Learning from contributing any
thing, either to the Chrysostom.
speaking or receiving the Gospel. For (says he) to believe in Him that was
Crucified and Buried, and to be fully persuaded that he Rose again, and sits at
the Right Hand of God, and has all Power in Heaven and Earth given to Him, and
that He is made of God to the whole Church, Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification and Redemption; this Doctrine stands not in need of Humane
Wisdom and Reasonings, but of Faith only, and that both in Them that spoke it,
and in Them that receive it. For the Apostles did not proceed in this Matter
(...). Chrysostom. in 1. Epist. ad Corinth. Hom. 4.
in outward Wisdom, but in Faith, and so became more Wise and Excellent then
the Worldly Wise: and so much the more, as it is a Greater Matter to receive
the things of God by Faith, then to be persuaded into them by the force of
Argument.

He adds also, That, To the receiving the Doctrine of the Gospel, neither is
the Wise man profited any thing by his Wisdom, neither is the Plain man
hindered any thing by his Ignorance; Yea if I may speak a wonderful thing
(says he) Ignorance is more fit and ready to receive the Gospel then Wisdom.
(...), etc. Idem. ibid.
And a Shepherd, and a Plowman will sooner receive the Gospel and submit to it,
then a Scholar who lives in the strength of Humane Wisdom and Reason.

He farther says there, that where the Wisdom of God is, (...). Chrysostom.
(as it is in the Gospel) there is no need of Man's Wisdom, as where the Sun is,
there is no need of a Candle.

And he concludes there this Matter thus, That the Preaching of the Gospel is a
Heavenly Thing, and that Humane Wisdom and Learning cannot help herein, but
rather hinder. And that therefore when Christ sent forth the first Teachers of
the Gospel, he took not Wise and Learned Philosophers, that the Cross of Christ
might not be made void, and that the Faith of Christians should not stand in
the Wisdom of Man, but in the Power of God: But he chose plain Fishermen,
Tentmakers, Publicans, Obscure, Simple, Poor, Contemptible, Ignorant and
Unlearned Men; And These overcame Kings, (...).
Princes, People, Nations, Greeks, Philosophers, Orators, Sophisters* they
overcame the ancient Manners, Customs, and the very Religion of the World, also
their Laws, Judgments, diverse sorts of Punishments, and innumerable kinds of
Deaths, and by all this (says he) it was Manifest, that their Preaching was
not in Humane Wisdom, but in the Grace of God.

And thus does Chrysostom affirm, and prove that Humane Learning does not fit
men to the Ministry of the Gospel, but is rather a Hindrance thereunto, and
that the Grace of God only fits them for this Heavenly Work.

Hear also what Wickliff says to this matter, in his Book Wickliff.
entitled, The Path way to Perfect Knowledge; where he shows, that it is not
Humane Learning that helps to understand the Scriptures, and to profit in the
study of Them, but something more High and Heavenly; His own words are Through
Love we understand the Scriptures.
these. He whose heart is full of Love, comprehends without any Error, the
manifold abundance, and largest Teaching of Gods Scripture: For Paul says, the
fullness of the Law is Charity; and in another place, the End of the Law is
Charity, of clean Heart, and good Conscience, and of Faith unfeigned; And
Christ says, Thou shall love thy Lord God, of all thy Heart, and of all thy
Soul, and of all thy Mind, and thy Neighbor as thy self: For in these two
Commandments, hangs all the Law and the Prophets: And, as the root of all
evil is Covetousness, so the root of all good is Love.

Charity by which we love God, and the Neighbor, holds surely all the
Greatness and Largeness of Gods Speeches. Therefore, if we have not leisure to
search all the Holy Scriptures, and to pierce into all the Privities of them;
hold thou Love, whereon all things hang, and so shall thou hold that
which thou learnest there, and also that which thou learnest not. For if thou
know Charity, thou know something, whereon also that hangs, which thou
know not. And in that that thou understandest in Scripture, Love is open;
and in that that thou understandest not, Love is hid. Therefore he that holds
Love in Virtues or Good Life, holds both that which is open, and that which
is hid in Gods Word.

And after speaking to the Clergy, he says, Therefore How the Ministers may
come to understand the Scriptures.
Worldly Fools, do ye first repent of your sins, and forsake Pride and
Covetousness, and be ye meek, and fear ye God in all things, and love your
Neighbor as your Self, and then shall ye profit in the study of Holy Writ. And
this is a far other way to understand the Scriptures then Humane Learning.

And after, he speaking of the Abominations of the University of Oxford, says
thus; The fourth Abomination, is, that it is now purposed to hinder Christian
Men from learning freely Gods Law, till they have spent nine or ten Years at
Art, or Philosophy, which compredendeth many strong Errors of Heathen men,
against the Christian Belief. It seems well, that God will not cease from
Vengeance, till it and other things be punished sore. For it seems that
Worldly Clerks, and feignedly Religious, do this under pretense, that simple
Men of Wit and Knowledge, know not Gods Law to preach it generally against sins
in the Realm. But wit ye, Worldly Clerks, and feignedly Religious, that God
both can, and may if it likes him, speed Simple Men out of the University, as
much to know the Holy Scriptures, as Masters in the University. Wherefore (he
says) it is no great matter, though Men of Good Will be not poisoned with
Heathen men's Error nine or ten years together; But let them live well, and
study the Holy Scriptures, and preach truly and freely against open sins till
death. Thus He. Whereby he declares that the Scriptures are not to be
understood by Humane Learning, but by Faith and Love: And that Humane Learning
does not prepare men to the Knowledge of the Word, but rather corrupt them with
Heathen men's Errors.

Tindal also, that Apostle of England (as Fox calls him) Tindal.
and blessed Martyr, speaks thus to this matter; They will say yet more
shamefully (meaning the Clergy) That no man can understand the Scriptures
without Philautia, that is to say, Philosophy: A man must first be well seen in
Aristotle, ere he can understand the Scripture, say they. Now (says he)
Aristotle's Doctrine is, that the World was without Beginning, and shall be
without End, and that the first Man never was, and the last never shall be: And
that God does all of Necessity, neither cares what we do. Without this
Doctrine (says he, Ironically) how could we understand the Scripture, that
says, God Created the World of naught, and God works all things of His free
will, and for a secret Purpose; and that we shall Rise again; and God will have
Accounts of all that we have done in this life!

Aristotle says, Give a man a Law, and he has Power of Himself to do, or
fulfill the Law, and becomes Righteous with working Righteously. But Paul and
the Scripture says, That the Law does but utter sin only, and helps not;
Neither has any man power to do the Law, till the Spirit of God be given him
through faith in Christ. Is it not a madness then to say that we could not
understand the Scripture without Aristotle? Moreover Aristotle's Felicity and
Blessedness stands in avoiding all Tribulations, and in Riches, Health,
Honor, Worship, Friends, and Authority, which felicity pleases our
Spirituality well. Now without these, and a thousand such like points, could
thou not understand Scripture, which says, that Righteousness comes by
Christ, and not of Man's Will? And how that Virtues are the Fruits and Gifts of
Gods Spirit, and that Christ blesses us in Tribulations, Persecution, and
Adversity. How I say, could thou understand the Scriptures without
Philosophy, in as much as Paul, Col. 2. warned them to be ware lest any man
spoil them (that is to say, rob them of their faith in Christ) through
Philosophy and deceitful Vanities, and through the Traditions of Men, and
Ordinances after the World, and not after Christ? -- And after -- But now, Ye
drive them from Gods Word, and will let no man come thereto, until he have been
two years Master of Art. First they nuzzle them in Sophistry, and in been
fundatum; And there corrupt they their Judgments with apparent Arguments, and
with alleging to them texts of Logic, of Natural Philosophy, of Metaphysick,
and Moral Philosophy, and of all manner of books of Aristotle, and of all
manner of Doctors, which yet they never saw, etc.

Again Huldricus Zuinglius speaks thus to this matter. We Zuingl. Lib. de
certitudine and Veritate Ver. Dei.
must needs be taught of God, and not of Men (to wit in the knowledge of the
Gospel) For this is the saying of the Eternal Truth, which knows not how to
lie, Joh. 6. But and if you Quod si non firmiter creditis, vos, humanis
Doctrinis desertis, divinitus doceri posse, vera fide etiamnum vacui estis.
do not firmly believe that you may be taught of God, Humane Doctrines being
utterly rejected, ye are yet destitute of true Faith. Neither have I my self
devised this thing; For Hilarie also is of this opinion; But there is no need
of his Testimony, when we hear that both Christ, and all the Apostles were of
the same mind. And here the whole use of School Divinity falls to the ground,
and whatsoever is drawn out of the Philosophers. For all these things do lean
on Humane Reasons, which when they have once possessed a man's Mind, he then
thinks that Cadit hic Theologiae Scholasticae usus universus, and quicquid ex
Philosophis haustum est.
the Heavenly Doctrine is wholly to be directed and framed according to the
Rule of Humane Learning, which he judges to be most firm and infallible. Which
thing they sufficiently discover in their words, saying, ubi cessat
Philosophus, illic incipit Theologus, where the Philosopher ceases, there the
Divine begins; whereby they signify thus much, that he is able to judge most
rightly in Divine Things, who comes most furnished with Humane Learning. As if
so be the Light of our Will were more excellent, and more perspicuous then the
Divine Glory: When yet we hear Christ saying, I receive not Glory of Men; but I
know You, that you have not the Love of God in you, Joh. 5. For they who have
the Love of God, cleave to no Word so constantly, as to the Word of God; seeing
This is the Light, that enlightens every man that comes into the World. But no
man is able to prove that Philosophy is such a Light. For which of the
Philosophers instructed the Apostles? Those simple, and in the Judgment of the
World, those foolish Men, unskilful, and unlearned Fishermen, were elected and
instituted of God, and then were sent forth to preach, that they might become
the Masters and Teachers of the whole World: to wit, that God according to the
saying of Paul, might make ashamed all the strength of the World, and all the
Wisdom of the World. Thus he.

Luther also says, It is an Error to say, that a man cannot be a Divine, but
through Aristotle; Nay, says he, A man cannot be a Divine except he become
one, without Aristotle. Error est dicere, Sine Aristotele non fit Theologus;
imo Theologus non fit, nisi id fiat sine Aristotele. Tom 1. fol. 10. Vivendo,
imo moriendo and damnando fit Theologus, non intelligendo, legendo aut
speculando. Luth. Tom. 2. fol. 57. In sacris rebus non est disputandum aut
Philosophandum: in Theologia tantum est audiendum and credendum, and statuendum
in cord, Deus est verax, etc. Rectius fecerimus si Dialectica seu Philosophia
in sua sphaera relictis, discamus loqui Novis Linguis in Regno fidei, extra
omnem Sphaeram. Affectus fidei exercendus est in Articulis fidei, non
Intellectus Philosophicus. Luther.
And again, A man becomes a Divine by living, yea by dying, and by being damned
(to wit in his own sense) not by studying, reading, or speculating. And again,
In Holy Things we must not dispute or play the Philosophers; but in Divinity we
must only hear and believe, and resolve in our heart that God is true, though
the Things he speaks in his Word, seem never so absurd to Reason. And again, We
shall then do well, if we leaving Logic or Philosophy in their own Sphere, do
learn to speak with New Tongues in the Kingdom of Faith, without all Sphere.
For the Affection of Faith is to be exercised in the Kingdom of Faith, and not
a Philosophical Understanding.

And thus have these Godly men held forth and proved from the Word, that Humane
Learning is rather a hindrance then a Help, to the Ministry of the Gospel, and
does rather unfit then fit men for it: and that the Grace and teaching of God
only, prepares and enables men to this Divine work, and no Humane Thing at all.

Wherefore let all true Christians be advised, that Humane Nothing in greater
enmity to Christ crucified then Humane Learning.
Learning is so far from fitting men for the Gospel and the Ministry thereof,
as is suggested, that indeed there is nothing in Greater Enmity to Christ
Crucified; nor more Contrary to the Word of the Cross, then that; Yea nothing
in all the world has been such an Introducer, Favourer, Supporter, and
Inlarger of Antichrists Kingdom, as Humane Reason,
Learning, and Philosophy; This has brought in all the Hypocrisy,
Superstition, false Doctrine, false Worship, Sects, Schisms, Divisions, which
have at any time prevailed in the Church during all the Reign of Antichrist:
And the Gospel of Christ, and the true Belief and Practice of it, has not had
at any time a greater, and more subtle, and plausible Enemy then This. Yea
farther, the Gross Ignorance and Blindeness of the rude World, has not so
perverted and falsified the Word of the Gospel, nor rendered it such
Contradiction and Resistance, nor has brought such annoyance to the Faithful
who have received and confessed it, as Humane Science has done; For this has
enabled men stoutly to oppose the Truth, and subtly to defend Error as the
Truth; this has made men bold and cunning to suppress Gods Mind from the
World, and to hold forth their own Mind to them, as if it were Gods, under the
pretense of the outward Letter of the Word; and a multitude of other Evils have
sprung from this Corrupt Fountain. Wherefore the Apostle Paul is so far from
encouraging Christians to betake themselves to Humane Learning to fit them for
the Gospel, that He by the Spirit utterly forbids Christians Heathenish
Philosophy, lest they should be spoiled through the Vanity of it, and beled
away from Christ. And thus in this matter has Mr. Simpson manifestly departed
from the Doctrine of the Scriptures, and of Faithful Men who have spoken from
it.

5. ERROR.
That men's Hatred to God does as well appear in their Hatred 5. Error.
to Humane Learning, as if they hated the Scriptures.

Answer.
I conceive Mr. Simpsons Heart was hot within him, out Answer.
of his great Zeal to Humane Learning (the great Goddess by which the
University lives) when he thus spoke; And it appears he is very tender of the
Reputation and Glory of it, who thus vindicates it, at as high a rate as the
very Scriptures. But Sir, do you know no more Difference between the most
precious Word of our Eternal Lord God, and his Son Jesus Christ, and the
foolish, corrupt, and stinking Doctrine of Men? is there no more Difference in
your Divinity, between the Word of Righteousness, Life, and Salvation, which
God has spoken by Christ, and Christ by his Servants, and the Word and
Doctrines of wretched Men, full of sin, death, and destruction? And if the Law
it self, given by the Ministration of Angels, loses its Glory before the
Gospel, as the Apostle testifies; How much more does Heathenish Philosophy,
brought forth, partly from the corrupt Reason of Man, and partly from the
Inspiration of the Devil, become loathsome and abominable before it, for ever!
And cannot we be Enemies to this, say You, without hating the Blessed Word of
God? Nay, the blessed Word of God where it prevails in truth, does make men to
hate This, and to count it loss, and dung, and filth, and the most loathsome
Baseness in the World, in comparasion of it self. Wherefore, through the Grace
of Christ, we will so love the Scriptures, which are Divine Learning, as to
hate Humane and Heathenish Learning for their sakes, seeing it has put a veil
of Darkness in the Church, over this Glorious Sun, the Word of Faith.

6. ERROR.
That if the Spirit teach without Means, men may as well be 6. Error.
without the Ordinances, as without the Universities and Humane Learning.

Answer. Answer.

We do not say, that the Spirit usually teaches without Arts and Sciences are
not the Means whereby Christ Teaches his Church.
Means in the Church of Christ; But we say, he teaches by Means of his own
appointing; And how will Mr. Simpson prove by any Scripture that Universities
and Humane Learning, are Means which the Spirit of God uses to teach his
Church by? Where did ever the Lord speak one Word, that he would use the
Disciplines of the Gentiles, as Means whereby to teach men to know the Mystery
of Christ? Wherefore this is strange Doctrine, that Arts, and Sciences are the
means whereby the Spirit teaches the Church: For sure I am the Lord never
taught his Church, either of the Old, or of the New Testament by these Means:
Only Antichrist has taught his Church after this manner, and has set up
Humane Learning as an Ordinance of God, yea, as an Ordinance of the New
Testament to learn Christ by; that Christians might be trained up to know
Christ the Wisdom of God, by Humane Learning, the Wisdom of the World, which is
in direct Enmity to God.

The chief Ordinances whereby God helps his Church, are the Word of Faith, and
the Prayer of Faith; And by the Ministration of the Spirit, he begins, and
carries on the Salvation of his Spiritual People: And these Ordinances the true
Church cannot want, neither does God do any thing in his Church without Them.
But the Spiritual Church, for ought that I could ever yet read in the Word, may
well want their Divine Ordinance of Humane Learning, and yet not want any
Ordinance of God, that he has appointed and sanctified for the Use of his true
Church.

7. ERROR.
That Men now, are not to receive the Spirit, in that immediate 7. Error.
way to understand the Scriptures, in which it was given to them who wrote the
Scriptures.

Answer.
Surely Mr. Simpson will not deny, that the Spirit is given Answer.
to that whole Church which is the body of Christ; seeing Paul The Scriptures
cannot be understood, but by the same Spirit whereby they were given.
says, If any man have not Christ's Spirit, he is None of his, he is no Member
of his. Now the Spirit is always given to whomsoever it is given, by the
Father and the Son, as Christ taught his Disciples, promising them that the
Father would send the Spirit to them in his Name; and also, that he Himself
would send it to them from the Father. And was this Promise only made to Them,
and not to all the Faithful also, who should believe in Christ through their
Word? does not Paul say, Romans 12. 13. of the Whole Church, that by one Spirit
we are all baptized into one Body, and are all made to drink into one Spirit?
He says also to the Galatians, Chap. 4. because ye are Sens, God has sent the
Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying Abba Father. And thus it is manifest
that the whole Church of Believers, and every true member thereof, do receive
the Spirit of God. And do they not receive it alike immediately from God? Who
can give the Spirit of God to Man, but God Himself? when God promised to pour
out his Spirit in the last days upon all flesh, did he name any difference in
the pouring of it out, saying, some shall receive it immediately, and some
mediatly? No, but all that are counted worthy to receive the Spirit of God, do
receive it alike immediately from Him; neither has Christ left any Lieutenant
or Deputy in the World* to give his Spirit to men in his Absence: But he
Himself is always Present in his true Church to the end of the World, both to
teach them, and to give them his Spirit. He is too much in the Darkness of
Antichrist, that denies this.

It is manifest then, that all the true Church do alike receive the Spirit of
God; and that They all receive it alike immediately from God, seeing no Man nor
Angel can give the Spirit of God, but God himself gives his own Spirit to Whom
he pleases; by his own Word, which he Himself Ministers by his own Spirit; And
by this Spirit did Holy Men speak the Scripture; and by this Spirit only, do
Holy Men of God understand the Scripture, as Paul says, 1 Cor. 2. 12. Now We
have received not the Spirit of the World, but the Spirit which is of God, that
we might know the Things that are freely given to us of God; among which his
Word has a Chief Place: and after says, that by the Spirit* They had the Mind
of Christ, which Others want, who yet have the same Letter of the Word, and are
destitute of the Spirit. And so as the Faithful spoke the Word by the Spirit
of Faith, so through the same Spirit of Faith only so given, do the Faithful
understand it.

And though this thing be clear in it self, yet I judge it convenient to add
here the Testimonies of Luther and Calvin in this Matter. Luther says, The
Scriptures are not to be understood, but by that very Spirit by which they were
writ; which Spirit can be nowhere found more readily and effectually, then in
those Holy Letters of his, which He has written.

And Calvin says, The same Spirit that spoke by the Scriptures non nisi eo
Spiritu intelligendae sunt, quo scriptae sunt: qui Spiritus nusquam praesentius
and vivacius quam in ipsis Sacris suis quas scripsit Literis, inveniri potest.
Luth. Tom. 2. fol. 309. a.

Idem Spiritus qui per os Prophetarum locutus est, in corda nostra penetret
necesse est: ut persuade^t fideliter protulisse quod divinitus erat mandatum.
Calv. Institut. lib. 1. cap. 8.. 4.


month of the Prophets, it is Necessary that That should pierce into our
Hearts, to persuade us, that They faithfully delivered that which was committed
to them of God, So that We must necessarily have the same Spirit to know his
Mind, that They had to utter his Mind. Wherefore it is evident that Mr. Simpson
is not Orthodox in this Point neither.

8. ERROR.
That men now are to get Knowledge (to wit of the Scripture) 8. Error.
by Studies, and Humane Learning, and not by Inspiration.

Answer.
This Doctrine carries the Visible Mark of Antichrist upon Answer.
it; For it is only the Inspiration of God that enables a Divine Knowledge is
given by God, not got by Humane Learning.
Man to know the Things of God, and not a man's Study or Humane Learning: It is
not in this Case, in Him that Wills or Runs, but in God that shows Mercy.
Wherefore Christ has said* No Man knows the Son but the Father, and He to
whomsoever the Father will reveal him; Wherefore Paul prays for the Ephesians,
that God would give them the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, in the Knowledge
of Christ: without which Spirit of Revelation, Christ and the Father can never
be known. What can Humane Learning, and the Studies of Men find out of the
Mystery of Christ, which was hidden from Ages and Generations, as Paul
testifies, till the Spirit revealed it? Yea, Christ has taught, that God hides
these things of the Gospel from the Wise and Prudent, that is, the Studying and
Learned Men, and reveals them to Babes; and that this is his Good Pleasure so
to do. And so no man can know Christ and his Gospel, and what is the Faith,
Hope, and Love of the Gospel, but by the most present Teaching and Revelation
of God Himself by his Spirit. Wherefore to deny the Inspiration of Gods Spirit
now, and to ascribe all Knowledge of the Word of God to men's Studies, and to
Humane Learning, is the most Gross and Palpable Doctrine of Antichrist and his
Prophets; whereas, all the People of God are taught of God Himself, in all the
Things of God, as Christ has said; Because, no Man by his own Studies and
Pains can attain thereunto.

And in this matter, I shall also add the Testimony of Luther, and Latimer.
Luther says, No man sees one jot or title in the Nullus homo u^um iota in
Scripturis videt, nisi qui Spiritum Dei habet: omnes habent obscuratum cor ita
ut si etiam dicant and norint proferre omnia Scripturae, nihil tamen horum
sentiant aut vere cognoscant, etc. Spiritus enim requiritur ad totam Scripturam
and quamlibet ejus partem intelligendum, Luth. Tom. 3. fol. 169. a.
Scriptures, but He that has the Spirit of God: For all men have a Darkened
Heart, in such sort, that if they could speak, and knew how to bring forth all
things of the Scripture, yet have they not any true sense, or right Knowledge
of them. For (says he) the Spirit is required to the Understanding of the
whole Scripture, and of every part thereof.

And Latimer says, The Carnal and Philosophical understanding Carnalis and
Philosophica Scripturarum intelligentia non est Sapientia Dei quae a
sapientibus absconditur, parvulis revelatur. Latimer in his answer to Sir
Edward Baintons Letter.
of the Scriptures is not that Wisdom of God which is hid from the Wise, and
revealed to Little Ones.

9. ERROR.
That Humane Learning is as the Outworks to the Fort of 9. Error.
the Gospel, and as the outer Court to the Temple of the Gospel; and so, if you
will keep the Fort well, you must keep the Outworks strong; and if you will
preserve the inner, you must look to the outer Court.

Answer.
How highly has Mr. Simpson honored Socrates, Pythagoras, Answer.
Plato and Aristotle, etc. to make them a strong Guard Humane Learning is not
the Outworks to the Gospel.
for the Person of Christ! And how highly has he honored their Learning, to
make it a defense for the Gospel! And how weak and feeble has he sought to
render the Word of Faith, that must be thus defended by the Arts and
Disciplines of Men, as not being able to stand alone, and to defend it self?
Does this man truly believe in the Son of the Living God, who makes Him such an
helpless Idol? or does he believe the Word of the Gospel, which has given Eyes
to the Blind, and Ears to the Deaf, and Feet to the Lame, which has raised
the Dead, and cast our Devils, and commanded the Winds and Waves, and they have
obeyed? I say, does he believe this Word to be of God, which has done the very
Works of God, and yet openly affirms to the World, that it cannot maintain it
Self, or subsist without the Help of Philosophy? Is that Word, which mightily
and perfectly saves all the Elect, and that in despite of the World and the
Devil, and the Gates of Hell, not able to save it self without Humane Help?
Must that Word be secured by Aristotle, which delivers all the Elect from Sin,
Death, and Hell for ever? Are Grammar, Rhetoric, Logic, Ethics, Physics,
Metaphysics, Mathematics, the Weapons whereby we must defend the Gospel? Is
Mr. Simpson so ill a Proficient in Christianity, that he has not read, or does
not remember that of Paul, Ephesians. 6. 12. where he says, We wrestle not against
Flesh and Blood, but against Principalities, against Powers, against the Rulers
of the Darkness of this world, against Spiritual Wickedness in high places.

Wherefore take unto you the whole Armor of God, that you may be able to
withstand in the Evil Day, and having done all to stand.

Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with Truth, and having on the
Breast Plate of Righteousness.

And your feet shod with the Preparation of the Gospel of Peace.

Above all, taking the shield of Faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench
all the fiery darts of the Wicked.

And take the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword of the Spirit, which is the
Word of God.

Praying always with all Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit, and watching
thereunto with all Perseverance.

Here now are the true Christians Weapons, whereby he defends Himself through
the Word, and defends the Word against all the World.

And the same Paul, in 2 Cor. 10. 3. says,

For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh.

For the Weapons of our Warfare are not Carnal, but Mighty through God, to the
pulling down of Strong Holds:

Casting down Imaginations, and every High thing that exalts it self against
the Knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the
Obedience of Christ:

And having in readiness to revenge all Disobedience.

So that the faithful do not defend the Gospel by Philosophy, as is heat
henishly suggested; but by the Gospel, they defend the Gospel: and the Gospel
has in it self that Wisdom, Righteousness, Strength, and those Virtues which
are infinitely able to defend it self against all the World, and against all
the Powers of Darkness. And how contrary is this Doctrine to Mr. Simpsons? And
thus much for his Outworks to the Gospel.

Now for his outer Court to the Gospel: I know no other Humane Learning is not
the outer Court to the Gospel.
outer Court the Gospel ever had, then the Law of Moses, which Law was the
Preparation to the Gospel, and the Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, which
Humane Learning never was. But Humane Learning is the outer Court to
Antichrists Temple, it is the Schoolmaster to bring men to Antichrist. And
thus would Mr. Simpson also turn the Law out of its place, and set up Humane
Learning in the stead of the Law, and so would make void both Law and Gospel
for Humane Learning sake; Surely one would think he has some considerable
Advantage thereby, that he thus senses for it.

10. ERROR.
But what is the bottom (says he) of all this (that is, of some men's appearing
against Humane Learning, as the Unction 10. Errror.
of the Ministry, and against the Universities as the Fountain of the Ministry)
but this, That some say, They are one with Christ; and as Christ has the
Divine nature in Him, so every Believer also has: and he that has God in Him,
need not go to any Man to Learn? Whereas Joh. 17. Christ speaks of Believers
as at an infinite Distance from Himself; He their Lord, they his Servants. He
in Glory, they in the World. And if They be so united to Christ, then it will
follow, that Christ is not the only begotten Son of God; and that Christ and We
should be Equal, and He not our Lord, etc.

Answer.
Now does not all this declare a most woeful Ignorance of, Answer.
and Enmity to the Gospel of God our Savior? For is our Union with Christ, the
Foundation of Error? or have true Christians through their Union with God, have
God dwelling in them of a truth.
Believers no real Union with Christ, but imaginary? Do not the Saints partake
of the Divine Nature? does not Peter expressly affirm it, 2 Pet. 1. 4. where he
says, exceeding Great and Precious Promises are made to us, that We thereby
should be made partakers of the Divine Nature! and what is the Divine Nature,
but the very Nature of God? See Luther on the place.

Again, are Believers, as he affirms, at an infinite distance from Christ? If
this were true, what sad news would it be to the Church of God? How can this
Doctrine agree with these Scriptures? that Christ may dwell in your Hearts by
faith; and, Christ in You the hope of Glory; and, of Him are Ye in Christ
Jesus: Again, says Christ, I am the true Vine, and ye are the Branches: and so
as the Vine is in the Branches, and as the Branches are in the Vine, so is
Christ in Christians, and so are Christians in Christ. Again, John 14. 20. At
that day ye shall know (says Christ Himself, that you need not doubt of the
Doctrine) that I am in my Father, and You in Me, and I in you: And again, John
17. 21. says Christ, I pray not for These alone; that is, who now believe, but
also for All that shall hereafter believe in me, through their Word, That they
all may be One, as thou Father art in Me, and I in Thee, that They may be One,
as we are One: I in Them, and Thou in Me, that They may be made perfect in One,
that the World may know thou have sent me, and have loved Them as thou have
loved Me. Here now is no infinite Distance between Christ and Believers, but a
Wonderful and Admirable Nearness, and Oneness; which the learned Ignorance of
Philosophy understands not, nor the ignorant Knowledge of any carnal Christian.

But sure this Word of God is true, and the Saints receive it in faith, and
will not be deluded with any Philosophical, Sophistical or Antichristian
Glosses of False Teachers.

And thus does the Holy Word of God affirm plainly enough, that Christ and his
Christians are most nearly United; And yet does not this Union make an Equality
and rob Christ of his due Glory, seeing Christ is the Head, and They his
Members; Christ the First Born, and they his Brethren. And so as Christ has
the Pre-eminence in all things above them all, as becomes the Head and First
Born, so They have Communion with Him in all things, as becomes his Members and
Brethren.

And whereas he jests, and says, He that has God in Him, And need not learn
of Man.
needs not go to Man to learn; I do affirm this is true enough, and the
Scripture has affirmed it in several places; Isaiah says to the Spiritual
Church, All thy Children shall be taught of the Lord: And Christ says it is
written, They shall be all taught of God; He therefore that has heard and
learned of my Father, comes to Me. And John says, 1 John 2. 27. The
Anointing which Ye have received from Him abides in you, and Ye need not that
any Man teach you, but as the same Anointing teaches you all things, and is
Truth, and is no Lie. And this Doctrine is so manifest from the Scriptures,
that He is of Antichrist that denies it: For God inwardly teaches all his
People by his Spirit his own Self: and They so hear the Word by the Ministry of
Man, that it is always God that teaches them, and not Man.

11. ERROR.
Arts and Tongues are the Cups in which God drinks to us. 11. Error.


Answer. Answer.
Gods drinking to Christians in Arts and Tongues is a profane newness of speech.

In what a sad condition then are the Common and Plain People, that they cannot
Pledge him? But only the Learned Clergy keep these Cups to Themselves, as
heretofote they kept the Cup in the Sacrament.

But what strange Phrase is this? Savouring of the Ranters Religion; as if God
was the familiar Companion of the Clergy, and sometimes drank to them in a Cup
of Hebrew, sometimes in a Cup of Greek, and sometimes in a Cup of Latin; and
as if sometimes he drank to them in a Cup of Logic, and sometimes in a Cup of
Ethics, sometimes in a Cup of Metaphysics? Is not this truly, Profana vocum
novitas, a Profane Newness of Speech, never before heard of to my Knowledge in
the Church of God, and which the Apostle utterly condemns?

12. ERROR.
We shall never keep up Religion, if we do not keep up 12. Error.
Learning; but when Learning goes down, Religion goes down too.

Answer.
The Church is founded on Christ, and Christ and His Answer.
Church (it seems) are both founded on Humane Learning. It The Christian
Religion is not upheld by Humane Learning.
is no wonder now, that Mr. Simpson lays so great stress on it everywhere! And
that Men of his Religion, term the University, Fundamentum Ecclesiae, the
Foundation of the Church. And if Humane Learning do indeed uphold all Christian
Religion, let all Men and Magistrates come forth and uphold it in the Name of
God. But surely the Religion of the Gospel depends wholly on Christ, as Christ
on God: and there is no need of Humane Learning to support this, except God and
Christ are insufficient. We have a sure Word and Doctrine of the Gospel, that
remains firm for ever, and inviolable, and inconquerable, in and through
Christ, and his Spirit, and the Father; and all the World shall shatter in
pieces, and Humane Learning go down to Hell, and This shall stand fast for
ever: Heaven and Earth shall pass away, and not one jot or Tittle of my Word,
says Christ.

Believers, know that not one Point of their Religion depends on Humane
Learning; But all on Christ Himself, who is the true and Living Word. Wherefore
these are the fears of Antichrist and his Prophets, that their Religion will go
down with Humane Learning, because it was set up by it; But the true Religion
of the Gospel of God our Savior, was at first set up without it, and has
hitherto remained without it, and will abide so for ever. And to this the
Spirit and the Bride give witness.

13. ERROR.
Seeing Religious Foundations are so Ancient, then keep 13. Error.
them up: Your Destruction will never be but from Your Selves.

Answer.
Religious Foundations! What Religion founded the Universities is well known.
For by the Counsel of four Monks, Answer.
the Scholars of Bid, to wit, Rabanus, Albinus, Claudius, What Religion
founded the Universities.
and John Scotus, the University which had been translated from Athens to Rome,
was translated by Charles the Great from Rome to Paris, An. 791. And for our
English Universities of Cambridge and Oxford; Thus it is recorded, That the
Study of Cambridge was instituted, Anno 630. By Sigisbert King of the East
Angles, who after changed his Purple or Kingly Robes for a Friars Cool or Hood.
And the Lectures here, were begun by four Monks, of which Brother Studium
Cantabrigiense institutum noscitur, Anno 630. a Sigisberto Anglorum Orientalium
Rege, qui postea purpuram in cucullum commutavit. Arnoldus Wion Duacensis,
Benedictinus. lib. 5. cap. 94.
or Friar Ode (as they termed him) read Grammar, according to Priscians
Doctrine: Terricus an acute Sophister read Aristotle's Logic, according to the
Institutions of Porphyrius, and Averroes; Brother or Friar William, read
Tullies Rhetoric; and Gislebertus, read Divinity to them on Sundays, and
Saints days.

And for Oxford, that was founded by King Alfred, Anno An. 895. Rex Alfredus
hortante Neoto Monacho viro, doctissimo, Oxonii publicam Academiam instituit,
propositis Professoribus literarum praemiis. Georg. Lilius in Chron. Britan.
Regnante Edvardo primo, de studio Grantbrig, facta est Universitas, sicut est
Oxonium, per Curiam Romanam. Robert. Remington.
895. by the persuasion of Neotus the Monk; and Rewards were propounded for
those that would profess Learning there. Afterward both these Schools were
made Universities, in Edward the firsts time by the Court of Rome, as Robert
Remington affirms.

Yea farther, by the very Names of the Colleges, it is manifest, what Religion
set them up; some being founded in the Honor of one Saint, some of another
Saint; one being founded in the Honor of Christ, another in the honor of Jesus,
another in the Honor of Immanuel, another in the Honor of the Trinity; Whereby
they have rent the Name of God in pieces, each one seeking to honor that Name
of Christ most, in the Honor of which his College was founded; Yea, some
Colleges have been founded in the Honor of Christ's Body; as the Colleges of
Corpus Christi, in both Universities: and one in Oxford, for the Help of all
Dead Souls, and for their rescue out of Purgatiry: And so it is well known what
Religion founded them. And what Religion will in due time Destroy these
Foundations (if they be not Reformed) is as well known.

For, Wickliff whom God raised up to be one of the most Eminent Reformers of
the Christian Religion, since the Apostles times, speaks thus touching
Universities, Colleges and Quia enim Christus non ordinavt istas
Universitatates, sive Collegia, manifestum videtur, quod ista, sicut
Graduationes in illis, sunt vana Gentilitas introducta, in cujus signum tam
Collegiati quam and alii Graduati, quaerunt quae sua sunt, Charitatis Regulas
deserentes: ex qu pullulant invidiae, comparationes Personarum and Patriae, and
multa alia seminaria patris mendacii. Wickliff in Speculo Militantis Ecclesiae.
cap. 26.
Students. Seeing Christ (says he) has not ordained these Universities, or
Colleges, it is manifest that both They and the Graduations in them, are
nothing but so much vain Heathenism introduced; in Testimony whereof, as well
the Collegiates as other Graduates do seek the things which are their own,
leaving the Rules of Charity: From whence do arise Envies, and Comparisons
between Persons and Countries, and many other seed-plots of the Father of Lies.

Again, he having spoken of other Sects, says, Our Judgment -- Quantum ad
Collegia in Studiis suis generalibus est idem Judicium. Nam per ipsa, Patriae
and Personae, contra Charitatis regulas acceptantur, and intrinsecae invidiae,
cum peccatis aliis and perjuriis ac Simoniis contra instituta propria
cumulantur. Conceditur tamen, quod ex talibus Collegiis, sicut ex aliis sectis,
eveniunt multabona, non tamen tot, quot occasion peccati Diaboli, and peccati
primi Hominis. Ideo erubescat Fidelis, fructum talis commodi allegare Wickliff
lib. de cura Pastorali, cap. 10.
concerning Colleges is the same, as touching their General Studies: For
through Them, Persons and Countries are accepted against the Rules of Charity,
and inward Envies are heaped up, with other Sins, Perjuries, and Simonies,
against their own Statutes. Notwithstanding it is granted, that out of such
Colleges, many Good Things do arise, as well as out of other Sects; yet not so
Many, as by the occasion of the sin of the Devil, and the sin of the fiest Man.
And therefore let a Faithful Man be ashamed, to allege the fruit of such
Profit.

Again, says he, If these Colleges are in their Conversation Si Collegia ista
sunt in conversatione a Domino reprobata, quis dubitat quin sic nutrire eos non
foret Eleemosyna, sed Factionia and Partis contra Christum stulta praesumptio.
Omnes hae Sectae and omnes Novitates, quae non in Christo Domino fundatae sunt,
tentant Christum cum Satana, Mat. 4. cum spernunt Ordinationem liberam Sectae
ejus, and praeeligunt servilem sectam aliam, minus bonam; acsi nollent per
gradus quos Deus ordinat, in Sion Coelestem ascendere, sed per lationem Satanae
ad Templi pinnacula transvolvere. Quae ergo Eleemosyna est, sic sovere puerulum
talem Diaboli in Castris Cainiticis contra Christum? Idem.
rejected of the Lord, who doubts but that to nourish Them in this Way, is no
Alms, but the foolish Presumption of a Faction and Party against Christ? For
all these Sects, and all Newnesses which are not founded on Christ the Lord,
they tempt Christ with the Devil, Mat. 4. seeing they despise the free
Ordination of his Sect, and do rather choose another servile Sect, less good;
as if they would not ascend into the Heavenly Sion, by the steps which God has
Ordained, but would fly to the Pinnacle of the Temple by the carrying of the
Devil. What Alms therefore is it, to cherish such a Child of the Devil, in
Cains Castles, against Christ?

He also affirms, that one Idiot through the Help of the Grace of God, does
more Good in the Church, then many Graduates in the Schools and Colleges: and,
that Gods Inspiration of such* does more profit the Community of the saithful,
then all the Universities, and all their Studies and Privileges.

Thus has Wickliff witnessed in this Matter, who was also Himself Master of
Baliol College in Oxford: And Philip Melancthons testimony of Wickliff.
Melancthon gives this Testimony of Him, Equidem sapientem virum judico fuisse
Wicklefum Anglum, qui omnium primus, quod ego sciam, vidit Universitates fuisse
Satanae Synagogas; that is, I do indeed judge Wickliff of England to have been
a Wise man, who for ought I know, first of all, saw Universities to have been
the Synagogues of Satan.

John Hus also, that excellent Instrument of Jesus Christ, John Hus. Pedibus
conculcabitur Corona Superbiae. Nam muliorum Doctoratus and Magistratus, qui
suffocato in ipsis prorsus verbo Evangelii, jam inverecunde nimis magnificant
umbrias and dilatant Phylacteria sua, and amant primas Cathedras in Scholis and
salutari in Foro, vocari ab hominibus Rabbi; ac per hoc cedunt in Apparatu and
Armamento Corporis Mystici Antichristi, quoniam Scriptum est, Est* Rex super
omnes filios Superbiae. Joh. Hus. Lib. de Regno Antichristi, cap. 14.
and blessed Martyr, says, speaking on that Scripture, Isa. 28. Woe to the
Crown of the Pride of Ephraim, and the Crown of Pride shall be trodden under
foot, says, The Doctorships and Masterships of many, who having the Word of
God wholly choked in them, do now too shamelesly make broad their
Phylacteries, and enlarge the borders of their Garments, and love the chief
Chairs in the Schools, and to be saluted in the Markets, and to be called of
men Doctor; And by this, They go in the Apparel and Harness of the Mystical
body of Antichrist, because it is written, that He is the King of all the
Children of Pride. And the Crown of Pride, of these Children of Pride, shall be
trodden down.

And thus, as it is manifest, what Religion founded the Universities; so it is
as manifest, what Religion will, in the appointed What Religion will destroy
these foundations.
time, destroy these Foundations, if they be not truly and thoroughly Reformed.
For surely as they are, if the work of Christ go forward in the World (as it
necessarily must do (notwithstanding the present Defection) in the appointed
time) They can no more be held up, then the House built on the sand, in the
time of Tempest. For the true Spiritual Church is built on the Foundation of
the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ Himself being the chief Corner Stone;
and so it is firmly founded upon a Rock, and can never fall. But the
Universities are built on the Philosophers and Heathens, Plato and Aristotle
being the chief Corner Stones; and so They are built upon the Sand. And neither
can their own Hands uphold them, nor the Secular Arm establish them, in that
Day, wherein the Lord alone shall be exalted. But it is not Men of Moral and
Civil Religion and Righteousness, who will do this Work, and execute this
Vengeance; for the Enchantments of the Universities are too strong and mighty
for all Humane Spirits; But the Called, Chosen, and Faithful Ones of Christ,
when He shall summon them, and call them to his foot, They shall not stand on
Complements, Formalities and Niceties; nor regard Friendship or Enmity; but
through the Power of Faith, shall break through all, that can be said and
objected by the Wisdom, Policy, Prudence, and Religion of Man, and shall
execute the Righteous Judgments of the Lord, on these Mothers of Harlots, and
Fornications of the Nations.

And whereas he says, their Destruction will never be but of Themselves: I do
verily believe that: For seeing their Root is rottenness, their Fruit must
needs be Destruction. Yea, the Lord will raise up his Word in the midst of
them, to destroy them: For the more the Word of the Lord shall blow upon the
University, the more shall this Grass wither, and the Flower thereof, that is,
Humane Learning fade away, till it be at last quite dried up. And this is the
University, whose Day is coming, when Iniquity shall have an End.

And thus have I done with these Things; There were many Other things in that
Sermon, as contrary to the Gospel, which for brevities sake I have omitted.

Now what a sad Thing is it, that such poysonful Doctrine should be poured
forth into an University Congregation, and that by the Ministry of such a Man?
And if the Ceremonies of the Law were in use under the Gospel, how ought we to
rendour Garments at the Hearing of these Things?

And now, O blessed Lord Jesus, who wast Crucified, Dead, The Conclusion.
and Buried, but yet art risen from the Dead by the Eternal Spirit, and art
ascended on High to fill all things, have Mercy on thy poor Church, which is so
grievously rent and torn this day, by Wolves in Sheeps Clothing; and is thus
hurt and consumed by poysonful Doctrines of Men, who seek Themselves, and their
own Things, to the Harm and Ruin of thy poor People! O thou Son of the Living
God, who art the Way, the Truth, and the Life, how shall the Kingdom of
Antichrist be brought down, when the Hands of such Men, who seem Pillars in the
Church, are stretched forth so strongly, to hold it up? And how shall the Days
of Antichrist be shortened, when his Kingdom is coming forth again, in the
Greatest Deceiveableness of Unrighteousness, that has ever yet appeared in the
World, to delude the Nations? O Lord, remember all thy Promises, and make haste
to destroy Babylon the Great, with all its mysteries of Righteousness and
Unrighteousness, and let it sink as a Millstone in the Sea, without any hope or
possibility of a Resurrection. And seeing there is no hand of Man stretched out
for this Work, but all Hands are against it; do thou destroy it, O Lord,
without hand, even with the Spirit of thy mouth, and brightness of thy Coming,
according to the Truth of thy Promises, and the unutterable Sighs and Groans of
thy Spirit occasioned thereby, in the Hearts of all thy faithful and Elect.
Even so Lord, And let thy Kingdom come, and make no long tarrying.

AMEN.
A TESTIMONY From the WORD Against DIVINITY-DEGREES IN THE University, OR, Any
Academical Degrees made use of, for the Ministry of the Gospel.
THE Universities (whose very Soul and Life, do lie in Humane Learning, and
School Divinity) that they might gain the greater Profit to themselves, and
Glory to their Children, have (after the example of the Heathen) given their
children Degrees in Divinity (as They in Arts) and the Glorious Titles of
Batchelors, Masters, and Doctors in Divinity, as so many Crowns of Gold upon
their Heads, to win them Honor and Reputation with all People who have been
under the Delusion of Antichrist.

And in the confirming of these Graduations or Degrees, (which also is done for
a sum of Money) they give the Graduates License and Power to Preach, and to
Expound the Scriptures, and that by the sole Authority of the University.

For the Vice-Chancelor, admitting a Bachelour in Divinity to his Degree, uses
these Words in the Name of the University, Procancellarius Bacchalaureum
Theologiae admittens, his verbis utitur; Admittimus te ad enarrandum omnes
Apostolicas Epistolas, in nomine Patris, Filii, and Spiritus sancti* Doctorem
admittens ita dicit, Admittimus te ad interpretandum universam sacram
Scripturam, tam veteris quam novi Testamenti, In nomine Patris, Filii and
Spiritus sancti. cap. 20. De Ceremoniis in Gradibus conserendis.
We admit you to declare all the Apostolical Epistles, in the name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. And so the Batchelour in Divinity, has Power
according to his Degree, only to deal with the Apostolical Epistles, but must
go no farther. And admitting a Doctor to his Degree, the Vice-Chancelour says
thus, We admit you to Interpret and Profess all the Holy Scriptures, both of
the Old and New Testament, in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

And thus does the University, through power received from Antichrist, give
men, chiefly for Money, Divinity-Degrees; and through those Degrees, it gives
Authority and privilege to Batchelors in Divinity to expound part of the
Scriptures, and to Doctors to expound and profess all the Scriptures; and they
that gain these Degrees to Themselves are (as there is good reason) the Great
Men in account with the University, and also with the Carnal People of
Antichrist, how destitute soever they be of the Faith and Spirit of the Gospel.

Wherefore I cannot choose, but give in my Testimony against this Glorious and
Gainful Privilege of the Universities, to wit, their conferring upon their
Children Degrees in Divinity, and creating them Masters in that Mystery which
none can teach but God Himself; and which none can learn but true Believers,
who are born of God, and are his true Disciples.

And so I do openly affirm, that Degrees in Divinity (for I Universitydegrees
in Divinity, Antichristian.
meddle with none else) given by the Universities to their Children, are
plainly and grossly Antichristian, being most manifestly contrary to the Word of
the Gospel, and the Light that shines in the New Testament. 1.


For first, In the Gospel of God our Savior, we learn, The Gospel against
Divinity-Degrees in the Universities.
That only a New and Heavenly Birth, makes Men to be of the true Church; and
that the pouring forth of the Spirit on these Children of God, according to the
measure of the Gift of God, makes Christians of several Degrees in this Church,
and not Academical Graduations.

Secondly, In this Gospel also we are taught, that all the 2.
true Ministers of Christ are Equal, and not One Superior to Another, as these
Degrees make them.

Thirdly, In this Gospel also we are taught, that the true 3.
Greatness amongst Christ's true Disciples, does not stand in Academical
Degrees, or Worldly Honor and Dignities, but in the Faithfuls near and exact
following of Christ, in Word and Conversation; and that the sons of Zebedee, in
desiring Superiority and Pre-eminence above the other Disciples, contrary to
the Life and Doctrine of Christ, did grievously offend, and were therefore
sharply rebuked of Christ.

Fourthly, Yea here, we hear Christ himself forbidding 4.
this very Thing to his Disciples, that Antichrist and his Prophets might have
no cloak for doing the contrary, where his Gospel is truly taught and
published. For Matthew. 23. Christ does forbid his Disciples before all the
Multitude, to be as the Jewish Rabbis or Doctors, who (says Christ) do their
works to be seen of Men, and disguise themselves with different Garments or
Habits from others (that they might be the more taken notice of, and have the
more respect) and do love the uppermost Rooms at Feasts, and the chief Seats in
the Synagogues, and greetings in the Markets, and to be called of men Doctor,
Doctor; but says Christ to his Disciples, Be not ye called Doctors, for one is
your Master, even Christ, and Ye all are Brethren, and so equal.

Whence it is evident, that this Practice of Universities and Colleges in
giving men Degrees in Divinity, as they call it, and Titles, Habits, and
Dignities accordingly, is contrary to the express Command of Jesus Christ, and
so is a mere Invention of Antichrist, to put Honor and Reputation on his
Ministers.

It is also manifest, that this practice of the Universities, has all along
made many Doctors in the Church, which yet never were Christ's true Disciples.

It is also manifest, that these Degrees and Titles do cause men to be Proud,
and to lift Themselves up above their Brethren, and to think Themselves
Something when they are Nothing; such Graduates usually proving Theologi
Gloriae, Divines of glory; and not Theologi crucis, Divines of the Cross, as
Luther speaks; that is, proud and haughty Clerks, and not the humble Ministers
of Christ crucified.

These Degrees also do break the Simplicity of the People of God, and do
prejudice the Communion of Saints.

Farther, these Degrees are a Dangerous Snare to simple People; causing them to
receive all for good Doctrine that is delivered by Such Men, though it be never
so Erroneous and Unsound; inasmuch as their High Titles which they have gotten
in these High Places, and the Reputation of their Learning, strikes an awe into
them, that they dare not once question what Such Men deliver, much less
contradict it.

Wherefore, as much of the Mystery of Iniquity is discovered and dissolved
already, so there is no doubt, but that this Glorious Relic thereof, to wit,
Divinity-Degrees, will also in due time follow, as the Lightnings of God shall
enlighten the World.

And seeing so much of the Light of the Gospel has shined forth in this Age,
it were to be wished that the Universities, Heads of Colleges, and Clergy,
would not wilfully for Worldly Honor, Respects, and Advantage sake, shut their
Eyes against it, or rather with open Eyes, maliciously seek to extinguish it,
but that they would be contented, to have all their Honor lie in their
Likeness to Christ, who was in the Church as One that Served; and who was so
far from receiving Honor, and taking Titles from Men, to make Himself thereby
of Account in the World, that being Lord of all, he made Himself of no
Reputation; and that they would reject all the Pomp and Pride of the false
Church, which being destitute of Faith and the Spirit, makes It self and its
Ministers Glorious in Outward Names and Titles.

Now though this be a plain Case in the Gospel, and there needs no Testimony of
Men, yet for the fuller Conviction of the World, I shall add the Witness of
other Believers, that it may appear, that I am not alone in this Matter; though
to The Saints and Martyrs against Divinity-Degrees.
have been alone with the Word, would have been sure and safe enough.

In Edward the Third's time, there was an excellent discourse set forth,
called, The Plow-mans complaint, etc. which testifies Plowmans complaint.
against these Divinity-degrees, in these words, Antichrist (says it) makes
Masters too many, who teach the People with their own Teaching, and leave Gods
Teaching which is needful, and hide it with quaint Glosses from the mean
People. But (says he) these Glossers object, that they desire not the state of
Mastery to be worshipped thereby, but the more to profit the People when they
preach the Word. For they say, the People will more believe the preaching of a
Master, that has taken a State of School, then the preaching of another Man
that has not taken the State of Mastership. To which he replies, That it is no
need that Masters bear Witness to Gods Teaching or Word, that it is True and
Good; neither (says he) can any man by his State of Mastership which God has
forbidden, draw any Man from his sin, rather then another man which is not a
Master, nor will be none, because it is forbidden him in the Gospel. And a
little after, He says, Seeing we are to believe a man's Works more then his
Word, the Deed shows well of these Masters, that they desire Mastership,
rather for their own Worship, then for Profit of the People, etc.

After, John Wickliffe that chosen servant of Christ, did John Wickliff.
witness against these Antichristian Degrees, who says, The Clergy do busily
seek their own Worldly Worship, and Glory, and by great Gifts and vain Costs,
to be called Masters in Divinity, and to speak before Lords, and to sit at meat
with Them, and not to teach truly the Gospel to all manner of Men, by meek
Life, and freely, as Christ bids.

The same Wickliffe on Mat. 23. cap. 4. says, Licet in quibusdam studiis Nomen
Doctoris sit excellentius, cum sit Ritus Gentilis ex multis Honorbus and
statibus aggregatus, tamen in textu Apostoli sumitur simplicius, pro quocunque
Fideli, qui notabiliter docet Fdem Catholicam; and sic dicit nomen Doctoris
Meritum and Laborem, and interimit Superbiam and status Eminentiam quoad
Mundum. Wickliffe Tractat. in cap. 23. Mat.
Although in some studies, the name of Doctor imports Excellency, seeing it is
a Heathenish Rite, heaped together of many Honors and States, yet in the Text
of the Apostle, it is taken more plainly, for any Faithful Man, who does
notably teach the Catholic Faith: and so the name Doctor, speaks Desert and
Labor, and takes away Pride and Eminency of State, according to this World.

Again, says he, Every Sect, State and Operation, which Breviter, omnis Secta,
Status vel Operatio, quam Christus non approbat in suo Evangelio, est
rationabiliter dimittenda; ideo cum Christus non approbat sed reprobat Gentile
Magisterium supradictum, patet quod est de Ecclesia dimittendum. Idem.
Christ does not approve in his Gospel, is in reason to be rejected; and
therefore seeing Christ does not approve, but reprove the forenamed Heathenish
Mastership, it is manifest that it is to be discharged, and cast out of the
Church.

Again, says he, Note that the Name of an Office, does Nota quod nomen Officii
multum distat a nomine Graduationis Scholasticae, gentiliter introductae.
Wickliffe, in Sermon. Domini in Monte.
much differ from the name of a Scholastical Graduation, heathenishly brought
in.

He says also, That Christ has specially forbidden his Disciples, Heathenish
or Scholastical Mastership; and that Christ would have the name of Master or
Doctor singularly reserved to Himself, seeing He, by reason of his Hypostatical
Cum periculum and superfluitas sit in isto Nomine, videtur quod istud Nomen sit
rationabiliter fugiendum.
Union, has a certain Excellency which cannot agree to any other of Mankind.
And concludes, That seeing there is Danger in attributing to Men the Title of
Master or Doctor in Divinity, therefore in good Reason, those Titles are to be
shuned in the Church of God.

John Hus also says, That they who take to Themselves Academical John Hus lib.
de Regno, etc. Antichristi. c. 14.
Degrees, and Titles answerable, do go in the Apparel and Harness of the
Mystical Body of Antichrist, who is the King of all the Children of Pride, to
wit, of the Masters and Doctors in Divinity.

Again, in another place He speaks to this purpose, Christ (says he) says,
John 8. Neither came I of my Self, but the Father sent me; so the Saints have
come in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and in the Name of Jesus they have
performed their Priesthood, and he is the Crown of their Glory: Ac per hoc
distinguuntur a quibusdam aliunde Coronatis, ut Magistri and Doctores, and
Baccalaurei, nec non aliis varii generis Titulorum, in multiplici Scientia
hujus Mundi, etc.
and by this, They are distinguished from certain, who are otherwise Crowned as
Masters, and Doctors, and Batchelors, and from others of other kind of Titles,
according to the manifold Wisdom of this World: for These excelling Others by
their Pains, and through their own Science and Learning, are notably beautified
with their own Titles and Crowns, and therefore do rather perform their Office
in their own Name, then in Christ's. Thus he.

Luther speaks much to this purpose also: but I shall have Luther.
occasion to use him more largely.

Zuinglius on that Scripture, Mat. 23. Be ye not called Doctor, Zuinglius.
Audis hic hujusmodi Titulos Magistrorum and Doctorum non ex Deo esse, quum
Christus hoc vetat. Zuingl.
for one is your master, Christ, etc. says thus, Thou hear here, that these
Titles of Masters and Doctors, are not of God, seeing Christ forbids them.

Conradus Pelican also, a godly Preacher, having the Conradus Pellican^.
sense of this on his Deathbed, desired his friends, that he Melch. Adam* in
Vita Pellicani.
might by no means be buried, as the manner then was, in the Habit of a Doctor,
quia sperabat se resurrecturum ad judicium non ut Doctorem, sed ut humilem
Christianum; because he hoped he should rise to Judgment, not as a Doctor, but
as an humble Christian.

Now methinks, the clear and precious Word of Christ alone, should take off the
Universities and Clergy from giving and receiving these Degrees and Titles, if
they do in good earnest profess themselves to be his Disciples; but how much
ought They to be ashamed and confounded, when they see Other Believers, for the
love of Christ and his Word, utterly renouncing these Things before their
faces, that They, if they persist, may be left wholly without excuse before
Christ and his Church!

And now for the Conclusion of this matter, I shall hold forth to the
Universities, the true Degrees, which Christ the Son of God, did Himself take
in the Church of God, and which all his Saints are to take after his Example.
The true Divinity-Degrees in the Church of God, which Christ Himself first took.


Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God, the first and chief Teacher of the
New Testament, did neither commence Batchelour nor Doctor in Divinity, but he
took five other Degrees, wherein the University Graduates are usually wanting.

Christ's first Degree in the Church was this, that He was the Son of God, as
the Lord said to him, Thou art my Son, Christ's first degree in the Church, was,
His Divine Sonship.
this day have I begotten thee; and again, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased. And this is the first Degree that Christ himself took in the
Church, his Divine Sonship according to his Humane Nature. And this Degree all
the Faithful take with Him, for They all are begotten of God, and born of the
immortal Seed of his Word; and their being the Children of God through Faith,
is the first Degree also that They take in the Church.

2. Christ's second Degree in the Church, was His Unction with the Spirit; for
being the Son of God, the Spirit of God His second degree, His Unction.
came and sat upon him in the form of a Dove, which was his New Testament
Baptism: and his First Degree was confirmed to him by the Father, when he took
this Second; for whilst the Spirit rested on him, a Voice from Heaven said,
Thou art my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleassd.

And this second Degree also, all the Faithful take with Christ; for They all
as his Fellows, are anointed together with Him, the Chief among them; they as
Members are anointed together with Him the Head, with the same Oil of Gladness;
and being Sons, God sends the Spirit of his Son into their Hearts; and the
Spirit of the Son in their hearts, is a sure Testimony they are Sons: and their
second Degree also confirms their first; to wit, the Gift of the Spirit, their
Sonship.

3. Christ's third Degree was this, that after He was anointed His third degree,
His victory over temptation.
by the Spirit, and declared to be the Son of God, then for the Proof of both,
He was led by the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the Devil, forty
days and nights together; and in all these Temptations, through his Sonship,
and Unction he overcame the Devil, and came away Conqueror: And this was his
third Degree in the Church of God, that the anointed Son of God overcame the
Devil, in all the greatest, and most grievous Temptations, he could assault him
withal.

And this third Degree also, all the Faithful take with Christ; for when they
are the anointed Sons of God, Satan sets upon them, with all sorts of
Temptations, and they are led by the Spirit of God, to wrestle with
Principalities, and Powers, and Spiritual Wickedness set in high Places, and
the Rulers of the Darkness of this World: and yet They in the strength of their
Sonship and Unction with Christ, do also with Him, tread Satan under their
feet, and go away Conquerors through the Grace of God in them; and this also is
their third Degree in the true Church.

4. Christ's fourth Degree in the Church was this, that after His fourth degree.
his Sonship, Unction, and Victory over the Devil in all Temptations, His
teaching the Word.
He then went forth as a fit and able Minister to teach the Gospel of the
Kingdom, against all the Enmity and Opposition of the World, Devil, and false
Church, as it is taught us, Matthew. 4. v. 11. and 17.

And this fourth Degree also, all the truly Faithful take with Christ. For,
after they through Faith are the Sons of God, and through their Sonship are
Anointed, and through their Unction overcome the Devil in all his Temptations,
then also they preach the Gospel of the Kingdom, being all of them a chosen
Generation, and royal Priesthood, to show forth the Virtues of Him that has
called them out of Darkness, into his mavelous Light, as Peter testifies: and
they all speak as they do Believe, and have Experience: and there Sonship,
Unction, and Victory over Temptation, is as sufficient a Ground for them to
teach, as it was for Christ to teach; and so they without any Regard of the
Laws of Antichrist, or Orders of the Clergy, go forth to teach the Everlasting
Gospel, as Christ did before them; and this is the fourth Degree of Christ and
the Faithful in the Church.

5. Christ's fifth and last Degree, which he took in the His fifth degree.
Church was this, that he having both preached and lived His dying for the Word.
the Word, whereat the World and Worldly Church were wholly offended, and
enraged; did at the last, willingly confirm his Doctrine with his Death, and
did seal to the Truth of it, with his Blood; exposing Himself to the most
shameful and ignominious Death of the Cross, to confirm his Gospel to his
Church; and this was the highest and most glorious Degree that Christ took in
his Church, as Christ testifies, when speaking of his sufferings, he says, Now
is the Hour come, that the Son of Man should be glorified.

And this fifth Degree also, all the truly Faithful do take with Christ,
either in Deed, if need require, or in Preparation and Readiness of mind, and
that whilst they live in outward Peace. All the blessed Martyrs have taken this
highest Degree in the Church with Christ; and all the rest of his Seed have
been, and are ready to take it also, when it is the good Will of their Heavenly
Father, seeing They can say, in the same Faith and Spirit with Christ, even in
this matter, Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me; yet not My
Will, but Thine be done: for they also are come to do the Will of Him that sent
them, even to the laying down their Lives.

Now these are the only Degrees, that Christ Himself took in the Church, and
which all the Saints take with Him; and the true Spiritual Church of Believers,
allows and approves no other Degrees but These.

And what now are the University-Degrees in Divinity to these? they are Degrees
in Antichrists Church only; and every Heathen or Humane Creature, Turk or
Infidel, may take them as well as They, with a little Time and Pains, and Money.

Wherefore (that I may turn my speech a little to the University) Do thou
University (if thy Day, and Time of Visitation be not already past) lay this to
Heart, how much thou have departed from the Gospel of Christ in this Matter, as
well as in all the rest; and have received the Doctrine, and Laws, and Methods,
and Manners of Antichrist, wherewith thou have deceived Thy Self as well as the
Nations. And thou University, have like thy own mother Babylon, Mystery
written on thy Forehead; for thou have taken to Thy Self this Glorious Title,
ALMA MATTER, the Beautiful Mother, which only belongs to Jerusalem from above:
and though thou have brough forth a company of Prodigious Children, Heathenish,
Foolish, Vain, Vile and Abominable, yet have thou called them Learned, and
given them Degrees in Divinity, contrary to the Degrees in the Gospel, and have
sent them forth, into every City, Country, Town, and Village, as Ministers of
Christ, yea as Sons of the Morning, though yet very Unbelievers and altogether
destitute of the Spirit: And thus have thou deceived the Nations, and given
them a false Ministry instead of a true; and by this false Ministry, a false
Word in stead of the Gospel; and the World has not at any time received a
Greater Woe, nor more Grievous Plague then from Thee: Wherefore thus says the
Word of the Lord, The day of thy Vengeance is coming, and the Years wherein
thou shall be made Desolate; and thy Dainty and Goodly Things shall depart from
thee, and thou shall find them no more at all; and the voice of Musicians and
Pipers shall no more be heard in Thee; For in Thee is found the Blood of
Prophets and of Saints, and of all that have been slain upon the earth. Thy
Humane Learning, to wit, thy Philosophy and School Divinity, and the false
Ministry that they have set up, and the false Christians, that have proceeded
from that Ministry, have devised and executed all these Murders, and Massacres,
on the true Saints of God.

Quis est sapiens and intelliget haec? FINIS.
The Testimony of Martin Luther upon the whole matter, To wit, touching
Universities, Humane Learning, or Philosophy, University-Degrees, etc.
MArtin Luther in his Answer to Ambrosius Catharinus, expounding the Vision
concerning Antichrist, Dan. 8. speaks thus:

The twelfth and last face of Antichrist, is that Chaos, and open Gate of Hell,
yet very comely to behold, to wit, the Universities; into which, Perjurie, and
the Abuse of Gods Name, are the Entrance; and the Progress is a free and most
licentious Conversation, in all manner of Wickedness. And yet under these Sins
and Destructions, Science and Sapience are promised. Yea Titles and Degrees are
given in stead of Rewards.

But what do they perform at length? First, the more Choice Youth of Christian
People are here prostituted, and are cast into the open Throat of Hell; that I
verily think this Destruction was figured by the Idol Moloch, to whom anciently
they made their Choice Children to pass through the fire. Afterward Aristotle
being read to them, and not rightly understood, the Wits of Christian Youth are
exercised with Heathenish and Humane Learning, yea, are quite blinded and
oppressed with it. And in stead of the Word of God, the Doctrine of Antichrist
is delivered, that it may seem, the Devil Himself could not bring forth a more
subtle and effectual Invention and Engine, utterly to extinguish the Gospel,
then to set up Universities. Wherein, under the Pretense of Christian Doctrine,
nothing should be taught, but that which is most contrary to the Christian
Faith. And if at any time it seems good, to call forth the Choicest to the
Government of the Churches, they call them out of these Stews and Dens.

And truly to me, this last Face of Antichrist seems to be the most hurtful of
all, because this has the Pretense of the Word, when all the rest have only
the color of Example; and this is plainly Schola Hidoth, the School of
Propositions, of which anon. For it is incomparably the Greatest Prejudice,
under the color of the Word, to teach Things contrary to the Word; seeing the
Face of Examples, is formed and strengthened by the Face of the Word, which
otherwise would soon come to nothing, if the Word should reign in its Genuine
Sense; and also, seeing the pretense of Examples does only deceive the Manners;
but the Pretense of the Word, overthrows the Word. But if by any Grace of God,
the Universities should receive the Word (to wit, instead of Philosophy and
School Divinity) how soon would the Papacy, with all its Faces or Appearances
perish? seeing this Face, to wit, the Universities, is the Prop, Bones, and
whole Strength of that Knigdom of Faces.

This Deceitful Face seems to be foretold, Rev. 9. which Rev. 9. from the first
to the twelfth verse, expounded by Luther. Verse. 1.
Scripture, it is worth the while to rehearse, and a little to unfold. For John
says, The first Angel sounded, and I saw a Star fall from Heaven unto the
Earth, and to him was given the Key of the Bottomless pit, etc. I will here
make trial a little (says he) with my own Apprehension. Now certain it is,
that by Angels through all the Apocalypse, is meant the Overseers of Churches,
as does plainly appear out of the second and third Chapters, where it is
written, to the Angel of Ephesus, Smyrna, and others. Further, that other sort
of Angels which sounds the Trumpet, of which there are seven mentioned, chap.
8. cannot agree to any but the Roman Bishop, seeing no others are said to sound
with Trumpet. Now to sound wtth Trumpet, can be nothing else, as appears by the
consequence of the Text, and the following effects, then to make Decrees, which
none ever arrogated to Himself, besides the Bishop of the Roman Church. Neither
is it said in vain, that they prepared Themselves to sound, seeing chiefly in
these Popes, there has been an impatient fury, and unquiet Tyranny, to make
Laws, and thereby to subject Others to Themselves.

But let us come to our first Angel, who was the first among three, who were to
bring three Woes upon the Earth, and this is He, who did first institute and
confirm Universities, whom it is not easy for me to name, Histories so varying
in this matter. But let him be whosoever he was, he was a Star fallen from
Heaven to Earth, whether it were Alexander of Hales, or (which I rather think)
St. Thomas, who only (after the Universities were approved, and this Angel had
sounded) was either the first, or chief Author of bringing in Philosophy into
the Christian World, being the most Aristotelian, yea plainly Aristotle
Himself, to whom, as to the Earth, he fell from Christ the Heaven, having
obtained the Authority of that most Wicked Angel, approving such Studies.

And he received the Key of the Bottomless Pit, and opened Ver. 2.
it, and brought forth to us Philosophy, long ago Dead and Damned by the
Doctrine of the Apostles: and from thence ascended the Smoke of that Pit, that
is, the mere Words and Opinions of Aristotle and the Philosophers, as the Smoke
of that great Furnace: for then Philosophy prevailed, and became of large
Extent and Power, so that Aristotle was made equal with Christ, in respect of
Authority and Faith. And hereby was the Sun darkened, (even Christ the Sun of
Righteousness and Truth; Moral Virtues being brought in, instead of Faith, and
infinite Opinions instead of Truth) and the air also, with the Smoke of the
Pit; that it may be understood, not to be an Eclips of the Sun, but the
obscurity of the Air and Sun, by the Smoke of the Pit ascending, to wit, Humane
Doctrines, obscuring Christ and his Faith, as the Sun and Air.

And out of the Smoke of the Pit, there came forth Locusts Ver. 3.
on the Earth. Here the People of the Universities, bread and born of
Philosophy, are called Locusts by a most fit Name, because they are without a
King, that is, Christ, and fly in Companies, as is said, Prove. 3. and also
because they waste and burn up all green things, wherever they light; and so
the Grammarians think they have their name Locustae, Locusts, a loco usto and
vastato, from the place which they burn and waste. And so, this People of the
Universities, consumes and burns up all the green Pasture of Christ, that is,
the fruit of Faith.

And Power was given to Them, as the Scorpions of the earth have Power: to wit,
to wound the Conscience of Men, because the green Fruit of Faith being wasted,
which heals the Consciences of Men, it cannot be but the Conscience must be
hurt and prejudiced.

And it was commanded them, that they should not hurt the Grass of the Earth,
nor any Green Thing; that is, that Ver. 4.
they should not hurt the Elect. For they do not hurt all, neither do natural
Locusts hurt every green thing, but some certain Place: so it is here.

But only those Men who have not the Mark or Seal of God in their Foreheads;
that is, some Grass they should hurt, to wit, those who have not Faith, which
is the Mark of God, which we carry in a pure Conscience and free Conversation.

And it was commanded Them, that they should not kill Ver. 5.
them, but only should torment them five months. This seems to be spoken of
Moral Doctrine, which seeing it teaches us the Knowledge of Sin like the Law of
God, it does not kill, but only afflict a man with Vain Studies, wherein he is
always learning, and yet never coming to the Knowledge of the Truth: For They
who are killed with the Letter, are quickened with the Eternal Spirit, they are
not tormented five Months, that is, the whole time of their Sensual Life, in
which Moral Virtues reign. And we see by Experience, that all Moral Divines,
are of a most Evil and unhappy Conscience, full of Scruples and Unquietness,
and have Power neither of Good nor Evil: and therefore it follows,

And their Torment is, as the Torment of a Scorpion when it strikes a Man.
Behold here a Wounded Conscience: for here he expounds what he had said before,
that they are not savingly killed, nor spiritually quickened.

And in those days men shall seek Death, and shall not Ver. 6.
find it, and shall desire to Dye, and Death shall flee from them: to wit, the
Death of Sin, which does too much live in the Conscience, and yet is not
rightly known; for if it were known, presently it being slain, would perish:
But this cannot Ver. 7.
Aristotle's Ethics do, but it is the Office of the Letter and Praeparatis in
praelium, and armatis omni genere Doctrinae, and art loquendi, arguendi,
respondendi, exhortandi: potentes sunt ad invadendum and defendendum quamcunque
velint Veritatem, aut Speciem Veritatis, armati nihilominus omni apparentia
Facetiae and Honestatis. J. Hus. Et super capita eorum Coronae: i. e. Tituli
Magistrales, vel Dignitatum and Graduum in Ecclesia, investitura. J. Hus.
the Spirit.

And the shapes of the Locusts were like to Horses prepared to Battle, to wit,
of Scholastical Disputation and Conflict. He describes the War by this
Allegory; for they are ready to argue pro and contra (as they speak.) And on
their Heads were, as it were, Crowns of Gold: that is, the Names and Titles of
Degrees, as, Magister noster Eximius: sacrae Theologiae Humilis and Indignus
professor, etc. that is, Our famous Master: and, the Humble and Unworthy
Professor of Sacred Theology, and the like. And these Crowned Ones, John Hus
called Hypocritas Coronatos, Crowned Hypocrites: and by reason of these Crowns,
they have Authority and Power among the multitudes of Carnal Christians, who
are willing to entertain Antichrists Pomp into Christ's Church. Yet have they
not true Crowns, but as it were Crowns of Gold, which yet they are very proud
of, and are much pufft up with them, though usually they are set on the Head of
Ignorance and Error.

And their Faces are like the Faces of Men, because their Doctrine and Life is
governed, not by the* Spirit of Faith, but by the Dictate of Natural Reason,
and by the Light of Nature illuminated by Aristotle.

And they had Hair like the Hairs of Women. For Philosophy Ver. 8.
brings forth effeminate Ministers, given to case and luxury; and in whom is
nothing of Spirit, nor of Manly Abilities in Christ. For the Hairs are Priests,
as you may see, Psalm. 68. Isa. 3. and in other Places.

And their teeth are like the Teeth of Lions: Consider only the Thomists
instead of all other Divines, whether they be not biting, slanderous, and
devourers of all that speak a Word against Aristotle's Divinity. Yea, the
Thomists, Scotists and Modern men, bite one another among Themselves, and
sharpen against one another, not any teeth, but the teeth of Lions; neither is
there any sort of Men which war more fiercely, or with greater hatred, then
those Sects of Divines, each of which desires to devour the Other, that it may
reign alone.

And they have Brest-plates, as it were Brest-plates of Iron; Ver. 9.
and this is the pertinacious and confident Presumption of Each Sect, on the
truth and soundness of his Opinion: and by these Iron Brest-plates they are
unconquerable: And these are the Principles of each Sect.

And the sound of their Wings was as the sound of Chariots, and of many Horses
running to Battle: the Wings are the Words of those that dispute and conflict,
by which they do impetuously, brawlingly and clamorously rush on one another,
and fight: as we see in the Tumults of Disputants both by Words and Writings,
where neither yields to neither, but Each one is Unconquerable. For he
signifies this pertinacious affection of Disputing, by the rushing of Chariots
and Horsemen.

And they had Tails like unto Scorpions, and there were Ver. 10.
Stings in their Tails, and their power was to hurt Men five Months. Here he
explains what before he had propounded, to wit, that the Fruit and End of this
Divinity, is nothing but* evil Consciences, during all the time of the Sensual
Lives of Men. For that Divinity is an Abomination to those who are Spiritual,
because these are without the bounds of the five months, in the Spirit of
Liberty.

And they had a King over them, which is the Angel of Ver. 11.
the Bottomless Pit, whose name in Hebrew is Abaddon, and in Greek Apollyon.
Here we may learn that the Rector General of all Universities, is not Christ,
nor the Holy Spirit, nor any* Angel of God, but an Angel of the Bottomless Pit,
that is, one that is Dead, and is among the Dead and Damned* Who is it then?
even that Light of Nature, to wit, Aristotle, who does truly reign in the
Universities, as Abaddon, and Apollyon, that is, a Waster and Destroyer of the
Church. For we have said that an Angel signifies a Teacher or a Doctor in the
Church. And certain it is, that Aristotle who is Dead and Damned, is at this
day, the great Doctor of all the Universities, rather then Christ; for He
reigns alone, being exalted by the Authority and Study of Thomas, reviving
Freewill, and teaching Moral Virtues and natural Philosophy* to wit, the
three-headed Cerberus, or three-bodied Gerion.

Behold the first Woe which the Church has from the Romish Antichrist by the
Ministry of Saint Thomas: and They whose duty it was chiefly to have prohibited
and extinguished these things, they chiefly have erected and established them.

Thus Luther, word for word, in the forenamed place. Luthers second Testimony.
He also in his book De abroganda missa privata, speaking of the Idol Moloch,
faith thus:

Moses and Jeremy have described the Worship of this Idol to be after this
manner, That they did burn or offer to Him their Children in the fire,
supposing that hereby they did perform the greatest and highest Service to God,
inasmuch as after the example of Abraham they do not spare their own Children;
though they do this, not only not being called as Abraham was, but also without
Faith, and in the highest Wickedness; and therefore the Psalmist testifies,
Psalm. 78. That they offered not their Children to God, but to Devils. For
whatsoever is not done by the Call and Command of God, is not done to God, but
Devils, who suggest this, though it be done under Pretense of the Name of God.

Now hereby (says he) I conceive the Universities to be represented, in which
the best and choicest Part of Christian Youth is offered, as it were in Burnt
Sacrifice to God, that there they may be instructed, and be made as it were
wholly Divine. For the Common People believe there is no Place under Heaven, in
which Youth can be better instructed, so that even Religious People have
recourse hither. For to learn any Thing out of the University, is to learn
Nothing: but to have studied in the University, is to know all Things. There
all Divine and Humane Things are believed to be taught: for no man sends his
Son hither, with any other Opinion then this, that he can no where be better
sent. They think they perform the Highest Service to God, that they offer their
Sons to be formed according to the Instruction of Godliness, that thereby they
may become profitable and useful Ministers, Preachers, Governors, who may
wholly become Gods own Portion, and be useful both to God and Men.

And hereto appertains the name Moloch, which signifies a King, or Kingly,
because this kind of Study does honor them with Degrees and Promotions, and
renders them fit and able to Govern Others. For we see, that all that are
preferred to Governments, are taken out of Universities: and he that is not a
Graduate or Member of an University, is not qualified for Preferment, or to be
set over any People: but let the Ass first be crowned ( to wit, with a Degree)
and then let him reign.

And Parents do not see, and They that do see, do not regard, that Youth are
usually here destroyed, through rude and vile Manners, none commonly forbidding
them. Yea Fornication, Luxury, and other manifest sins do but mildly destroy
them: but that they are endued and possessed with Philosophical, Heathenish,
Humane, Wicked, and Impious Opinions, this is the fire of Moloch, which no
tears can sufficiently bewail, seeing through this they especially are devoured
and perish, who are the most studious and modest Youth in Universities. So
great is the Fury of God upon this Valley of Tophet and Hinnom, that they
perish more grievously who learn most, and live modestly, then they who learn
nothing, and are corrupted with lusts. For These learn Nothing which is to be
unlearned again, seeing they know they do Evil; whereas the other suck in
Poison which happily or never they do vomit up again, holding that
for Good which is Evil, and instructing Those with the like Ut Academiis, ab
initio M^ndi, Satanas nihil excogitaret praesentius, ad vastandum fidem and
Evangelium, toto Orb.
Opinions, whom they take to teach.

And to these Pits of Hell it is to be imputed, that the Sun of the Gospel is
obscured with the Smoke of the Pit: for out of this Smoke proceed those
Locusts, which possess all Chairs, and Pulpits, and administer all Governments,
that Satan from the beginning of the World could devise Nothing in all the
World more strong and pernicious to waste Faith and the Gospel, then
Universities: Neither was it meet that this Evil should arise, but in the End
of the World, when the World through the prevailing of Sin, being laden with
the Wrath of God, should draw near to Hell and Damnation. For the miserable
People must needs hear those Things taught, and delivered out of the Pulpits,
which those Molochites have learned in the Universities. And they have learned
nothing but the Highest Blasphemies of God. Neither is it lawful to have any
where, any other Pastor then These.

In Jeremiah that Valley is called Gehinnom, from whence Christ took that word
Gehenna, which what it signifies, I do not well know: but it seems to me to
come from Janah, which signifies, to eat up, or to pill, or waste, as Tyrants
or Usurers, do pill and suck out the People: so that Gehinnom is the Valley of
pilling or wasting the People. For These being set over the People as
Shepherds, ought to feed them with the Word of Life, and They in stead thereof,
do insensibly waste and devour them, in their Body, Goods, and Soul, with the
pestilent Doctrines of Universities. And such Teachers do the Universities,
those Synagogues of Perdition, give us. Thus Luther.

These now are Luthers own Words, which I have made legible to English Men.
Wherein it is manifest that He condemns the Universities in the very
Institution and Constitution of Them, and chiefly in their Chief Studies,
Humane Learning, and School Divinity; and also, as to that gross Popish
Opinion, that they are the Fountain and Nurseries of the Ministry: and that
None are fit to Teach, or so fit to Teach, as Those that have been educated in
Them. Yea though these be Raw, Foolish, Ignorant Fellows, yet being University.
Graduates, must they be set over Towns, and Parishes, and the miserable People
must not only hear Them and their doltish Doctrine, brought from the
Universities, but also must be constrained by Secular Power and Laws to pay
them well for such Pains, which tends only to the ruin of their Souls for
ever: and no Hand is yet strongly and resolutely stretched out, to deliver the
People from this intolerable Bondage. For the Necks of the People of the World
have never endured so grievous a Yoke from any Tyrants, as from the Doctrine
and Domination of the Clergy. For Worldly Tyrants have only afflicted men's
Bodies and Temporal Estates, which reaches but to this short Life: but these
spiritual Tyrants, the Clergy or false Ministry, when they have got
Countenance, Strength, and Aid from the Worldly Magistrates, how have they with
their Academical, Philosophical, Heathenish Divinity infected, poisoned, and
destroyed the People to Eternal Death, and No Body durst shun Them; upon Pain
of Temporal Death, or Punishments! But now, through the great Goodness of God,
and his mighty Providence and Works from Heaven, it is a more Happy Age: and
Happy shall They be, who being called forth, shall do the Work of God against
all Discouragements and Difficulties, and shall not with Ephraim being
harnessed, turn their Backs in the Day of Battle.

And now to return to our Business again, touching the Universities, let none
object that Luther speaks against Popish Universities only; for this is but a
weak and simple Defense, and altogether unable to ward off the Mighty Blow of
Gods Word, from their Heads and Hearts. For the Things condemned in the
foregoing Testimonies of Luther, are the Self Same for the Substance of them,
as do live, prevail, and flourish in our present Universities, as has been
before declared, and I leave it to every faithful Christian to judge the Truth
in this Matter. But men would fain preserve their Titles, Degrees, Authority,
Dignity, State, Stipends, and therefore for Defense of These Things, they must
needs say Something, though it be to never so little Purpose: but yet by such
Discourse, they sufficiently declare how cool and icie they are for Christ's
Interest, and how zealous for their Own.

But certain it is, that as the Universities were set up at first, as Nurseries
for Antichrists Kingdom, Men being therein so educated (according to the
undertaking of Charles the Great) in Philosophy and School Divinity, that it
might be said to them, Vos estis Sal Terrae, and Lux Mundi, Ye are the Salt of
the Earth, and the Light of the World (which yet only agrees to the Faithful,
who are born of God) so have they still remained the Same hitherto in
Substance, though not without some small Change of Outward Form.

2. For first, the Philosophy taught and studied in the University, The
University Philosophy.
is the very Same that it was at first; and this Philosophy is nothing but the
Religion of the Heathen. For what the Law was to the Jews, and the Gospel is to
the Christians, Philosophy was, and is to the Heathen; and in this Study the
poor Lads waste the flower and cream of their Lives to no purpose, but to make
them more Heathenish, Corrupt, and Bold in Evil, then they were by Nature. And,

For their Divinity, which they usually learn in the Universities, The
University Divinity.
out of the Fathers, Schoolmen, and Systems; and in which they are trained up,
to Dispute either for it, or against it, in the Schools (it being in
seriousness, all one to Them, what they hold and maintain in Religion, seeing
all is but Opinion to them) and which they after teach to the People, with
special Regard to their own Profit and Advantage, this is not the true Word,
and Ministry of the Gospel. For the Gospel is the Word of Faith; which Word, is
the Word in our Hearts, according to the Tenor of the New Covenant, wherein God
says, I will write my Law in their Hearts, and put it in their Inward Parts;
But now the University-Divines, the Truth being indeed dead in their Hearts,
and having no Presence nor Power there, they take it up out of the Books and
Writings of Men, wherein it has been buried; and by this Means, bring forth a
dead Doctrine to the World (which Other Men have spoken, but Themselves have no
Experience of) and not the Word of Life, which has quickened them; but only a
Dead Letter, raised up like the Living Letter, which they present to them; as
the Witch of Endor, raised up a Dead Samuel in the outward Habit and Appearance
of the Living Samuel, and presented him to Saul: so these University-Divines
bring forth the outward Garments and Appearance of the Truth to the People,
when they do best; but the Substance, Soul, and Life of the Truth, they cannot
bring forth, because they have not the Living Word of God in their Hearts, but
have only a Dead Word, which they gather out of the Books and Writings of Men.
And this is the University-Divinity.

And Lastly, The Preachers which the Universities send The University-Preachers.
forth, are usually in the greatest Enmity to Christ and his Gospel, of all
other Men whatsoever, and do bring greatest Prejudice to Christ's Kingdom, and
greatest Advantage to Antichrists. For when Men without Learning, and yet
without the Spirit of Christ, will undertake to teach the People (as many also
now do) their Ignorance is manifest to all, and is judged of all, and they
through their Rudeness, can never long deceive the World; but now, when Men are
as destitute of the Spirit as They, and yet have Humane Learning, and the
Letter of the Word, in a Philosophical sense, to help them, this is that, that
exceedingly endangers and deceives the World; the People supposing, the
Doctrine of the Gospel according to Philosophical Learning, to be the
Ministration of the Spirit, and to be sufficiently enough, to instruct the
Church. And so Antichrists Kingdom is set up with Credit and Renown, by These:
whereas the Ignorant Teachers, who are destitute of the Spirit, are able to do
Him no considerable Service. But Christ will not have the Learned Men to be
Teachers in his Church through their Learning; and as little will he have
Ignorant Men to teach in his Church, because of their Ignorance; but whether
Men be Learned or Ignorant according to the World, it is no matter in Christ's
Church, where each Man is to speak in the Spirit of Christ, which makes both
the Ignorant and the Learned alike wise in Christ: and so the Learned Man
becomes Ignorant in the Church, to be Learned in Christ; and the Ignorant Man
without Worldly Learning, forthwith becomes Wise in Christ; and the Learned,
and the Ignorant, meet together only in the Wisdom of Christ, which is the
Wisdom of God, and swallows up at once, all the Learning and Ignorance of the
World alike, and will have all Wise alone in it Self.

Wherefore, all Universities being left and forsaken as to this Matter, let
Learned and Ignorant Men come alike to Christ, to be made Wise in Him, who is
made unto us of God, our only Wisdom.

FINIS.
THE Right Reformation of Learning, Schools and Universities, according to the
State of the Gospel, and the True Light that shines therein.
THough I do not pretend to that Wisdom which might direct the World ( farther
then the Word of God is with me) yet shall I be bold, as one who desires to be
faithful to Christ, and profitable to his true Church, to offer my
apprehensions and advice to the Called, Chosen, and Faithful Ones of Christ,
that either now are, or hereafter may be in Authority in these Nations,
touching the instructing Youth, and ordering Schools.

1. First therefore, as to this matter, I do judge, there neither is, nor can
be any greater evil then to bring up Children in ease and idleness, and to
suffer them to live freely and without control, according to those Natural
Lusts and Corruptions which they bring along with them into the World, which do
soon wonderfully improve through such a careless and unnurtured life. And such
Children and Youth usually become an early Prey to the Devil, who readily fills
them with all the ungodliness and unrighteousness of the Heathen.

2. I conceive it meet, that the Civil Power, or chief Magistrates should take
great care of the Education of Youth, as of one of the Greatest Works that
concerns them, and as one of the Worthiest Things they can do in the World;
inasmuch as what the Youth now is, the whole Commonwealth will shortly be.

3. To this end, it is meet that Schools (if wanting) be erected through the
whole Nation, and that not only in Cities and great Towns, but also (as much as
may be) in all lesser Villages: And that the Authority of the Nation take great
care, that Godly Men especially, have the charge of greater Schools; and also
that no Women be permitted to teach little Children in Villages, but such as
are the most sober and grave; and that the Magistrate afford to this work all
suitable encouragement and assistance.

4. That in such Schools they first teach them to read their Native Tongues,
which they speak without teaching; and then presently as they understand, bring
them to read the HOLY SCRIPTURES, which though for the present they understand
not, yet may they (through the blessing of God) come to understand them
afterward.

5. That in Cities and greater Towns, where are the greater Schools, and the
greater opportunities to send children to them, they teach them also the
Latin, and Greek tongues, and the Hebrew also, which is the easiest of them
all, and ought to be in great account with us, for the Old Testaments sake. And
it is most heedfully to be regarded, that in teaching Youth the Tongues, to wit
the Greek and Latin, such Heathenish Authors be most carefully avoided, be
their Language never so good, whose writings are full of the Fables, Vanities,
Filthiness, Lasciviousness, Idolatries, and Wickedness of the Heathen. Seeing
usually, whilst Youth do learn the Language of the Heathen, they also learn
their Wickedness in that Language; whereas it were far better for them to want
their Language, then to be possessed with their Wickedness. And what should
Christian youth have to do with the Heathenish Poets, who were for the most
part the Devils Prophets, and delivered forth their Writings in his Spirit, and
who through the smoothness, quaintness, and sweetness of their Language, do
insensibly instill the Poison of Lust and Wickedness into the hearts of Youth;
whereby their Education, which ought to correct their Natural Corruption, does
exceedingly increase and inflame it?

Wherefore my counsel is, that they learn the Greek and Latin tongues
especially from Christians, and so without the Lies, Fables, Follies, Vanities,
Whoredoms, Lust, Pride, Revenge, etc. of the Heathens; especially seeing
neither their Words, nor their Phrases are meet for Christians to take into
their mouths: and most necessary it is, that Christians should forget the Names
of their Gods, and Muses, (which were but Devils and damned Creatures) and all
their Muthology and fabulous Inventions, and let them all go to Satan from
whence they came.

6. It may be convenient also, that there may be some Universities or
Colleges, for the instructing Youth in the knowledge of the liberal Arts,
beyond Grammar and Rhetoric; as in Logic, which, as it is in Divinity (as one
calls it) gladius Diaboli, the Devils sword, so in humane things it may be of
good use, if Reason manage that Art of Reason: but the Mathematics especially
are to be had in good esteem in Universities, as Arithmetic, Geometry,
Geography, and the like, which as they carry no wickedness in them, so are they
besides very useful to Humane Society, and the affairs of this present life.

There may be also in these Universities or Colleges, allowed the studies of
Physic, and of the Law, according to that Reformation which a wise and godly
Authority will cause them to pass under, both being now exceedingly corrupt and
out of order, both for Practice and Fees.

7. But why these Universities or Colleges should be only at Cambridge and
Oxford, I know no reason; Nay, if Humane Learning be so necessary to the
knowledge and teaching of the Jurent etiam, quod extra istam Universitatem,
nusquam alibi in Anglia, praeterquam Oxoniae, in aliqua facultate incipient,
aut Lectiones suas solemiter resument, nec consentient quod aliquis alibi in
Anglia incipiens, hic pro Magistro in illa facultate habeatur.
Scriptures, as the Universities pretend, they surely are without Love to their
Brethren, who would have these Studies thus confined to these Places, and do
Juramentum Magistrorum in receptionibus and resumptionibus solennibus.
swear men to read and teach them nowhere else: certainly it is most manifest,
that these men love their own private Gain, more then the Common Good of the
People. But now seeing by the hand of God, a Kingdom is turned into a
Commonwealth, and Tyranny into Freedom, we judge it most prejudicial to the
common good of a Commonwealth, that these two Universities should make a
Monopoly of Humane Learning to themselves, especially (as is said) seeing they
say, no body can well understand or teach the Scriptures without it; and so by
reason of this their Incroachment, against the Rule of Love, through the former
Grants of Popes and Kings, all men should be necessitated to send their
children hither, from all parts of the Nation, some scores or hundreds of
miles, for Liberal Education, to the great trouble and charge of Parents:
especially this considered, that the Universities usually have been places of
great Licentiousness and Profaness, whereby it often comes to pass, that
Parents sending their Children far from them, Young and Hopeful, have for all
their care and cost, after several years, received them back again with their
Tongues and Arts, proud, profane, wicked, abominable, and incorrigible Wretches.

Wherefore doubtless it would be more suitable to a Commonwealth (if we become
so in Deed, and not in Word only) and more advantageous to the good of all the
People, to have Universities or Colleges, one at least, in every great Town or
City in the Nation, as in London, York, Bristow, Exceter, Norwich, and the
like; and for the State to allow to these Colleges an honest and competent
maintenance, for some Godly and Learned Men to teach the Tongues and Arts,
under a due Reformation. And this the State may the better do (by provision out
of every County, or otherwise, as shall be judged best) seeing then there will
be no such need of Indowment of Scholarships; in as much as the people having
Colleges in their own Cities, near their own Houses, may maintain their
Children at home, whilst they learn in the Schools; which would be indeed the
greatest advantage to Learning that can be thought of.

8. It would also be considered, whether it be according to the Word of God,
that Youth should spend their time only in reading of Books, whilst they are
well, strong, active, and fit for business. For commonly it so falls out, that
Youth lose as much by Idleness, as they gain by Study. And they being only
brought up to read Books, and such Books as only contain wrangling, jangling,
foolish and unprofitable Philosophy, when they have continued any long time in
the University, in these unwarranted courses by God, they are commonly in the
end, fit for no Worthy Employment, either in the World, or among the Faithful.

To remedy which Great Evil, Colleges being (as has been spoken) dispersed
through the great Cities and Towns of the Commonwealth, it may be so ordered,
that the Youth (according to Luthers counsel) may spend some part of the
Luther. libel. de Instituend. pueris.
day in Learning or Study, and the other part of the day in some Lawful
Calling; or one day in Study, and another in Business, as necessity or occasion
shall require.

And thus shall Youth be delivered from that Ease and Idleness, which fills the
Hearts of University-Students with many corruptions, and noisome lusts, whilst
they fill their Heads only with empty Knowledge and foolish Notions; whereby
neither can God be glorified, nor their Neighbor profited.

9. And if this course were taken in the disposing and ordering Colleges, and
Studies, it would come to pass that twenty would learn then, where one learns
now, and also by degrees, many men (on whom God shall please to pour forth his
Spirit) may grow up to teach the people, whilst yet they live in an honest
Calling and Employment, as the Apostles did. And this would give them great
efficacy and power in teaching, whilst they lived by faith, through their
honest Labor, and were delivered from the mischief of Idleness: But and if the
faithful shall desire any one that is more apt to teach, and has received a
greater measure of the anointing then his Brethren, to spend more of his time
in the Word and Prayer, then his Calling will afford, at such times They ought
to supply him: and the Law of Love in the hearts of the Faithful will be Law
enough in this matter, without calling in the aid of the Magistrate.

And by this means, may the chargeable and burdensome maintenance of the carnal
Clergy, by degrees be taken away, and the Church of Christ, and the very
Nations Themselves, be supplied with a more Faithful, Christian, and Spiritual
Ministry then now it has, at a far less rate. For God has promised in the
last days to pour out his Spirit on all flesh, and the sons, and daughters,
and servants, and handmaids shall prophecy, and then shall Knowledge cover the
Earth as waters the Seas.

Now for conclusion, I do conceive that none of the Faithful and Wise have any
just cause to be offended for speaking for the Use of Humane Learning in this
reformed way, which the Gospel will permit; seeing by this means, these two
Errors of Antichrist would be dissolved among us; the one of making
Universities the fountain of the Ministry; which One Thing, is, and will be
more and more (as Christ's Kingdom shall rise up and prevail in the World) a
Millstone about their necks: and the other, of making the Clergy a distinct Sect
or Order, or Tribe, from other Christians, contrary to the simplicity of the
Gospel.

2. Let the faithful consider that this reformed use of Tongues and Arts,
justly has its place in the World. For if all men cannot be Christians (as
Paul says, all men have not faith) yet let them be Men, and improved in the
use of Reason, and sober Learning, whereby they may be serviceable to the
Commonwealth in their age, whilst the Church of Christ has its own Members and
Officers, through the Call of God, and Unction of his Spirit only. For Sufficit
autem ut homines de his rebus (scil. de artibus and scientiis) quantum in
Schola didicerunt, noverint propter usus humanos. August. in act. contr.
Felicem.
Humane Learning has it is place and use among Humane Things, but has no place
nor use in Christ's Kingdom, as has been sufficiently proved.

And thus, have I freely offered my advice for mending things that are amiss,
and making strait the things that are crooked in this matter.

FINIS.

