THE DELIVERER IN A PANEGYRIC Spoken to his EXCELENCY General Monck.

At SKINNERS HALL on Wednesday April 4th.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1660

THE DELIVERER.
Great Sir,
DID not our unbelieving grief once say
That we should never see this happy day?
Did not our pressures great, but greater fears
Command our eyes to wallow still in tears?
Or if some dawn of hope did ever appear
To cozen our just sorrows of a tear;
If then a joyful drop stole out by chance
It ran unseen, and did the grief advance.
Until the sighs and groans of the oppressed
Roused up a noble anger in your breast,
To snatch our Freedom in a Luckie hour,
From the fell jaws of Arbitrary power.
Moved like a Zealous patriot you drew forth
True Safety bringing Legions from the North,
And broke their Tyranny, but not their shame,
Who called their Junto by so false a name.
Fixed in their Orb once more those fallen Stars
Then we believed might prove our Tutelars,
Till their dire Influence was understood
To blast the Nations interest and Good.
How did they court you with officious lies?
Whom yet they veiw'd with waking Jealousies;
Since their false love could no command afford,
But what might make you like themselves abhorred
But see! How Justice scourged their crimes and threw
The hate of such an Order where 'twas due;
Swelling to such an height the pop'lar rage,
As nothing but their ruin could assuage.
'Twas but high time; when your creating word
Some order to our Chaos did afford;
Charging the Honored relics the of Old cause
Once more t'assert our Liberties and Laws.
But (ah!) They only could assuage our grief,
Not soundly cure the wounds; the true relief
Is a full Sessions and a free, to heal,
In the right method, the sick Commonweal.
These, these are glorious hopes, which make each breast
Swel with unruly joys; nor can ours rest,
But, big with their true zeal, would let you know
What they to so immence a merit ow.
In the glad train of them, souls that have reared
Pure vows of gratitude, let ours be heard;
Whose pious breathings would be understood
To wish you still as Great as you are Good.
Ah! (Noble Sir,) propitious Heaven, that meant
You for this great and glorious instrument,
To make three Nations blessed, sure did inspire,
And warm your breast with this heroic fire.
Where are the Triumphs? Where the Laurels now
That should incircle your victorious brow?
Where are those means, that may your fame dilate,
And mount your Glory 'bove the reach of Fate?
Pious Antiquity Statues allowed,
Made Heroes Gods, and at their Altars bowed;
Trophies advanced, and Pyramids so high,
Their wounding spires might bore the Galaxie.
In stead of these pompous expensive arts,
We Will rear you living pyramids of hearts,
Flamed with revering thoughts, which when we dye,
Shall fall entailed on our posterity:
Infants shall be instructed how to frame,
And lisp (before they know their debt) Your Name;
Thus by successive reverence shall your Glory,
And grand atchievments be immortal story.
How did at first the silly Vulgar gaze
At your suspicious carriage and delays?
How angry talk, and in a fancy mood,
Censure those actions, they nere understood?
Poor shallow Hot-spurs, zeal not Judgment show!
Have their eyes nere observed the Sculler Row?
Or that, not a clear morn, but duskish Gray
Oftener foretells a fair ensuing day?
Go on (Great Sir) go on, as you begun;
Since slightest Counsels are the soonest spun,
And in such Misty times to walk secure,
The slowest paces are the safest sure.
Pursue with indefatigable pace
Those brave resolves, that did begin the Race:
And may (while you through the State Ecliptic run)
Your course be as unerring as the Sun.
And while insinuating Earwigs try
To snare your Judgment with their flattery:
Damp all their cursed designs, whose pride and hate
Might make them else the Boutefeus of State.
You are our Hopes upon whose single breast
The Nations whole prosperity does rest;
So safe from Fortunes vain Artillery
We in your Valor and your prudence lie.
Should Armed Discontent cloud our calm days
Or raging storms the phrantick sectary raise?
We know your courage can allay them quite
Look up the winds, and slumber all their spite.
Guide then the public Vessel and so stear
From treacherous rocks and greedy quicksands clear
Into the port, where it may ride secure
In you the skilful watchful palinure.
Thus while your Virtues shine with constant light,
Envy may show her teeth but never bite;
Too weak to hurt she and her brood accursed
Will by the rage of their own Venom burst.
Descend (blessed peace,) from Heaven to us below,
Long looked for come; The Gallant MONK say so:
With balmy hand (ah! Borbarous civil Wars)
Cure both our Wounds, and take away the scars.
Clap thy glad pinions on, be no more coy,
But spread throughout an universal joy,
Shout cherishing seat, through the whole Commonweal,
That every member may its vigor feel.
Raise the sad Church, from ashes where she lies,
Nor let mad zeal more spurn them in her eyes:
Bright in her pristine form shall she inspire
Then with new songs of praise her holy Lyre.
Make the hot servants of the Alter fear
Their Masters feamless coat again to tear;
Least it be ever mentioned to their shame,
Their holy water does all broyls inflame.
Fly through the Courts of Justice, make them be
Firm pillars of unbiased equity;
where neither fear nor favor shall prevail,
But hands unpalsi'd hold the even seal.
Calm to the good, but stern toward the base,
Learn them to give or Glory or Disgace,
Free from that unjust and obsequious aw,
That too often warped their Judgments from the Law.
Then shed the welcome favor of thy smiles
On all the Schools of Learning in our Jles;
Let their high Laws record, it was MOMK that made
The Arts break out from their inglorious shade
Give Learned; Oxford hopes, hopes not in vain
That their dry bays shall burgeon once again;
And that their honey shall no more be thrown
To be a guerdon for the Wasp or Drone.
Bid Chams pure Waters run unmuddi'd now,
And all his Muses wear a cheerful brow:
Strike (Sisters) strike the Panegyrie Vein,
While The Deliverer closes every strain.
Cast on this City too a pleasing glance,
Their hopes encourage, and their trade advance,
Give them light hearts, who fear no greater curse
Then heavy hearts, that spring from a light purse.
Nor longer let the Flayl and plow be cursed;
Rejoice (Swain) in thy labors as at first,
And when our present public needs relax,
Sweat thou no more for an Excise or Tax.
When thus (dearest peace) tho^ shall dispense,
Great MONK protecting this bland Influence;
plenty our wishes shall anticipate
And make these Isles the truly Fortunate:
So Mangre their mad rage that dare oppose,
Shall we arise a Nation Glorious.
The joy of our friends eyes, but enemies sore,
Who though they deadly hate, shall fear us more.
Thus with more luster does the conquering Sun
Break through a Cloudy Exhaltation:
Thus welcur'd sicknesses confirm the more,
And Fractur'd bones grow stronger then before.
Thrice blessed be you! (Just General) for no less
Then Britains present and hoped happiness:
Our thronged petitions, shall nere cease to rise
For You and Yours a Votive Sacrifice.
May you have blessings from an endless store
And nere know cross to make you prize them more,
Health and long life attend, you and a mind
From common dreggie passions refined.
As peace without, may you have peace within,
Calm conscience and the guilt of no black sin.
Sweet end your days, and may your night end so,
And never an affrighting Vision know,
Let discontent its sullen forces prove
On them that marry where they cannot Love;
Send anxious thoughts to Merchants, in whose minds:
Fear keeps a greater coil then the row winds:
But let your joy be such as Heroes warm,
When they reviw the beauty, order, charms
Of Kingdoms moving regular and true
Which their high courage from confusion drew.
May Angels be your Lifeguard, and still stand
Safe to protect you from the treacherous hand
And since such power have pure prayers ours shall be,
Your never penetrable Cap-a-ne.
Still with fresh Laurels be your temples pressed
Snatched from the swelling foes triumphed crest:
Firm stand your Legions may they never fly
(Unless after a routed Enemy)
True, just, and no more wavering then the poles,
As if a ray from Yours had fixed their souls.
May that immortal honor and renown
which being our Deliverer you have won,
Look with blithe face and never smiling lips;
And nere be darkened by the least Eclipse.
What shall we wish you more? SIR, may you know
All that is truly good, or men prize so.
If there be more then this, we must not name
It till the Royal Charles confirm the same
(Crowned by your hand) when he (all foes subdued)
Makes you a Star of the first Magnitude.
FINIS.

