CERTAIN ASSAYES Propounded to the consideration of the Honorable COMMITTEE
for regulating the proceedings at Law.

Whereby it is made evident that most Cases now determined in Chancery and
other Courts of Equity, may be reduced to Trial at Law.

To the great ease and benefit of the COMMONWEALTH.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Creake. 1652.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE the COMMITTEE appointed for the regulating proceedings
at LAW.
May it please your Honors,
TAking to consideration the great delay and charge that continually happens to
the Clyent by prolix and costly suits in Equity, and considering the
flourishing condition of the Common Law, even in the Swording times of the
three first Edwards, and for some good space after, when few, or rather no
suits were determined in an equitable course: and finding the inconveniency of
them at this day, which no man can wonder at, when the Lord chief Justice
Fairfax in their infancy complained 21 E. 4. 232.
against them, and the pleaders or Counselors that promoted them, the same
having been more proper for actions of the Case at Law. And also observing the
great care former Parliaments have used to reduce causes from Equity to Law, as
appears by the Act of 27. H. 8. of transferring uses, 13 Eliz. for suppressing
frauds, and diverse others; and having formerly published some Proposals in
order to regulating the proceedings at Law, many of which you have been pleased
to take into consideration, has made me to adventure upon your clemencies this
once more, by submitting these second considerations to your judgments,
assuring my self that by your patronage and favoring the same with your eye
and labors, something may thereby be produced to the benefit of the
Commonwealth, and the Common Law cleared of many aspersions (by the ignorant)
cast upon it, by reason of the delato^y and costly proceedings in all Courts of
Equity. Which is the greatest of the ambition of him that herein is

Your most humble servant and welwisher, S. D.

The Assayes follow:
1. FIrst it is propounded that all Coppyholds be made Freehold, and
Commissioners may be assigned into all Counties, with rules for the setting
down rates between Lord and Tenant; and that all Lands, etc. may be devisable
and descendable at Common Law.

2. That the execution and perfecting of all Contracts and agreements for
Lands, etc. may be compelled at Common Law upon Action of the Case as now in
Chancery, with damage only to be taxed for the delay; and that all mean
Estates and privyes may be bound that are either parties to the suit or the
judgment by Scire facias.

3. That uses and trusts be transferred of Leases for years, debts, goods, etc.
as it is now of Freeholds by 27 H. 8. with some provision that the Lessees
estate may not merge in the Freehold to the prejudice of the party.

4. That Legacies may be sued for, Morgagers and obligers relieved against
forfeitures, and Tithes recoverable at and by the Common Law as formerly
proposed.

5. That such proof of Deeds, etc. wanting, lost etc. may be allowed at law,
as is now in equity.

6. That special actions of the case may be brought at Law in all equitable
cases, according to the Lord Fairfax his advice in the 21 H. 4. 23.

7. That the states of Joyntments, etc. may not survive, and they and
coexecutors may have special actions of the case against each other for all
Equitable injuries.

8. That imperfect and deficient conveyances made upon valuable and good
consideration may be allowed at Law according to the intent of the parties
expressed or proved, and that an action of the case may lie against the party
and his heirs, etc. to compel them to make good the same.

9. That Joint-sureties may have actions of the Case against each other for
contribution, and against the principal in the nature of a Writ de plegiis
acquietandis to be discharged from engagements.

10. That non compos mentis may have the plea in his own person.

11. That wast and remedy for Rent may be had by the Purchaser against the
Tenant, after notice; and the Reversion pass as well without as with
attornment, in all cases.

12. That union of possession within memory, and above 60 years, may not
prevail against usage by all the time of present memory, but that prescription
therein may be allowed.

13. That where deeds, etc. belong to two or more, and are kept by one in trust
for the rest, and not produced upon reasonable request, upon trials, etc.
(charges being tendered) for the defense of the common title, that an action of
the case may lie to recover the deeds and damage.

14. That detinue may lie for deeds, etc. though the date be not known, and
that like Action may lie for the trustor against the trustee; for deeds, etc.
and that the release or discharge of the trustee without consent of the trustor
may not be valid, where either the trust is expressed or known.

15. That assigns of Statutes, Judgments, Recognizances, Bonds, Bills, Debts,
etc. made for valuable consideration, and not for maintenance may sue the same
in their own names, and discharge them at pleasure; and that the release or
discharge of the assignor after notice shall not be valid; and that if the
assignor notwithstanding such notice shall sue, etc. garnishment shall lie, and
interpleading, as is now used in detinue, etc.

16. That upon bills of discovery the Plantiffe may proceed no further then to
Bill and Answer, and to examine the defendant upon Interrogatories, if the Case
or party desire it, and then the Answers to be used at Common Law.

17. That Depositions of witnesses in perpetual memory may presently be
published and used upon Trials for the ease of the Clyent, where the witnesses
be sick, impotent, far distant, or do not appear upon due service, or for
other reasonable cause.

18. That Costs and Damages may be given to the parties, where they are staid
by Injunction, for delay or upon unjust or untrue surmises, as was anciently;
as appears by 21 E. 4. 74. and the same to be ascertained by the oath of the
party, or other competent witnesses.

19. That Fee-farmes, Heriots, etc. may be good in Law, as they were before the
Statute of quia emptores terrarum, and are at this day decreed in equity.

20. That in case any Court of Equity shall proceed in any cause wherein there
is or shall be proper remedy at Law, that then the Courts of Law may prohibit
them as anciently, and that the party upon the prohibition may recover Costs
and damage for the vexation.

Lastly, because the Proposer of these Assayes knows his own weakness and
unworthiness to propose any thing of this kind; and knowing how apt humane
nature is to err, and to transcend its due bounds; and these his Assayes being
the first of this nature that has been proposed, and being willing to offer
his mite at the After of so worthy a work, humbly and heartily desires the
Reader, that if he find any thing herein that he conceives may be
inconvenient, that he will then either in private or public make his
Animadversions, with his reasons; or if he shall think fit to add, or propound
any more rationally, as it will be a very acceptible work to the Commonwealth,
so it shall thankfully and heartily be subscribed to by his very humble servant,

S. D.

FINIS.

