A LEGACY TO HIS SONS. Digested into Quadrins.

By HENRY DELAUNE.

Baudius Virtus decore sat nitet suo, neque
Vulgus moratur, pluriumque gratiam,
Contenta semet, atque paucioribus.
LONDON: Printed for Henry Seile over against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleetstreet. 1651.

TO PARENTS.
THese Precepts (Parents) which Paternall Love
Gives to mine Own, and to their profit serve;
May no less useful to your Children prove,
If you take Care they learn them, and observe.
I send 'em You; That Good (if Good) may flow
To All, and, Common, may the more be so.
TO THE HONORABLE and virtuous Lady, THE LADY KATHERINE SHIRLEY.
MAdam,
To You, whose sublimated Mind,
When (...) Things sink to Mischief, soars to find
The shortest way, to Goodness; and whose Sage,
Sweet, Staid Comport, in th'April of your Age,
Is of so high Example, As from whom,
The gravest Matrons, that 'ere graced Rome,
Might have received a Copy, and no Shame
In the Imitation; It Is to you I aim,
And in more special manner dedicate
This small Essay: Yet Such, as may instate
Those hopeful Scions, whom your fruitful Womb
Gives to the World, In Virtues, that no Tomb
Shall 'ere eclipse. At This you most aspire.
And, That so be, (Madam) is the Desire
Of Your Ladishps much humble Servant, H: DELAUNE.

TO THE READER.
HAd I had ( Reader) confidence, To Beg,
It Is not unlikely but a Cap and Leg
Had gained a Verse, or Two, or More; To raise
This Pigmie upon Stilts: And by some Praise
(How undeserved so'ere) have teazed on
Thy better Part, to Expectation
Of something worth thy Labor. But, in troth,
I Love plain Dealing so, as I am loath
To put Cheats upon Men. Pray take, thy self,
The pains to sift what is Here, Pearl, or Pelf.
If Bad; I know, Thou will soon make a Tush:
If Good; Thou know, No good Wine needs a Bush.
THE PERMIT.
NOr Momes, nor Critics, do I, Hence, Avaunt:
All may have fair Access; And after chant
As to them Best shall seem. What Is Good, is Good;
And being, So; will, So, be understood
By Them that understand: What Is otherwise;
I leave to be corrected by the Wise.
Errata.
In Quadrin 42. line 1. read Ant, for Ape. Q 45. l. 3. r. fare, for face. qu.
75. l. 2. r. semblance. qu. 87. l. 4. r. Praises, for praise: and slanders, for
slander. quad. 112. l. 1. r. noise. and l. 2. r. immateriall. qu: 116. l. 3. r.
made, for make. qu. 121. l. 4. r. Herostratus. qu. 171. l. 3. at Pray, point;
for? qu: 173. l. 3. r. sinks. qu: 183. l. 3. r. have little Flame. qu: 251. l.
2. r. your, for the: and Heaven, for Heaven.

(...). OR, A FATHERS LEGACY TO HIS SONS.
1.
SProuts of my Stem, and Deeds of my Defects,
(In whom the frailties of our Being reign)
When I am gone (for Age my way directs)
Let these few Precepts in my stead remain.
2.
God, your great Maker, see you duly fear,
And daily pray, and praise his holy Name:
Who by this Compass, steadily does stear,
Shuns Rocks of Earthly, and Eternal shame.
3.
Be sound in Faith, and in Religion fixed;
G^d not to change, nor fangled Fancies own:
God does reject a Worship that is mixed;
He must have All, or else he will have None.
4.
Honor your Mother, both in Word and Deed;
So shall you bring a blessing on your head.
Have special care, in her old age, to feed
Her, her, by whom you have in youth been fed.
5.
Have Peace among your selves; Let each provoke
Each unto love: Banish all strife and wrong.
Faggots, of smallest sticks, are hardly broke.
And Cords, of many Twines, are very strong.
6.
Implore the blessing of the God of might,
Upon each work you set your hand unto:
But set your hand to nothing but the right.
Pyrate do pray, that they may mischief do.
7.
Think not to scale the spears, with strain-tear-Eyes;
A mimick face, and the long winded Art.
Fervent ejaculations catch the skies:
God looks not on your Lungs, but on your Heart.
8.
Wear no Mausolean outside, of pure zeal,
Lined with the putrid stuff of Tombs and Graves.
A good Mask often does a bad face conceal:
Many that Saint-it-out within are Knaves.
9.
The Magistrates, the Aged, and the Wise,
Look you obey, you honor, and attend:
These will direct, instruct, and well advise,
Your works, your ways, what ere you do intend.
10.
Your friend, the poor, and such as are oppressed,
Respect, relieve, redress in what you may:
The first's a staff; the second is your Guest;
The third may help you when you may decay.
11.
Deal squarly with all men; and what you do
Maturely promise, see you duly pay:
But rash Engagements are the seeds of Woe;
And Vows ill placed do ever lead astray.
12.
Strive not to please the Most, but still the Best:
The vulgar eyes are not so bright and clear.
Be, what you should be; on that Basis rest.
It Is better, to be good, then, to appear.
13.
Be neither vainly proud, nor weakly base:
If wealth abounds, think not your selves the more.
If wants befall, yet let not wants debase.
Be still the same in Scarceness, and in Store.
14.
Store well your Mind, and then though Fortune rage,
Though Time be cross, though the world storm and tear,
You are still rich: and like the Grecian sage,
Carry your All about you every where.
15.
Have special care with whom you do converse,
Converse breeds liking, liking likeness makes:
He smells of pitch, that has with pitch co^merce;
Who with sweet odors, of their sent partakes.
16.
Be not enticed to any thing that is ill,
Though you were sure that none should it perceive;
The supreme Eye does overlook you still:
You may cheat Man; you cannot God deceive.
17.
Speak in due time, not rashly, out of course;
And speak not much, for too much talk is vain:
Let truth and grace still season your discourse,
For it is a vice to flatter, lie, and feign.
18.
Speech is the Index of the Wit and Mind:
Silence conceals alike the Wise, and Weak:
If prone, to talk, your Nature you do find,
Be sure to learn how you may wisely speak.
19
Get not the habit (by much use) to lie:
For truth, at length, will hardly gain belief;
He that often cried, A Thief, and no Thief nie,
When a Thief came indeed, had no relief.
20
Lies and Deceit, though with a good intent,
And to good ends, you may not think to use:
These pious frauds are by sound Doctrine shent,
Sin, upon no pretense, can plead Excuse.
21
Let profane Cursings, Oaths, and talk impure,
Not touch your Lips with a polluting kiss:
Where springs are sound, the streams are ever pure.
The mouth's the shop, the heart the storehouse is.
22
Shun as a plague, or any thing that is worse,
The lewd embraces of lascivious Dames:
For they will breed Consumption in your purse;
Rot in your Bones; and Cankers in your Names.
23.
Of healthless Healthings hate the boundles cup;
The, now, too much, too too much worshipped shrine;
Know, it is a Circe, by whose fatal sup
You are made worse then either Ape or Swine.
24.
Gaming and Quarrels have a dismal fate
Attending on them; come not near their stings:
The first like sulphur, blows up an Estate:
The last, the life, the soul in question brings.
25.
Make still a conscience of the meanest sin:
Sin fruitful is, and one begets more.
A little Theif, crept at a window in,
May, to the great, wide open set your door.
26.
The point of Honor, that true Honor is,
Cherish as much, nay rather more then life.
But, oh, that point is understood amiss;
And fools now bleed for any word of strife.
27.
Know, that your life as a rich treasure is,
Which you may well, nay you are bound to use
In brave Results: But you do much amiss
If idly you it squander, and abuse.
28.
Your Country, Friends, and Kindred have a share
As great in you, as in your selves you have:
Wrong not their Right; But take a special care,
By virtuous Deeds, to gain a noble grave.
29.
Be, in expense, nor pinching, nor profuse:
The golden mean is still the surest path.
He lives in want, who, having, makes no use:
He dies in want, who wastes what he has.
30.
Let your Apparel be as may become
Your place and person; yet without excess.
But Ape not the fantastic Modes of some
She-Hees that wear fix Pedlars in their dress.
31.
Go not to Law, but when strong motives press;
Let some wise Friend the lesser Jars appease:
Who thinks all wrongs by Lawsuits to redress,
Shall find the Cure far worse then the Disease.
32.
Love Money for its use, not for it self;
And that right Prudence too must regulate:
Who, above measure, dotes upon that pelf,
Has, beyond Midas, an unhappy fate.
33
Study more to be Good, then Rich, or Great,
These two last you must leave, or they will you;
The first will place you in a glorious Seat,
Of lasting Bliss, and Comforts ever new.
34
Let Prudence guide each Action you intend
Of any weight: The want thereof has brought
Many to ruin. Still foresee the end;
It Is a fool's part to say, I had not thought.
35
Fly not too low, lest Damps do flag your Wings;
Soar not too high, lest the Sun melt your wax:
A just course between both a safety brings;
Most to be sought for, which each other lacks
36
Dissemble not, for it is a servile Vice:
Yet who speaks all he thinks is counted weak.
From solid Wisdom take a sound advice,
How, when, and where, to be or Mute, or Speak.
37
Lend to a Friend, when he shall stand in need,
Out of your purse; But avoid suretiship:
If you loose that, you know how much you bleed;
This is a leak that often sinks a ship.
38
Shun Idleness, the Mistress of each ill.
Honest Employment sets the Mind to task.
This wears an open face: The other still,
Bears a Complexion that requires a Mask.
39
Labor, from education, to receive
What Nature has denied you; and is more
Then fortune can bestow: which will so cleave,
That She, nor Fate can ever make you poor.
40.
Beasts pass you much in Body-qualities,
The Lion is more stout, more swift the Hind;
The Horse more strong; Eagles have better Eyes;
If you excel, you must excel in Mind.
41.
And to the moulding of that too, you may
From Beasts have a fit model; if you read,
With a judicious Eye, the trace and way,
Wherein Instinct of Nature makes 'em tread.
42.
The Ape can teach you industry; The Dove,
Mildnes; The Serpent, Prudence; Care, the Dog;
Meeknes, the Lamb; The Pelican, true Love;
Pure faith, the Turtle: But decline the Hog.
43.
If your Employments, or Desires shall
Carry you forth to foreign Climes; be sure
So to provide, as not to want. To all
Emergent griefs, Money's a present cure.
44.
Take along with you, as a special Pass,
The eye, the front, the back, the mouth, the ear,
Of Faulcon, Ape, and Camel, Swine, of Ass,
To see, to soothe, to bear, to eat, to hear.
45.
Foresight, is emblem'd in the Faulcon; fair
Compliance, in the Ape; the Camel quotes,
Patience; the Swine, not to be nice in face;
The Ass, attention, and retention notes.
46.
Let your Comportment, to each one, be such
As you may gain their favor, and their love:
It is a purchase will not cost you much;
And, more then gold, may useful to you prove.
47.
Keep all good parts, by exercise, in heart;
But, upon none, be too too much intent:
We slack the string when we have played our part.
The Bow grows weak that stands always bent.
48.
Good parts are much; yet, if you may, you must,
On honest wealth, with a just hand, lay hold.
Virtue, through wants, often grovels in the dust.
The Gem more glorious shines, that shines in gold.
49.
Have not (as too too many have) an itch
Of bringing gold, on a post-horse, to gold:
He scarce is honest, that too soon is rich.
A fair gradation, a fair name does hold.
50.
Give to Desert, with a wide open hand,
Of what you have, and have no pressing need.
But Nature's Laws he does ill understand,
That starves himself, and will another feed.
51.
The state you have, whether or left, or gained,
Keep in a modest, not profuse attire:
That hand to no less merit has attained,
That does preserve, then that which does acquire.
52.
Be not self-willed, and do not humor more
Your own conceits, then sad and sound advice.
He lets in ruin, that does shut his door
To wholesome counsel, and contemns the wise.
53.
Do not the Dog and shadow, imitate;
Two Birds in Bush, are less then one in Hand:
Who, Hopes, to come, buys with a now-Estate,
Does hardly yet these Morals understand.
54.
Run not in debt, by Bond or Merchant Book,
So shall you keep your Credit, and Repute:
If otherwise you shape your course, then look
For scorn, Neglect, a Sergeant, and a Suit.
55.
Compute your comings in, and by that square,
Set forth your layings out. Go less, then more:
Who loves to spend, and looks not how to spare,
Soon turns himself and household out of door.
56.
Let Industry, whilst you have Halcyon days,
Still with your Teem for food and fuel go.
For if you stay till Winter's muddy ways,
You may want Meat and on your fingers blow.
57.
When most you rise, then bear the humblest mind;
So shall you make a Piramis, a Fort.
Where Arrogance sets Pilot to the wind,
The Vessel does but seldom gain a Port.
58.
Explode all self-conceit; It does deprave,
The better Judgment, and makes Reason blind:
Yet of selfworth it is not amiss to have
Some modest feeling, to uphold the Mind.
59.
Bear not a greater Port then your Estate
Will bear; or Calling calls for: Let the rail
Of Wisdom hem you in. A dismal fate.
Sails in that Ship that carries too much sail.
60.
Have settled thoughts, and not a roaving Brain;
The rolling Stone can never gather Moss:
Often to remove, may plead uncertain Gain;
But you will find it brings a certain Loss.
61.
Avoid Excess, as well in meat, as drink;
So shall you reap much good, much mischief shun:
These two have sent more souls to Charons brink,
Then ever yet did either Sword or Gun.
62.
Of what God gives to you, give to the Poor
Some Dividend, when he comes in your way:
Make him not loud, nor linger at your door.
He doubly gives, that gives without delay.
63.
Abound in deeds of charity; but so
As not to sound a Trumpet when you give:
Merit is lost where Boasting makes a show;
He dies to God, that unto Man will live.
64.
Look what you have to do; and do not look
Into your neighbors closet, kitchen, shelves.
Ardelious heads still learn beyond the book:
And striving to find others, loose themselves.
65.
Make not your Tougue the Usher to your wit:
And quarter not, within your mouth, your heart
Self shafts, shot at our selves, more home do hit:
And, more then others, do both wound and smart.
66.
The double sconce wherewith wise Nature has
Fenced in the Tongue, does plainly moralize,
She must not rove at random: guide her path
So as she may not slip, and you are wise.
67.
Let not unrighteous Mammon's sordid love
Byas your thoughts to acts unjust, or base:
Ill gotten goods do much unluckie prove;
The third descent will hardly find their place.
68.
In all transactions be upright and square;
Let your word still out-value Bond or Bill.
Of him, that is good only for fear, beware:
He wants but an occasion, that has will.
69.
Impart not to a friend, what none should know;
Lest that, at length, you strike upon a shelf:
How can he think but others may be so,
Who is the first that is false unto himself?
70.
Secrets, received, from any friend, in trust,
Blaze not abroad, though he become your fo:
For your own sakes, if not for his, be just.
If he be bad, yet may not you be so.
71.
Let virtuous Aemulation's noble flame
Burn still (like Vestall fire) in your breast:
But banish, banish thence that snaky Dame
Envy the hagg, that will not let you rest.
72.
It Is Envies Nature ever most to blame
Where she finds virtue most. Give her still cause
To exercise her spleen. She cannot shame
But such as fear her vipers, and her claws.
73.
Love goodness for it self, and all for it,
Then be assured your Compass right is set:
Who does this Pole-starr loose, is sure to split
His Barque on Rocks that have too many met.
74.
Motions to Ill, resist in their first grass,
Lest gaining strength they shoot into the Ear
Custom to Sin, at length, will make you pass
That for a Bat, which was, before, a Bear.
75.
You must not only shun the guilt of Ill,
But all the remblance of it: For Men's Eyes
Judge as they see. If Sheath, or Dagger kill;
The end is one. He Is lost whom Fame decries.
76.
Guilt is still dogged with Terror, less, or much;
Let your best Armor be, your Innocence:
Should this All crack to pieces, not a touch
Of Fear, can touch who has it for defense.
77.
Good turns received, you must in Marble write:
And make a just requital when you can.
No greater Brand on any one can light,
Then to be counted, An ungrateful Man.
78.
Of wrongs received, do not a Tally keep:
Nor charge your Book of Records therewithal.
The peaceful Soul does fetch a quiet sleep.
To Give is Well; But to Forgive is All.
79.
Be not, as some, that boast the Deeds, and Race
Of Ancestors, and yet themselves do flag:
No, no; But lead of Virtue such a trace,
As may give Cause, to yours, of you to brag.
80.
Adorn not more your Body, then your Brain;
Lest that this Emblem in your teeth be flung,
That you resemble Houses, which remain
With empty Garrets, though the Rooms be hung.
81.
Admit All to your Courtesy; But Few
Into your Councels: And those Few you must
Choose by a Rule, that is as Old, as True,
Look 'ere you leap; and try before you Trust.
82.
Consult a Friend, then Canvasse his Advice:
And if, therein, you do Self Ends perceive;
Conclude Him One that turns upon a Vice;
And will not stick, for profit, to deceive.
83.
To make a trial of a Friend, you must
Give him, for Secrets, what indeed are None.
If He holds stauch, He has discharged his Trust:
If not; you take no harm; And he is known.
84.
Another way there is. You may pretend
Distress, and wants. If He shall then relieve,
His stamp is right: If, To assist, or lend,
He frames Excuse; you know what to believe.
85.
If you do mean to have a Friend in store,
Be sure to catch him when your Moon is full:
For if Men find the Waining at your Door,
They loof it off; and let you lie at hull.
86.
When you a wise, and trusty Friend have met,
Then, then, indeed, you have a Treasure found:
Make much of Him, as your souls Cabinet.
Many profess; But very Few are sound.
87.
Be Good, and to Applause not vainly move;
Nor from Detraction feintly fear a Scarr:
Whom a pure Conscience does, within, approve,
Praise can neither make; nor Slander mar.
88.
When fawning Gales your well set Course shall fan,
Then, then, take heed too too much sail to bear
Where Pride and Scorn are Leaders in the Van;
Vengeance and Shame do bring up still the Rear.
89.
Stains, upon Scarlet, more affect the Eye.
Lights set on Steeples further off appear.
Look to your ways, if ever mounted high:
And know, that Observation still is near.
90
Judges, or Umpires, If in any Cause,
Or State, or Choice, at any time shall place you,
Regard not Gifts, or Persons; But the Laws.
The equal Balance is the Point will grace you.
91.
Nature, on either side, gives you an Ear;
And give an Ear to either side you must:
Who Judgment gives, and but one side does hear,
Though He judge justly, is a Judge unjust.
92
Though All have right to Justice; yet the Poor
In a more special Manner speed away.
A Pound is much: A Pin to him is more.
He more then half Denies, that does Delay.
93.
Bear not a Spirit, of so mean a Gage,
To trample, in Distress, not on your Fo.
The princely Lion, when he does engage,
And finds his Rival fallen, lets him go.
94.
Let no access of Honors, or of Wealth,
(Though to full banks) make you presume, or proud.
No Man can be termed ( Happy) till his Death.
Many a glorious Sun sets in a Cloud.
95.
That female Vice, of Slander, and of Tales,
Scorn, as a Shame beneath the pitch of Man:
Who makes a practice of it, seldom fails
Of a foul Draught, out of a filthy Kan.
96.
Do, as you would be done to. Make your Beam
Not short on this side, on that other long:
Sell, by the Weight you buy; Forge the Stream
Of Them will do no Right, and take no Wrong.
97.
Be apt to speak the best of every Man:
But chiefly of the absent, and the dead.
Forbear (though urged) to do the ill you can:
And ever sleep in a well minded Bed.
98.
Go not without your selves to seek Content;
You Will find it no where true, but in the Mind.
All Pomp and State this vain World can present,
Is Dew, and Dust before the Sun and Wind.
99.
To test this Truth, He, whom the E^st did fear,
Dying, orda^n^d his Page should, as a sign,
Before his Hearse, his Shirt high mounted bear;
And cry, Here Is all remains of Saladine.
100.
So use this World, as not to fix, and place
Your Thoughts, and Love upon it is vanities.
God, unto Man, gives an erected face,
And not to Beasts, To make him mind the skies.
101.
The world's a Sea that ever ebs and flows;
Where Nothing's fixed, but all things move to change.
Lay hold still on the Present; For who knows
What next Day's Light may bring of new and strange?
102.
Summer is now; the Winter will succeed:
The next Day may be foul, though this be fair.
Life, thus revolves. Provide against a Need:
Trust not a Calm, but for a Storm prepare.
103.
When Storms most strain your Barque, more stoutly then
Stand to the Helm, if you will safety find.
Crosses, and Losses are the Tests of Men.
No skill to be a Pilote with the Wind.
104.
If Fortune shall upon you fawn and smile,
Yet trust her not; and be prepared withal:
For it is her trade and Nature, To Beguil;
And often does raise, to give the greater fall.
105.
I shall not need to instance. Your own eyes
Are full of sad examples. Have a Care
Not to increase the Number. He is wise
That does (not teach, but) learn how to Beware.
106.
Of thriving Ill, think not the Ill the less;
And, through Events, do not on Actions look:
Who still does judge of Causes, by Success,
Often blames the Meat, when he should chide the Cook.
107.
Level your Thoughts at Honor, by that Square
Which bright Desert, not base Sale holds forth.
They chiefly spur to Buble-title Fair,
Who have less want of Money, then of Worth.
108.
If you, to Honor's Temple, will ascend,
You must your Passage make through Virtue's Fane.
And, unto that, Humility will lend
Her leading hand, if you her love do gain.
109.
O court the Love of sound Humility,
All Goodness springs from her: She, she alone
Opens the Gate to blessed Eternity;
No surer Base; no firmer Cornerstone.
110.
Honor attained: Do not your selves deceive,
To think that, then, it is Essence fixed lives
In your own Vote. Not He that does Receive
Has it in full dispose; But He that Gives.
111.
Honor is but Opinion, of some Worth,
For which Men court, and give you place and praise:
But if they once leak this Opinion forth,
Honor straight sinks, and Scorn does blast your Bays.
112.
That Cracker, Boasting, which does make a No se,
And, like to Echo, unmateriall is,
Decline with scorn: Much Prattle, little Poise,
Has ever been exploded with a Hiss.
113.
Court not the empty Man for his gay Clothes;
For, so, you make an Idol of an Ass.
Fear not the roaring Blade; but fear his Oaths:
Shoale streams run loud; Deep Rivers mutely pass.
114.
Take the Dimensions of a Gallant-Man,
Not from big Words, or Looks: But stayed Comport
Such fight an absent Lion, that look Wan
At a Dog's snarling, or a Gun's report.
115.
Let real Worth, not ranting Gusling, bind
Your love to Men, whilst it with them does dwell.
Worth a good Cement is: But when you find
They basely turn it off, bid them Farewell.
116.
Be Cautious in all things; But never tie
Your Thoughts unto Mistrust. For howsoere
It Is make the Mother of Security;
It Is still the Daughter, both of Guilt and Fear.
117.
Of Ils foreseen, you may, by timely Care,
And good take Heed, avert and stop the Fate.
Preventing Physic in a Medicine rare.
Death, not the Doctor comes, that comes too late.
118.
When the black Welkin, from its pregnant womb,
Threatens a storm, strike your top-Masts, and Sails.
He does live well, that can himself entomb
From searching Eyes, when Mischief most prevails.
119.
Value Men more for Worth, then Wealth or Race:
And scorn not, by the meanest, to be taught:
The Jewel may be rich, though plain the Case.
Gold is still Gold, by whomsoever brought.
120.
Love Virtue wheresoere: But yet explore
How fair the Subject, and of what Descent.
For Wine, though good, will please the Palate more,
When in a Vaze of Gold, or Crystal sent.
121.
Bravely contend, a lasting Fame, to have.
That Fame, I mean, bright Virtue gives to us:
Better to sleep in an obscured Grave;
Then to survive as an Evastratus.
122.
Knowledge is the best purchase you can make;
And of that Best, self Knowledge is the Best.
Be not like many Travelers, that take
Exotic Surveighs, and neglect their Nest.
123.
Man, by how much he knows, by so much more
He has God's Image in him. Do not waste
Your precious time. Who has but little store
Of Oil, and much to Do, had need make haste.
124.
Much you may know, if that you do not know
Too soon you know enough. Know, To discern,
No Knowledge yet did 'ere so fully flow,
But the most Learned might still learn, To learn.
125.
Knowledge, the more it is used, the more shines bright:
Impart it still, and to instruct be prone.
Diffusive Good impares not. You may light.
Another's Candle, and not waste your Own.
126.
Let not that Day behold a setting Sun,
But to the Gaol you have some Progress made:
Who spurs not on, when he has once begun
To run in Virtue's Race, does retrograde.
127.
What any Man may speak, or think of You,
You cannot hinder: But it is in your Choice,
To make what is said, or Thought, or false, or true.
Elect the Best; Then Weigh not Thought, or Voice.
128.
Mind still to do the Task you have in hand:
And ramble not, from thing to thing, like Fools.
Heat, at once, many Irons, some must stand;
And whilst you anvile One, the Other cools.
129.
If, in a Work you have begun, you shall
Find Knots, and Rubs; loose neither Heart, nor Hold.
More then one stroke must make a Tree to fall:
It Is Perseverance does a Task uphold.
130.
Be Careful, not to do the Ill you see,
And tax in others; And would have them mend.
No greater fault can in a Teacher be,
Then to commit, What he does reprehend.
131.
The Friendly Guest, whom you have bid; or came
Distressed for shelter to your House; Have still
A Care to treat with Love: For, with less Shame,
You might have kept him out, then use him ill.
132.
Pray for the Blessing of long-running-Days;
For, well used, so it is. Yet let me tell,
That Life's best Measure is not Time, but Praise:
He has lived long enough, that has lived well.
133.
That which is Good, you must still strive to do;
But so to do it, as you do it Well.
Nounes, to have Merit, must have Adverbs too.
Men may do Good, and yet may go to Hell.
134.
Hate Dalliance, for it is a Bait to Ill;
And often injects a loose, and wanton Thought.
Though it seem sweet, it is a Sweet, To Kill.
Who would love Sweetmeats, if they poison brought?
135.
Wanting the Kernel, never Vaunt the Shell:
And, Having Worth, do not, as Ciphers, stand.
Take value to your selves: Serve not to swell
Figures that lean to the sinister Hand.
136.
Weigh of each Man the Person, and the Place:
Let no rash Anger in your Looks be seen.
The Snarlings, and the Venom of the Base,
Must rather move your Scorn, then raise your Spleen.
137.
Pass by, with Silence, and not seem to see
Many Disgusts, that will attend your Life:
Unless you do, expect not, to be free
From daily Jarrs, Distempers, Suits, and Strife.
138.
Be not of rash Belief, to enterta in
Malicious Tales against Friends you long have known.
Sift still the Truth. Loss is more swift then Gain.
Forts are not reared so soon as overthrown.
139.
Still at a distance, with Detractors, stand,
Those base amphibious Beasts, and Pests of Life,
That always fish in troubled Waters; and,
Like Salamanders, live in Flames of Strife.
140.
If through Misinformations, You have erred,
Or injured any; Count it not a shame
To give redress. Right must be still preferred.
Recanted Ill, can never bring you blame.
141.
Learn, Not to learn Back-Racquet Complement;
To praise, before; and rail at men, behind.
A forked Tongue is a base Instrument:
The Satyr left the Man of double Wind.
142.
Do not, like Cocks, on your own Dunghill, Crow;
And prove Crest-fallen in another Clime:
Order the Music, of your Actions, so,
As, in all parts, to keep both Tune, and Time.
143.
Keep still within the Verge of your own Sphere:
Let no eccentrick Motion catch your Thought.
Comets affright, and Glowworms scarce appear.
Have all you do, to a due scantling brought.
144.
Know that al things whatever have their Bounds,
And due set Limits, both of Less, and More.
Who from Them swerves, does swerve from Virtue; Wounds
The Right; and thrusts Decorum out of Door.
145
Look you so act the good turns you intend,
As still good Manner, with good Matter, go.
Many a Kine, a good Meal's milk, does lend;
And, with her foot, the Pail does overthrow.
146.
If through Example, or Infirmity,
You chance to fall, get up, and scrape your Clothes.
The Best may slip: the Beast alone will lie
And wallow in the puddle of his Woes.
147.
As you grow more in years, more mind your End;
And less the World; which still strives to deceive.
The young may die; the Aged must. Intend
The Bliss to come; and not the Bane you leave.
148.
The sentenced Prisoner, that, each minute, looks
To breathe his last, Who would not think him mad,
To talk of Rents, trade, contracts, Bond, or Books?
Age, that, Thus, carks, and Cares, is just as Bad.
149.
Weigh well each Word you utter: But abstain
From Writing much, unless your Vein do hit.
Words wind away: But Writings do remain
As lively Pourtraicts of the Mind and Wit.
150.
Do that, to Day, which would be done too late
If, till to morrow, you sho^^d let it rest.
Again take heed, Not to precipitate,
And make, A Now, of what, Anon, is Best,
151.
Sift not, by too too deep a scrutinie,
Each rise of Scandals, or of Truths with thorns:
Coals, blown, will blaze; Neglected, they may die.
It Is Wisdom often, To pass by Wrongs and Scorns.
152.
From sacred Things keep a purloyning Hand;
For, like a Rust they will the Rest consume:
The Sacrilegious Eagle brought a Brand,
That turned her Tree, Nest, Eaglets, into Fume.
153.
Do not use Friends, As, basely Many do,
Merely for Steps, and Ladders to their Ends.
Which gained; Away with Steps, and Ladders too:
For what, now, most did help; most, now, offends.
154.
Never presume upon, or Wealth, or Might
To injure any; For the Meanest may
Sometime or help, or hurt. A Mouse did bite
The Toyls in twain that did a Lion stay.
155.
Confide not in a Multitude, begot
'Twixt Hydras and Cameleons. If you fail
To answer their fond Fancies (as Who not?)
He straight cries, Hang; that did, but now, cry, Hail.
156.
Presume not, so, on what you undertake,
As if you led, Success, tied in a slip.
Often, in its Port, a Barque does, Shipwreck, make.
Many Things happen'twixt the Cup and Lip.
157.
Hold still a Hand to help what is amiss.
Yet be not vexed if you shall often find
Crosse-grains not to be smoothed: And learn, This,
That what you cannot Mend, you must not Mind.
158.
Hear all, observe; say little. Silence rows
Under a Weather Shore, when Storms increase.
He knows enough, although he little knows,
That knows but well, how to, Well, hold his peace.
159.
When you shall find your selves in any Straight,
Let not your Rudder loose, or your Sheat fly.
Courage and Prudence are a main Receipt
To quell the Qualmes of such a Malady.
160.
Send not a Head of Glass against Stones to war:
For quickly, so, you at a loss will stand.
Trust not, at Need, to Friends that absent are:
Waters a far cannot quench Flames at hand.
161.
Trust, tied by faith, discharge with truth and Care;
But chiefly that, from dying friends, or dead.
Know, It Is not more a Sacrilege, To dare
Steal Gold, from Altars; then from Tombs the Lead.
162.
Collect, each where, (as Bees from Flowers do)
The purest Sap, and join it to your Hive.
Who day by day adds but a Mite, or Two
Unto his Store, cannot, at length, but thrive.
163.
You must use Reading, as you should use Meat;
Surcharge in each does cloy and Nauseate:
He eats to health, that does by leisure eat;
He reads to Profit, that does Meditate.
164.
Let love of Virtue more restrain from Ill,
Then any servile fear of Punishment.
Where this Last sways, dwells a depraved Will:
The First hold forth a Mind to Goodness bent.
165.
Be not deterred, by Fear, from what is Good.
Be not allured, by Hopes, to what is Bad.
Carry not forth two faces in a Hood.
Keep Word and Work still in one Liv'ry clad.
166.
If you have Means, then let an open Hand
(Discreetly though) deal Gifts, Rewards, and Fees.
Gold is the Monarch that does all command.
It Is Wealth, not Worth, that now gains Caps and Knees.
167.
Know, and observe, with use; That Bad often springs,
By accident, from Good. Security,
Breeds Danger; Plenty, Pride; Truth, Hatred brings;
Contempt proceeds from Familiarity.
168.
Before you shoot still take a heedful aim:
So, ere you speak look to Whom, What, Where, when.
Speeches and Shafts, in This, are much the same,
No Art (when loose) can bring 'em back again.
169.
Take heed, too often, bad Lessons to repeat;
Lest that, at length, in Ill you learned grow.
Not to Engage, is easier then Retreat.
Habits more slowly ebb, then they do flow.
170.
If, through neglect of Vice, you find Neglect
From Those that court it, Let it be your Glory:
Good Men will use another Dialect.
Esteem from These in that will fame your Story.
171.
When Visitations, from above, are sent
For sins, upon your selves, or on the Land;
Pout not, but Pray? Repine not, but Repent;
Bite not (like Dogs) the Stone, but Bless the Hand.
172.
Think not, when you are spared, and others struck
With the angry shafts Heaven often to Earth does send
That, because Better, you have better Luck;
But that it is Mercy shown, That you may mend.
173.
If through God's Hand, or the Times Fate and Lot,
You fall to wants, such wants can bring no blame.
But he that finks by Play, Pipe, Punck, or Pot,
Or such, locks Pity out, and lets in Shame.
174.
To Want, is bad; To Have is, sometimes, Worse.
Wants whet the Wit, and Waken Industry:
To Have, is often of many Sins the Nurse.
Leave Wealth depraved, for Honest Poverty.
175.
Submit to States; For, or for Woe, or Weal,
They are ordained: And Might still makes the Law:
In his Swords Hilt, the fifth Charles wore his Seal,
To warn, That where that failed, the Blade should aw.
176.
Wisely refrain from Things indifferent,
At which the Times are apt to take offense.
Prudence complies, Where Conscience is not rent.
It Is better please our Reason, then our Sense.
177.
When Power makes That Bad, Which you think Good,
Struggle not with it; For you kick at Thorns.
Things, as they are, are not still understood:
Lions may say, That Foxes Ears are Horns.
178.
Power is like a Sturdy Storm, whose Rage
Rends, and roots up resisting Oaks; when Weak,
And Yielding Reeds stand firm. Betimely Sage:
And learn this Rule, It Is better Bend, then Break.
179.
Of Prince, or State, under whose aw you live,
It Is hard to talk and a Dilemma shun.
For, It Is to Flatter, if you Praises give:
If you find fault, You into Danger run.
180.
When you are well, have not an itch, To change.
Never forsake an old friend, for a New.
Shun the resort of Them that loosely range.
Be Fair, to All: Familiar, but with Few.
181.
Converse most with your Betters; Men of brain
Still bring some Feathers to emplume your Nest:
And you more Credit, from a Meeting, gain,
Where you the Meanest are, then Where the Best.
182.
If by your Wits you be constrained to live,
Get, if you may, Employments to your Mind:
But rather take such Lots as Time will give,
Then to Court Fortune, and Cast Fame behind.
183.
To do that which is Honest, never Shame,
Though it be sometimes much beneath your Sphere.
Glowworms have Light, though they little Flame:
And when the Night's most Dark, most bright appear.
184.
Be with your selves, at home; Live not apart.
(For To be Here, and There, at once, may hold)
Man is not where his Body is, But Heart.
We still find Misers with their Bags of Gold.
185.
If you do mean, the Rich Man, to define,
Look not on Coffers, Garners, Sellars, Store:
But look on Him that can himself confine.
He Is only Rich, that does not covet More.
186.
Where you have smarted once, next time take heed;
The Scalded Dog shuns to be served the same.
The Wise once May: The Fool that twice does bleed,
Of his last Wound, does give himself the blame.
187.
Seek not, by slubbring slights, to undermine,
Or supplant Any; By much less a Friend.
Who, of such Stuff, makes Stairs to his Design,
Often falls himself that way he did ascend.
188.
Look often within a Glass, (for that advice
Wise Socrates unto his Scholars gave).
If you be Fair; foul not that Fair, with Vice:
If you be Foul; from Virtue Beauty have.
189.
Both Eat, and Drink, when Thirst and Hunger crave;
For these two mainly against weak Nature fight:
But when, Enough, to quell them Both, you have,
Seek not for Sauce to stir up Appetite.
190.
Aim where you mean to hit, but aim aright;
Lest that by Chance you hurt the Standers by.
Shafts shot at random, may to Mischief light.
Look thrice about, before you once let fly.
191.
So Speak, and Do, as you may never Shame
To own your Words and Deeds. He gives the Lie
To himself basely, and a Coward's Name,
That Speaks, or Does, what he must Needs Deny.
192.
Let true Discretion (as a Cook does Meat)
Set forth, and season all you Do, or Say:
Nothing so much inviteth Guests to Eat,
As sav'ry Sauce, dressed in a cleanly Way.
193.
Those whom you have received into your charge,
From Nature's hand, or by some Compact made;
To Them, in Love, your Bowels still enlarge.
Debts justly due, are justly to be paid.
194.
Purchase not Vain and Wanton Pleasures; though
You, at an easy rate, may them obtain.
Bad Wares never come cheap: It Is better throw
Away your Money, then to Buy your Bane.
195.
Go always armed with Christian Fortitude;
So no Events shall shake you from your Sphere.
When Dangers press, let not base Fear intrude:
He more then once does Die, that still does Fear.
196.
Life's Date is short; Arts have a long Carreer:
Wings to your Feet, Let Active Virtue give.
If once you drowse, your Sails do flat, and veer:
The more you foster sleep, the less you Live.
197.
Take Time while Time you have; For Time once lost,
No Time, at any Time, has Time to find:
Time will not be recalled by Care, or Cost;
Time can no more be staid, then Sun, and Wind.
198.
Keep promised Faith; And, Trusted, Trust maintain.
Play not the Traitors upon any rate.
Falsehood may thrive; But it still bears a Blain.
Such love the Treason, who the Traitor hate.
199.
Sow in good Ground your Seed, and it will grow.
Stanch and Sound Vessels will preserve your Wine.
Base Dunghill Birds the Pearls, aside, will throw.
It Is Labor lost, when you do wash a Swine.
200.
Consort with Men of your own Stamp, and Strain:
For Like to Like is like to Cotton well.
Think how absurd it were, and cross the grain,
Colliars and Fullers should together dwell.
201.
Weave winning Words when you will Wroth allay.
A tart Reply makes Choler rant it higher.
He much mistakes, who is of Mind, He may
By Chasing Cool; and with Flax fence a Fire.
202.
Of Sycophants, Dissemblers, Bawds, Beware,
As of pernicious Beasts. The First are there
Still, where they are not. And the Second are
Not, where they are. The Third are every Where.
203.
Strive, all you may, to Master fond Desire,
Which daily does with settled Reason fight:
The Task is hard; so is the Glory higher.
No Conquest like to That, of Appetite.
204.
Never be rash in Censure. Let the Test
Of Time set forth the Worth of every Man.
Things are not still as they appear. It Is Best
Ere once you Judge, five, or six times, To Scan.
205.
If the World on you frowns, smile on your selves:
For Frowns, that save, shame Favors that do kill.
Who ever sailed, and escaped Rocks and Shelves,
But did rejoice, though he might then be Ill?
206.
Help still where there is Need. Actions have Worth,
Or Vileness from their Objects. Has he Eyes,
Who, Having store of Water, poures it forth
Into a River, when his Garden fries?
207.
The more you are esteemed, the more contend
To merit that Esteem. Such as assume
Aims, only at a Name, and there will end;
Do Die in Fact, and merely Live in Fume.
208.
When you find Fraud furled up in Friendship, then
Stand to your Arms, and watch to ward a Blow:
The Wary Fox that, from the Lyon's Den,
Saw no Return, wisely refused, To Go.
209.
Of Foes you may beware: But with what skill
Can Wounds be fenced from Kindred false, or Friends?
Corrupted Best becomes the Worst of Ill:
The brightest Angels made the blackest Feinds.
210.
Set such a Value upon real Good,
As due Discretion may therein appear.
The Bargains make the Buyers understood:
Nothing so Good, but may be bought too Dear.
211.
Walk not in Ways where Danger Centry keeps.
Nor Bypath leading to the House of Shame.
Take heed, to wake a Lion, when he sleeps.
And shun to thrust your fingers in the Flame.
212.
To help a Friend (so you may safely do it)
In any straight, be ready still, and prone.
But Who, Not Mad, out of Another's Foot
Will pluck a Thorn, and thrust it in his Own?
213.
Him, whom you mean to Trust, be sure, To Try;
And how, to God, his pulse beats, duly Scan:
Faith that is True, dwells with true Piety:
He that plays False with God, will cozen Man.
214.
The Heart of Man full of Meanders is;
Let not an Outside Gloss bind your Belief.
Many do Well, till they can do Amiss.
Fitted occasion is that makes a Thief.
215.
Divine Astrea is to Heaven Fled.
Conscience subsists in a bare Sound and Name.
Religion's now by Sense and Fancy led.
Gain, and Self Ends do chiefly play the Game.
216.
Have no Contrast with Souls of base Aloy,
For you will Sill be Worsted in the End.
Bespatt'red all, He needs must go away,
Who, or with Mud, or Dunghils does contend.
217.
If often you find (as too too often, you will)
At the World's hands, Bad Dealings, and cross Play;
Fret not, or Fume: But use a Gamester's Skill,
Outface the Game; Throw not your Cards away.
218.
Run not a Madding with the Uulgar Sort,
That take all upon Trust; and wear their Ears,
And Eyes, in Others Heads: Canvasse Report;
And, with ripe Judgment weigh, both Hopes, and Fears.
219.
When you, a Work of any Weight, intend,
Rush not on Rashly; But ripe Council ask.
Rightly disposed Mediums Work the End.
Who well Begins has Ended half his Task.
220.
In deep Designs, Whereon high Hazard floats,
Look, that, With steady Hand and Heart you stear
Be not like skittish Brains, in shallow Boats,
Who make, themselves, the Danger which they fear.
221.
Weighty Resolves, must not shoot, in a Night,
Like Mushrums up; Give'em due time, To grow.
But, when full fleg'd, Let Them have speedy flight:
Danger's often Swift, Where Execution's slow.
222.
Him, whom you Love, and whom your Love may aw,
Admonish gently, when you See him Stray.
Know, That, To Lead, is easier then, To Draw:
Cauters inflame, But Catapsalms allay.
223.
Shun, To be Good, as Hogs and Medlars be,
Only when Dead, and Rotten: Merit lies,
When whilst We live, the Hand and Heart are free.
What Miser breathes but leaves All, When he Dies?
224.
Fall not, By Ill, within the Lash of Laws:
But if, For Good, you suffer, It Is no Stain.
Brave is a passive Fortitude. The Cause
Designs the Malefactor; Nor the Pain.
225.
Do not, at any Time, contemn Advice,
Which Men of Years and Wisdom forth do reach.
He that has Wealth, consumes it in a Trice,
That is Too old, to Learn; Too young, to Teach.
226.
When great Estates, to green Heads, do descend;
The Juncture, often, is like, To Flax and Fire.
He seldom knows discreetly how to Spend;
That never knew The Labor, To acquire.
227.
If you may Choose; Then Choose not, To engage
The Freedom You, From God and Nature, hold.
Not any Beast, but does abhor a Cage.
Fetters, are Fetters still, though made of Gold.
228.
But if the Laws of harsh Necessity,
At any Time, shall on You, put a Tie;
Let Diligence, Care, and Fidility,
Show, That you serve more then to please the Eye.
229.
The more your Mind adorned is, the less
Give Ostentation leave, to make a Show:
And like the Wise Philosopher, profess,
That all you know, is, That you Nothing know.
230.
When you are fixed, let Hospitality
Give Answer, at your Gate, to such as Call.
But, in your Wall's foundation, have an Eye.
Your Kitchen be not Wider, then your Hall.
231.
Consult your Purse, How it does sink, or Swell;
And let that Nilus bound out your Expense.
Where a lean Barn and a fat Kitchen dwell,
The Beggar's Bush is never far from Thence.
232.
By prescript Rules, You must your Household guide;
Else you will soon put all Things in a Toss.
But, from those Rules, if you, First, start aside,
What will They do that share not in the Loss?
233.
Be, to your Servants, neither Cheap, nor Stern;
The First, Neglect; the Last, will Hatred, draw:
Let a discreet mild Distance make'em Learn,
Not to presume; nor, too much, stand in aw.
234.
As, of your Court, they are; so, sometimes too,
They may be of your Council: But take heed
How, with your Secrets, they have much to do.
Often a false Servant makes his Master bleed.
235.
The single State, so it be pure, is Best:
Yet, full of Honor is the Married Life.
Matches, for Virtue, not for Wealth, are Blessed.
It Is Better want a Portion, then a Wife.
236.
When, By wise Choice, not by Wild Fancy, led
To sacred Hymen, He shall make you see
The hopeful Blessings of a happy Bed;
Bid Them be such, as I wish You, To be.
237.
To give good Rules is Good; But it is not all,
Unless your selves walk by the Rules you give.
What, Words have raised, Works have soon made to fall.
Men, less by Precept, then Example, live.
238.
If ought, in me (as God knows much there is)
Be out of Square; My Charge, as my Desire,
Is, That you shun the Track: If That, or This
Be Good; It Is Good, To imitate your Sire.
239.
Actions of Virtue, of what kind so ere,
Pursue, embrace, and with all Might advance:
Who has such Props, to bear him, needs noe fear
The Counter-buffs of either Time, or Chance.
240.
Of what is Bad, and yet allures the Sense,
Have none at all, or curb your fond Desire.
Eternal Bliss crowns Virtuous Abstinence:
When loose Fruition fries in quenchles Fire.
241.
Build not assured Hopes and of long Wind,
On This, both short and fickle, Term of Life:
He, that has other Eyes, is sadly Blind;
And does, as sadly, meet the Sisters Knife.
242.
Early set forth to your Eternal Race:
Th'Ascent is steep and craggy you must climb.
God, at all times, has promised Sinners Grace,
If they repent: But He never promised Time.
243.
Cheat not you selves, as Most, Who then prepare
For Death, when Life is almost turned to Fume.
One Thief was saved, that no Man might despair:
And but one Thief, that no Man might presume.
244.
The Life of Man is but a Breath, a Blast,
A Tale, a Dream, a Buble: Therefore Count
Each Day you live, as of your Life the Last;
And put not off, To make up your Account.
245.
How Many has the Morn beheld, To rise,
In their Youth's Prime, as glorious as the Sun;
Who (like a flower Cropped) have had their Eyes
Closed up, by Death, before the Day was done?
246.
Poison, a Knife, a Pistol, Thousands more
Sad Instruments set Periods to our Fates.
Nature lets in, to Life, but at one Door;
But, To go out, Death opens Many Gates.
247.
Do at not on Life, What has it that can please?
Some few false Joys: But of true Sorrows Store.
It Is but a Clog, a Prison, a Disease;
By how much longer it is, it is, So, the more.
248.
That Death is horrid, is a Thing Untrue;
Be not afraid; She but a Vizard Wears:
That once removed, She has a lovely Hue.
The Child is laughed at that a Vizard fears.
249.
Nature Expects a Death, by Law of Sin.
Our Longest days unravell, like a Clue.
Make not this World your Palace, But your Inn:
The Reckoning Pay, and bid your Host Adue.
250.
Do as that Prince, of Whom We read in Story,
Who day by day did meditate his End.
If you be good; A good Memento mori
Will keep you so: If Bad, 'twill make you Mend.
251.
In all the Course of your Life's Pilgrimage,
So on the Load-Star ( Heaven) cast your Eye,
As not to Shame your Parts upon the Stage:
Nor (when your Exit comes) repine To Die.
252.
Now may the glorious Triple, Unity,
That Made, Redeemed, and Sanctifies us all,
So guide, preserve, and in all purity
Bind up your Souls, that you may never fall.
253.
May You, O May you, with all Graces filled,
As your Days grow, in Goodness so increase,
That, your Thread spun, and your last Glass distilled,
You may all reign in Everlasting Peace.
FINIS.
To CRITICS.
MEthod is wanting, Here, You Will say; It Is true:
And needs must wanting be; since the whole Clue
Consists of several Ends: Which who shall knit,
In one smooth knotles Line, must have more Wit
And Skill, Then I. Method, I must confess,
Is of especial use; and gives a dress
Of Comelines. But Matters whose each Part
Little Coheres with other, to this Art
Submit not much: Such, Miscellanies are;
And of Such, chiefly This: Wherein a Care
Is mostly taken, You may cull, from Hence,
Quadrin, by Quadrin, and not mar the Sense.
And though, in their Disposal, I might show
Something of Order: It Is enough, To Know,
That the main Scope whereat my Thoughts do fly,
Is, To teach, Well to Live; And Well to die.
THE PENITENT CHRISTIAN HIS METAMORPHOSIS.

By H: DELAUNE.

In nova, mutatas deformes dicere Formas
Corpora, fert Animus, pretioso Sanguine Christi.
LONDON: Printed for Henry Seile over against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleetstreet. 1651.

THE DEDICATION.
TO You, Whom a true Sense, of What you are,
And would not be, invites to a Desire
To be Such, as you are not; Do I spare
(To you alone.) This Coal of Sacred Fire.
Whose Heat, I wish, may warm you So, As This,
Here, may become your Metamorphosis.
To OVID.
OVid, confess Thy Metamorphosis
(Though choisely rare) comes mainly short of This.
Thine makes Men Beasts: This turns Beasts into Men.
Thine makes Men die: This makes Men live again.
I blame Thee not; For, Herein, lies the Ods,
This know; but One; and Thine knew many Gods.
This One, moves All: Thine could not see, nor go.
This One is true: But None of Thine were so.
By how much, then, Truth beyond Falsehood is,
By so much ( Ovid) Thine comes short of This.
THE CHRISTIAN METAMORPHOSIS.
1.
MOst glorious Essence, In whose sight
The Angels bright,
And Saints dare scarce appear,
Thou art so Holy: How then may
Worms, Ashes, Clay
Adventure To draw near?
2.
Ido Confess, with contrite Heart,
I have no Part,
By Right, in any Good:
For, as I was conceived in sin,
And born therein,
In sin I still have stood.
3.
And to that Ill, which Nature brought,
Deed, Word, and Thought
Have added more, and more:
Commission and Omission reign
In Me; these Twain
Have heaped up the Store.
4.
He that can balance, in his Hand,
The Sea, and Land,
Count A^tomes, Stars, and Times:
He, He alone, the Weight can tell,
And reckon well,
The Number of my Crimes.
5.
If He, that owes but a Mite,
By Law and Right,
Must to a Dungeon go:
Oh then In what a Case is He,
Let Any See,
That does a Million ow?
6.
Such is my Debt; Nay ten times more
Is on my Score;
And Whips and Tortures be
Prepared, in the grim Jaylor's Hands,
Who roughly Stands
Ready to Seize on Me.
7.
I have no Means the Debt to pay;
Or run away
From Hell's wide open Gate.
What shall I do? To whom shall I
My Self apply
For Help, in this Estate?
8.
Shall I to Saints, and Angels go,
To Cure my Woe,
And ease my Pain and grief?
Alas! They blush, and Sorrow too
At what I do;
But can give no Relief.
9.
The Aid of Princes, States, and Kings,
And such like Things,
It is in vain to crave.
For Each of them, as well as I,
Is doomed, To Die:
And None, himself, can save.
10.
Whither, Oh whither then shall I
For Succor fly?
Ay me, most wretched Wight!
The griesly Fiends, with Iron teeth,
Hooked hands and feet;
Come on, with main and might.
11.
Hold, hold; Hands off: I do descry
Mount Calvary,
That much contemned Place:
But, unto Me, in this strong Strife,
A Hill of Life;
And only Seat of Grace.
12.
And, there, behold, raised upon high,
I do epsy
That ever blessed Cross:
Which unto Men not doubly born,
Is mock and scorn,
Strife, Scandal, Dung, and Dross.
13.
Upon it hangs that Holy One,
Who can alone
Whole Worlds of Sins deface.
See, how with stretched Arms he stands,
Gored Feet and Hands,
Poor Clients to embrace.
14.
Stand farther off, Accursed Crew,
In spite of You,
I Will, thither, haste and hie:
Faith, and Repentance, come along,
And make me strong,
Till, at his Feet, I lie.
15.
O thou, that were, ere Time began,
Moon Wax, or Wan,
Sun Shine, or Stare appear:
Ere Fire, Water, Air, or Earth,
By refined Birth,
Knew Day, Week, Month, or Year.
16.
Thou, Thou, that art the only Word,
That Made, Staid, Stirred
The huge Material,
Out of the which, by wise Dispose,
Thou did Compose
This goodly Mighty All.
17.
Thou, Thou (I say) Who, God above,
Did Man so Love,
As for his only Sake,
Thou would thy glorious Throne forgo,
To come below,
And his frail Nature take.
18.
(That as Man's Life, who first had breath,
First, Sin, then Death
Established in their Reign:
So might Man's Death, who knew no Ill,
Sin, and Death kill,
And Life restore again.)
19.
Help, Help, O Lord, I humbly crave,
And quickly save
My Soul from Death, and Hell.
See how I am beset: O Pay
My Debt, I pray;
And all these Haggs repel.
20.
One little Drop of thy Dear Blood
Can do more good,
To wash my Sins away;
Then Ganges, Nilus, Euphrates,
And such as These,
Or the vast Ocean may.
21.
Grant it, O grant it, Lord; For, Lo,
A Stream does flow
From thy Feet, Hands, and Side:
And, till I may attain that Grace,
In this blessed Place,
Thus prostrate, I Will abide.
22.
My Suit is gained; Up Faith, Go, stand
With ready Hand;
(But pure, have special Care)
And, from his Hand, receive it: You
Repentance true,
Come, and all Things prepare.
23.
Bring now, now bring that precious Balm,
From the blessed Palm
Of my dear JESUS sent:
Bathe, Bathe me in it, from Head to Foot,
And so look to it,
As none in vain be spent.
24.
Ha! Dare I trust mine Eyes? O strange!
What blessed Change
Do I both feel, and see?
I am become more white then Snow,
Just now a Crow:
All Terrors vanished be.
25.
The horrid Brood, of Barathrum,
That were, Here, come
To hurry Me away,
Look how they fly; And in Despair,
Do tear their hair,
That they have lost their Prey.
26.
O my Redeemer, For this Grace,
In every Place,
I will, for evermore,
Set forth, and Magnify thy Praise,
In sacred Lays,
And thy great Name adore.
27.
And now, led by thy holy Spirit,
Roab'd with thy Merit,
I Will to the Father go,
In full assurance of his Love,
And one Suit move,
Which he will grant I know.
28.
Father, dear Father, For his Sake
Who did me take
To Mercy, Mercy have:
And to the Kingdom of thy Son,
When Life is done,
Translate my Soul, I crave.
FINIS.
A Table showing the chief Matters contained in the several Quadrins, as they
stand in their Order and Number.
THe Introduction or Adresse. Quad: 1 Prayer and Praise to God, and the benefit
thereof. q. 2 Soundness in Faith, and stedfastness in Religion. q. 3 Honor
and Reverence to Parents, brings a blessing. q. 4 Concord and amity among
brethren, adds strength. q. 5 Invocation of God upon any work we took in
hand. q. 6 Outward show, and longest prayers not most acceptable to God. q. 7
Against Hypocrisy in Religion. q. 8 Magistrates, the Aged, and Wise to be
reverenced; and why. q. 9 Friends, and such as are in distress to be
respected, and relieved. q. 10 Rash Engagements and Vows not to be run into. q.
11 The best, not the most, are to be pleased. q. 12 To bear a like mind in
Prosperity, and Adversity. q. 13 The Goods of the Mind are only properly our
own. q. 14 Election to be made of persons with whom to converse. q. 15 Not to
do Ill, though unseen of Man. q. 16 To speak in due time and season, and how.
q. 17 Who is apt to speak much, must learn to speak wisely. q. 18 The habit of
lying begets often an unbeleif of the Truth. q. 19 Ill mnst not be done upon
any Pretense of Good. q. 20 Against Oaths, and all profane and impure talk. q.
21 Against the society of loese Dames, and the Mischiefs thereof. q. 22
Against Drunkenness. q. 23 Against Gaming and Quarrels. q. 24 Conscience is to
be made of the meanest sin. q. 25 The Point of Honor to be cherished, but much
mistaken by many. q. 26 Life is a rich Treasure, not to be idly wasted. q. 27
Our Country, Friends, and Kindred have enterest in us. q. 28 A moderation in
Expenses, is to be used. q. 29 Apparel must be fitted to the Person and his
place. q. 30 Not to got Law, but upon pressing Necessity. q. 31 Money only to
be loved for its use, well regulated. q. 32 Goodness more to be sought after,
then Riches, or Greatness. q. 33 Prudence must be the guide of all our Actions.
q. 34 A Medium between the two Extremes in the safest Course. q. 35 Against
Dissimnlation. Yet not to speak all we think. q. 36 Against Suretiship. q. 37
Against Idleness. q. 38 Education gives, what Nature and Fortune cannot bestow.
q. 39 The Excellency of Beasts above Man, in body qualities. q. 40 The mind
of Man may receive some information from Beasts. q. 41 Instances in sundry
Brutes to the information of the mind. q. 42 Travel into foreign Countries not
to be undertaken without Means. q. 43 Certain Rules to be observed in Travel.
q. 44 The Emblems for Travel explained. q. 45 Fair Comportments gain favor and
love. q. 46 Good Parts to be kept in use, but not to be too intent upon any
one. q. 47 Wealth very necessary to the setting forth of Virtue. q. 48 It is
not good to be rich too soon. q. 49 We must so feed others, as not to starve
our selves. q. 50 To preserve is no less virtue then to purchase. q. 51
Against self-will, and self-conceit. q. 52 A Certainty not to be left for an
uncertaintie. q. 53 Against running into Debt. q. 54 Expenses must be limited
by the Comings in. q. 55 Industry in Yruth, must provide for Age. q. 56 In
greatest Prosperity to be most humble minded. q. 57 Not to have too good, nor
yet too mean an opinion of self-worth. q. 58 Not to carry a greater Port then
our Estate will bear. q. 59 Vnsettledness in Thoughts, and often removing much
prejudicial. q. 60 Against Excess in Meat and Drink. q. 61 To give something
to the Poor of what God gives to us. q. 62 Deeds of Charity not to be done
with ostentation. q. 63 Not to be busy and inquisitive into other men's
Affairs. q. 64 The Tongue to be restrained. q. 65 Why Nature has doubly fenced
in the Tongue. q. 66 Base Gain must not byas our Thoughts to unworthy Actions.
q. 67 Vprightness in Dealings, and keeping of word recommended. q. 68 What None
should know, not to be imparted to a Friend. q. 69 Secrets received in trust,
not to be revealed. q. 70 Virtuous Emulation to be followed: and Envy shunned.
q. 71 Virtue is still the Butt of Envy. q. 72 Goodness for it self to be loved,
and all for it. q. 73 The first Motions to Evil are to be resisted. q. 74 Ill
not only to be shunned, but all the semblance of it. q. 75 Terror dogs Guilt.
Innocence is confident. q. 76 Good turns received are to be had in remembrance.
q. 77 No Records to be kept of Injuries received. q. 78 Better give Examples of
Virtue, then to boast of our Ancestors. 79 To take more care of adorning the
Brain, then setting forth the Body. 80 Courtesy to be used to All: Councels
imparted but to few. q. 81 By the Counsel given, to judge of the Counselor.
q. 82 How to make trial of a Friend. q 83 Another way of trial of a Friend.
q. 84 When Friends may best be purchased. q. 85 A true Friend is a rich
Treasure. q. 86 Applause and Detraction, neither make, nor mar him, that is
Good. q 87 Pride and Scorn bring always Vengeance and Shame. q. 88 Men the more
eminent they are, the more their failings are Noted. q. 89 Equal Justice to be
distributed without respects. q. 90 A just Judgment given, and but one side
heard, makes an unjust Judge. q. 91 The Poor, in Justice, must be dispatched
first. q. 92 Not to infult upon any in distress. q. 93 No Man may be termed
happy till his Death. q. 94 Against Slanders, and Tale-bearing. q. 95 To deal
with others, as we would be dealt with. q. 96 To speak well of all men, but
chiefly of the dead, and absent. q. 97 Solid content consists only in the
Mind. q. 98 Saladine his insinuation of the worlds vanity. q. 99 Our Love and
Thoughts not to be fixed on this world, but on Heaven. q. 100 The instabilitie
of this world, and of all things in it. q. 101 The Revolutions of Life; and to
provide for them. q. 102 Adversity is the trial of men's spirits. q. 103
Fortune deceitful, and not to be trusted unto. q. 104 It Is wisdom to be warned
by other men's harms. q. 105 Actions not to be judged of, by Events. q. 106
Titles of Honor are to be gained by Merit, not by Money. q. 107 Virtue leads
to Honor, and Humility to Virtue. q. 108 Humility opens the Gate to eternal
Happiness. q. 109 Honor is in him that gives, not in him that received it. q.
110 The Definition of Honor. q. 111 Against vain glorious boasting. q. 112
Against Out side Men, and Roarers. q. 113 How to know a gallant Man. q. 114
Worth must Cement our Affections to Men. q. 115 It Is good to be Cautious still,
but not mistrustfull. q. 116 Timely prevention is the best Medicine of Evils.
q. 117 Privacie in dangerous times most secure. q. 118 It Is no shame to learn,
even of the Meanest Man. q. 119 Virtue in a fair and noble Subject pleases
more. q. 120 Fame, which Virtue bestows, is to be sought after. q. 121
Knowledge of our self is the best Knowledge we can have q. 122 By how much a
Man knows, by so much more he has Gods Image in him. q. 123 A too early
opinion of sufficiency of Knowledge, obstructs the increase. q. 124 Knowledge
by imparting it shines more bright. q. 125 Some progress in Virtue is to be
daily made. q. 126 It Is in our power to make Reports of us, either false, or
true. q. 127 To end one work, before we undertake another. q. 128 Perseverance
brings a work to perfection. q. 129 To commit, what we blame in others, is no
little fault. q. 130 A Guest may with lesser shame be kept out, then when
admitted, used ill. q. 131 Praise, and not Time, is the best measure of Life.
q. 132 That which is Good, must still be done Well. q. 133 Against Wanton
Dalliance. q. 134 Emptines must not vant: nor worth be a Cipher. q. 135 Each
Man to be weighed: and to regulate our anger. q. 136 It Is not good to take
always Notice, of what does offend us. q. 137 Against rashness in Belief of
Reports, and Tales. q 138 Against Detractors. q. 139 When we have erred it is no
shame to recant our Error. q. 140 Against Men of double Tongues. q. 141 Not to
insult where we are in authority. q. 142 Every one ought to confine himself
within his own Bounds. q. 143 All things have due set Limits, of Less and
More. q. 144 Good Turns may be marred in their Manner of doing. q. 145 Good
Men rise from their falls: the Bad lie still. q. 146 Men in Years must more
mind their End, then the World. q. 147 A parallel between a sentenced Prisoner,
and a carking aged Man. q. 148 Not to write much, without good abilities. q.
149 Not to procrastinate: or precipitate, but seasonable time to be taken for
all things. q. 150 It Is wisdom not to search for what we would not find. q. 151
Against Sacriledg. q. 152 Against such as use Friends to gain their Ends, and
afterward neglect them. q. 153 Not to do Injury to Any; For the Meanest may
sometimes either help or hurt q. 154 A many headed multitude not to be confided
in. q. 155 Not to presume upon hope of Success in our undertakings. q. 156 Not
to vex when we cannot reform what is a miss. q. 157 Silence, in times of
Danger, brings safety. q 158 Not to be fainthearted in Straights and Dangers.
q. 159 Not to contest with stranger then our selves: Nor rely upon Friends
afar off. q. 160 Promises to the Dead must religiously be performed. q. 161 To
better our selves daily in Goodness and Knowledge. q. 162 How to use reading of
Books and Study. q. 163 Love of Virtue, not fear of punishment, must restrain
from Ill. q. 164 Of Good and Bad: Work and Word. q. 165 Liberality captivates
Observance. q. 166 Ill often proceeds by accident, from Good. q. 167 Look how to
speak, Words cannot be recalled. q. 168 It Is easier not to learn Ill, then to
depose the habit of it. q. 169 Such is the praise, as they are that give it. q.
170 Corrections from Heaven must be humbly submitted to. q. 171 Not to presume,
but Mend, when Heaven shows mercy to us, q. 172 Wants bring no shame from Gods
hand; but from our own Vices they do. q. 173 It Is better sometimes to want, then
to abound. q. 174 Authority must be submitted unto. q. 175 Things Indifferent,
when they give offense must be abstained from. q. 176 It Is not good nor
prudenciall to struggle against Powers. q. 177 Power overthrows most, where it
is most opposed: q. 178 Princes and States cannot be talked of without some
Inconvenience. q. 179 Against Ficklenes, Change of Friends, and bad Resort. q.
180 The benefit of conversing with ones Betters. q. 181 In the lowest
Condition, still to prefer Fame, before Fortune. q. 182 It is no shame in
necessity to do any thing that is honest. q. 183 It Is good to be at home with
our selves. q. 184 The definition of the Rich Man. q. 185 Wisdom bewares,
where it has smarted once. q. 186 Against Underminers and Supplanters. q. 187
Socrates his Counsel to his Scholars touching Virtue. q. 188 Meat and Drink
must only be used to sustain Nature, not abused in wantonness q. 189 Wit and
Mirth must be so used, as not to offend. q. 190 Against such as speak or do,
what they afterward deny. q. 191 Discretion is the Salt that Seasons Words and
Actions. q. 192 To provide carefully for those whom we have taken into charge.
q. 193 No good Penniworth over to be had of bad wares. q. 194 Christian
fortitude is a strong Bulwark against Adversity. q. 295 The Shortness of Life,
and the length of Arts, require an Active Virtue. q. 196 Time is to be taken
hold of whilst it is present. q. 197 Faith and trust not to be broken or
defrauded. q. 198 Pearls must not be thrown before Swine. q. 199 Like to like
makes the best Consortship. q. 200 Mild words are most proper to allay Anger.
q. 201 Against Sycophants, Dissemblers, and Bawds. q. 202 Self-conquest, is the
greatest victory. q. 203 Against rashness in censure of Men. q. 204 The frowns
and disfavours of the World, often turn to our Good. q. 205 Actions take their
qualities of good or bad from their Objects. q. 206 Esteem must still be a
spur to Merit. q. 207 To beware of Fraud under the mask of Friendship. q. 208
Mischief from false Friends or Kindred hardly to be prevented. q. 209 To value
every thing with Discretion. q. 210 To shun bad ways; and not wilfully run
into Dangers. q. 211 To assist a Friend, but with due respect to our own
Safety. q. 212 The best ground of Trust, is Piety toward God. q. 213 Fair
shows and semblances must not always bind our belief. q. 214 Of Justice,
Conscience, Religion: Gain and Self Ends. q. 215 Contest with base persons is
still disadvantagious. q. 216 To bear the Worlds Traverses with Patience. q.
217 Not to take things upon trust, as the vulgar does. q. 218 Mediums rightly
disposed work the End. q. 219 Courage and Resolution wade through deep
Designs. q. 220 Weighty Resolves must be slow in growth, and speedy in
Execution. q. 221 Gentle Admonitions are more prevalent then harsh Reproofs. q.
222 Good Deeds are to be done whilst we are living. q. 223 Persecution, for a
good Cause, is not shameful. q. 214 Contempt of sound Advice brings many to
ruin. q. 215 He best knows how to spend, that has sweated in the purchase. q.
216 A Man's Freedom (if possibly) not to be engaged. q. 227 Fidelity, etc. in
service recommended. q. 228 The more a Man is wise, the less he is
presumptuous. q. 229 Hospitality recommended with due Caution. q. 230 The
Beggar's bush is ever near a lean Barn, and a fat Kitchen. q. 231 Families
ought to be governed by Rule and Order. q. 232 How Servants ought to be used.
q. 233 Servants are not to be much trusted with Secrets. q. 234 Of the single
State, Marri^ge, a Wife and Portion. q. 235 Parents ought to educate their
children virtuously. q. 236 Parents must walk in these precepts they give their
Children. q. 237 Children must imitate what is good iu Parents, and decline
what is bad. q. 238 All virtuous Actions are to he embraced, as solid Props. q.
239 Every thing that is bad is to be avoided, as destructive. q. 240 Not to
depend upon the shortness and uncertainty of this life. q. 241 To begin early
our Journey toward Heaven q. 242 Against those who never think of Death, till
they be ready to die. q. 243 To account each day our last, and to be prepared
for Death. q. 244 Many have risen in perfect strength, and gone to bed to their
Graves. q. 245 We come into Life at one Door, and go out at Many. q. 246 Life
not to be doted on, being full of Miseries. q. 247 Death in its self has
nothing that is terrible. q. 248 We ow a Death to Nature by the Law of sin. q.
249 The Continual Meditation of Death very useful, and necessary. q. 250 So
to live, as not to shame to have lived; Nor repine to Die. q. 251 The blessings
of the holy Trinity implored. q. 252 Daily increase of Grace, and eternal
happiness supplicated. q. 253
FINIS.

