Food and Physic, FOR EVERY Householder, and his Family, During the Time of the
PLAGVE. Very Useful, both for the Free and the infected. And Necessary for all
Persons, in what Condition or Quality soever. Together with several Prayers and
Meditations, before, in, and after Infection. Very needful in all Infectious
and Contagious Times. And fit as well for the Country, as the City. Published
by T. D. for the Public Good.

LONDON, Printed by T. Leach, for F. Coals, at the Lamb in the Old Bailey, 1665.

An Excellent Medicine, to Prevent the PLAGVE.
TAKE Sage of Virtue, Rue (otherwise called Hearb-Grace) Elder Leaves, Red
Bramble Leaves, and Wormwood, of each of them a good handful; stamp them
altogether, and then strain them through a fine Linen Cloth; and put to the
Juice a Quart of perfect good VVhite-VVine, and a good quantity of VVhite-VVine
Vinegar: Mingle them all together, and put thereto a quarter of an Ounce of
White Ginger, beaten to small Powder. Use to drink this Medicine every Morning
fasting, for the space of Nine Days together, the quantity of a spoonful at a
time, and this will (by Gods help) preserve you, for the space of a whole Year.

An approved Medicine after Infection.
IF it fortune, that one be stricken with the Plague, before he has taken the
former Medicine; then take the things rehearsed, and put thereto a spoonful of
Bettony Water, and as much Scabios Water, and a pretty quantity of fine
Treacle, and temper them well together, and let the Patient use to drink it
often, and it will expel the Venom or Poison forthwith. But if the Botch do
happen to appear, then take a good quantity of Elder Leaves, Red Bramble
leaves, and Mustard Seed; stamp them well together, and make a Plaster
thereof; apply it to the Sore, and it will draw forth all the Venom and
Corruption.

Those that fear the Plague, and are not Infected, let them take of this Drink
hereafter following, which is twice in every Week, half a spoonful at a time:
It has been observed, that never any one dyed of the Sickness, that did take
it in time.
TAke three Pints of Malmsey, a handful of Rue, as much of Sage; boil these to
a Quart, then strain out the Herbs, and then take an Ounce of Long-Pepper,
Vinegar and Nutmegs, all beaten small in a Mortar, and put into the Wine, and
boil it a little; then take it off, and put into it one Ounce of Mithridate,
two Ounces of the best Treacle, and a quarter of a Pint of Aqua-Vitae, and put
all into the Wine, and so keep it.

The Use of it.
If any be Infected, take one spoonful of it, as soon as the Party does presume
himself Infected, lukewarm; and so go to Bed, and sweat two or three hours;
and then dry the Body well, and keep warm, and drink no cold Drink, but warm
Drink and Caudles, and Posset Drink, with Marigold Leaves and Flowers: When
the Party has sweat, and is well dried with warm Clothes; and so long as the
Party is ill, take a spoonful Morning and Evening.

IF you fear you are Infected, or feel any Kernel rising, or any Apostumation
burning or pricking, abstain from Sleep, for Sleep leads the Venom to the
Heart. That Day that you are Infected, eat but little, or no Food; for evil
Humors so fill you, that they take away your Stomach: Or if you do eat, then
do you covet to sleep, and feel a great burning, with a kind of shuddering, as
it were, through Cold: You have also a great Pain in the fore part of the Head:
You cannot endure to ride, or to walk, or any motion of the Body; but are dull,
lumpish, and given wholly over to-sadness and drowsiness.

To prove, that these are Arguments, that you are Infected; let any Man,
finding his Body in this Distemper, not stir or walk (which I counsel him to
do; for to go into the Air, and to use motion, keeps the Poison longer from
the Heart) and he shall find within one half Day, some Impostume rising under
his Armhole, in his Groyn, or behind his Ear.

The first thing therefore (after you feel your self thus) is, with all speed,
to be let blood; when you are let blood, sleep not all that Day; you must be
let blood on the same side the Swelling appears, if so be the Impostume arise
before you sleep: but if it prick after you have slept, then be let blood on
the contrary side: As if there be a swelling under the left Arm, then be let
blood on the right Arm, If thou art saint or weak after letting blood, then
sleep a little, yet every half hour stir thy Body too and fro. If the Impostume
wax bigger and bigger, it is a good sign that the Venom is driven from the
Heart, and will come forth. To ripen it, do thus; Stamp Leaves of Elder, and
mix that Juice with Mustard Seed; of this make a Plaster, and lay it on the
Swelling.

These Things ought duly to be looked unto* viz.
IT is very convenient, that you keep your Houses, Streets, Yards, back-sides,
Sinks and Kennells sweet and clean, from all standing Puddles, Dunghills, and
corrupt Moystures, which engender stinking Savours, that may be noisome, or
breed Infection. Nor suffer no Dogs to come running into your Houses; neither
keep any, except it be backward, in some Place of open Air; for they are very
dangerous, and not sufferable in time of Sickness, by reason they run from
Place to Place, and from one House to another, feeding upon the uncleanest
things, that are cast forth in the Streets; and are a most apt Cattle to take
Infection of any Sickness, and then to bring it into the House.

For Ayring your Rooms.
Air your several Rooms with Charcole-fires, made in Stone Panns or
Chaffingdishes, and not in Chimneys; set your Panns in the middle of the Rooms;
air every Room once a Week (at the least) and put into your Fire a little
quantity of Frankincense, Juniper, dried Rosemary, or of Bay Leaves.

To Smell to.
The Root of Enula-Campana, steeped in Vinegar, and lapped in a Handkerchief,
is a special thing to smell unto, if you come where the Sickness is.

To taste or chew in the Mouth.
The Root of Angelica, Setwall, Gencian, Valerian, or Cinnamon, is a special
Preservative against the Plague, being chewed in the Mouth.

To Eat.
Eat Sorrel, steeped in Vinegar, in the Morning fasting, with a little Bread
and Butter. Sorrel Sauce is also very wholesome against the same.

To Drink.
Take Rue, Wormwood and Scabios, steeped in Ale a whole Night, and drink it
fasting every Morning.

Another.
The Root of Enula-Campana, beaten to Powder, is a special Remedy against the
Plague, being drank fasting.

Another.
If any feel themselves already infected, take Angelica, mixed with Mithridatum;
drink it off, then go to Bed, and sweat thereon.

Another special Preservative.
Take an Egg, make a hole in the top of it, take out the white, and the yolk,
and fill the shell only with Saffron; roast the shell and Saffron together, in
Embers of Charcole, until the shell wax yellow; then beat shell and all
together in a Mortar, with half a spoonful of Mustard Seed: Now so soon as any
suspicion is had of Infection, dissolve the weight of a French Crown, in ten
spoonfulls of Posset-Ale, drink it lukewarm, and sweat upon it in your naked
Bed.

Drink for ordinary Diet.
So near as you can, let the Patients ordinary Drink, be good small Ale, of
eight days old.

For Vomiting.
Vomiting is better than Bleeding, in this Case; and therefore provoke to
Vomit, so near as you can.

To provoke Vomit.
Take three Leaves of Estrabecca, stamp it, and drink it in Rhenish Wine, Ale,
or Posset-Ale.

For Purging.
If the Party be full of gross Humors, let him blood immediately upon the
right Arm, on the Liver Vein, or in the Median Vein, in the same Arm; so as no
Sore appear the first Day.

A very wholesome Water, to be Distilled.
Steep Sorrel in Vinegar four and twenty hours; then take it out, and dry it
with a Linen Cloth; then Still it in a Limbeck; drink four spoonfulls, with a
little Sugar; walk upon it till you sweat, if you may: if not, keep your Bed,
and sweat upon it. Use this before Supper on any Evening. If the Patient happen
to be troubled with any Swellings, Botches, Carbuncles, let him sweat
moderately now and then.

Outward Medicines to Ripen the Sore.
Take the Root of a White Lilly, roast it in a good handful of Sorrel; stamp
it, and apply it thereto very hot, let it lie four and twenty hours, and it
will break the Sore.

Another.
Take a small quantity of Leaven, a handful of Mallows, a little quantity of
Scabios, cut a white Onion into pieces, with half a Dozen Heads of Garlic;
boil these together in running Water, make a Poultess of it, and then lay it
hot to the Sore.

Another.
Take a hot Loaf, new taken forth of the Oven, apply it to the Sore, and it
will doubtless break the same: but afterward bury the same Loaf deep enough in
the Ground, for fear of any Infection; for if either Dog,' or any other thing,
do feed thereon, it will infect a great many.

For Ayring Apparel.
Let the Apparel of the Diseased Persons be well and often washed, be it Linen
or Woollen: or let it be ayred in the Sun, or over Panns of Fire, or over a
Chaffingdish of Coals; and fume the same with Frankincense, Juniper, or dried
Rosemary.

To Preserve from the Infection of the Plague.
Take Garlic, and peel it, and mince it small, put it into new Milk, and eat
it fasting.

To take the Infection from a House Infected.
Take large Onions, peel them, and lay three or four of them upon the Ground;
let them lie ten Days, and those peeled Onions will gather all the Infection
into them, that is in one of those Rooms: But bury those Onions afterward deep
in the Ground.

Against the new Burning Fever.
If the Parient be in great heat, as most commonly they will; take of fair
running Water, a pretty quantity; put it on a Chaffingdish of Coals; then put
thereinto a good quantity of Saunders, beaten to Powder, and let it boil half
an hour, between two Dishes; that done, put a couple of soft Linen Clothes
into a Dish, wet the Cloths well in Water and Saunders, and apply the same, as
hot as you can suffer it, to your Belly.

To procure Sleep to the Sick Persons, that are Diseased, either with the
Plague, or the hot Fever.
Take of Woman's Breast-Milk, a good quantity; put thereunto the like quantity
of Aqua-Vitae; stir them well together, and moysten therewith the Temples of
the Patient, and his Nostrills; lay it on with some Feather, or some fine thin
Ragg.

Butter-Milk, in this Contagious Time, is generally wholesome to be eaten; and
is a good Preservative, against either the Plague, or the Pestilent Fever.

A PRAYER Against the PLAGVE.
OMnipotent God, and most merciful Father, bow down thine Ear to our Requests,
and let thy gracious Eye look upon the Miseries of thy People. A long time have
the Vials of thy Wrath been held open, and have powered thy Divine Vengeance on
our sinful heads. O Lord, we confess, that Sodom and Gomorrah, were never so
wicked, as we have been, and are still: The Jews were never so hard-hearted
toward thee (our God) as we are; who hourly Crucify thy Son Jesus Christ, in
our vile Bodies. Yet behold, we cry to thee for Mercy; we repent what is past,
and are contrite and sorry, that we have been stubborn Children, to a Father so
mild, and ready to pardon. Stay therefore thine Arm, and let not the Arrow of
Death, strike our Young Men into their Graves, nor our Old Men to the Earth.
Call home thy Angels of Wrath, whom thou have sent forth, and let no more of
thy People perish, under the heavy Strokes of This Dreadful Plague, which is
now a Dweller amongst us. Grant this our Request, and all other whatsoever,
needful to Soul or Body, for his sake, in whose Name thou deniest nothing, Amen.

A PRAYER, For those that are not Visited.
OH most Mighty and Merciful Lord God, in whose hands are health and sickness,
who at thy pleasure can kill and comfort; I do confess, that my Sins call
louder for Justice, than I can cry for Mercy; and I deserve all Plagues and
Punishments, in this Life* and the Plague of Plagues, in the Life to come,
Damnation both of Body and Soul: But, O Lord, be thou more merciful, than I can
be sinful; and in Jesus Christ be reconciled unto me, and purge me, and cleanse
me from all my sins. And I beseech thee, Oh heavenly Father, at whose
Commandment the Angels passed over the Houses of the Israelites, when it
struck the Egyptians (if it be thy blessed will) that this present Sickness may
pass over me, and my Family. We do confess, O Lord, that I and others have
deserved the Plagues of Egypt; but, O Lord, howsoever keep us from the greatest
Plague, which is hardness of heart; and if it be thy pleasure, withhold thy
heavy hand from us. Do not correct us in thine anger, nor yet chastise us in
thy heavy displeasure; but in thy mercy release us. And if it be good unto
thee, that I and others should taste of this birter Cup, strengthen our Faith,
increase our Hope, augment our Patience; that so we may rest in thy Peace, rise
in thy Power, and remain in thy Glory; and that for Christ Jesus sake, in whose
Name we further call upon thee, saying, Our Father, which art in Heaven, etc.

A PRAYER, For those that are Visited.
OH Lord God, thou best Physician, both of our Souls and Bodies, who can
bring to the Grave, and pull back again, whom thou please; which were moved
at the Prayers of Moses for others, of Ezekiah for himself; O Lord, hear me for
others, others for me, and all of us for thy Son; and look with the Eye of
mercy upon me, whom it has pleased thee, at this time, to visit with the
Plague and Sickness: O Lord, I am held in thy fetters; Oh thou which have bound
me, loose me; and, if it tend unto thy glory, and my good, restore my health
unto me. O Lord, I have been an unprofitable Servant all my Life time: Oh then,
let me not then be bereft of the Life of Nature, when I begin the Life of
Grace; but if thou have disposed of me otherwise, increase my Patience with my
Pains; show thy strength in sustaining my weakness, and be my strong Fortress,
in this hour of my Trya^; give me grace to apprehend and apply all the merits
and mercies of Christ unto my Soul; and, O Lord, let thy Comforter oppose the
Tempter, in such a measure, that he may not prevail against me; but as thou
make me like Lazarus, full of Sores, so let also thy Angels carry me into
Abraham's bosom. O Lord, I entreat, let me obtain, even for his sake, for whom
thou have promised, and bound thy self, to hear and help the afflicted, even
thy Son, and my Savior, Christ Jesus: To whom, with thee, and thy blessed
Spirit, be all Praise, etc.

Meditation 1.
IT cannot choose but be a grief unto a Christian, to see how many murmur in
this Visitation; some fearing the Plague in their Persons, others in their
Purses; some being loath to lose their Goods, others to leave the World, not
fearing to say with despairing Cain, their Punishment is greater than they can
bear; and thus do they undervalue Gods Mercy in his Justice, in whose Vial is
not only Wine, but also Oil: Had he delivered us up to Famine, it would have
been a Burden far more grievous; and had he delivered us up into the hands of
our Enemies, as he has done some Neighboring Nations, it had been likely,
that our should not only have been banished from our Country, but that all hope
should have been banished from us: How much better is it then, as David chose,
to fall into the hand of God, than into the hands of Men; and to be visited
with this Plague, than to be Plagued with our Enemies: The Lord give us grace
to repent and amend, that he may cease to afflict us; and grant, that being
once cleansed, we may sin no more, lest a worse Evil happen unto us.

Meditation 2.
IT is true indeed, that Sin was the first Cause of this Sickness; but as God
does not the Works of Mercy, so he does not the Works of Justice, without a
means. Our Sins were the Parents of this Pestilence, but it is a question, how
God brought it in, there is no Man can absolutely determine, but many may
conjecture, And (I fear me) it was the want of Charity, and the neglect of the
Poor, in this City, which partly caused this Infection; for how can it be
otherwise, but that, where multitudes are pestered together in a little room,
and in it have but little comfort; as no Rags, to cover their nakedness; no
Linen to shift them from filthiness, it cannot choose but cause them
noysomeness, and by consequence Infection: If then the rich Men desire to leave
to be miserable, let them learn to be merciful, and free the City from the
multitudes of Poor.

Meditation 3.
IT is a strange thing, to see the difference of Men; and to consider, how the
Seed of Andam, being composed of the same Matter, should so differ in Manners:
For here you may see one so timorous of Sickness, that he dares not go to
Church, for fear of Infection; being so full of base Cowardice, that he is
fearful to gather a Rose, lest he should prick his Fingers; neglecting his
Souls welfare, for fear of his Bodies sickness; notwithstanding, he can trudge
to Westminster, about Quarrels and Contentions. But on the contrary side,
another so audacious and presumptuous, that he seems to challenge the
Pestilence, and seeks it at Plays, searches it from one Tavern to another,
as if he dared Gods Judgments to encounter with him; both of which are extreme
Follies. We must part, viz. from our frail Life. I will therefore resolve, not
so much to fear the Evil of Sickness, as to commit the Evil of sin; neither so
much Sin, as to seek out Sickness: The one is a sin against my Soul, to deprive
it of the Food which is offered; and Tantalus like, to starve, it under the
means: The other is a sin against my Body, to seek to impair the health of it;
but howsoever, both of them against God: The one being Timidity, the other
Timerity; the one Fear, the other Folly; the one showing himself faint-hearted,
the other foolhardy.

A Remedy, sent to the Lord Mayor of London, by King Henry the Eighth, against
the PLAGUE.
TAKE a handful of Sage, a handful of Hearb-Grace, a handful of Elder Leaves, a
handful of Red Bramble Leaves; stamp them all, and strain them through a fine
Cloth, with a quart of VVhite-VVine; and then take a quantity of Ginger, and
mingle them together, and take a spoonful of the same, and you shall be safe
for twenty four Days; Nine times taking of it, is sufficient for a whole Year,
by the Grace of God. And if it be so, that the Party be stricken with the
Plague, before he has drank this Medicine, then take the Water of Scabios a
spoonful, of Water of Bettony a spoonful* and a quantity of fine Triacle; and
put them all together, and cause him to drink it, and it will expel all the
Venom. If the Fotch appear, then take the Leaves of Brambles, Elder Leaves,
Mustard Seed, and stamp them together, and make a Plaster thereof, and lay it
to the Sore, and that shall draw out the Venom, and the Party shall be whole,
by the Grace of God.

M. H. Receipt against the Plague.
TAke Setwel Root, to the quantity of half a Walnut, and gra^e it; of
Triacle-Jean, one good spoonful; of Wine-Vinegar, three good spoonfulls; of
fair Water, three spoonfulls: Make these more than lukewarm, and so drink them
off warm in your Bed, and sweat six or seven hours after. Drink Posset-Ale,
made with small Drink, as your thirst requires; so that you expect an hour and
a half, after the Potion taking, before your first drinking, and it will drive
forth the Plague. Let the Posset-Ale be lukewarm, at the first draughr, but
after as you like it, so it be not quite cold.

These two Medicines have Cured above a thousand People, in this City, the last
Plague time; And none has took it in time, but escaped.

FINIS.
The Table.
AN Excellent Medicine to prevent the Plague. Page 1 An approved Medicine after
infection. p. 2 A Remedy for those that fear the Plague. p. 2 Things duly to be
looked into. p. 2 For Ayring Rooms. p. 5 Things good to Smell, Taste, Eat,
Drink. p. 6 Drink for ordinary Diet. p. 7 Outward Medicines to ripen* the Sore.
p. 8 To take the Infection from a House infected. p. 9 Against the new burning
Fever and To procure Sleep to the Sick Persons. p. 10 A Prayer against the
Plague. p. 11 A Prayer for those that are not Visited. p. 13 A Prayer for those
that are Visited. p. 15 Meditations. p. 17, 18, 19. A Remedy sent to the Lord
Mayor of London by King Henry the 8th against the Plague. p. 20 M. H. His
Receipt against the Plague. p. 21
FINIS.

