A DECLARATION SENT TO THE KING of France and Spain, From the Catholics or
Rebels in IRELAND: With a manifesto of the Covenant or Oath they have made
and taken for the defense of the Catholic League against the Protestants in
that Kingdom.

Wherein is discovered their treacherous practizes under the pretense of
Religion, and their bloody Actions full of Cruelty and Barbarism.

Published in Paris, April the 24 1642. And translated out of French by R. C.
Gent.

London, Printed for I. T. 1642.

News from France.
The Laws newly established, by the* Catholics of Ireland now in Arms with
the form of their new Oath taken for the maintayning of their league.
IRreland being to this day the Sole Right and a country subject to the
Government of the King of great Britain where the war now is, which is the
principal subject of this History; and the Parliament of England imputing to
that war one of the causes of the division with his Majesty of Britain, as if
some Manifesto had interressed him in it, it will be important not only for
the illustration of the Historic but also for the discussing of the truth of
that objection, and because they condemn the Irish to live without rule and
discipline, and to exercise many cruelties against the Protestants, to
understand what laws they are under which they live, and the Articles of their
new confederacy.

To the better understanding whereof, we are to presuppose that Ireland having
bin sometimes governed by five several Kings (every one of which reigned in
one of those five Provinces* in the ye^re ^^^^ ^here arose a division betwixt
two of those Kings namely he of Lageny whose Royal (...)e was at Dubling, and
was called Di^rm^th Omorochon, and he of Connaught who was called Ochonnoch.
Donn, the first whereof having called the English to his succor, Richard de
Strongbow repaired to him who behaved himself so valiently that joining with
the King of Lageny, he made himself Master of one part of that Island, and
became an Introduction to Henry the second, then King of England, who came
thither with a great Army, which the other Provinces perceiving, they willingly
did submit unto him to be delivered by him from the calamities that did attend
their civil war; but as new plantions do seldom agree with the ancient
Inhabitants whose lands they came to usurp and to possess, these two Nations
had always some difference, which traversed daily the success of the Irish,
and hindered them that they could not retire themselves from their obedience to
the English, especially at that time when Oneale Earl of Tyrone took arms
for the maintayning of the liberty of the Catholics against the Protestants in
that great and universal subject of division which the diversity of religion
had caused to arise throughout all Christendom, who did encourage and conduct
them as discreetly and as valiantly as all other people, and added to the first
and great difference which arrose in that country between the natural Irish
and those who were called English-Irish, that is to say descended from the
English and the Inhabitants of Ireland, another difference to it of Catholics
and Protestants, which now is grown so strong as to make them forget their
ancient quarrel, and to recombine all those into the same body which are found
of the same belief, two Lords only excepted, to wit the Earl of Clenricard,
and of Antrim, Catholics both in their profession, and are not yet openly
joined to the Catholics now in arms, but remain as newtralls, although they
impute the cause to the Estates they have in England, the first being Earl of
S. Albans, and invested with the honors of three other Baronys, the other with
the rich dowry of the Duchess of Buckingham his consort. Now there being no
society which can subsist without laws, behold those which they have lately
published to entertain their mutual correspondence and military discipline
with the oath taken by them to the same intent.

1. It shall not be lawful for any under pain of death to take away the
Catholics goods, or to do any damage to them, whither they be Irish,
English, or Scotts, or of any other Nation whatsoever inhabiting within this
Realm, those only excepted who shall be declared enemies to the common cause,
or shall refuse to take arms for their defense, in which last case it shall
not be lawful under the former pain to indammage the said Catholics
without express order from the Lords, Directors, or Intendants of Justice
established in every County, or in the greatest part of them.

2 If any either of the one or oath sex which to this present has made
profession of the Protestant Religion, shall reconcile himself to the holy
Church of Rome, provided that he persevereth in it he shall suffer no damage
either in his Body or his goods, howsoever to prevent deceits the Castles and
strong places which shall be found to appertain unto them shall remain six
months in pleage in the hands of the directors or of those who shall be
committed to that charge who shall give them an account of the revenues of the
said places.

3. If the Husband be a catholic and his wife a Protestant they shall suffer
no damage in their goods, moveable or Immovable, but if the Husband be a
Protestant, and his Wife a Catholic, the thirds of the goods shall be taken
from the disposing of the Husband, for the lively hood and maintenance of his
wife, and from them both a third remaining shall be taken according to the
arbitration of the abovesaid directors for the education of their children.

4. The Tributes, Revenewes, Rites, and temporal prerogatives of this King of
great Britain shall exactly be preserved and maintained, and all subjects and
tenants precisely constrained to pay them into the hands of the Farmers and
ordinary receivers for his Majesty for the use and service of him.

5. There shall be no distinction between the natural Irish and the ancient
English Irish or any other true Catholics whatsoever, but they shall
indifferently be considered and advanced to offices according to their
deser^s, being faithful to the King and preserving and promoting with all
their power the common cause of the foresaid Religion.

6. It shall not be permitted to any to depart beyond the confines of his own
County to go to foreign without order from the directors.

7. They who shall appropriate to themselves the goods of their kindred of the
contrary party shall be constrained to leave them to the administration of the
directors, or to give them an account of them or to bring in unto them the
greater part; in which first case the Directors shall dispense unto them a
fitting and considerable recompense, and the usurpers who shall be convinced
to have dealt falsely with them shall be condemned to pay unto the common
cause the double of the value of the said goods.

8. It is forbidden to all on the forfeit of their lives, either under the
pretext of war or under any other pretense to invade any house whatsoever it
be, no not of those who make open profession of the protestant religion, or
are not yet declared open enemies to the cause if they have not a sp^ciall
warrant from the Directors, and for the time past, if any one has so offended,
he shall be bound on the first demand to restore the goods of him or them
from whom he has usupt them.

9. All indifferently and of whatsoever condition they are shall proportionably
contribute of the goods which they poss^sse within every County to the
necessities of the affairs of the said Counties those sums which the
Directors or the greatest part of them shall appoint under the penalty of
paying amends by them the said Directors so appointed.

10. None onthe pain of Death shall ravish or offer violence to any married
woman, widow, or Catholic maid or Protestant, or shall go about to take
away any habit from the body of any man, maid or woman of whatsoever Religion
they are.

11. As often as any Castle or strong place shall be taken by composition, it
shall be a capital crime to break the Articles and condition of the Treaty*
or to enter into it with a greater number then was accorded too, to hide or
take away any of their goods, and to employ them to his particular use, but all
shall be left to the free disposition of the Directors to be employed for the
subsistence of the Soldiers, and that with as much Justice as possible can be.

12. No Soldier or any other shall be so bold, as to steal, pillage, burn
the fruits or the houses of the Enemies themselves, or to commit any
preiudicialle offense without the express commandment of the Directors.

13. But above althings it is forbidden under the same penalty es to steal
from, or make any trespass on the bodies or goods of Tradesmen or Merchants,
in this Country exercizing their Art and commerce, and the directors do take
them into their protecton and special safeguard so long as they shall not be
found guilty of any treason against the common cause, but shall follow their
honest exercise.

14. It is forbidden on the same penalty to all laborers, Sheepheards or
other persons not intolled and being not under the charge of any, and who are
no members of any of the catholics armies to renounce their condition to carry
Arms, but they shall be enjoined to stay at home to continue the exercise of
their arts and manufactures, if they bear not with them a certificate from
some person of quality containing the place from whence they came, and whether
they would go.

15. They shall proceed against the Catholics refusing to assist the common
cause, as if they were but Protestants, which nevertheless shall not be done
but by the order from the Directors.

16. All the tenants of the Catholics of whatsoever Religion they are shall be
grievously chastized according to the arbitration of the said Directors, in
case they shall defer or refuse to pay their rents and anuall duties.

17. Every twelfth day, provided it falls not upon a Sunday or upon a
Festival day, which if it does the assignation shall be then remitted to the
day following, the Directors shall be bound to assemble themselves in a
conv^nient place chosen by them to determine all differences, to appease all
commotions and to avoid all confusions which are too ordinary in all new
designs.

18. Lastly, it is fo^bidden under pain of death to carry or cause to be
carried any provision or ammunition into places where the enemy does quarter,
or to have any intelligence or commerce either by word or pen with any Captain
or Soldiers of theirs to the prejudice of the cause.

The form of the Oath of the Irish Catholics now in Arms.
IN the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, I promise;
vow and swear, to advance and defend with all my power the holy Catholic
Rom^n Faith and never under hope of recompense or for re^enge to carry or
wilfully suffer to be carried any thing that may prejudice a Roman Catholic,
an Irish or Scottish Catholic or of any Nation whatsoever who freely has
exposed his goods, his liberty and life to preserve that union; And withal I
shall repute all wrongs done to any whatsoever, who shall oblige himself by
this present Oath as done unto my self and I will procure with all my power
that satisfaction shall be given which shall be due to a person so offended. I
acknowledge also and with my conscience I do attest that Charles our most
Excellent King and Master is the lawful and Sovereign Lord of this Realm*
and that I will maintain him, his lawf^ll heirs and successors, the true
faith, subjection and obedience, that I will defend and conserve him with all
my force, as likewise his lawful successors within the due prerogatives and
right of the Crown against all forces, Princes, and foreign States, as also
against all treachero^s* sacralegious, and domestic plots.

I promise also to observe all the Laws and Statutes made for the good of this
Kingdom, and for the liberty of the Subjects, intimating withal that they
shall not be contrary to the Catholic Roman Religion and I will give no
occasion as much as in me lies to change any thing without the authority of our
Parliament.

As also to employ my self withal my endeavors to deliver my Cuntrie from the
oppression of evil governors, and to make no distinction betwixt the ancient
English, and the true I rish, or whatsoever nation that shall be comprised with
in this union, in which maugre the Devil and all the gates of hell I will
stand unshaken till the last drop of my blood. I promise also to bring no
damage to the said Catholics, neither to attache or impair their patrimony,
nor to make any extent upon their lands during he time that the Wars shall
last, and in case I had a process against them to prorogue and void the same
until those troubles be past over.

I promise in the end the better to embrace the common cause to acquit during
the said troubles all particular quarrels, jealousies and other differences
which already are or shall arise.

So God shall help me, and the holy Evangelists, on whom I willingly do take
this Oath.

FINIS.

